Several SERMONS AND DISCOURSES OF William Dell Minister of the Gospel;
Sometimes attending both the Generals in the ARMY: AND Now Master of GONVIL and
CAIUS College in CAMBRIDGE.

Heretofore published at several times, and on several occasions; and now
gathered in one Volumn, for the benefit of the faithful, and conviction of the
world.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle, at
the West End of Paul's toward Ludgate. 1652.

A Preface to the Reader.
WE are almost at the end of Books; these paper works are now preaching their
own Funerals; whilst they are holding forth the spirit, the letter is grown
old and is dying into the newness of the spirit, and there looks to be found,
into which all things shall be resolved, being restored out of their enmity, as
into their Original whence they came; even Preaching and Preachers, Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, given for the perfecting of the
Saints, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; till we come into a spiritual
uniformity in Christ, being all filled and clothed with him, beyond all
external forms, which are the rudiments and elements of children, with which
state there is no uniformity consistent, there being in it so many several
statures and ages; And the Design of Uniformity upon that is from none but
Satan, to kill Christ whilst he is a Child, and stifle him in his swaddling
clothes, though the pretense be with Herod to give him honor and worship. But
how vain are these plots upon him, who shall subdue all things to himself and
swallow up death, or the vail (a part whereof external forms are) into victory
and bring forth judgment with triumph? He shall swallow up all, and rise up
out of that which has swallowed him and been his grave, and that have we been,
and made every thing to be, who are now giving up our dead, Esai. 25 7. 8.
expecting to live in the liberty of of our prisoner, whom we see at last to be
our Lord, and Life. We are now by an earthquake and the shaking of the prison
beginning to awake; and to make to our Prisoners feet, as the Jailer at
Philippi, did to Paul, Acts 16.
and Silas his, looking for Salvation there, and waiting when he will lead his
Captivity Captive, and convert us from being Goales, and Tombs, to be his City,
and Temple, built of precious stones, in whom he will live and walk, and cause
us to live and walk in him. We are giving up our own life, which is death,
finding in these present earthquakes the true life which has been buried in
us, now rising, and are with the whole Creation groaning to be found in him,
giving up all that we thought gain as loss, and rejoicing in our decrease
seeing his increase, and our dying daily because he lives.

And we glory in him who has wrought us to this, to be content to lose our
lives that we might find them, now that the day is coming when all that will
find their life shall lose it; and whatsoever comes not into him, the fire of
destruction shall take hold of it, and it shall be thrown with death and hell
into the lake.

The ensuing Treatises, have begotten this in me, or driven it forth into a
Preface or Epistle, for which the book came into my hands, by a Friends
direction, which office of love I could not refuse, however conscious of my own
unworthiness. And I cannot dismiss it with so short a Preface, having the
Author and book in my heart, and that venting it self out of its abundance, yet
not as Solomon's fool who has his heart in his mouth, pouring out all that is
in it, or more then is convenient for an Epistolary Design, which is only to
be a sign to acquaint the Reader of what good entertainment there is to be
found within.

It is time now for us to hear of power which is in the Spirit, who so long
have been opposing it, and languishing in flesh, in man, in forms external, in
wisdom of words, in Ministers, Preachers, Writers, Books, Universities,
Moralities, Councels, Synods, Assemblies, Civil and worldly Power, instead of
standing upright and being strong in the Lord, and the power of his might; we
have only exhibited a shell and carcass of Religion, and have held out our
selves the generation which these last Times by the express prediction of the
spirit were to bring forth, Having a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof. It has been the hour and power of Darkness; the man of sin his
revealing, and sitting in the Temple of God, and holding forth himself to be
God; The Spirit has given this Man large Rope, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
he has suffered this Absalom the underminer of his Father David, his hair to
grow, and is now coming forth the strong and spread and tall oak where this man
is hanging, and twisting himself for his destruction; He has been contented to
become the stone, though precious and the head of the Corner, to be rejected by
the builders, that Satan and all his Kingdom might fall upon him, and dash
themselves to pieces; and he is pleased to make his way through these clouds,
and to rise more gloriously the King of Israel from under the stuff, higher by
the head and shoulders then any, anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows; This is the Child set for the fall and rising of many in Israel, and a
sign to be spoken against; Christ the power of God, and wisdom of God, the
foolishness and weakness of man.

What destructions do we see already made? what heaps upon heaps by a Jaw Bone
of an Ass? the weakness of God stronger then man, and the foolishness of God
wiser then man; How far is the day of the Lord already risen upon the tall
Cedars of Lebanon and the oaks of Bashan, Esa. 2. 12. 13.
and the high mountains and Hills, upon the high Towers and fenced Walls? what
ruin upon these? how many gallant Ships wrackt, how many pleasant Pictures
defaced? And yet the rest of the trees and ships and Towers; the high things
which yet stand, do not fear nor lay to heart, nor begin to stoop and bow of
themselves, but say we sit as a Queen, and shall see no sorrow; they see not
who is risen; They bribe their own consciences as they did the Soldiers, least
they should speak the truth; they are far from asking the question, What ayled
thee O sea that thou fleddest, and thou Jordan that thou wast driven back! ye
mountains that ye skipped like Rams! Tremble thou earth at the presence of the
Lord; Power belongs to God, he pulls down one, and sets up another; How has he
broken the staff of the wicked, the Scepter of the rulers? how has hell
enlarged her self! and what glory and pomp is sent down thither, which stand
exspecting those by whose hand they were thrown down, to come to them, and have
taken up a Proverb to entertain them with! Esa. 14. 9.
Hell from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming; it stirs
up the dead for thee, and all the chief ones of the earth; it has raised up
from the thrones all the Kings of the nations; all they shall speak and say
unto thee, art thou also become weak as we! art thou become like to us! The
worm is spread under thee, and the worms cover thee, etc.

Humane Learning, Gen 49 5.
the excellency of power and strength created, thou Ruben my first born, the
head of this world, thou shall be made the tail; thou that wilt comprehend
Christ, thou that wilt bring God into thy compass and under thy span, and weigh
him in thy balance, thou that know no spirit nor wisdom besides thy self,
thou that condemnest that which is not there for folly and weakness; thou
Lucifer son of the morning, that have said, I will ascend into heaven, and set
my Throne above the Stars, I will be like the most high; thou spirit of the
world that wilt acknowledge none above thee, Thou shall not excel because thou
did ascend into my bed; he went up to my couch; I will rise out of the weak
and foolish things to confound thee; I will ordain strength out of the mouth of
babes and sucklings to undo thee; I will fight against thee in the Carpenters
Son and the Fishermen: Judah shall have the Scepter, Gen 49. 10. 11.
binding his Foal unto the Vine, and his Asses Colt unto the choice Vine: The
King that rides on the Ass, and the Foal of an Ass, whom the Boys and Girls
follow with the voice of Hosanna, shall destroy your Place and Nation: O ye
Scribes, Pharisees, Lawyers, Rabbis, after that you have mocked him, and
crucified him, done to him what ever you listed, he will rise again, and fear
will take hold of you as sorrow upon a woman, and you will call to the Rocks and
Mountains to fall upon you, and so go unto your own Place.

And thou Independency, the fairest Form, the most beautiful Face as yet that
the Sun has looked on, The world has thrown dirt on thee, Number. 12. 14.
and disguised thee, which thou have washed off; take heed thy Father spit not
in thy Face; that will make thee ashamed indeed: Thou art Rachel, thou have
with great wrestlings prevailed, and brought forth Gad, a Troop, and have
routed, pursued, destroyed, taken; if thou lift up thy self against thy root
that bears thee, that spirit that has lifted thee up, thou shall be so dealt
withal, in thy high mindedness, if thou work not out thy salvation in fear and
trembling.

And thou Righteousness that derivest thy pedigree from Adam and stand in
the Law, and walk like a Queen in man's wisdom and Forms of Religions,
shinest in the outward Court that is given to the Gentiles to be trodden under
foot, thou have a beauty as if it were of the holy place, and look like the
Spouse and Bride of the Lamb; but thou shall be discovered a base Harlot and
Strumpet, whilst thou set up thy self against the righteousness of the
Spirit: And when thou shall fight against him as a Blasphemer, and think to
destroy him, as thou have Episcopacy and Presbytery, when thou shall look that
Jerusalem should fall before thee, as the gods of the Nations, Es. 37. 12.
Gozan and Haran and Reseph, and the children of Eden, which were in Telassar;
when thou shall come to lay hold on Christ as a blasphemer, and shall go forth
like Sampson thinking to do as thou have done at other times; when thy zeal
shall gather an Army that goes upon the breadth of the earth, and thou
compassest the Camp of the Saints about, Revel. 20. 9.
and the beloved City, then shall fire come down from God out of Heaven and
devour thee. Then shall thou find that sword of the Lord which has drunken
blood, and eat flesh, to fall out of thy hand, and shall see a battle fought in
a way of war that thou never knew, having only known carnal weapons, a
battle not with confused noise and garments rolled in blood; Es. 9. 5.
but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire; for his name is wonderful,
who has the Government on his shoulders, in the day of his begetting, which is
his manifestation or declaratiou with power; Then no more Iron against Iron,
Acts 13. 32.
flesh against flesh, the potsherds against the potsherds of the earth; The
naked power of the Spirit, the holy arm of the Lord made bare, shall make a
supper to the ^^wls of the air, of the flesh of Kings and Captains, and mighty
men and horses, and them that sit thereon, and there shall the beast be taken
and the false Prophet; No more carnal weapons thenceforth; they shall all be
beaten into mattocks and pruning hooks, when the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea; then I looked and every
Island fled away, and the Mountains were not found; I saw none but the Lamb
standing on the Mount Sion, and with him a hundred, forty and four thousand,
having his Fathers name written on their foreheads, and I heard the voyuce of
Harpers harping with their Harpers, and they sung a new Song.

This manner of War, God was pleased to come forth in, in the Apostles, and
Primitive Christians, who had laid the world on its back, and made it like
Sodom and Gomorrah, had not the Trumpet sounded a retreat, and that power which
was abroad, retired again, that the world might recover its deadly wound, and
get up upon his legs again, that the man of sin might be fully revealed, in the
return of this power to be utterly consumed when it shall come in the
brightness of its glory.

And thou Rule, authority and power earthly, that wilt not acknowledge the
Lord; thou earth that do not tremble at the presence of the Lord, his day
will be on thee to put thee down: if the Host of Heaven, those Powers be
shaken, thou must not look for a privilege and exemption; and though thou have
been made like Nebuchadnezzar, the servant of the Lord to pull down those
heavenly powers, that kept not their first estate, and have been a scourge upon
the Powers of the Earth, and smote them in wrath, though thou have been a
feller among the Cedars of Lebanon, thou that have broken the Gold and Silver,
Dan. 2. 31.
and the Brass with thy Iron feet; remember that the Iron is mixed with clay,
that shows thy weakness; thou shall be shattered to pieces by that stone cut
out of the mountain without hands, when Satan shall lead thee against him as
against a Blasphemer.

Therefore, you Heavens and Religious Forms that are putting for the Government
of the world, and sadling Kingdoms and Re publiks, and making them the Beast to
carry the false Prophet, which now begins to kick and winch, and look upon thee
that rides.

And you Mountains of the earth; worldly Powers that say in your hearts, We
will ascend into Heaven and set our throne above the Stars of God; that will
exercise a Judicature in Heaven, and determine of things of the Kingdom of God,
which the Spirit has kept in his own hands; you may break one the other,
earthen potsheards; But if you join against the Spirit, and be one as Jew and
Gentile, Herod and Pilate against Christ, it will be your everlasting breaking;
so that a man cannot gather a Sherd of you to take fire from the hearth, or
water out of the Pit; for God has set his King upon his holy Hill; and you are
but sheaves against a hearth of fire. The Power of Christ is coming forth;
happy they that wait for it. The Lord shall send the rod of his power out of
Sion; be thou Ruler in the midst of thine enemies. Psalm. 110.

All Forms and Shadows shall fly away; and the new creature only abide; and
they that walk after this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy, Gal. 6.
and upon the Israel of God.

The spiritual Church shall rise and be established in the beauty of holiness.
Psalm. 148.
These are the tidings of this Book; And I heard a voice saying Hallelujah,
Praise the Lord from the Heavens, praise him all ye heights, praise him all ye
Angels of his; all the wisdom of man; Praise him Sun and Moon, all worldly
Magistrates; praise him all the Stars of light, all Ministers, Pastors,
Teachers; praise him ye Heavens of Heavens; all Forms and Churches, and what
ever of you excel, and are lifted up above others; exalt the Lord, not your
selves; for his name only is excellent, his glory is above the Earth and
Heavens; verse. 13. 14.
he also exalts the Horns of his people, the praise of all his Saints, even
of the children of Israel a people near to him. Thy part be among these, who
ever art the Reader, it is the desires and prayer of him who knows no greater,
no other happiness,

Who is thine as to it Christop. Goad.

CHRIST'S SPIRIT, A Christians Strength: OR, A plain discovery of the mighty
and invincible power, that all Believers receive through the gift of the SPIRIT.

First held forth in two Sermons, on Act. 1. 8. and after published for the
instruction and use of those that are spiritual, Anno 1645.

By WILLIAM DELL, Minister of the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST at Yelden in the
County of Bedford.

1 Cor. 4. 19. 20, I will come to you shortly if the Lord will, and will know
not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power. For the Kingdom of
God is not in word but in power.

2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power of it; from
such turn away.

London, Printed for Hen. Cripps and Lod. Lloyd, 1651.

To the Right Honorable the Lady ELIZABETH Countess of BULLINGBROOK.
Right Honorable,
THe form of Godliness, is very common in these days of ours; but the power of
it, is very rare. How few persons, shall we find in the visible Church, who
live and act in the strength of God? But generally, men do, what ever they do,
in their own strength, and that not only in humane things, but in divine. How
seldom do we see, either in Ministers or Christians, in the discharge of their
duties in their several places, more then the power of men? The greatest part
by far, not only of those who are called Christians, but also of forward
Professors, being ignorant what it is, to be strengthened with might in the
inner man, according to the glorious power of the great God. How little is
there (among all our plenty) of that preaching, which is not in the plausible
words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit and Power? How few
Congregations (among the many that are in the Kingdom) are gathered together in
the Spirit and Power of our Lord Jesus Christ? How few of those Christians are
there, in whom is the exceeding greatness of Gods power, together with the
effectual working of it? But the form of Godliness, is now become, almost the
covering of all flesh, and in these days of light and knowledge, it is
accounted by all (that are not downright Atheists) a great shame, not to seem
to be religious. And when men, and families, and Congregations, are gotten into
this form, they think themselves both safe and happy, as being near the suburbs
of the Kingdom of God, and close Neighbors to the Saints. And this form of
godliness, as it is of very easy compliance with flesh and blood, in this
particular, in that according to this, men only make their actions new,
retaining still their old natures; so it is also of great credit and esteem,
with carnal Gospellers. But the spiritual man judges all things, and yet he
himself is judged of no man: and he being partaker of the power of God himself,
can in some measure discern both the presence and want of it in others, both
which he knows in his own experience.

Now this form of godliness, is, when men are godly without God, and anointed
without Christ, and regenerate not having the Spirit; that is, when they have a
semblance, of holiness, but not the thing it self: a semblance of grace,
retaining their old natures. And such Christians as these, perform spiritual
duties, with natural strength, heavenly duties, with earthly strength, the
works of God, with the power of men. In the Religion of these men, there is the
outward duty done, and it may be very speciously and plausibly, but there is
none of Christ, nor the Spirit in the duty. There is their own working toward
God, which is faint and faithless, and not Gods own working in them toward
himself, which is lively and mighty: and all the religious acts they do are
only their own operations, and not the operations of God in them.

This form of godliness, how pleasing soever it be to a man's self, and of what
reckoning soever with others, who are like himself, yet is indeed, of very evil
and woeful consequence, whether we regard the doings or sufferings, unto which
this form necessarily engages.

For first, when men by occasion of this form are called forth to do the great
works of God, and yet are destitute of the power of God, their duties are above
their strength, and their strength bears no proportion to their duties. And so
sooner or later, meeting with difficulties, they faint, and languish as a
Snail, their works being too high for their faculties. For nature being
strained above its power, and offering at that which is beyond its abilities,
by degrees grows weary, and returns to its old temper again. And he that sought
that glory which was not his own, at last lies down in his own shame.

Again, the form of godliness exposes a man to those evils, that are incident
to the faithful because of godliness. Now when a man has the same evils, with
the faithful, and not the same power to support him under those evils; when men
have the same evils in the flesh, but not the same power in the Spirit, the
same burdens on their shoulders, but not the same everlasting arms underneath
them, they fall sadly and desperately, to the great scandal of the ways of God.

However, if men be not called forth, to such eminent doings and sufferings,
and so escape such manifest discoveries and downfals: yet the form of godliness,
has this evil in it, That it brings a man only to the troublesome part of
Religion, but not to the comfortable; it engages a man in the same duties with
the godly, but supplies him not with the same strength; it involves him in the
same bitterness of flesh, but does not furnish him with the same joy of Spirit.
For as such a man's Religion, does not reach above flesh and blood, no more does
his strength and comforts. And so he performs duties at a low rate; yea and his
bare and empty form, casts a black vail upon Religion, and utterly obscures its
beauty, and glory, and makes the world judge meanly of it, and to think it a
matter only of singularity and humor, and not of power. Whereas when a
Christian walks in the strength of the Spirit, doing and suffering the will of
God, beyond all strength and abilities of flesh and blood, the world often
times wonders and gazes at him, and many are provoked to glorify God, who has
given such power to men.

For this power of godliness, among other things, has these three advantages.

1. It makes a man do every duty strongly and mightily. And whatever, might
take a man off from duty, or distract and disturb him in it, all falls to
nothing before this power. There is that strength, in each duty, performed by
the power of the anointing, which declares it to be the operation of God
himself in man, and nothing else, but the very power of God, that is, Jesus
Christ himself, in action in us.

2. It makes a man inflexible in the ways of God, that he shall neither turn to
the right hand, nor to the left, but take straight steps toward the mark set
before him. No fear nor favors, nor frowns, nor flatteries, nor temptations,
nor insinuations nor designs of others, nor ends of his own, can turn him
aside. He carries such strength in his Spirit, as he can never be bended, and
so far forth as he partakes of the power of God, is as unmovable and
unchangeable, as God him self.

3. It makes a man invincible, by all evils and enemies. Because all the power
against him, is but the power of the creature, but the power in him, is the
power of God. And the power of God, easily overcomes the mightiest power of the
creature, but is never overcome by it. And if this power in a Christian, should
be prevailed against, God himself who is that power, should be conquered, which
is impossible.

To conclude, the power of godliness, is the doer of every duty, in Gods
Kingdom, the subduer of every sin, the conqueror of each tribulation and
temptation, the life of every performance, the glory of each grace, the beauty
of a Christians life, the stability of his conversation, the luster of his
Religion, his great Honor and excellency both in doing and suffering, yea it
is the very glory of God himself, in the Church of God; for by faith, the Lord
arises on us, and by this power of godliness, his glory is seen upon us.

These considerations, right honorable, moved me to discourse of the power of
the Holy Spirit coming on all Christians, Ministers and People. And besides the
importunity of some other friends, your Honors earnest desires of these notes,
has especially prevailed with me to publish them. Not that I am worthy to
publish any thing, but that the truth of God is worthy to be published, be the
instrument never so mean and unworthy. And although I well know, the doubtful
success of such undertakings as these, yet in this matter I am not at all
careful, being most willing to be bound up in one condition with the truth of
God, and to have with it, the same common friends and enemies. Besides if
Christ dwell in my heart by faith, I carry in my bosom already, my reward, out
of whom, I neither regard praise or dispraise, good or evil.

Now I was bold to prefix your Honors name to these Notes, because your desire
of them, has made them yours, and also your many noble favors are a strong and
continual engagement, for me to serve you, according to what God has made me.
Especially I remember your extraordinary compassion, and bowels toward me, in
the day of my deepest distress, when my soul drew near to the Pit, and the
shadow of death sat upon my eye lids, and I had not the least drop of comfort,
either from earth or heaven; Your Honor then showed me the kindness of the
Lord, and encompassed me both with your pity and goodness, though then through
bitterness of spirit, I tasted it not. Wherefore when I remember the wonderful
goodness of God to me after so great sorrow and darkness, I cannot forget that
part of his goodness, which he was pleased to administer to me by your Honors
hands; And the remembrance of this, causes me to pray, that God would double
the same goodness on you, and that he would pour forth upon my Lord, your
Honor, your noble offspring and family, this power of the holy Spirit, here
treated of: which shall render you, a thousand times more precious and
excellent, before God and his Saints, then all worldly Honor and Nobility
whatsoever. And by this means, shall Religion shine in your Family, in its
native beauty and luster, and the Kingdom of God, which stands not in word, but
in power, shall appear in its bright glory among you, till the Kingdom of the
Son, first fit you, and then after deliver you up to the Kingdom of the Father,
and God be all in all immediately;

Which is the earnest prayer of your most humble and faithful servant WILLIAM
DELL.

The Contents.
THe Context. The Explication of the Words. Three General Doctrines. 1. That
Christ gives his own people sufficient strength for their employments; his own
strength for his own Works. 2. That when Christ leaves his people in regard of
sense, he never leaves them without a promise; and in that promise his
Spiritual presence. 3. That the pouring forth of the spirit, is the means
whereby God both increases and governs his Church.
The more special Doctrine from the words, is That the receiving of the Spirit,
is the receiving of power. For the Spirit it self is power, 1. Essentially in
it self. 2. Operatively in us. By being in us, 1. A Spirit of Knowledge, 2. Of
Truth, 3. Of Wisdom, 4. of Faith, which inables us To do Endure
the same things with Christ himself. 5. Of Righteousness, in Destroying sin.
Imparting Grace.
6. Of the fear of the Lord. 7. Of Love and Unity.
The Use, twofold. 1. Exhortation, to enforce this; the necessity of having
this power is urged, in reference 1. To Ministers. 2. To all Christians.
1. Ministers stand in need of the power of the Spirit to come upon them. 1.
Because, without they have this power, they are destitute of all power. 2.
Without this power they are insufficient for the work of the Ministry: As
being unable, 1. To preach the Word, that is the true Spiritual and living Word
of God. 2. To preach it zealously and powerfully;
But without this presence of the Spirit of power, 1. Their Ministry is cold
and has no heat in it. 2. Weak and has no strength in it. 3. To persevere in
their ministry and to carry it on against all opposition and contradiction. 4.
To reprove the world of sin. For the Spirit of judgment, must needs be
accompanied with the spirit of might. 5. To encounter and overcome the Devil.
6. To enable them to be comfortable and invincible against all evils and
enemies.

2. Christians; this Spirit of power, and power of the Spirit is necessary for
all Christians, as well as Ministers. Object. But do all Christians receive the
Spirit of God, as well as Ministers? Answ. Yes, equally and alike; without any
difference.
Now this Spirit of power is necessary for them, 1. To distingush them from
reprobates and Devils. 2. To exalt them above all the rest of mankind who are
destitute of the Spirit. 3. To unite them unto Christ.
And the power of the Spirit is necessary for them, 1. To change their natures;
which is the daily work of the Spirit, till all be renewed. 2. To work grace in
them; and each grace, is so much of the power of the Spirit in the flesh. 3. To
enable them to mortify sin; and the power of the Spirit mortifies, 1. The
whole body of sin in all its parts and members, and 2. Each particular strong
corruption.
4. To perform duties. For no more strength in any duties then of the Spirit
in them. 5. To confess the Word before Kings, and Magistrates. 6. To publish
the word, and that both 1. In private, 2. In public, in case of necessity.
7. To suffer and overcome affliction. Natural strength, withdraws it self from
the evil. Spiritual strength, stands to it and overcomes it.


The second Use, is for information and instruction, showing that the way to
obtain this power, is to obtain the Spirit; and to increase this power, is to
increase the Spirit. Now that we may obtain the Spirit, we must first prepare
our selves.

Wherein this preparation does not consist. Wherein it does consist: that
(...), 1. In emptying us. 2. The work of the Spirit after he has emptied us,
is to fill us.
The means through which the Spirit is conveyed to us. 1. By the Word; and his
word, the Word of the Gospel. 2. By Faith, which carries us to Christ's flesh to
receive of his Spirit. Through the word and faith, we are born of God, and so
partake of the Spirit of God. 3. Prayer: and in prayer we may ask the Spirit
either of the Father or the Son.
Again that we may increase the Spirit, 1. We must be constant and continual in
the use of the Word. 2. We must daily increase faith. 3. Must be much in
prayer. 4. Must withdraw our seves from the creatures, and live loose from
them. 5. Must cease from our own works. 6. Must give our selves up to the Sprit
that he may work his work in us. 7. The works of the Spirit we must attribute
to the Spirit, and not to our flesh.




Christ's Spirit a Christians strength, OR, A plain discovery of the mighty and
invincible power that all Believers receive through the Gift of the SPIRIT.
Acts 1. 8. But ye shall receive power, when the Holy Ghost is come upon you,
and ye shall be witnesses unto me, etc. Or, You shall receive the power of the
Holy Ghost coming upon you.
THese words are the more remarkable, because they are the very last words in
the conference between the Son of God, and his beloved Apostles, immediately
before his ascension into heaven. Now, you know, when dear and intimate friends
are to part, as their love then runs strongest, and their affections are most
entire and vehement, so then also they especially discourse of those things,
wherein most of all they desire to be satisfied, and resolved. Thus was it
between Christ and his Apostles: never was there such dear and intimate
friendship, and such sincere and burning love between any, as between them. The
Apostles, all of them, loved Christ most truly, and passionately; and Peter,
who had three times denied him, three times professed his love to him, and
being sorry that Christ should question his love the third time, he thus
answered, Lord, thou know all things, thou know that I love thee. And
Christ also loved them dearly, yea he loved them John 4 19.
first, and having John 13. 1.
loved his own, he loved them to the end, and so he was not discontented with
them, for their leaving and forsaking him, through-humane infirmity, when he
was led away to judgment and to death; For though death quite puts out all
natural love, yet spiritual love is not extinguished, but enlarged by death.
Now when such loving friends as these, were even now ready to take their last
leave one of another, in regard of bodily presence, who would not most
willingly have been present, to have heard what discourse passed between
Christ, and his Disciples, at this their last parting?

Now Luke acquaints us with the Whole sum and substance of Christ's discourse
with his Apostles, The sum of Christ's discourse with his Disciples after his
Resurrection, till his Ascension.
all the time he lived together with them, after his Resurrection, till the day
wherein he Ascended into Heaven: In the third verse of this Chapter, he says,
he did discourse with them, De Regno Dei, touching the Kingdom of God. That
is, not only touching his Spiritual Kingdom, which he sets up in each
particular Christian, and which begins at our regeneration, and is consummate
in glorification: but also touching his Mediatory and Monarchical Kingdom,
which, in the time appointed of his Father, he should set up in the world; When
he should have the Psalm. 2. 8.
Heathen for his inheritance, and the utmost ends of the earth for his
possession, and Dan. 7. 14.
all people and Nations, and Languages should serve him, and he Psalm. 72. 8.
should reign from sea to sea, and from the river to the worlds end. This was
the sum of Christ's discourse with them. And the Apostles were fully satisfied
touching the thing, only they were unsatisfied touching the time. For besides,
that the setting up of this Kingdom of the Messiah in the power, beauty, and
glory of it, was at that time the common discourse and expectation of all
Israel; the Apostles themselves remembered many Prophesies and promises of the
Old Testament, for the restoring the Kingdom of David; And this they thought
Christ would have done, in the days of his flesh; but presently, all their
hopes were blasted by his death. But when they saw him risen again from the
dead, then presently their hearts were revived, into their former hopes; but
yet again, seeing nothing done, all the time he conversed with them after the
resurrection, when now he was ready to Ascend into Heaven, they desire him,
first, to resolve them of this question, whether or no he would at that time,
restore the Kingdom to Israel; Lord (say they) Will thou at this time restore
again the Kingdom to Israel? Now Christ, does not deny, the restoring of the
Kingdom to Israel, but denies, to acquaint them with the time when it should be
done. He tells them, it was not for them to know the times and seasons, which
the Father had put in his own power. verse 7.

The like answer to the like demand, Daniel received in his time. For when the
Angel had represented to Daniel, the total destruction of the image of worldly
Monarchy, together with the rise and reign, and ruin of Antichrist, and the
setting up of Christ's Kingdom in the world, in the stead of the two former,
Daniel said, Chap. 12. 8. And I heard, but I understood not; then said I, O my
Lord, What shall be the end of these things? And he said, Go thy way Daniel,
for the words are closed up and sealed till the time of the end. So that the
Angel, who discovered the things themselves to Daniel, refused to discover to
him plainly and expressly, the time when they should be done: but that was to
be closed and sealed up till the time of the end. And so here in like manner,
Christ who had discoursed largely and clearly to the Disciples touching the
Kingdom of God, yet denies to discover to them the time, when it should be set
up in the world. And the reason why he denied this to them, to whom he had not
denied himself, was not for want of love, but because the Father had kept the
time and season, wherein all this should be done, in his own power. Had this
been placed in Christ's power, he had no doubt made it known to them, as well as
he did those other things, which he had heard from his Father; but the Father
had not placed this in his Sons power, but had reserved it in his own: and the
Apostles were not to pry after, that which was hidden with God, but were to
content themselves with what he had revealed.

But though the Son did not reveal to them what the Father had kept in his own
power, yet he tells them, what the Father had promised unto them, and what he
had also put into his power, and what he would certainly perform ere long, and
that was the gift of the Spirit of power, saying, But ye shall receive power
when the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and you shall be witnesses to me, etc. As
if he should have said, Do not you trouble your selves about secret things,
which shall not be accomplished in the world, till many years after you are
fallen asleep, but do you mind your present business, wherein you are to serve
God, in your generation; your present task is to be witnesses unto me, in
Jerusalem and all Judea, and in Samaria, and to the utmost parts of the earth;
to declare and make known, what you have heard and seen with your eyes, and
looked upon, and your hands have handled of the Word of life: you are to
testify to the world, my Incarnation, Doctrine, Miracles. Life, Death,
Resurrection, and my Kingdom and glory, that is to come; You are to make known
to the world, the high and deep, the great and glorious mystery of Christ and
of the Gospel; and that you may be fit for this great and weighty work, you
shall receive the power of the Holy Ghost: you shall receive power, when the
Holy Ghost is come upon you, etc.

Which words also may be an Answer to another question which the Disciples did,
or might make, after this manner.

Our dear Lord and Master, Quest.
why will thou leave us, thy poor Disciples, among so many evils and enemies in
the world, which our weakness must of necessity sink under? We well remember
how fearful and foolish we have been, whilst thou wast yet with us; but how
much more timorous and trembling shall we be, when thou art gone from us? When
thou wast apprehended by the armed power of the Magistrates, thou know how
we all forsook thee and fled; and I, said Peter, denied thee and forswore thee,
at the voice of a simple maid. And therefore if thou now quite leave us, what
Witnesses are we like to be unto thee, and what Preachers of thy Name, among
the obstinate Jews, among the angry and enraged Rulers, and people, who will be
ready, for thy Names sake, every day to deliver us up to a new death? And how
shall we be able to stand amidst so many difficulties, troubles, distresses,
oppositions and persecutions, when thou have left us? Surely, we are such weak
and infirm creatures, that we shall never be able to hold out, but shall lie
down both in shame and sorrow.

To this Christ answers in these words, Answ.
Accipietis virtutem, You shall receive the power of the Holy Ghost coming upon
you. As if he should have said, You have a hard task indeed, but you shall be
furnished with proportionable power. The business you are to undertake, is not
humane, but Divine; the things that you are to teach, are not carnal, but
spiritual; the work that you are to set upon, is not man's work, but Gods: you
are to act among men for God; you are to act in the world, against the world;
you are to act against the devil, in the very midst of the devils Kingdom. You
are to convert Infidels; to make, of Heathens, Christians; to bring them near
unto God, who are now without God in the world; to carry the light of heaven,
up and down this dark world, among the people that sit in darkness, and shadow
of death, to show them the way to life and salvation; you are to turn the world
upside down; to change the manners, and customs of the people; to bring them
off from the idolatry of their forefathers, to worship the true God in spirit
and truth; you are to reduce the earth into conformity with heaven, and set up
Gods Kingdom, here in this present world. And all this you shall not do, in
ease and quietness, and prosperity, and pleasure; but whilst you are thus
employed and busied, you shall have the whole world rise up against you, and
the devil prosecuting you with his utmost power through wicked men, and you
shall not only be hated of all men, for my names sake, but you shall be even
overwhelmed with reproaches, obloquies, slanders, oppositions, persecutions,
prisons, torments, deaths. And therefore that you may be able both to do and to
suffer all these things, You shall receive the power of the Holy Ghost coming
upon you.

Now from these words, we shall note something generally, and something more
particularly.

In general three things. The first is this:

1. That as Christ will not suffer his Disciples to be tempted above their
power, 1. General Doctrine.
so neither to be employed above their power; but he furnishes them with power
sufficient, both for their temptations, and for their employments; for their
sufferings, and for their doings. And as Soldiers, that are under a wise and
careful Commander, when they are near an engagement, are not suffered to run
rashly upon the enemy, nor permitted to go forth to battle till they are armed,
and mounted; so Christ would not suffer his Disciples, to go forth in his
warfare, to encounter so many evils, and oppositions, and persecutions, and the
whole power of the world, and of the Devil, till first he had armed them with
the power of Holy Spirit; Ye shall receive power when the Holy Ghost is come
upon you, etc.

Christ always gives unto all those whom he sends forth and imployes, of his
own power, for his own works; heavenly power for heavenly works, spiritual
power for spiritual works, the power of God, to do the works of God. Indeed
Christ gives unto some a greater measure of power, and to some a lesser,
according as he intends to use some, in greater works and difficulties, and
some in lesser; but still they have of Christ's power, whether more or less,
who are employed by Christ; and a little of that power that is communicated by
Christ, will enable a man to do great things, far greater then the world
suspects, or imagines.

So that we may judge of our calling to any business, and of our employment in
it, by the power we have received from Christ for it. If we have none of the
power of Christ, we were never set on work by Christ; for Christ never sets
any, on his work, with out communicating unto them of his power. And hereby we
may certainly know and conclude, that those in the Ministry, that are loose
and vicious, and idle, and negligent, and insufficient for that work, were
never called to it, nor employed in it, by Christ, but they run of their own
heads, when they were not sent, and minister in the Church for the gain of
money, and preach only that they might live. Whereas if Christ had employed
them in that calling, he would have furnished them with abilities for it: and
they being destitute of such abilities, it is most evident, they were not sent
by Christ. Melius est, nullum habere, quam sacrilegum, impium and sceleratum
ministrum, qui non venit nisi ut mactet and. perdat, sicut fur and latro. Luth.
de instit. Ministr. Eccl.


Judge then what a kind of Reformation this church were like to have, if some
men might have their minds; who would have ignorant and insufficient men, yea
loose and profane men, tolerated in the Ministry, under pretense of keeping up
ordinances; when yet such men, were never employed by Christ, nor supplied with
any power from him: Yea and what ordinances (I pray) are those like to be,
which are kept up by men that are carnal, not having the Spirit? But you see
here that Christ's way and wisdom, was different from this; for he first gives
the Apostles, the power of the Spirit, and then sent them to preach, when he
had first enabled them to preach.

2. You see here, 2. General Doctrine.
that Christ being to leave his Disciples, in regard of his bodily presence,
yet leaves behind him the promise of the Spirit of power; and this was some
establishment to them, yea this gave great joy and comfort to them, who before
had their hearts filled with sorrow.

Christ, though sometime he leave his people in regard of sense, yet he never
leaves them without a promise. The soul sometimes, in the hours of temptation
and desertion, may want the sense and feeling of Christ, but it never wants a
promise from Christ: and the promise makes Christ present, in his absence. For
Christ himself is spiritually present, in the promise, and not Christ only,
but the Holy Spirit also; for Christ, and the Spirit, are never asunder, but as
the Father and the Son. are one, so is Christ and the Spirit one, and all are
in the promise. And so the promise is able to uphold the soul in any condition,
not because of its own nature, but because God and Christ and the Spirit are
present in the Promise, and they are infinitely able to support the soul
through the Promise, under the greatest evils either of earth or hell. Now this
enjoyment of God in the Promise, is the enjoyment of faith, and not of sense;
and this enjoyment of faith, is the most excellent and intimate enjoyment of
Christ. And thus may the soul, enjoy Christ's presence in his absence; his
presence according to faith, in his absence according to sense. And therefore
Christ departing from his Disciples in regard of his bodily presence, leaves
with them the promise of the Holy Spirit, and in that promise, his spiritual
presence. And this is the worst condition, that Christ ever leaves his true
Church in; he leaves them his presence in a Promise, when in regard of sense,
he forsakes them.

3. Note, 3. General Doctrine.
that Luke being to speak in this Book of the Acts of the Apostles, of the
propagating and enlarging, and governing the Christian Church, does first make
mention, of the pouring forth of the Spirit, and that both upon the Apostles,
and afterward upon the Disciples. Signifying hereby, that there is nothing so
necessary, for the increase and well ordering of the true Church of Christ, as
the pouring forth of the Spirit. And therefore they are altogether deceived,
and walk in the light of Nature and not of God, who think the increase, and
propagation, and preservation, and establishment, and order, and ordering, of
the Church of God, depend especially upon the Councels, and Decrees, and
Constitutions of men: and that without these, the Church of God, would soon
come to woeful disorder, yea to utter ruin and confusion; as if Christ and his
Spirit sat idle in heaven, and had left the whole business of his Church to
men: and the sacred power confirmed with the secular, were abundantly
sufficient, for the increase and well ordering of the Church. In the mean time,
not regarding the promise of the Father, or the pouring out of the Spirit by
the Son. And this is the very mystery, of the mystery of iniquity among us, and
the very head of Antichrist, which is yet to be broken. And therefore let us
know, that as the Psalmist says, Except the Lord build the house, they labor
in vain that build it: and except the Lord keep the City, the watchman watches
but in vain: so also except the Lord through his Word, pour forth the promise
of the Spirit, and by that Spirit of his, in and through the Word enlarge and
govern the Church, they labor in vain, that undertake these things of
themselves. For it is the Spirit alone, that through the faithful ministry of
the Word, makes the increase of the Church, and lays hold on all the elect,
and brings them through faith, into the unity of the Son and of the Father, and
teaches them, and orders them, and governs them, and preserves them. And
therefore you see here, that the promise of the Spirit is first performed,
before the Church of God has any enlargement, or government.

And now from these general things we proceed to the words more particularly.
The particular handling of the words.
Ye shall receive power when the Holy Ghost is come upon you.

And here we may note two things.

1. What he promises them, and that is Power; you shall receive power.

2. How they should be made partakers of that power, and that was, by the Holy
Spirits coming upon them.

The point we will insist on from both, is this.

That the receiving of the Spirit is the receiving of power: The Doctr.
till we receive the Spirit, we are altogether without power; and when we
receive the Spirit, then first of all, do we receive power; power from on high.

By nature, we are all without strength, weak, impotent creatures, utterly
unable to any thing, that is truly and spiritually righteous and good. For by
nature, we are nothing but flesh; for that which is born of flesh is flesh, and
all flesh is grass, a fading, withering and decaying thing, together with all
the flowers of it, that is, the perfections and excellencies of it. So that by
nature, we are all without power, because we are nothing but flesh, of which,
weakness is an inseparable adjunct.

But when we receive the Spirit, The Spirit is Power two ways.
we receive power: for power is an inseparable adjunct of the Spirit, as
weakness is of flesh: yea the Spirit it self which is given us, is power, and
that both essentially and operatively, in it self, and in us.

1. The Spirit is power essentially in it self: for it is one God with the
Father and the Son, 1. Essentially in it self.
co-essential, coequal, coeternal; and so as Christ, is the power of God, so
also is the spirit, the power of God; yea the spirit is the God of power, as well
as the power of God. So that the Spirit is power in himself essentially, and he
that partakes of the power of the spirit, partakes of that power, which is God
and no creature.

2. The Spirit, 2. Operatively in us; By being in us;
is power operatively in us, by being in us,

1. A Spirit of Knowledge; for the Holy Spirit teaches us to know the things
that are freely given to us of God; yea, he teaches us to know, what sin is,
and what righteousness; what death is, and what life; what Heaven is, 1. A
Spirit of Knowledge.
and what hell; what our selves are, and what God is, and these things he
teaches us to know, otherwise then other men know them. In a word, the spirit
teaches a Christian to know all things, that is, to know God and the Kingdom of
God, and all the things of both, all other things being nothing in comparison
of these. Thus the Holy Spirit is a Spirit of knowledge in us, and so of power;
for knowledge is the strength of a man. Whereas an ignorant man is a weak man,
you may carry him whither you will; but knowledge, renders a man strong and
unmovable. And in all things, wherein the Holy Spirit is a spirit of knowledge
in us, he is also a spirit of strength.

The Holy Spirit is a spirit of Power in us, by being in us a spirit of Truth.
And so the spirit is, 2. A Spirit of Power.
because it does not only lead us unto the truth (that is unto the word which
is the only truth, as it is written, Sanctify them through the truth, thy
Word is truth) but also the Spirit leads us into the Truth; it leads us into
the truth, and the truth into us, till we and it, become one by an inseparable
union. The Holy Spirit takes a believer, and leads him, into one truth after
another, till at last it lead him into all truth. Now wherein the Spirit, is a
Spirit of truth to us, it is a Spirit of Power; for through the truth we learn
from the Spirit of truth, we are altogether steadfast and unmovable, among
variety of different and contrary winds of Doctrine. And this is the very
cause, that among so many divisions, and factions, and errors, and heresies,
which woefully prevail in these present times of ours, the people of God are not
seduced and overcome, to wit, because they are all taught of God, of God and
not of men, and have the Spirit of truth, to lead them into the truth; the
Spirit I say and not men: and so it is impossible, that they should fully and
finally be deceived. For wherein we are taught by the Spirit of God, it is
unpossible we should be perverted by men. Whereas on the contrary, the true
ground, why so many are seduced and overcom, by the errors and heresies of this
age, is* because they have taken up their religion only from man's teaching,
and have received their opinions or doctrine from men: and so what one man has
taught us, another man can unteach; yea if we be led, to the truth it self,
only by man, man can again lead us from it. For all the world cannot lead any
man into the truth, till the Spirit lead him into it; and when the Spirit does
lead us into the truth, all the men in the world cannot lead us out of it; but
we are so sure of those things, wherein the Spirit has been a teacher to us,
that if all the Councels and Churches in the world, yea all the Angels of
Heaven should teach us contrary, we would hold them accursed. But a man that
has not been taught of the Spirit, every day you may win him into new
opinions, by the power and authority of men, together with the strength of
other advantages; But he that has been led into the truth, by the Spirit of
truth, is unmovable and invincible among all doctrines. And thus also the Holy
Spirit by being a Spirit of truth is also a Spirit of Power in us.

3. The Holy Spirit is a Spirit of Power in us, 3. A Spirit of Wisdom.
by being in us a Spirit of Wisdom: and so it is, because it makes us wise with
the wisdom of God, wise upon earth after the rate of heaven, wise to salvation.
There is no man wise without the Spirit of God; for the wisdom of carnal men is
but foolishness before God, yea before Angels and Saints: but the wisdom of the
Spirit is most gracious and heavenly wisdom. And this wisdom of the Spirit, is
the strength of a Christian: the more he has of it, the more mighty he is,
both in all his doings and indurings. It is said, Eccles. 9. 15. That there was
a poor wise man, delivered a small city from the power of a mighty King, and
therefore Solomon concludes that wisdom is better then strength, for it can do
greater things then strength can. When David carried himself wisely, Saul a
great King was afraid of him: he thought himself too weak, to deal with David,
and David too mighty to deal with him, because of his wisdom; and Solomon asked
Wisdom of God above all things, for the strength of his Government; 2 Cor. 1.
10.
all Government without this, being but weak and brittle. Thus wisdom
contributes strength to us, whereas we say of a man that wants wisdom, he is a
weak man; And so the Holy Spirit being a Spirit of wisdom in us, is also a
Spirit of Power.

4. The Holy Spirit, 4. A spirit of Faith.
is a Spirit of Power in us, by being in us a Spirit of Faith. For faith is a
work of the Spirit of power; and no less power would work faith in us, then
that which raised up Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19.
when he lay under all the sin of man, and all the Wrath of God, and all the
sorrows of death, and all the pains of hell; it must be a mighty power indeed,
that must raise Christ then, and that power was the power of the Spirit; and no
less power, will work faith. So that, whoever truly believes by this faith, of
the operation of God, is sensible in his own soul, of the self same power, that
raised Christ up from the dead. And thus the Holy Spirit is a Spirit of Faith
in us, and so of Power. For unbelief keeps a man in himself; but faith carries
a a man out to Christ; now there is no man weaker then he that rests on
himself; and there is no man stronger, then he that forsakes himself, and rests
on Christ. And so a man through the power of Faith, is able both to do, and
endure, the self same things which Christ himself did and endured. The power of
faith inables us, 1. to do the same things Christ himself did.


1. He is able to do the same things that Christ himself did, and therefore
says Christ, all things are possible to him that believes; so that a believer
has a kind of omnipotency, and all things are possible to him; because by
faith he lays hold upon the power of God, and all things are possible to the
power of God, and so all things are possible to a believer, Phil. 4. 13.
who is partaker of that power of God. And hence Paul says, I can do all
things through Christ that strengthens me; This Christ that strengthened him,
was the power of God; and this power of God, is not a finite power, but an
infinite: nor a particular power, but an universal; and so can do, not some
things only, but all things; and so also can all they, who are truly partakers
of it, by faith. Yea Christ himself has a greater expression then this, yea
such an one, that I never durst have spoken, if Christ himself, had not first
spoken it* and that is this, John 14. 12. He that believes in me, the works
that I do, shall be do, and greater works then these, because I go to the
Father. Where Christ says, a believer shall not only do, the same works with
himself, (which also had been a great thing) but also greater works then
himself; and this indeed, is altogether admirable and wonderful, That a
believer shall do greater works then Christ; But how is this made good? Why
thus. Christ he overcame the Law, and Sin, and Death, and Hell, and the whole
power of the Devil, in a body and soul free from sin; (his humane nature being
the immediate formation of the Holy Spirit in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and
so had not the least spot of sin in it.) But now believers, overcome the same
evils, even the Law, Sin, Death, Hell, and the whole power of the Devil, in
corrupted and polluted nature, in bodies and souls, at the first full of sin,
and afterward defiled through many corruptions. The Devil came to Christ, and
found nothing in him, and so he overcame: but he comes to a believer and finds
much in him, and yet he overcomes. And this truly is a greater work, then
Christ did; And these works we do, but not through our own power, but through
Christ's, of which we truly partake through faith.

2. A Christian, 2. To suffer the same things that Christ himself suffered.
through the power of faith, is able not only to do, but also to suffer the
same things that Christ himself sufferd. Now the sufferings of Christ were the
most grievous, and intolerable to nature, that ever were. For how did Christ
for the present, as it were lay aside his Divine nature, that he might suffer
in his humane! and how did he suffer in this, the whole weight and condemnation
of sin, to the very utmost, and the whole wrath of God, to the utmost, and all
the sorrows of death, and the pains of hell, to the very utmost! And among all
the sufferings, had not the least drop of comfort, either from heaven or earth;
and yet through the power of the Spirit, he endured and overcame all. And so
each Christian, is able to endure and overcome, the same evils, by the same
power: and therefore Paul desired to know Christ truly, Phil. 3. 10.
and not only, the power of his resurrection, which any one would desire to
know, but also the fellowship of his sufferings, which flesh and blood trembles
at, yea and to be made conformable to his very death. Yea I add yet further,
that if a Christian should chance to fall down into Hell (as we believe Christ
descended into Hell, and so also many of his Saints have done, as David and
Hezekiah, etc.) Yet a Christian, through the power of the Spirit, were able to
overcome both the sins and the pains of Hell; Cant. 8. 5, 6.
and therefore says Solomon, Love, (which is the power of the Spirit) is too
strong for death and too hard, or too cruel for Hell; As is evident in that
Godly woman (for I will name but one instance instead of many) who thinking of
the torments of hell, and of the hatred and blasphemy of God, which reigned in
the damned, did earnestly entreat God, ut etiamsi damnaretur, tamen Deum
diligeret; that though she were damned, yet still she might love God. Here
love, was too hard for Hell indeed.

And thus a believer through faith, is enabled, both to do and endure, the self
same things, which Christ himself did and endured: and the Holy Spirit by being
a Spirit of faith, is a Spirit of Power in us.

5. The Holy Spirit is a Spirit of power in us, by being in us a Spirit of
Righteousness: 5. A spirit of Righteousness.
and so he is two ways.

1. In regard of mortifying sin. For the Spirit of God dwelling in us, is not
idle in us, but continually active; and so from day to day mortifies sin. 1.
Mortifying sin.
And this is the proper work, of the Spirit in our flesh, to destroy out of us,
whatsoever is contrary to it self; and that is, every sin, lust and corruption.
Now our sins are our weakness; a man's pride and passion, and envy and
covetousness, and lust, and intemperance, and every sin is his weakness. Now
the Holy Spirit, by being in us, a Spirit of righteousness, mortifies and
destroys all our sins, and so takes away our weakness.

2. Again, as the Holy Spirit is a Spirit of righteousness in us, in regard of
mortifying sin, 2. Imparting grace.
so also in regard of imparting grace to us. For all grace is the fruit and
operation of the Spirit in our flesh; and as all light is from the sun, so is
all grace from the Spirit. Now every grace, is so much strength in the soul.
Faith, so much strength; Hope, so much strength; Love, so much strength; and so
humility, and patience, and temperance, and godliness, and brotherly Kindness,
and all other graces, are so much strength: and according to each man's measure
of grace, so is his measure of strength; and according to each man's measure of
the Spirit, so is his measure of grace. And thus the Holy Spirit, by being a
Spirit of righteousness, is also in us a Spirit of power.

6. The Holy Spirit, 6 A spirit of the fear of the Lord.
is a Spirit of power in us, by being in us, a Spirit of the fear of the Lord:
and so he is, by representing God to us in his Glory and Majesty, according as
he has revealed himself to us in his word; from which knowledge of God springs
his fear. For what is the reason, that the men of the world fear not God, but
sin securely, against the great and glorious God every day? Why, the reason is,
because they know not the Lord. Now the Spirit comes, and reveals the Father in
the Son, and presents God to the soul, through his word, in his infinite and
eternal power, and justice, and wisdom, and truth, and faithfulness, and love,
and mercy, and goodness, etc. and shines to the soul, in each attribute of God;
and now, when a man sees God, by his own light, and knows him by his own
teaching, then first does he begin, truly to fear God; and the fear of God, is
his strength. For he that fears God, is free from all other fear: he fears not
men of high degree, nor men of low degree, nor the united power of all the
creatures; he fears not the fear of other men in their evils, but in the mid^^
of all fearful things, he is without fear; because he sanctifies the Lord of
hosts in himself, in his heart, and makes him his fear, and his dread. And by
this means, amidst all evils, he has admirable confidence and assurance; Isa
8. 13.
because he knows, that no evil can befall him from any man, or from any
creature, till first it be the will of God: and also, that what ever evil
befalls him, according to the will of God, it shall work for good unto him, in
the end. Thus the fear of the Lord is a Christians confidence, and a believers
strength: whereas, he that fears not God, fears every thing, yea, not only
real, but imaginary evils; and as evils multiply his fears, so his fears
again, multiply his evils, till at last he be swallowed up of both. But the
Holy Spirit being in us a Spirit of the fear the Lord, is also in us a Spirit
of strength.

7. The Holy Spirit is a Spirit of power in us, 7. A spirit of love and Unity.
by being in us a Spirit of love and unity. The Holy Spirit, is a Spirit of
love and unity; in the Godhead; for the Father loves the Son, with the Spirit;
and the Son, loves the Father, with the Spirit; and the Father, is one with the
Son, in the Spirit; and the Son, is one with the Father, in the Spirit; and the
Spirit, is both the bond of love, and unity, between the Father and the Son;
and God, being most love, and most one, is also most strong. Now what the
Spirit is in the Godhead, he is the same in the Church of God, which is the
true temple and habitation of the Godhead, and that is, a Spirit of love and
unity: For why is there such constant love, and unity, between the members of
the same body, but because one Spirit runs through them all? and so there is
such constant love and unity between all believers, because one Holy Spirit
runs through them all. And hence we may take notice of a remarkable difference
between nature and grace; for nature, of one, makes many; for we all, who are
many among our selves, even a whole world of men, were but one in Adam, omnes
eramus ille unus homo; but grace, of many makes one; for the Holy spirit which
is as fire, melts all the faithful into one mass or lump, and makes of many,
one body, one thing: yea it makes them one, in the unity of God, according to
that of Christ, John 17. 21. that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; mark the words, for they are
wonderful; that they all may be one, that is, that all believers, who are many
among themselves, may be all made one; one? How one? As thou Father art in me
and I in thee, that is, as thou and I, being two persons, are yet but one God:
after this highest example of unity, let them be made One in us; as long as
they remain in themselves, they are many; and how much they remain in
themselves, they are many; for their unity, is not in themselves, but they are
one in us who are one; that is, how much the saints by the Spirit, are carried
into the Father; and the Son, who are one, so much also are they made one, not
only with the Father and the Son, but also with one another. You may see, in
the Acts how the multitude of believers, after they had received the Spirit, so
far forth as they had received the Spirit, Were of one heart and of one mind.
And this unity of beelievers, is their strength: and when God shall take away,
all those prejudices, and suspicions, and jealousies, and particular ends and
interests, and divisions, and separations, and Schisms, that are among his own
people, and the people of God shall be reduced into this blessed unity, among
themselves, and the Lord be one, and his name one, among them all; then shall
the Church also, be of admirable and invincible power. So that, all they that
strive with it, shall perish: and all they, that war against it, shall be as
nothing: yea then shall the Lord, make the Church as a new sharp threshing
instrument, Isa 41. 15.
having teeth, and it shall thresh the Mountains (that is the Kingdoms of the
world) and shall beat them small, and shall make the hills, (that is, the
lesser Commonwealths) as chafe. But till the Church of God attain to this
unity, it shall not do any excellent thing; it shall not work any notable
deliverance in the earth, neither shall the inhabitants of the world fall. When
the Spirit of God shall be a Spirit of unity in the faithful, and shall heal
all the sad differences, and dissensions, that are now between them, then also
shall it be a Spirit of admirable power in them.

And thus much for the explication of the point.

The Use, is twofold.

1. The first is, to exhort all men, everywhere, to endeavor to partake of
this supernatural, spiritual, and divine power of the Holy Spirit, which is
certainly communicated, to all the faithful, 1. Use.
and Elect, in Christ Jesus. And let no man think it is a thing indifferent,
whether he have this power or no, but know that the having of this power of the
Spirit, is of absolute necessity, and that both for Ministers, and for all
other Christians.

1. There is a necessity of this power of the Holy Spirit for Ministers, and to
them, this present place does chiefly relate. A necessary for Ministers to have
the power of the Spirit.


1. For first, if they have not this power of the Holy Spirit, they have no
power at all. For Christ sent them, only as his Father sent him; 1. Otherwise
they have no power at all.
and so Christ, never gave unto them; any earthly or humane or secular power,
no power of words or prisons, no power of outward constraint and violence.
Christ gave them, no such outward and worldly power, for the enlargement of his
Kingdom, as not being at all suitable to it. For his Kingdom is spiritual; and
what can carnal power do in a Spiritual Kingdom? His Kingdom is heavenly; and
what can earthly power do, in a heavenly Kingdom? His Kingdom is, not of this
world; and what can worldly power do, in a Kingdom that is not of the World?
And though Antichrist, and his Ministers, have arrogated and usurped, such a
carnal and earthly and worldly power to themselves, in their pretended managing
the Kingdom of Christ, yet the faithful Ministers of Christ cannot.

And therefore seeing the Ministers of the Gospel, have no power, from beneath,
they must needs have power from on high; seeing they have no fleshly power,
they must needs have Spiritual power; seeing they have no power from earth and
from men, they must needs have power from heaven and from God, that is, the
power of the Holy Spirit coming on them, or else they have no power at all.

2. The Ministers of the Gospel, 2. Without this they are insufficient for the
work of the Ministry.
must needs have this power of the Holy Spirit, because otherwise they are not
sufficient for the Ministry. For no man, is sufficient for the work of the
Ministry, by any natural parts and abilities of his own, nor yet by any
acquisite parts of humane learning and knowledge, but only by this power of
the Holy Spirit, and till he be endowed with this notwithstanding all his other
accomplishments, he is altogether insufficient. And therefore the very
Apostles, were to keep silence, till they were induced with this power: they
were to wait at Jerusalem, till they had received the promise of the spirit,
and not to preach, till then. Yea, Christ himself, did not betake himself, to
the work of the Ministry, till first, the spirit of God came upon him, and
anointed him to preach. And therefore for thirty years together, he did not
preach, publicly and ordinarily, till at John's Baptism, he received this power
of the spirit, coming on him. Now if Christ himself and his Apostles were not
sufficient for the Ministry till they had received this power from on high, no
more are any other Ministers, whatsoever. For as I said, it is not natural
parts and abilities, and gifts, and learning, and eloquence, and
accomplishments, that make any man sufficient for the Ministry, but only the
power of the Holy Spirit coming upon him. So that who ever is destitute, of the
spirit of power, is insufficient for the work of the Ministry; and that in
these regards.

1. Without this power of the spirit, 1. They are unable to preach the Word.
Ministers, are utterly unable to preach the Word; that is the true, spiritual,
and living Word of God. For to preach this Word of God, requires the Power of
God. One may speak the word of man, by the power of man: but he cannot speak
the Word of God, but by the power of God. And Christ himself, in all his
Ministry, spoke nothing of himself, in the strength of his humane nature; but
he spoke, all he spoke, by the power of God; and without this power of God, he
could not have spoken one word of God. And so in like manner, no man is able to
preach Christ but by the Holy Spirit, which is the power of God. For Christ, is
the power of God; and can never be represented* but by the Holy Spirit, which
is the power of God. For as we see light in his light, that is, the Father who
is light, in the Son who is light; or else the Son who is light, in the Holy
Spirit who is light; So we know power in his power, that is the Son who is
power, in the Holy Spirit who is power. And Christ who is the power of God, can
never be made known to the Church, but by the ministration of the spirit, which
is the power of God. So that, it is not an easy thing, to preach Christ the
power of God; yea none can do it aright, but by the power of the Holy Spirit
coming upon him.

2. Without this power of the Spirit, 2. Unable to preach it powerfully.
Ministers are unable to preach the word powerfully. They may, it may be,
happen upon the outward word, yet there is no power in their Ministry, till
they have received this power of the spirit, coming upon them. Otherwise,
their Ministry is cold, and there is no heat in it; it is weak, and there is
no strength in it.

1. It is cold, 1. The Ministry cold without this power
and there is no heat in it. Without men have received the power of the spirit,
there is no fire in their preaching. Their ministry, is unlike the ministry
of Elias, whose ministry was as fire; and unlike John Baptists, who in his
ministry was a burning and shining light; and unlike Christ's, whose ministry
made the Disciples hearts burn within them; and unlike the Apostles, who having
received this spirit, were as men made all of fire, running through the world
and burning it up. Without this spirit, a man's ministry is cold, it warms the
hearts of none, it inflames the spirit of none, but leaves men still frozen in
their sins.

2. It is weak and has no might in it. 2 Weak.
There is no strength in a Ministry where there is no spirit. Whereas when men
have received the spirit, then their ministry is a powerful ministry, as Paul
1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. The Gospel came to you not in word only, but in power and in
the Holy Ghost; and therefore in power because in the Holy Spirit. And again,
1 Cor. 2. 4. My speech and preaching was not with the entising words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit and power. Where you see the spirit
and power in the work of the Ministry, are always conjoined, as the Sun and
light are. And that Ministry that is in the spirit, is always in power. And
being in power, it is always effectual, either to convert men or to inrage
them: And the inraging of men, is as evident a sign of the spirit of power in a
man's ministry, as the conversion of men. Whereas a cold and dead ministry that
is destitute of this power, does (as we use to say) neither good nor harm,
neither converts nor inrages, neither brings in righteousness, nor destroys
sin, neither kills nor quickens any, but leaves men, in their old temper, for
many years together, and never stirs them. But the ministration of the spirit
and power, is operative and mighty, and carries all before it. And though evil
and carnal men, will ever be murmuring, and wrangling, and opposing, and
contending against such a ministry, yet they are never able to resist the
wisdom and spirit of it; as the Libertines, Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, Acts
6. 10.
were not able to resist, the wisdom and spirit by which Stephen spoke. And
therefore, let them that will needs be striving against such a ministry, know,
that they strive against more then a mere man, they strive against power from
on high, against the greatest power that ever God put forth; against the power
of Christ himself, and his eternal spirit, and so they shall never be able to
prevail against this power, but shall surely sink under it. But to return from
whence we have a little digressed.

3. Without this power of the spirit, as Ministers are not able to preach the
Word, 3 Unable to hold out in the Ministry.
nor to preach it powerfully, so neither are they able to hold out in their
ministry, and to carry it on strongly against all opposition and contradiction.
Peter and John preached the Gospel, but presently the Rulers and Elders and
Scribes convented them; and straightly threatened them, and commanded them, not
to speak at all, Acts 4. 17. 18.
nor to teach in the name of Jesus. And now if the Apostles, had wanted this
power of the spirit, they would presently, have been snibd and awed, and would
have sneaked away, and you should have heard no more of them. But they having
received this power, all the threatenings and scornings, of the Rulers and
Magistrates, could not deterr them from the discharge of their office, and that
ministry they had received from Christ. But though before, they were fearful,
and trembling, and daunted at the apprehension of the least danger, yet now
having received this power, they are altogether undaunted, and said to the
Rulers and Elders, whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto
you, more then unto God, Acts 4. 19.
judge ye. As if they should have said, O ye Rulers and Elders of the people,
our case is a plain case, wherein we are most willing that even your own selves
should be Judges. For we have received a command from God, to preach the Gospel
of his Son Jesus Christ; and you forbid us to do that, which God has commanded
us. Now do you your selves, be Judges, who is fittest to be obeyed, God or you?
the great and glorious God of heaven and earth, or poor wretched men, such as
your selves? Nay, what God has commanded us, we must, and will obey, against
all your threatenings and punishments, and what ever you can say or do. We
cannot conceal, but must publish, what we have seen and known, of our Lord
Jesus Christ, of his incarnation, life, death, resurrection, ascension,
kingdom, glory, and of that great redemption and salvation, which he has
wrought and purchased for all the Elect of God.

Now I would to God, that the unjust commands of all Magistrates, and secular
Powers whatsoever, might be no otherwise obeyed, then this unjust command of
the Rulers, was by Peter and John; and that no man would dare to yield more
obedience to the creature, then to the Lord of all.

For no Princes or Magistrates in the world, have any power to forbid the
preaching of the everlasting Gospel, which God has commanded, should be
published to all Nations, for the obedience of Faith. I say, they have no power
at all, to forbid the preaching of this Gospel, or of any one truth of it,
though never so cross to their designs. And if they should, yet herein, ought
we to know no more obedience, then Peter and John did here. We ought to obey
God, and not them, and to make known the whole mind of God, though it be never
so contrary to their mind: After the example of Peter and John, who having
received this power of the Holy Spirit, held on their Ministry, against all
the countermands, and threatenings, and punishments of the Magistrates. Whereas,
without this power, they had soon fainted and failed, and had never been able
to have gone through with it.

4. Without this power of the Holy Spirit, 4. Unable to reprove the world.
Ministers are not able to reprove the world. For every man by nature, seeks
the amity of the world, and no man by his good will, would provoke the enmity
of it, against himself. And therefore flesh and blood, will never reprove the
world of sin, but allows it, and countenances it, in sin. But now the Spirit
when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin. When a man has this power
of the Spirit in him, then presently he reproves and argues the world of sin,
and so by his ministry, bids defiance to the whole world, and provokes the
whole world against himself. And this no man, either can do, or dares do,
except he be first endued, with this power of the Spirit, coming on him. And
therefore says Micah, Cha. 3. verse. 8. I am full of power by the Spirit of the
Lord, and of judgment and of might, to declare unto Jacob his transgression,
and to Israel his sin.

The world, of all other things, cannot endure the reproof of sin, and the
declaration of its evil ways. And therefore it is exceedingly offended, yea
and extremely rages against the faithful teachers of the Word, with all sorts
of punishments and persecutions, as the examples of all the Prophets, Apostles
and faithful teachers of the Word of God in all ages, do declare. Yea, and
Christ himself, testifies touching himself, therefore the world hates me,
because I testify of it, that the works thereof are evil. But now, they that
will connive at sin, and flatter the world in its own ways, these are the
only men of reckoning, and live in all worldly Honor and prosperity. And all
ages can witness, that all Teachers, are not of that strength, and resolution,
to contemn the hatred and fury of the world; Nay, the most are quite overcome,
with the prosperity of this present life, and with the desire of friends and
riches and preferment, and so wink at the sins of the world, and are, Ministers
in whose mouths are no reproofs, though the whole world lie in wickedness. For,
thus they escape the rage and violence, and obtain the favor and love of the
men of this world. And thus weak and unworthy are those men, who are only
endued with their own Spirits. But now (says Micah) I am full of power by the
Spirit of the Lord, and of judgment and of might, to declare unto Jacob his
transgression, and to Israel his sin.

As if he should have said, the power of the Spirit of the Lord dwelling in me,
puts forth its self, two ways, in judgment, and in fortitude.

1. In judgment, and this signifies the reproving and the condemning sin and
wickedness, as the Prophet himself explicates, saying, that I might declare
unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin. But seeing their being
full of judgment does not want danger, but exposes a man to a thousand evils,
in as much as the world can endure nothing less then the reproof of sin;
therefore I am, by the power of the Spirit, not only full of judgment, but
also

Secondly, full of Might; and as the Spirit of judgment exposes me to danger,
so the Spirit of might inables me to contemn those dangers. So that though the
world, because of the Spirit of judgment, threatens never so many evils: yet
the Prophet is not frighted from his office, but through the Spirit of might,
discharges it faithfully, in despite of all those threatenings.

And whatever Ministers, want this Spirit of might, though out of danger, they
may be confident, yet at the very first encounter of evil, they will bend and
yield, and speak and do all things for the favor of the world; rather then for
the truths sake, they will expose themselves, to the hatred and opposition of
the world.

5. Without this power of the Spirit, they are unable to wrestle with, 5.
Unable to wrestle with and overcome the devil.
and overcome the Devil; whose subtilty, and wrath, and malice, and power, they
must needs encounter with, in the work of the Ministry. Christ, as soon as he
was endued with this power, and anointed by the spirit to preach, was
immediately led into the wilderness, to be temped of the devil, who would fain
have taken him off, from the work of the Ministry, if it had been possible:
But Christ being endued with this power, overcame the devil. And Christ, before
he sent his Apostles to preach the Kindgdom of God, as you may see Luke 9. 1.
called them together, and gave them power and authority over all devils; and
when they returned, they told him, that the devils themselves, were subject to
them. But now, the seven sons of Sceva, who were destitute of this power, when
they took upon them, to call over one, who had an evil spirit, the name of the
Lord Jesus, and to say, we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches, The evil
spirit, answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? and
so, the man in whom the evil spirit was, leaped upon them, and overcame them,
and prevailed against them, and they fled away, naked and wounded. Acts 19. So
that they being destitute, of this power from on high, the devil was presently
too hard for them, and they were overcome by the devil. But now, they that are
invested with this power of the Holy Spirit, are able to wrestle with
principalities and powers and the rulers of the darkness of this world, and to
out-wrestle them, and to tread Satan himself, under their feet.

Sixthly, without this power of the Holy Spirit, they are unable to suffer
persecution for the Word; 6 Unable to suffer persecution for the Word.
but the least touch of evil, causes them to pull in their horns; and each
reproach, and opposition, and persecution, shakes them down. Whereas this
power, makes them confident, courageous, comfortable, and invincible, in the
midst of all evils. See this in some examples. Our Lord Jesus Christ being
anointed with the Holy Spirit and with power, did not only preach the truth in
his life, but also witnessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate, and
sealed to the truth with His death. Paul, who was endued with the same power,
when Agabus foretold him by the Holy Spirit his bonds at Jerusalem, and the
brethren hearing it came weeping to Paul, and besought him to keep himself out
of bonds, by not going up thither, Paul reproved them and told them that he was
ready not only to be bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the Lord Jesus.
Chrysostom, was endued with the same power, and so resolved to preach the
truth, and not to depart from the truth, though the whole world, should wage
war against him alone: And professed, that he desired nothing more, then to
suffer for the cause of Christ; and that if it were offered to him of God,
whether he would immediately go to heaven, or stay on earth and suffer for
Christ; he would a thousand times rather choose this latter, then the former.
Because in going immediately to heaven, he should seek himself; but in staying
on earth to suffer for Christ, he should wholly deny himself, and seek his
honor alone. Luther was endued with the same spirit of power, and so when he
was called to Worms before the Emperor Charles the fifth, and before all the
estates of the Empire, to render a reason of his Doctrine, and some of his
friends (perceiving undue dealing among his adversaries) persuaded him not to
go, to expose himself to danger; but he answered with a mighty spirit, Mihi
vero qui vocatus sum, decretum and certum est ingredi urbem, in nomine Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, etiamsi scirem tot diabolos mihi oppositos, quot sunt
tegulae in omnibus totius urbis tectis.
I have decreed and am resolved, because I am called, to go into the City in
the name of our Lord Jesus Christi, though I knew there were so many Devils to
oppose me, as there are tiles on all the houses of the City. And when he was
called to return to Wittenberge by the people, which he could not do without
most evident and apparent danger, he being already condemned by the Edicts and
Authority both of the Pope and Emperor, and so in regard of them, could expect
no less then a violent death every day, yet for all this, he was resolved to
return to his charge; and upon this occasion has this passage to the Duke of
Saxony. Verum quid faciam? urgent me causae inevitabiles, Deus cogit and vocat,
hic nulli creaturae tergiversandum est. Age fiat igitur in nomine Jesus Christi
qui est Dominus vitae and mortis. Nihil habeo quod possim perdere; Domini ego
sum; si perdor, Domino perdor, id est invenior. Alium ergo quaere quem terreas.
Verum ego scio and certus sum, Iesum Christum Dominum nostrum vivere and
regnare: qua scientia and fiducia inflatus, non timebo etiam multa millia
Paparum. Major est enim qui in nobis, quam qui in mundo est.

Quid si me occidat Papa aut damnel ultra Tartara? Occisum non suscitabit, ut
bis and iterum occidat: damnatum vero ego vo^^ut nunquam absolvat. Confido
enim, instare diem illum quo de^^ruetur regnum illud abominationis and
perditionis. Vtinam nos primi digni simus, vel exuri vel occidi ab eo, quo
sanguis noster magis clamet, and urgeat judicium illius, accelerari. Sed si
digni non sumus sanguine testificari, hanc saltem oremus and imploremus
misericordiam, ut vita and voce testemur, quod Jesus Christus solus est Dominus
and Deus noster, Benedictus in secula seculorum. Luther. in Epist. ad Patr.


But what shall I do? unavoidable causes urge me, God himself calls and
compells me, and here I will turn my back to no creature. Go to then, let me do
it in the name of Jesus Christ, who is Lord both of life and death. Again, in
his answer to the Dialogue of Sylvester Prierias, who had threatened him, he
says, I have nothing that I can loose, I am the Lords, and if I am lost, I am
lost to the Lord, that is, I am found. And therefore seek some body else to
fright, for me you cannot. Again in his answer to Ambrosius Catharinus, he
says of the Pope and his Instruments, they seek not to overcome me with
Scriptures, but to destroy me out of the earth, but I know and am sure that
Christ our Lord lives and reigns. And being even filled with this knowledge and
confidence, I will not fear many thousands of Popes. For greater is he that is
in us, then he that is in the World. And again, in his Epistle to his Father,
he has this remarkable passage, What if the Pope shall kill me or condemn me
below hell? He cannot raise me up again when I am slain, and kill me a second
and third time. And having once condemned me, I would never have him absolve
me. For I am confident that the day is at hand, wherein that Kingdom of
abomination and destruction, shall be it self destroyed. But would I might
first be counted worthy either to be burned or slain by him, that so my blood
might cry the louder and urge his judgment to be the more hastened. But if I
am not worthy to testify with my blood, let me at least entreat and implore
this mercy, that I may testify by my life and Doctrine that Jesus Christ alone
is our Lord, and God blessed for ever and ever.

Calm Melancton was endued with the same Spirit of power, and so when his
enemies threatened him not to leave him a place in all Germany whereon to set
his foot, he said, avido and tranquillo animo expecto exilia. I expect
banishment with a desirous and peace able mind.

Many more Examples might be produced, to show that when Ministers are endued
with the power of the Spirit coming on them, then they are stronger then all
opposition and Persecution whatsoever; otherwise, when these evils encounter
them, they with Demas leave the Work, and embrace the World.

And thus you see, what necessity all the faithful Ministers of the Gospel have
of the power of the Holy Spirit coming upon them; and without this power,
though they be called Ministers, yet they are none. For without this power,
they are unable to preach the Word, to preach it powerfully, and to persevere
and hold out in the course of the Ministry; they are unable to reprove the
World, to wrestle with and overcome the. Devil; and to suffer that Persecution,
which necessarily attends that calling. And so without this power, they may
Minister to themselves, but cannot Minister to others, the manifold graces of
God: they may do their own work, but they cannot do Gods work; they may seed
themselves, but not the Flock of Christ: they may domineer over the sheep, but
cannot drive away the Wolf: The Holy Spirit and the power of it necessary for
all Christians.
they may build up their own houses, but cannot build up God house.

Secondly; as the Holy Spirit and the power of it, is necessary for Ministers,
so also for all other Christians whatsoever.

But some here will be ready to say, Question.
yea, but do all believers, receive the Spirit of God, and the power of the
Spirit, as Ministers do?

Yes, Answer.
Equally and alike with them, without any difference. This is evident, Act. 11.
15. where Peter tells the Jews, who contended with him for conversing and eating
with the Gentiles, that when he began to speak the Word to them, the Holy
Spirit fell on them (says he) as on us at the beginning. And again, ver. 17.
Forasmuch then as God gave unto them the like gift as he did unto us, who
believed on the Lord Jesus Christ, what was I, that I could withstand God. So
that God gave the Holy Spirit to as many Gentiles as believed, in like manner
as he did unto the Apostles themselves: and they received the same power of the
Holy Spirit coming on them, as the Apostles did. Whereby you may perceive that
not Ministers only are Spiritual men, and all others temporal, as the Papists
have taught, and many Ignorant people among our selves, are still persuaded:
but all true Believers are spiritual, as well as they, being born of the
Spirit, and Baptized with the Spirit, equally as they are.

And so all true Believers as well as Ministers being endued with the Spirit;
are also endued with the power of the Spirit, and so have more then an Earthly
power in them. They have all of them, power of another nature then the power of
the World; they partake of spiritual, heavenly, and divine power, even of the
very power of Christ himself, which infinitely transcends all the power of the
creature.

You see then clearly, that all faithful Christians, have the Spirit of power,
and the power of the Spirit coming on them, as well as Ministers. And they stand
in need of both these, for these causes.

1. They stand in need of the Spirit of power, They need the Spirit of power.
first to difference and distinguish them from Reprobates and Devils: for
without the gift of the Spirit, there is no difference, between us and them.
For Michael does not differ from the Devil, nor Gabriel from Beelzebub, but only
by the Spirit. And Moses differs not from Pharaoh, nor Abel from Cain, not
Jacob from Esau, nor Peter from Judas, in regard of their substance, but in
regard of the Spirit, which the one received, and the other were counted
unworthy of.

2. To advance them above the condition of flesh and blood, and above all
those, in whom is none of Gods Spirit. The excellency of each creature is,
according to its Spirit; for the more excellent the spirit of the creature is,
the more excellent is the creature it self; and each creature, is valued and
rated according to the Spirit of it. How excellent then, must they be above all
the World, who have received the Spirit that is of God? Surely these are people
of the most excellent spirit: And hence it is, that the righteous is more
excellent then his neighbor, because his spirit is more excellent then his
neighbors.

3. To unite them unto Christ. The Spirit is the bond of Union between the
Father and the Son, in the Godhead; and the Father and the Son, are one in the
Spirit (as we spoke before.) And now, the same spirit, is our bond of Union
with Christ, and makes us one with Christ, as Christ is one with God, and
unites us unto Christ, in the unity of God; for as Christ, is one with the
Father, in the Spirit, so are we one with Christ, in the Spirit: For he that is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit; and he that is not one Spirit with the Lord,
They need the power of the Spirit.
is not joined to him.

4. All faithful Christians stand in need of the power of the Spirit, as well
as of the Spirit of power.

1. To change their nature, 1. To change their nature.
which is impossible to all power, but the power of the Spirit. It would be a
great power, to change clay into Gold, and a pibble into a Diamond; but it is a
greater change that is wrought in a Christian, and requires a greater power.
For the power of the Spirit, when it comes into our flesh, changes the nature
of it. For it finds a man carnal, it makes him spiritual; it finds him earthly,
it makes him heavenly; it finds him a drunkard, it makes him sober; an
adulterer, it makes him chaste; a swearer, it makes him fear an oath; proud, it
makes him humble; it finds him darkness, makes him light in the Lord; in a
word, it finds him nothing but a lump of sin, and makes him the righteousness
of God in Christ. Thus the power of the Spirit, changes our whole corrupt
nature, and makes it conformable to the divine nature; as fire makes the Iron
in which it prevails, like unto it self, communicating its own nature to it.
After this sort, the power of the Spirit changes our nature, and our nature
cannot be changed without it. But without this power of the Spirit, we shall
always remain the same we were born, without any change at all. Yea, our
corruption will by daily use and exercise, increase in us, till at last it
quite eat out that common natural good, which God has given to every one of
us, for the common benefit of mankind.

2. All Christians have need of the power of the Spirit to work grace in them.
2. To work Grace.
For our natures, are wholly carnal and corrupt; and nothing can implant grace
in them, but the mighty power of Gods Spirit. And it is as great a Miracle, to
see the Grace of God dwelling in the corrupt nature of man, as to see the Stars
grow upon the Earth. And yet the power of the Spirit does this, as it is
written, Psalm. 25. 11. 2 Pet. 1. 14.
truth shall spring out of the earth; and again, great and precious promises
are made to us, that we should be partakers of the Divine nature; and again, he
has predestined us that we should be conformable to the Image of his Son.
That is, as in other things, so also in all his virtues. So that the power of
the Spirit, implants grace in our nature; and each grace, is so much of the
power of the Spirit, in our flesh, as was said before. Wherefore we must needs
learn to know, whose power, the power of grace is. For though grace be a power
in our flesh, it is not the power of our flesh: for Paul says, in me, that is
in my flesh, dwells no good thing, but and if, any good, be, in my flesh, it
dwells not in my flesh, but in Gods Spirit which dwells in me. As light, is in
the air, but dwells in the Sun, so when men are regenerate, good is in the
flesh, but dwells in the spirit. For grace in the soul, is nothing but so much
of the power of the Spirit, immediately dwelling and working in us; and when
the Spirit is gone, all grace goes along with him, as all light with the Sun;
but it dwells in him, and is inseparable from him.

3. All Christians stand in need of the power of the spirit, 3. To mortify sin.
to enable them to mortify and destroy sin. There is no power in our flesh,
against sin; but all the power of our flesh, is for it: and therefore it must
be another power, then the power of our flesh, that must destroy sin, and that
can be no other, then the power of Gods Spirit. And the power of the Spirit,
destroys the whole body of sin, and each particular strong corruption.

1. The whole body of sin, 1. The whole body of sin.
in all the parts and members and branches of it; each several influence and
operation of the Spirit, being a several destruction, of some sin or other. For
as the spirit that is in us, lusts after envy, or pride, or vainglory, or
covetousness, or uncleanness, or the like; so the Spirit we have of God,
according to its mighty power, destroys all those sinful works of our corrupt
spirit, and mortifies all the deeds of our flesh, according to that of Paul, if
ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, Romans 8. 13.
ye shall live: The flesh will never mortify its own deeds, but the spirit
must mortify the deeds of the flesh* and this will mortify them, according to
the whole Latitude of them.

2. Again, 2. Particular strong corruptions.
as the power of the Spirit sudues the whole body of sin, so also it over
powers each particular strong corruption, and keeps a Christian straight and
upright in the ways of God. Every man has some one corruption, to which by
nature he is more inclined, then to another, and this is the byas of a man; but
the strength of the Spirit, will overpower this. A boul, if it be thrown with
strength, knows not its byas, but is carried on strait, as if it had no byas at
all. So the Godly have still some flesh in them which is their byas, and
carries them from God to themselves and the World* but the strength of the
spirit, takes away this byas, and makes us take straight steps to God.

4. All Christians-stand in need of the power of the Spirit, 4. To perform
duties.
to enable them to perform duties, to perform them aright, that is,
spiritually. For spiritual duties, may be performed, for the outward work
carnally; and in such duties there is no strength but weakness, because there
is none of the Spirit in them. For there is no power in any duty, except there
be something of the spirit in the duty. There is no more power in praying, nor
in preaching nor in hearing, nor in meditation, nor in reading, nor in
resisting evil, nor in doing good, nor in any duty of sanctification, or of
mortification, then there is of the Spirit in them.

And according to the measure of the spirit, in each duty, is the measure of
power in the duty. If there be none of the Spirit in a man's duties, there is no
power at all in them, but only weakness and deadness, and coldness and
unpofitableness. If a little of the spirit, there is a little power; if
abundance of the Spirit, there is great power; and that duty that is most
spiritual, is the most powerful. And therefore says Paul, I will pray with the
Spirit, and I will sing with the spirit; and all the worship of the faithful is
in the spirit. Philip. 3. 3. We are the Circumcision which worship God in the
Spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh. So that there is no more power in
any duty then there is of the Spirit in it: and there is no more acceptance of
any duty with God, then there is of power in it.

Fifthly, To enable them to the use of the word. In private.
all Christians stand in need of the Power of the Spirit, to enable them to the
use of the Word, and that both in private, and in public, as occasion serves.

1. In private; for no man can say, that Jesus is the Christ but by the Holy
Spirit. No man can speak of Christ, spiritually, but by the Spirit; and without
this spirit, which searches the deep things of God, and reveals them to us,
Christians are unable to give the Sense of the Word of God in their families,
and among their friends, and acquaintance, and are also ashamed to do it.
Whereas the Spirit of God gives both ability, and boldness: as Aquila and
Priscilla his wife, did not only speak the word in their family, Act. 18. 16.
but also took Apollos a Minister, home, when they perceived him somewhat
ignorant in the mystery of Christ, and instructed him in the way of God more
perfectly.

2. They have need of the power of the spirit, to enable them to speak the word
of God in public, In public.
as every Christian may do, if he come where people are ignorant of Gods Word,
and there be no Minister to do it. This I say in such a case he may do by
virtue of his anointing with the spirit; And for this you may see the practice
of Stephen and Philip, who were but Deacons, and not Elders or Ministers, and
yet published the Word, where the people were ignorant; yea you may see Act. 8.
how all the Disciples except the Apostles, were by reason of a great
persecution scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, and they
that were so scattered, went everywhere preaching the Word because the people
among which they were, were ignorant, and there was no body else to do it. And
God, having made known Christ unto them, they could not, but declare him unto
others: the love both of Christ, and of their brethren constraining them. But
this is in case of necessity, and where other fuithful Christians are absent:
otherwise when Christians are present, no man can take that to himself, without
the consent of all, which belongs to all.

Sixthly, all Christians stand in need of this power of the spirit, to enable
them to confess the word, To enable them to confess the word.
before Kings, and Rulers, and Magistrates, when they are called thereunto.
Whereas without this power they would tremble, and bite in the truth. In the
10. Chap. of Mat. Christ tells his Disciples that they should be brought before
Governors and Kings, for his names sake. But says he, verse. 19. When they
shall deliver you up, take no thought, how, or what ye shall speak; for it
shall be given you in that same hour, what ye shall speak. For it is not ye
that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you. Here Christ
tells his Disciples that they should be brought before great men, yea before the
greatest in the world, to give testimony to his truth. And surely, it is a very
hard thing, for a man not to be daunted then, but to be unmovable, before all
worldly power and glory, and all the terrible frowns and threats of mighty men.
Now says Christ at such a time, when you are to speak before the armed power
of the world, be not troubled beforehand, how, or what to say. For if you have
Christ and his Spirit in your hearts, you cannot want words in your mouths. And
the truth which you profess is most glorious, when it is most naked, and
destitute of the garnishings of humane eloquence and wisdom. And therefore be
not fearful before hand, no nor yet careful, touching what you shall say; for
it shall be given to you in that same hour, in that same moment; you shall have
most present help. How so? for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your
Father that dwells in you. The spirit of truth that dwells in you, shall enable
you to speak the words of truth, when you are called to it. And though you, it
may be, are plain and mean men, and your lips would tremble, and be quite
closed up before such an Assembly of power, and Majesty: yet Gods spirit shall
give you a mouth to speak, even then. And because, if you were only supplied
with a mouth to speak at such a time, you would be ready to speak rashly, and
foolishly, to the great prejudice, and disadvantage of the truth, therefore he
will give you not only a mouth, but wisdom too; and he himself will manage his
own cause with your mouths. And you shall so speak as all your adversaries,
shall not be able to resist the truth that you speak, but shall be so convinced
in their consciences, that their tongues shall not know what to say. You shall
have, a mouth and wisdom, and they shall want both.

And thus, have many poor, mean, simple Christians, when brought before Rulers
and Magistrates, been able to carry out the truth in that strength, that all
their adversaries have been put to silence and shame, as you may see in a
multitude of examples, in the Book of Martyrs. And all this they did, by the
power of the Spirit coming upon them.

Seventhly, 7. To overcome afflictions and persecutions.
and lastly, all Christians stand in need of the power of the Spirit, to
overcome afflictions and persecutions, from which it is impossible they should
be free, in this world, they being contrary to the world, and the whole world
to them. A natural man, who has no strength in himself, but his own strength,
faints and fails under affliction and persecution: but the faithful have in
them, strength above natural strength, strength above the strength of men, even
the strength of the Spirit coming on them, and so they endure and overcome. Our
spirits are weak spirits, and are conquered by every evil; but when they are
strenghtned, by the power of Gods Spirit, they are, over all evils, more then
Conquerors. And this is one thing observable, between natural and spiritual
strength, in the overcoming of evil. Natural strength seeks always to throw
off the evil, and so it prevails: but spiritual strength neever seeks the
removing of the evil, but let the evil be what it will, it stands to it, and
overcomes it. For the strength of the Spirit, is easily able to overcome, all
evils that can happen to flesh and blood, whether they arise from earth or
hell. And thus those blessed Martyrs mentioned Hebr. 11. and thousands and ten
thousands of their consorts since, have overcome, cruel mockings and
scourgings, and bonds, and imprisonment, and stoning, and sawing in sunder, and
slaying with the sword, and all the woes of poverty and want, and banishment,
and of living in wildernesses and caves, and dens of the earth; these and all
other evils, they have mightily overcome, by this only power, of the Spirit
coming upon them. Thus we stand in need, of the power of the Spirit, to
overcome affliction and persecution; and how much power we have, in affliction
and persecution, to endure them and overcome them, just so much, of the power
of the Spirit, we have, and no more.

And thus also, have I declared unto you what necessity, all Christians have,
of the power of the Spirit, coming on them as well as Ministers. And this was
to strengthen the Use of exhortation.

The second Use, is for information and instruction, after this manner. Second
use.
If the receiving of the Spirit be the receiving of power, then it clearly
informs us, that the way to partake of this power, is to obtain this Spirit:
and the way to increase this power, is to increase this Spirit. I shall
endeavor to speak to both these things, and so shall conclude.

1. The way to obtain this power, is to obtain the Spirit.

And that we may obtain the Spirit, we must first prepare our selves to receive
the Spirit.

Now this Preparation does not stand (as Papists teach, and many ignorant
persons among our selves think) in sweeping the soul from sin, The way to get
this power, is to get this Spirit.
and then strewing it with graces, that so we may be fit to receive the Spirit.

For first, To this end we must prepare our selves. Wherein preparation does
not consist.
the sweeping of the soul from sin, is not a work of our own, before the coming
of the Spirit, but a work of the Spirit, it self, after it is come. For no
flesh can clear the soul of one sin, it is the Spirit must do that.

And secondly, for the strewing of the soul with grace, neither is this a work
of our own, but a work of the Spirit it self, after it is come. For the Spirit
it self, brings all grace with it, and before the coming of the Spirit, there
is no grace at all.

So that, Wherein it does.
we cannot, by any acts of our own, prepare our selves to receive the Spirit;
but only by the Spirit we prepare our selves to receive the Spirit. For it is
not any work of our own, upon our selves, but the immediate work of the Holy
Spirit upon us, that can make us fit to receive himself. It lies wholly in his
own power and goodness, first to prepare in us a place for himself, and then
after to receive and entertain himself, in that place he has so prepared. Now
the works of the Spirit, whereby he first prepares us for himself, and then
entertaines himself in us, are these two especially.

1. He empties us; and 2. he fills us with himself, whom he has made empty. 1.
The Holy Spirit empties us.


1. He empties us. And this emptying, is the first and chief work of the
Spirit, upon the Elect, whereby he prepares them to receive himself. For the
more empty a man is of other things, the more capable he is of the Spirit. If
you would fill a vessel, with any other liquor then it holds, you must first
empty it, of all that is in it before; if you would fill it with Wine, you must
empty it of Beer or Water, if any such liqour be in it. For two material
things, cannot possibly subsist in the same place, at the same time, the
substances of each being safe and sound. And so if the Holy Spirit who is God,
must come into us: all mortal and unstable creatures, together with sin and our
selves, and what ever else is in us, must go forth. Humane reason, and humane
wisdom, and righteousness, and power, and knowledge, cannot receive the Holy
Spirit: but we must be emptied of these, if ever we would receive him.

We must thus suffer, A caution.
our selves, to be prepared by the Spirit, to receive the Spirit: but with this
caution, That when the Spirit of God has wrought this in us, we do not
attribute it to our selves, as our own work, nor think any thing of our selves,
but descend into our own mere nothing. Otherwise we shall be a hinderance to
the Spirit, that he cannot work in us after a more excellent manner.

And when a man is thus empty of himself, 2. Fills us.
and of other things, then he becomes poor in spirit, and such the Spirit
always fills, and descends into with a wonderful and unresistible power, and
fills the outer and inner man, and all the superior and inferior faculties of
the soul, with himself, and all the things of God.

And this is the second work of the Spirit, The means are.
to fill those whom he has emptied. Now the usual and ordinary means, through
which the Spirit does this, 1. The hearing of the Word.
are these three.

1. The hearing of the Word preached. But here we must distinguish of the Word.
For the Law is the word of God; but St. Paul says that by that word the Spirit
is not given, but by the Word of the Gospel. And therefore how beautiful are
the feet of them that bring the Gospel of peace! for nothing is so sweet and
precious as the word of the Gospel, which brings with it the Holy Spirit. This
you may see Act. 10. 44. where it is said, that whilst Peter yet spoke, the
Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the Word. And therefore also the Gospel
is called the ministration of the Spirit; because as it proceeds from the
Spirit, and the Holy Spirit gives utterance, so it also conveyes the Spirit to
the faithful. Now the gift of tongues and miracles, and other such like gifts
are at the present ceased in the Church: but the gift of the Spirit, is not
ceased; and this, the Lord still joins with the Ministry of the Gospel, that
he may keep up in our hearts the due respect of this ordinance, and may
preserve us, from the ways of those men, who seek for the Spirit without the
Word.

2. Means, 2. Faith.
is faith in the word heard. For it is not every one, that hears the word, that
receives the Spirit: but only they, that hear with the hearing of faith. For
if thou hear the word of the Gospel a thousand times, and want faith, thou
shall never receive the Spirit; for unbeleef, shuts up the heart against the
Spirit, and ever opposes and resists the Spirit, and never receives it. But
faith opens the heart to receive the Spirit.

By faith, we lay hold on Christ in the word: and through our union with
Christ, we obtain the Spirit. For we have not the Spirit immediately in it
self, but in the flesh of Christ. And when we, by faith are made the flesh of
Christ, then we partake of that Spirit, that dwells in the flesh of Christ.

Now through these two things, the Word and Faith, the Spirit communicates to
us a new birth; it begets us unto God: and so we partaking of the nature of
God, partake also of the Spirit of God. They are born of men, have nothing in
them but the spirit of men. but they that are born of God have the Spirit of
God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and has no spirit in it; but
that which is born of the Spirit, is spirit, and has spirit in it. So that
there is no means to partake of the Spirit of God but by being born of God: and
the means by which we are born of God, are the Word and Faith

3. Means is Prayer. 3. Prayer.
For Christ has said, the Spirit is given to them that ask. And the Disciples
when they were to receive the promise of the Spirit, continued with one accord
in prayer and supplication. Act. 1. 14. For God who has promised to give us
his Spirit, has commanded us to ask it: and when God has a mind to give us
the Spirit, he puts us in mind to ask it: yea God gives us the Spirit, that by
it we may ask the Spirit, seeing no man can ask the Spirit, but by the Spirit.
Now in asking the Spirit, there is no difference, whether we ask it of the
Father or of the Son, seeing the Spirit proceeds from both, and is the Spirit
of both. And therefore Christ, promises the sending of the Spirit from both.
From the Father, Joh. 14. The Spirit which the Father will send in my name.
From himself, Joh. 16. Except I go, the Comforter will not come: but if I go I
will send him to you. So that both the Father and the Son, give the Spirit, and
it is no matter whether we ask him, either of the Father, or of the Son, so we
ask him, of the Father in the Son, or of the Son in the Father.

And thus you see the way, to obtain this power, is to obtain the Spirit, and
also by what means this is done.

2. The way to increase this power, 2. The Way to increase this power.
is to increase the Spirit. And therefore it is as needful for us, to know the
means to increase the Spirit, as to receive it. And they among others are these:

1. To continue in the use of the Word. As the Spirit is first given by the
word, so by the same word it is increased; and the more any Christian is in the
use of the word, the stronger and more vigorous and mighty is the Spirit in
him: but the neglect of the word, is the quenching of the Spirit. Let a
Christian, that is strong in the spirit, neglect the word a while, and he will
soon become weak, and as a man without strength. For the Spirit, is not
bestowed on us, but through the word, neither does it dwell in us, but by the
word; and the more the word dwells in our hearts by faith, the more the spirit
dwells in our hearts by the word. And according to the measure of the word in
us, is the measure of the Spirit.

2. To increase faith. For the more we believe, the more we receive of Christ;
and the more we receive of Christ, the more we receive of the spirit, in
Christ. For faith does not apprehend bare Christ, but Christ with his Spirit,
because these are inseparable. Now always* according to the measure of Christ
in us, is the measure of the spirit; and according to the measure of faith, is
the measure of Christ in us.

3. To be much in prayer. For the prayer of the spirit, increases the spirit.
The more we have the spirit, the more we pray; and the more we pray, the more
we receive the spirit. So that when we have the spirit in truth, we shall have
daily, a greater and greater increase of it, till we be filled with the spirit.
For the spirit comes from Christ, in whom is the fullness of the spirit, and
carries us back again to Christ, that we may receive still more of the spirit.
And so by the spirit that is in our hearts, we lay hold on the spirit that is
in Christ, and receive more and more of it.

4. To turn our selves daily from the creature to God. For the more we enlarge
our hearts, toward the creature, the less capable are we of the Spirit of God.
For to live much upon the creature, is to live much according to the flesh, and
this quenches and straitens the spirit in us. And therefore we must live
abstractedly from the creatures; and so use them, as if we did not use them:
and so mind them, as if we did not mind them: and abandon the contents and
satisfactions of flesh and blood, and wean our selves from all things but the
necessities of nature. And the more free and loose we are from the creature,
the more capable are we of Gods spirit, and the operations of it. He that lives
at greatest distance from the world, and has least communion with the things
of it, has always the greatest proportion of Gods spirit. For as the Apostle
says, If any man love the world, the love of the Father (that is, the Holy
Spirit) is not in him: so, if any man love the Father, the love of the world is
not in him: now the more, any one loves the Father, the less he loves the
world: and the less he loves the world, the more the spirit dwells in him.

5. To cease daily from our own works. The more we act our selves, the less
does the Spirit act in us. And therefore we must must from day to day, cease
from our own works, from the operations of our own minds, and understandings,
and wills, and affections, and must not be the Authors of our own actions. For
we being flesh our selves, what ever we do is fleshly, seeing the effect cannot
be better then the cause. And if we mingle, the works of our flesh, with the
works of Gods Spirit, he will cease from working in us. But the less we act in
our selves, according to the principles of our corrupt nature, the more will
the spirit act in us, according to the principles of the divine nature. But our
own works, are always a mighty impediment, to the operations of the Spirit.

6. To increase the spirit in us, we must give up our selves to the Spirit,
that he only may work in us, without the least opposition and resistance from
us. That, as the soul acts all in the body, and the body does nothing of it
self, but is subject to the soul in all things: so the spirit may do all in us,
and we may do nothing of our selves without the Spirit, but be subject to the
Spirit in all its operations. For the Spirit of God, cannot work excellently in
us, except it work all in all in us. And in such a man, in whom the Spirit has
full power, the Spirit works many wonderful things, that he according to humane
sense is ignorant of. For as the soul, does secretly nourish, and cherish, and
refresh the body, and disperses life and spirits through it, even when the body
is asleep, and neither feels it, nor knows it: so the Holy Spirit dwelling in
the soul, by a secret kind of operation, works many things in it, for the
quickening, and renewing it, whilst it oftentimes for the present, is not so
much as sensible of it.

7. The seventh means, to increase the spirit, is to attribute the works of the
spirit to the spirit, and not to our selves. For if we attribute to the flesh,
the works of the Spirit: and take from the Spirit, the glory of his own works,
he will work no longer in us. Wherefore we must ascribe unto the Spirit, the
whole glory of his own works, and acknowledge that we our selves are nothing,
and can do nothing: and that it is he only, that is all in all, and works all
in all: and we our selves, among all the excellent works of the Spirit in us,
must so remain, as if we were and wrought nothing at all; that so, all that is
of flesh and blood, may be laid low in us, and the Spirit alone may be exalted:
first to do all in us: and then, to have all the glory, of all that is done.

And thus you see the means to increase the Spirit, and so consequently
strength, as well as to get it. And by the daily use and improvement of these
means, we may attain to a great degree of spiritual strength, that we may walk
and not be weary: and may run and not faint, and may mount up as Eagles, yea,
and may walk as Angels among men, and as the powers of heaven upon earth, to
his praise and honor, who first communicates to us his own strength, and then
by that strength of his own, works all our works in us: And thus is he
glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe.

FINIS.
Uniformity Examined, Whether it be found in the GOSPEL, OR In the PRACTICE of
the Churches, OF CHRIST.

By WILL. DELL, Minister of the Gospel.

2 Cor. 4. 13. We having the same spirit of Faith, according as it is written,
I believed, and therefore have I spoken: we also believe, and therefore speak.

Published according to Order.

London, Printed, 1651.

Uniformity Examined.
OBserving that our Brethren of Scotland, together with the Assembly of
Divines, and the rest of the Presbyterian judgment, do often both in their
Discourse and writings, exceedingly press for Uniformity; I have been urged in
my spirit, to think upon the matter, and to consider whether there could be any
such thing found in the Word of the New Testament, or in the practice of the
Churches of Christ. And for my part, I ingenuously profess, I cannot yet
discover it, and would be glad if any would instruct me further in this
particular, so he do it from the Word.

Now Uniformity what is it, but an unity of form? and the form they mean, no
doubt, is outward: for the inward form, as it cannot be known by the outward
senses; so neither can it be accomplished by outward power. And therefore (till
I know their meaning better) I conceive that by uniformity they understand an
unity of outward form in the Churches of God: yea, some of them do declare so
much calling the thing they would have, External Uniformity.

Now such a thing as this (after so much meditation and recollection, as my
other employments, and the many distractions that necessarily attend my present
condition, will permit me) I cannot discern, in the Word of the Gospel. For
Christ speaking of the Church of the New Testament, says, Joh. 4. 23. The hour
comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit
and Truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him. God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him must worship him in Spirit and Truth. In which words it
is most evident, that the worship of God in the time of the New Testament, is
inward and spiritual, consisting in faith, hope, love, and in prayer, which is
the operation of the three former, etc. And so, is so far from Uniformity as it
has been explicated, and as they understand it, that it is not at all capable
of it. And therefore I cannot but wonder, at the strange workings of darkness
in the minds of men, who would have an exernal Uniformity, in a worship that is
inward and spiritual, and of which, the outward form is no part at all, but is
merely accidental, and so absolutely various.

Again, as I find not this Uniformity, in the doctrine of the Gospel, so
neither in the practice of the Saints, who had the spirit of the Gospel, as
that practice is represented to us, in the Word.

In Acts 1. 14. I read, how the Apostles being together with the women, and
Mary the Mother of Jesus, and his brethren, continued (...) with one accord or
mind in prayer and supplication: and Acts 2. v. 44. and 46. how all that
believed were together, and continued daily (...) with one mind in the Temple,
and did break bread from house to house, etc. And in all this there was Unity,
but no external Uniformity, neither name nor thing. Again, Acts 4. 23. Peter
and John being let go by the Magistrates, went to their own company (which many
of our Clergy would term a Conventicle) and reported all that the chief Priests
and Elders had said to them; and when they heard it, they lift up their voice
to God, (...), with one mind, and prayed. Here was inward Unity, in faith, and
love, and joy, and spiritual prayer, but no external Uniformity: and verse 32.
The multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and one soul. Unity
still, but nothing of external Uniformity. Further, we read Acts chap. 7. and
chap. 8. that Stephen and Philip, who by the Church were ordained Deacons, and
were to serve only for the Ministry of the Table, yet by virtue of the
anointing, preached the Word of God freely, and powerfully: and how all the
Members of the Church of Jerusalem, who were neither Ministers not Deacons,
being scattered abroad by Persecution, went Preaching the Word everywhere,
where they came, in that case of necessity: the unction of the Spirit of which
all Believers partake alike, being one fundamental ground of such Ministry,
where there are no Believers to call to the Office: and in this, though there
was unity of faith, spirit, and doctrine, yet I am sure they will say, there
was no such uniformity as they would have. Again, Acts 20. Paul the first day
of the Week, preached to the Disciples of Macedonia, from the Evening till
Midnight (which Dr. Pocklington in a printed Sermon says, was out of order,
that is, out of Prelatical order, or Presbyterial Uniformity) and after brake
bread, and did eat, and talked with them a long while, till break of day: and
going from thence, he arrived at Ephesus, and there called the Elders of the
Chuch together, and appeals to them after what manner he had been with them, to
wit, serving the Lord with all humility of mind, and with many tears and
temptations, etc. and how, he had held back nothing profitable for them, but
had taught them publicly, and from house to house (which I wish were more in
use now-a-dayes, if it might obtain so much leave from Uniformity) and had
preached to them Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ: our chief work toward God since our fall and corruption being
Repentance, which is the change of the creature toward God, through Gods own
work in the creature: and this is not done without the sorrow of the flesh; and
our chief work toward Christ, who is given to us as a head, being Faith or
Union. And in the end, exhorts the Presbyters, to take heed to themselves (who
according to the Church principles of this age, want no admonition themselves,
seeing they are become a peremptory rule to all others) and to the flocks over
which the holy Spirit (and not Patrons) had made them Overseers, to feed the
Church of God, which he had purchased with his own blood, etc. But in all this,
neither practices himself, nor preaches to them, nor commands them to preach to
others; or impose upon others, any such kind of thing as external uniformity.
And so surely, they that so vehemently urge this thing, that they make it all
in all, in their Reformation, have some other teacher then the Apostle, who
being taught of Christ, as Christ was taught of God, yet knew no such thing at
all, in the worship of God as Uniformity.

And yet further, that the world (if it be possible) may be the more convinced,
observe a little more seriously the practice of Christ and the Saints, in
reference to this point, and you shall see nothing less then external
Uniformity. See this in the prayer of Christ, (Prayer for the duty it self,
being nothing, but so much spiritual worship, as being the voice of the Spirit
in the flesh, both in head and members) This, Christ sometimes performed, with
his eyes lifted up to Heaven, sometimes being prostrate with his body on the
Earth, and so several times, several ways: and as he, so the Saints, have;
some prayed standing and lifting up their hands, as Moses; some, kneeling and
lifting up their hands, as Solomon; some, standing and not lifting up their
eyes, as the Publican, etc. And what external Uniformity in all this?. And as
for Praying, so for Preaching; Christ sometimes preached in a ship, sometimes
on the shore, sometimes in the City Jerusalem, sometimes in the Temple,
sometimes in the Desert, sometimes early, sometimes late, as if he intended on
purpose, to witness, against that piece of the Mystery of Iniquity, which in
after. Ages should be called Uniformity. So Paul preached sometimes on the Jews
Sabbath, sometimes on the first day of the week, sometimes each day of the
week, sometimes in the day, sometimes in the night; sometimes prayed in the
house, sometimes on the shore: he circumcised Timothy among the weak, refused
to circumcise Titus among the perverse, became as a Jew to the Jews, as a Greek
to the Greeks, to the weak as weak, to the strong as strong, all things to all
men, that he might win some: and what external Uniformity was here? And then
for the Sacraments, Christ administered the Sacrament of the Supper, immediately
after Supper; Paul at midnight, and it may be others in the morning, or at
noone: and what external Uniformity in all this? And for Government; sometimes
the Apostles met together into a Council, and in that Council ordered things
not of their own heads, or by plurality of voices, but by the Word and Spirit;
and what they ordered by the Word and Spirit, they put in execution by the
power of the Word and Spirit, and not by the power of the World. At other
times, Ministers and Believers, did things by the Word and Spirit among
themselves, by the mutual consent of both; or else Believers alone among
themselves, if there were no Ministers present. And where the number of
Believers were more, they stood in need of more Officers: and where fewer, of
fewer Officers; and all these things, are the free ordering of the Churches,
who have Christ, the Spirit, and the Father among them, and in them, and so are
taken out of the bondage of men, into the freedom of God. That truly I see not
the Gospel, more setting its spirit, against any thing of Antichrist, then
against this point of external uniformity. For if we have one Lord, Christ,
Spirit, Faith, Baptism, and God, all other things are free to the Churches, as
God shall order by them, and no otherwise; and the reason, and wisdom, and
prudence of man, have no place in this world, where the Sun of righteousness
shines, as the only light?

But against this that has been said, do lie some objections; as first,

The Prophet foretold that the Lord should be one, and his name one, and does
not this imply external uniformity.

I answer, nothing less: for the Apostle explicates plainly and clearly, what
it is to have the Lord one, and his name one, among believers, Ephesians. 4. chapter 4.
5. 6. where he says, there is in the spiritual Church, one Body, and one
Spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
father of all, who is above all, through all, and in all. Where you see, that
among believers, there is a manifold unity, but no external uniformity; yea the
prayer of Christ the Son, for the Church, unfolds clearly the promise of God
the Father to the Church, Joh. 17. Christ prays, that they all ( who are many
among themselves, according to the flesh) may be one as thou Father art in me,
and I in thee, ( that is according to the unity of the Spirit, not external
uniformity) that after this manner they also may be one in us.

But again it is objected out of 1 Cor. 14. that the Apostle requires that all
things may be done in the Church decently and in order: and does not this imply
external uniformity?

I answer, that they will hardly admit in their Parish Churches, such a decency
and order as the Apostle there means, neither are they capable of it. For he
says before, When the whole Church is come together into some place, that all
may prophecy one by one that all may learn, and all may be comforted: and that
during this exercise of prophesying, if any thing be revealed to another, the
former to give place; and he must speak that has the clearest light, seeing
the Spirit, to whomsoever it is given, it is given to profit withal. And that
though all may prophecy one by one, yet all may not prophecy at once, for
then it would not be order, but confusion, which the Apostle would have
avoided, saying* Let all things be d^ne decently and in order. And this decency
too, he persuades to by the word, he does not enforce by secular power: And if
they will call this uniformity, for believers to prophecy one after another,
according to the variety of the gifts of the Spirit, and not many, or two or
three at once, or the same time, we willingly agree with them: but how far this
thing, is from their sense, every one knows.

Thus you see, these objections answered,and I am confident there are no more
can be brought, but may as clearly and easily be answered as these.

And therefore, I say, I wonder, and wonder again, that we having covenanted
and agreed together solemnly, to endeavor for a Government most agreeable to
the word of God, should in the mean time, be left so void, of the spirit and
light of the Gospel, as to fall upon external uniformity, which is nowhere to
be found in the Gospel, nor in the practice of primitive Christians.

Yea, while I consider more seriously of the Matter, me thinks external
uniformity is a monstrous thing, (how glorious soever in their eyes) and not to
be found either in nature or in grace, either in Christ's Kingdom, or the
Kingdoms of the World.

In nature is no external uniformity extended to all the works of nature; for
look into the world, and see if there be not variety of forms; heavenly and
earthly bodies, having several form; and in the earth, each bird, beast, tree,
plant, creature, differs one from another, in outward form. If the whole
creation, should appear in one form, or external uniformity, what a monstrous
thing would it be, nothing differing from the first chaos? But the variety of
forms in the world is the beauty of the world: So that though there be a most
admirable unity among all the creatures, yet there is nothing less then
external uniformity.

Again, as there is no external uniformity spread over the great world, so nor
yet over the little world, or man. For look upon a man, consisting of head and
members, unto which the Apostle compares the Church, and you shall not find
all the members like one another, neither in regard of their outward forms, nor
operations: for the hand, does not move as the foot, nor the foot act as the
hand; and if all the members should appear and act in one form, what a monster
would a man be? And yet among the members, though there be no external
uniformity, yet there is admirable unity.

And yet again, look into the Kingdoms of the world, and you shall see no such
thing in them as external uniformity: Here in England you shall observe that
York is not governed as Hull, nor Hull as Hallifax, nor that as Bristol, etc.
neither is one County, governed uniformly as another; there is no uniformity in
the government of Kent and Essex; nor one town, governed like another; in
Godmanchester, the youngest son inherits, in Huntington the Eldest: nor one
Corporation governed like another, nor one Company in the City governed as
another; and yet between all Counties, Cities, Towns, Corporations, Companies,
there is unity, though no external uniformity. Yea, look upon the famous City
of London, and there are, it may be, an hundred thousand families, or more in
it, and each one governed after a several manner, and among all these families,
there is no external uniformity, and yet they all agree well enough, in the
unity of a City.

Nay further, to bring but one man, to an uniformity of life and practice, by
an outward Law, would be the most absolute tyranny in the world, and make his
life worse then death. To compel every man by a Law every day in the week, or
every Monday, Tuseday, etc. in the week, to an uniformity of life, that he
shall rise at the same time, use the same postures, speak the same words, eat
the same food, receive the same physic, sit, and stand, and walk, and lie down
at the same set times, who ever heard of such a cruel bondage? What an absurd
and intolerable thing then is uniformity in the life of a man, taking away all
freedom of the soul? But how much more evil and intolerable is uniformity in
the life of a Christian, or of the true Churches of Christ, taking away all
freedom of the Spirit of God, who being one with God, works in the freedom of
God, and is not to be bound, with any authoritative or coercive power, of poor,
dark, ignorant, vain, foolish, proud, and sinful men?

What now then do the Presbyters mean by uniformity? Would they have the word
preached, and the Sacraments administered, and the name of God called on, and
all this done in Spirit and truth, in the Churches of Christ? this truly is
unity and not uniformity, and such an unity as no man can compel. But would
they have, the Word preached, the name of God called on, Sacraments
administered, the spiritual Discipline of the spiritual Church managed, the
virtues of Christ, and graces of the Spirit in the Saints exercised, and all
this in one and the same outward form, or uniformity? This is the burden of
the Saints, the bondage of the Church; the straitning of the Spirit, the
limiting of Christ, and the eclipsing the glory of the Father. And how wise so
ever, these men may be, in natural and carnal things: yet their wisdom, is but
foolishness in spiritual things, in which there is no more uniformity, then in
the workings of the Spirit, who works severally, in several Saints, and
severally, in the same Saints, at several times: And therefore they that would
tie the Church to an uniformity which works not of it self, but as the Spirit
works in it, let them first tie the Spirit, to an uniformity, and we are
contented. But these men, seem to run a sad hazard, who would thus reduce the
workings of the Spirit, in Christians and Churches, to an outward uniformity,
according to their own mind and fancy, and so would rule and order, and enlarge
and straiten the Spirit of God, by the spirit of man, seeing it is worse, to
sin against Christ in the Spirit, then against Christ in the flesh.

And therefore, till I be otherwise taught by the word, I cannot conceive that
there ought to be, or is possible to be, any such external uniformity, in the
Churches of Christ, as these men strive, wrestle, sweat, contend for, I will
not say are ready to fight for: but that several Churches of Christ, having
unity of doctrine, faith, the Spirit, ordinances, etc. may have diverse forms,
of outward administrations as God and Christ by the Spirit shall lead them; and
that every Church, is in these things to be left free and no Church forced, by
any outward power, to follow or imitate another Church, against its Will, not
being freely led unto it, by the Spirit of God.

Neither do I think, that God has set up, any company of men, or Synod in the
world, to shine to a whole Nation, so that all People shall be constrained to
follow their judgment, and to walk by their light, seeing other Ministers and
Christians, may have more light and spirit, then they. Neither has Christ,
promised his presence and spirit, to Ministers more then to believers, nor more
to an hundred, then two or three: And if two or three Christians in the
Country, being met together in the name of Christ, have Christ himself, with
his word and Spirit among them, they need not ride many miles to the Assembly
at London to know what to do, or how to carry and behave themselves, in the
things of God And therefore, for any company of men, of what repute soever, to
set up their own judgment in a Kingdom, for a peremptory rule, from which no
man must vary, and to compel all the faithful people of God, who are the very
members of Jesus Christ himself, to fall down before it, upon pain of being
cast into the burning fiery furnace of their indignation, heated seven times
more hot then ordinary, through the desired access of secular power to their
power, is a far worse work, in my eyes, then that of King Nebuchadnezzars
setting up a golden Image, and forcing all to fall down before it; seeing
spiritual Idolatry, is so much worse then corporal, as the spirit is better
then the flesh.

And therefore I do think (let them teach me better by the word that can) that
uniformity (the great Diana of the Presbyterians, and the Image that falls down
from the brain and fancy of man) has no footing in the Scriptures, or in the
practice of the Churches of Christ: And that the Presbyterian uniformity, is
near a kin to Prelatical conformity, and is no other then the same thing, under
another word, after the manner of Prelacy and Presbytery; and do conclude, that
unity is Christian, uniformity Antichristian.

And this I have only hinted, and that briefly, among many occasions, to
discover to the faithful, that some of the very dregs of Antichristianisme,
still prevail and domineer, under the very name of Reformation: And also to
give occasion, to men of more spirit, and abilities, and leisure, to discourse
more fully to this point, that the Serpents head of Formality, which is so
carefully nourished by humane reason, may be crushed in pieces by the power of
the word.

1 JOHN 2. 27. The anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you,
and ye need not that any man should teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has
taught you, you shall abide in him.

The spiritual Church is taught by the anointing, the carnal Church by Councels.

FINIS.
The Building, Beauty, Teaching, and Establishment of the truly Christian and
Spiritual CHURCH. Represented in an EXPOSITION On Isai. 54 from Verse. 11. to
the 17. PREACHED To His Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax, and the general Officers
of the Army, with diverse other Officers, and Soldiers, and People.

At Marston, being the Head-quarter at the Leaguer before Oxford, June 7. 1646.

By WILLIAM DELL, Minister of the Gospel, attending on His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax in the Army.

Together with a faithful Testimony touching that valiant and victorious Army,
in the Epistle to the Reader.

Matthew. 5. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.

Verse. 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven:
for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

Psalm. 69* 9. The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me.
Published according to Order.

London, Printed for G. Calvert, at the Black Spread Eagle at the West End of
Paul's, 1651.

To the Reader.
HAving obtained this grace from God, to be called into some friendship and
familiarity with Jesus Christ among the rest of his poor Saints; so, as to to
hear and receive from him, something of the mind and bosom of the Father,
according to his Free Grace, who has mercy on whom he will: and having after
many tears and temptations (not-unknown to many yet in the body) obtained this
further grace, to speak the Word of God with boldness: I have also though most
unworthy, been counted worthy to be taken into some fellowship with Christ, in
his sufferings, and to endure the contradiction of sinners, and oft-times to
encounter the rage and madness of men, yea, and to fight with men after the
manner of beasts, altogether brutish and furious. And thus it has fared with
me often, especially at two remarkable times. The one at Lincoln, upon occasion
of two Sermons preached there, on these words of the Prophet Isaiah, 9. 7. Of
the en^crease of his Government and peace there shall be no end. Wherein,
giving unto Christ his own proper due, many were angry I had taken too much
from men, to whom yet nothing belongs, but iniquiry, shame and confusion; they
could not bear this, that the Lord alone should be exalted. But that Doctrine
of Truth being the Lords, and not mine, the Lord himself has strongly upheld
with the right hand of his righteousness, and the glory of it has since shone
into many hearts in this Kingdom much contrary to their desire.

The other time, wherein I met with remarkable opposition, was lately at
Marston, the Head quarter at the Leaguer before Oxford: whither some coming out
of the City of London, in all probability out of some special design (seeing
the old malignity now acts in a new form, and is daily coming forth, in a
second and more plausible, cunning, and deceiving edition) became exceeding
angry and heady against the plain and clear Truth of the Gospel delivered in
this following Exposition (wherein the whole truth and substance of what was
then delivered, is exactly set down, and nothing abated; but rather some things
farther pressed, Jer. 36. 32.
adding (as Jeremiah in the second role) many like words to the former. Now
some of these men, seeing themselves, and their new designs, clearly discovered
by the light of the Word, and made altogether naked, suddenly they grew fierce
and furious, contradicting and blaspheming, yea, some of them speaking the
language of Hell upon earth (of which there are some witnesses) as became men
of such a generation. Joh. 8. 44.
These men, according to the operation of that spirit which works mightily in
the children of disobedience, come and fill the whole City with lies and
slanders, laying to my charge, things that I knew not; the falsehood and
untruths whereof, there are some hundreds, and some of them, of great and
eminent worth and piety, ready to witness. Wherefore of mere necessity I was
constrained to publish this Exposition, as a witness to this present and the
following generations, of these men's resisting the Spirit, and acting against
Christ himself in the Word. And though the Discourse be very plain, not
favoring of any accurateness of humane wisdom and learning, yet they that are
themselves spiritual, will acknowledge something of the Spirit in it, and for
that cause will relish and love it; though others will therefore be at the
greater enmity against it. But for my part, I have set down my resolution in
the Lord, in this Cause of Jesus Christ, not to weigh all the power of earth or
Hell, one feather; but to put it to the utmost trial, whether the truth of the
Gospel, or the slanders and lies of men, shall prevail; whether, the smoke of
the bottomless Pit, that comes forth out of the mouth of these and many others,
shall be able to blot out or darken, the brightness of Christ's coming, in the
Ministry of the Gospel: yea, and whether the power, and malice, of the Devil
and the World, shall be stronger, then the love and protection of Jesus Christ.
And I doubt not, but the more the World acts in the spirit of the Devil, the
more will Christ enable us, to act in his own Spirit, till all at last, shall
be forced to acknowledge, that the Spirit that is in us, is stronger then the
spirit that is in the World. And what now have all these men, obtained by all
their malice and fury, but a greater and more open discovery of the truth? and
to cause, that that light of the Gospel, that only stone in one Congregation,
should, through the printing of it, have its beams scattered in many pars of
the Kingdom? and where ever the truth comes, the children of the truth will
entertain it, and ask no body leave. And thus through the overruling power of
Gods wisdom, do these men betray their own and their fellows cause, and
overthrow their own, and their ends; and whilst they think to oppress the
truth, propagate it the more: and thus shall truths enemies perish, and the
truth it self flourish; yea, flourish, through slanders, oppositions,
contradictions, blasphemies, and all the vileness and villainy in the world. And
all this confidence in us, arises hence, because Christ is not as a dead man,
but is risen and ascended, and sits at the right hand of God, and fills all
things, and does all things in heaven and in earth, in the World and in the
Church, among his friends and among his enemies, till these be made his
footstool: which is the very thing we are now in expectation of.

Now one thing more which I think fit to acquaint the world withal in this
Epistle, is this, That none of these thorny hearers, durst after come to
Discourse with me, or to look me in the face; but one among them, that seemed
of a better temper then the rest, upon the urging of a godly Citizen then
present, did speak with me: and the question he asked of me, was this: Whether
I thought that all Presbyterians, were carnal Gospellers? I told him, I was far
from thinking any such thing; for I knew some of them very godly Christians,
and did acknowledge the grace of God in them; and that for mine own part, I did
not allow any such distinction of Christians, as Presbyterians and
Independents, this being only a distinction of man's making, tending to the
division of Church; and added, that as in Christ's Kingdom, neither circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, so in this same
kingdom of Christ, neither Presbytery avails any thing, nor Independency, but
a new creature: and that the Kingdom of God, stands not in Presbytery or
Independency, but in righteousness and peace, and joy in holy the Spirit; and
that if I saw any thing of God, or Christ, or the Spirit in any one, I reckoned
him as a brother, not taking any such opinion into consideration; and that the
unity of Spirit, and not of opinion is the bond of Peace in Christ's Kingdom.
The man then pretended to be satisfied, and to rejoice in his satisfaction; but
since (as is related) has showed his stomach again: but because he seems to be
a Christian, the Lord lay it it not to his charge.

And truly, Reader, it is a sad thing, that ever these names, of Presbyterians
and Independents, grew up to this height in the Church; and that these Opinions
should be reckoned more in a man, then the presence and dwelling of God himself
and the Spirit in him. For my part, I utterly disclaim all such distinctions of
man's making, and will allow of no distinction of men, but what God himself has
made; and that is this, The world, and they that are taken out of the world;
or, The Church, and they that are without: and in the Church, the children that
are born after the flesh, and the children that are born after the Spirit: or,
which is all one, carnal and spiritual Christians. This distinction of men, God
has made, and this I do and must needs use, though the world (as it appears)
likes this worse then the other. For the distinction of seeds in the Church, is
the true distinction; and the more this is brought about by the Word and
Spirit, the more glorious will the Church be. Now some spiritual Christians may
be among those that are called Presbyterians, and some among those that are
called Independents; and all these, though called by different names, are of
one spiritual Church: And again some carnal Christians, may be among those that
are called Independents, and some among those that are called Presbyterians;
and all these, though called by different names* are of one carnal Church. And
therefore I could wish, we had obtained such wisdom from God, as to let the
distinction and division of men, lie only there where God has made it, and
not where flesh and blood has made it; and so shall the true spriritual Church
be delivered from these distinctions of flesh and blood, and be separated from
the world, and be gathered together in it self, and be at unity with it self;
which will be Gods great glory, and its own great strength, comfort and
happiness, and the great terror and dread of all profane men and formalists.

Another thing, which I find my heart stirred up within me to do, is, to
testify to the world what I know in mine own experience, touching the Army
under the command of that most faithful and worthy General, Sir Tho. Fairfax:
and that because I am not ignorant of the great undervaluing, and despising,
and reproaching of it, by many, even of those, whose blood runs warm in their
veins, and who enjoy all the comforts they have in the world, through the
faithfulness, diligence, activity, labors, hunger, thirst, cold, weariness,
watchings, marchings, engagements, stormings, wounds and blood of these men,
instruments in the hand of God for the subduing that malignant power, that rose
up against the State, and Saints of God; yea, instruments of Gods own choosing
and calling forth to his foot, for this great and glorious service; which
after-ages will wonder and stand amazed at, as well, as at the vile ingratitude
of this age, to such instruments as these; for which God will not hold it
guiltless. This then, for mine own part, I am most confident on, that there
are, as many gracious, and godly Christians in it, as in any gathering together
of men, in all the world again: men full of faith and the Spirit, and the
admirable endowments of it. More particularly, there are these six things most
remarkable in this despised Army.

1. Their Unity, which is admirable: it being more the Unity of Christians then
of men; more a Unity in the Spirit then in the flesh; in the Father and Son,
then in themselves. And this has been one great means, of their great success,
they being all, both in Counsel and Action, but as one man. The Lord has taken
them, and knit them up, in one bundle; and so, their Enemies could not break
them, but have been broken by them. Many of their matters of greatest moment,
have been carried in Council, with that Unity, that sometimes, not so much as
one, has contradicted.

2. Their humility; which has been admirable, as well as the former. For after
great, and glorious Victories, to the wonder of the Kingdom, and of the World,
when Kings of the Army did flee apace, and the men of might ran away as women,
I have never heard any of the worthy and godly Commanders or Officers ever to
say, I did this, or that, or to boast of his own counsel or his own strength,
or to attribute any thing to himself, or any body else, of what God had done;
but every one to say, This was the Lords own doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes; and it was not our own sword, or bow, but the Lords right hand, and his
arm, and light of his countenance. And they have been most willing, to be
nothing themselves, that God might be all.

And this has been one means, to keep them humble, because though God has
been much with them, yet the world has been much against them, not for their
own sakes, who have done the work of the Kingdom faithfully and honestly; but
for Gods sake in them: because there is more of God among these men, then among
other men; therefore are they so maligned by many men. For the world always
most hates, where there is most of God: and you may have a shrewd guess,
wherethere is most of God, by observing where the greatest hatred of the world
lies.

3. Their faith, There are many in the Army men of great and precious faith;
through which, they have wrought righteonsness, obtained promises, stopped the
mouths of Lions, quenced the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword,
out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the
Armies of the Aliens. Through this faith, they have pursued their Enemies and
overtaken them, and turned not again, till they had consumed them: they have
beaten them small, as the dust before the wind, and cast them out as dirt in
the Streets. Through faith they have entered strong Cities; and I can truly and
particularly say (let them that will needs be offended, stumble and fall at it)
that Bristol ( among other places) was conquered by faith, more then by force;
it was conquered in the hearts of the godly by faith, before ever they
stretched forth a hand against it; and they went not so much to storm it, as to
take it, in the assurance of faith. Through faith, one of them has chased ten,
and ten put an hundred to flight, and an hundred a thousand. And this was
performed in the very letter of it, at that famous and memorable battle at
Naseby. Many more instances I could relate of the power of faith in this Army,
but that I should thereby, grieve and afflict many too much.

4. The spirit of Prayer; and this the Lord has poured forth upon many of them
in great measure; not only upon many of the chief Commanders, but on very many
of the inferior Officers, and common Troopers; some of whom, I have by
accident heard praying, with that faith and familiarity with God, that I have
stood wondering at the grace. We never undertook any thing of weight, but God
was always sought to, of us again and again, and we have found God near to us,
in all things we have called upon him for. Yea, God has been found of us,
whilst yet we have been seeking him, and has given us the answer of our
prayers into our bosoms.

5. The special presence of God with them. I have seen more of the presence of
God in that Army, then amongst any people that ever I conversed with in my
life. There has been a very sensible presence of God with us: we have seen his
goings, and observed his very foot-stepts: for he has dwelt amoug us, and
marched in the head of us, and counseled us, and led us, and has gone along
with us step by step, from Naseby to Leicester, and from thence to Langport,
and Bridgewater, and Bath, and Sherborn, and Bristol, and the Devises, and
Winchester, and Bazing, and Dartmouth, and Exceter, and into Cornwall, and back
again to Oxford, and all along his presence has gone along with us, and he
has been our strength and glory. How often has fearfulness and trembling
taken hold upon the enemy? and the stout men been at a loss for their courage,
and the men of might for their hands, because of the presence of God with us?
yea, because of this, they have melted away in their strong Holds, and
delivered up their fenced Cities into our hands; and every place we have come
against, we have taken in, and every battle wherein we have fought, we have
prevailed. And because God has been in the midst of us, we have not been moved
our selves; and our Enemies have perished (not by our valor, and weapons, and
strength) but at the rebuke of his countenance. This shall be written for the
generation to come (seeing so many of this present generation so little regard
it) and the people that are to be born shall praise the Lord.

6. The sixth remarkable thing in the Army, is, their faithfulness to the
state. How, have they, gone up and down, in weariness and labors, and dangers,
and deaths, to do the Kingdoms work? when was it, that they sat idle? have
they not, as soon as one field was fought, prepared to another? as soon as one
City was taken, advanced to another? and so gone on, from one strong hold of
the enemies to another, till all have been reduced? that peace might be hastened
to this Kingdom, if it were the will of God, and not come as a snaile, but as
on Eagles wings? yea, have they not been active, even all the winter long, in a
most cold and frosty season that continued so for two months together, beating
the enemy ont of the field, and taking their Strong Holds, when other Armies
use to lie still? Have they taken the pay of idleness, or lived the life of
luxury, upon the State-maintenance? Have they sought to lengthen the Wars for
their own advantages? Have they not made even a short work? I challenge all the
former Generations of the world, to stand forth and to show, so much work of
this kind, done in so little time. And farther, by all this success, have they
ever been lifted up, so much as to petition the Parliament in any thing, or to
remonstrate any thing proudly and undutifully to them as some people surfeited
with peace and plenty have done? Or, though the Kingdom, next under God and the
Parliament, owes its protection, and deliverance, and freedom from Tyranny and
Popery, to this worthy Army, have they for all this ever appeared to contest
against the Kingdom for any thing, or to stand with their swords in their hands
to make demands? Nay, I declare this to all the Kingdom, that as God has made
them glorious in doing, so he has made them contented to be perfected by
suffering, if it be the will of God. And most confident I am, that though some
men for private ends and interests are murmuring, and others speaking out
against this Army, as the perverse Israelites against Moses and Aaron, Deuteronomy.
33. 29.
yet the Lord in his due time, will take away the reproach of all his people
therein; and that we shall hear songs from all the ends of the kingdom, even
glory to the righteous. This I have spoken in truth and sincerity to the
Kingdom: And to that Army I shall say, Who is like unto thee, O people? saved
by the Lord, who is the shield of thy help, and the sword of thine excellency;
and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon
their high places.

I have been longer in this Epistle then I intended: but seeing there was such
a cause at this, no ingenuous man will blame me.

Christian Reader, I am Thine to serve thee in the Lord, and in the Gospel of
his Son. W. D.

AN EXPOSITION Of the 54. Chapter of Isaiah, from Verse. 11. to the end.
The words are thus:

Verse. 11. Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted; behold, I
will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with Saphires.
12. And I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all
thy borders of pleasant stones, etc. THis place of Scripture, is very useful to
the Church of God, in these times wherein we live; yea, verily this Prophet,
did not so much Prophecy to his own age, as to ours, nor to the Jewish Church
as to the Christian. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
For unto them it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us, they did
minister the things which are now reported unto you.

The Prophet Isaiah, prophesied in the Spirit, touching the Kingdom of Christ,
which stands not in the flesh, but in the Spirit; and delivers, from the Father
by the Spirit, many excellent promises, to be fulfilled in the Son Incarnate,
head and members.

The first promise in this Chapter, is touching the great increase of the
Church, The great inc^ease of the spiritual ^hu^ch.
in the days of the New Testament; that whereas before, the Church was to be
found but in one kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; now, it should be
gathered out of every kindred, Rev. 5. 9.
and tongue, and people, and nation. And this is so desirable and comfortable a
thing, that in the beginning of the Chapter, he calls upon all to rejoice at
this; verse. 1. Sing O barren, thou that did not bear; break forth into
singing, and shout aloud, thou that did not travel with child: for more are
the children of the desolate then of the married wife, says the Lord. Enlarge
the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy
habitations. Spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes: for thou
shall break forth, on the right hand, and on the left, and thy seed shall
inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be inhabited. So that
there shall certainly be, a most wonderful, and numerous increase of the
faithful, in the Christian Church, till they become as the stars of heaven, and
as the drops of the morning dew, that cannot be told, all of them assembled, in
the beauties of holiness.

And therefore let us not be overmuch troubled, Use.
though at present we see, in a numerous nation, but few true children of the
spiritual Church; for God shall bless these few, and bid them increase, and
multiply, and replenish the earth: so that though the Assemblies of the Saints
be now but thin, and one comes from this place, and another from that, to these
Assemblies, and in many and most places of the kingdom, these few are fain to
come together secretly, for fear of the Jews, that is the people of the letter;
yet through the pouring forth of the Spirit, it shall come to pass, at last,
that they shall come in flocks, and as doves to their windows. And it shall be
said to the Church by the Lord, Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold, all
these gather themselves together and come to thee: As I live, says the Lord,
thou shall surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind
them on thee as a bride does, etc. till at last the Church shall say in her
heart, Who has begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children and am
desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who has brought up these?
Behold, I was left alone; these where had they been?

Yea, these very promises, are now in the very act of accomplishing among us;
for the spiritual Church, has received a very great increase, within these few
years, and God has many faithful people, in many places of this Kingdom; and
of this my self and many more in this Army are witnesses: for having marched up
and down the Kingdom, to do the work of God, and the Sat, we have met with
many Christians, who have much Gospel light, and (which makes it the more
strange) in such places, where there has been no Gospel Ministry; which has
put me in mind of that prophecy, Isa. 66. 8. Who has heard such a thing? who
has seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day, or
shall a Nation be born at once? For as soon as Sion traveled, nay, before she
traveled, she brought forth her children. There was, no outward Ministry of
the Gospel, to travel or take pains with them, and yet Sion brings forth her
children.

And one thing that is remarkable touching the increase of the Church at this
day, is this, That where Christ sends the Ministration of the Spirit, there
many young people are brought in to Christ, as being most free from the forms
of the former age, and from the Doctrines and Traditions of men, taught and
received instead of the pure and unmixed Word of God: whereas many old
professors, who are wholly in the form, prove the greatest enemies to the power
of godliness: and thus, the first are the last, and the last first.

Now this great and sudden increase of the faithful, is that which does so
exceedingly trouble the World, and makes them angry at the very heart. For, if
they were, but a few, mean, contemptible and inconsiderable persons, whom they
might easily suppress and destroy, they would be pretty quiet: but when they
begin to increase in the land, as Israel did in Egypt, and notwithstanding all
the burdens of their taskmasters, wherewith they are afflicted and grieved, do
yet increase abundantly, and multiply, and wax exceeding mighty, till they
begin to fill the land; and when they consult to deal wisely with them, lest
they multiply too much, do yet see them grow and multiply the more, that they
know not at what Country, or City, or Town, or Village, or Family, to begin to
suppress them: this is that which does so exceedingly vex and inrage the world,
and makes them even mad again, as we see this day. For the increase of the
faithful, as it is the glory of the Church, so it is the grief and madness of
the world. But these men in vain attempt against this increase of the faithful,
as the Egyptians against the increase of the Israelites; for none can hinder
the increase of the Church, but they that hinder God from pouring out his
Spirit; and according to the measure of God pouring forth the Spirit, is and
must be, the increase of the Church, in despite of all the opposition of the
world.

And thus much touching the first promise of the Churches Increase.

Now in the words I read to you, the Lord comes to another promise: so that the
Lord because of the Churches weakness, adds one promise to another; and these
promises are nothing but the out goings and manifestations of his love, throug
the Word Christ. But to look more nearly upon the words.

Verse. 11. Oh thou afflicted. Affliction in the world, does so inseparably
attend the Church, that the Church even takes its denomination from it, The
affliction of the Spiritual Church.
Oh thou afflicted. The condition of the Church, is an afflicted condition. For
the Church, being born of God, and born of the Spirit, is put into a direct
contrariety to the world, which is born of the flesh, and is also of its father
the devil. And so, the whole world is malignant, against the faithful and
spiritual Church; and all that are not regenerate, set their faces, yea their
hearts and their hands against the Saints; and the unregenerate world, is
against the regenerate; and the carnal world, against the spiritual; and the
sinful world, against the righteous; and all the people and nations in the
world, are against that people and nation which the Apostle calls a holy nation,
and a peculiar people.

As the world cannot endure God in himself: So neither can it endure God in the
Saints; and so the more God dwells in the Saints, the more does the world
afflict the Saints: for they oppose not the faithful for any thing of flesh and
blood in them, but because that flesh and blood of theirs is the habitation of
God, and the very presence of God himself is there, as he says, I will dwell
in them, and walk in them. Agreeable to this, is that of Christ, where he
says, All this shall they do to you, for my Names sake; that is, when the Name
of Christ is called upon us, and we are taken into his Name, that is, into his
righteousness, and life, and truth, and wisdom, and holiness, and into his
Nature, which comprehends all this; then, when the world perceives the Name of
God in the Sons of men, and the nature of God in the natures of men, then
presently they fall a persecuting the Saints, for this Name and Natures sake:
and he that strikes at God in his Saints, would if he could, strike at God in
himself. And therefore let the world take heed what they do in this point; for
while they persecute the Saints, they are found fighters against God himself,
because God is one with them, and they are one with God in Christ. And let the
Saints be admonished, so to hide and retire themselves into God through Christ,
that whoever is an enemy to them, and opposes them, may rather be an enemy to
God, and oppose God then them, they living and acting in God, and not in
themselves.

Now this affliction, the Church meets with in the world, is profitable for the
Church; it is good for it, that it should be afflicted: for the more it is
afflicted in the flesh, the more it thrives in the Spirit: this affliction
stirs us up to the exercise of our faith and prayer; yea, then is our faith
most active and vigorous, and our prayers most fervent, till they fill the
whole heavens again; then are we most in the use of the Word; then are we set
off furthest from the world; then do we keep closest to God; then have we
nearest intercourse and communion with him: so that we could better want fire,
and water; and the sun, then want affliction, which God out of his mere love,
through his overruling power and wisdom, causes to work unto us for good. So
that we who are placed in the hand of Christ, are set in such a condition,
wherein nothing can do us any harm for ever, but evil it self must work good
unto us. But we proceed.

Tossed with Tempest. Where we see that the Church is not only afflicted, The
spiritual Church is violently afflicted.
but violently afflicted; one wave comes against it after another, as in a
tempest; and the more spiritual the Church is, the more does the world become
as a raging sea against it; because the more spiritual the Church is made, it
is set in the more contrariety to the world, and the world to it. The Psalmist
describes this temper in the world against the Church; They came upon me like a
ramping and a roaring Lion: And again, They came upon me, to eat up my flesh,
as they would eat bread. When the Saints have appeared in the Spirit, and acted
in the Spirit, how violent and enraged has the world been against them? It
would toss them, as in a tempest, from place to place, from post to pillar, as
they say, till it has quite tossed them out of the world. Yea, men naturally
meek and moderate, how fierce have they become against the Saints, when there
has appeared any glorious discoveries of Christ in them? For the enmity, that
is in the seed of the Serpent, against the seed of the Woman, will be still
breaking forth: And though it may for a time be covered, under many moral
virtues, and a form of godliness, yet when God leaves them to themselves, and
lets them act outwardly according to their inward principles, how cruelly, and
maliciously, and fiercely, and desperately do they act against the Saints of
God? Yea, there is not that enmity between Turk and Jew, as there is between
carnal Gospellers, and spiritual Christians; the former hating these, and being
angry against these to the very death. And when ever the Lord, shall suffer
these, to exercise their enmity against the Church, then shall the Churches
condition, become such as it is here described, afflicted and tossed with
tempest.

And not comforted. The Church of God in all the evil it meets withal in the
world, The spiritual Church in affliction, has no comfort from the world.
has not one drop of comfort from the world: it has affliction, tribulation,
persecution, from the world, but no comfort.

This we see in Christ the Head; you know what he suffered in the world in the
days of his flesh; he was despised and rejected of men, and so full of
sorrows, that he took his name from them, and was called A man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: At last, out of mere envy and malice they apprehended
him, bound him, buffeted him, spit on him, crucified him; and all this, would
have been but a small matter, to have suffered from the Heathen; but he
suffered all this from the only visible Church of God in the World, who put
him, to the most painful and shameful death of the Cross, between two
malefactors, to bear the world in hand, that he was the third, and the chief.
And in all this evil, he had no body to pity him, or have compassion on him;
but they laughed at him, and derided him, and mocked and jeered him; but no
body comforted him.

And as it was with Christ the Head, so it is with Christ the body and members;
they in all the evils, and woes, and sorrows, and oppositions, and persecutions
they have from the world, have no body to comfort them, or take compassion on
them. Refuge failed me (says David) no man cared for my soul. Lover and friend
have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness, says Heman.
Psalm. 88. 18.

Brethren and Beloved, ye that are partakers of the heavenly calling, and of
the divine nature, if ever the Lord suffer the world to prevail against you, to
afflict you, and toss you, from one evil to another, as in a tempest, to
reproach you, throw you out of your comforts, banish you, imprison you, etc.
you shall find no body to comfort you; no body will take notice of you, or
regard you, or own you, or pity you, or be so sensible of your condition, as
to say, Alas my brother.

You must look for affliction in the World, but you must look for no comfort
there. When God shall cast us into sorrows and sufferings, let us not look for
one worldly man, to stand by us, no not of those that now smile upon us, and
pretend friendship to us; no nor^ yet of our near relations; but then that
shall be fulfilled, I was a stranger to my brethren, an alien to my mothers
children* Nay yet further; they that are weak or worldly Christians, will stand
aloof from thee, and will be shye to own, and countenance, and encourage, and
comfort thee publicly. The disciples of Christ, when he was led to the Cross,
they all forsook him, and fled, and left him to tread the wine^press alone. And
so if you suffer, in the righteousness and truth of God, you shall find little
comfort from men. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted.

Now this the Lord does, in much mercy to his Saints; he leaves them destitute
of earthly Comfort, that they may look for heavenly; he leaves them destitute
of all comfort from men, that they may look for comfort from God alone. And
therefore when thou art brought into such a case, to be afflicted and not
comforted, lift up thy heart to God, and expect all from him. Says Christ, Joh
16. The world shall hate you and persecute you, and shall put you out of their
synagogues, and shall kill you; and in doing all this, shall think they do God
good service: But, says he, I will send you the comforter. Christ knew well
enough, that among all these evils, they should have no Comforter on earth, and
therefore promises to send them one from heaven.

And therefore, when thy soul is placed in affliction, never look after any
earthly or sensual, or creature comforts, for they will prove poison to thy
soul; but only look for heavenly comforts, such as the Spirit brings, such as
flow immediately from God; for these are pure, and sweet, and unmixed, and
refreshing, and supporting, and satisfying, and enduring comforts; comforts,
that are able to make thee rejoice, not only in fullness, but in wants; not only
among friends, but in the midst of enemies; not only in good report, but in
evil report; not only in prosperity, but in tribulations; not only in life, but
in death; they will make thee go singing to prison, to the Cross, to the grave:
they are mighty comforts, infinitely stronger then all the sorrows of the
flesh: and hence it is that many Saints and Martyrs have gone cheerfully to the
stake, and sung in the very flames: the comforts of God in their souls, have
strengthened them to this.

Thou that art a believer, and in union with Christ, never doubt of this
comfort in thy greatest sorrows. When Christ had none to stand by him and
comfort him, God sent an Angel from heaven to do it: And so when we are left
alone in the world, rather then we shall want comfort, God will send us an
Angel from heaven, to comfort us; yea, the Spirit it self, which is greater
then all the Angels in heaven; and we shall certainly be comforted by God, when
we are afflicted and tossed with tempest, and not comforted by men.

Behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, etc. The Lord sees the
Church in its affliction, The spiritual Church in affliction comforted by a
promise.
without all comfort in the world, and then the Lord comes and comforts it
himself; and this he does by a promise They are the sweetest comforts, that are
brought to us in the promises. The promises are the swadling-clothes of Christ,
they carry Christ wrapped up in them; and Christ represented to the Church, has
been the comfort of it, in all its evils, outward or inward.

And therefore whatever affliction takes hold on thee, have recourse to the
promises, to draw thy comforts from Christ through them. Oh how sweet is that
life that is led in the promises! a life led in the promises, is the best life
in the world. Men that have estates in money or land, depend on those things
for their maintenance; but a Christian, may have little or nothing of these in
the world, but he has a promise* which is a thousand times better, and makes
his life more comfortable: I am God All-sufficient; and, I will not fail thee
nor forsake thee: whereupon he comes to this resolution, The Lord is my
portion, says my soul, I will trust in him. Oh how sweet a life is this life,
that knows no cares, nor fears, nor troubles, nor disquietments! here, says a
believer, lies my estate, and living, and the lot of mine inheritance; and this
is a thousand times better and more certain estate, then all the Manors and
Lordships in the Kingdom: for, my bread shall be given me, my waters shall be
sure; The Lord is my shepherd, and I shall not want; no not then, when the
Lions (the great men of the Kingdom, to whom every poor man is a prey) shall
lack and suffer^hunger. He that has given me his own Nature and Spirit, will
not leave me destitute of food and clothing.

Take another instance. A man feeling the bitterness of affliction to flesh and
blood, is ready to think, Oh how shall I ever be able to suffer this or that,
or to part with my relations, with my estate, with my life, and all that is
near and dear unto me? Why, when a Christian lays hold on the promise, God is
faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that which we are able. O,
says a Christian, God will never bring me to any temptation or trial, but he
will give me strength proportionable to it, or above it: and so lives satisfied
with the truth, and goodness, and power of God. And thus you see in these
instances, that a life led in the promises, is the sweetest and best life; when
a man can draw all from God himself, through a promise.

And this in general, That God comforts his Church by a promise.

But to come more particularly to the words. Behold, I will lay thy stones with
fair colors, and lay thy foundations with Saphires. The special promise that
comforts the Church, is, that God himself shall build it up gloriously.


Verse. 12. And I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles,
and all thy borders of pleasant stones. The promise relates to the Spiritual
Church of the New Testament: and this you shall observe, is often in Scripture
compared to a building, and that to a most stately, sumptuous, magnificent and
glorious building; as being all built of precious stones, and so more glorious
then the first Temple, which was built up of common stones: and it was
prophesied, that the glory of the second Temple should far exceed the glory of
the first. The first Temple was Solomon's, which was indeed filled with the
outward presence of God; but the second Temple is the humanity of Jesus Christ,
or the flesh of Christ, both head and members: this is the living Temple of the
living God; the Temple that God has built by his Spirit, for his own
habitation; wherein God dwells truly, really, spiritually, and most nearly, by
the way of the most near union, whereby God and the creature are knit together:
and this spiritual Temple, is more glorious, then the first material one,
either according to the first edition of it by Solomon, or the second edition
of it by the Fathers, in the days of Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes.

Here then you see, that the Lord promises to build up the Church of the New
Testament, with stones of fair colors, with precious stones. I will not stand
to enquire particularly into the natures of the several stones here named; for
the Jews themselves, do not fully agree about them. It shall be sufficient for
us to attain to the meaning of the Spirit in this place, and that is this.

That the Spiritual Church of the New Testament, is not to be built with
common, but with precious stones.

Now the full sense of these words I shall give you forth in several
particulars.

1. You see here the matter of which the Church of the New Testament is made;
The matter of which the spiritual Church is made.
and that is not of common, but of precious stones; elect and precious stones;
and such are the faithful: For,

1. They have a more excellent nature then other men have: for they are born of
God, and so partake of the nature of God; and so in this sense may be said to
come forth from God, as the child from the father: and the Lord Jesus did not
more truly partake of the nature of man, then these do partake of the nature of
God; and therefore says Peter, Great and precious promises are made to us,
that we should be partakers of the divine nature. Others have only the nature
of men in them, or which is worse, the nature of the devil: but the faithful,
have in them the nature of God, communicated to them through a new birth.

2. They have a more excellent spirit then others have; as it was said of
Daniel, that there was a more excellent spirit found with him, then with all
the other wise men. Now the excellency of each creature, is according to the
spirit of it: but the Saints have the Spirit of God, even the Spirit of the
Father and the Son dwelling in them; they have the same spirit of God dwelling
in their flesh, as Christ had dwelling in his flesh: so that the very Spirit of
God, is found in the faithful, and therefore they are more glorious then the
rest of the world.

3. They have a more excellent luster then other men. One thing that
appertains to the excellency of precious stones, is the luster of them. Now
this luster in the faithful, is the glory of God upon them: The Lord shall
arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee, says Isaiah, Chap.
60. And Paul says, We all, beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the
Lord. So that as Christ was taken into the glory of the Father, so are we taken
into the glory of Christ, as he says, Joh. 17. And the glory which thou gave
me, I have given them: for the head and members are taken into the same glory,
acccording to their proportion.

4. They have more excellent operations; for the faithful, are not such
precious stones, that are only for show, but they also have some virtue in
them, even the very virtues of Jesus Christ: for they having the same Nature
and Spirit of God as he had, are able according to the measure of the gift of
Christ, to do the same works that he did: and so the Saints, are excellent, in
the operations of faith, hope, love, humility, meekness, patience, temperance,
heavenly mindedness, etc. And in this regard also are more precious then the
rest of the world. And therefore the Lord calls them his Jewels; In the day
whrein I make up my jewels: and elsewhere they are called the precious Sons of
Sion. The people of God are a most precious people, men and women of a precious
anointing; though some wicked and scurrilous Libellers, against the spiritual
Church, will not allow them this name; but (according to the anointing they
have received from Satan) reproach it. And yet still it is a truth, that the
gates of hell shall not prevail against, That the truly faithful are precious
stones in the building of the Church, partaking of the Nature and Spirit of
God, and of the luster and operation of both.

Whereas, on the contrary, other people are the vile of the earth the true
filth and offscouring of all things, Psalm. 15. In whose eyes, a vile person is
contemned: a man that is a natural man, a sinful and unregerate man, who has
no other nature in him, but that corrupt nature he brought into the world,
though in this present world he may be a Gentleman, or a Knight, or a Noble
man, or a King: yet in the eyes of God and his Saints, he is but a vile person;
and a poor mean Christian that earns his bread by hard labor, is a thousand
times more precious and excellent then he, according to the judgment of God
and his Word.

And thus much for the first thing, The matter of which the Church of the New
Testament is made, that is of precious stones. 2. Now the next thing
observable, The variety of the precious stones in the building of the spiritual
Church.
is the variety of these precious stones. For the spiritual Church, is not
built up of precious stones of one sort only, not all of Saphires, or all of
Agates, or all of Carbuncles; but of all these; both Saphires, Agates,
Carbuncles, and many other precious stones of fair colors.

And this notes the diversity of gifts in the Saints of God. For though all of
them are precious stones, yet they are of diversity of colors, and luster, and
operations: And this also makes for the greater glory of the Church: for the
variety of luster adds to the beauty and ornament of it. In the body of a man,
there is not one member, but many. If the body were all but one member, it
would be but a lump of flesh; but the variety of members, with their several
gifts and operations, are the glory of the body. And so it is in the Church,
the Body of Jesus Christ, wherein are diverse members, with diversity of gifts
and operations, excellently set forth by Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 4. etc. Now there are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit: And there are differences of
administrations, but the same Lord: and there are diversities of operations,
but it is the same God, that works all in all. But the manifestation of the
Spirit, is given to every one, to profit withal: For to one, is given by the
Spirit, the word of wisdom; to another, the word of knowledge, by the same
Spirit; to another, faith by the same Spirit; to another, the gift of healing
by the same Spirit; to another, the working of miracles; to another, prophecy;
to another, discerning of spirits; to another, diverse kinds of tongues; to
another, interpretation of tongues; but all these, works that one and the
same Spirit, dividing to every man, severally as he will. Here you see, are
diversities of gifts, and administrations, and operations in the faithful; but
all proceed from one and the same Spirit: and whatsoever gift proceeds from the
Spirit, there is an excellent beauty, a heavenly luster in it.

And therefore labor to distinguish between those gifts that are connatural to
thee, and flow from thy own spirit, and those gifts that are supernatural, and
flow from Gods Spirit. In all the operations of thine own spirit, in all thy
natural abilities, parts, wisdom, learning, actings, there is nothing but
ungloriousness, deformity, darkness, death, how specious soever they may appear
to the world: but in the gifts and operations that flow from Gods Spirit, there
is a heavenly beauty, and luster, and glory; yea, even in weak Christians, that
are true Christians, you shall often see and discern an excellent beauty in some
gift or other, which they have received from the Spirit; which shines not forth
so clearly, in some stronger Christians. And therefore, let us not expect* all
gifts in all men, and that every man should excel in every gift; for then one
would be saying to another, I have no need of thee. But God has given
diversity of gifts to diverse Saints, that each may acknowledge something in
another, which he has not himself, and may reckon his perfection to lie in his
Union and Communion with them; that so the Communion of Saints may be kept up
in the world, in despite of the world. One Christian has the gift of Faith,
another the gift of Prayer, another the gift of utterance in preaching, another
the gift of courage, another the gift of meekness, and the like; and no man,
has all things in himself, that every man in the sight of his own wants, may
be kept humble. And this a is glorious thing in this building, that the luster
of each stone, adds to the luster of all; and the luster of all, is
communicated to each stone: and so in the Spiritual building, what one has
from the Spirit, it is for all; and what all have, is for each one. If thou
have the gift of utterance in the ministration of the Spirit, it is to build up
me; if I have the spirit of Prayer, it commends thee as ca^efully to God as my
self: one watches over another, as over his own soul; and if any be weak, the
strong support them; if any be doubtful, they that have the gift of knowledge
direct them: If one be troubled, the rest mourn with him; if one be comforted,
the rest rejoice with him; and they are all so linked together in the body of
Christ, that the good and evil of one extends to all. Where thou can fince,
such another communion, there join thy self: but if this be the only excellent
Communion in the world, who would not willingly join himself to that spiritual
people, where no man calls his grace his own, but all gifts, are in common
among all, every one having a share in the faith, hope, love, prayer, peace,
joy, wisdom, strength of all; and all having a share, in these gifts and
graces, that are in any one? And thus much for the diversity of the stones, as
well as the preciousness of them.

3. The third thing, The spiritual Church is made up only of precious stones.
that reveals the sense of the words, is, to observe, that this spiritual
building of the Church of the New Testament, is made up all of precious stones,
without any mixture of common stones; is made up of Saphires, Agates,
Carbuncles; and adds, And all thy borders of pleasant stones.

Here then must be no mingling, of the precious and the vile, the holy and the
profane, the faithful and the unbeliever, the spiritual and the carnal; but all
must be precious. If a man had a Jewel, that had here and there only a precious
stone in it, and all the rest common pebbles, there would be no great glory in
such a Jewel; but the common stones, would take off from the luster of the
precious ones: And so the Church, is Gods Jewel in the world, and it must be
made up, only of precious stones, as you see here. And where are their eyes,
that perceive not this?

There be some that talk much against New Doctrine, which is the old reproach
of the Gospel; but surely, there was never newer Doctrine then this, That the
Spiritual Church of the New Testament, should be made up of all the People that
live in a Kingdom; and that all that are born in such a Nation, should
necessarily be stones for the building up the New Jerusalem. This is a new
Doctrine indeed, which neither the Old nor the New Testament owns; but was
conveyed into the world by the spirit of Antichrist. For God does not now make
any People, or kindred, or Nation his Church; but gathers his Church out of
every people, and kindred, and Nation: and none can be stones of this building,
but those that are first elect, and after made precious, through a new birth,
and the gift of the Spirit. And this Doctrine, the Word will justify, against
the world; for Paul writing to the Churches of Ephesus and Corinth, etc. does
he mean all the people that lived at Ephesus or Corinth? No, but the faithful
and elect, Children by adoption, Saints by calling; and says, So it was meet
for him to judge of them all. And if any were mistaken for a Saint that was
none, surely he carried himself very like one; he was outwardly in sheeps
clothing, or he had not been reckoned among the flock: and so, if a stone be
taken into this building, that is not truly precious, yet it is so like one, in
show and color, that it can hardly be discerned to be other, but by a very
skilful Lapidary. And indeed, such a mistake there may be in Christ's Kingdom
here, that a few counterfeit stones may be taken up among many precious ones:
but that, is the mistake of a false Church, where a thousand counterfeit ones
are taken in for one truly precious; wherein for one faithful Christian, there
are many Formalists, and many more profane. This is not such a building the
Prophet speaks of; for this is all of elect and precious stones. But I cannot
enlarge on these things, because this exercise, I intend chiefly as an
Exposition: only I will add one or two things more, touching this particular,
and so go on.

1. If the Church of the New Testament, is to be built all of precious stones,
what a building is that, where the only care is, to keep these stones out of
the building, lest by their glory and luster, they should darken the rest?

2. Consider, when the Church shall be built up all of such precious stones,
what a glorious Church will that be, when the glory of the Lord shall shine
forth in every stone of this building? how will there be then glory upon glory,
till the glory of the Church, first darken, and then put out, all the glory of
the world?

3. Consider, what great enemies they are to the true and native glory of the
Church, that would have every man in a Kingdom, a member of the Church, and
would have those taken into the flock, that are none of Christ's sheep; and
those taken into the Church of God, that are not of God; and would gather up
any stones, to make up this Temple of God. These are the men, that would keep
off, those glorious things from being fulfilled in the Church, which are spoken
of it, in the Word.

4. We are to take notice, who is the Builder of such a structure as this, The
Builder of the spiritual Church is God.
all made up of precious stones: and you shall find in the word, that the
builder and maker of it, is God. I will do it, says the Lord; behold, I will
lay thy stones with fair colors, and I will lay thy foundations with Saphires,
and I will make thy windows of Aggates; it is all Gods work from the beginning
to the end. For who can build unto God, a living Temple to dwell in, but
himself? This the Prophet speaks plainly, where he says, The man whose name is
the branch, he shall build the Temple of the Lord, even he shall build it. It
lies in the power, of no man, to make such a building as this is. What wild and
woeful work do men make, when they will undertake to be building the Church, by
their own humane wisdom and prudence and counsel? when they think, we will have
the Church of God, thus and thus; and we will make it up, of such and such men;
and we will govern it, by such and such Laws: and we will get, the power of the
Magistrate to back ours; and then, what we cannot do by the power of the Word
and Spirit, we will do by the power of flesh and blood: Poor men! that think
that these new Heavens, wherein the Lord will dwell, must be the work of their
own fingers; or that the new Jerusalem must of necessity come out of the
Assembly, which is to come down from God out of Heaven: or that they can build
the house of God, all of precious stones, whereas this must be Gods own work
and his own doing; and no State or Council in the World, can bring this about;
and after much trial, and pains, and weariness, the Lord will at last teach
his own, that the gathering, and laying these precious stones together, must be
the Lords own doing, even his own doing.

When the building of the Church, is left to men, how woefully is it managed?
why says one, we must needs admit such an one, he is the chief man in the
Parish, or he is a man of good esteem in the world, or he is a Noble man, or he
is my near kinsman, or is thus and thus related to me, or he is a good civil
fair dealing man, and we must needs admit him; and thus will flesh and blood,
be ever making a carnal temple for God to dwell in; but Gods* true habitation,
can never be framed but by the Spirit.

And therefore, for the building of the Church, let us look higher then the
highest instruments; for it must be the Lords own work by the word and Spirit:
and though every man be against it, and oppose it, yet the Lord will do it;
when there are no hands to build it up, he will build it up without hands. I
will lay thy stones with, etc. It follows.

Ver. 13. And thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the
peace of thy children. See here, how the prophet by the Spirit, carries up the
Saints above all visible and sensible things, The teacher of the Sp^ritual
Church is God.
even as high as God himself; God ( says he to the Church) shall build thee,
and God shall teach thee; all thy children shall be taught of the Lord. The
note is this: That all the true, and genuine children of the Church, have Gods
own teaching, in all the things of God; they have the Father and the Son, to
teach them by the Spirit. This truth, Christ himself confirms, where he says,
It is written, that they shall be all taught of God; he therefore that heard
and learned of my father, comes to me. And again, the spirit when he is come,
he shall lead you into all truth; Which doctrine John after preached thus. 1 John 2. 27. The anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in you: and
ye ^ceed not, that any man should teach you, but as the same anointing teaches
you all things.

Hereby now we perceive, how few true children of the Church there be, among
those who are commonly called Christians; for among all these, how few are
there who have the teaching of God? but most, have their teaching only from
men, and no higher.

Consider therefore I pray, whether the knowledge you have, be from the
teaching of God, or the teaching of man; you all pretend to know, that Christ
is the Son of the living God: and that redemption and salvation, is by him
alone; but how came ye by this knowledge? did you read it in the letter? or did
some body tell you so? or has God himself taught you this? For no man knows
the Son but the Father, and he to whom the Father will reveal him; and
therefore when Peter said, thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Christ
answered, flesh and blood has not taught thee this, but my Father which is in
heaven. And so, though all of you profess your selves Christians, yet none of
you know Christ truly, but only such as are taught of the Father. And this
holds, in all other points, as touching calling, and faith, and union, and
justification, and sanctification, and the gift and sealing of the Spirit,
touching the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, and the Government of it; oh
consider, whether you have the teaching of God in these things or no; and if
you have not the teaching of God, you are none of the children of the Church;
what ever truth thou know from the letter, if thou have not the teaching of
the Spirit, it will do thee no good; thou know not any thing spiritually and
savingly, wherein thou have not the teaching of God. All thy children shall be
taught of the Lord.

And therefore, what a sad thing is it, when men look for their teaching no
farther then men? they only look to the Minister, or to such an able, learned,
Orthodox man, as they phrase it; or at the highest, to the Assembly; and what
they shall teach them, they are resolved to stand by it, and build upon it, for
their foundation; in the mean time, never regarding in truth, the teaching of
God: but say, what can so many grave, learned, godly men err? and shall not we
believe what they determine? why now these, are none of the children of the
spiritual Church; for they neither have Gods teaching, nor care for it: but the
spiritual Church is all taught of God.

Object. But you will say, does God teach, without means?

Answ. I answer, no: God teaches, but it is by the Word, and that chiefly in
the Ministry of it: and he that pretends to be taught of God without the Word,
is not taught of God, but of the Devil. And therefore no man is to despise the
Ministry of the Word, which is Gods own Ordinance, and to depend upon I know
not what revelations, and inspeakings without the word; seeing God teaches all
his children by the word, and none without it. And therefore it is not the
Prophets meaning, when he says all thy children shall be taught of the Lord,
that they should neglect and despise the Word, and the Ministry of it; but
that we ought, so to use the Word and the means, as not to look for our
teaching from them, but from God himself, in and through them; and when you
come to hear, not to think, I will hear what Mr. such an one, or Mr. such one
will say, but with the Psalmist, I will hear, what the Lord God will say. And
truly, I would not care to hear what any man in the world would say, in whom
Christ himself did not speak.

Now much more might be said, of this teaching of God (but that I intend
brevity in all) as namely, that this teaching,

1. Is a clear and evident teaching, that you shall have certainty in what you
are taught: and shall be so taught of God, that no man or Angel, shall be able
to unteach you again.

2. It is an inward teaching, though by the outward Word; reaching to the
inward soul and spirit, to the hidden man of the heart.

3. It is a successeful teaching; he so teaches as men learn; he that has
heard and learned of my Father; hearing and learning go together: he teaches
faith, and we believe; humility, and we are humble; patience, and we endure,
etc.

But I cannot enlarge any farther in this point. It follows.

And great shall be the peace of thy children. That is, The Spiritual Church
being taught of God is peaceable in it self.
when men are taught of God, then there is nothing but peace among them; when
God comes, and teaches thee, and me, and another, and many, then we all agree
because we are all taught of God, and see all things, by the same light, and
apprehend all things, by the same knowledge, and perceive all things, by the
same spirit, because all, have the same teaching. And so, they that are taught
of God, though one come out of the East, and another out of the West, and
another out of the South, and never had any former communion together, yet they
all agree in the same truth, and think and speak the same things; and so, there
is love and amity, and peace and unity among them, because they are all taught
of God, and have learned the truth, not as it is in this or that man, or
assembly of men, but as it is in Jesus.

And truly, this is the true ground of all the differences and dissentions, and
heats that are in the Kingdom, at this time, to wit, because some are taught of
God, and some are not taught of God, but men only: the carnal Church is only
taught of men, and goes no higher; but the spiritual Church, is truly taught
of God. Now they that are taught of God, and they that are taught of men, see
the same truths, with a great deal of difference, and hereupon arises the
Controversy and Quarrel; for one will have the truth, as he sees it in the
light of God; another will have it, as he apprehends it in his own fancy: and
the carnal man, will not yield to the spiritual; and the spiritual man, cannot
yield to the carnal. Says one, this is the mind of God, and I have learned it
from his own teaching: says another, this is not the mind of God for such a
learned Minister, or Ministers, taught me otherwise, and so I apprehend it; and
thus as the flesh and spirit are contrary, so are their teachings: and hence
our divisions and troubles. But when men, are all taught of God, then they are
all at peace one with another, and all do agree in the substance of the truth
of the Gospel; and if some do not know, the same things they do, they can wait
with patience, till God also reveal that unto them; for they know with all
their hearts, that they themselves could never have known those things, except
God had taught them: and so they cannot be angry at others, whom the Lord as
yet has not vouchsafed to teach: and so they are meek, and gentle toward all,
as beseems the spirit, as well as at peace among themselves. All thy children
shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the peace of thy children: For
they know, that no man is higher or lower then another, in the Kingdom of God,
but all are equal in Jesus Christ; they know that no man can challenge Christ,
more to himself then another, but all have equal interest in him, and Christ is
alike near to all, in whom he dwells; yea, they all, as willingly communicate
their own things, to the brethren, as they themselves do partake of Christ's
things; and so there is nothing but peace. When men know, that no man is any
thing in himself, but every one is all that he is, in Christ: and when men love
Christ, merely for himself, and where they see most of Christ, there love most,
and if Christ be more in another, then himself, can love such a one more then
himself, not for his own sake, but for Christ's sake; then there is nothing but
peace. Great shall be the peace of thy children.

Verse. 14. In righteousness shall thou be established, etc. This spiritual
Church, The establishment of this Spiritual Church.
had need of establishment; for, when God has done all this for it, when he
has built it, and taught it himself, it shall not want trouble and opposition,
and contradiction, and persecution in the world, and therefore it stands in
great need of establishment. But how shall this be done? Why says he, In
righteousness shall thou be established.

That is, not by any outward power or force, or armies, or fortifications, or
factions, or confederacies; all these, are but a staff of reed; but in
righteousness; and that is, both in the righteousness of Christ received by us,
and working in us: the first is, the righteousness of justification: the second
is, the righteousness of sanctification, and our establishment lies in both.

1. In the righteousness of Justification, which is called the righteousness of
faith, or Christ's own righteousness, received into us: and in this sense it is
said, Except ye believe, ye shall never be established: for by faith we partake
of the righteousness of God through Christ: and this is an infinite, and
everlasting righteousness, that has neither spot, nor blemish in it, this is
able to establish us for ever and ever; so that the Church has no more
establishment, then it has of the righteousness of Christ by faith; and as the
Church goes from faith to faith, so it goes from establishment to establishment.

2. Our establishment lies in the righteousness of our sanctification; which is
nothing but Christ working in us, as the former was Christ dwelling in us; for
the same Christ that is the righteousness of our justification, is the
righteousness of our sanctification. Now the establishment of the Church is,
when we let the righteousness of Christ work all in us, and we work all in the
righteousness of Christ; then are we established mightily and invincibly
indeed; and how much Christians swerve from this Rule, so much they become weak
and unsettled: sometimes Christians will be living out of Christ in themselves,
and they will be moving, and acting, and working according to humane wisdom and
prudence, and the counsels and devices of flesh and blood, but in all this they
have no establishment at all. And therefore ye that are faithful, see to it,
that ye turn aside neither to the right hand, nor to the left, through any
worldly hopes or fears, but do ye live and act in the righteousness of Christ:
and as the Lord lives, though you have Kingdoms and Nations for your enemies,
you shall not be moved, but shall be established more firmly then the earth.

And therefore I pray consider your establishment, where it lies, and that is
in righteousness, and in righteousness only. Some trust to this strength, and
some to that, some to this aid, and some to that; but the spiritual Church,
scorns to trust to any creature for establishment, but looks to be established
only in righteousness; and because of this, neither men nor devils shall
prevail against it. And therefore you that are of this Temple and building
which is made by God, seeing you have so many enemies on all hands, pray look
to your establishment, which is in righteousness: In righteousness shall thou
be established.

Thou shall be far from oppression, for thou shall not fear; and from terror,
for it shall not come near thee.

The fear and teror he speaks of here, The Spiritual Church being established,
is without fear and terror.
is inward fear and terror, from which the Church shall be free, in the midst
of all outward evils; for though the Church be full of danger and persecution
without, yet it is free from fear and terror within; Nay, the Church has
trouble without, but peace within; affliction without, joy within; weakness
without, strength within; imprisonment without, liberty within; persecution
without, content within: against all the sorrows and sufferings on the flesh,
they have refreshings, comforts, hopes, sweetnesses, rejoycings, triumphs in
the spirit; and so in the midst of evil, are free from evil; and in the midst
of sufferings are free from pain; yea, they rejoice in tribulations, and in the
midst of evil are filled and satisfied with good.

Verse. 15. Behold they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever
shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake. A very strange
thing it is, that the spiritual Church, being this builded, and taught, and
established, and should yet be so blind, and mad, as to engage against it; and
yet the world, and the carnal Church especially does this: yea, the more pure
and spiritual the Church is, the more enmity the world and Formalists have
against it.

Behold they shall surely gather together. The worlds enmity, against this
spiritual Church, thus built, taught, and established.
When they shall see the Churches gathering together into the true communion of
Saints, then will they gather themselves together against the Churches; And why
do these men blame the Churches, for gathering together unto Christ, when they
themselves gather together against the Church, as we daily see? Indeed the
gathering together of the Saints, the world does most hate of all other things:
Oh, this is a dreadful and terrible thing to them; it makes their hearts ache
within them, and loses the joints of their loins; they think, their
exaltation, will be their own abasement; and their gathering together, their
own scattering; and their glory, their own shame; and their strength, their own
undoing; and out of these conceits the world acts, so strongly and furiously,
to scatter abroad again, Christ's own gatherings together. But the Lord has
decreed and promised, to hew that little stone of Christ's spiritual Church, out
of the mountain of the World, with out hands, and will certainly accomplish it,
and is now about that very business: but the world, that never looks beyond
sense, they think this is surely a plot of ours, and that we have a great
design in hand, and so we have indeed; but the design is not our design, but
Gods, contrived in eternity, and discovered to Daniel chap. 2. and this is the
setting up a Kingdom of Saints in the world, under Christ the King of Saints,
wherein the people shall live alone in point of spiritual worship and
communion, and shall have nothing to do with the rest of the Nations. This
counsel of God, begins to be accomplished, and the world thinks that we are
subtle, and we are mighty, whereas they are clearly mistaken in us; for the
wisdom and strength, whereby this is done, is Gods and not ours. For it is the
Lord must build this spiritual Church, and set it up in the world, and preserve
it against the world, and cause it to increase, till it fills the world; so
that the design, and the accomplishment of it, belongs to God, and not to us;
and they that are displeased at it, let them go and quarrel against God: and so
they will certainly do, through the operation of the Devil; Behold, says he,
they shall surely gather together: As soon as ever the Church separates from
the world, the world gathers together against the Church.

Yea this place, is not only to be understood of those that are open enemies
without the Church, but of a generation in it, that are not of it; and so the
gathering together against the Church, shall be in the Church: and so Calvin
interprets; and such a thing will assuredly come to pass, that the Church as
well as the Kingdom will have domestic enemies; it has been so in all ages,
and what wonder will it be, if it be so in this? The first division in this
Kingdom, was between common profession, and open profaneness, and if ever there
be another, it is like to lie between the form and the power of godliness; and
the children that are born after the flesh, will up and be persecuting them
that are born after the Spirit; and the deepest wounds we shall receive, will
be in the house of our friends; not our friends indeed, but of such who seem to
be so; for they pray as well as we, and preach, and hear, and receive the
Sacraments, and use the same ordinances with us; and yet their enmity, of all
other, will be the greatest against us, and we shall receive deeper wounds in
the house of these friends, then in the streets of our enemies. They shall
gather together in thee, against thee.

But not by me. The Saints gather together by God, having the Spirit of God to
bring them into Union and Communion: but the carnal Church gathers together,
against thee spiritual, not by God, but without him, for worldly base ends and
interests, and profits, and advantages. But mark the end of such gathering
together: Whosoever shall gather together against thee, shall fall for thy sake.

We have seen the accomplishment of this promise, with our eyes; The world has
no success in their undertakings against the spiritual Church.
even a great party, of the greatest men in the Kingdom, as well as of mean
ones, gathered together against the Church, but all fallen: What is become of
the great Power, and Armies, that were in the West and the North, and other
parts of the Kingdom? are they not fallen through the strength of this promise?
and if any new party shall arise up again, they shall also fall in like manner.

For thy sake. For the Lord loves the Church the body of Christ, even as he
loves Jesus Christ himself, thou have loved them as thou have loved me; he
loves Head and Members, with the same love. The Lords people are his portion on
Earth, as he is theirs in Heaven, and so he will give Nations and Kingdoms for
them, and has said, the Nations and Kingdoms that will not serve thee, shall
perish; yea, those Nations shall be utterly wasted; Oh that this Kingdom in it
self; and in its representation, would avoid this evil, as they would escape
this end.

The four Monarchies for opposing the spiritual Church, have fallen for its
sake; and so shall every other Kingdom and Commonwealth, that undertakes
against it!

Verse. 16. Behold I have created the Smith, that blows the coals in the fire,
and that brings forth an instrument for his work, and I have created the
waster to destroy. Verse. 17. But no weapon that is formed against thee shall
prosper, etc. Thou art, says God to the Church, a small, weak, despised,
contemned, persecuted people; but thy safety, protection, blessing, lies in me,
and in my power, and wisdom, and love.

Behold I have created the smith, etc. That is, I have formed him that makes
the Sword, and Gun and Pike, and that prepares the Ammunition; and both he that
makes the weapon, and he that uses it, are in my hands, and they shall only
do what I would have them do, and no more: and so No weapon, that is formed
against thee, shall prosper.

God blunts the edge of the weapon, and weakens the hand, and puts fear into
the heart of him that uses it; and so no weapons that have been used, have
prospered hitherto, and if any more weapons shall be used hereafter, they shall
be as unprosperous as these.

And every tongne, that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall
condemn. Two ways you see the Enemies of the Church assault the Church; by
their hands, and by their tongues; and this latter way is the more dangerous of
the two: by the former, they scourge the Church, with rods; by this latter,
with Scorpions. This weapon of the tongue, is the most dangerous weapon, that
ever was used against the Church in any Age, and the last refuge of the Devil,
and his instruments, to annoy the Church. And thus when the enemy sails at the
strength of his weapons, he undertakes again with the malice of his tongue: and
with this, the Enemy strikes against the Saints, that profess the truth, and
against the truth it self, professed by the Saints.

Against the Saints, that profess the truth, clothing them with odious names,
and loading them with base aspersions, Independents, and Sectaries, and
Schismatics, and Heretics; and some suh, there are indeed in the Kingdom; but
they abuse the precious Saints of God, with these and other reproaches, and so
crucify Christ again in his body, not between two Thieves, but between two
hundred Thieves, that so it may be the greater difficulty to discern him: Their
tongues rise up in judgment against them; it intimates, they shall have
specious pretenses against the Church Oh these are the men that would turn the
world upside down, that make the Nation full of tumults and uproars, that work
all the disturbance in Church and State; it is fit, such men and Congregations
should be suppressed, and they should have no employment in Church or State; it
will never be a quiet world, till some course be taken with them, that we may
have truth and peace and government again. And thus they have fair pretenses
against the godly, and use the glorious names of truth, peace and government,
to the destruction of them all. And this is the sense of these words, for their
tongues to rise up in judgment against them.

Yea, me think, this phrase, intimates thus much, as if they would call in the
aid and power of the secular Magistrates, against the spiritual Christians; and
then their tongues rise up in judgment against them indeed; and except they
engage the Magistrates power against the Saints, they think they can never do
them mischief enough. And thus their tongues, rise up in judgment against the
Saints, that profess the truth.

2. As the enemy strikes with their tongue against the Saints that profess the
truth, so also against the truth professed by the Saints: and this, they call
by way of reproach, new light, as their Predecessors, at the beginning of the
breaking forth of the Gospel in this Kingdom, called it new learning: yea, they
call the truth, error; and the very mind of Christ in the word, heresy; and
the power of godliness, Independency; and the contending for the faith once
given to the Saints, faction, and sedition, and the like; and this grieves the
Saints, a thousand times more then any personal reproaches, to hear the truth,
and light, and life, and spirit of the Gospel, despised and spoken against, and
blasphemed; that is that, that fetches not only tears from their eyes, but
even drops of blood from their hearts: the truth of God, being much dearer to
them, then their estates, or names, or lives.

But see how God, conquers this weapon, of the Enemies tongue to the faithful,
as well as the former weapons of their hands; every tongue that rises up in
judgment against thee, thou shall condemn. All that speak, and rage and rail,
and reproach and slander, and vilify and abuse the Saints, either by their
tongues or pens, thou by thy uprightness, integrity, innocence, truth,
faithfulness, shall condemn them; thy ways, and thy works, that are led and
acted, in Christ and his Spirit, shall be the condemnation, of all thine
Enemies; and their misreports and slanders shall be done away as a mist before
the Sun; and thy righteousness, and integrity shall break forth in that
clearness and brightness and strength, that they shall sit down astonished and
amazed; and they shall be condemned, not only by the word, and by the Saints,
but by all the common morality of the world, yea, and by their own conscience;
so that they shall carry their guilt with them night and day, and shall not be
able to look the godly in the face, whom they have so reproached; the very
presence of the Saints, shall be the condemnation of their enemies, who have
before so unworthily judged them: yea, the whole world shall see the
faithfulness and integrity of the Saints of God, and shall justify them, and
condemn their Enemies; and shall say, lo, these are the men that the world
judged for Sectaries, and Schismatics, and what not? see how faithful they
have been to God and the true Church of God, and to the State; and surely they
must needs be bad men, that are Enemies to these. And thus while our Enemies
judge us, they shall be condemned themselves. And this shall certainly be done,
as sure as the world of God is true, and as sure as the Lord lives, to make
good his word: For This is the heritage of the Servants of the Lord.

That is, you shall have this by as sure right, as any man has an inheritance,
that is entailed upon him. This is your heritage, O ye servants of the Lord, to
make void the force of every weapon that is used against you, and to condemn
every tongue that judges you. This promise is our portion, and the lot of our
inheritance; and in this we rejoice, that while we serve the Lord, truly and
faithfully, neither the hands nor tongues of the Enemy shall hurt us, but in
the end we shall be more then Conquerous over all. Let my portion fall in this
pleasant place, and I shall have a goodly heritage.

And their righteousness is of me says the Lord. That is, these servants of
mine, are not men of a humane and moral righteousness only, but they partake
of the righteousness of God in Christ; Their righteousness is of me; or thus,
though they are sinners before the world (for as the world reckons their own
sin, for righteousness so it reckons Gods righteousness, for sin) yet they are
righteous before me, and in my eyes. So that however the world reckons us evil
doers, and not worthy to live in the world, yet God reckons us righteous, and
our righteousness is before him.

To conclude, seeing God has engaged himself, to secure us, in his ways, both
from the weapons and tongues of men, Go and tell the Foxes, that we will walk
without fear in the world both to day and to morrow, and the third day we shall
be perfected.

FINIS.
Right Reformation: OR, The Reformation of the CHURCH of the NEW TESTAMENT,
Represented in GOSPEL LIGHT.

In a Sermon preached to the Honorable House of COMMONS, on Wednesday,
November 25. 1646.

Together with a REPLY to the chief Contradictions of Master LOVE'S Sermon,
preached the same day.

All published for the good of the Faithful, at their desire.

By WILLIAM DELL, Minister of the Gospel, attending on His Excellency Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX.

John 7. 12. And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him; for
some said, He is a good man; others said nay, but He deceives the people.

John 16. 3. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not
known the Father, nor Me.

Credo me Theologum esse Christianum, and in regno veritatis vivere; ideo me
debitorem esse, non modo affirmandae veritatis, sed etiam asserendae, and
defendendae, seu per sanguinem seu per mortem.

Luth. London, Printed by R. White, for Giles Calvert, at the
Black-Spread-Eagle, near the West End of Paul's. 1651.

TO THE HONORABLE THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Honorable and Worthy,
AS the LORD represented these Truths to you before, in the Ministry of the
Word; so now again, He offers them to your second consideration, in this
Printed Book; because he has a mind, you should take notice of them. And I
must needs say, it is the LORD'S voice to you; and I hope he will move your
hearts, to regard it; though Satan has mightily bestirred himself, by casting
an ill Vizzard upon the Truth, to make you dislike it. But if you like CHRIST
the worse for a Face spit on and buffeted, you may want a SAVIOR: And if you
like the truth of CHRIST the worse for a scratcht Face, you may make your
dwelling place, with Error and Humane Doctrines, which are all one. Micaiah
had no sooner delivered the truth of God, but there was a False Prophet, to
smite him on the face: the LORD no sooner prepares Instruments to reveal his
Truth, but Satan has his Instruments ready, to turn the truth of GOD into a
lie. And this GOD suffers to be done, to exercise your skill and wisdom, that
you might learn, not to be offended at the Truth with the World; but to receive
and love the Truth, notwithstanding all the indignities and reproaches of men.
When you read what you have heard, you must needs acknowledge it to be the
mind of GOD, if you have received the anointing of the Spirit: and the truth
herein contained, shall prevail with all that belong to GOD. For my part, I am
not careful touching the success of it; I can trust GOD with that, whose Word
it is. For, as the Doctrine of the World, has the weak power of the World to
carry on that; so the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, has the mighty power of GOD to
carry on that; and the power of GOD in the World shall as soon be made void, as
the true Doctrine of the Gospel, though called Error, Heresy, and Schism, and
have all the misguises of Hell put upon it. The truth you then heard delivered,
and may here read again, shall carry all opposition, and opposers before it,
and none shall be able to stand against it, that engage against it: And of
this, both your selves and this generation shall be Witnesses.

If any think that I gave too much power to CHRIST, in the Reforming of the
Church, his own Body; let them consider again, that too much, cannot be given
to CHRIST in GODS Kingdom, seeing he is, all in all in it. Neither is that
exaltation the Gospel gives to CHRIST in this Business, any diminution to your
selves: neither by making CHRIST all in the Kingdom of GOD, are you made ever
the less, in the Kingdoms of this World. But what ever power the Word of GOD
has given you, I will deny you none of it; nay, I will be among the first,
that shall attribute it to you. And do desire, you would no more, any of you be
displeased, for attributing the Reformation of the Church, to CHRIST alone,
then the Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, or Glorification of it, to
CHRIST alone: The former being every whit, as great and glorious a work of
CHRIST, as the latter. I do most willingly allow you, your Thrones in the
Kingdoms of this World: but only desire to reserve to Christ, his own Throne,
in the Kingdom of GOD.

There are those indeed, that would lift you up to this Throne, not because
they would have you sit there, but place them there: they would ascribe to you,
the power only due to the Son of GOD, not because they would have you use it,
but would use it themselves; they would derive power from you, to do that,
which they say you cannot do: and the power they attribute to you in the things
of GOD, they say, is not well in your hands, but in theirs.

And here I would desire you, to take notice of the working of the Mystery of
Iniquity, from the Head, to the very Little-toes of the Man of Sin: At first
you know the Pope interested himself in the Emperor, and Powers of the World
(for his own advantage and support no doubt, rather then for theirs) after, the
Prelates successively, said to worldly Kings, Lend us your power, and we will
lend you ours; Let our spiritual power, deal in temporal things; and your
temporal power, shall deal in spiritual things; and still the Clergy-power
(which called it self spiritual) so linkt it self with the temporal, that the
power that was not of God, might be upheld, by the power that was of God; and
(having got this advantage) they cried, Destroy one, Destroy both; and so the
Prelates were wont to say, No Bishop, no King. And their successors in the
Kingdom of Antichrist still cry, No Minister, no Magistrate; and so still
mingle interests and powers with the civil Magistrate; that under the
Magistrate, the power of GOD, they might cunningly shroud that power that is
not of GOD. And thus they still, under the name of the Magistrate, seek
themselves, and the drawing off that power that is only his, from him to
themselves, to whom it does not belong: Being, in the mean time, really against
Magistracy, further then it is serviceable to their own ends. Whereas, we
reckon Magistracy, not less Magistracy, no less the Ordinance of GOD, though we
suffer under it, and by it.

This Clergy-Antichristian power where ever it is, will still sit upon the
power of the Nation; the power of Antichrist, so domineering over the powers
of the World, that none but the power of CHRIST can cast it off. That will
still be uppermost, what power soever is supreme. Besides all the experience of
former Ages (which is the greatest wonder in the World, that men consider not)
GOD gives you sparklings enough of it, in this Age; some preaching, That the
government of the Church (which they make outward and visible, and over men's
estates, bodies, and lives,) belongs not to King nor Parliament, but to the
Ministers and their Elders: and better it is, there should be no government at
all (say they) then not in their hands by whom it should be. And here lies the
Mystery of Iniquity in this, That they make the whole Kingdom a Church, and
then require a power, authority and jurisdiction in their Church-Kingdom, which
the Magistrate is not to deal withal, but themselves. Whereas we acknowledge
the whole power of the Kingdom, to belong to the Magistrate, and only give
unto CHRIST the power of his own Kingdom, which is not of the World, but
spiritual and heavenly.

And here also, fully to deliver my self from misapprehensions, I understand
not by the Church of CHRIST, any company of men whatsoever, who under the
notion of a Church or Saints, or any other title, may plead privilege or
exemption of their lives, liberties, or estates, from the power of the Civil
Magistrate; for that were to justify the Papal, Prelatical, or any other
government of a newer name, which under pretense of Jus Divinum, shall set up
and exercise an outward and visible power and jurisdiction, free and exempted
from the authority and power of the civil Magistrate; which I utterly both deny
and detest, as Antichristian.

And therefore, I humbly represent, how prejudicial this may prove to you in
the end, to suffer a Generation of men in the Kingdom, under the name either of
Church or Clergy, whose power, preferment, and interest is different and
excentrical from the power, welfare, and interest of the Kingdom; and what a
balance they may prove against the State, where they live, in turning and
tumultuous times, as they themselves know, so (I hope) you clearly perceive it,
as well as they. How they already dare lift up the Head against you, who sees
not? How do they manifest their discontents against you, in Pamphlets and
Pulpits, in their Sermons and Prayers, because you have not settled the
Government, they have studied out for you, as Jus Divinum, and the certain and
unchangeable mind of GOD; though they can neither make it out, to your selves,
nor to any body else, by the Word, that it is so? And how do they labor to
instill, into the people, their own discontents; persuading them, you have done
nothing at all, because you have not done all that ever they would have you do,
though you can see neither Scripture nor reason for it? And for this cause,
rendering you every where odious to the people. Many other things besides, do
they scramble up, and use against you, which they conceive may make for your
disadvantage, and dis-interest in the people: because they think, they shall
never get much higher, except they make you a little lower; for they must
(according to the law of Antichrist) set their feet on your power, to get up to
their own.

Some discoveries of this spirit you might see in Mr. Loves Sermon, telling you
before your faces, and before the people; That some called you a Mungrel
Parliament: Indeed the King (as I understand) called the Parliament at Oxford
so; but Mr. Love was the first (for ought I can learn) that ever named you so,
and I wish he may be the last, (but any Doctrine is orthodox, out of a man's
mouth of his Order) farther threatening you with a discerning people, to look
into your actions, and to spy out your boundless privileges; as if you must do
justice, not out of the love of Righteousness, but out of fear of Mr. Loves
discerning people. Telling you also, The Clergy had done as much service for
you in their Pulpits, as your Regiments in the Field: that by this means he
might mind you, what they can do against you, as well as for you, if you be
not servants to their designs; for they that have heretofore been for you, can
(if they please) turn to others against you, who shall be more for themselves.
And in many other things flying out against your worthy Commanders in the Army,
upon suspicions of his own; and against the Articles at Oxford, etc. For it is
no proper Presbyterial Doctrine, that does not (at least) meddle with the
affairs of the State, which in time they may hopefully come to order. In these
and diverse other things, he took his full swing, all of them (no doubt) deeply
appertaining to the mystery of the Gospel.

The other things, he spoke, to the disadvantage of the ignorant and weak, and
neither to the Truths disadvantage, nor mine, I shall clear in a short Reply,
set after the Discourse; and so shall trouble you no farther, with any such
stuff, but only with a smart expression, from one (it seems) of some note in
the Assembly, who said, If the Parliament approved Mr. Dells Sermon, it were no
blasphemy to say, They were no Parliament. So that it seems you shall be no
longer a Parliament then you approve, what the Assembly approves; but the
Kingdom hopes you are built upon a better foundation. And to him (who has been
so bold with you) I shall only crave leave to Reply in your presence, If the
Assembly (which I hope they will not) should condemn that Doctrine of the
Gospel for the substance, of it, delivered then by Mr. Dell; it will be no
blasphemy to say, They are the enemies of the truth of Christ: And (I hope) the
last prop of Antichrist in the Kingdom.

For your selves, Honorable and Worthy, I beseech you consider, that GOD is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working; and that all power is given to
CHRIST, in Heaven and in Earth, that he might give free passage to the Gospel.
And therefore take heed, after GOD has blessed your Power and Forces in the
field, and subdued that Malignant power that was against you, and has given
you a little peace and quietness in the Kingdom; you do not now begin your
affairs with discountenancing, disrelishing, much less condemning, the
faithful and true Word of GOD, witnessed in the Scriptures, and confessed to by
the faithful and Martyrs of Christ, in all Ages; and with the setting off from
you, that Ministry, that has most of the Spirit in it, lest the Lord withdraw
his presence from you, and your latter end be not answerable to your beginnings.

It might be easily showed unto you, how many great and wise Kings and
Magistrates, acting according to humane wisdom and prudence, and despising or
neglecting the wisdom of the Word, have with all their own wisdom, prudence,
and designs, destroyed themselves, and their Kingdoms: For it is written, He
takes the wise in their own craftiness: And again, The Lord knows the thoughts
of men, that they are but vain.

And therefore renounce the wisdom of the world, with all its fleshly Counsels,
and cleave close to the true, faithful, and sincere Doctrine of the Gospel; and
then, though you have many enemies and Kingdoms against you, you shall not be
moved, but GOD will yet establish you, in all the shakings of the World, and
your Enemies shall be as a thing of naught. I shall no longer detain you, but
only desire this, in the behalf of the faithful, GODS peculiar portion in the
Kingdom, That you would not suffer us to be oppressed by our Adversaries, who
would use your power against us, not for you, but for themselves: neither would
suffer them, thus publicly and shamelessely to call us Sectaries and
Heretics, who do believe and profess the truth of the Gospel in sincerity and
simplicity of heart, according to what we have received from GOD; but that you
would suffer, yea, procure us, to live quietly and safely under you, in the
faith and practice of the Gospel, we in all things obeying you, as becomes
Christians.

The Remainder, is, to assure you, That there is no man shall serve the State
more sincerely, according to his place and calling; nor in more faithfulness
and humility tender the Truth of GOD, either to your selves or the Kingdom (as
occasion serves) according to the measure of the gift of CHRIST, Then,

Your Servant in the Gospel, W. DELL*

To the Reader.
Christian Reader.
THE Times we live in, are dangerous times; it is dangerous to conceal the
truth, and dangerous to publish the truth; if we publish the truth, God has
taught us, and we have heard and learned from the Father, we fall into the
hands of men; if we conceal it, we fall into the hands of God. And therefore,
in this case, in a contrary choice to David, I reckon it much better, to fall
into the hands of men, then into the hands of God; seeing the wrath of men can
but reach the body; but the wrath of God, body and soul. I shall therefore
willingly confess Christ, amidst an adulterous and sinful generation, not
doubting but Christ will confess me, before his Father, and before his Angels.
And for the reproaches of men, it is best conquering them, as Luther was wont
to say, Silendo and contemnendo, by silence and contempt of them, seeing a man
may as easily restrain Satan himself, in his various workings, as stop the
mouths of his instruments. And therefore it is good for us Christians, to do
the work of God, without so much as taking notice of such men: and if sometimes
we are sensible of these things, because we are flesh, yet as we are
Christians, we are above them, in the Spirit, and see already in certain faith
and hope, all evils and enemies under our feet: And therefore for Mr. Love, and
other men of the same mold and metal, I am resolved neither now nor hereafter,
to take them into any more consideration, then the business it self necessarily
requires: and where they may be omitted, without prejudice to the truth, to let
them quite alone: being every day, through the use of affliction enabled to
patience, and through patience brought to experience, and so to a
proportionable measure of hope: And this carries me above the shame of the
world, in the strength of the love of God.

For the Doctrine contained in this Discourse, thou shall not find it New
light (as some men slanderously affirm) but the ancient light, that sprang
forth in the first morning of the Gospel* but was since obscured, by the New
darkness of Antichrist, which these men love better then that old light, and
will by no means exchange the one for the other. But this light, that now after
a long night, breaks forth again, in some of its first glory, let these men set
their hearts at rest; for they shall never be able to obscure it again; and the
fire of the Spirit that GOD has kindled in the Kingdom, they shall never be
able to quench, with any fire either of Earth or Hell. And therefore we fear
them not, though they breath forth threatenings now, and ere long, are like to
breath forth blood: For by all their subtle and industrious actings, in the
end, they shall not work the truths ruin, but their own. And these, as well as
their forefathers, of the same race and lineage, in whose stead they are now
risen up, shall in due time become a reproach and a shame, and their name shall
be for a curse to all Gods chosen.

Reader, It is my earnest desire, that the Lord would deliver thee from this
new form of the Mystery of Iniquity, which in every Age puts on a several form,
when the old one is discovered by the light of the Word. And in this present
Age, it is become, so Exceeding cunning, and so furnished with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness, under the form of Righteousness, that it
seems to be the last and subtilest work of Antichrist, that is now in hand; and
he that prevails in this encounter, has Antichrist under his feet, for ever:
but none are like to prevail here, but the Faithful and Elect alone.

And therefore hold fast that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown; Rev.
3. 11,
and consider Christ's encouragement to this work in the following verse; [Him
that overcomes, will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go
no more out, and I will write upon him, the name of my God, and the name of the
City of my God, which is New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from
my God, and I will write upon him, my New Name.]

Christian Reader, I commit thee, and the Word now offered to thee, in this
Discourse, to God, and his powerful blessing, and wonderful working; Remaining,

Thine in the Difficult, and Despised Service of Jesus Christ in the Gospel. W.
DELL.

Right Reformation: OR, The Reformation of the Church of the New Testament,
represented in Gospel Light.
Heb. 9. 10. Until the time of Reformation.
THe natural man (says Paul, 1 Cor. 2.) knows not the things of the Spirit,
neither can he, for they are spiritually discerned. Now, a man that is not born
of God and his Spirit, with all his parts, abilities, reason, wisdom, prudence,
learning, is but a natural man still, and so has no right knowledge of the
things of God and his Spirit.

And hence it has come to pass that the things of God and his spirit have been
so grossly and dangerously mistaken, by the World, and the carnal Church. For
all the spiritual things of God they have understood carnally: and have
apprehended the whole Scriptures, not according to Gods mind, but according to
their own; not according to the sense of the Spirit, but according to the sense
of the flesh. Antichrists Kingdom set up by the carnal understanding of the
Scriptures.
And thus was Antichrists kingdom first set up, and thus it has been kept up
and continued; even by the carnal understanding of the Scriptures. For they
have understood the Church, the kingdom of God in the world, carnally; the rock
on which it is built, carnally; the door of this Kingdom carnally; the Laws of
it carnally; the Liberties of it carnally; the Power, Authority, Government,
Glory, Officers, etc. all carnally. And to this very day, which of the things
of God does not the carnal Church understand carnally? Faith, hope, love, it
understands carnally; Redemption, Adoption, Justification, Sanctification,
Glorification, Union with Christ, Communion of the Spirit, Access to the
Father, together with Christ the Head, and the Church the Body, in their joint
union and offices and all other things, they understand carnally, and have a
fleshly sense and apprehension of them.

And as they understand all other things of Gods kingdom carnally, The
Reformation of the Church understood carnally.
so also the Reformation of it; And there are not greater and grosser Mistakes
about any of the things of God, then about this: men imagining the Reformation
of the Church, which is altogether a spiritual and heavenly kingdom, after the
manner of the Reformation of Worldly States and Commonwealths, which only
stands in outward things, and is brought to pass by humane Counsels, and humane
Power.

Now because this is not only a gross, but a general Error, in all Sorts of
People, both of high and of low degree: I shall endeavor at this time,
according to the good hand of God with me, to represent in some Gospel light to
this Honorable and Christian Auditory, the true Reformation of the Church of
the New Testament: And blessed is he who shall not be offended at it.

For this purpose I made choice of the Words now read, Until the time of
Reformation.

For the better understanding of which, we must read the Context.

Ver. 9. The first Tabernacle was a figure for the time then present, in which
were offered both gifts and sacrifices, that could not make him that did the
service perfect as pertaining to the conscience.

V. 10. Which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
ordinances ( it should be righteousnesses or justifications of the flesh,
(...)) imposed on them, (...), until the time of Reformation.

In which words the Apostle shows the imperfection of the worship of the old
Law, The imperfection of the worship of the old Law.
because it stood in outward rites, ceremonies, duties, performances, and so
could not make him that used them, and was busied in them, perfect as
pertaining to his conscience; and therefore God did not simply and absolutely
impose these things on the Church, to continue for ever, but only until the
time, wherein all things were to be reformed, not only evil things, but
imperfect. And then, all that outward Religion was to be abolished.

Now if the Law of Moses could not make men perfect, No outward law can make
men perfect as pertaining to the conscience, and so the Gospel abolishes all
such outward laws imposed on conscience, as well now as heretofore.
as pertaining to the Conscience, much less can any new laws invented now. And
if any such laws, should be imposed on the people of God now, the Gospel has
the same strength in it self to make them void, as the former; and also the
same ground from them, because all such laws and ordinances devised by men,
cannot make them that obey and practice them perfect as pertaining to the
Conscience: and therefore are all to be at an end, when the time of Reformation
comes.

Quest. Now if you ask me, when this time of Reformation was.

Answ. I answer: It was when Christ came: not a servant, as Moses, but the Son
out of the bosom of the Father, the great Prophet of the new Testament, whose
doctrine was not letter as Moses was, but Spirit and life. And now when Christ
the Minister of the new Testament, came with the ministration of the Spirit,
now was the time of Reformation.

In the time of the Law there were outward duties, and performances, and
ceremonies, and sacrifices, and strict laws to enjoin the observation of these
things carrying along with them the severity of death: and yet notwithstanding
all this, there was no true Reformation; but under all that outward Religion,
men were inwardly as corrupt and wicked, as the very heathen: for all their
Circumcision in the flesh, they were uncircumcised in heart; for all their
outward washing, they were inwardly unclean; for all their blood of bulls and
goats, their sins remained in their natures and consciences; for all their
strict forcing of men, to the duties of the outward worship of God, the people
still remained far from God, even in all those duties. So that notwithstanding
the outward worship of Moses Law, the people remained inwardly corrupt, filthy,
and unclean, and without any true Reformation before God; till Christ who was
God in the flesh, came with the ministration of the Spirit, and then indeed was
the time of Reformation. Until the time of Reformation.

The thing then, the Spirit would have us take notice of in these words, is
this,

That the time of the Gospel is the time of Reformation. Doctr.


When ever the Gospel is preached in the spirit and power of it, that is (...),
the time of Reformation.

For our more orderly proceeding in this point we will observe this Method.

1. Show what true Gospel-Reformation is, and how it is qualified; that so you
may the better distinguish it from Political and Ecclesiastical Reformation.
Now both these I join together, because the carnal Church has always
interested and mingled it self with the power of the world, as being able to
do nothing without it.

2. I will endeavor to show, to whose hands the work of Gospel-Reformation is
committed.

3. By what means he to whose hands it is committed, brings it about.

4. The advantages of such a Reformation where it is wrought.

5. The Use.

The first General.
What true Gospel Reformation is, Gospel Reformation:
and how qualified.

1. What it is. 1. What it is.
It is the mortifying, destroying, and utter abolishing out of the Faithful and
Elect, all that sin, corruption, lust, evil, that did flow in upon them,
through the Fall of Adam. Or,

It is the taking away and destroying the body of sin out of the Faithful and
Elect, by the presence and operation of the righteousness of God, dwelling in
their hearts by faith. This is true Gospel-Reformation, and besides this I know
no other. This the Evangelical Prophet Isaiah describes, Chap. 1. 27. Zion
shall be redeemed with judgment, and her Converts with righteousness.

Now Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, Christ Judgment.
as he discovers, reproves, condemns, and destroys sin, so he is called
Judgment: And thus is Judgment to be understood in the Gospel sense, and not
terribly, as in the sense of the Law: And this Judgment shall at last break
forth into victory; that is, though Christ in us has to do with many strong
Corruptions, and Lusts in the Soul, yet at last he prevails against them all,
and Judgment breaks forth into victory; because Christ, the Judgment of God
in the Soul, must needs in the end prevail against every sin of man.

Again, Christ the Righteousness of God, Christ Righteousness.
as he makes us righteous with his own righteousness, and makes us the
righteousness of God in him, so he is called Righteousness, not in himself
only, but in us: he is the Lord our Righteousness: and by this Judgment and
Righteousness is Zion and her converts redeemed and reformed. And so true
Gospel reformation is the destruction of sin out the faithful, by the presence
of righteousness.

And therefore you see how grossly they are mistaken who take Gospel Reformation
to be the making of certain Laws and Constitutions by the sacred power or
Clergy, for external conformity in outward duties of outward worship and
government, and to have these confirmed by civil sanction, and enforced upon
men by secular power; when in the mean time, all that inward corruption and sin
they brought with them into the world, remains in their hearts and natures as
it did before. After this manner the old Prelates reformed, who were wont to
say to the Kings, We will study out the faith, and you shall maintain it; and
the faith, they studied and brough^ to the Kings, the Kings must maintain, and
not quest^on but that it was Jure Divino.

And thus you see in general what Gospel Reformation is, and that it is a clear
different thing, from Civil Ecclesiastical Reformation.

2. Now in the next place let us see how this Gospel Reformation is qualified,
Gospel Reformation is.
whereby the difference between this and the other will appear yet more clearly.

First then, 1. Spiritual.
it is a spiritual Reformation. For as the Kingdom of Christ is a spiritual
Kingdom: so all the things that belong to it are spiritual things; and so the
Reformation of it. A carnal Reformation, is not suitable to a spiritual Kingdom.
And spiritual it is, because it proceeds from the Spirit, and stands in
spiritual things, as you shall see more full anon.

But now the Reformation of the Civil and Ecclesiastical State, is but a carnal
Reformation, wrought by the powes of flesh and blood, and stands in outward and
fleshly things, as you shall presently see.

Secondly, it is an inward Reformation. For as the Kingdom of God is an inward
Kingdom, 2. Inward.
( the kingdom of God is within you) so the Reformation that belongs to it, is
an inward Reformation. This true Gospel reformation, lays hold upon the heart,
and soul, and inner man: and changes, and alters, and renews, and reforms that;
and when the heart is reformed, all is reformed. And therefore this Gospel
Reformation does not much busy and trouble it self about outward forms, or
external conformity, but only minds the reforming of the heart; and when the
heart is right with God, the outward form cannot be amiss. And therefore says
Christ touching the worship of the New Testament, God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth; but speaks not one
word of any outward form. So that God in this Gospel Reformation aims at
nothing but the heart, according to the tenor of the new covenant, Jer. 31.
33. This shall be the covenant that I will will make with them after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts: so that they shall not only have the word of the letter in their
books, but the living word of God in their hearts: and God intending to reform
the Church, begins with their hearts, and intending to reform their hearts,
puts his word there; and that living word put into the heart, reforms it indeed.

But now Civil Ecclesiastical Reformation is only outward, and busies it self
in reforming the outward man, in outward things; and so is very industrious and
elaborate about outward forms, and outward orders, and outward government, and
outward confession, and outward practice, and thinks if these be put into some
handsomeness and conformity, they have brought about an excellent Reformation:
though the heart in the mean time remain as sinful, vile, and corrupt as ever,
and so altogether unreformed.

And so this Reformation is like that Reformation of the Scribes and Pharisees,
notorious hypocrites, who made clean only the outside of the cup or platter;
Latth. 23. 25.
leaving them all filthy and unclean within: and whited over sepulchers, to
make them beautiful outwardly, when inwardly they were full of rottenness and
corruption. So Civil Ecclesiastical Reformation makes a man clean outwardly,
with an outward Confession of faith, etc. when inwardly he is all filthy
through unbelief; and whites him over, with a few handsome forms of worship,
when inwardly he is full of ignorance of God, and Atheism.

Object. Now if any ask, But must there be no change of outward things, in the
Reformation of the Gospel?

Answ. I answer, Yes; an outward change that flows from an inward: but not an
outward change without an inward; much less an outward change to enforce an
inward.

3. It is a through Reformation; 3. Through.
for it reforms the whole man; it reforms not the soul only, but the body too,
and the very spirit of the mind: the spirit as it animates, and quickens, and
acts the body, is called the soul; as it is in it self, in its own nature and
essence, so it is called the spirit of the mind: and this Gospel Reformation
reforms all; that is, both inward and outward, and outward and inward man; yea,
the inwardest of the inward man; and not only the operations of the soul in the
body, but of the soul in its self.

But Civil Ecclesiastical Reformation reforms by halfs, it reaches the body,
and orders that, but attains not to the soul, much less to the spirit of the
mind.

Again, Gospel Reformation reforms sin wholly, as well as the man: it reforms
all sin whatsoever, Isa. 1. 25.
I will turn my hand upon thee, (says God by this Gospel Reformation) and will
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. It reforms a man not
only of outward sins, but of inward It reforms him of those sins that seldom
come forth into the view of the world, as Atheism, ignorance of God, pride,
vain glory, self-seeking, hypocrisy, carnal mindedness, and all the evil
desires of the flesh, and of the mind. Yea, it does not only reform all evil
things in us, but all imperfect things: doing away imperfect things by the
coming of perfect things, doing away our own strength by the coming in of Gods
strength, and our own wisdom and righteousness, by the coming in of Gods
wisdom and righteousness.

But now, Civil-Ecclesiastical reformation reforms sin by the halfs, as well as
the man; and so only reforms outward and gross sins, such as run into the eyes
of the world, which are the least by a thousand times, of the evils that a man
has and acts; but the greatest part of sin, it still leaves within as it was.

Fourthly, It is a powerful and mighty Reformation: It is wrought in a man by
the very powor of God, 4. Powerful.
even by the right hand of his Righteousness. And so no sin, lust, corruption,
though never so mighty, is able to resist this work of God by the Gospel; but
it makes the whole body of sin, and the whole kingdom of the Devil, fly in
pieces before it: The power of God in creating and redeeming the elect, may as
well be resisted, as the power of God in reforming them: for it is a power
above all power, that God puts forth in this work, and so is not to be made
void by any creature. In every stroke of this work, the power of the Lord God
almighty is put forth, as every rightly reformed Christian knows. And if the
love of God, had not put forth this power in the soul, a Christian had never
been reformed, no not from one sin.

Now the power of this Reformation eminently appears, in that it changes the
very natures of men; it finds them lions, it makes them lambs; it finds them
wolves, it makes them sheep; it finds them birds of prey, it makes them doves;
It finds them trees of the forest, it makes them apple trees; In a word, it
finds them flesh, it makes them spirit; it finds them sin, it makes them
righteousness. Mighty indeed is the power of this Reformation.

But now, as this Gospel Reformation is mighty, so Civil-Ecclesiastical
Reformation is weak: for as the former has the power of God engaged in it: so
this later has only the power of man; and so can do no such works as the
former. I appeal to all that are spiritual, what heart or nature was ever
changed by this sort of Reformation? For, there its that corruption in the
heart of every man, that is able to stand out against all the Reformation that
all the powers in the world can undertake. And so, the Reformation managed by
the mightiest and severest power of man, is weak as water in this business of
changing natures; and can only change some outward forms and postures, and the
like, leaving in the mean time a man's nature the same it was before; It only
puts sheeps clothing upon men, which is easily done; but still leaves them
wolves underneath.

Fifthly, 5. Constant.
It is a constant Reformation; a Reformation which being once begun, is never
intermitted again, till all be perfected. For as long as Gods nature dwells in
ours, it will ever be reforming our nature to it self, till it be altogether
like it. As long as the Spirit of God dwells in the flesh, it will still be
reforming the flesh to the Spirit, till the whole body of sin be destroyed, and
the natural man be made spiritual. So that the whole time of this life that is
lived in faith, that is, in union with Christ, is a time of continual
Reformation; and a Christian is daily washing, cleansing, and purifying
himself, till he purify himself even as Christ is pure.

But now Civil-Ecclesiastical Reformation at first makes a great noise and
tumult in the world, and after lies as still as a stone. For such Reformation
reforms States and Kingdoms to men's own profit, honor, power, advantages; and
so to themselves, rather then to Christ. And when men have once attained to
their own ends, their activity ceases.

Again, it brings men to certain outward orders and conformities, and then runs
round as in a mill, and goes no farther.

Again, It reforms for a time, and not constantly, because the outward power
being taken away, nature returns to its own course again. For
State-Ecclesiastical Reformation only changes some outward works leaving the
nature the self same that it was (as you have heard.)

Now where the works are contrary to nature, nature by degrees returns to it
self again, and puts an end to those works; and so there is an end of that
Reformation.

And thus you see what Gospel-Reformation is, and how qualified, whereby you
see it clearly differenced from Civil-Ecclesiastical Reformation.

And oh that that Prophecy might here be fulfilled, Isa. 32. 3. The eyes of
them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken.

The second General.
To whose hand this work of Reformation is committed. Christ the Reformer.


Now that is only to Jesus Christ, the great and only Magistrate in the Kingdom
of God; and who only, is to do all that is done, in the Church of God: he is
the Dominus fac totum (as they say.)

If the Church be to be redeemed, Christ must redeem it; if it be to be
governed Christ must govern it; if it be to be protected Christ must protect
it; if it be to be saved, Christ must save it: All that is to be done in the
Church of God, Christ only is to do it; and so among other things to reform it;
that is, to wash it, sanctify it, purify it.

Christ then is the only Reformer of the Church of God. Note.
For,

First, 1 The care of the Church given to Christ.
God has committed the care of the Churches Reformation to Christ only, and
to no body else: and this is a thousand times better for the Church, then if he
had committed it to all the Princes and Magistrates in the world. All things
are given to me of my Father, says Christ; and the Church above all other
things: Thine they were, and thou gave them me; thine they were by election,
and thou gave them me, that I might redeem them, and reform them, and present
them to thee again without spot. So that the Father has committed the care of
the Reformation of the Church to Christ.

And secondly, 2 Christ takes it.
Christ has taken this care upon himself out of obedience to his Father, and
love to his Church.

1. Out of obedience to his Father: 1. Out of obedience.
for he says, I came not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me:
and this is the will of him that sent me, that of all that he has given me I
should lose none. And so Christ reforms all, that he might lose none, out of
obedience to his Father.

2. Out of love to his Church he takes this care and charge on him. 2. Love.
For such is the love of Christ to the Church, everywhere so gloriously
discovered in the Gospel, that he does not only give himself for us, to redeem
us; but also gives himself to us, to reform us. Christ dying for us, is our
Redemption; Christ dwelling and living in us, is our Reformation.

Thirdly, 3. The work of Reformation only suitable to Christ.
This work of Reformation, is only suitable to, and convenient for Christ the
Head, as having so near and deer interest in the Church his Body. And so he is
full of love, and bowels, and tender compassions to the Church: he will not
deal roughly ruggedly, and boystrously with the Saints; he will not grieve
them, and vex them, and oppress them, and crush them in pieces: but he being
their Head, will deal meekly and gently with them; He will not break the
bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. When he is reforming the sins and
corruptions of the faithful, he deals with them in the very love and goodness
of God, and will not put them to more sorrow then needs must; and when he must
needs put them to sorrow in the flesh (for flesh cannot choose but mourn to part
with it self utterly in this reformation) yet he is present with the comforts
of his Spirit, and when he has smitten them, is ready to heal them, and to
bind them up as soon as he has broken them. He deals with every Christian in
this reformation, as tenderly as a man does with one of his own members, that
is in grief and anguish; he regards and handles him as his own body, as his own
flesh. And so the reformation of Christ is altogether for edification, and not
at all for destruction: for it is his own body he reforms, and so does it with
the love of the Head.

But when strangers, whose the Church is not, set upon reforming it, what
havoc do they make of the Church of God? how do they wound, and threaten, and
punish, and destroy it, and have no regard at all to the weak, infirm,
sorrowful Saints, that are wrestling with many doubts, fears, agonies,
corruptions, temptations, till they are overtaken with the very shadow of
death? how do they persecute them that are already smitten, and grieve them
more that are already wounded?

And so you see, that he only that has an interest in the Church, as being the
Head of the Church, is only fit to reform it; whereas the reformation of
strangers, has more cruelty in it then love, and more destruction then
edification.

Fourthly, 4. Christ only able for the work of Reformation.
Christ is only able for this work: for the Reformation of the Church is as
great a work as the Redemption of it: and he only that could do the one, can do
the other, Christ must die to redeem the Church and he must live to reform it:
and so as the Government of the Church only lies upon his shoulders who is the
Head; so the Reformation of it only lies upon his hands, and his hands only
are sufficient for it. If all the Angels of heaven should undertake the work of
Reformation, they would sink under it; how much more the powers of the world?

For, the taking away transgression for us, and from us, which is the only
Reformation of the New Testament, is a work agreeable to none but the Son of
God; as it is written, His name shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins: where you have, both the Reformer, Christ; and the
Reformation, shall save his people from their sins: now he must needs be the
Righteousness of God, that must save people from sin.

And he must need be God in the flesh, that must reform the flesh; none else
can do it.

To conclude this: None but the Power of God, and Wisdom of God, and the
Righteousness of God, which is Jesus Christ, can reform the Church, which is
the Kingdom of God: and the power, wisdom, and righteousness of men have no
place at all here, except they will turn the Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness
of God out of his office; for so speaks the Spirit by the Prophet Isaiah, Chap.
2. 17. The loftiness of men shall be bowed down and the haughtiness of men
shall be made low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted. Now what is the
loftiness and haughtin^ss of men, but the power, wisdom, and righteousness of
men? and all this, says the Lord, shall be bowed down and laid low; and the
Lord alone shall be exalted, that is, Christ alone, who is the Power, Wisdom,
and Righteousness of God; and that in the day of the Churches Reformation, as
well as in the day of the Churches Redemption. And thus you see that Christ is
the Reformer of the Church his Body, which is the City and Kingdom of God.

And therefore the Reformation of the Church is certain; for Christ will a
surely reform it, as he has redeemed it; and all that the Father has given
him he has redeemed; and all that has redeemed he will reform, that he may
make them fit to present to God: That so all that the Son has received from
the Father, having redeemed and reformed them, he may give them back to the
Father again.

So that I doubt not of the Churches Reformation, because it is Christ's own
work, and he has undertaken the doing of it. And as none of the powers of the
earth could help him to reform the Church; so none of the powers of hell shall
be able to hinder him, but as many as he has redeemed unto God by his blood,
in his due time he will reform them all by his Spirit, as belonging to his care
and charge. And therefore let us look to Christ for the reformation of his
Church, that is, of his faithful people: the rest of the world that lies in
wickedness, he lets remain in wickedness, as not belonging to his care and
charge. This Reformation is the work of Christ's care and love: and he being
faithful in this business, I am at rest and quiet, seeing Christ is as able for
the reformation of the Church, as for the redemption of it.

And therefore (Honorable and Beloved) I say to you touching this work of the
reformation of the spiritual temple of the New Testament, as God once said to
David touching the building of the material Temple of the Old Testament, 1
King. 8. 18. Whereas it was in thine heart ( said God) to build an house to my
Name, thou did well it was in thy heart. Nevertheless, thou shall not build
the house, but thy Son that shall come out of thy loins, he shall build an
house unto my Name. And elsewhere he renders the reason of it, why David should
not, and Solomon should build this house, because, says he, thou have been a
man of war, and have shed much blood: but Solomon, he shall live and flourish in
peace, and he shall do it.

So say I to you, touching this work of Reformation; You did well, in that it
was in your hearts to reform the Kingdom of God, and the spiritual Church,
which is Christ's own dear body. Nevertheless you shall not reform it, for you
have been men of war; that is, you have managed a great and mighty war against
great and mighty enemies, and have shed much blood; for the Lord has given you
the necks of your enemies, and has subdued them; under you that rose up
against you, and you have trod them down as mire in the streets. And therefore
you shall not do this work, having been men of war; but Christ the Prince of
Peace, he shall reform the Chruch of God: For this is not a work of men of war,
but of the Prince of peace, seeing this is not a work of humane might or
strength, but of the Spirit. So that you did well, that you thought to reform
the Church: but when you shall understand, that the Reformation of the Church,
is as great a work as the Redemption of it. you will acknowledge the work is
too great for you, and that it belongs only unto Christ, seeing the Father has
committed the care of this work only to him; and he has taken this care and
charge upon himself, and it is only suitable to him, as being the Head of the
Church: and he only is able for it, as being the Son of God, and equal to God.

The third General.
By what means Christ brings this Reformation about.

And that is, by these two, and them only; to wit, the Word, and the Spirit.

The first means whereby Christ reforms the Church, is the Word. 1. The Word.


By this Christ does all that ever he does in his Kingdom: by this he calls and
rejects; by this he binds and loses; by this he comforts and terrifies; by
this he enlightens and makes blind; by this he kills and quickens; by this he
saves and damns; and all that ever he does in this Kingdom, he does by his
word, and without this he does nothing of all that he does. Christ does all in
his Kingdom by the word only; but Antichrist does all things without the word,
even by the Decrees and Constitutions of men.

Now as Christ does all other things in the Church by the word, so he reforms
too: Now are ye clean through the word that I have spoken to you. All the
powers in the world cannot reform the Church as the word of God can do; for
this is quick and powerful and sharper then a two-edged sword, piercing even to
the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, and does change and renew,
and reform all.

And therefore Christ, when he comes to reform the Church, comes with no
worldly power or weapons, but only with the word in his mouth; yea, though God
set him King upon his holy hill of Sion, yet he reforms not by outward power,
but by preaching, saying, I will publish the decree whereof the Lord has said
unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And again, The Spirit
of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me to preach the Gospel. And
again, The Redeemer shall come to Sion: and then follows the Covenant of God
with the Redeemer, My word shall never depart out of thy mouth, Isa. 59. 10.
and in Psalm. 45. the Church says by the Spirit to Christ, Ride on prosperously
in the word of truth, meekness, and righteousness, which is the word of the
Gospel.

And so Christ, when the time of Reformation was come, went up and down
preaching the word. And thus he brought to pass the glorious Reformation of the
New Testament, by preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and nothing else.

And when he was to eave the world, he sent his Disciples to carry on the work
of Reformation, as he himself had begun it, as he says, As my Father sent me,
so send I you; not with the power of the world, but with the power of the word:
and so he bid them go teach all Nations, and preach the Gospel to every
creature: and by teaching and preaching to the world, to reform the world: and
so accordingly they did Mark 16. ver. 20. They went forth and preached
everywhere, the Lord working with them. So that Christ sent them not forth with
any power of swords, or guns, or prisons to reform the world, or with any power
of States, or Armies: but sent forth poor, illiterate, mechanic men, and only
armed them with the power of the word; and behold what wonders they wrought by
that power alone: They turned the world upside down; they changed the manners,
customs, religion, worship, lives, and natures of men; they carried all
oppositions and difficulties before them; they won many in most Kingdoms unto
Christ, and brought them into willing subjection and obedience to him: and all
this they did (I say) not with any earthly or secular power, but by the
ministry of the Gospel alone, Christ's great and only Instrument for the
conquering, subduing, and reforming of the Nations. And so the power appeared
to be Gods only, and not the creatures.

And thus you see how the word is one means Christ uses for Reformation.

And this word only works a right Reformation: For this reforms truly and
indeed; all other power reforms but in appearance. So that there is no true
reformation of any thing but what is wrought by the word: but what ever evil
is reformed, and not by the power of the word, it is not truly reformed; it is
only reformed in the flesh, and not in the spirit: it is only suspended in the
outward operation of it, but the seed and nature of it still remains in the
heart, to grow up and work again, as opportunity serves. And therefore what
ever evil or corruption is reformed in thee, see it be reformed by the power of
the word: if the word has killed it in thee, it is killed indeed; if not, it
is alive in thee, though it seem to be dead. The outward power of the world may
set up an image of Reformation, but it is the word only can work true
Reformation.

And therefore let us learn to rely on the word for the Reformation of the
Church.

For this is much for the honor of the word (which God has magnified above
all his Name) when we can neglect the power of the world, and leave the whole
work of Reformation to the power, working, and efficacy of the word alone,
which is Almighty, and able to bring off the heart from all things to God. As
on the contrary, it is a great dishonor to God and his word, when men dare not
rely on the word alone to reform the Church, though it be stronger then men
and Angels and all the creatures; but will needs be calling in the power of the
world, and rest and rely on that, for this work, as if the power of the word
were not sufficient. But let such men know, that if the power of the word, will
not reform men, all the power of the world will never do it. And therefore well
said Luther, Praedicare, annuntiare, scribere volo; neminem autem vi adigam. I
will Preach, and Teach, and Write; but I will constrain no body.

Oh therefore that our Civil and Ecclesiastical powers would so much honor
Christ's Word, as to trust the reformation of his Kingdom with it; and that, as
it is sufficient to reform the Church, so you would be pleased to think it
sufficient; and thus shall you give Christ and his Word due honor, as well as
declare your own faith.

And if you would commit this work to the power of the word, to which only it
belongs, you should soon see what the Word would do. There is no such glorious
sight under heaven as to see the Word, in the spirit and power of it, come in
to an unreformed world, and to observe the changes and alterations it makes
there.

And thus you see that one means that Christ uses for the Reformation of his
Church, is the Word.

But here I must further declare to you that this Word by which Christ reforms
the Church, The Gospel-Reformes.
is not the Word of the Law; for the Law made nothing perfect, but the Word of
the Gospel; This, this, is the only Word, that works Reformation.

For first, Word works faith; and therefore it is called the word of faith, 1.
Works faith.
because faith comes by hearing of this Word, Romans 10. ver. 8. and ver. 17. Now
as the Word works faith, so faith apprehends the Word, even that Word that was
with God and was God; this living and eternal Word, dwells in our hearts by
faith, as the Apostle says, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith: And
this Word dwelling in us by faith, changes us into it is own likeness, as fire
changes the Iron into its own likeness, and takes us up into all its own
virtues.

And so the word dwelling in the flesh, reforms the flesh, and it dwells in us
through faith, and faith is wrought by the Gospel.

So that the Word whereby Christ reforms, is not the Word without us, as the
Word of the Law is; but the Word within us, as it is written, The Word is nigh
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; and this is the word of Faith: If
thou live under the Word many years, and if it come not into thy Heart, it will
never change thee, nor reform thee. And therefore the reforming Word is the
Word within us, and the Word within us is the Word of faith.

2. The Gospel reformes, 2. Cummunicates Righteousness.
because it does not only reveal Christ's righteousness, as it is written, The
righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith; but also it communicates
it to us; And therefore it is called the Word of righteousness, because it
works righteousness. So that Christ, the righteousness of God, is conveyed to
us through this Word of righteousness. And when the righteousness of God,
revealed in the Gospel, comes and dwells in us, what Reformation of sin does
this work? all sin perishes, at the rebuke of his countenance: for the
righteousness of God will endure no sin in us; And so the Gospel reforms by
working righteousness in us.

3. The Gospel reforms, because it shows us Christ; and by showing us him, it
changes us into his Image: 3. Shows Christ.
the more we see Christ in the Gospel, the more are we made like unto him, that
as we have born the Image of the earthly, so we may bear the Image of the
Heavenly Adam.

2. Yea the Gospel shows us God in Christ in all his glory, 2.
and changes us into that glory of God which is shown us; we all says Paul,
with open face, beholding as in a glass (and this glass is the Gospel) the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as
by the Spirit of the Lord: so that, the Gospel by showing us God, changes us
into the Image of God; and God through the Gospel, arises on us, till his
glory be seen upon us.

And thus you see the grounds of the Gospels Reformation.

So that now the Word of the Gospel, is the only Reforming Word: and if there
be never so much preaching, if it be but Legal, it will reform no body aright;
because there can be no working Faith, nor communicating righteousness, nor
changing men into Gods Image, and so there can be no true Reformation.

And thus much for the first Means of Reformation which Christ uses, which is
the Word, and this Word the Gospel.

2. Means, the Spirit.
For the Spirit accompanies the Word in the Ministry of the Gospel; The second
means Christ uses to reform the Church withal.
and therefore the Gospel is called the Ministration of the Spirit, that is,
the Word and Spirit in union and operation. In the Law, there was the Letter
without the Spirit, and so that could do nothing; but in the Gospel, the Word
and the Spirit are always joined: and therefore says Christ, The words that I
speak are spirit and Life, that is, they come from the spirit, and carry spirit
with them.

And this Spirit that is present in the word of the Gospel, and works in it,
and is given by it, reforms mightily; and therefore it is called the spirit of
judgment and burning; And the Lord looking to this time of reformation,
promised long before to pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, and so to reform
all flesh.

Now the Spirit poured forth upon the flesh, reforms it two ways.

1. By taking away all evils out of the flesh.

2. By changing the flesh into its own likeness.

1. The Spirit poured forth upon the flesh, reforms it all by taking all evil,
out of the flesh; As first, all Sin and Corruption, says Paul, If you mortify
the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, ye shall live; the deeds of the flesh
are not to be mortified by any power, but by the Spirit; all pride and envy,
and lust and covetousness, and carnal mindedness and all other evils of the
flesh, are reformed by the presence of the Spirit in it, and no other way.

2. The Spirit reforms not only all Sins in the Church, but all Errors, 2. All
errors.
and Heresies, and false doctrines, as is evident by that of Paul 1 Cor. 3. 12.
If any man, build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious stones, wood,
hay, stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest; for the day shall declare
it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try every man's
work of what sort it is, etc.

So that a man may lay Christ for a foundation, and yet build wood, hay, and
stubble upon him, that is, humane doctrines and the inventions of men, and
false and wicked opinions.

2. The destruction of this hay, wood, and stubble, that is, error, heresy,
and humane doctrines, in the Church of God, that is, the people built on
Christ, shall not be by Laws of States, or Constitutions of Councels, but by
the Holy Spirit which is as fire.

The Spirit shall come into the Saints, and burn up all that corrupt and false
doctrine that will not endure the Spirit; and error shall never be destroyed,
but by the Spirit of truth. So that the Spirit reforms all error, as well as
all corruptions in the faithful.

2. The Spirit does not only reform the flesh by taking away all evil out of
it, whether corruptions or errors; but also it changes the flesh into its own
likeness: For the Spirit is as fire, that changes every thing into its self;
and so does the Spirit in the flesh, make the flesh spiritual: like heavenly
fire, it changes men into its own likeness, and makes them spiritual,
heavenly, holy, meek, good, loving, etc.

And thus the Spirit reforms indeed: When the Spirit is poured forth upon a
man, how wonderfully does it reform him? this works a change in him in good
earnest; and no man is ever truly reformed, till he receive the Spirit.

And thus you see the means that Christ uses to work this Reformation, and
these are the only Means.

Object. Yea but I hope you will allow secular power too: May not the Spiritual
Church of Christ, Object.
be Reformed with worldly and secular power?

Answ. I answer, Answ.
by no means; and that for these Causes.

1. Forceable Reformation, is unbeseeming the Gospel: for the Gospel, 1.
Unbeseem the the Gospel.
is the Gospel of peace, and not of force and fury. Civil-Ecclesiastical
reformation reforms by breathing out threatenings, punishments, prisons, fire,
and death; but the Gospel by preaching peace. Though the truth carry its
evidence in it self, and the lord of God is greater then all the testimonies of
men, yet for their sakes that are weak, I have inserted the judgments of some
godly men (as I have accidentally met with them) who have spoken of these
things in the spirit; that so you may see the truth though it has but few
followers, yet it has some. Melancton on Psalm. 110. v. 3. -- habebis populum,
non coastum gladio, sed verbo collectum, and laeto cord amplectentem
evangelium, and te sponte celebrantem. Di^cernit igitur ecclesiam ab imperiis
mundanis, and externam servitutem a cultibus cordis, accensis voce evangelii
and a spiritu sancto. -- Ag. Religio cogi non vult, doceri expetit. Immanitate
non stabilitur, sed evertitur. Polan -- This Charles to whom Leo gave the title
of the most Christian King, was a great conqueror, and overcame many Nations
with the sword, and as the Turk compels to his faith, so he compelled with
Violence to the faith of Christ; but alas the true faith of Christ whereunto
the Holy Ghost draws men's hearts, through preaching the Word of truth, he knew
not, etc. Tindal. Fides, sua sponte, non coacte agere vult. Luth. Christus non
voluit vi and igne cogere homines ad fidem. Luth. Haereticos comburere, est
contra voluntatem spiritus. Luth. He has given in the Church, the sword of the
spirit to enforce with, and not the sword of the Magistrate. Prorsus diversa
ratio est regni Christi and mundi. Mundani Magistratus quae volunt imperant,
and subditi coguntur obedientiam praestare. At in Regno Christi, quod non est
mundana aut pontificia Dominatio, sed spirituale regnum, nihil simile geritur,
sed quivis alterius judex, and quilibet alteri subjectus est. At tyranni and
animicida illi, nihil morantes vocem Christi, regnum me^m non est de hoc mundo,
ex Ecclesia, Politiam civilem, seu potius Pontificium imperium constituerunt.
Luth. -- Quare ipsam sedem Bestiae nego, nihil moratus sit ne bonus vel malus,
qui in ea sedet. Seeds inquam quae fit super omnes seeds, nulla est in Ecclesia
super terram jure divino, sed omnes sunt aequales, quia una fides, unum
baptisma unus Christus, etc. Luth.

Where there is no wordly superiority over one another, there is no worldly
compulsion of one another. In the natural body, there is no convocation of many
members to govern one, or of more members to govern fewer, but the foot
performs its office without being under the authoritative power of the hands*
yea each member performs its office aright, without being in subordination to
another, by the guidance of that head to which it is united, and of that Spirit
that dwells in it; each member having an immediate influence of the head upon it
self, though it may outwardly seem to be further from the head then another
member. And thus it is in Believers and Congregations. -- Quid autem vi and
coactione opus vobis est, qui hujusmodi certamen decertatis, in quo cogi nemo
debet? Ulrichus ab nutren, to the Council of Priests.

What need you the power of the Magistrate to defend the truth, who have so
many Scriptures to defend it? the truth of God being to be defended by the Word
of God, and not by the power of men. Idem. I could produce many more
Testimonies; but these are sufficient to show, that I am not alone in this
point, against Forcible reformation; but have the Armory of David, to defend it
withal, on which there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men.


And therefore it is most unbeseming the gospel, to do any thing rashly and
violently, for the advancement thereof: for the gospel of peace, is not to be
advanced by violence; and therefore violent Reformers, live in contradiction to
the Gospel of Peace, and cannot be truly reckoned Christians, but enemies to
Christianity; since Christianity, does all by the power of the Anointing; but
Antichristianity, does all by the power of the world.

2. Forceable Reformation is unsuitable to Christ's Kingdom; 2. Unsuitable to
Christ's Kingdom. This stand in the Spirit.
For Christ's Kingdom stands in the Spirit; and the force of flesh and blood can
contribute nothing to this.

2. Again the faithful, the Subjects of this Kingdom, are a Spiritual people,
and so they are without the reach of any outward force; 2. The Subjects of it
are a spiritual people.
You may as well go about to bring the Angels of heaven under an outward and
secular power, as the faithful, who being born of the Spirit, are more
spiritual then they. And what has flesh and blood to do with them that are
born of the Spirit, in the things of the Spirit? And therefore touching this
Kingdom which is spiritual, and beyond not only the power, but the cognizance
of the world, Isa. 11. 9,
God has said, There shall be none to kill nor hurt in all my holy mountain.
Isa. 60. 18.
And again, Violence shall no more be heard in thy streets, 3. A willing people.
wasting nor destruction within thy borders.

3. As they are a spiritual people, so also a willing people; and what needs
outward power to force a people made willing by the Spirit? Psalm. 110. 3.
Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power: The very day of Christ's
power, is not to force men against their wills, but to make them willing. The
Spirit of God that brings them to this Kingdom, makes them willing to obey God
there, and gives them pleasure in that obedience, by shedding abroad the love
of God in their hearts. They that are not a willing people, belong not to
Christ's Kingdom, but to the world.

3. By this Forceable Reformation, 3. Humane institution is set up.
humane Institution is set up; for the power of the world reforms by the
prudence of the world: and men never use humane power in the Church, but they
first make humane laws in it; and humane laws are the rule of humane power. And
so by this means, the authority of men, is made to have power, not in the
things of men, but in the things of God: which is the great dishonor of God
and his Authority.

4. It brings man into blind obedience, 4. It brings men into blind obedience.
and makes them obey what is commanded on pain of punishment, though they know
not whether it be right or wrong; with the Word, or against the Word: So that a
man shall say, that which I do I am constrained to do, and therefore I do it
because I am constrained.

I read in Frithes Answer to the Bishop of Rocehester, that a youth being
present at his fathers burning, the officers seeing him, resolved to examine
him also, to try if they might find him a Sectary or an Heretic: but the youth
dismayed at the sad sight of his fathers death, and fearing the like end
himself, being asked of one of them, how he believed? Answered, Sir I believe
even as it pleases you. And so, the more outward and violent power is used
upon men, the more of this kind of faith and obedience you shall have: When men
shall see prisons, and banishments, and loss of goods, and death, walking up
and down the Kingdom for the Reformation of the Church, you shall at last have
men say, Sirs, we will believe and do, even as it pleases you: We will believe
as the State pleases, or we will believe as the Council pleases; And let them
make what confession they will, we had rather believe them, then endure them.

And thus by fear and punishment, may men be brought to say and do, that which
they neither believe nor understand: and how acceptable such popish faith and
obedience is unto God, all spiritual Christians know, and every man's
conscience, me thinks, should be convinced.

5. It makes men Hypocrites and not Saints; 5. It makes Hypocrites.
for it forces the body, and leaves the heart as it was; for the heart cannot
be forced by outward power, but by the Inward efficacy of the truth: Now the
hearts of men being corrupt, what are all outward duties, they are forced to,
but so much Hypocrisy? So that forceable Reformation makes only Hypocrites and
gilded Sepulchers, putting a form of godliness upon the outward man, when there
is no power of godliness in the inner man, but a power of ungodliness.

That Reformation, with which the uncleaness of the heart stands, is none of
Christ's Reformation.

What is the Reformation of the outward man, when the heart is full of Atheism,
Ignorance of God, Adultery, Pride, Murder, etc. and all the corruptions of
Nature? Call you this a Reformation of the Church of Christ? This Reformation
makes none Saints, but all Hypocrites, forcing men's actions contrary to their
natures.

6. It causes disturbances and tumults in the world; when men are foced by
ouward power, 6. Causes Disturbances.
to act against their inward principles, in the things of God, what
disturbances and tumults this has bred in States and Kingdoms who knows not?
So that they that lay hold on the power of men, and go about to Reform hearts
and consciences, by outward violence, are never the cause of Reformation, but
always of tumult: And this renders the cause of the Gospel grievous and odious
to the world, rather then commends it. And therefore, let all that love the
Gospel of Christ, abstain from outward violence; for they that use the sword,
in this kind, shall in the end perish by the sword.

A man when he sins not against the State, may justly stand for his
State-freedom; and to deprive a man of his State-Liberties for the Kingdom of
Christ's sake, as it causes disturbances in the world, so let any man show me
any such thing in the gospel.

7. Christ uses no such outward force himself, 7. Christ uses no such outward
force.
for he is meek and lowly in Spirit; and not boisterous and furious in the
flesh. And it was foretold of him, that he should not strive, nor cry, nor lift
up his voice in the streets, to call in outward and secular aid, and power. He
never used the power of the world, but did all by the power of the Word; even
his very punishments and destructions, he executes by the Word; He shall smite
the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall
slay the wicked: And Antichrist himself, his greatest Enemy, he destroys by the
Spirit of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming.

2. Neither did Christ command his Apostles to use any such outward power, 2.
Neither commanded his Apostles.
but he sent his Disciples to preach, and bid them say, into what house soever
they entered, Peace be to this house; and if men would not receive peace, and
the doctrine of peace, not to force them, but to depart thence, and to shake
off the dust of their feet, as a witness against them, that they had been
there, according to the will of Christ and the Father, and offered them mercy
and salvation, which they refused. And this is all, that the Ministers of the
Gospel can do, to any that refuse their doctrine; and not to go presently to
the secular Magistrate to ask power to punish them, or imprison them, or sell
their goods, as is now practiced in some parts of the Kingdom, even upon the
Saints: and if men be wicked, is it not misery enough for them to refuse
eternal life, except also they inflict on them Temporal death? Is it not misery
enough for men to refuse the good things of heaven, except they also deprive
them of the good things of this present life? and yet as Luther said of the
Clergy, Quando non invocat brachium seculare, and morte utraque terret mundum?
When does it not call upon the secular power, and terrify the world with both
deaths? Surely Christ and the Word, approve not these ways. For, Math. 18.
Christ imposes no other punishment on them, that would not hear the Church,
then that he should be reckoned as a heathen, and Paul, Titus 3. Teaches us
after once and twice admonition to avyd an Heretic, but not to imprison him,
or kill him, or banish him: and again they that do these things, shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; and again, he that believes not, shall be damned;
but not one word, of outward or corporal punishment, in all the Gospel.

3. Yea, Christ reproves his Disciples, for discovering such a spirit of
tyranny, as to punish men for not receiving him, Luke 9. when the Apostles of a
Prelatical and Antichristian Spirit, in that particular, desired fire to come
down from Heaven upon them that would not receive him, Christ did severely
rebuke them, saving, Ye know not of what spirit ye are; not of Christ's Spirit,
which is meek, but of Satan's who was a murderer from the beginning, and of
Antichrists, his first begotten in the world: and he adds, the Son of man came
not to destroy men's lives, but to save them; and therefore to go about to turn
the Gospel, not to save men's lives, but to destroy them, and so to change
Christ himself, from a Savior into a Destroyer, this is Antichrist Triumphant.

All these things show that worldly power has no place at all in the
Reformation of the Gospel.

Now I should have proceeded here to answer some Objections, as namely:

1. That of Luke 14. compel them to come in: Object.
this, I forgetting, named not.

May a Christian then live as he list? 2. Object.


No by no means; Answ.
for he has the Word and Spirit in him, to keep him from living as he list;
and he knows that no man in Gods Kingdom, may live as he wills, but as God wills.

But would you have no Law? 3. Object.


No Laws in Gods Kingdom, Answ.
but Gods Laws; and these are a thousands times better, then all the Laws of
men: and they are these three:

The Law of a new nature.

The Law of the spirits of life that is in Christ.

The Law of love.

But would you have no Government? 4. Object.


Yes, Answ.
but the government of Christ the Head, and the Holy Ghost the Spirit, in and
over the Church the body. They that would govern the faithful, the Members of
Christ's own body, make themselves the head of those Members; and so Antichrist
may as well be found in a combination of men, as in one single person.

But would you have no Order? 5. Object.


Yes, Answ.
the best thas is; even such an Order as is in the body of Christ; where every
Member is placed by Christ, and none by it self; The Order of the spiritual
Church is a spiritual Order, and not a carnal.

But would you have sin suffered? 6. Object.


No, Answ.
but more truly and thoroughly destroyed, then any power of the world can
destroy it; even by the Spirit of judgment and burning.

But would you have sinners suffered? 4. Object.


No, Answ.
but punished more severely, then any powers of the world can punish them; For
he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of lips
he shall slay the wicked.

And as for those that are outwardly wicked, the Magistrate is to keep them in
order, for the quiet of the State, he having power over their persons, estates,
and lives.

I should also have proceeded to the next thing, The advantages of such a
Gospel Reformation where it is wrought; together with the Uses: but because I
would not be everlong, I pass by these things, and so proceed no farther in
this Discourse.

But now being brought hither by an unexpected providence, I shall crave
liberty to speak a few words to you, in the behalf of two Kingdoms, that is,
this Kingdom, and Gods.

1. That which I have to request of you for this Kingdom, is, that you would
regard the oppression of the poor, and the sighing of the needy: Never was
there more injustice and oppression in the Nation then now; I have seen many
oppressed and crushed, and none to help them. I beseech you consider this with
all your hearts; for many who derive power from you, are great oppressors. And
therefore I require you in the name of God, to discharge the trust that God
has put into your hands; and so to defend the poor and fatherless, to do
justice to the afflicted and needy, to deliver the poor and needy, and to rid
them out of the hands of the wicked; This is your business, discharge your
duty: if you will not, then hear what the Lord says, Psalm. 12. 5. for the
oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise says
the Lord: and Gods rising in this case, would prove your ruin. If you will not
do Gods work in the Kingdom, which he has called you too, he will do it
himself, without you; Psalm. 72. 12.
as it is written, He shall deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also,
and him that has no helper; he shall save their souls from deceit and
violence; the common evils of the times. And this is all that I have to say for
this Kingdom.

2. I have a few more things to say touching Gods Kingdom; 2. Gods Kingdom.
and the first is this:

1. That as Christ Kingdom, and the Kingdoms of the world are distinct, So you
would be pleased to keep them so; and not mingle them together your selves, nor
suffer others to do it, to the great prejudice and disturbance of both.

2. That you would be pleased to think that Christ Kingdom (which is not of
this world) has sufficient power in it self, to manage all the affairs of it,
without standing in need of any aid or help from the world; Seeing the power of
man is of no place or use in the Kingdom of God, which is not a Temporal, or an
Ecclesiastical Dominion, but a Spiritual.

3. That you would suffer, the little stone of Christ's Kingdom, to be hewn out
of the Mountain of the Roman Monarchy, whereof this Kingdom is a part, without
hands, even by the power and efficacy of the word and spirit; seeing the hands
of men cannot help, but hinder this work, which is to be done without hands:
And that your might, and your power, would please to let God do this work of
his, without might and without power, and by his Spirit only.

4. That you would be pleased to suffer the assemblings of the Saints, both
publicly and privately, as occasion serves, seeing this can be no prejudice to
the State, but a great advantage; in as much as they meet peaceably, and make
no tumul^s, and in their assembling pray for the peace and welfare of this
divided and distracted Kingdom. And also, that you take heed of scattering
those Churches, that meet in the Name and Spirit of Jesus Christ, (which are
Christ's own gatherings together) least Christ so scatter you abroad, that you
never be gathered together again.

5. That you take heed, you do nothing to the prejudice of the faithful, Gods
own people; as he has warned, you by the Spirit, saying, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; This place has been miserably mistaken:
for the Kings of the Earth, and the Clergy, have shared it between themselves,
whereas indeed it belongs to neither; for Gods anointed are the faithful, that
are anointed with the Spirit, the oil of God, and so are anointed as Christ was
anointed: And these anointed ones, are the Lords Prophets, and the Lord has no
Prophets, but such as are anointed with the Spirit. Thus Christ was made the
Lords Prophet, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me to
preach the Gospel; and thus are all his Brethren made Prophets; being fellows
with him in his Unction. And therefore take heed how you meddle with the Lords
anointed ones, and with the Lords Prophets; for as it is said, He suffered no
man to do them wrong, yea he even reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch
not, etc. So the Lord has still the same care of the same people, and will
suffer no man to do them wrong, but will reprove Kings and Parliaments, and
Kingdoms, and Cities, and Counties, and Committees, he will reprove them all
for their sakes, and say, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm:
for they that are anointed with the Spirit, are the flesh of Christ, and the
Prophets of God, and therefore touch them and harm at them your own peril. It
grieves me to see, the rest of the Kingdom, touching these anointed ones of
God, and doing harm to these his Prophets, abusing, and spoiling and
imprisoning them; It would grieve me much more if I should see you doing the
same; for this would bring you as well as the Kingdom under Gods own reproof;
and the reproof of God who can endure?

Sixthly and lastly, Take heed you do not hinder the free passage of the
Gospel. When God has put his Spirit into the hearts of men, take heed how you
resist the Word in those men's mouths; for the Word of God in the meanest
instrument, can never be resisted, but will carry all before it; The Honor,
Power, Dignity, Authority, Nobility, Magistracy, of the Kingdom, if they should
once stand up, to hinder the Word of God, the Word of God would carry them all
before it.

And therefore it grieves me, to see how the City, Country, Counties, Towns,
Villages, do all rise up for the most part against the ministration of the
Spirit; for this is a certain sign of the undoing of them all: God will suffer
and endure any sin long, but only the contempt and opposition of the Gospel:
but when men, once rise up, against the Gospel, in the Spirit and Power of it,
they are sure to be undone by it, and to be shattered all in pieces; for this
brings swift Vengeance.

And therefore when I see, the generality of the people of all sorts, rise up
against the Ministration of the Spirit (which God has now in these days of
ours, set up even in every County for salvation to his people, but for a stone
of stumbling and a rock of offense to the rest) I am then exceedingly
distressed, and pained at the very heart, for thee O England, and for all thy
Cities, and Towns and Inhabitants; for thou that dashest against the Spirit in
the Gospel, how shall thou be dashed in pieces thy self, and there shall be no
healing for thee?

I could hope for Peace again and good days, suddenly in this Kingdom, but for
this sin of the contempt and opposing the Gospel, and this makes my hopes even
at an end; and the day of my fear, is come forth upon me.

But oh you honorable and beloved Christians, let not your soul enter into
those men's secrets, neither yet walk in their open and public ways; for ruin
and destruction are in their paths, and the way of peace they shall never
know, seeing God is about to enter into controversy with all flesh, for their
rising up against the Ministration of the Spirit. And therefore be Wise here I
beseech you, that in the shattering of the Nation (if there be no remedy) you
may be kept together as a blessed remnant and a hopeful seed of the following
generation.

To conclude, Honorable and Worthy, we will be willingly contented, to do and
suffer all things with you; we will cheerfully run through honor and dishonor
with you; fame and infamy, gain and loss, trouble and quietness, War and Peace,
Life and Death; and do desire to reserve nothing to our selves, Nisi unicum
verbum domini, but only the Word of God, in its own purity and liberty, to
preach it, and to publish it, and to profess it, and to practice it, for the
glory of God and his only begotten Son, and for the good of his Kingdom, and
this Kingdom.

And thus much unto you from the Lord.
A REPLY To Mr. LOVE'S. Contradictions.
SIR,
BEcause I would not wrong you in any measure in what you said, I went to one
who took your Notes in shorthand; and he gave me what I here set down for
yours, which I well remember are the things you then spoke, for the substance
of them: To which I give you this following Reply.

Mr. LOVE. Cast your eyes upon the begun Reformation, though peradventure cried
down with Confidence, No such thing as the Reformation of the Church etc.


Reply. I taught indeed, That the Kingdom of Christ is a spiritual Kingdom, and
the Reformation of it is answerable; and that Christ himself, who is the Lord,
the Spirit, is the Reformer of this spiritual Kingdom, by his Word and Spirit:
but little thought that any man would have been so blind or worse, as to have
affirmed, the preaching of this spiritual and glorious Reformation, was to
preach against all reformation. Is the Reformation of Jesus Christ, which he
works by his Word and Spirit in all the faithful, and in all the Churches of
the Saints, no Reformation at all? How durst you affirm this Mr. Love?


Mr. LOVE. As if all were encompassed within the narrow heart of man.


Reply. Yet I said plainly enough, When the heart is reformed, all is reformed;
and Gospel Reformation, though it begins in the inward man, ends in the
outward. Did you Sir, accuse me rightly then, or no?


Mr. LOVE. If this be so, Race out the first Article of the Covenant.


Reply. I had rather the whole Covenant were raced out, then the least truth
contained in the word of God: Though I like the Covenant well enough, according
to the true intention of it.

Again, if the thing be truly considered, it will appear, that you are more
against the Covenant then I: for the Covenant engages us to reform according to
the word of God; but you (it seems) would reform without, yea against the Word,
with outward and secular power; which you will not suffer in the Magistrates
hands neither, but will needs have it in your own.


Mr. LOVE. If this Doctrine be true, That Gospel-Reformation be only spiritual,
then I wonder how Paul was so out, who said, When I come I will set all things
in Order? surely, that was a Church Order.


Reply. But pray, What outward or secular power had Paul, (who suffered not
only much from the world, but most from the false Apostles) to set the Church
in order? Did Paul (think you) use any worldly power to set the Church in
order; or only the power of the word and spirit? But these men think, if the
Church be to be set in order by the word and spirit only (which were
sufficient in Paul's time) it is like to be out of order for them.


Mr. LOVE. To cry down all kind of Government under heart-government; and all
Reformation as carnal, because you have the Civil Magistrates hand to it, is
against that place of Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Pray for Kings, and all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.


Reply. Well argued now indeed. Babes and sucklings, you shall come forth, and
answer this Master in Israel.

The sense of this place is evidently this: That Christians should pray for
Kings and Governors, that God would so incline their hearts, that whilst we
live in godliness under them, they would suffer us to live in peace; and not
make us fare the worse in the world, for our interest in the Kingdom of God.
And what one drop, can Mr. Love squeeze out of this Scripture, to cool the tip
of his tongue? For the meaning is not, That the Magistrate should enforce
godliness; but portect us in godliness.


Mr. LOVE. To justle out the Magistrates power, is to justle out the first
Article of the Covenant; ( What again?) and they that justle out that; will
justle out you shortly.


Reply. Good Sir, Ascribe not your own work to our hands. The justling out the
Magistrate, have you not made it the chief part of your business now for a long
while together? and are you not still so diligently acting it every day, that
now you think your work is in some forwardness, and you are pretty well able to
deal with him? And now because you would not be mistrusted your selves, you
publicly slander us with it. We see clearly, through all your slender disguises.


Mr. LOVE. Ezra was of another mind, Ezra 7. 26. Whosoever will not do the Law
of thy God, and the Law of thy King, let Judgment be executed speedily upon
him, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods,
or to imprisonment.


Reply. Well, Sir, will you stand to this place, and shall this end the
Controversy? Pray mark then; This was part of the Decree of Artaxerxes, a King
of the Nations, touching the Jews, for the rebuilding of the material Temple;
That they should have liberty to do it, and not be molested in the doing of it,
but should have what assistance the State could afford. The Decree was this:
Ezra 7. 13. I make a Decree, That all they of the people of Israel, and of the
Priests and Levites in any Realm, which are minded of their own free will, to
go up to Jerusalem, go with thee; Forasmuch as thou art sent of the King and
his seven Counselors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to
the Law of thy God that is in thy hand, etc. And verse. 21. I Artaxerxes the
King do make a Decree to all the Treasurers beyond the River, That whatsoever
Ezra the Priest shall require of you, it be done speedily unto two hundred
Talents of silver. And then, verse. 26 follows; Whoever will not do the law of
thy God, and the law of thy King, Let him be so and so punished, as you have
heard.

1. Here then you see, That Artaxerxes made no Decree to enforce all the Jews
to go build; but as the Text says, Those that were minded of their own free
will. See you not here, that even a King of the Nations thought it unreasonable
to force any man to go to build Gods material house, against his will?

2. And secondly, you see, How he gave them no laws how to build, but permitted
them to do it, according to the law of their God that was in their hands.

3. And thirdly, you see, How he deterred any from hindering them from this
work, upon pain of death, banishment, etc.

Do you not perceive now by this time, how you then deceived the people, by
giving them the letter of the Word, without the (...) sense of it, as Satan
dealt with Christ in his temptations? Such Sermons bring an Hour of Temptation
upon the people.

This then is the force of the place:

1. First, That the Magistrate may make a Decree, for all that are minded of
their own free will, to build the Spiritual Temple of Jesus Christ, and to
gather up into a Communion of Saints.

2. Secondly, That he ought to permit this to be done, according to the law of
our God that is in our hands, or rather according to the law of the Spirit of
life that is in our Hearts; and not to enforce upon us any Clergy constitutions.

3. And thirdly, That he may deter you, and the rest of the Kingdom that are of
the like mind with you, from resisting and hindering this work, which has its
Authority from Heaven. That so the Saints (the Kingdom of Christ) may pray for
the Magistrate; and Christ (the King of Saints) may bless the Magistrate, and
make him prosperous. And pray now what is all this to your purpose?


Mr. LOVE. If it was good in your Hearts to think to Reform; its much better to
do it.


Reply. Does not GOD say, It was well, that David thought to build a Temple;
and yet for all that, he should not build it? And do you now dare to blame this
very thing? Cannot the Scripture it self be quiet for you?


Mr. LOVE. You need not fear losing a Party.


Reply. Yea, but how if God be in that Party? What then, Sir? Is it not better
keeping a little, poor, despised Party, that has GOD in it; then a great and
numerous Party, without God?

Again, Did you preach before the Parliament, to make or cast off parties? Does
this appertain to the mystery of Christ and the Father? Reader, These men are
so over busy in making, and marring Parties, that I much fear they will, in
the end, throw the Kingdom into more misery and blood then their Predecessors
have done.


Mr. LOVE. Reformation is no forcing Conscience, it meddles not with
Conscience, it restrains Practice: If a Jesuit come from Rome to kill a great
Person, he does it in Conscience, but I meddle not with his conscience, I
restrain his Practice.


Reply. Does not your Reformation meddle with Conscience; Mr. LOVE? Did you
speak this of your self, at random, as the rest, or is this the sense of your
Brethren? And does your Reformation only restrain outward Practice? Then to tie
up mad Dogs, and Bears, and Tigers, is your most excellent Reformation. You
that will not meddle with the Consciences of men, it is no wonder you are
making so many Iron yoaks for their necks, and so many snares and fetters to
hamper the outward man, the proper subject (it seems) of your Reformation. And
thus taking upon your selves the Reformation of the outward man, you do indeed
put the Magistrates work to an end; And then the Assembly may serve, in the
place of the House of Commons; and Sion-Colledge in the place of the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Counsel. See you not yet, O ye Powers of the World,
how the Ecclesiastical Powers would eat you out?

And for your Jesuit, Did you ever hear me say or hint, That the Magistrate
should not restrain and punish outward wickedness? I wish therefore you would
unriddle your selves, and tell truly, if you dare, how far you would limit the
Magistrate, and enlarge your selves upon the outward man.

But certainly, if the Magistrates power has under it the whole outward man,
as indeed it has: And if Christ's power have under it, the whole inward man, as
indeed it has; what place then (I pray) is there left for your Ecclesiastical
power, when the outward and the inward man are disposed of before? Sure, when
the Magistrate takes his own proper power to himself, and Christ his own proper
power to himself, your power will be found to have no place, either in the
Worlds Kingdom, or GODS; but you must find out some third place for it; for I
will assign you none, lest you prove too angry.


Mr. LOVE. The Church of Thyatira might think she had New light, and yet God
says, I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer the woman
Jezabel, etc.


Reply. Truly Sir, when God shall make you a new Creature, you will be glad of
New Light; for behold (says God) I make all things New, even the light as well
as the creature: the Old Light will serve the Old man well enough.

And for the Spirit reproving the Angel of the Church, for suffering false and
erroneous Teachers; does this prove as you undertake, that the Angel of the
Church had or exercised, Civil and Secular power in the Church of Christ? You
err, not understanding the Scripture; for then any thing is suffered in the
Church, when it is not reproved and condemned by the Word; the Word of truth,
taught and published in the Church, will suffer no error there: but you
understand this suffering, of outward and violent power. Do you not remember,
that I said at the beginning, that the carnal Church understands the whole
Scriptures carnally?


Mr. LOVE. And now to hear such Sermons preached, and Books printed; if it had
been at Amsterdam, it had been no marvel: But at London, and at Westminster,
etc.


Reply. Truly, such a Sermon as mine, might have been preached at Amsterdam, or
any where else where the Gospel has free passage: and such a Sermon as yours,
might have been preached at Rome, or any where else, where the precious Word of
GOD is under restraint, and Ecclesiastical power exalts it self, both above the
power of the Word, and the power of the Nation. Your Sermon savours as ill to
the Faithful, as mine to the World.

Many other weak, passionate, inconsiderate, erroneus things, fell from Mr.
LOVE, neither worth the troubling the Reader with, nor my self; and so they may
perish and rot in their ow^ grave (if they will) for they shall never receive a
Resurrection from me.

And now at the close of all, I desire the Reader to observe the difference
between our Enemies and our selves, in this great point of Authority and
Jurisdiction, which is this: That We exalt Jesus Christ alone in the spiritual
Church; and attribute to the Magistrate, his full power in the world: But they
exalt themselves in Christ's stead, in the Church; and set under their feet, the
Magistrates power in the world. And this is so evident, that there is some
operation of Satan, more or less, upon him that sees it not.


FINIS.
-- Praesens male judicat aetas,
Judicium melius Posteritatis erit.

THE WAY OF TRUE PEACE and UNITY In the true CHURCH OF CHRIST, In all humility
and bowels of love presented to them.

By WILLIAM DELL, One of the least and unworthiest of the Servants of God, in
the Gospel of his dear Son.

Psalm. 120. 7. I am for peace; but when I speak, they are for war.

Utrum nos schismatici sumus an vos, nec ego nec tu, sed Christus interrogetur
ut indicet Ecclesiam suam,

August. contr. liter. Petil. l. 2. c. 85. London, Printed for Giles Calvert,
at the Black-Spread-Eagle, at the West End of Paul's near Ludgate. 1651.

To the Honorable the Commons of England Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
IT is written, that the Kingdoms of the World shall become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of his Christ: and now when all almost, that is great and honorable,
and noble and Royal, and wise and learned, is found against this Counsel and
design of God; how highly are you honored of him, and how happy are you, that
You yet are found for it? You after a manifold Apostasy and def^ction of many
of your Members, seem yet to remain as pillars in the House of our God; yet you
seem to be, among those called and chosen, and faithful ones, that now continue
with the Lamb, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, in his engagement
against, and conquest over the TEN-HORN'D BEAST: And to turn aside, from this
work, would be, to give up your selves to double ruin, to wit, both from
heaven and earth. And therefore the Lord make you faithful, that you may do
this work for God, and to fulfill his Word; and not for your selves, and to
fulfill your own Ends.

And now as you are busy about the Peace of the Kingdom, to settle and
establish that upon a right and sure foundation; so God has engaged my heart,
to meditate the peace of the Church. And though I have excluded your power from
having a hand in this Work, yet I have not, in any measure, wronged you, as you
shall perceive, but rather endeavored to preserve you, from dashing your
selves, against that Rock, against which, all the ignorant and unwise Rulers
and Kingdoms of the world, both have and yet shall, dash themselves in pieces.
It shall be your wisdom to be built up, together with the Church, on Christ;
but it would be your confusion, to go about to build the Church on your selves
and your power; seeing this building is too weighty for any foundation; but
Christ himself. Your power will do well in the Kingdoms of the world, but not
in Gods Kingdom, which is Christ's inheritance, from the beginning to the end.
You shall be happy, to be subject in it, but none must be Lord or Lawgiver
here, but Christ himself. Let not the Devil who in these last times, has in
many places translated the mystery of iniquity, from the Ecclesiastical Kingdom
of the Clergy, into the temporal Kingdom of the Magistrate, any longer keep it
there; seeing, it will be as pernicious in this, as in that: for it will be, no
less dangerous an evil, for the Magistrate to make himself Lord and Lawgiver
in the Church, then for the Pope, or General Council, in all the Kingdoms
called Christian; or for the Archbishop, or National Assembly in particular
Kingdoms. Men have commonly thought, that to preserve the godly in worldly
peace and prosperity, is to preserve the Church; whereas, to preserve them in
faith, hope, love, in union and communion with Christ and the Father, in and
through the Spirit, this only is to preserve the Church; and this oft-times, is
better done by Christ, whose work only it is, in affliction, then in
prosperity. Wherefore do You look to the care of the State, and trust Christ
with the care of his Church, seeing he is both faithful and able to save it
perfectly. The peace of the Church lies in Christ only, and no part of it out
of him, no not for a moment; and this their peace, Christ is able to preserve
in Himself, in the midst of the most cruel and desperate evils of the world.
Now what the true Church of Christ is, and wherein its Peace and Unity lies, is
here in some measure declared, for the good of the faithful everywhere, and
particularly for Your good; lest you being glorious instruments in the hand of
God, for one work, should miscarry in another. And this I have done, through
God, not because I was worthy to do it, but because, it was worthy to be done.
For why should the Church, any longer be ignorant of the things that belong
unto its peace? and why should the Members of it, any longer lie as scattered
bones, dry and dead, and not gathered up into the unity of a living body? and
who could longer endure, to see unskilful Physicians, under pretense of
healing the Church, wound it still deeper; and under pretense of procuring its
peace, hurry it into endless dissentions and divisions? In this case of
necessity, I could not but speak, both out of duty and love, and I hope none of
You will despise to hear, who consider, that God, when he lays aside the wise
and prudent, chooses Babes and Sucklings, to perfect his praise, out of their
mouths; that so he himself, may be the more glorified and admired, in his weak
and mean instruments. Now let his praise be above the earth and the heavens;
and let him give you the honor that all his Saints have: and this is his hearty
desire, who humbly writes himself

Your servant in the Gospel, William Dell.

To his Excellency the Lord General FAIRFAX, And the Honorable
Lieutenant General CROMWELL, Together with the Council of War.
THE presence of the Lord having turned your course backward like Jordan, from
what it was a year ago; and all former enchantments and divinations used
against you, being dissolved, through the renewing of the same presence of God
with you, after a manifest withdrawing of it; and You through a blessed
necessity, being now doing that work of God, which once you had little mind
to, viz. The procuring the Peace of the Kingdom, by subduing the great enemies
of Peace, and removing all the enmity against peace, that was inwrapped in our
very Laws, and degenerated Constitution of the Kingdom: I thought good, whiles
You are thus busy about the peace of the Kingdom, which is a peace without
you, to put you in mind of the true peace of the true Church, which is a peace
within you, and an eternal peace, as the former is but a temporal; for what
advantage will it be for you, to have peace among men, and to want peace with
God? to do the work of God in the world, and to be destitute of the work of God
in your own hearts? to destroy the enemies to worldly peace, and yet to
maintain in your own hearts the corruptions of unrenewed nature, which are the
enemies of heavenly peace? Take heed therefore, that your present employments,
do not so over-ingage you in this world, that you neglect the world to come:
take heed, lest by seeking your selves, you have your reward here: but do the
work of God, for God; and whilst you act for God, live in him, and let him be
your reward, and not the creature.

And now here in this Dicourse, shall you see a better Peace and Agreement,
then you are striving for, (though your work also be excellent and glorious)
even such a Peace and Agreement, of which Christ himself, is the immediate
Author and Prince, and which he communicates, not to the world, but to them he
chooses out of the world, even the Peace of God in Jesus Christ, by the Spirit,
which has its foundation in Christ; and its influence into each Communion of
Saints, all the world over: And this Peace can no more be brought about by your
Sword, then by the Magistrates Scepter; and therefore take heed, lest you now,
having power in your hands, to another purpose, should so far forget your
selves, as to do that your selves, which you have condemned in others.
Therefore suffer the Word only, to be both Scepter and Sword in the Kingdom of
God, and let the true Church remain free, in the Freedom which Christ has
conferred upon it; or else, the Lord, whose own the Church is, will as
certainly, in his due time, take the sword out of your hands, as he has done
the Scepter out of the Magistrate's, and throw you, into one destruction with
him. But I am persuaded better things of you, though I thus speak, and even
such things, as are suitable to the light of the Gospel, and to the virtues and
graces of Christ and his Spirit, which have been hitherto (and I hope, will yet
still be) very manifest, not only in You Honorable Ones, who have the chief
Conduct, but also in very many of the Council and Army besides. And upon such a
gathering together of Gods people, and Saints, (let the world (if it please)
still laugh at that word) who can but think, he has some choice and singular
work in hand for his own glory? The Lord God Almighty has already done great
and wonderful works by you, and is yet doing greater, if you will continue to
believe and obey; and in all these things he only is to be exalted, and not
You. For has not that Day of the Lord of Hosts dawned? yea the morning of it
is already gone forth, Which is upon every one that is proud and lofty, and
upon every one that is lifted up, and he is to be brought low, and the Lord
alone is and must be exalted, in this day.

Now the Lord cause you to dwell and continue in that Church, which is the body
of Christ, and habitation of God, and give you peace with those that are
reconciled to God by Christ, and to one another in Christ, by the Spirit; in
which union and communion, I remain.

Your assured Servant, W. D.

TO THE READER.
SUCH are the noises of waters, and thundrings, and earthquakes among us; and
so great and continued are our shakings and confusious, through hatred and
love, hopes and fears, joys and sorrows, triumphs and indignations, that there
is no silence in heaven, for so much as half an hour. Wherefore, though I
discourse here, touching so sweet and glorious a thing, as PEACE, and do
declare from the very word (or else I had said nothing) wherein the true peace
of the true Church consists; and also, how the faithful, and Churches, may
preserve that peace, in their Communion with one another, which they have, in
the Son, and in the Father: yet men's heads and hearts are now so full, that it
is to be doubted, but few will regard it. Notwithstanding, considering that
there is among us, an election of grace, and a flock of Christ, who both know,
and will hear his voice at any time; I thought good to speak this in their
behalf, for whose profit all the creatures of God were made in the world, and
all the gifts of Christ are given in the Church. And though I am very
conscious, of my rudeness of speech, 2 Cor. 11. 6.
in this Discourse, as also of my weakness and infirmity in many things, having
not yet attained to a perfect man, and to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ; and so dare not say, that every jot and tittle here, is of
the pure river of water of life, without any humane mixture; yet they that are
spiritual, and able to judge, will own all in it, that is of the word and
spirit of truth, and will not reject silver tried four or five times, because
it is not tried seven times. And what is weak and imperfect in it, the true
Church of Christ (for whose dear sake and love I have spoken all this) seeing
it is, Ecclesia Regina misericordiae, cujus viscera sunt merae miserationes and
remissiones peccatorum.
as Luther speaks, The Queen of Mercy, whose very bowels, are mere compassions
and forgivenesses of sins, will easily pass it by, and forgive it. And as for
men, haughty and high in their own spirit, contemning and disdaining any thing
that agrees not to their palate; I do as easily despise their censure, as they
lightly pass it. It is enough, that I seek the glory of Jesus Christ, the Son
of the living God, and the welfare of that Church, that is his body; and for
the rest, let me become as vile as the Apostles were made to the world, who
were counted the filth and offsouring of all things; or as Mr Baily,
Rutherford, Bastwick, Pryn, Love, or any other of my old enemies in Parliament
and City, not worth the naming, Cito vos omnes, ut respondeatis mihi coram
Aitissimo and justissimo Judice, post paucos annos.
have sought to make me. All whom, unless God give them repentance to life, I
cite, as once Hierom of Prague did his enemies, in the like cause, To appear
within a few years, before the most high and righteous Judge, Jesus Christ, to
answer all that they have done wickedly, if not maliciously, against his Name,
Truth, Gospel, Spirit, People; and that under the form and pretense of
godliness. And now well knowing, that the more any thing is of Christ, the more
enmity and opposition it will meet with from the world, and from the worldly
Church. I commit Christ's own word and cause to his own care and protection, who
lives and reigns for this very purpose, to uphold his own despised truth,
against the glorious, but deceitful doctrines of men; and to make all his
enemies his footstool. And so waiting in this assured hope, if thou love
Christ, I remain,

Thine in him, William Dell.

The Contents.
THE Introduction. page 149 The Gospel propounded, is neither, 1. Between the
Church and the world, p. 150 2. Nor between the Spiritual and Carnal children
of the Church. ibid. 3. But between the faithful, or true children of the true
Church. p. 151
The true Church described. p. 152 The true Church of God, differs from the
Churches of men, in 13. particulars. from p. 153 to p. 157 How this Church may
be known. p. 158 How we may be joined to it. p. 159 The Church a great mystery,
as well as Christ. p. 160 Seven bonds of this Churches Unity. viz. ibid. 1. One
body. p. 161 2. One Spirit. p. 165 3. One Hope of our calling. p. 167 4. One
Lord. p. 169 5. One Faith. p. 172 6. One Baptism. p. 175 7. One God and Father
of all, who is above all, through all, and in all. p. 176
These seven bonds are sufficient, for the Unity and Peace of the Church,
without any additions of man's devising. 178. How the true Church of believers,
thus made one by God, may be preserved one, in their communion among
themselves. p. 180 To this end, 1 They must know, some things otherwise, then
yet they do. ibid. Particularly, they must be instructed touching the
government of the church. ibid.
This Government is twofold. 1. Immediate, And this also is twofold. 1. The
Government of Gods special Providence. p. 181 2. The government of his
spiritual presence. p 182
These two Governments the true church never wanted in any age, nor in this. p.
184
2. Mediate. This also is Christ's Government, and not man's. p. 185 And it is
Christ's ordering all things by the faithful, among the faithful, in reference
to the communion of Saints. ibid. This is drawn forth into several particulars,
which are these. 1. To whom Christ has committed the power of ordering and
managing all things in the true Church. 186 2. What kind of power it is, which
the true Church has; set down, in 6. particulars. 188 And here, 1. To whom the
keys of the church are given. 2. What they are. 3. What is the extent of this
power. 190 4. What is the outward instrument of it. ibid. 5. What the true
church can do, by virtue of it.
And this comprehends these particulars. 1. It can gather it self together. 192
2. It can appoint its own Orders. 193 What rules it is to observe herein. 194
3. It can choose its own Officers. 196 And here What Officers are to be chosen.
197 2. Out of whom. ibid. 1. By whom. 198 What the true church, as the case now
stands, is to do, in point of choosing officers. p. 199 And if need be, can
Reform them, p. 200 Or depose them. p. 201



4. It can call its own Councels, if it need any. ibid. Certain reasons why the
church may now well want Councels. p. 202 And if it will have any, what rules
it is to observe touching them. p. 204
5 It can judge of all Doctrines, both of its Officers and Councels. p. 205
And thus the judgment of believers is to be rectified in these things, for
the preserving peace among themselves. practice of the true church is to be
rectified in other things. The practical Rules that are more absolute and
general in the way of peace, are these. 1 That the true Church keep it self,
distinct from the world. p. 206 2. That the true Church content it self, with
its own power, for its own affairs. p 207 3. That the true church do not fetch
or force men unto it, against their wills. 209 4. That the true church make
void, the distinction of Clergy and Laity, among Christians. p. 211 5. That the
true church keep equality between Christians and Churches. p. 212 6. That the
true church keep the Officers of the church, in subordination to the Community.
p. 213 7. That all true Christians and Churches, do take Christ alike, for
their Head, and do not set up visible heads or Ringleaders* to themselves of
men, no not of the best men. p. 214 8. That the true Church keep out all error
in doctrine. p 215 5 Ways by which this may be effectually done, without the
help of the Magistrate. p. 216 The great Question, touching the Magistrates
power to keep out error, answered. p. 224
9. That the true church, do not enforce Uniformity, in outward orders and
discipline. p. 225
Practical rules for peace more special and occasional in point of difference,
among the faithful. weight of things, is to be first considered. p. 233 If the
things wherein they differ be points of Doctrine, yet such are not absolutely
necessary to salvation, then there are p. 235 If the Doctrine wherein the
difference lies, is such as is absolutely inconsistent with true faith and
salvation, yet then, 1. The person is to be heard. p. 237 2. If after full
hearing, it is manifest to be a Doctrine contrary to the faith of Gods Elect,
then the true Church ought, 1 To condemn the Doctrine. p. 241 2 To
excommunicate the person. ibid.

And this is the last punishment the true Church can inflict. p. 242 The
conclusion of all. ibid.


THE Way of true Peace and Unity, in the true Church of CHRIST.
HAving now for a long time time together observed with a said heart and
troubled spirit, the grievous differences and dissentions, among the faithful
and Churches of Christ, and perceiving also, that there is yet no healing of
this error, many or most of them not clearly understanding, wherein their true
peace and unity ought to consist; and so, are still prosecuting former, with
later mistakes* till their wound is become almost incurable; I found my heart
inclined and engaged by God, to propound to others, that way of Peace, which my
self have learned from the Word. And this I desire to do, not that I might seem
to be something* or be accounted of, any more, then the meanest of all Gods
people, being indeed unworthy to minister, so much as a cup of cold water, to
the Church the Spouse of Christ, much less ^o incomparable a treasure as the
word of God is, in comparison of which, all the world is not to be mentioned;
but merely out of love and compassion to the infirmities of my brethren, whom I
see walking in the light of their own (...), and in the sparks, which they
themselves do kindle, whereby they are in great danger to lie down in sorrow;
whilst in the mean time they neglect the true light, which alone is to shine in
the Kingdom of God, till all ignorance and darkness be done away. And a^ my end
and scope is, to bring all men, from all humane doctrines, and conceptions of
carnal wisdom and prudence, to the Word of God; so I desire all men that are
spiritual, and able to judge, to allow of no more in this Discourse, then they
shall find agreeable to this word; and what ever the Word of God in the true
sense and meaning of it, shall disapprove or condemn; so far, let them also
disapprove and condemn with it, as I my self also do; knowing well, that no
Word ought to have any place in the Church of God, but the Word of God, which
alone carries light, life, righteousness, wisdom and power, sufficient and
enough in it self, to do the whole mind and work of God in his Church.
Wherefore what I have freely learned, I shall freely communicate, desiring
every one to regard his own salvation, seeing now after so clear a discovery of
truth, he can have no cloak, nor the least excuse for his sin.

Now that he that reads may understand, it is necessary for me, speaking of the
unity and peace of the Church, to tell you now at first, that I intend not to
propound any way of peace, either between the Church and the World, or else
between the carnal and spiritual children of the Church, The peace propounded,
is,
as having learned no such thing out of the word of God.

First, Not between the Church and the world: for the Lord never intended any
reconciliation and agreement between these, 1. Not between the Church and the
world.
in the spiritual and eternal things of the Kingdom of God; for these, are two
distinct seeds, and sorts of people; the one from beneath, the other from
above; the one the seed of the woman; the other the seed of the Serpent; and
between these two, God has put such an emnity, that no man can take away.
Wherefore they, who never minding these two different seeds; between whom God
has put such irreconciliable enmity, would make all the people of one or more
whole Kingdoms a Church at once, and would reconcile all of them together, in
the things of God, and in the ways of his worship, according to devices and
methods of their own; these men know not what they do; for they walk in the
darkness of their own hearts, and not in the light of the Word; which shows us
clearly, that it is as possible to reconcile Michael and the Devil, as the
Angels of both.

2. Neither secondly, 2. Nor between the carnal and spiritual children of the
Church.
do I find any way in the World, to reconcile all those together, who are
commonly called The visible Church, seeing even among these, there are two
distinct sorts of children, as Paul teaches us; one sort of those, that are
born after the flesh, as Ishmael and Esau; and another of those, who are born
after the spirit, as Isaac, and Jacob: and there is as great enmity between
these in the Church, as between the former in the world; for they that are born
after the flesh, are always persecuting them that are born after the spirit,
but never agreeing with them.

Now of these two sorts of Christians, Spiritual Christians make up the body of
Christ.
one makes up the body of Christ; the other, the body of Antichrist. The
spiritual children, make up Christ's true body, as it is written, He gave him,
to be the Head over all things, to the Church which is his body; for these
being born of the Spirit, do also partake of the Spirit, and so are the true
flesh of Christ as all that flesh is, in which the Spirit dwells; and these all
worship God in the spirit, and have no confidence in the flesh, that is, in no
fleshly Forms, Ceremonies, or Worship.

The carnal children of the Church make up Antichrists true body: Carnal
Christians the body of Antichrist.
For as Christ's body consists of spiritual Christians, so Antichrists of
carnal; For Antichrist sets up in the temple of God, as well as Christ; and as
Christ get his body together of spiritual Christians; so Antichrist gets his
body together of carnal Christians: and these have a form of Religion, or
godliness, but they have no spirit or power in that form: yea, under the form
of godliness they exercise the greater power of ungodliness: And Christ and his
Spirit, and all their things, are nowhere more opposed, then by those in the
Church, who have the letter of the word, but want the spirit of it, being
taught of men only, and not of God. So that, all that part of Christianity,
that is destitute of the Spirit, and has the name only, and not the anointing
of Christians, this makes up the body of Antichrist. And now there can be no
more agreement, between these two bodies, of Christ and of Antichrist, that is,
between spiritual and carnal Christians, then between Christ and Antichrist
themselves, the heads of these bodies. And as I find nothing in the word, so
neither do I propound any thing for an agreement here: for to go about to
reconcile there, where the Father never intended, nor the Son never undertook
any reconciliation, would not be a work of wisdom, but of weakness.

So then the way of peace I shall speak of, Peace between the children of peace.
is between the children of peace, touching whom God has promised* That he
will give them one heart and one way; and for whom Christ has prayed That they
all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in the^, that they also may be
one in us: And these are the elect made faithful, called to be Saints, and
sanctified through their calling; and these are the true Church of God.

The peace then I seek by this Discourse, is the peace of the true Church:
Wherefore I shall first declare the Church it self, whose peace I seek; and
then after declare, wherein this Churches true peace and unity lies; and also
how it may be preserved among themselves, it being first wrought by Jesus
Christ.

For the Church it self; what I have learned touching it, I shall speak
plainly, and something largely, because the right understanding hereof is so
absolutely necessary to our present business, and yet there are very many, and
very great mistakes and mis apprehensions touching it* even among the faithful.

The right Church then is not the whole multitude of the people, What the right
Church is not.
whether good or bad, that join together in an outward form or way of worship;
for in this Church there are Whoremongers, Idolaters, Thieves, Murderers, and
all sorts of wicked and unbelieving persons, which are so far from being the
Church of Christ, that they are the very Synagogue of Satan, and children of
the Devil, and therefore I shall not speak of this Church. But the Church I
shall speak of, is the true Church of the New Testament, which I say is not any
outward or visible society, What it is.
gathered together into the consent or use of outward things, forms,
ceremonies, worship, as the Churches of men are; neither is it known by seeing
or feeling, or the help of any outward sense, as the Society of Mercers, or
Drapers, or the like; but it is a Spiritual and Invisible Fellowship, gathered
together in the unity of faith, hope and love, and so into the unity of the
Son, and of the Father by the Spirit; wherefore it is wholly hid from carnal
eyes, neither has the world any knowledge or judgment of it.

This true Church is the Communion of Saints, which is the communion believers
have with one another: not in the things of the world* or in the things of men,
but in the things of God; for as believers have their union in the Son, and in
the Father, so in them also they have their communion; How the Church of God
differs from the Churches of men.
and the communion they have with one another in God, cannot be in their own
things, but in Gods things, even in his light, life, righteousness, wisdom,
truth, love, power, peace, joy, etc. This is the true Communion of Saints, and
this Communion of Saints is the true Church of God.

Now this true Church of God, differs from the Churches of men, in very many
particulars, as follows.

1. Members come unto the Churches of men, either of their own minds, or else
by the persuasion, or by the forcing of others; and so, but after the will of
man; but none come to this true Church but from the drawing of God the Father,
and his own calling, according to his own purpose.

2. In the Churches of men; members are admitted through an outward confession
of doctrine; but none are admitted into this true Church, but through a new
birth from God and his Spirit, Joh. 3. Except a man be born again, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God (which is the right Church of the New Testament)
For that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and so remains without in the
world; but that which is born of the spirit is spirit, and so has entrance
into the true Church.

3. In the Churches of men there are more wicked then righteous; but in this
true Church of Christ the people are all righteous, not one excepted, as it is
written, Thy people shall be all righteous, Isa. 60. For they all have their
iniquities forgiven them, and they are all redeemed and washed with the blood
of the Lamb.

4. In the Churches of men, the people for the most part, are only taught of
men, who are their heads and leaders, and whose judgments they depend on, and
follow in all things; but in the right Church, the people are all taught of
God, as Isaiah says, Thy children shall be all taught of the Lord: and Christ
says, They shall hear and learn from the Father: and John says, The anointing
they have received, teaches them all things.

5. In the Churches of men, the greatest part are hated and rejected of God, as
being strangers and enemies to Christ; but in the true Church all the members
are dear to God, as Christ is dear; and loved of God, as Christ is loved, as
being one flesh and spirit with him.

6. The Churches of men are of men's building, contriving, framing, fashioning,
beautifying: but the true Church is built only by Christ, as it is written,
Zach. 6. 12. The man whose name is the BRANCH, he shall build the Temple of the
Lord, even he shall build it: And again, Math. 16 18. Upon this rock I will
build my Church: The true Church is such a building, which neither Men nor
Angels can frame, but Christ alone.

7. The Churches of men are all of them more or less the habitation of
Antichrist, who (as Paul says, 2 These. 2. 4.) as God sits in the Temple of
God, that is, not in the true Temple of God, but in the Churches of men, which
arrogate to themselves that name and title; showing himself that he is God: For
Antichrist always dwells there, where men have a form of godliness, denying the
power: but the true Church is built together, to be the habitation of God, in
the spirit, Ephesians. 2. 22. And again, 2 Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the Temples of the
living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them.

8. The Churches of men are as large as men will make them; for they that have
chief power in these Churches, interesting themselves in worldly Magistrates,
through their favor and help, make their Churches as large as the Magistrates
Dominions: thus the Church of Rome was made of as large extent as the Dominions
of the Emperor, and of other Princes, in whom the Pope had interest. And so
likewise, the Church in other Kingdoms, was made as large as the Dominions of
the temporal Magistrate; and all under their power, must be forced to be, of
their Church. But the true Church, which is the Kingdom of the Son, is only
the preparation of the Fathers Kingdom, and so will admit no more into it, then
the Fathers Kingdom will admit into it; the Sons Kingdom, and the Fathers being
of a like latitude and extent; and so the Sons Kingdom is no larger then the
Fathers, nor the Fathers then the Sons: The Fathers Kingdom will not receive
any into it, that have not first been of the Sons Kingdom; and the Sons Kingdom
will not admit into it, what the Fathers Kingdom will not after receive; but
the Son delivers up, his whole Kingdom to the Father, and the Father receives
it all, without any exception.

Now from hence these three things are evident.

1. That the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, etc. are not the Church, but the
world, as well as the Kingdoms of France, Spain, Hungary, etc. but in all
these, and all other Kingdoms, the faithful who are taken into union and
communion with Christ, and with one another in him, they are the Church, and
not the Kingdoms themselves.

2. In particular Assemblies, whether Parochial or Congregational, all the
company that meet together bodily, and have outward communion in outward
Ordinances, are not the Church; but those among all these, that meet together
in one Faith and Spirit, in one Christ and God; for herein only stands the true
communion of Saints, and the true Church of the New Testament is to be judged
hereby, and by no outward things whatsoever.

3. That it belongs not to Magistrates and worldly Powers, to say, which is the
Church, and, which is not the Church; who do belong to it, and who do not; but
it belongs to Christ only to point out his own Church, seeing he only knows
it, and it only stands by his election and collection, and not by man's.

9. The Churches of men knit themselves together into such Societies, by some
outward Covenant or Agreement among themselves: But the true Church is knit
into their Society among themselves, by being first knit unto Christ, their
Head; and as soon as ever they are one with him, they are also one with one
another in him; and are not first one among themselves, and then after one with
Christ: So that the true Church is a spiritual Society, knit unto Christ by
Faith, and knit to one another in Christ, by the Spirit and love; and this
makes them infinitely more one, then any outward Covenant they can engage
themselves in: the union wherein God makes us one, passing all the unions,
wherein we can make our selves one. And so when some believers perceive the
grace that is given to others, they presently fall into one communion, without
any more ado. Wherefore they that are of the Church, the body, cannot deny
communion to them that are in true union with Christ, the head, when they do
perceive this grace. For this is considerable in this matter, that we are not
first one with the Church, and then after one with Christ: but we are first one
with Christ, and then one with the Church, and our union with the Church flows
from our union with Christ, and not our union with Christ, from our union with
the Church: Christ, Joh. 17. prays, That they all, that is, believers, may be
one in us: So that our union is not first among our selves, and then with the
Son, and with the Father: but it is first with the Son, and with the Father,
and then with one another in them: And Christ is the door through which we
enter into the Church, and not the Church the door, through which we enter into
Christ: For men may join themselves to Believers in the use of all outward
Ordinances, and yet never be joined to Christ, nor to that communion which
Believers have in Christ; but a man cannot be joined to Christ, but he is
joined to all Believers in the world, in the communion they have with Christ,
and with one another in him; which upon all occasions he enjoys with them,
wherever he meets with them. So that the true Church is knit up together into
one body and society, by one Faith and Spirit; the Churches of men by an
outward Covenant or Agreement only.

10. The Churches of men have humane Officers, who act in the strength of
natural or acquisite parts, who do all by the help of Study, learning, and the
like: But in the true Church, Christ and the Spirit are the only Officers, and
men only, so far, as Christ and the Spirit dwell and manifest themselves in
them: and so when they do any thing in the Church, it is not they that do it,
but Christ and his Spirit in them, and by them: And therefore says Paul, Seek
ye a proof of Christ speaking in me? which to you wards is not weak but mighty:
who ever is the instrument, Christ is the only Preacher of the New Testament;
and that which is the true Gospel, is the ministration of the Spirit; for holy
men spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit; and were first anointed with
the Spirit, before they preached: Judas who preached the word, and was not
anointed with the Spirit, proved a traitor to Christ; and who ever preach the
word without the Spirit, are the successors of Judas, and also traitors to
Christ.

11. The Churches of men have the government of them laid on men's shoulders,
whether single persons, as Pope or Archbishop; or combined, as the General
Council, or a National Assembly; but the true Church, has its government laid
only on Christ's shoulders, as the Prophet foretold, Isa. 9. Unto us a child is
born, a Son is given, and the government shall lie on his shoulders: and Zech.
6. 12. He shall build the temple of the Lord, etc. and he shall sit and rule
upon his throne: for none can rule the true Church, but he that built it. For
if the Church be gathered together in Christ, as the true Church is, Christ is
always in the midst of them; and if Christ is ever present with them, his own
self, how comes it to pass that Christ may not reign immediately over them?
Wherefore the true Church, reckons it sufficient authority, that they have
Christ and his Word, for the ground of their practice; and what ever they find
in the word, they presently set upon the practice of it, and never ask leave
either of civil or ecclesiastical powers; but the Churches of men will do
nothing without the authority of the Magistrate or Assembly, though it be never
so clear in the word of God: For in their Religion they regard the authority of
men, more then the authority of God.

12. The Churches of men, are still setting themselves one above another; but
the assemblies of the true Church are all equal, having Christ and the Spirit,
equally present with them and in them: and therefore the believers of one
congregation cannot say, they have power over the believers of another
congregation, seeing all congregations have Christ and his Spirit alike among
them, and Christ has not anywhere promised, that he will be more with one,
then with another. And so Christ and the Spirit in one congregation, do not
subjected, neither are subject to Christ and the Spirit in another
congregation: as if Christ and the Spirit in several places, should be above
and under themselves. But Christ in each assembly of the faithful is their
head, and this head they dare not leave, and set up a fleshly head to
themselves, whether it consist of one or many men: seeing Antichrist does as
strongly invade Christ's headship in many, as in one man; in a Council, as in a
Pope.

Lastly, The churches of men, the gates of hell ( which are sin and death)
shall certainly prevail against; but the true church of Christ, though the
gates of hell do always fight against it, yet they shall never prevail against
it; as Christ has promised, Mat. 16. 18. Upon this rock I will build My
church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it.

In these things among other, the true Church of Christ differs from the
churches of men: By which we may clearly see, that the true Church is not an
outward and visible society or corporation, neither can it be pointed out by
the finger, lo here, or lo there, seeing it is not confined to any certain
place, time, or person, but it is wholly a spiritual and invisible society (as
I have said) that is assembled in the Son and in the Father, who are the true
pale and circumference of this Church, and out of whom, no part of it is to be
found.

Now hereupon it will presently be said, if the true Church be invisible, as
you have affirmed, then, 1. How shall we know it? 2. How can we join our selves
to it?


To both which, I hope, I shall return a clear answer: And first to this
Question,

How shall we know the true Church seeing it is invisible?

I answer; How the true Church may be known, though spiritual and invisible.
Just so as Christ the head is known, is the church his body known, and no
other way; now Christ is known,

1. By the revelation of the Father; when Peter confessed Christ to be the Son
of the living God, Christ told him, that flesh and blood had not revealed it to
him, but his Father: now the members of Christ can no more be known, without
this revelation of the Father, then Christ the head of these members, seeing
the Apostle has said, that as he is, so are we in this world; so that he had
need of other eyes then the world sees withal, that would discern the true
Church, and of another Revelation then any that flesh and blood can make.

2. Christ was known by the Spirits resting on him, Joh. 1. 33. And I knew him
not ( said John Baptist) but he that sent me to baptize with water the same
said unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on
him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Spirit; and I saw and bare
record, that this is the Son of God. After the same manner the Church of Christ
is known, to wit, by the Spirits coming and remaining on it: So that whatever
people have received the Spirit of Christ, of what sort or condition soever
they be, they are the Church of Christ; and they that are destitute of this
Spirit, are not of the Church.

3. Christ was known by the works he did, Joh. 10. 37. If I do not the works of
my Father, believe me not; but if I do, though you believe not me, believe the
works; that ye may know, that the Father is in me, and I in him. And thus also
is the true Church known, by doing the works of Christ; seeing Christ has
said, He that believes in me, the works that I do shall he do, etc. And thus
the body of Christ, is known by its living the life of the head, which is the
life of faith and love; and the members of Christ are known, by their doing the
works of the head.

Thus then you see, that though the true Church be spiritual, and cannot be
known by our outward senses, yet we have certain tokens of her spiritual
presence; whereby we may reckon, that in this or that place, there be certain
of her members. As by a natural example; though the soul of man in it self be
spiritual and invisible, and cannot be discerned by any of our senses, yet may
we have sure tokens of its presence, by the effects and operations of the soul,
in that body wherein it dwells; as the exercise of reason, understanding,
discourse, etc. so likewise the true Church which is invisible in it self, may
yet be known by some certain signs, as by the word of faith, which sounds no
where but in the Church, through the inspiration of the Holy Spirit; as also by
the life of Christ; and presence and operations of his Spirit, etc. And thus
you see how the Church, though it be spiritual, may be known.

Well, Quest. 2.
but how can we be joined to such a spiritual and invisible Church?

I answer, Answ.
Is not Christ a spiritual and invisible head? And how can thou be joined to
such a head? How we may be joined to the true Church, though invisible.
Sure our joining to Christ, the head; and to the Church his body, is of one
nature; and that which joins us to Christ, the head, will assuredly join us to
the Church his body. Now through faith and the spirit only, are we joined to
this head; and through faith and the Spirit only, are we joined to this body;
and we cannot be of this spiritual body and society, but by being taken up into
one faith and spirit with them: And so it is no more a difficult thing to be
joined to the true Church, because it is spiritual and invisible, then to be
joined to Christ himself upon the same account; that is, it is no more
difficult to be joined to a spiritual and invisible body, then to a spiritual
and invisible head; and all acknowledge Christ to be such a head, and all must
acknowledge the Church to be such a body.

If any shall say that they cannot presently agree to these things, because
they have had far different apprehensions of the Church heretofore: I desire
all such to consider, that if the true Church were only an outward and visible
society and corporation of men, that were to be governed by outward and visible
officers, according to outward and visible forms and orders, there would then
be no great mystery in the Church; The Church the body, as well as Christ the
head, a great mystery.
for these things lie within the easy reach of every man's reason: But now,
whole Christ is a great mystery, hid from ages and generations; that is, not
only Christ, the Head of the Church, but also the Church, the body of Christ,
Ephesians. 5. 32. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church: And this latter mystery (though both indeed make up one and the same
mystery) of the Church, or Christ the body, can no more be known by humane
sense or reason, then the former of Christ the head; the revelation of the
Father, and the anointing of the Spirit, being equally necessary, for the right
knowledge of both. And, as Antichrist has had his mystery of iniquity, in
opposition to Christ the Head, in setting up a visible and carnal Head, instead
of the invisible and spiritual: so also, he has had his mystery of iniquity,
in opposition to the Church the body; in erecting a visible and carnal body or
Church, instead of an invisible and spiritual: for without all peradventure,
the head and the body must be suitable each to other; and of the same kind and
nature: And so, as a visible and carnal head, the Pope, was in no measure
suitable to an invisible and spiritual body, the true Church; so likewise a
visible and carnal body, or Church, made and constituted by a mixture of Civil
and Ecclesiastical laws and power, is in no measure suitable to a spiritual and
invisible head: The Church just such a body as Christ is a Head.
But what a kind of Head the true Christ is, such a kind of body or society
the true Church is, and both are spiritual and invisible. And as the Lord in
the former age, has been pleased to reveal to the Church, the mystery of the
Head, after a long time of its obscuring and darkning, under the reign of
Antichrist: so now we wait in hope, that he will in this present age, reveal
the mystery of the body, which has been no less obscured then the former; that
so, the whole mystery, of whole Christ, may both be known and accomplished
among us, according to the riches of his glory, by the Gospel. Wherefore all
the faithful are desired, as occasion serves, to make known, what God has
taught them in this matter, to supply, what is here spoken, weakly and
imperfectly.

And thus having declared what the true Church of Christ is, Wherein the Unity
of the true Church lies.
and rectified some ancient and general mistakes touching it, I shall now
proceed to make known from the clear and evident word, the true and only bonds
of the Churches union, peace and agreement, as the Apostle has delivered them
to us, by the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.

There is one body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your
calling; One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, One God and Father of all, who is
above all, and through all, and in you all.

Where note in general, that among all these bonds of the Churches unity, the
Apostle makes not so much as any mention of UNIFORMITY; Indeed the Rhemists
(being through the just judgment of God blinded) from this very place, urge
and press Uniformity (which is the very word they use) as being the great and
mighty engine, first to advance the mystery of iniquity to its Throne, and
after to preserve it there. But it will appear anon by the Apostles Doctrine,
that no Conformity or Uniformity, are any bonds of the true Churches peace and
union; seeing the Church, is such a Kingdom, as is not preserved in its peace,
by any outward forms and orders, as the Kingdoms of the world are, but by
inward principles: Wherefore I shall proceed to speak of those spiritual bonds
of the spiritual Churches unity, which the Apostle names; and they are in
number, seven; the first whereof, is,

ONE BODY.
There is one body, The right Church is one body.
says Paul; The right Church of Christ is but one body consisting of many
members; and this is not a natural or Political, but a spiritual body, even the
body of Christ. Paul in several of his Epistles, takes pleasure to set forth
the unity of the Church by this similitude; as in Romans 12. 4, 5. As we have
many members in one body, and all members have not the same office; So we being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another. And again,
1 Cor. 12. 12. As the body is one, and has many members; and all the members
of that one body, being many, are but one body, so also is Christ: Where he
calls the body, by the name of the head, both making up one Christ.

Now this Unity of Body, This one body comprehends Believers of all Ages.
comprehends believers of all ages, and of all sorts.

1. Of all ages; for all believers that has been in the world heretofore, or
now are, or shall be hereafter, do all make up but one body of Christ, though
born and brought forth of God in several times and ages of the world; as in a
natural example, a child is not born all in a moment, but is brought forth by
degrees; and though one part be born, and another not yet born, this does not
hinder unity of body in the child; so the bringing forth the Church into the
world in several ages, does in no wise hinder this unity of body.

2. As this unity of body, Of all sorts.
comprehends believers of all ages, so also of all sorts and conditions, Jews
and Gentiles, bond and free, etc. all which are made one body in Christ. Paul
in Ephesians. 2. 15. speaking of Jews and Gentiles, says, That Christ of these
twain (who differed as much as mankind could) he has made in himself, one new
man: For Christ melting these two, by his Spirit, which is as fire, causes each
to depart from himself, and makes both together, one new man, or body of Christ
in himself; and thus makes peace: For as long as men remain different bodies,
or men, there is no peace amongst them; but when Christ makes them one body in
himself, he makes peace between them; unity of body being a most necessary bond
of peace in the Church; as the Apostle testifies, Col. 3. 15. Let the peace of
God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called, in one body.

Now from this unity of body in the true Church we may note very considerable
things, all to our present purpose.

1. That unity of body in the Church, Many things to be considered from the
Churches unity of body.
flows from unity of head: for here the members do not first conspire into an
unity of body among themselves, and after choose a head to their body; but
first, these members are united to the Head, and then to one another in, and
with the Head; and so because there is but one true head, Christ: there is but
one true body, the Church.

2. As the members of the natural body, are born such, through a natural birth,
before they do or can exercise and acts or offices suitable to such members, and
do not first exercise such offices, and then after are made such members; as
for instance, the eye does not first see, and then or therefore, is made an eye
in the body: or the ear first hear, and then or therefore is made an ear in the
body: but the eye, is first born an eye in the body; and then sees; and the ear
is born an ear, and then hears etc. So in the spiritual body of Christ; each
Christian has his membership, merely from a new or spiritual birth, and has
his office from his membership, and not from any action or operation of his
own, before he was a member. In this spiritual, as in the natural body, the eye
is born an eye, and therefore it sees, and the foot is born a foot, and
therefore it walks, and each believer, is only that, which he is through a new
birth, and cannot be placed, in such and such an office by men; no more then
men can place, a seeing eye or walking foot in the natural body, but they must
be born there, ere they can be there. Each member in the true Church, is born
in his place and office by God, and is not placed there by man, and when the
Church perceives this grace in its members, it suffers them to exercise those
places and offices in the body, in which God has produced or brought them
forth, by his Spirit.

3. This unity of body, stands well with a difference or distinction of
members, and the difference of members, does not hinder, but help the unity of
body: for says Paul, The body is not one member, but many, and if they were
all one member, where were the body? And therefore in the body, there are
diversity of members, and each member has its several form and office; If the
whole body were an eye, where were the hearing, and if the whole were an ear,
where were seeing, smelling, walking, etc. So in the unity of Christ's body,
there are diversity of members, 1 Cor. 12.
with diversity of gifts and offices; and so one has the word of wisdom,
another the word of knowledge, another the word of faith, another the gift of
healing, etc. Every member in this body being in office, and having received
the Spirit to profit withal. And so again, Romans 12. 6. Having then gifts
differing, according to the grace that is given to us ( he speaks of all the
members of the body, which have some of or other gifts, given to them) if it be
prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of faith; if ministry,
let us wait on our ministering; or he that teaches on teaching, or he that
exhorts on exhortution, etc. So that in the true Church, unity stands with
diversity, but in the false, unity will not stand without uniformity.

4. In this true Church, or one body of Christ, notwithstanding diversity of
members and offices, there is still an equality among them all; seeing all
alike make up one body; in which regard one member is as necessary to the body
as another, and no member can say to another, that I contribute more to the
making up of the body then thou; the most honorable member, cannot lay thus to
the most mean, not the Apostles themselves to Believers among the Gentiles; for
we are the body of Christ, as well as they, and they are the body of Christ no
more then we: wherefore no member, for diversity of office, is to lift up
himself above another member, who is as necessary as it self, to the making up
the body, and also is every whit as useful in its place.

5. As in the natural body, each member is contented with its own place and
office in the body: so is every member through the grace given unto it,
contented with its place and office in the spiritual body, and not one either
envies or despises another.

6. The members of the natural body, do not each live to themselves, but all of
them serve one another, and each of them serves all; as the eye sees for the
foot, and the whole body, and the hand works for the eye, and the whole body,
etc. So among believers, none lives and acts for himself only, but each
believer serves all, and all serve each one in love.

7. Members that are united into one body, have a true sympathy with one
another, both in good and evil things, 1 Cor. 12. 26. And whether one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the
members rejoice with it.

8. Among the members of the body, there is no law of force, but only a law of
love; no member compelling another, but each member serving another by love:
and if one member be infirm, the rest help it, and do not reject it: the more
they care for it, and do not the more despise it.

And this now is the first bond of the true Churches unity, Unity of body.
Now they break this first bond of unity, Who break this bond of the Churches
Unity.
that either live out of this one body of Christ, or else live in it, but not
as members.

1. They that do content themselves, in joining to some outward and visible
society and corporation of men, though called a Church, and think that by being
knit to them in ways of outward worship, and ordinances, they live in the
unity of the Church, when as yet all this while they live out of that one body,
that is born of the Spirit, which is the only true Church, and body of Christ:
he that lives out of this spiritual body, though he live in the most excellent
society in the world, yet he breaks the unity of the Church, not living in one
body with it. And thus many break the Churches unity, that never think on it.

2. Again, they break this bond of the Churches unity that live in this one
body, but not as members; And such are they, who having got the advantage of
the Magistrates power, will needs lift themselves up above their
fellow members, and exercise authoritative, coercive, domineering power over
them, whereas the very Apostles themselves, were not Lords of the Church, but
fellow members with the faithful; living in one body, and under one head with
them, and so did all by love and persuasion, and nothing by force and violence.
Now those members that exalt themselves above their fellow and equal members,
what do they else but usurp the place of the Head? and so break in sunder the
unity of the body, which stands in the unity of the Head? He that in a single
or combined unity sets himself up above other Believers, by giving Laws, and by
prescribing and commanding Forms and Rules to those that are every way his
equals, he advances himself as another head besides Christ; and so Antichrist
is nearer to us then we are aware; and many men that are so forward and fierce,
to make and enforce Rules and Orders, colourably to procure the Churches peace,
they are the first men that do themselves break this first bond of the Churches
Unity, to wit, Unity of Body, which makes all Believers equal members, equally
subject to one Head.

The second bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE SPIRIT.
There is one body, The right Church is one Spirit.
and one Spirit, says Paul; and through unity of Spirit, they become one body.
Now as the body of man consists of many members, and but one soul comprehends,
quickens, moves, and governs all these members, making the eye to see, the hand
to work, the foot to walk, etc. So the body of Christ, which is the Church,
consisting of many members, has yet but one and the same HOLY SPIRIT, which
comprehends, quickens, moves and governs them all, and brings them into a most
near and intimate society together, and inables each member, to its several
office, according to its place and use in the body of Christ.

And as a member, being cut off from the body, the soul does not follow it, to
cause it to live out of the unity of the body: So he that is divided from the
true body of Christ, the Spirit, does not follow him to make him live single by
himself; and so neither is the body of Christ without the Spirit, nor the
Spirit of Christ without the body.

And as the same soul in several members, acts severally, and yet is but one
and the same soul in all; so the same holy Spirit in several Believers, works
severally, as it pleases, and yet is but the same holy Spirit in them all.

So that the whole body of Christ, that is all Believers in the world, have but
one and the same holy Spirit in them, and this unity of Spirit in the Church,
is one strong bond of its peace. Among mankind in general, and more nearly
among kindred, there is unity of flesh, but because there is difference of
spirit, there is much envy, hatred, strife and variance in that unity of
flesh; but now the members of the body, are not only one flesh, but one soul or
spirit too, and so there is always peace and agreement between them. And so the
true Church of Christ is not only one body, but one Spirit too, and this makes
it one indeed. For as this Spirit, is the love and connection of the Father and
the Son; so it is also our love and connection in the Father and the Son; and as
the Father and the Son live in unity of Spirit, so all Believers live the unity
of the same Spirit in them.

Now they on whom the Spirit was first given, after Christ was glorified, had
also with the Spirit the gift of tongues, the Spirit given being for the
communion of the Church, and so they spoke with the tongues of all, the Church
having through the communion of the Spirit, its society and consociation: For
he that speaks by the Spirit in the Church, where all are one Spirit in Christ;
he speaks with the tongues of all; and when a Believer hears another speak, it
is, as if he himself did speak; and when one speaks, it is, as if all spoke;
for he speaks in the unity of Spirit with them, and so speaks the same doctrine
of the Gospel and mind of Christ, which they all have equally heard and
learned from God.

Hence it is evident, that it is nothing to have the outward from of a Church,
even as our souls could wish; except there be, inwardly in that Church, the
Spirit of Christ; for it is not unity of form will ever make the Church one,
but unity of Spirit: That Church then that is destitute of the Spirit, in its
laws, orders, constitutions, forms, members, officers: what true unity can that
have, in all its uniformity?

And this is the second bond of the true Churches Unity: Unity of Spirit.
Now they break this bond of the Churches unity, Who break this bond of Unity.
that live in their own spirits, and not in Christ's; for they that live in a
different spirit from the true Church, what unity can they possibly have with
it? They then that live in their own humane reason, understanding, thoughts,
council, wills, ends, they live quite and clean out of the unity of this Church,
yea, in direct enmity against it; seeing our own corrupt and earthly spirits,
are most contrary to the Holy and Heavenly Spirit of Christ, in which the
Church lives. Wherefore we may learn hence, what to judge of those men, that
cry out much for the peace of the Church, and yet themselves, neither live in,
nor are led by, the Spirit of the Church; but either by their own Spirits, or
Antichrists.

2. They that labor to join men into one body with the Church, that are not
one Spirit with it, do mar the peace of it: For as unity of Spirit in the
Church is the bond of peace, so diversity of Spirit is the breach of peace, and
therefore to preserve the peace of the Church, none are to join themselves to
this one body, that are not of this one Spirit.

3. They that being of the Church, do any thing in it by their own Spirits, and
not by Christ's, prejudice the peace of the Church; for the true Church is such
a body which is to have all its communion in the Spirit. And therefore when any
pray or prophecy, or the like, in the strength of natural parts, or humane
studies and invention only, and do not pray and prophecy in the Spirit, they
break the unity of the Church; for the faithful have communion with one
another; only so far forth as the Spirit is manifested in each.

Now if any shall say, Quest.
How may I know Christ's Spirit in these acts and duties from a man's own?

I answer, Answ.
That as by the Word of God we can judge of all other Words and Doctrines; and
as by the Faith of Christ we can judge of all other beliefs, so by the Spirit
of Christ we can judge of all other spirits; and can know where is the same
spirit, and where is a different or a contrary spirit; as the members of the
body can judge of the one-ness of Spirit that is among themselves.

The third bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE HOPE OF OUR CALLING.
Even as ye are called in one hope of your calling: The right Church have one
hope of their calling.
As all Believers are called by one calling (which is the inward and effectual
voice of God to the soul, by his Spirit through the Gospel) so they are all
called into one blessed hope of obtaining the Kingdom and glory of God. And no
one is called to this hope more then another, or has more interest or share in
it then another. Fishes that live in the Sea, though some be greater, and some
less, yet none has more interest or share in it then another; but all being
alike produced in it, enjoy it alike: and creatures that live on the earth,
though some be greater, and some less, yet all enjoy the Sun and Air alike; and
yet nearer, the members of the body, though of different quantity, form and
office, yet all have alike interest in the head and all its senses, and in the
soul and all its faculties: So all the faithful enjoy Christ alike, and in him
the Spirit and the Father; and no Believer has more interest in Christ and
God, then another.

So that all the faithful are called to the same things, and God gives not
more, nor better things to one then to another, but he gives immortality,
glory, eternal life, the Kingdom of Heaven. which is the inheritance of the
Saints, or which is all one, himself, alike to all, and makes all to sit alike
in heavenly places in Christ* and in the Father.

All the faithful then are equally called to an Unity of hope, and none can
hope for greater or better things then another. It was a very carnal thing in
the Mother of Zebedee's children, to desire of Christ, That one of her Sons
might sit at his right hand, and another at his left hand, in his Kingdom,
where all alike sit at his right hand, and none at all at his left. Indeed in
the Kingdoms of men, some have greater estates then others, and are in higher
Honor and Authority; and this breeds envy, and emulation, and strife, and
distances, etc. but in the Sons Kingdom, and in the Fathers, all that are
counted worthy to dwell therein, do alike inherit all things; All things are
yours, says Paul: And he that overcomes shall inherit all things; says John:
And the least believer has no less, and the greatest has no more; and this
causes unity and peace among them. We see what a strong bond of peace and
agreement, unity of hope is in them that travel together, that fight together,
that labor together; and so much more in them who are equally called by God to
the Kingdom of God.

And this, is the third bond, of the true Churches Unity: Unity of Hope.
Now they break this bond of the Churches Unity, Who break this bond of Unity.
that live out of this hope of the Church, whose hope is in earthly, carnal,
base things; who pretending to be Christians, yet live only in the hopes of
men, in hopes of worldly profit, honor, preferment, and the attaining and
enjoyment of the things of this life, which they, according to the eagerness of
their hopes, prosecute mightily, by all ways and means. These men, I say, break
the Unity of the Church: for what true Unity can they have with the true
Church, that live not in unity of hope with it? Seeing worldly hopes carry men
one way, and the hopes of Believers carry them another: carnal hopes make men
leave God for the world; and the hope of Saints make them leave the world for
God: Wherefore they that differ in their hopes, which are their ends, must
needs differ in their ways and works; and so he that lives out of the hope of
the Church, lives also out of the unity of it.

The fourth bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE LORD.
The right Church has not many Lords, The right Church has one Lord.
but One; and this one and only Lord, is the Lord Jesus Christ: And so all the
subjects of this Kingdom are fellow servants to one Lord, to whom they do owe
equal obedience; and this also is a strong bond of Unity.

For when there are diverse Lords, there are diverse minds, and wills, and ends,
and so diverse laws; and these breed divisions, and dissentions, and wars among
men; but where there is but one Lord, there is also but one Law; and where
people live by one Law, under one Lord, unto whom all are equally subject, this
breeds peace and union.

Now the Lordship of the Church, is the Royal Prerogative of Christ, and no
creature must presume to arrogate this honor to himself; seeing unto the very
Angels he has not put in subjection this world to come, whereof we speak. And
for men, Christ has charged his own Apostles (who if there were any difference
among Believers, might undoubtedly challenge the pre-eminence) I say, Christ
has charged even them on this sort, Matthew. 23. 10. Be not ye called Masters,
for one is your Master, even Christ; but he that is greatest among you, shall
be your servant: That is, you may and ought to be servants to one another, but
not masters: and this same doctrine the Apostle James preaches, Jam. 3. 1. My
brethren (says he) be not many Masters, knowing that we shall receive the
greater condemnation: it is not fit for brethren, who are equal among
themselves, to make themselves masters over one another. Christ also has
spoken again, so plainly to this matter, Math. 20. that one would wonder, that
ever the Beast, or his image, should dare to arrogate to themselves, Lordship
over the People of God, in so clear a light: Ye know (says Christ to the
twelve) that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they
that are great exercise authority over them: but it shall not be so amongst
you: he speaks it peremptorily; that some Believers should not exercise
dominion and authority over Believers; no not the greatest over the least, all
being fellow servants alike, under one Lord. Wherefore they that are puffed up
in their hearts against their fellow servants, might better think thus with
themselves, why Christ is our Lord, as well as theirs, and is as much over us
as over them; and we are not over our fellow servants, nor they under us; but
both of us are equally under Christ, and Christ is equally over us both; and so
Christ has given us the same laws, he has given them; to wit, that we should
believe in him, and love one another; and he expects the same obedience from
us, as from them; and so we are not to command one another; but are all alike
to be commanded by him. It was the evil servant, that beat his fellow servants
upon hopes of the delay of his Masters coming.

And this is the fourth bond of the true Churches Unity, Unity of Lord.
Now they break this bond, Who break this bond of the Churches Unity.
of the Churches Unity, that either make themselves, or others, Lords over the
Church, besides Christ, and parcel out this one Kingdom of the Son to many
Lords, to the great dishonor of Christ, and disunion of the Church.

The Pope was the first that professed himself to be the general Master in the
whole Church of God: and after the Pope, a general Council took this honor to
it self; and by degrees, this last became as hard, yea, a harder taskmaster to
the Church, then the former. After, when particular Kingdoms fell off from the
Pope and his Antichristian Church, the mystery of iniquity, was not by this
means wholly dissolved; but only was contracted and brought into a less
compass; for then the Archbishop made himself general master of the Church in
each particular Kingdom, as the Pope before had done in all; and after the
Archbishop rises up a National Assembly, as the General Council after the Pope;
and each of these in their courses, usurp Lordship over the Church of Christ,
to the sad dissolution of its unity.

Most evident then it is, that during the time of the Apostasy, the Church
has been most miserably Lorded even amongst us; for the Priest he Lorded it
over the People, the Archdeacon over the Priest, the Dean over the
Archdeacon, the Bishop over the Dean, and the Archbishop over the Bishop;
under which woeful bondage the Church cried out, as Isa. 26. O Lord our God,
other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us. And is this bondage of the
Church now eased, by casting off those strange Lords? Yea, do not men rather
seek to increase it, by setting yet stranger over it, whose names are so full
of mystery, that the common people cannot understand them? for now they would
have the Classical Presbytery set over the Congregational, The Assemblies vote
for their government.
and the Provincial over the Classical, and the National over the Provincial;
for so it is Voted, THAT IT IS LAWFUL AND AGREEABLE TO THE WORD OF GOD, THAT
THERE BE A SUBORDINATION OF CONGREGATIONAL, CLASSICAL, PROVINCIAL AND NATIONAL
ASSEMBLIES FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CHURCH: Now here is mystery, and nothing
but a certain rising up into the old power, under a new name. And mark how they
prove this subordination of Congregational, Classical Provincial and National
Assemblies, to wit, by that Scripture, Mat. 18. where it is written, If thy
brother trespass against thee, and will neither hear thy admonition nor
council, nor the admonition, and council of other brethren, TELL THE CHURCH;
that is, the Congregation of the faithful. Now from this place they prove the
fore mentioned subordination of Assemblies, just as the Pope once proved
himself to be above the Emperor, to wit, because it is written, Genesis 1. That
God made two great lights, the Sun to rule by day, and the Moon by night. Now
if this might be brought about, which they design, the Church would be so far
from being eased of its strange Lords that it should have them exceedingly
multiplied; for what is a National Assembly, but an Archbishop multiplied? and
what a Provincial Assembly, but a Bishop multiplied? And a Classical, but a
Dean and Arch deacon multiplied* And thus the former Lords being removed, they
would in their stead, cause the Church to swarm with Classical, Provincial and
National Lords, and would by no means suffer Christ's own Kingdom to return to
his own Lordship and Dominion. And thus whilst they by secular power, seek to
enforce these Ecclesiastical Lords over the Church, they absolutely break in
pieces the unity of it, even whilst they bear the simple people in hand, that
they above all other men seek to preserve it: seeing the plurality of Lords, is
always the cause of Schisms and divisions in the Church, which can never be
one but under one Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ.

The fifth bond of the true Churches Unity, is, ONE FAITH.
The true Church of God has but one Faith, The right Church has one faith.
wrought by one Spirit, apprehending the same Christ, or the same living and
eternal truth of God. So that Abraham, and Moses, and David, and all the
Prophets, and all the Apostles* and we who now believe, and all that shall
believe hereafter, all have, and do, and shall live in the same mystery of
faith, that is, Believers in all Ages, do not live their own lives, but all
live the life of Christ in their own souls and bodies, each one receiving
equally from Christ; the life of Christ, which they all live alike in him,
being one with him; as the branches live equally, the life of the Vine; and one
brnch, lives it not more then another. Through faith then every Christian is
carried out of himself, and all his own things into Christ, whom he apprehends
with all his fullness, for his own; and in this faith, all Christians are equal,
and none has a better or worse faith then another.

So that in regad of faith also, there is among the true Church unity and
equality.

For all Believers have one and the same faith, of the operation of God,
wrought by the same Spirit, which raised up Christ from the dead; and that
faith which the Spirit works, neither sin, death nor the devil can possibly
prevail against; and so the faith of the operation of the Spirit, is altogether
invincible in all the faithful.

Among true Christians, some are not justified by faith, and some by works, but
all are saved through faith, without the works of the law.

Among true Christians, one Believers faith does not apprehend one word, and
another, another word; but the faith of each, and of all apprehends one and
the same word of truth and life, which is Christ himself, Yesterday, and to
day, and the same for ever.

Among Believers, one does not live his own life, and another Christ's, which
indeed would make them very different and unequal, but all live Christ's life
alike, and none their own.

And thus is the whole Church knit together in Unity of Faith.

Now this unity of faith is mightily able to preserve peace among Believers,
Unity of preserves peace.
notwithstanding diversity either of inward gifts, or outward works.

1. Unity of Faith preserves peace, 1. Notwithstanding diversity of inward
gifts.
notwithstanding diversity of inward gifts, inasmuch as we are not made members
of Christ's body, through such and such gifts, but merely through faith; and so
he that has one or a less gift, is equally a member of Christ, through his
faith, with him that has another or a greater gift; and so unity of faith,
which makes us all one body in Christ, is to keep us one, notwithstanding
diversity of gifts and operations; and diversity of gifts are in no wise to
divide where there is unity of faith. Further, among them that believe, where
there is the more gift, there is only the more labor; but there is not
another, or a better Christ; and where there is the less gift, there is the
same Christ, equally enjoyed through faith: He that had five Talents given him,
brought in five that he had gained; and he that had ten, ten: but he that
brought in most Talents, had not more of Christ then he that brought in fewer;
and he that brought in fewer, had not less of him, then he that brought in
more; but each having Christ alike by faith, brought in the exercise of his
several gifts. And so unity of Faith is to keep us one, notwithstanding
diversity of inward gifts.

And secondly, 2. Notwithstanding diversity of outward works.
it is to keep us one, notwithstanding diversity of outward works. For unity of
Faith makes all believers righteous alike, though they differ in outward work;
For in Christ's Kingdom each ones righteousness is reckoned by his faith, not by
his outward works. And therefore Paul, Heb 13. 7. having reckoned up many
excellent works of the Fathers, does not enjoin us to follow their works, but
their faith, saying, Whose faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation; seeing the unity of the Church stands in unity of faith; and
there may be unity of faith in diversity of works; for faith uses freely any
outward laws, manners, forms, works, so far as they may tend to the mortifying
of our bodies, and the edifying of our neighbors; wherein faith also will
judge for it self, and will suffer no body to judge for it: and in all change
of works, faith is the same, and changes not; and the Church still remains,
one, through unity of faith, in the midst of variety, and diversity of outward
works. And therefore where men are accounted Christians for such and such
outward works sake, and this unity of faith is not taught and received, there
the gates of hell do certainly prevail.

And this is the fifth bond of the true Churches unity, Unity of Faith.
Now they break this bond of the Churches unity, Who break this bond of the
Churches Unity.
that live out of this faith of Gods Elect, seeing it is written, That the just
shall live by faith: And therefore they that live by sense in the things of the
world, or by form in the things of God, they live out of this faith and unity
of the Church.

1. They that live by sense in the things of the world, break this bond of the
Churches unity; even such as mind, and affect, and love, and desire earthly
things, and have all their joy, comfort, sweetness, satisfaction, support and
confidence in the creature; these live out of the unity of the Church; seeing
the life of sense is clean contrary to the life of faith: Faith carrying us to
live in God out of the creature, and sense carrying us to live in the creature
out of God.

2. They that live by form in the things of God, whether it be called
Conformity, as the Prelates called it; or Uniformity, as the Rhemists, do also
break this bond of the Churches unity. For to live upon this or that form of
religion, or worship, so as to think our selves good Christians therefore, and
others evil, that shall live otherwise, is to fall apparently from the faith of
the Church, seeing faith does not live upon this or that form of Religion, but
it lives on Christ only in every duty; and whatsoever form it may use for a
help to the infirmity of the flesh, yet in the use of forms it lives above
forms in Jesus Christ, and his fullness.

The sixth bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE BAPTISM.
The true Church, which is the body or flesh or Christ, has but one and the
self same Baptism, by which it is purified; which is the Baptism of the Spirit:
For the Apostle speaks here of that Baptism wherein the whole Church is one;
which is not the Baptism of the sign, which has often been altered and
changed, but the Baptism of the substance, which comprehends all believers, and
all ages, and under several and various dispensations; and was the same before
Christ's coming in the flesh, as since; believers both of the Jews and
Gentiles, of the Old and New Testament, drinking all alike into one Spirit,
though these more plentifully then those: So that, though many have wanted the
Baptism of water, yet not one member of the true Church, has wanted the
Baptism of the Spirit, from whence our true Christianity begins.

Now this Baptism of the Spirit, is the only Baptism that has power and
efficacy to make Christians one: For through the Baptism of the Spirit it is,
that the Church is made one body, as Paul says, 1 Cor. 12. 13. For by one
Spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Greeks, whether
we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit: The true
Church, drinks all into one Spirit (as ye have heard) and not into many; and
through one Spirit are baptized into one body, and not into many; and believers
are never truly, one, till they partake of this one Baptism.

Now this Baptism of the Spirit, as it is but one, so it is administered only
by one Christ; as John Baptist witnesses, Math. 3. 11. saying, I indeed
baptize you with water unto reprentance; but he that comes after me is
mightier then I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with
the Holy Spirit, and with fire; For as none can give the Son but the Father, so
none can baptize with the Spirit but the Son; for this is Christ proper and
peculiar Baptism from the Throne of his glory, and no man's whatsoever; this he
has reserved in his own power, and has not given it into any man's power.

And this is the sixth bond of the true Churches unity: One Baptism.
Now they break this bond of the Churches unity, Who break this bond of Unity.
that content themselves only with the Baptism of water, being destitute of
the Baptism of the Spirit; and so remain in the uncleanness of all their old
corruptions and lusts, and in all the filthiness and pollutions of flesh and
spirit; by reason of which they can have no true peace and agreement in heart,
and Spirit, and Nature, with those who are cleansed from these pollutions, and
are washed and justified purified and sanctified in the name, and by the Spirit
of God: For what agreement can there be between them that live in all the
corruptions of sinful men, and them that live in the renewing of the Holy
Spirit? So that it is not the washing of water, but the washing of the Spirit,
that is the true ground of the true Churches unity; and they that want this
Baptism of the Spirit, though they have been baptized with water never so much,
live quite and clean out of the unity of the Church.

The seventh bond of the true Churches unity, is, ONE GOD AND FATHER OF ALL,
The right Church has one God, and Father of them all.
WHO IS ABOVE ALL, AND THROUGH ALL, AND IN YOU ALL.
And this, though it be last named, yet it is the first fountain and original
of the Churches unity, even One God and Father of all.

The true Church is a Kingdom of brethren, The true Church is a Kingdom of
Brethren.
who have all, one God and Father, from whom all receive alike the divine
nature; which being one and the same in all, without any difference, makes them
all one, and equal, that are born of God. For among these, none have a better
Father then another; nor none has a more excellent nature then another, but
all receive the same nature from the same God and Father; and so are brethren
in the Lord; and this also is another strong bond of unity.

For they having all one God an Father; Where all are, 1. Alike dear to God.
First, all are alike dear to him, because all are alike born of him, and so he
loves not one more or less then another, but comprehends all in one and the
same love with Jesus Christ. And this truly known, will restrain believers from
wronging one another, when they know, that such are every whit as dear, to God,
as themselves; and that God has as great and tender love to them, and care
over them.

Secondly, 2. Alike dear to us.
All are alike near to us, because of this one God and Father; and so among
true Christians there can be no such divisions, and factions, and sidings, as
among worldly people; because one Christian is not nearer to us then another;
and so we do not take part with one against another, but all are alike near to
us: and so without any respect of persons, we embrace all that are born of God,
with an equal love, and seek the good of each one, yea of every one as well as
any one.

Now this God and Father of the Church, This one God and Father of the true
Church, is, 1. Above you all.
he farther describes that he is,

1. ABOVE ALL; The Father is above the children, and they are not above one
another, but he is above them all, ruling and overruling them; and so they are
not to live in their own wills, which might cause difference, but in their
Fathers will, which causes unity; and thus his being above them all, keeps them
in peace; Whereas we see, where children live without due subjection, having no
body above them, as it falls out sometimes among Orphans, there they are often
unquiet and grievous to one another: But God is above all his children, and so
keeps them in due subjection to him, and in quietness and love with one
another, daily composing their differences through his unity.

2. He is, 2. Through you all.
THROUGH ALL; as having communicated to all his own nature; and so according to
this nature of his, which he has communicated to all alike, and all alike
possess, he is through them all. And hereupon they all must needs be one,
because God never differs from himself, but his nature is at unity with it self
in all, in whom it dwells; and brings them all out of the differences of their
natures, into the unity of Gods.

3. He is, 3. In them all.
IN THEM ALL. God is such a Father as has his presence in all his Children; he
has a special presence in them, dwelling in them after the manner he dwelt in
Christ, though not in that measure; for God dwells in Christ and Christians
otherwise then in the rest of the creatures; to wit, by communicating his
nature to them through his union with them: And wherever God communicates his
nature, there he is present most truly, powerfully, and gloriously indeed: And
such a presence of God in his Church as this, keeps it in constant and
unchangeable unity: For how can they who have God thus dwelling in them, and
who again thus dwell in God, be at odds among themselves?

And this is the seventh bond of the true Churches unity; ONE GOD AND FATHER,
etc.
Now they break this bond of the Churches unity, Who break this bond of Unity.
who have not this one God and Father of the Church to be their God, and their
Father, who will needs call God Father, and yet are none of his children; who
will be of the Church of God, and yet are not born of God; and so live
according to their own natures, and not according to Gods; all these, I say,
break the unity of the Church, seeing we can no longer live in peace, then this
one God and Father is above us, and through us, and in us. All they then that
will needs be members of the Church through outward profession, and yet are
none of this spiritual brother hood, as having no descent from this heavenly
Father, they break this unity of the Church, even all the children that are
only born after the flesh, and so still live according to the natures of men,
and are not born of the Spirit, to live after the nature of God.

These now are the seven bonds of the true Churches true unity and peace; There
is no other bond of the Churches unity besides these seven.
and there is no other bond of unity necessary for the Church, besides these:
For if there had, the Apostle being guided by the Spirit, would never have
omitted it. And therefore the more are they to blame, who making a great noise,
and lifting up their voice on high for unity, It is a wicked thing to cry up
Uniformity in the stead of this Unity.
peace and agreement in the Church, yet do wholly neglect these seven bonds of
the true Churches unity; and cry up one instead of them all; and that is
External Uniformity. So that now among them, one body, and one Spirit, and one
hope of our calling, and one Lord, and one Faith, and one Baptism, and one God
and Father of all, are nothing at all to the Churches unity, but their
uniformity is all in all; and whoever breaks that (which yet they have no
Scripture of God to enjoin, no nor once to name) he is the man, with them, that
breaks the Churches peace; and so, Antichrist-like, they have exalted their
single uniformity above this sevenfold unity of the Church, and so have (as
much as in them lies) made the word of the Spirit void, through their carnal
(that I say no more) traditions. For a man may break all these seven bonds of
the Churches unity, and yet be a very good member of their Church, if he only
observe their uniformity; but if he break this, he is a Schismatike and an
Heretic, and not worthy to live in their account, though he live in all the
bonds of this true and spiritual unity.

Wherefore to escape these snares, let all believers know assuredly, that these
seven bonds named by the Apostle, which are all spiritual, and of God, and not
one of them carnal, or of man, are the only bonds of the true Churches true
unity; and that whoever of their own minds presume to add to these, are guilty
of adding to the word of God, themselves being but wretched creatures; and so
involve themselves in all the curses written in his Book, among which death and
hell have their place. And let us further know, that whoever do combine
together to make themselves one, out of the forenamed unity, though they call
themselves the Church never so much, yet they are but sects, and schisms, and
divisions, and factions rent from the true Church of God: for such men choose
and frame to themselves some singular way of worship, form, order, etc. whereby
they think they excel other Christians, and so cause the simple and ignorant
(which are the multitude of people) to follow them; especially having
countenance of worldly authority; by which means both they and their followers,
depart from the true unity of the Church: For when, this sevenfold spiritual
unity is neglected, Christianity is torn in pieces, into as many sects as the
world and Devil please, till there be no footsteps left, either of faith or
love. So that whatever these men pretend, most certain it is, that all
confedracies in the Church, of outward orders forms, rites, laws, ceremonies,
disciplines, which are necessarily enforced by the secular power, seduced by
the Ecclesiastical, will never hold the Church together; but all these are, and
have proved, and will prove, rather a wall of partition in the Church, then a
bond of union; and if they seem to work union, yet it is no other then the
mingling clay and iron together, which no pains nor art can perfectly compound.
For all peace and union in the Church, knit by other bonds, then are here
named, is no spiritual union, neither will it stand.

And therefore dear Christians and believers, seeing we have seven bonds of
unity, all of Gods own making, to make us one, let not diversity of forms and
rites, which are but sorry things of man's making, separate and divide us: but
seeing each of these bonds are able to make us one, how much one, should all of
them together make us?

And thus having showed from the word, How the union which God has wrought
among Believers, should be preserved in the communion, which they have here in
this world, with one another.
how all Christians and believers are made one by God; the next thing, I shall
aim at, is, to show how they may continue one among themselves, in reference to
that communion they have with one another, whilst they sojourn in this world,
flowing from the former union; that so all darkness and mistakes, which now,
even many believers are grievously inwrapped in, may be dispelled and done
away, and we may live in this pure and perfect union with one another in God,
making all outward things subservient hereunto, and none of them prejudicial.

And to this purpose I conceive, we are, 1. To know some things: And 2. To do
other things: To preserve that peace among our selves we have in Christ.
And both otherwise then yet we seem, either to know or do them.


1. To preserve our peace we have in Christ, 1. We must know some things
otherwise then we do.
we must be instructed aright, in the matter of the Churches GOVERNMENT,
because the mistake in this thing is so great a cause of controversy and
division among us at this day. For if the true Church has its true government,
without any such forms and laws and power, as is now so earnestly contended
for, Particularly the Churches Government. Church government two fold.
Immediate, Mediate.
there is no reason we should. fall out and divide for these things.

Now the Government of the Church, is twofold.

1. There is that Government, which God exercises immediately by himself.

And 2. That Government which he exercises mediately, and by the faithful.
Gods immediate government twofold.


The first of these, that is, Gods immediate Government, is also two fold:

1. The Government of his special providence. 1. The government of his special
providence.


2. The Government of his spiritual presence.

The first sort, of Gods immediate Government of his Church, is the Government
of his special providence, and this is a most strange, wonderful and glorious
Government. This was that Government of God, over the Church of Israel, when he
took his own Nation, out of the midst of another Nation, by temptations, signs,
wonders, by a strong hand, and a stretched out arm, and great terrors, when he
led them through the red Sea, and through the wilderness, in paths that were
not trodden, when he fed them with bread from heaven, and water out of the
Rocks, when he suffered no man to do them wrong, but reproved even Kings for
their sake, and through multitudes of enemies and oppositions, led them into
the Land of Canaan. Thus, God led that Church, from bondage to liberty, from
tribulation to quietness; from a sordid condition, to honor and renown; from a
strange land, to a land of inheritance; and from slavery to a Kingdom. And this
was a glorious Government indeed, standing in Gods immediate conduct from
heaven, far above all humane councels, wisdom, stratagems, or any thing else of
man's contriving and acting: and this government of God is so far beyond all
humane apprehensions that according to this, it is said, His way is the Sea,
and his path in the great waters and his footsteps are not known.

And is not this kind of Gods government, of the spiritual Church of the New
Testament, every whit as wonderful and glorious, as was that of the visible
Church of the Old Testament? For though the beginning of it was small and low
in the world, yet did it receive increase with the increase of God, and was
preserved, maintained and enlarged in the world, notwithstanding all the rage
and cruelties of the persecuting Heathen Emperors, for three hundred years
together; and ever since, God himself has taken the conduct of this Church,
and has carried it through difficulties, distresses, reproaches, prisons,
torments, deaths, to ease, liberty, comfort, joy, salvation, glory, life,
happiness; and this has been Gods glorious government of the Church hitherto.
And at this present time the Church of God wants not this government, among all
the troubles, confusions, wars, and desolations of the Kingdom, but God is now
as near his true Church as ever, and supports it and comforts it, and guides it
as a skilful Pilot, in such sort, that though the floods lift up their voice
and billows against it, yet they cannot sink it; For the Lord on high is
mightier then the mighty waves of the Sea: And so still, even at this day, the
Lord leads his flock through the midst of Wolves and Lions, yea through the
midst of Devils, in admirable and invincible safety, and gives them light in
darkness, councels in difficulties, and success in all attempts, above and
beyond, both all the power, and all the expectation of the world.

Now note here, that this kind of government of the Church, God does not
manage, according to the wisdom and thoughts, no not of his very people, but
wholly according to the council of his own will, and the thoughts of his own
heart: doing things, that they must not know yet, but must know afterward;
yea, such things as for the present seem absurd, and absolutely destructive.
And this is the usual way and order of Gods governing his Saints. That of
Luther, on Genesis 39. is worth our minding here. I (says he) have often
endeavored to prescribe certain ways and methods to God, Ego saepe certas
rations conatus sum Deo praescribere, quibus uteretur, in administratione
ecclesiae, etc.
which he should use in the governing of his Church. Ah Lord (said I) I would
have this to be thus done, in this order, with this event. But God did
altogether contrary to what I did desire. Then again thought I, why, my council
is not differing from the glory of God, but it will make much for the
sanctifying of thy name, the gathering and increasing thy Kingdom, the
propagating the knowledge of thy word; and to be brief, it is a most excellent
and profitable design. But God no doubt laughed at this wisdom of mine, and
said, Go to now, I know thee to be wise and learned, but this was never my
manner, that either Peter or Martin (meaning himself) should teach, or form, or
govern, or lead me. For I am not a passive, but an active God, who use always
to lead, govern, form. Now (says he) it is very grievous, that our wisdom
should be only passive, and that we are commanded to mortify and slay it; and
therefore many, who could not endure this mortification, have fallen horribly.
And thus this kind of Gods government, is wholly according to his own wisdom
and council, and wholly without, yea contrary to ours. And thus we are in some
measure acquainted with the government of Gods special providence, over his
Church.

2. The second sort of Gods immediate Government of his Church, 2. The
Government of his spiritual presence.
is the Grvernment of his spiritual Presence, or Gods government within us. For
the right Church, is the City of God, and has God in the midst of it, being
built and framed, and that according to every part of it, by the Spirit, to be
the habitation of God; this is the temple of the living God, as God has said,
and God is in it of a truth: And if any would know what this Church is called,
the name of it is, THE LORD IS THERE. And so the whole guiding and ordering of
this Church, depends wholly on God, who dwells within it. For God will not dwell
in his own Church, and sit still, whilst others that are without it, shall
govern it; but the government of the right Church, lies on his shoulders, who
is Immanuel, God with us, and in us. And so this government of the Church, is
one of the invisible things of God, in the Church: Christ who fills it,
governing it, by a most present and powerful, but invisible influence, leading
it into truth, by the Spirit of truth; into patience, by the Spirit of
patience; into love by the Spirit of love; into power, by the Spirit of power;
into humility, meekness, patience, heavenly mindedness, and into the fullness of
all Righteousness, by that Spirit, which contains all these graces in it self,
and works them in all those, in whom it dwells. In this government we hear the
voice behind us, saying, This is the way, walk in it, when we turn either to
the right hand, or to the left. In this government we have not outward laws to
order us, as the Kingdoms of the world have, but an inward law written in our
hearts by the Spirit of God, as God has said, I will write my law in their
hearts, and in their inward parts; and this law, is the word of life; for the
living Church or body of Christ, can only be governed by a living word, which
is called, the law of the spirit of life.

And according to this Government also, God guides the true Church wonderfully
the soul not seeing the ways and councels of God, whereby he forms and fashions
the Church, according to his own mind, and good pleasure, clean contrary to
humane reason and judgment; for he brings them to mourning, to bring them to
comfort; brings them to despair, to bring them to faith; to death, to bring
them to life; yea, even to hell, to bring them to heaven: leading his chosen
people after such a manner, that nothing would follow but faith, which looks
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. And
thus, when the soul is in the midst of many fears, woes, agonies, temptations,
till it feel in good earnest, the true sorrows of death, and pains of hell, and
in this darkness sees no beam, nor the least glimmering of light; and wants all
counsel, and knows not which way to turn it self: then Christ comes and
manifests himself to the soul, and counsels, and directs, and comforts it, and
leads it into the path of life, and redeems it from all distress, subduing the
world, and the devil, and sin, and death, and hell under it; yea, and carrying
it into all the fullness of God.

Now these two sorts of Governments, The Church never wanted this twofold
Government of God in any Age.
to wit, the one of his special providence, and the other of his spiritual
presence, the true Church never wanted in any Age: And in this present Age,
when the Prelatical Government has been dissolved for several years together;
Can any Christian think, that the right Church of Christ has been without all
Government? Nay, all this while it has been governed most powerfully by his
special providence, and most sweetly by his spiritual presence: So that neither
the world, nor the devil have been able to prevail, neither against its grace
nor comforts: And for an outward, formal, visible, enforced Government, after
the manner of civil Corporations, or worldly Kingdoms; the true Church can as
well want such a Government at all times, as at any time; yea, and it is best
without it, as being farthest removed from the tyranny of men, and more
immediately under the Government of Christ, its only King and Lawgiver.

And therefore they that are so violent for an outward and visible Government
of the Church, It were to be wished, that they that are so busy about outward
orders in the Church, were themselves acquainted* with inward temptations.
after the manner of the Kingdoms of the World; I do heartily wish, that if it
be the good pleasure of God, they might sometime or other be exercised with
temptations of despair, and with the sense of the wrath of God, and everlasting
burnings: For by this means their idle and vain thoughts and speculations of
governing the Church of God by humane power and methods, would soon vanish, and
they would soon give over to trouble themselves, and the faithful, about things
that have neither power in them to free from eternal death, nor to procure
eternal life.

And thus much for that twofold Government of the Church, which God himself
exercises immediately in and over it; whereof we must not be ignorant, The
mediate Government of the Church is Christ's, and not Man's.
if we desire to preserve the peace of the Church, both in our selves and
others.

Now besides this immediate Government of God there is another sort of
Government of the Church, which Christ exercises mediately by the Church: And
this also is Christ's Government, and not man's; and men who have not known nor
understood the former Government of Christ, have mistaken this also, through
the same unbelief; wherefore, they not so much as minding the former Government
of Christ, which is immediate, and by himself, have made this mediate
Government of the Church by man, to be all; And this also, I say, they have
understood most grossly and carnally, and not according to the Word, but
according to their own ignorant and seduced hearts. I shall not trouble the
Reader with their particular mis apprehensions in this matter; seeing it is far
more profitable to content our selves with the plain and evident truth, then to
enquire after variety of errors. Wherefore letting alone their darkness, I
shall only endeavor that the light of the word may shine unto us in this
matter, that herein also we may be taught of God, if it be the will of God.

This mediate Government then of Christ, in the true Church, What the mediate
Government of the Church is.
I conceive to be nothing but this, Christ's ordering all things by the
faithful, among the faithful, in reference to the communion of Saints.

Now because many Christians desire instruction and light in this matter, I
shall be willing to hold forth to them that measure of knowledge, which I have
received herein; being desirous also to learn my self of them that can teach me
better by the Word. And that I may proceed the more distinctly, I shall
propound several things, to which I shall speak in order; and they be these:

1. To whom Christ has committed, The particulars contained in this mediate
Government.
the power of ordering and managing all things in the true Church, in reference
to the communion of Saints.

2. What kind of power this is which the true Church has.

3. What is the extent of this power.

4. What is the outward instrument of it.

5. What the true Church can do, by virtue of it. And this comprehends these
particulars.

1. It can gather it self together.

2. It can appoint its own order.

3. It can choose its own officers; and if need be, reform them, or depose them.

4. It can call its own councels.

5. It can judge of all Doctrines, both of its Officers and Councels.

And all these things I reckon needful for the true Church to know, for the
preserving among themselves that peace and unity they have in Christ.

They first thing then is,

1. To whom Christ has committed the power of ordering and managing all things
in the true Church, in reference to the communion of Saints.

I Answer; Church Power given to the whole Church alike.
He has given it to the true Church it self, as formerly described, even to
each and all the members of it: for as natural power belongs to all natural men
alike, so spiritual power (which is the true Church power) to all spiritual men
alike. Christ in a Believer is the root of true Church Power; and because
Christ dwells in all Believers alike, through unity of faith: therefore all
Believers partake alike of spiritual and supernatural power; and no one
partakes of this power more then another, any more, then he partakes of Christ,
more then another; but Christ in them all, is the self same power of God, to do
all things that are to be done in the Kingdom of God.

And according this sense, that place in Math. 16. 19. is to be understood;
Math. 16. 19. explained.
where Christ says to Peter, And I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom
of heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven;
and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven. The Pope
and Papal Church, under color of this place, have made great merchandise, and
have exceedingly abused, and cheated the Nations, for many hundred years
together; but the light of the Gospel has shined forth, and the days of their
traffic are at end: And yet since, others have been trucking with the world,
by their false interpretations of this place, and have thought to use it, to
their great advantage; but the day has so far dawned, that their shadows also,
are flying away.

But not to keep you longer, from the words themselves; Peter had said to
Christ, Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: And Christ replied to
Peter, Blessed art thou, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but
my Father which is heaven; and then adds, Unto thee will I give the keys of the
Kingdom of heaven, The Keys, given to all that have the revelation of the
Father.
etc. that is, not to Peter as an Apostle, or Minister, but as a Believer, who
had the Revelation of the Father, touching the Son: and so also, they are given
equally, to each faithful Christian, who has the same Revelation with Peter,
as also to the whole communion of Saints. And so, these Keys are not given to
any particular person or persons, consisting of flesh and blood, or employed in
such or such an Office; but that man, whoever he be, that has the Revelation
of the Father, he it is, to whom these Keys are given, and to none else: and so
they are given to each Believer in particular, and to the whole Church of
Believers, in general.

But what are these Keys, Quest.
about which, there has been so great a do in the Church?

I answer, Answ.
They are not any outward Ecclesiastical power whatever, What the Keys are.
that men have devised, to serve their own turns withal; but to pass by the
many false conceits, wherewith many former and present Writers* have and do
still trouble the Church; John does tell us plainly, Joh. 20. 22. what Matthew
means by the Keys of the Church. Christ (says he) appearing to his Disciples
after his Resurrection, breathing on them, said, Receive the holy Spirit [here
are the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven] and then adds, Whose sins ye remit, they
are remitted; and whose sins ye retain, they are retained; that is, when ye
have received the Spirit, then you have received the Keys, to bind and loose,
to remit and retain sin, and that not according to your wills, but wholly
according to the mind, and will, and direction of the Spirit. And so, Christ
then before his ascension, gave these Keys, truly to his Disciples, but more
solemnly and fully at the day of Pentecost; when the Spirit was given by Christ
glorified: and after, the Gentiles, who by the preaching of Peter received the
Spirit, even as the Apostles did, they also received these Keys; and so all,
that have received the Spirit, have the Keys of the Kingdom equally committed
to them and the power of binding and loosing by the ministration of the Spirit.
And so these Keys, appertain not only to greater Congregations of Christians,
but to the very least communion of Saints, as Christ has promised, Where two
or three are met together in my name, there am I present in the midst of them:
Where we see, that two or three, gathered together in Christ's name have as much
power, as Peter, and all the Apostles; because Christ, is equally present with
these, as with those. Again, Christ has commanded, that if the offending
brother, will not hear the admonition of two or three other brethren, the
offended brother should tell the Church, Mat. 18. 17. Now the Church, is not
the Officers, but the Congregation of the faithful, seeing men are not of the
Church through any Office, but only through faith. And by all these things it
is evident, That the power of Church Government, that is, the power of acting
and ordering all things, among the faithful, belongs to every faithful man
alike, in the Congregation of the faithful.

2. What kind of power this is, which the true Church has.

I answer in general, The true power of the true Church, is a spiritual and
heavenly power.
that it is a power suitable to the Church or Kingdom, whereof it is the power:
now as the Church we speak of, is that Church, which is born of God, and of the
Spirit, and so is not at all of this world; so the power, that is agreeable to
this Church, is the power of God, and his Spirit, and not at all of this world;
that is, it is not any civil or secular power; I may add, nor any
Ecclesiastical power (according to the common understanding it) that has any
place in the true Church, but merely a spiritual and heavenly power, without
any conjunction or mixture of the other; seeing Christ's power is perfect, and
every way sufficient for his own Kingdom, and Christ's Kingdom is Gods Kingdom,
as well as the Fathers: and so men may as well carry worldly and secular power,
into the Fathers Kingdom, as into the Sons, seeing this, is no other then the
Kingdom of God, though it be among men, and no other then the Kingdom of
Heaven, though it be upon earth; which has not been understood nor considered
by them, who have been so busy to bring secular power into a spiritual
Kingdom, as if Christ's own power, in his own Kingdom, were either weak or
imperfect.

More particularly, this true power, of the true Church, is (as I said) Christ's
power in the faithful, which is, the self-same with Christ's power in himself;
and so,

1. It is not a power of violence, but a power of influence, even such a power
as the Head has over the members, and the soul over the body; it is not a
coercive, but a persuasive power, a power that makes men willing that are not
willing, and does not force the unwilling, against their wills.

2. This power is humble, and not proud, as worldly power is; for the power of
the world, sets men over others, but the power of the Church, sets men under
others; I ( says Christ of himself) am among you as one that serves: and
again, He that will be the chief among you, let him be the servant of all.

3. This power, is for edification, and not for destruction; as Paul
acknowledges, 2 Cor. 10. 8. -- 13. 10.
again and again, that the power the Lord gave him, was this, and no other
power, viz. not to cast men out of their native Kingdoms, but to translate them
into Gods Kingdom; not to take away their outward Liberties or Estates, but to
bring them into the Liberty and Inheritance of the Saints; to bring men to
eternal life, and not to destroy men, by temporal death.

4. This power, seeks the good of others, more then its own, yea good of
others, with the neglect of its own: So Moses was not busy, to have a most
rebellious people, blotted out of the Book of life, but rather desired, his own
name might be blotted out of that book, that (if it had been the will of God)
theirs might have been written in. And Paul desired that himself might be
separated from Christ, that his brethren and kinsmen after the flesh, might
have been united to him. And if this power seek the good of others after this
high rate, even to the neglecting, as it were, and laying aside their own
eternal good, how much more to the neglecting and laying aside their temporal
good, their worldly profits, advantages and dignities?

5. This power, does not make others suffer, to enlarge the Church, but suffers
it self, to bring this about; So Christ, as Wickliff says, through his
poverty, humility and suffering injury and death, got unto him, the children of
his Kingdom, and not by force; and the Martyrs enlarged the Church of Christ by
dying themselves, and not by causing others to die; the blood of the Martyrs,
being the seed of the Church.

6. This power, only acts to a spiritual end, salvation, and only according to
spiritual Laws; but not, to any temporal and worldly ends, according to civil
and humane laws.

And thus you see, that this true Church power, for the nature and quality of
it, both in general, and in particular, differs very much, both from the
apprehensions and practice of the most of our Ecclesiastical men.

3. What is the extent of this true Church power?

I answer; Christ's power extends it self to the whole Church, but no further.
that this power extends it self full as far as the Church, but no further: For
what has the Church to do, with those that are not of the Church? What have we
to do (says Paul) with them that are without? For Church power, which is
spiritual, is no more suitable to the world, then worldly power, which is
fleshly, is suitable to the Church. The power of the Church, which is Christ's
power, only reaches so far as Christ's Kingdom; that is, the people that are
born of God, and his Spirit. True, Church Government reaches as far as Christ's
and the Spirits effectual influence and operation, but no further; that is, to
all that are willing, but to none that are unwilling. As nothing has more
troubled the Church, then to govern it, and give it Laws after the manner of
the world, by secular force and power; so nothing has more troubled the world,
then to govern it, and give it Laws, after the manner of the Church, by the
aforesaid compulsion. Wherefore as the Government of the world is not to be
spread over the Church; so neither is the Government of the Church to be spread
over the world: but as the world and the Church are distinct things, in
themselves, so they are to be contented with their distinct Governments.

4. What is the outward instrument of this power?

I answer, The word the only outward instrument of Church power.
The word only, which is the only scepter and sword of Christ's Kingdom, to
govern his people, and subdue his enemies. Christ himself the Head of the
Church, used no other instrument to govern his people by, but the word or the
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and declaring what he had heard from his
Father; and at his departure out of the world, he told them, That as his Father
had sent him, so did he send them, and no otherwise; that is, to do all in the
Church by the power of the word, and nothing by the power of the world. And so,
the true Church does all in it self only by the Gospel, by the Gospel it
binds and loses; by the Gospel, it remits and retains sin; by the Gospel,
it quickens to life, and wounds to death; by the Gospel, it receives in, and
casts out; by the Gospel, it works faith, renues the life, acts, orders, guides
and governs all things; and that Church that has another scepter and sword
besides the word, that has orders, and constitutions of men, to govern by, and
plurality of votes in Classical, Provincial and National Assemblies to bind
and loose by; that have their own Laws and Orders to be their Scepter, and the
Authority of the Magistrate to be their Sword in their Kingdom; I say, if these
be the ways and instruments of their Governments, assuredly the Church they
boast of, is another Church then Christ's, and is no other in very deed, but a
Kingdom of sin and darkness, and death; and when its form of godliness, which
it has put on to deceive, shall after a few years vanish away, it shall return
into the shape of its first beginning.

And therefore let us know, whatever rules, orders, or humane inventions, men
do study and devise to govern their Churches by, the true Church of Christ
shall ever be known by the scepter and sword of the only Gospel preached in
it, which is fully sufficient for the regiment of the Church; else Christ were
an imperfect Lawgiver: And all those that do affirm, that the votes,
determinations, rules and constitutions of Councels, are better for the well
ordering and governing the Church, then the pure and naked word of the Gospel,
by the ministration of the Spirit, in my judgment they speak blasphemously.

Let us now hear what Luther says to this purpose; Christiani eo verbo, and
non alio regi debent, quo Christiani, id est liberi a peccatis fiunt; hoc est,
solo Evangelio Dei puro, sine additionibus Conciliorum, Doctorum, Patrum, etc.
Luther. Epist. ad Carol Ducem Subaud^ae, tom. 7. f. 483.
Christians (says he) ought to be governed by that word, and no other, whereby
they are made Christians, that is, free from sin; and this is, only by the pure
Gospel of God, without the addition of Councels, Doctors, Fathers. For what is
it to govern Christians by that word, which though they keep, yet neither do
they become Christians, nor continue such? nay, they cease to be Christians,
and lose Christ. And of this sort is every word besides the Gospel: and
salvation reigns in us, not by the laws of men, but by the power of Christ.
Farther, they that are not Christians, are to be restrained other ways, then by
the traditions of men; for these are to be let alone; and as Paul says, We are
not to mingle with them. There is the secular sword, there is the Magistrate
for these, and it belongs to him to restrain those that are evil, from evil
deeds, by the power of the sword. But the Bishop, or Overseer, governs
Christians without the sword, only by the Word of God; seeing it is certain,
they are not Christians, except they be spontaneously good; and such they are
made by the force of the spirit of faith; Quae ergo insania est, spontanee
bonos urgere legibus malorum?
as Paul says. Romans 8. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
children of God. What madness then is it to urge them that are willingly good,
with the Laws of the evil? And yet, says he, There are not a few light and
vain men, Sunt non parum multi, leves and futiles homunciones, putantes rem
Evangelicam gladio and pugnis esse promovendam. Ibid.
that think that the business of the Gospel, is to be promoted with weapons and
cuffes.

And the same Luther, in his Epistle to the Christians, and Preachers of
Erphurd, says, Consider in your mind, with what sword, I subdued the Papacy,
and the whole state of religious men, who before were dreadful to all; of whom
it was said, Who shall fight with the Beast, that has power to make war with
the Saints, and to overcome them? And yet (says he) I never touched them with
so much as one of my fingers; Reputate animo, quo gladio ipse Papatum, etc.
but Christ destroyed and overthrew all that detestable Kingdom, by discovering
their iniquities, by the Spirit of his mouth, that is, by the Word of the
Gospel.

In which passages of his (besides what is spoken before) it is apparent, that
there is no other instrument of the true Churches power, but the word of the
Gospel, which is the only scepter and sword of Christ's Kingdom. What the Church
can do through the power it has received from Christ.


5. What the true Church can do by virtue of this power.

Now the true Church by the power it has received from Christ, can,

1. Gather it self together, 1 It can convene and meet together, as often as it
pleases.
when, and as often as it pleases. The company of Believers have power to
gather themselves toge^ther for their mutual good, instruction, preservation,
edification, and for the avoiding or preventing of evil, and that without the
consent or authority of any extrinsecal and foreign power whatever; else
Christ were not a sufficient founder of his Church.

And if every free Society, not subjected to tyranny, has power in it self to
congregate and come together; as convenience and necessity shall require; as is
evident in all civil Corporations, and in all Fraternities and meetings of
love; much more has the Church of Christ, which is the freest Society in the
world, power to meet together into a communion of Saints, though it be without
and against the consent and authority, of the powers of the world.

And thus the Disciples, immediately after Christ's resurrection, though the
People and Rulers were wholly set against them, did often meet together among
themselves, though privately, and Christ himself came and stood in the midst of
them, and finding them in that way of Communion, said, Peace be unto them: And
so by his own presence did both justify and encourage such meetings. And
after, the Apostles, with other Believers, to the number of an hundred and
twenty, met together in an upper room, to pray, and to choose an Apostle in the
stead of Judas, Act. 1. And at the day of Pentecost they all met again, Act. 2.
Though the Elders of the Church, and Rulers of the state, were utterly against
their meetings. And again, Act. 4. Peter and John, after the threatenings of the
Rulers and the Jews, went and met with their own company, which was now
mightily increased by the Ministry of the Gospel, and declared to them all
things that God had done by them, and the Rulers had done against them;
whereupon all of them joined together in the praise of God, for the success of
the Gospel, against the power of the world. And again, Act. 6. the Church of
its own accord met together to choose seven Deacons; And a multitude of other
instances, might be produced. By all which it appears, that the Church of
Believers has power of it self to appoint its own meetings, as convenience or
necessity shall require for the good of the Church. And therefore none are to
presume to deny the Church, this power which it has received from him, that
has all power in heaven and in earth: Neither ought the true Church to suffer
this power to be taken from them, which they have received from so good a hand;
but still to use their own Christian meetings, though the Powers of the world
never so much oppose them, as the Apostles and Believers in their time began,
and as Believers after, for 300 years continued, notwithstanding the barbarous
cruelties of the persecuting Emperors.

2. As the Church of the faithful, 2. It can appoint its own orders.
has power from Christ to meet together; so, secondly, to appoint its own
outward orders: For the Church whilst it dwells in flesh and blood, uses some
external Rites, by which it is neither sanctified in soul or body; but they are
things merely of outward Order and decency: And these things each Church or
Communion of Saints may order by it self, according to the wisdom of the
Spirit; so it observe these Rules.

1. That they do all things in love, Rules to be observed in the Churches
appointing its Orders.
seeing all Laws without love are tyranny; and so whatsoever is not from, and
for love, is not to be appointed; and if it be, it is again to be abolished;
seeing no Text of the Scripture it self, if it build not up love, is rightly
interpreted.

2. They are to do all things for peace, and all outward Orders in the Church,
must be to procure, and to preserve Peace among the faithful, and not to break
it. They are most unhappy and pernicious Orders, that do not only offend a few
of Christ's little ones, (which it sef^ is a sad thing) but do grieve, disquiet
and prejudice the peace of the generality of the faithful.

3. They must do all things after the wisdom of the Spirit, Nunquid Ecclesia
per mundum gubernanda est, and non potius contra morem mundi, co quod scriptum
est, nolite conformari huic seculo? Jo. Gers. Decl. Viror. Ecclesiast.
and not after the manner of the world: seeing the Church is not to be ordered
according to the manner of the world, but rather against it; as the Apostle
says, Be not conformed to this world.

4. They must appoint nothing as of necessity; For there is no more pestilent
doctrine in the Church, then to make those things necessary, which are not
necessary: For thus the liberty of faith is extinguished, and the consciences
of men are ensnared. We doubt not but Believers may order any outward things
for their own good, so they do not impose them necessarily on any; as if the
observing of them were righteousness, and the omission of them sin. And so the
Church after all its Orders, it is to leave indifferent things as it found
them; that is, free, and at the liberty of the faithful, to observe, or not
observe, as they shall see cause, or judge convenient. For all these kind of
things are indifferent in their own nature; and God regards no more the manner,
and form, and time, and circumstances of spiritual duties, then the manner, and
form, etc. of our eating, and drinking, and working, and marrying, and trading;
for all which, it is sufficient, if they be done in Christian wisdom and
discretion, without being tied necessarily, to a set and unchangeable form.

5. They may persuade their Orders (if they see cause) by the spirit of love
and meekness, but must not enforce them, upon pain of secular punishment, or
Church censure; as those use to do, that make themselves Lords and Tyrants in
the Church. For these outward things the Church can order, only for the
willing, but not for the unwilling. And so, if some Believers shall think good,
upon just grounds, to do otherwise in these outward things, then the generality
of the Church, yet ought the Church to be so far from censuring them, that it
is to entertain Communion with them, notwithstanding any such differences. For
when Christians are knit to Christ, by faith, and do receive and walk in his
Spirit, all other things are indifferent to them, to do, or not to do; to use,
or not to use, at their own freedom. And Christ only being sufficient for all
his; whatever is besides Christ, is a perishing thing; and so is so far from
being to be imposed, that in it self it is not to be valued.

Now if the Church do appoint any outward Orders, these rules it is to observe;
yea, the spiritual Church does always observe them, and never made rules in it
self, upon other terms, then are here set down.

But on the contrary, The carnal Chnrch minds outward Orders more then the
power of godliness.
the carnal Church, or Churches of men, they especially trouble themselves
about these outward things; and of these they make Laws, and Constitutions,
yea, sin and righteousness; and by these things they judge the Church, and the
members of Christ: In such sort, that they that will submit to their Rules and
impositions, shall be the Church of Christ; but they that will not, shall be
reckoned Heretics and Schismatics. And hereby they declare, that they are
fallen from the power of godliness, to the form, and from the substance of
Religion, to the circumstances; inasmuch as they advance empty forms and
shadows, in the place of righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Spirit.
And to these we may say, with Peter, Why tempt ye God, in putting such a yoke
upon the Disciples and Members of Christ?

And though this kind of Church will with these things still be troubling us,
and biting us by the heel, yet in the power and prerogative of the seed of the
Woman, we will, by degrees, bruise its head, till at last we break it quite in
pieces,

Now one thing more I shall add, touching the Churches power to appoint its
own Orders, as conceiving it very necessary to be known; and that is this:

That the true Church has power to appoint these outward Orders, The Church is
to appoint Orders for its Officers, and not its Officers for it.
not for it self only, but also for its Officers (which also are part of it
self) and it is not to suffer its Officers to frame or impose such on it. For
the Church is not the Officers, but the Officers are the Churches; as Paul has
taught us, saying to the Church, All things are yours, whether Paul, or
Apollos, or Cephas. And so the Officers are the Churches, and are to be ordered
by it, in these things, but are not to order it. And if the Officers of the
Church, forgetting that they are servants, shall presume by themselves to order
outward things for the Church, without the Church, as now is done; the Church
still remains above the Officers, and has power to interpret, change, or
wholly take away all those things, as it sees occasion: to wit, so far as they
are a stumbling block to the weak, and a grief to the strong, and tend to work
division among the faithful. Presumptuous Officers are they, and know not where
Christ has set them, who instead of being ordered by the Church, go about to
order it, and make themselves the Lords of the Church, being but the servants
of it.

3. The true Church has power to choose its Officers, and if there because, to
reform them, or depose them.

The Church has power to choose its own Officers. 3. To choose its Officers.
True indeed it is, that as in the natural, so in the spiritual body, every
member is in office; and that the Ministry of the New Testament, being the
Ministration of the Spirit, is common to all that have received the Spirit.
Wherefore, if every Believer, has received the Spirit to profit withal, and
has power and privilege, as opportunity serves, and necessity requires, to
speak the word, that the power and virtue of Christ may be declared through
them all: there is no doubt, but any Community of Christians may, by a common
consent, choose one or mo, to speak to all, in the name of all. Agreeable to
this is that of Paul, 2 Timothy 2. 2. where he commands, That the office of
teaching be committed to faithful men, who are able to teach others. Where the
Apostle, contemning all superfluous ceremonies and pomp of ordaining, only
seeks, that the Ministers may be fit and able to teach, and without any more
ado, commits the Ministry of the word unto them.

More parricularly in this matter we shall enquire after these three things.

1. What Officers are to be chosen?

2. Out of whom they are to be chosen? And,

3. By whom they are to be chosen?

For the first, What Officers the Church is to choose?
What Officers are to be chosen? Paul teaches us this, saying, They must be
faithful men, apt and able to teach others. For as among natural men in the
world, they that have most natural power and abilities, are fittest to be the
Officers: so among spiritual men in the Church, they are fittest to be the
Officers, that have most spiritual power, that is, such in whom Christ and the
Spirit are most manifest; and of this, the faithful of all sorts are Judges.
Wherefore no natural parts and abilities; nor no humane learning, and degrees
in the Schools, or Universities; nor no Ecclesiastical Ordination, or Orders,
are to be reckoned sufficient to make any man a Minister, but only the teaching
of God, and gifts received of Christ, by the Spirit, for the work of the
Ministry, which the faithful are able to discern and judge of.

2. Out of whom these Officers are to be chosen? And that is, out of the flock
of Christ, and nowhere else. Indeed Antichrist bringing in humane learning,
instead of the Spirit, chose his Ministers only out of the Universities: but
the right Church chooses them out of the faithful; seeing it reckons no man
learned, and so fit to speak in the Church, but he that has heard and learned
from the Father. Moreover it is plain, that as natural power is founded on a
natural gift, and he must needs be a man, that is capable of humane power; so
supernatural power is founded on a supernatural gift, and he must needs be a
Believer, that is capable of this spiritual power: And so a man must needs
first be of the Church, ere he can have any power or office in it. Wherefore
all unbelievers and carnal men are so far from having any power in the true
Church, that they have no place in it; and are so far from being Officers, that
they are not members: For they that neither have, nor know spiritual power
themselves, how can they exercise it among others?

3. By whom they are to be chosen? 3. Who chooses them.
And that is, by the Congregation, or Community of Believers: For if every free
Society has power to choose its own Officers, much more has the true Church
this power; being (as is said) the freest Society under heaven. And so the true
Church is not to have Officers thrust over them by others, but is to choose them
its self.

If any object against this, Object.
that Paul commanded Timothy and Titus to appoint Elders; and that Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 14. 23. did choose Elders in every Church with prayer and
fasting. And therefore it may seem that the Congregation has not power to
choose its own Ministers, but that some chief Ministers must appoint other
Ministers in each Congregation.

To this I answer: Answ.
That if there were any Ministers among us, that did hold the place of the
Apostles, living and acting evidently in the virtues of Christ, and in the
knowledge and power of the Spirit, I would not doubt to allow them as much
authority, in ordaining Ministers, as Paul and Barnabas, or any of the other
Apostles had: But since it is very evident, that very few of these have the
Spirit of the LORD upon them: how should they have Authority to appoint
Ministers, who cannot themselves be reckoned Believers, or spiritual?

But secondly, If they were true Ministers, through the anointing of the
Spirit, yet could they not appoint Ministers in other Congregations, without
their own consent and approbation, but those whom the whole Church chooses, they
are to commend to God by prayer; and if they should refuse to do this, yet he
who is chosen by the Church, is sufficiently its Minister, through the Churches
choice alone. Neither did Paul, or Barnabas, or Timothy or Titus, appoint any
Minister, by their own single Authority, without the consent of the Church; as
may appear by those Scriptures, 1 Timothy 3. and Titus 1. where Paul says, The
Overseers, or Elders, as also the Deacons, or Ministers, should be blameless
and unreproveable. Now neither Timothy, nor Titus, knew of themselves who were
blameless in those places, but only received the Testimony of the Church,
which chose them to that office.

Further we see, Act 6. that the Twelve Apostles together, did not, by
themselves, appoint any to a lower office, to wit, to be Deacons, without the
Churches own choice of them: But say the Twelve to the multitude of the
Disciples, Look ye out among your selves seven men of honest report, full of
the holy Spirit, and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business. And those
whom the Church chose, the Apostles confirmed. Wherefore if it were not lawful
for the Apostles, at their own pleasure, to appoint men to minister so much as
alms to the necessities of the poor, without the choice and consent of the
Church; much less was it lawful for them to appoint any, among Believers, to
the hard and difficult work of the Ministry, without their own choice and
approbation. By all which it is clear, that the Congregations of the faithful
have power in themselves, according to the doctrine of the Gospel, to choose
their own Ministers.

And therefore seeing the true Church of God cannot possibly be without the
word, seeing it is born, and nourished, and increased, and strengthened, and
preserved, and comforted, and perfected by it: And seeing the generality of the
Clergy of these times, are ignorant of the mystery of the Gospel, and destitute
of the Spirit; it must come to pass, that either the Church must perish for
want of the word, or else (according to what we have heard) Believers must meet
together, as they can conveniently, up and down the Kingdom; and such Meetings
must choose one or mo fit persons, from among themselves, to be their Elders in
the Lord, and then by prayer to commend them to the work of the Ministry, and
so to acknowledge them for their Pastors. And there is no doubt, but what
Believers met together in the name of Christ, do in this matter, it is done
through the working and approving of God himself. And besides this way, I see
no other, how (in this great defection of the Clergy) the Church may have the
true word of God restored to their meetings and assemblies again. Now this
thing that is so directly cross to the way and working of Antichrist, for many
Ages together, and is so opposite to Fathers, Schoolmen, Councels, Doctors,
Antiquity* Custom, and the general pra^ctice of the Kingdom, cannot be hoped to
be accomplished at once, but by degrees, as the lightnings of the Gospel shall
enlighten the world, and the Spirit shall be poured forth. And therefore in
this matter, let some begin, and the rest follow, as this practice shall be
cleared up to them from the Scriptures. For none are to be forced in this
matter (if Authority should entertain this truth) but the Spirit is to be
allowed its own liberty, to blow, when and where, and on whom he lists.
Neither ought this to trouble, any, if all do not presently agree with them; it
is sufficient, if at first a few begin, whom others may follow afterward, as
God shall persuade them.

Now as the Church has power to choose its Officers; so if they prove evil, it
has power, either, 1. To reform them. Or, 2. To depose them.


1. It has power to reform them, if so be that they may be brought to
repentance and amendment: Yea, as all the evils of the Church do commonly first
flow from the Officers, so the reformation of it is first to begin with them.
And who shall reform the Officers of the Church, but the Church it self? Seeing
the Officers will be sure to tolerate one another in their Vn-Gospel and
Unchristian courses, against the life of Christ, and true practice of the
word, because it is their own case. Wherefore seeing the Generality of the
present Clergy, Hi profecto non venient in concilium, ut ^udicentur ab aliis,
ut emendent ea qua ipsorummet conscientia, ad^oque totus mundus emendanda esse
clamat, sed omnes alios jud^care and subjugare; suam illam potentiam retinere^
and quicquid ipsorum obstat libidini, conculcare, e medio tollere conabuntur.
Bullinger. Ep. ad Edward sex^.
are arrived to this height of evil, that they will not be contented to be
servants, but will needs make themselves Lords over Christ's Flock, plotting and
striving to procure and maintain their Ecclesiastical state by secular power;
seeing they have left off to preach Christ, and the Gospel, and only preach of
state affairs, raging and railing against the most just and necessary
proceedings of the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom, as not suitable to their
designs; seeing they are daily depraving the sayings and writings of men more
righteous then themselves; yea, and dare cast a veil of their falls Expositions
over the very Scriptures, to darken them, and make them as Sackcloth to the
world, that the glory of the Father, and the mind of Christ, might (if it were
possible) be wholly obscured; yea, seeing they are become so vile, that they
had rather Christ himself, with his Gospel, and true Church, should all perish,
then that they should suffer the least dimin^tion of their power, dignity,
riches, dominion and tyranny: What remains, but that the Societies of
Christians should meet together to reform these evil Officers? And whereas they
are now met to reform the Church, it is far more necessary, and would be far
more profitable, for the Congregations of the faithful, to meet together to
reform them, if yet they be capable of reformation; which I confess is much to
be doubted, seeing they sin against so clear a light.

2. If the Officers of the Church prove incorrigible, the Church has power to
depose them, seeing they have no indelible character, whatever the Romish
Church affirms. Wherefore as the true Church has power to choose its Ministers,
and to continue them, as long as they remain faithful in their work; so also it
has power to remove them, if they forsake the truth and power of the Gospel.
For as in civil Societies, not subjectd to tyranny, Officers that prove evil,
are moveable by them that made them; so likewise the Church has power to
remove, if it see cause, this spiritual Officer; yea, the spiritual Officer is
so much the more moveable then the civil by how much the more he is
intolerable, if he be unfaithful: for the civil Officer can only hurt in the
things of this life, but the spiritual in the things of eternal life. Wherefore
the Church has the greatest necessity to remove him and choose another; seeing
this salt when it has lost its savor, is good for nothing, but to be cast
upon the dunghill. And to this, worthy Mr Tindal, a blessed Martyr, witnesses,
saying, If they (that is, the Ministers) err from the word, then may whosoever
God moves his heart, play Paul and correct him; Tindal. Practice of Popish
Prel. p. 344.
and if he will not obey the Scripture, then have his brethren ^uthority by the
Scripture, to put him down, and send him out of Christ's Church, among the
Heretics, which prefer their false doctrines above the true word of Christ.

4. The true Church has power to call its Councels.

If the Church of the faithful stand in need of a Council, 4. Can call its
Councels.
it may call one, if it pleases, and it has power so to do: and the Council
is not to call and appoint the Church as is now done, but the Church is to call
and appoint the Council; and the Council is to have its Authority from the
Church, and not the Church from it. And for the world, it can no more call the
Councels of the Church, then the Church can call the Councels of the world; the
Councels of the Church and the world, being as distinct, as the Church and the
world themselves are.

Now I said, The Church, if it need a Council, may call one; because the Church
of Believers now seldom needs a Council, seeing all things are so clear in the
word of God, with which the faithful are so well acquainted.

There are many other causes why the right Church may very well be without
Councels; As,

1. Because Councels; as the manner was, were either called or congregated by
the Pope, Certain reasons why the true Church may very well want a Council.
a mere Usurper in the Church; or by secular and worldly Princes, who advanced
themselves to the same power in the Church, though upon another account. And
according to their ends and designs, Councels for the most part, have been
guided and pointed.

2. Because they have, for the most part, been made up of Bishops and
Ecclesiastical men, who have only sought the interest and advantage of the
Clergy, to the prejudice of the body of Christianity; by which means they have
set up their own Kingdom and tyranny over all other Christians.

3. Because, being gathered and met, they have especially meddled with outward
rites and Ceremonies; and touching these have made binding and coercive laws,
to the overthrow of Christian liberty, and the ensnaring and enslaving men's
consciences.

4. Because if they have meddled with Doctrine, they have rather perverted and
obscured the clear word of the Gospel, then truly explicated and unfolded it.

5. Wherein they have done well, yet this evil has always gone along with it,
that they have made People rather look to men then unto God, and that in the
very things of God; and to take divine things from them, by a humane says
rather then from God himself, and his immediate word according to the faith of
Gods Elect: and so have given forth themselves in their opinions and
judgments, as a foundation to the Church, in the stead of Jesus Christ.

6. Because, they always determine the things of God, by the plurality of
Votes, and do not weigh but number the suffrages, and so the greater part,
still overcomes the better; and the many that are called, carry the Vote
against the few that are chosen; Whereby it comes to pass that the truth is
subdued, and error is established, by a plausible Authority.

7. Because such Councels, Nam quid expectemus ex generalium conciliorum
determinationibus, docent ros proxima aliquot seculerum exempla, jam inde ab
an^is quandragintis aut amplius. Quo enim crebriora ceiere concilia, lanto
magis invaluit superstitio, and error in doctrina, abusus in ritibus, superbia,
luxuries, avaritia, omnisque c^^rplio in docentibus, vel saccrd^tibus, denique
soedissima omnis discipl^nae obliteratio. Bulling Epist ad ^dvard. Sex^um.
commonly attribute to themselves, infallibility; and so, set themselves up, as
a peremptory rule, by which the whole Church, must walk, and none must presume
to say to them curita facitis? why do ye so? though they do never so ill. They
say, they cannot be judged, by any other Christians, because they are subject
to none, but all other Christians are subject to them, and are to be judged by
them: They say, they may pronounce all other Schismatics, and Heretics, but
no body must pronounce them so, though they be so. And after they have once
drunk of this cup of abomination, what hope can there be, that any thing
hereafter, should be done right among them?

8. And lastly, because after so many Councels, things have not been the
better, but the worse in the Church, through their means: for it is not dead
laws and orders, wrtten by men, will do the true Church any good; but the
living law of God, written in their hearts, by the Spirit, as God has promised
to do, saying, I will write my law in their hearts, and put in it their inward
parts. For as the law of sin has been written in our natures, to corrupt us;
so the law of the Spirit of life, must be written also in our natures to reform
us. Wherefore, after all their Decrees, Laws, Rules, Orders etc. the Church
commonly has been so far from being bettered, that it has become more
ignorant of the Word, superstitious formal, profane then before.

All these things being seriously considered, the Church may very well want
Councels.

Now if any shall say, Object.
Yea, but had not the Church a Council in the Apostles times, as we see Act.
15? and did not they order and decree matters in the Church?

I answer, Answ.
the Church had a Council then, but far differing from the Councels now adays;
for,

1. That Council was not called, nor packed together by secular power, but
freely met together, by the general consent o^ the Church of the faithful: For
by the Believers at Antioch, it was agreed, that Paul and Barnabas should go to
the Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem, about the matters in controversy.

2. This Council did not consist only of the Apostles and Elders, but of the
brethren also, and whole Church; and the whole Church, as well as the Apostles
and Elders, did agree and order what was done in that matter.

3. That free Council, consisting of the Apostles, Elders and Brethren, did not
determine any thing by their mere power and authority, but debated the business
by the word, and by the word concluded it: And so it was not the Authority of
the Council did any thing, but the Authority of the Word, that did all in that
matter; as you may see in the fore named place. And in these regards that
Council differs from ours.

Now if notwithstanding all this, Rules to be observed in calling a Council.
the Church upon some occasions, desire a Council (for herein (as in all other
outward things) it is free) it must mind these things.

1. That it has power it self to call one, as the Primitive Church had. And
what men can object against this, of worldly Princes calling them; let them not
say, what they did, but what they ought to have done. Ex ejusmodi coetu. i. e.
fidelium, delig^ ndi erunt homines ad concilium; hoc v^ro esset pulcherrimum
conciliu^, quod ab ipso Spiritu Sancto regeretur. In hanc sententiam and Ly^a
scriptum reliquit, Ecclesiam no^ aestimandam esse ex summis illis, aut
spiritualibus ordinibus, sed ex vere creden tibus. Luth. Libel. de notis verae
Eccles. tom. 7. s. 152.


2. As the Church it self is to choose its Council, so it is to choose it, out of
its self; For the Councels of the Church are to be chosen out of the Church,
and not of the world; out of the faithful, and not out of unbelievers. For the
natural man that neither knows nor savours the things that be of God, can be of
no use here; but he must be able to know the word of God from the doctrines of
men and to separate the precious from the vile, that is employed in this
matter. And so the natural, carnal and litter (...) man must be declined here,
where the things are wholly spiritual and divine; and the spiritual man only,
who speaks spiritual things by a spiritual rule, must be heard and regarded;
and so a man must first be of the Church, ere he can be of the Council.

3. As the Church is to choose men out of it self, for its Council, so likewise
it is to choose brethren, as well as Elders; and Ecclesiastical men are not to
meddle alone, in the matters of the Church, and to thrust out other Christians,
as if they were necessarily to be concluded in, and by them.

4. In choosing Elders and Brethren to this work, great care is to be had, that
they choose not men of worldly power or place, lest wordly power, and Authority,
and honor, might seem to bear sway in the things of the Kingdom of God: but
they are rather to make choice of men destitute of these things, that it may
appear, whatever they do, is done only by the clear evidence of the word, and
influence of the spirit, and so only by the law of love, all secular power and
force being excluded.

5. The Church has power to judge of all Doctrines, and that both of its
Officers and Councels.

The Clergy and Ecclesiastical men have been wont to challenge to themselves
the knowledge and judgment of Doctrines, and have excluded ordinary Christians
from it; whereas in truth, the judgment of doctrine belongs to the people,
and not to the Ministers. And all Christ's Sheep have power to judge of the
doctrine the Ministers teach, whether it be Christ's Voice, or a Strangers, John
10. and Christ commanded them to take heed of false Prophets, which come to
them in sheeps clothing, being inwardly ravening wolves, Mat. 7. And the
Apostle commands them, to try the spirits, whether they be of God: and has
said, Let one or two speak, and the rest judge, 1 Cor. 14. etc. by which, with
many other Scriptures it is evident, That Ministers are not to judge of
doctrine for the People; but the People are to judge of the doctrine of the
Ministers, and according as they find it to be of God, or not of God, to
receive it, or reject it. For every one is to be saved by his own faith, and
not by another man's; and so is to take heed how he hear the things of faith at
his own peril; and he is not (if he will be wise to salvation) to take up
things on trust, in a matter that concerns, either his eternal life, or eternal
death.

2. As the Church is to judge of the Doctrine of its Officers, so also of its
Councels: For the Church judges of them, and their doctrine also by the word,
and does not take all, that they determine for truth, to be certain and
unquestionable: Yea, in the first Council of the Apostles, Act. 15. Other
Churches and Christians had both liberty and power, to try both the doctrine
and Spirit of the very Apostles, in that matter, and were not to swallow it
down whole, as they say, because the Apostles had determined it, and they were
holy men; but the faithful were to judge, whether or no, they had judged
according to the word; and if not, they might have resisted them, as Paul did
Peter. And Paul gives this liberty to Christians; yea, we have it from Christ
himself, whether Paul had allowed it or no, to try the very Apostles
themselves, and the very Angels of Heaven, whether they bring the right word or
no: for Christ, commanded the Apostles, to teach that Nations, to observe and
do, whatsoever he had commanded them, and nothing else; and says Paul, If I,
or an Angel from heaven, bring you any other doctrine, let him be accursed. So
that the Church has power, to examine, try and judge, the doctrine of the
Apostles and Angels, much more of other men, who have not received such an
anointing, neither do live in so clear a light of God.

And thus I have declared, the things, which seemed to me both convenient and
necessary, for the true Church to know, for the preserving of that peace among
themselves, which they have in Christ.

Now as the judgment of the Church, is to be rectified in these things; so the
practice of it, is to rectified, in other things, for the preserving it in
peace.

The things wherein the practice of the Church, is to be rectified in the Way
of Peace, are either,

1. More absolute and general. Or,

2. More special and occasional, in case of difference among the faithful.

Among the things that are more absolute and general, which are to be done, to
procure and preserve the peace of the Church: these nine things, that follow,
have not the least place.

1. Practical Rule for Peace.
1. The true Church is to preserve it self distinct from the world: The Church
is to keep it self distinct from the world.
and is neither to mingle it self with the world, nor to suffer the world to
mingle it self with it. For if the Church and the world, be mingled together in
one Society, the same common Laws, will no more agree to them, who are of such
different natures, principles and ends, then the same common Laws, will agree,
to light and darkness, life and death, sin and righteousness, flesh and spirit.

For the true Church are a spiritual people, being born of god, and so they
worship God in the Spirit, according to the law of the Spirit of life, that was
in Christ, and is in them: but the carnal Church, is of the world, and only
savours the world, and so will have a worldly Religion, Forms, Orders,
Government, and all worldly as it self is. Now whilst these two are mingled
together, what peace can there be? for what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness, and light with darkness, and Christ with the Devil? And so
what agreement have Believers with unbelievers, or the true Church with the
world? Wherefore it is not the way of Peace, to mingle the Church and the
world, but to separate them, and to keep them distinct; that those that are of
one nature and spirit, may be of one communion among themselves: and this way
of Peace God himself teaches us by Paul, 2 Cor. 6. 17. saying Come out from
among them my people, and be ye separate: for to separate the Church from the
world in its communion of Saints, is the only way to preserve peace in both;
seeing the Church will best agree with it self. and the world with it self.

The second Rule.
2. The Church being thus distinct from the world, The true Church is to be
contented with its own power, for its own affairs.
is to be contended with its own power, for its own affairs; and is not to
introduce, or entertain any power in it, that is not of it. Wherefore, the true
Church, being such a Kingdom as is not of this world, stands in need of no
worldly power; and being a spiritual and heavenly Kingdom, is only to have and
exercise a spiritual and heavenly power; seeing this power alone, and by it
self, is able to accomplish the whole good pleasure of God in the Church, and
to work all the works in it, that God has to do.

And so, it is strongly to be suspected, that those men, that dare not commit
the success of their business to Christ's power alone, but will call in secular
power, over and above, to help them: I say, it is more then probable, that they
have underneath some secular end, seeing Christ's power alone is fully
sufficient to do all things that are necessary and profitable for his Kingdom.

Besides, this worldly power never works peace, but always disturbances in the
Church, putting all things out of Gods way and method, into man's, and working
man's will rather then Gods; yea, man's will against Gods; and it is wholly
contrary to the very nature of the Church; and how then can it agree with it in
any thing?

If any shall reply, Object.
that worldly power does well in the Church, because it keeps down many profane
persons that would not be kept down by the word.

I answer; Answ.
That so far as such profane ones are governed by worldly power, they are of
the world, and not of the Church; and worldly power had better govern them in
the world, its own proper sphere, then in the Church, which is beyond their
line; especially seeing the Church has power enough in it self, to govern
those that are of it; and they that will not be governed willingly in the
Church, as Christians, let them be governed against their wills, in the
Commonwealth, as men. For the Government of the Church is over men, as
Christians, as spiritual; but the government of the state is over men, as men,
as natural and carnal. The first of these governments belongs to Christ, and
the latter to the Magistrate; And if the Magistrate be faithful in his Office
and headship, there is no doubt to be made of Christ's faithfulness in his. But
now, if the Magistrate will not content himself with his own Kingdom and power,
but will needs intrude on Christ's al^^ and not reckoning it enough to govern
men, a men by his world, power, will also by the same power, be tampering with
the (...) Church: this both renders him troublesome to the faithful, and the
faithful troublesome to him: Him troublesome to the faithful, in that he uses a
power over them, that is neither suitable to them, nor their affairs; and them
troublesome to him, because in Gods Kingdom, as they hear not the voice, so
neither do they obey the command of a stranger*

The Pope he arrogates both swords to himself, when neither belongs to him, and
therefore in due time shall perish by both; and if the Magistrate shall assume
to himself power of both ^ingdoms, Christ's, and the Worlds, when of right but
one belongs to him, to wit, the Worlds, and not Christ's; it will be very
dangerous, lest by encroaching on Christ's Kingdom, he lose his own.

Let the Magistrate therefore use his power in the state, and let him suffer
Christ to use his power in the Church, seeing his presence is always there;
and then there will be quietness in both, but else in neither; seeing Christ
will as assuredly trouble the Magistrates Kingdom, as the Magistrate trouble
his.

The third Rule, The true Church is not to force men unto it against their wills.
is,
Not to bring or force men into the Church, against their wills. The Kingdoms
of the world are unquiet, because many that are unwilling, are under those
Regiments; but Christ's Kingdom is therefore quiet, because all the people in it
are willing; and none of them are forced in, but all are persuaded in, as it is
written, God persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of Shem: That is, the
Gentiles were to be persuaded, and not forced into the Church. And so Christ
commanded his Disciples to go and teach all Nations, and not to offer them
outward violence; Ea est Ecclesiae natura, ut nusquam magis requiratur interna
persuasio. Nam and ad fidem nemo cogi potest invitus, and Deus toto se cord
vult amari, and denique hypocrisis peccatum est imprimis Deo exosum. Quo fit,
ut tota Ecclesiae gubernandae ratio, hunc scopum habere debeat, ut in Ecclesiam
vocentur plurimi persuasi, and in Ecclesia contine^ntur non alia ratione.
Itaque quo magis ea ratio aberit ab imperio, hoc magis est apta, regendae,
augendae and confirmande Ecclesiae, Cha^er. de Occumen. Pontific.
and to persuade peace, but not to threaten or enforce it. For such is the
nature of the Church, that inward persuasion is required nowhere, more then
here. For none may be compelled to the faith against their wills, and God will
be loved with the whole heart; and also hypocrisy is a sin chiefly hated of
God. Whereby it comes to pass, that the whole manner of governing the Church
must have this scope, that they that are persuaded, may be first called unto
it, and after kept in it, upon the same account. And so, the more this manner
shall be free from dominion, so much the more fit it is to govern, increase and
confirm the Church. And this way only was used as long as the Apostles lived,
and those that succeeded them in the same Spirit; and that unquestionably for
300 years after: Yea, and when the Church come to be countenanced by worldly
authority, yet this same freedom still was allowed; of which shall produce a
few testimonies.

I read, that Constantine the Emperor would have no man enforced to be of one
religion more then another.

Also the same Constantine, in his Epistle to his Subjects inhabiting the East,
Secundum hanc itaque nostram voluntatem, sano ac rectissimo judicio decrevimus,
nemini prorsus d^negandam esse potestatem, christianam observantiam v^l
religionem eligendi ac seq^endi; sed unicuique dandam esse hanc facultatem, ut
animum suum illi religioni addicat, quam ipse sibi competere putat, quo nobis
Deus consuetam in omnibus diligentiam and probitatem praestet. Eusebius. l. 10. c.
5. Fox. vel. 1. p. 131.
says, Let no man be grievous one to another: but what every man thinks
BEST, that let him DO. For such as are wise, ought thoroughly to be persuaded,
that they only mean to live holily, as they should do, whom the Spirit of God
moves to take their delight and recreation in reading his holy will; And if
others wilfully will go out of the way, cleaving to the Synagogues of false
Doctrine, they may at their own peril. As for us, we have the worthy House or
Congregation of Gods verity, which he, according to his own goodness and
nature, has given us. And this also we wish to them, that with like
participation and common consent, they may feel, with us, the same delectation
of mind. And after, Let no man hurt, or be prejudicial to his neighbor, in
that wherein he thinks himself to have done well. If by that which any man
knows, or has experience of, he thinks he may profit his neighbor, let
him do the same; if not, let him give over, and remit it till another time. For
there is a great diversity between the willing and voluntary embracing of
Religion, and that whereunto a man is forced and constrained.

I read also that Ethelbert King of Kent, Fox vol. 1. p. 150.
Being converted to the faith, ann. 586. after his conversion, innumerable
others daily did come in, and were converted to the faith of Christ, whom the
King did especially embrace, but COMPELLED NONE; for so he had learned, THAT
THE FAITH AND SERVICE OF CHRIST OUGHT TO BE VOLUNTARY, AND NOT COACTED.

The Church then, at first, consisted only of the willing, and such as were
persuaded unto it by the word, till Antichrist began to prevail, and then they
fell from persuading to forcing; and they no longer went about to make men
willing, by the word, but to get power from the Kings of the earth, to force
them against their wills. And this main piece of the mystery of iniquity, was
perfectly brought forth by Boniface the third, who was the first that used
these words in the Church, Volumus, mandamus, statuimus, ac praecipimus, We
will, we require, we appoint, we command: which is not the voice of the true
Ministers of Christ, but the true voice of thieves and murderers. And from that
time the peace of the Church decayed apace, when there were more unwilling
forced unto it, then willing persuaded. And true peace will never be restored
to it again, till men shall abandon the power of force, and only use the
persuasion of the word, that the Church may consist only of a willing people.

The fourth Rule, is,
To make void the distinction of Clergy and Laity among Christians; The true
Church has no distinction of Clergy and Laity.
For the Clergy or Ecclesiastical men have all along, under the reign of
Antichrist, distinguished themselves from other Christians, whom they called
the Laity; and have made up a distinct or several Kingdom among themselves; and
separated themselves from the Lay in all things; and called themselves by the
name of the Church; and reckoned other Christians but as common and unclean, in
respect of themselves. Whereas in the true Church of Christ there are no
distinctions, nor sects, nor difference of persons; no Clergy, or Laity; no
Ecclesiastical, or Temporal; but they are all, as Peter describes them, 1 Pet.
2. 9. A chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar
people, to show forth the virtues of him that called them out of darkness into
his marvelous light. And so all Christians, through the Baptism of the Spirit,
are made Priests alike unto God; and every one has right and power alike, to
speak the word; and so there is among them no Clergy or Laity, but the
Ministers are such who are chosen by Christians, from among themselves, to
speak the word to all, in the name and right of all; and they have no right nor
authority at all to this office, but by the consent of the Church. And so
Presbyters and Bishops, or (which is all one) Elders and Overseers in the
Church, differ nothing from other Christians, but only in the office of the
word, which is committed to them by the Church; as an Alderman, or Common
Council man in the City differs nothing from the rest of the Citizens, but only
in their Office, which they have not of themselves neither, but by the Cities
choice; or as the Speaker in the House of Commons, differs nothing from the
rest of the Commons, but only in his office which he has also by the choice of
the House; and thus, and no otherwise, does a Minster differ from other
Christians, as Paul says, Let a man so esteem of us, as of the Ministers of
Christ, and dispensers of the mysteries of God.

But Antichrist, he has cast out the simplicity of Christian people, and
brought Sects into the Church, dividing it into Clergy and Laity; and this
distinction, they have made visible by their garments, disguising their Clergy
in their habit from other Christians, that they might appear holier then they,
and of another order from them. And this distinction, has proved a Seminary of
implacable discord, and heart-burning in the Church; For hereupon, the Clergy
have preferred themselves above others Christians, and have exercised authority
and coercive power and domination, and very tyranny over them, and have made
themselves their Lords, and given them Laws, rules, forms, orders, after their
own minds, and agreeable to their own advantages, and would not so much as
suffer them to judge, whether they were agreeable to the word of God or no; as
if other Christians were their Subject, Slaves, Vassals, yea very dogs. And
hence again, the Laity (as they called them) have envied and maligned them, and
hated and opposed them, and as they could get power, have been subduing them,
and have looked upon them, as men of a different sect and interest from
themselves, whose prosperity, was their ruin, and whose power, was their
inslaving: and all this was to the making void Christian brotherhood and
communion. Wherefore the right Church, to preserve in it the peace of Christ,
must admit of no such distinction of Laity and Clerg, but all Christians must
equall^ ^^main it it, Kings, Priests, and Prophets unto God.

The fifth Rule is.
To keep equality in the Church, and that both between Christians and Churches:
for this also is an excellent way to preserve peace.

1. To keep equality between Christians. For though according to our first,
Nativity, whereby we are born of men, there is great inequality, some being
born high, some low, some honorable, some mean, some Kings, some Subjects,
etc. yet according to our new or second birth, whereby we are born of God,
there is exact equality; for here are none better or worse, higher or lower,
but all have the same faith, hope, love; the same God, Christ, Spirit, the same
divine nature, the same precious promises; the same incorruptible Crown, and
inheritance of Saints in light. And therefore says Paul, Gal. 3. 28.
speaking of this true Church, There is neither Jew nor Greek* nor bond nor
free, nor male, nor female, but all are one in Christ Jesus. Indeed in the
world, and before men (I say again) there is distinction of persons, and
inequality; but in Christ's Kingdom, and before God, all Believers aae equal:
and this equality preserves peace. But when in this Kingdom, some will be
advancing themselves above others, like Diotrephes, that would have the
pre-eminence; and some will be striving to sit at the right hand, and some at
the left, whilst they leave others to sit at the footstool; this is that which
breeds difference among the very Disciples, who envied Zebedees children for
such a desire. And therefore Christ, to preserve peace, forbad Lordship in his
Church, and commanded service, and tells them, that the nature of his Kingdom,
is not to place men one over another, but one under another, and that the
greatest must be the least; the greatest in the way of the spirit, must be the
least in the way of the flesh.

2. As equality among Christians is to be kept for the preserving of peace,
Equality among Churches
so also among Churches: For all Churches are equal, as well as all Christians;
and there is no Church can set it self before, or above another; all being
sisters of one Mother; beams, of one Sun; branches of one Vine; streams, of one
Fountain; members, of one Body; branches of one golden Candlestick; and so all
equal in all things. Wherefore there may, and ought to be a consociation of
Churches, but no subordination, which makes void at once, both equality and
unity. And so that Church, or those Churches that will set themselves above
other Churches that are their equals; as the Classical above the
Congregational, etc. they are the breakers of Christian peace and unity; and
the unskilful vote of the Assembly for the subordination of Churches, was not a
way to make peace, but to mar peace in the Church of God.

Moreover, Christ the Head, is subjected in the subjection of any true Church
that is of his body.
no Church can be subjected to another, but Christ who is present in it, and is
King and Lawgiver, is subjected too; which not true Church will either require
or allow. For if the true Church will not subject the Word of God, which they
have received, to any men or Angels, but will judge all by it, and will suffer
none to judge it; much less will they subject Christ the Lord of all, to any
other power or authority; for so they should dishonor and disanul their Head.
Where two or three are met in Christ's name, Christ himself is among them, and
the Head of them; and so they can submit to no body else, seeing Christ has
made no greater, nor surer promise of his presence, to any body then to them.

The sixth Rule, is,
To keep the Officers of the Church in subordination to the whole Church or
community; The true Church keeps its Officers in subordination to it self.
and not to suffer them to get head over it: seeing the very nature of ruling
the Church, is not Dominion, but Service. We read, Act. 11. 2. that when Peter
had preached in the house of Cornelius, Regendae Ecclesiae ratio, n^n imperium
est, sed (...).
a Gentile or Heathen, the Church of the circumcision, to whom Peter was
Minister, contended with him, that he went in to men uncircumcised, and did
eat with them (for as yet they knew not that the Gentiles were to be called)
And Peter was fain to give an account to them of the whole matter, and to show
them, that he was warned of God in a Vision, to do so, etc. And this was a
sign, that Peter was a servant of the Church, and in subordination to it, and
no Lord over it. And after, verse. 22. when the Church at Jerusalem heard, that
the Grecians at Antioch had received the Gospel, they sent Barnabas to Antioch
to forward and perfect the Work. And also the Church at Antioch sent forth Paul
and Barnabas, to the work of the Ministry in diverse Towns and Countries. All
which are an evident sign, that the Church was above the Officers, and not the
Officers above the Church.

Now this also will preserve peace in the Church, to keep the Officers in their
proper place, and to let them remain as servants in the Church, which Christ
has commanded; and not to let them grow up to be Lords and Masters, which
Christ (knowing the evil and inconvenience thereof) has forbidden. For if the
Officers get above the Church, though they be never so good, they are masterful
and troublesome; and though never so bad, yet will they get a party in the
Church for themselves, and so work disturbance; but if the Church remain as it
ought, above the Officers, it quits them when they grow evil and unruly, and
chooses better in their stead, and so preserves union. Whereas fixed and
unmovable Officers, when they do degenerate, are the causes of all
disturbances and confusions, both in Church and State.

The seventh Rule, is,
For all true Christians and Congregations to take Christ alike for their Head,
All true Christians and Churches take Christ alike for their Head.
and not to set up visible heads, or Ringleaders to themselves, of men; no not
of the best men. For whilst some said, we are of Paul; others we of Apollos;
others, we of Cephas; they were all in this matter carnal, and divided, both
from Christ, and among themselves; whilst several, set up several heads, whom
they especially owned, and after whom they were called. Whereas each that
believed, by the Ministry of Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, were through the same
faith and spirit with them, as near to Christ as themselves were; and so were
not to set up a fellow member, as a Head, to the division of the body. I say,
each believer, and Communion of Saints has Christ equally for their Head, and
so ought not to set up, any outward or visible Head for them to join to; for
this is to rend the body in pieces, and to work great division and distraction
among the faithful.

And therefore I conceive it is a mistake among some brethren, to call the
Congregations of Christ, by the names of men, though godly and eminent; and to
say, Mr. such an ones Church, or Mr. such an ones Church; and so to put the
Church under several Heads, which works distinction and division; whereas they
should rather say, the Church of Christ, in such or such a place; it being,
wherever it is, one Church, under one Head and Governor, Jesus Christ.

And therefore let us know, that it is part of the mystery of iniquity for the
Church, or faithful, to have one or more visible Heads to go to, not being
contented with Christ alone. And though this has been, and will be, the
practice of the carnal Church: yet the spiritual Church and people, do only
own, and have recourse to Christ, their true and spiritual Head. And so they
all, living as one body, and members one of another, under one only Head, live
all in invincible peace and unity; whereas difference of outward Heads and
Ringleaders, always breeds difference and divisions among Christians.

The eighth Rule, is,
For the true Church, The true Church keeps out all error in Doctrine.
to keep out all error in Doctrine; seeing this breeds, not only division, but
confusion and ruin also in the Church. Wherefore the Congregations of Christ
must be the more careful and watchful in this matter. When some false Apostles
taught at Antioch, that, Except Christians were circumcised after the manner of
Moses, they could not be saved; which was a most dangerous error against
Christ, and the Gospel; the whole Church, first, at Antioch, and presently
after, at Jerusalem, met together to keep it out: which accordingly, through
God, they did. So that what ever Doctrines are evidently against the Word of
truth, and Gospel of our salvation, the Church is to take care to keep them
out, as it loves its own peace and unity.

Now if any say, Quest.
By what means may the Church be able to keep out error?

I Answer, Answ.
It may certainly keep out Error by these means.

1. Let the Church suffer none to teach among them, The ways whereby the true
Church keeps out Error.
that are not themselves taught of God; though they have never so great natural
parts, and never so much humane learning. For, when they are the Teachers that
are taught of God, they will only teach the truth, which they have heard and
learned from God: And the line of every man's teaching must extend no further.
But when they teach, that are not so taught, they will in many things vary from
the truth, as it is in Jesus; yea, and under a form of sound doctrine, will
give forth an unsound and false sense, to the deceiving of many that are weak
and simple; and so under pretense of Christ, will utter the voice of a
stranger, and endanger the mis-leading of some sheep for a time.

2 Let the faithful examine every thing that is taught by the Word of God, and
not receive doctrines upon trust, from their Teachers, who, through the
reputation of their learning and holiness, may easily lead them unawares into
error. And therefore let the Church compare the present Doctrine, Preached and
Printed, and generally received, with the Doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles, which without doubt is sure and certain, seeing those holy men of
God, spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit: And whatever Doctrine shall
be found contrary to, or different from, that Doctrine, let them reject it as
reprobate silver; seeing the Church is to be built upon no other foundation of
Doctrine, then that of the Prophets and Apostles. And though, through Gods
especial goodness, the Doctrine of the Gospel be again revived among us, at
this present time, yet ought we not to sit down content with the present state
of things; but to search and see if our present Doctrine do not yet err from
the Primitive purity and brightness of the Gospel, and that in many
considerable points; and whether some, or many corruptions do not yet remain
among us, to be purged out, by the light and truth, of the Apostles Doctrine.

Wherefore to conclude this thing, let us know, that the Church cannot possibly
keep out Error, longer then it precisely keeps it self to the bare and naked
Word of God, and tries all Doctrines of their Teachers by it.

3. The Church, that it may be able to keep out Errors, must desire of God, the
Spirit which he has promised; that this Spirit of Truth may lead them into the
true and spiritual knowledge of the word, and understanding of the mind of
Christ. For no man can make any right Judgment of the word he hears or reads,
without the teaching of the Spirit. And by this Anointing, as we shall be
certainly taught, which is Truth: so also we shall discern which is Error, and
that by so clear and true a light, that we shall not mistake. Wherefore
Christians must take heed, that they do not think with carnal people, that the
ability to judge of divine truths and humane and Antichristian errors, depends
upon humane learning, Arts and Sciences; for thus it will come to pass, that
they judging themselves unable to judge of matters of Religion, will wholly
leave the judgment of them, to those whom they conceive after this manner
learned: whereby they leave open a wide door through which the Teachers may
bring in all sorts of Errors upon them. But Believers must know, that the gift
of the Spirit only, without all humane learning, is sufficient to teach us
perfectly, which is Truth, and which Error; and to make us able, to judge of
all doctrines of men and Angels; and that all humane learning in the world,
without the Spirit, is not able to do this. And so a poor, plain, Country man,
by the Spirit which he has received, is better able to judge of Truth and
Error, touching the things of God, then the greatest Philosopher, Scholar, or
Doctor in the world, that is destitute of it.

4 Another notable means to keep Error out of the Church, is to restore in it,
that most ancient Gospel-Ordinance of Prophesying, which, how much soever, it
have been out of use during the reign of Antichrist, yet is no other then the
very commandment of the Lord, as Paul witnesses, 1 Cor. 14. 31. where he
says, When the whole Church is met together, ye may all prophecy one by one,
that all may learn, and all may be comforted; and adds verse 3^. If any man
think himself to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge, that the
things I write unto you, are the commandments of the Lord Wherefore brethren
labor that ye may prophecy. So that prophesying in the Church, is Gods own
Commandment, as every Prophet and spiritual man must acknowledge.

Now this divine Ordinance of prophesying, is three ways helpful, to keep out
Error.

1. For first, When one man only speaks in the Church, and no man is suffered
to speak besides him, as he is very subject to be puffed up, and to conceit,
that wisdom only dwells with him; so he i^ more ready to vent the thoughts of
his own heart, and to speak the Dreams and Visions of his own head. But when he
knows the Word of God is not come to him only, but to others also, and that
they have wisdom and spirit, to speak in the Church, as well as he, this will
both keep down his pride, and make him careful what he speaks, when he knows,
there are those present in the Congregation, that are able to reprove his
darkness by light. And this prophesying, is a strong bit and bridle in the jaws
of Error, that it cannot run that race in the Church, it does desire.

2. When one man only speaks, and the doctrine he preaches proves to be
erroneous, as it is ordinarily in the common Ministry of the Kingdom, it comes
to pass, that Error is not only preached, but also goes away uncontrouled, and
no way is left for the restraining Error proportionable to that of propagating
it; no body being permitted to speak, to keep the people from the poison of it.
And thus whilst the liberty of public speaking is permitted only to one man
in a Congregation, and to onesort of men in the Kingdom, any Error may suddenly
be spread over the whole Kingdom (as we see by daily experience) without any
sufficient and proportionable remedy to prevent it.

But now, when the right or power of prophesying, is allowed to the whole
Church, the Minister can no sooner vent any Error, but there is some believer,
or other, whose heart God shall move, ready to convince it by the word of God:
And so, Error is as soon discovered and detected, as it is published; and as
soon destroyed, as it is detected; the word of God, though from a private
Christian, being more mighty to destroy Error, then Error can be, to uphold it
self against the word.

3. Prophesying is a most useful means to keep out Error, in this regard,
because it gives the Church light, how to choose faithful Teachers out of its
own children, when it stands in need of any supply in this kind. Seeing
through the exercise of prophesying, the Church knows and discerns which of its
members are most spiritual, and most clearly taught of God, in divine things:
and who have received the most excellent gifts from Christ; and so are most fit
and able to hold forth the word of life, in most evidence and power of the
Spirit, that so the Church may be supplied with Pastors of her own Sons, and
not seek o^: after unknown persons; nor be constrained to use mercenary men,
who have been brought up to preaching, as their trade to live by; whereupon,
but few of them, can be expected to be other then hirelings, who will make
their Ministry serve their own advantage, and frame the Scripture to sound such
doctrine, as may best serve their own turns.

And in these three regards the use of prophesying helps the Church to keep out
Error. Object.


Now if any shall object against this, That it may seem very rash and absurd,
after an able, learned man has spoken in the Church, for an unlearned
Mechanic presenly to rise up and speak.

I return this answer; Answ.
That the true people of God are all taught of God; and the true Church is a
Kingdom of Prophets, through the anointing of the Spirit; and so, they, esteem
not that, to be learning in the Church, which is from man, but only that which
is heard and learned from the Father; and so they neither reckon him that has
humane learning, to be learned here; nor him that is destitute of it, to be
ignorant. Yea farther, in this society, God will have him, who is most
unlearned, according to humane literature, to speak, that the virtues of Christ
may the more evidently appear in the Saints; and the knowledge of heavenly and
divine truths, may not be attributed to gifts, parts, learning or studies, but
only to his Spirit, which can even in a moment, teach the ignorant, and make
the simple, wise; and open the mouths of babes and sucklings, yea and of the
very dumb, to perfect his praise by. Whereas when a man of great parts and
learning, speaks with wisdom and knowledge in the Church, this is commonly
attributed to his wit and study, and so God loses all or most of his praise;
but if a plain, ignorant man, shall speak spiritually and divinely, and hold
forth the mystery of the Gospel in a clear light, then men must needs
acknowledge God to be the Author, of such grace, and say, God is in him of a
truth; and so, God is acknowledged the Author, of his own gi^ts, and he himself
is admired in his Saints.

It will be again objected.

Yea but if every one have liberty to speak in the Church, will not this breed
great confusion and disturbance?

I answer, no, not in the true Church, which are a people met in the name of
Christ, and who have Christ himself present in the midst of them, and so every
one demeans himself answerably to the presence of Christ, that is, in the
wisdom, meekness, and modesty of the Spirit. And there also every one speaks,
not after the rashness of his own brain, but according to the revelation of
G^d, as it is written, If any thing be revealed to another, let the first hold
his peace; So that no man is to speak here, but by Revelation, or an inward
teaching and discovery of God. And where men speak thus, as the true Church is
to speak, there can be no confusion, but most excellent order and decency. Yea,
God himself, who is not the Author of confusion, but of peace in all the
Churches of the Saints, he has appointed and commanded Prophesying, as the way
of peace; and therefore do not thou dare to say, it is the way of confusion,
seeing God knows better how to order the affairs of his own Church then thou
do.

Wherefore, seeing Prophesying, is Gods Ordinance in the Churh, for the peace
of it; if any sort of men, shall, notwithstanding what has been said, still
attribute to themselves a proper and incommunicable Ministry, or the only
power to speak in the Church; I shall but use the Apostles words to them, and
so pass on from this thing; 1 Cor. 14 36.
What? came the word of God only unto you? and is it to come out only from
you? Nay, it is come to every believer as well as to you; and it is also to
come forth from all them, unto whom it is come; seeing they cannot but speak
what they do believe.

5. The last means I shall name, whereby the true Church may keep error out of
it self, is, To exercise its power in judging Doctrines; as Paul commands, 1
Cor. 14. 29. Let the Prophets speak, two or three, and let the rest judge. If
they that publish Doctrine, should also be judges of it, and the people be
bound to subscribe to their judgment, error would not only, by this means,
have opportunity to be vented, but would also be established and confirmed,
without the least contradiction. But now God has appointed it otherwise in the
Church; for whoever speak there, the hearers are to judge of the truth of the
Doctrine; and accordingly are either to receive it, or reject it, having power
to do either as they see occasion: and so error cannot prevail in that Church
where the faithful have liberty to judge of all Doctrines, and do exercise
that liberty. But where they, that publish Doctrine, are also the judges of it,
and the people are bound up to the Doctrine of the Teachers, and may not
question or contradict it, there error reigns, as in its proper Kingdom.

And thus, by these means, error may certainly be kept out of the Church, that
the Church may live in truth and peace.

But here now a great question will be moved, and that is this, Quest.
Whether the Magistrate has not power to suppress error by the sword; Whether
the Magistrate has power to suppress error.
and whether the Church may not use this remedy against error, as well as all
those before named.

I answer; that many men of great eminency, have attributed such a power to the
Magistrate; Answ.
and have done him the honor, besides his throne in the world, to erect him a
throne in Gods Kingdom, at the least equal to Christ; thinking that Religion
would soon be lost, if he should not uphold it. And to make this good, they
have produced many Scriptures of the Old Testament; which seem to arm the
Magistrate against the authors and spreaders of errors.

But I desire the wise hearted to consider, whether as clear Scriptures may not
be produced out of the Old Testament, to prove, that temporal power in the
world belongs to Ecclesiastical men, as that spiritual power in the Church
belongs to worldly Magistrates. And to this purpose (because I would not be too
large in this matter, now) I shall desire him, who has a mind to be
instructed, to read and weigh the Reply of the French Prelates to the Lord
Peter's; which he may find in Fox his Book of Martyrs, vol. 1 p. 467.

Wherefore, seeing the Scriptures of the old Testament, are every whit as
strong, to give Ministers power in temporal matters, as Magistrates in
spiritual; it is without all question, the only sure and safe way to determine
this cause by the new Testament, or the doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles,
by whom in these last days God has spoken fully to the Church, and after
whose doctrine there is no other word to be expected. And because herein I
find no such power given to the Civil Magistrate, to judge and determine in
spiritual matters, therefore I conclude, he has none.

Now if any shall say, Object.
This is a great wrong to the Magistrate, to thrust his power out of the
Church, and to confine it to the world.

I answer, Answ.
That to make the Church an Ecclesiastical Kingdom, standing in outward Laws,
orders, authority, dignity, promotion government, all which are to be granted,
established, and managed by state power, and yet to deny the Magistrates
authority and influence into these things, which flow from his own power, and
consist in it, and by it, this is to streighten and to wrong him indeed. But to
declare the true Church to be a spiritual Kingdom as Christ has made it, and
not at all of this world, but the very Kingdom of heaven upon earth, and
thereupon to deny him power in it, is no more to prejudice the Magistrate, then
to deny him power in heaven. Seeing the Sons Kingdom which is heaven on earth,
is to be as free from worldly and humane power, as the Fathers Kingdom which is
heaven in heaven: Christ being to be all, in all, in this, as God is to be all
in all, in that.

And so to deny the Magistrate, that power which Christ never granted him, is
no wrong to him at all; but to grant him; and gratify him with such power,
would be a great and intolerable wrong, to the truth and Church of Christ, as
in many other things, so in this present matter, we are speaking of, as you may
see, in the following particulars.

For the putting the power of the sword into the Magistrates hands, to suppress
error, is attended with these evils.

1. Hereby the Magistrate is made a Judge of Doctrines, and has power given
him* to pronounce which is truth, and which is error, being yet no more
infallible, yea everywhit as liable to err, as the meanest of the people. And
what Magistrate is there, that has the power of the sword, but will uphold his
own Religion and judgment to be the truth, though never so false, and will
sentence what ever is contrary thereunto, to be error though never so true?
and so the truth and word of God, which only is to judge all, and it self to be
judged of none, by this means is made subject to the judgment of vain man, and
shall either be truth or error, as he pleases to call it; and error, when it
pleases the Magistrate, shall be adorned, with the glorious title of truth;
and shall have his authority to countenance and uphold it. And how great a
prejudice, this has been, and is to the truth, and how great an advantage to
error, it is very easy to judge.

Now if any shall say, Quest.
that the Magistrate may not judge of doctrine by himself, and use his sword
accordingly, but he may take to him the council and advice of godly and able
Ministers, as now of the Assembly, and so may judge and punish, according to
their judgment.

I answer; Answ.
Is it fit, that the Magistrate in so great matters should be blind folded
himself, and see only by other men's eyes?

Again, if the Magistrate judge, according to the judgment of ^he Ministers,
and depending more on their knowledge then his own, shall draw his sword
against whomsoever they shall persuade him; What higher honor does he attain
to in all this, then to become their Executioner? Yea, if he punish amiss he
may prove a very murderer. Pilate, in this case, may be a sea-mark to all the
Magistrates in the world, who following the council and judgment of the High
Priests, put the Son of God himself to death, as if he had been the son of
perdition: Which, I say, may serve, for a sufficient warning, to the end of the
world, to all Magistrates, that they confide not on the judgment of the
Clergy, but that they be sure themselves, in what they do.

2. The putting power into the Magistrates hands, to suppress error by the
sword, gives him full opportunity to destroy and slay the true children of God,
if at any time he shall mistake, and judge them Heretics. For what power men
ignorantly allow a godly Magistrate, against true Heretics: the same power,
will all Magistrates arrogate to themselves, as their just due, against all
those that differ from themselves in matters of Religion, though their
judgment who so differ from them, be never so true. And thus the Magistrate,
who is a most fallible Judge in these things, in stead of tares, may pluck up
the wheat; and kill the faithful, in stead of Heretics, at his own pleasure,
till he have destroyed all the faithful in the land.

Wherefore, let all Christians take heed, how they favor the Magistrates with
this power, to punish those, whom he judges Heretics: for if he shall change
his mind, as he easily may, seeing he is but a man, or if another shall
succeed him, of another mind, that very Sword may be sheathed in their own
bowels, which now they draw forth against other men's.

3. When the Magistrate assumes power to himself, to suppress error, this makes
Ministers negligent in studying the Scriptures, the Magistrate doing that by
force, which they ought to do by the word and so saves them their labor: For
when once the Ministers, shall have so far interessed themselves in the
Magistrate, as to procure him, to call for the Jailer and Executioner, against
whomsoever shall oppose their Doctrine, they will then need no great pa^ns to
study the word, that they may be able to convince the gainsayers, and persuade
the rebellious, seeing the Magistrates sword, at all adventure, is to defend
their Doctrine; and all the objections against it, either from reason or
Scripture, the hangman is to answer. And so the Pastors having their work, as
they conceive, thus done for them, to their hands, do commonly betake
themselves to ease and idleness, and to the prosecution and enjoyment of
worldly things, and grow careless, and negligent of the Scripture, and word of
God, whereupon error steals in apace upon the Teachers themselves, whereby, by
degrees they corrupt, and seduce very many. And thus whilst the Magistrate
thinks to chase out error before him, one way, he lets it in behind him seven
ways.

4. This takes men off, from the certain means to destroy errors, which is the
word, and leads them to that, which can never destroy it, which is the sword of
the Magistrate; and so the Devil herein has a notable Stratagem; For he fears
not all the Swords, and Halters, and Weapons, and Prisons in the world, to
destroy error withal, but as securely contemns all these things, as Leviathan
a Bulrush; and yet does earnestly stir up the world, to use these things
against him, and his errors as the only means to subdue him. Whereas the only
thing he fears, is the word of God, which is that mighty power, than can bind
the Devil, and destroy his Kingdom, and break down all his strong holds of
errors and Heresy, and he is in no sort able to stand out against the power
thereof. Wherefore in his great cunning, he causes men to lay aside this, that
is able to prevail against him, and to go to the sword of the Magistrate, which
will do him no harm. And thus the sword of the Magistrate, presuming to lift it
self up against Error, in stead of the word of God, is so far from destroying
Error, that it upholds it; and strengthens Satan's Kingdom, whilst it seems to
destroy it.

By these things it appears, how great an Error and evil it is, for any to
attribute to the Magistrate or for the Magistrate to assume to himself, power
to suppress Error by the sword.

If any shall yet demand, Quest.
whether the Magistrate can do nothing at all, toward the suppressing of
Errors?

I answer, Answ.
This he may do; he may and ought, and if he be a godly man, he will
countenance and encourage faithful Ministers (that are called of God, and
anointed by the Spirit) to this work of the Gospel; and having done this he
need not trouble himself any farther; for the word preached, will do all the
rest. And let it not be doubted, but if the truth of God do enter the Lists
against Error, it will be infinitely able to prevail of it self alone, without
calling in any power, or borrowing any weapons from the world.

The ninth Rule, is.
By no means, The true Church does not enforce Uniformity, in outward Orders
and Discipline.
to enforce Uniformity, in the outward orders and discipline of the Church. For
such Uniformity, has been in all ages, not only the hinderance, but the very
break neck, of the Churches peace and unity.

Now because this is so vehemently and strongly urged by the unskilful builders
of this age, I shall the more fully acquaint the Reader with the State of this
business, from the very beginning of the Gospel; and show when this part of the
mystery of iniquity, first invaded the Church of God.

Most manifest i^ is, that the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, were only
intent about the Doctrine of Salvation, and so accordingly preached and pressed
nothing but faith in Christ, and love to all the Saints; as being the only
necessary things, which Christians were to regard; Fox vol. 1. page 72.
And for all outward Rites, and Ceremonies, and forms, wherein Christ had made
them fr^e, they commanded them, to stand fast in that liberty. And so they gave
no heed, nor regard, to the observation of days and times, neither bound the
Church, to any Ceremonies or Rites, except those necessary things mentioned,
Act. 15. to wit, things strangled, and blood, which was then ordained by the
holy spirit, not without urgent and necessary cause. For when the murdering and
blood of Infants, was commonly laid to the charge of Christians by the
Heathens, they had no other Argument to help th^mselves, but their own Law, by
which they were commanded to abstain from the blood of common Beasts, much more
from the blood of innocent men. And therefore that Law seems to be given by
the holy Spirit, and also for the same end, to be continued in the Church, so
long as the cause thereof, that is the persecutions of the heathen Gentiles
continued. And besides these, we read of no other Ceremonies or Rites, which
the Apostles greatly regarded, but left such things free, to the Liberty of
Christians, every man to use therein his own discretion, for the using, or not
using thereof. Whereupon, as concerning all the ceremonial observations of
days, times, places, meats, drinks, vestures, and such others, of all these
things, neither was the diversity among men, greatly noted, nor any Uniformity
greatly required. Thus Christian Liberty prevailed in the Church, and Christian
men did not much struggle about indifferent things, till the Asians and Romans,
Iraen and Mehex. l. 4.
began to dis-agree about Easter Day: to compose which controversy, Polycarpus,
a godly Martyr, went to Rome (ann. 157. and in the reign of Antoninus Pius) to
Anicetus, then Bishop there: and though these two, to wit, Polycarpus and
Anicetus, differed in their judgments and opinions in this matter, yet they
still retained Christian communion, and avoided all breach of peace.
Afterward, in the reign of Commodus, the Christians enjoying some respite from
pesecution, began to contend again among themselves, about the ceremony of
Easter; and neither yet did the difference prevail so far, as to break the bond
of love and communion of brotherly life: though they of the West, pretending
the tradition of Paul and Peter (which yet indeed was the tradition of Hermes
and Pius, and not theirs) kept one day; and they of Asia, pretending the
tradition of John, kept another. After this, Victor, Bishop of Rome, rose up a
great stickler in the controversy of Easter, and would needs have
excommunicated the Churches of Asia for not yielding to his judgment; to whom
Iraeneus writing, touching the diversity of outward things, Nihilo tamen minus
omnes illi, pacem inter se retinuerunt, and retinemus etiamnum; and jejunii
dissonantia, fid^i concordiam commendat.
used by the Primitive Christians, has these words, Notwithstanding the
variety of ceremonies among the former Christians, they all kept peace among
themselves; and we (says he) still retain it; and the difference of our
fasting, commends the unity of our faith. And thus the Doctrine of Christian
liberty remained sound and entire, till this Victors time, which was ann. 200.
And he earnestly endeavored to draw, or rather enforce, the Churches of Asia
to his opinion. And then began the Uniformity of keeping that Feast to be first
required, as a thing necessary; and all they to be accounted as Heretics and
Schismatikes, who dissented from the judgment of the Bishop of Rome.

Now against this judgment of Victor, Polycrates and many other Bishops and
brethren of Asia, declared; and the matter had burst out into a great flame,
had not some godly men of those times, brought forth the word of God to quench
it. Among whom Iraeneus, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 26.
as Eusebius relates, speaks to this effect, That the variety and difference of
ceremonies, is no strange matter in the Church of Christ, when as this variety
is not only in the day of Easter, but also in the manner of fasting, and in
diverse other usages among the Christians. For some fast one, some two days,
some more; and others counting 40. hours both day and night, reckon that for
their full fast day. And this so diverse fashion of fasting in the Church, began
not in our time, but in theirs who lived before us. And yet notwithstanding
they, with all this diversity, were in unity amongst themselves; and so be we:
Neither does this difference of ceremonies any thing hinder, but rather commend
the agreement of our faith.

And he brings forth the examples of the Fathers, of Telesphorus, Pius,
Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and such others, who neither observed the same
usage themselves, nor prescribed it to others; and yet notwithstanding kept
Christian charity with such as came to communicate with them, though not
observing the same form of things, which they observed; as well appeared by
Polycarpus and Anicetus; who although they agreed not in one uniform custom of
rites, Communionem tamen inter se habuerunt, yet had communion with one
another. And thus Iraeneus, in his practice answering his name, persuaded the
peace of the Church, notwithstanding diversity of forms and rites: And so
Christian liberty was still preserved in the Church, against the tyranny of
Uniformity, till the Nicene Council.

And farther, Socrat. l. 5. c. 19.
Socrates, the Writer of the Ecclesiastical History, who lived after the days
of Theodosius, speaking of the fasting before Easter, Perspicuum est, Apostolos
liberam potestatem in eadem* cujusque menti and arbitrio permisisse, ut quisque
nec metu, nec necessitate inductus, quod bonum sit ageret.
says, The Christians that dwell at Rome, fast three weeks continually before
Easter, besides the Sabbath, and the Sunday: but those that dwell in Illyria,
and all Greece, and Alexandria, fast six weeks before Easter. And speaking of
the several sorts of fasting in several Churches, says, And because no can
bring forth any Commandment written of this matter, it is plain, that the
Apostles left this fast free to every man's mind and will, that no man might be
compelled by fear and necessity, to do that which is good.

And in the same Chapter, he relates many several forms and usages in several
Christian Churches, and concludes that matter, thus; Verum omnes Ecclesiarum
^itus, qui in singulis urbibus regionibusque usurpantur, scriptis mandare, ut
va^de laboriosum est, ita vix aut ne vix quidem fieri potest.
But, says he, to commit to writing all the rites of Churches that are used in
each City and Country, as it would be very troublesome, so hardly could it be
done.

And yet further; I find that Austin, who was sent into England by Pope
Gregory, ann. 598. among other questions to the Pope, propounds this as one:
That seeing there is but one faith, how it should happen, that the customs and
ceremonies of Churches should be so diverse?

And Gregory returns this answer, The custom of the Church of Rome, what it is,
you know; wherein you have been brought up from your youth: but rather it
pleases me better, that whether it be in the Church of Rome, or in any French
Church, where ye find any thing that seems better, to the service and
pleasing of God, that ye choose the same, and so infer and bring into the
English Church (which is yet new in the faith) the best and pickedst things,
chosen out of many Churches. For things are not to be beloved for the place
sake, but the place is to be beloved for the things that be good. Wherefore
such things as be good, godly and religious, those choose out of all Churches,
and induce to your people, that they may take root in the minds of English men.

So that yet you see, the Church was not enslaved by any enforced Uniformity,
but kept its own Christian freedom, till Antichrist grew up to more height,
and got the secular power of Princes, to do what he listed in the Church; and
then he, and his Clergy, made laws of all that seemed good in their own eyes,
and enforced men to them, against their wills. And thus he reigned for many
hundred years together, till the determinate time of the Apostasy began to be
fulfilled; and then God poured forth his Spirit upon some chosen servants of
his, John Gerson against Uniformity.
to oppose Antichrist, as in other parts, of the mystery of iniquity, so in
this also of Uniformity. Among others who after the general falling away,
opposed this Uniformity, was John Gerson, Chancellor of Paris, who lived about
an 100. years before Luther, and in many things received much clear light from
God: he in his Sermon before the King of France, in the name of the University
of Paris, pro pace and unione Graecorum, in his 7th. consideration speaks thus;
Men ought not generally to be bound by the positive determinations of Popes
(and it will as well hold of all others, H^mines non non generali^^r (...)
debent, per determinationes positivas Paparum, ad tenendum and credendu^r, unum
eunderaque gubernandi modum, in rebus quae non proxime recipient, vel si^e
medio, fidei nostrae v^^itatem, vel legis Evangelicae
who arrogate to themselves an Ecclesiastical Supremacy, whether they be
Councels or Assemblies) to hold and believe, one and the same manner of
Government, in things that do not immediately concern the truth of our Faith,
or of the Evangelical Law. And he says, this consideration well taken and
understood, would be the principal key, to open a door of peace, between the
Greeks and Latins, who differ in many outward Forms and Rules: as in Baptism;
the Latin Church says, I baptize thee; the Greek, Baptizetur servus Christi,
Let this servant of Christ be baptized. And in the Supper the Latin Church
used unleavened, the Greek leavened bread, etc. And herein he spoke as a
Christian, that said, Quaelibet provincia abundet sensu suo, Let every Province
abound in its own sense. Note also (says he) that a good Prince, permits
diverse Laws and Customs, of diverse of his Subjects, so they be not evidently
against the Law of Nature: And not to do so, would often be the destruction of
the Commonwealth As the Lord of Arras, a City of Picardie, was wont to say,
that Flanders would be governed otherwise then France or Burgundy. And this
consideration (says he) rightly understood (to wit, not to press Uniformity in
the Church, but to let the Church use its liberty in these things) would be an
excellent beginning of the Reformation of the Church, Luther against Uniformity.
notwithstanding the contradiction of many of the Court of Rome.

Luther also, that chosen Vessel of Christ, did clearly oppose this evil of
Uniformity: He thus delivers his judgment touching Uniformity of Ceremonies:
Si una Ecclesia alteram non vult imitari externis istis, quid opus est
conciliorum decretis cogi, quae mox in leges and animarum laqueos vertuntur?
Imitetur ergo altera alteram libere, aut suis moribus sinatur frui; modo unitas
spiritus salva fit in fide and vero, quantumvis sit diversitas, and v^rietas in
carne and elemento mundi.
If one Church will not follow another, of its own accord, in those outward
things, what need is there that it should be compelled by the Decrees of
Councels, which presenly are turned into laws and snares of souls. And
therefore let one Church freely imitate another; or let it be suffered to use
its own way, so that unity of Spirit be preserved in Faith and the Word, though
there be variety and diversity in the flesh, or Elements of the world.

Again, the same Luther, after he had set down a Form of Celebrating the
Supper, for the Church of Christ, at Wittingberg, concludes thus, In quibus
omnibus cavendum, ne legem ex liberate faciamus, etc. That is, In all which we
must take heed, that we make not a law, of liberty; or constrain them to sin,
who shall either do otherwise, or shall omit some things, so they permit the
words of blessing to remain entire, and do all act here in Faith. For these
ought to be the Rites of CHRISTIANS, that is, of the children of the
FREEWOMAN; who may keep them willingly, and of their own accord, having power
to change them, when, and as often as they will. And therefore there is no
cause, that any should either desire, or establish, any necessary Form, as a
law in this matter, whereby he may either ensnare, or trouble men's consciences.
And therefore we read not in the ancient Fathers, or Primitive Church, any
example of any such Rite, but only in the Roman Church. And if so be they had
established any thing for a law in this matter, we ought not to have kept it;
Quod legibus hic obstringi, nec possent, nec debent; Because these things
neither could, nor ought to be bound by Laws. Moreover, if diverse men shall use
a diverse Rite, let none either judge or contemn another, but let every one
abound in his own sense, and let us all savor and judge the same things,
though for Forms we act diversely: and let each Rite please others, lest by
diversity of Rites, follow divesity of opinions and sects, as it came to pass
in the Church of Rome. For outward Rites, though we cannot want them, as
neither meat nor drink, yet they commend us not to God, but only Faith and
love commend us to him. And therefore let that of Paul take place here, That
the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, Cujus exemplar sicubi and aliis
placuerit imitari, licet: sin min^s, u^ctioni libenter locum dabimus, parati, a
vobis and quibusvis aliis, commodiora accipere.
but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit; and so no Rite nor Form
is the Kingdom of God, but faith within us, etc.

And at the end of the same form, for the Church of Wittenberg, which he writes
out for Nicholas Hausmannus, a Godly Minister, he says, Which Copy, either you
or others may follow if you please; if not, we willingly give place to the
anointing, being our selves to receive from you, or any others, more profitable
things. These things he spoke like a Christian indeed, and we acknowledge the
voice of Christ in him; as in others, that act these things peremptorily, and
command and enforce them by secular power, we are sensible of the voice of
strangers, and of such strangers, as are Thieves and Murderers.

Melancton also, Melancton against Uniformity.
persuades certain Christians to unity, who differed in Uniformity, in these
words. Seeing we do agree among our selves in the chief Articles of Christian
Doctrine, let us embrace one another with mutual love; Cum de praecipuis
articulis doctrinae Christianae inter nos constet, complectemur nos mutuo
amore, neque dissimilitas and varietas rituum and ceremoniarum, disjungere
debet mentes nostras.
and let not unlikeness, and variety of Rites and Ceremonies, [and Bucer
quoting this place, adds, no nor of Ecclesiastical government] disjoyn our
minds.

Upon all these Testimonies, which these godly men give from the light of the
word, which we acknowledge in them, it is evident, that all forms are to be
left free, to the faithful and Congregations of Saints, and when any shall set
down any form, the Congregations of the faithful may use them, so far forth as
they please; or may add, or alter, or wholly reject them; and no Laws are to be
made in this matter, (which the secular power should enforce) to ensnare
Consciences, and to infringe Christian Liberty, and to straighten the Spirit in
those in whom it dwells, and to obscure the virtues of Christ in his people.

Wherefore it is most evident, that they are most horribly mistaken, that now
urge external Uniformity on the Church, as the only means of Unity, who scarce
minding. I am sure not naming one body, one spirit, one hope of calling, one
Lord, Faith, Baptism etc. to make the Church one, do earnestly and fiercely
labor for one outward Form, and Order, one Directory, one Confession, one
Catechism, one Discipline, [and to have these things of their own devising
enforced on the Church, by the power of the State] as the only means their
hearts can find out, to make the Church one. But the Seers, are blind in this
matter, and the Prophets prophecy false things. For if the unity of the
Church, stand only or chiefly in Uniformity, what woeful division will be found
in it? For the Fathers before the flood, lived in one form, the Fathers after
the flood, in another; the Believers under the Law in an other; the Believers
under the Gospel in another; yea these being free from all forms, used any,
according to the wisdom of the Spirit: Christ himself, and John Baptist, who
both lived in the same time, observed no Uniformity between them; for John
lived retiredly in the wilderness, and came neither eating nor drinking; and
Christ lived in the frequency of the world, and did both eat and drink. And
their Disciples observed no Uniformity; for John's Disciples fasted often, and
Christ's not at all, in those days. Besides, at first, the believing Jews used
another form, then the believing Gentiles: and after among the Gentiles, the
Greek Church used one form, the Latin another; and several Churches under both
several forms; and so the Church on earth, according to the infirmity of the
flesh, still uses some or other form; and the Church in Heaven, is without all
form. Now then, if we shall have no Unity, but where is Uniformity, what an
Earthquake of confusion and division will this make through the whole Church of
God in all ages, and under all Gods own dispensations in the world, yea through
the whole Church in Earth and Heaven? Wherefore, I dare be bold to affirm, that
imposed and enforced Uniformity, is one of the greatest enemies, to the true
Churches unity, that Antichrist himself could devise. And therefore, let not
the true Church suffer it self to be reduced under this bondage again, through
specious pretenses of Reformation; but let the Church know, it may use what
forms seem good to it self; and that its true unity stands, in being one body,
and one spirit, etc. as has been before declared. And thus only, the Church
in all ages is one; yea thus only the Church in earth and heaven is one.

And therefore, I desire the faithful to know, that Uniformity is to be kept
out, or if it be brought in, it is to be cast out, for the preserving of peace
in the Church. For, that God might make Jews and Gentiles one, He abolished the
Laws of Commandments contained in Ordinances, Ephesians. 2. 15. Whence it is
evident, that God so highly valued, the peace of the faithful, that to bring
this about, he repeals his own Institutions, and dissolves his own outward
Ordinances Now if the Ceremonies of Gods own ordaining, were to be made void,
rather then to continue to the prejudice of the Churches unity: how much more
any Ceremonies, or outward rules of our own or other men's devising? Let him
that reads understand.

And these are the practical rules, in the way of the Churches peace, that are
more absolute and general.

And now we hasten to the rules that are more special and occasional, in case
of difference among the faithful. Rules to be observed to procure and preserve
peace in the Church, when the faithful differ, among themselves.
In which case, we are necessarily in the first place to consider, the weight
of the things, wherein they differ; to wit, whether those things be such, as
are necessary to salvation, or no.

If they be not such things as are necessary to salvation; then first, they are
either things Ceremonial and Circumstantial; Or secondly, very truths
themselves; yet such, wherein a Christian may for the present err without
danger of salvation. The weight of things wherein they differ, is to be
considered.


If the difference be in Circumstantial and Ceremonial things, we should mind
these things to preserve peace.

1. That we ought not to contend for vanities; Rules to preserve peace when the
difference among the faithful is in circumstantial things.
nor to trouble our selves and the Church of God, with trifles, and things of
no weight or moment at all. It is a wonder to us in these days, that the
ancient Christians should so earnestly contend about the day, on which Easter,
as they called it, was to be celebrated, and upon difference herein, should
divide into Sects as they did; seeing there always shone light enough in the
Gospel, to declare this to be a slight circumstance not worth the minding. The
Apostle exhorts the Philippians, to strive together for the faith of the
Gospel, but no where for the form of it, in one thing or other.

2. We ought not, for contrary mindedness in these things, to avoid Christian
converse and communnion with one another; for strangeness of Christians in
these cases, both breeds and increases suspicions and jealousies, and causes,
that we harbor hard thoughts, brother against brother, and it takes away all
opportunities of conference, and of understanding and persuading one another,
and so of Reconciliation.

3. In these things, whereof neither commend us to God, we are not to condemn
one another: for to condemn one another for every difference in judgment,
produces innumerable Sects in the Church; then which nothing can be more
destructive to the peace of it; seeing such deadly enmity arises among Sects as
we see by daily experience. And therefore, that rash judgment, that produces
these Sects, is the great enemy to the peace of the Church, and the great
advancer of the Devils work of division.

4. Let us know, 4. To be contented with the substance of Gods Kingdom in the
faithful.
wherein the essence of Gods Kingdom stands, to wit, in righteousness and
peace, and joy in the holy Spirit, in Faith and Love, etc. and not in outward
Ceremonies and Orders; and where the power and substance of Gods Kingdom is,
let us be contented, though there is a difference in form and circumstances. Let
us take careful heed, that we do nothing against the power and substance of
godliness, under pretense of the form and circumstance. The highest good in the
Church, is salvation in Christ; and the end of all gifts, given to all
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, is to bring us all to the
unity of the faith and knowledge of the Son of God. And if so be that this be
done, the Church is not to be troubled with other things; yea, all other things
are to give way to this. Where the heavenly things themselves are present, we
ought not in these days of grace and truth, to contend about the shadows of
them.

5. In case men differ in judgment, 5. To take care in these three things of
great importance.
in these circumstantial things, such as are in present power, ought take care
especial,

1. That they do not entertain men into the communion of Saints, that are only
of one judgment: 1. That they equally admit men of different judgments in
these things, into the communion of Saints.
but that every one to whom the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are given, may
have free liberty to go in and out, and find pasture. It is a most
Antichristian thing to make another key to the Kingdom of Heaven, or true
Church, besides that which Christ has given; for then it will soon come to
pass, that Christ's keys will not be sufficient without man's also; yea, soon it
will come to pass, that man's key shall be sufficient, without Christ's, that is,
it will not be reckoned sufficient for men to be believers, and to have
received the gift of the Spirit, to make them of the Church, unless they also
conform to the judgments of such and such men; but to be of their judgments,
will be enough to make them of the Church, though they be destitute of faith,
and the Spirit. And thus, by making another key to Gods Kingdom, besides the
key that Christ has given, and so to let in those that should be kept out, and
keep out those that should be let in; this must needs be avoided as extremely
prejudicial to the peace of the Church.

2. They must take care that they do not prefer Christians to places of public
Ministry and employment, 2. That they equally use and employ them.
that are only of one judgment, but that they dispose of them alike, to
godly, men, of (...) judgment; lest otherwise, many smell the design of
Antichrist underneath; which is, that none shall buy, or sell, or have any
place in the Church, or Universities, but only such as have taken a certain
mark into their foreheads and right hands. And though the outward mark of the
mystery may change, yet the inward mind and meaning of it does not change with
the change of form.

3. If one sort of Christians be not to be admitted as members, 3. That they do
not destroy the one, to uphold the other.
or preferred as Officers in the Church more then another, much less is one
party to be destroyed for another; for thus would Satan also be a Prince of
Peace, who would destroy Christ's Kingdom to exalt his own, that he might
possess all quietly and alone: but Christ's way is to reconcile those that
differ in these things, and of twain, to make them one new man in himself. And
so we shall be like Christ, if we seek to bring both into one, in love, and not
to destroy either, by force.

These Rules are to be observed, as means of peace, if the things be
circumstantial. Now if they be very truths, If the faithful differ in very
truths, but such as are not absolutely necessary to salvation, they must
observe these rules to preserve peace.
wherein Christians differ, yet such, wherein they may err, without danger of
salvation, then these Rules are of use.

1. To hear them speak their judgments, with freedom, and not to condemn them,
unheard; for thus may thou soon condemn the innocent, and make thy self
guilty.

2. To understand fully, what thy adversary means, before thou contend against
him; lest it thou want this wisdom and patience, thou oppose not so much his
judgment, as thy own conceit. Much better is it, calmly to hear a man's mind,
from himself, then hastily to guess at it; yea, to conclude it is so, before
thou have heard him speak. If thou can but have patience to hear him relate
his own mind, perhaps in the end, thou shall understand, it differs little
from thy own, in substance.

3. Reproach not any thing thy adversary speaks, with this, That thou never
heardest it before: for this may not so much discover his error, as thy
ignorance; and that which seems to thee a new error, if it be truly examined by
the word, may prove an old truth. And if thou will needs condemn whatever
savours of novelty how shall the truths we yet know not, be brought in; or the
errors, that yet remain with us, be purged out?

4 Be not over-confident in what thou hold, upon thy own judgment, or other
men's, strengthened from multitude, custom and antiquity; for men have erred
most grossly, even in those things, wherein they have thought themselves most
certain: And therefore, Prove all things, that thou may hold fast that which
is good. It is much better to hold fast the truth, upon clear grounds from the
word, then upon the strongest presumptions of thy own heart.

5. In these differences make the word the Judge, and not men. The word of God
is the sole and perfect Judge, in all the things of God. And therefore one said
well, Qui ponit legem judicem, ponit Deum qui autem addit hominem, addit and
bestiam: That is, He that makes the Law Judge makes God Judge; but he that
makes man Judge, makes a beast Judge; For every man is brutish in his
knowledge: And then only are we sure of any thing, when we have the word of God
for it. Neither is it sufficient to take the word in any fashion, for Judge in
these matters; but we must necessarily attain the knowledge of it, by the
teaching of the Spirit; seeing we see so many differences of judgments among
men, that make use alike of the same outward word for their rule. Now though
all have the same outward word, yet all are not of one mind, except they
attain to one Spirit; for Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. that only the Spirit of God
knows the things of God: Neither does man's sense, or reason, understand the
things of the Spirit, but the spiritual man judges all things. And hence it
follows, that we can only judge aright of divine truths by the word, and we
can only judge aright of the word, if we have the Spirit, to be the
interpreter of it to us.

6. If thou can not prevail with him, by the word, that he should agree with
thee, wherein he differs; then observe that moderate and Christian rule of
Paul; where he says, As many as be perfect, be thus minded; Phil. 3. 15, 16.
if any be otherwise minded, God shall also reveal this to him: And so let us
wait with patience, will God of his good pleasure shall please to teach him, as
he has been pleased to teach us; because, without this teaching, he can never
know it aright, though thou teach him never so much.

7. And lastly, When in many inconsiderable points of Religion, we cannot agree
with many that are truly faithful, nor they with us; let us, according to
Paul's rule, leave the final judgment of these things to the due time
appointed of God; as Paul has said, -- Judge nothing before the time: And if
you ask, what time this is? Christ has told us, saying, If any one hear my
word, and believe not, I judge him not; but the word that I have spoken the
same shall judge him at the last day. For the things of God are so far beyond
the sense, reason, knowledge, judgment and discerning of all the men in the
world, that many times the purest things are reckoned vile, and the most
spiritual things, carnal; and the very highest things of the mystery of God and
Christ, but conceits or errors; and therefore it is fit, that the judgment of
these things, which are so far beyond humane comprehension, should be deferred
to the last day, Gods judgment being better in his own time, If the difference
be in doctrine, absolutely necessary to salvation, what the faithful must do
in this case.
then in ours.

Now in case the doctrine, wherein we differ, be such as is absolutely
necessary to salvation, and without believing which, men can have no interest
in Christ, yet even in this case,

1. Hear them speak, and be rather confident, that the truth of God will
prevail over their error, then fearful, that their error will prevail against
the truth: and so strive not, for secular power, to shut up men's mouths, and to
restrain men's writtings, though they speak and print things that seem never so
contrary to the truth of God, and doctrine of the Gospel For if men have not
liberty to divulge their doctrines publicly, they will spread them privately,
to infect and corrupt many, ere it can be known or prevented; and if men vent
errors publicly, if there be as public liberty, to preach the truth; I doubt
not the success of the truth against it at any time, with all that belong to
God. And it is the only Gospel way, to conquer error by the truth, and all
humane, yea, and devilish doctrines, by the Gospel, which is the ministration
of the Spirit, and therefore so mighty, that all false teachers and false
doctrines, must needs fall down before it; seeing, stronger is that Spirit,
that is in it, then that spirit that is in the world, which is its own spirit,
and the devils. And if the Gospel of Christ, have given already, such proof of
its power, in former times, when the whole world lay in horrible ignorance, and
error, and darkness covered the earth, and gross darkness the people; and yet
the Gospel alone without any conjunction of earthly power, of States and
Kingdoms with it, did bind the devil, and cast him out of his possessions and
dominions, and overthrow all false Religions, men had received from their
forefathers, through many generations; and changed the manners, customs,
opinions, Religions, and very natures of men, and utterly dispelled errrors and
heresies of all sorts; I say, seeing the Gospel, has already given such large
testimony of its power, and made so great a conquest of the world, when it was
wholly under the power of the devil; I see no reason, that we should now so
doubt the power of it, as to suffer no man, to say any thing, but what likes
us, or what is indeed agreeable to the word; as if error should have now gotten
more power, to make void the word, then the word power to make void error.
Wherefore, if the word be suffered, to have free passage, I dare rest on that
alone (and so dare all, that have felt the power of it, in their own hearts)
for the conquering and destroying, all errors and Heresies whatsoever in the
true Church of God. And now it would be profitable to hear what some other men,
who have walked in the same light and Spirit, have said in this matter.

Zuinglius (in his book, Zuingl. respon. ad libel. Strethionis, tom. 2. f. 302.
quoted in the margent) speaks thus, Haec unica, eaque sola via est, qua ad
concordiam proxime perveniri potest, etc. that is, This is the one and only
way, whereby we may most, suddenly attain to concord; if whatsoever things may
be, or are commonly said for any opinion, or against it, be freely propounded
in the Churches, so that the people be allowed, free judgment in all these
things. For God, who is not the God of discord, but of peace, nevers suffers
those who are gathered together in his spirit, to err or be deceived. And if
this way were observed, we should shortly see the Churches of Christ, enjoying
sweet peace and concord. But now as often as there are some Princes and Cities,
that would have the doctrine of the Gospel free to all, presently there are
others that would stop and hinder the course of it, and so long there must
needs arise great discords and dissentions. And hence I would have you judge
whether you or we, are departed from the Church of God, and the doctrine of it.
For we suffer those writings that proceed as well from you, as from the
Papists, to be openly and freely read, and read again; and the evils which are
taught in them, we slay by the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God;
but you think, all this business may be dispatched, with PUBLIC EDICTS AND
COMMANDS. And therefore do you be judge, whose cause is most to be suspected;
ours, who suffer the doctrine of our adversaries to be published in our
Churches, and overthrow them by the word: or yours, who reproach our doctrine
before the simple people, as heretical; in the mean time by your good will,
neither suffering them to read it nor understand it. Thus far he.

Luther also, in his Epistle to Frederick and John, Dukes of Saxony, Luther.
Farrag. epistol. tom. 7. s. 509.
speaking against that Spirit, which he calls Spiritus Alstetinus, a proud,
haughty, enthusiastical spirit, that despised faith and love, and the cross,
and the whole Scriptures, as low things, not worth their minding, and gloried
in strange Revelations, and superlative holiness which they had, above other
believers: And these enemies of the Gospel, especially were gathered together
in Alsteta; and Luther writes to the Dukes, in whose Province this Town was, to
this purpose touching them: Quod vero praesentis interest negotii, Luthers
rule, how the Magistrate shall deal with the Ministers, to wit if they contain
themselves within the bounds of the Gospel, to suffer them; but if they (...)
seditions and disturbances, to suppress, or banish them.
nolim ab illustrissimis D. V. praedicandi officium praecludi cuiquam, etc.
That is, But for what pertains to our present business, I would not, that the
office of preaching should be denied to any, by your most illustrious
Lordships; but let there be granted to them free Liberty to preach, and let
them exhibit the best proof of their learning. For I said by the Testimony of
Paul, It must needs be, that there must be sects; and the word of God must
strive, and wage war in camps. And therefore it is evident in Psa. 67. that the
Evangelists are called Armies; and that Christ in the Psalms is called, more
then once, the King of Armies. Now if their spirit be a right and approved
spirit, it will easily subsist before us without all fear: and so if our spirit
be right, as we hope it is, it will fear neither them, nor any body else. But
if they transgress the bounds of the Gospel, and will not contain their hands,
but will do their work with violence, it is the duty of your most Illustrious
Lordships, when they (...) fierce and seditious, to repress them, or to banish
them out of your Dominions; saying, we will easily grant to you, to fight with
the word, for the proving and examining which is true Doctrine: but we will
restrain the fierceness of your spirits, and contain your hands; for these
things belong to our Magistracy. And therefore they that will not herein obey,
let them depart the Country: For (says he) we who are Ministers of the word
may preach, but we must do no violence; and Daniel has witnessed, that
Antichrist shall be destroyed without hands; And Isaiah says, that Christ
shall fight in his Kingdom with the spirit of his mouth, and the rod of his
lips, etc.

Also Albertus, Albertus Duke of Borussia.
Duke of Borussia, when the great controversy ^ell out, between Andreas
Osiander, and Morlinus, and other Ministers, touching the Righteousness whereby
a Christian is made righteous before God, he would not forbid either side,
either the Pulpit or Press; but left them free to both alike, and desired them
to forbear reproaches one against another, Melch. Adam. in vita Osiand.
and to debate the business quietly by the word of God.

Likewise the Bohemians, The Bohemians.
in a certain exhortation of theirs, to Kings and Princes, to stir them up to
the zeal of the Gospel, subscribed by Procopius and Conradus, Fox. Mortyrolog.
vol. 1. p. 858.
and other Captains of the Bohemians, have these words; They say (that is the
Papists) it ought not to be suffered, that we should be heard, in confessing
our faith. Now, how may that be proved by the holy Scripture, since Christ
heard the devil, as is written, Mat 4? And they are not better then Christ. nor
we worse then the devil. If they be righteous, and have the truth with them, as
they say they have, and we be unrighteous, why do they fear? since the truth
ought not to be afraid of falsehood; and Zorobabel declared, That truth is of
all things the most mighty, 2 Esdr. 3.
and overcomes all things. For Christ is the truth, John 14. I am the way, the
truth; and the devil is the father of lies. John 8. Therefore if the Pope and
his Priests have the truth, let them overcome us with the word of God: but if
they have lies, then they cannot long abide, in all their presumption.
Wherefore, we exhort and beseech, all the Imperial Cities, all Kings, Princes,
Noblemen, rich, poor, for Gods sake, and for his Righteousness, that one of
them, write hereof to another, and that there may be some means made, how we
may commune with you safely, and friendly, at some such place, as shall be fit,
both for you and us: and bring with you your Bishops and Teachers, and let them
and our Teachers fight together with the word of God, and let us hear them; and
let not one overcome the other by violence or false subtilty, but only by the
word of God etc.

By all which it appears, That let men's Doctrine be what it will, they ought to
be heard, and convinced by the word, and not presently to be silenced, and
subdued by force.

Now secondly, 2. If the doctrine after hearing of it be found damnable, the
community, is
if upon hearing and debating things by the word* it shall clearly appear, that
our adversaries hold such things, which are so false and erroneous, that they
cannot be reckoned believers and members of Christ, that hold them; nor can
retain those Doctrines, without unvoidable damnation: then in this case, the
true Church, has Authority from the word, to do these things.

1. To condemn the doctrine. 2. To excommunicate their persons.
1. The Church ought to condemn the doctrine, To condemn the doctrine.
as contrary to the Gospel, and to that eternal and unchangeable, and most
clear and certain truth, which Christ has heard from the Father, and delivered
to his Church; which is the faith once given to the Saints, and never to be
altered. And so to tell the people, what Doctrine it is; even such, as carries
in it an utter enmity to Christ and his Spirit; and so consequently death and
damnation; and that therefore they are to take heed of it, as they love
eternal life, and would void eternal death.

And thus Christ condemned the Doctrine of the Scribes, and of the Pharisees,
and of the Sadduces, and bid his Disciples, Beware of them; and Paul, the
Doctrine of Hymeneus and Philetus which did eat as a canker, etc.

2. The Church in this case, 2. To excommunicate the person.
may also excommunicate the Person; yea, though he should be silent and not
seduce others; seeing believers can have no true communion with such an one,
who is in enmity to the word of life, in which all the true communion of the
faithful stands. Wherefore such persons may justly be cut off from the Society
of the faithful. But herein also, these Rules are to be observed; to wit, 1.
That this censure be not proceeded to, Rules to be observed in excomunication.
for every varying from the truth (as is already said) but for denying such
truths, or holding such errors, as make a man incapable of salvation. 2. That
this be not done, till all other ways have been tried, to reclaim him. 3. That
this be done, not by two or three persons, but by the whole Church, or
communion. 4. That it be done, not by their own, but by Christ's Authority, who
is always present in his Church, as the Head of that body; and that it be
done, not by any humane Passion or violence, but by the efficacy of the holy
Spirit, who is always present among believers, as the Spirit of those members.


And this Excommunication thus regulated, Excommunication, the Churches last
punishment.
is the last punishment the Church can inflict, by the warrant and authority of
Christ: and it cannot imprison any, or banish them, or fine them, or put them
to death: for we must not expound that place of Paul, Haereticum hominem
devita, as Hugo Charensis did, to take a Heretic out of his life; but him that
is a Heretic, we must avoid, we must not kill; the former being Christ's rule;
the latter, Antichrists.

Now these things have I spoken and propounded to the faithful and Churches of
Christ, Conclusion.
wherever the providence of God shall cast this Book, which may travel farther
on this errand, then weak flesh can do: and I so propound them all, as being
most ready, my self, to hear from any what they can propound in more light and
evidence of the word. And I do humbly and earnestly entreat all faithful
Christians, that whatever they shall conceive of my judgment in these matters,
they will yet take in good part my care, to recover and preserve Peace and
Unity in the true Church of Christ: The desire of which, through Gods goodness,
is much stronger in my heart, then any private interest or respect of mine own.

FINIS.

