THE DEMANDS Of Lieutenant-Generall CRUMWELL TO The Estates of the Kingdom of
Scotland, assembled at Edinburgh, concerning General Monro, and his Forces,
and their surrendering of the English Garrisons. With his Resolution touching
the said Army, and all those who shall assist them, in case these Demands be not
granted.

ALSO, The proceedings of General Monro and his Army in relation to an
engagement, and their marching toward Stainmore near Northumberland, with the
Train of Artillery, and a great blow given to his Majesty's Enemies.

LIKEWISE, The Declaration, Resolution, and Protestation, of the Counties of
Yorkshire, Northumberland, and the Bishopric of Durham, concerning the two
Armies of England and Scotland.

Imprinted at London, for G. Horton, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange
in Cornwall, 1648. Sept ye 12

C R
central circle flanked by the English lion on the left and the Scottish
unicorn on the right and containing the initials of King Charles, all of these
figures enclosed within a rectangle flanked by an angel on the left and right
THE DEMANDS Of Lieu^enant-Generall CRVMVVELL TO The Committee of Estates of
the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning General Munro, and his Forces, with his
Resolution thereupon, in case of an unsatisfactory Answer.
Endeared Sir,
THe unanimous Spirits of the King and Kingdom grows numerous and succesfull
they leave no way unattempted, for the recovery or this languishing Nation to
a flourishing conidtion, their evil actions proves and manifestation to their
future intentions, and their affectionate carriage to the country Inhabitants,
demonstrates their reality in abundantly, who by great and vast numbers,
resorts to them daily, shrowding themselves under the wings of their
protection, jointly and unanimously adventuring lives and fortunes against the
enemies of Religon, King, and Kingdom; and to that end have entered into an
Engagement and Protestation, to assist the Lieuten^ General, or the Forces
under his command, to the last man, not doubting but that the great Jehovah
will go along with them, and give his mighty assistance in this great Work,
which so much tends, to the glory of God, and the advancement of his People;
and that the same God which crowned them with the late glorious Victory, will
still be present in the midst of their Army, and with his All seeing Eye and
Providence discover and prevent the rage of their enemies; that so He who is
the Giver of all Victories, and the Captain General of all Armies, may honor
his servants and soldiers with a final day of triumph, making them
instruments, to sheath the bloody Sword, and compose all unhappy differences
between the people of this Nation.

The Country people rise generally, arming themselves with great resolution,
and have declared their unanimous affections to the Lieutenant General to live
and die with him.

His excellent deportment toward them, unites their hearts in general; by
which means, he has attempted ma^y difficulties, and is now got as far as
Barwick upon Tweed, being resolved to charge Monro in the Rear, and to retard
his retreat into Scotland, if a satisfactory answer be not given to these
ensuing Demands which he has now proposed in a Letter to the Estates of the
kingdom of Scotland assembled at Edinburgh, viz.

1. That they recall Major General Monro, and the Forces under his immediate
command out of this Kingdom, and that for the future they shall make no
further invasion or inroad within the Bowels thereof.

2. That they forthwith surrender the Garrisons of Berwick, Carlisle, and all
other English Garrisons wha^soever, to the obedience and protection of the
Parliament of England.

3. And lastly, That in case these Proposals be not assenced to, he is resolved
to prosecute his design against them as Rebels and Traitors to this Kingdom,
and that all those who do adhere to, or assist them in this Engagement must
expect the same mercy.

We do not hear of any Answer as yet returned, but Monro declines an
engagement, and will not fight, our Horse diverse times provokes him to it, who
not long since upon their march) disputed a piece of ground with the enemy
recovered the same, and put them to a very disorderly retreat.

On Monday last both Bodies were within 8 miles of each other, our horse faced
them, expecting an engagement, but Monro wheeled off with his Army, and drew
toward Stainmore with his Artillery, so that they are now 20. miles distant,
the Lieutenant General attends their motion, and keeps betwixt Tweed and them.
Colonel Fenwick with some additionall Forces is designed for the blocking up
of Berwick.

Durham 7. September. 1648.
Another Letter from the North, communinicating the present proceedings of the
Scottish Army, to the Citizens of London, and all other parts adjacent.
SIR,
The proceedings of the Scots and Irish appears more visible and inhumane then
formerly, their actions are tyranicall, their ways most insufferable and
executes nothing but blood thirstinesse and cruelty, tending only to utter
ruin and desolation: they have burned down, diverse stately buildings in these
parts, executed some of my Lord Whartons Tenants, and threatens others, which
causes the Country to rise and join with Lieu. Genesis Crumwell, insomuch that
there will be a sudden engagement. The L. General has declared himself very
galiantly to the Country people, touching the preservation of their lives and
estates from the Scots, which takes exceedingly amongst the Inhabitants The
Committee of estates have given out orders for raising of more forces to assist
Monro.

We hear that Genesis Munro with his Army is marched on this side Appleby,
preparing for an engagement, his forces consisting of about 8000. and it is
reported that 5000. more are joined with him from Scotland. Our Intelligence
says that he is resolved to fight Lie. Genesis Crumwel, and the rest of the
English Forces, resolving rather to die, then yield ground, unless upon
advantage.

Our forces desires to Engage, but could not pass by the way of Cumberland for
want of provision, that County and Westmerland being exhausted, besides the wet
weather and mountainous ways makes cariages and Artillery unpassable had there
been provi^; in those respects we passed by Skipton upon Craven, (...) so by
the East Coast, where we shall have better opportunity to meet our enemy, who
we are informed is past at Steinmore in the Bishopric of Durkard, where is
plenty of provision and Antil covenanters, who bid them weclome to as much
benefit, as Colchester got by entertaining the Royal party.

Upon Satterday last Munroes Army randezvouzed at Borough near Stainmore in the
Bishopric, who mustered near upon 8000. horse and foot, English, Scots and
Irish, well armed and resolute.

At which Randevouz we hear, that Munro declared himself at the head of each
Regiment, intimating His resolution to live and die with them, and to fight it
out to the last man.

Then he called a general council of all his Officers where it was agreed,
That the Scots and Irish s;hold be commanded back to ^erigh, a^^ the English
into the Bishopric, and that within two days they march up to the Randezvours
at Hexam Moor in Northumberland, which accordingly they did, where was a great
appearance, Sir Philip Musgrave joining with them with a strong party of horse:
the train of Artillery likewise came up, as also 20 piece of Ordnance: and its
generally reported here that 5000. more are coming out of Scotland, which if
true, they will make a very considerable Army. Diverse English resorts from
these parts to Munro, who are by their great Landlords encouraged, and promised
to sit rent-free for the future.

We march slowly, because we wait the coming of Col. Genesis Lambert with 4
Regiments whom we expect daily. Sir Will. Huddleston (a papist) has raised a
considerable party for the King, and besieged Cockermouth the Lancashire forces
are gone to suppress him.

Col. Fenwicks horse and some Dragoons went near Barwick, relieved the Holy
Island, stormed Fenham Castle near the Isle, in which was a Scots Garrison,
took diverse prisoners, put the rest to the sword: they summoned Hagerston
Garrison, but the Scots sallying out of Berwick forced them to retreat.

The Inhabitants in Northumberland have pint themselves into a posture of
defense, and upon the 6. of this instant made proclamation at Morpeth,
declaring their resolution to live and die with Lieutenant General Cromwell,
and to assist him with all that is near and dear unto them, for the vanquishing
of the perfidious Scot, who have and are now entering into the Confines of this
kingdom, who by their barbarous and inhumane actions, have apparently declared
their great aversness both to Religion, King, and Kingdom.

Newcastle 8. September. 1648.
FINIS.

