Right Reformation: OR, The Reformation of the CHURCH of the NEW TESTAMENT,
Represented in GOSPEL-LJGHT. In a Sermon preached to the Honorable House of
COMMONS, on Wednesday, November 25. 1646. Together with a REPLY to the chief
Contradictions of Master LOVE'S Sermon, preached the same day. All published
for the good of the Faithful, at their desire.

By WILLIAM DELL, Minister of the Gospel, attending on his Excellency Sir
THOMAS FAIRFAX.

John 7. 12. And there was much murmuring among the people concerning him; for
some said, He is a good man, others said nay, but He deceives the people. John
16. 3. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father, nor Me. Credo me Theologum esse Christianum, and in regno veritatis
vivere; ideo me debitorem esse, non modo affirmandae veritatis, sedetiam
asserendae, and defendendae, seu per sanguinem, seu per mortem. Luther. LONDON,
Printed by R. White, for Giles Calvert, at the Blackspred-Eagle, near the West
end of Paul's. 1646.

TO THE HONORABLE THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Honorable and Worthy,
AS the LORD represented these truths to you before, in the Ministry of the
Word; so now again, He offers them to your second consideration, in this
Printed Book; because he has a mind, you should take notice of them. And I
must needs say, it is the LORD's voice to you; and I hope he will move your
hearts, to regard it; though Satan has mightily bestirred himself, by casting
an ill Vizzard upon the Truth, to make you dislike it. But if you like CHRIST
the worse for a Face spit on and buffeted, you may want a SAVIOR: And if you
like the truth of CHRIST the worse for a scratcht Face, you may make your
dwelling place, with Error and Humane Doctrines, which are all one. Micaiah had
no sooner delivered the truth of GOD, but there was a False Prophet, to smite
him on the face: the LORD no sooner prepares Instruments to reveal his truth,
but Satan has his instruments, ready to turn the truth of GOD into a lie. And
this GOD suffers to be done, to exercise your skill and wisdom, that you might
learn, not to be offended at the truth with the World; but to receive and love
the truth, notwithstanding all the indignities and reproaches of men. When you
read what you have heard, you must needs acknowledge it to be the mind of
GOD, if you received the anointing of the Spirit: and the truth herein
contained, shall prevail with all that belong to GOD. For my part; I am not
careful touching the success of it, I can trust GOD with that, whose Word it
is. For, as the Doctrine of the World, has the weak power of the World to
carry on that; so the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, has the mighty power of GOD to
carry on that; and the power of GOD in the World shall as soon be made void, as
the true Doctrine of the Gospel, though called Error, Heresy, and Schism,
and have all the misguises of Hell put upon it. The truth you then heard
delivered, and may here read again, shall carry all opposition, and opposers
before it, and none shall be able to stand against it, that engage against it:
And of this, both your selves and this generation shall be Witnesses.

If any think that I gave too much power to CHRIST, in the Reforming of the
Church, his own Body; let them consider again, that too much cannot be given to
CHRIST in GODS kingdom, seeing he is all in all in it. Neither is that
exaltation the Gospel gives to CHRIST in this Business, any diminution to your
selves: neither by making CHRIST all in the Kingdom of GOD, are you made ever
the less, in the Kingdoms of this World. But what ever power the Word of GOD
has given you, I will deny you none of it; nay, I will be among the first,
that shall attribute it to you. And do desire, you would no more any of you be
displeased for attributing the Reformation of the Church, to CHRIST alone, then
the Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, or Glorification of it, to
CHRIST alone: The former being every whit, as great and glorious a work of
CHRIST, as the latter. I do most willingly allow you your Thrones in the
Kingdoms of this World, but only desire to reserve to Christ his own Throne in
the Kingdom of GOD.

There are those indeed that would lift you up to this Throne, not because they
would have you sit there, but place them there: they would ascribe to you, the
power only due to the Son of GOD, not because they would have you use it, but
would use it themselves; they would derive power from you, to do that, which
they say you cannot do: and the power they attribute to you in the things of
GOD, they say, is not well in your hands, but in theirs.

And here I would desire you, to take notice of the working of the Mystery of
Iniquity, from the Head, to the very Little-toes of the Man of Sin: At first
you know the Pope interested himself in the Emperor, and Powers of the World
(for his own advantage and support no doubt, rather then for theirs) after, the
Prelates successively, said to worldly Kings, Lend us your power, and we will
lend you ours; Let our spiritual power deal in temporal things, and your
temporal power shall deal in spiritual things: and still the Clergy-power
(which called it self spiritual) so linkt it self with the temporal, that the
power that was not of God, might be upheld, by the power that was of God; and
(having got this advantage) they cried, Destroy one, Destroy both; and so the
Prelates were wont to say, No Bishop, no King. And their successors in the
Kingdom of Antichrist still cry, No Minister, no Magistrate; and so still
mingle interests and powers with the civil Magistrate; that under the
Magistrate, the power of GOD, they might cunningly shroud that power that is
not of GOD. And thus they still, under the name of the Magistrate, seek
themselves, and the drawing of that power that is only his, from him to
themselves, to whom it does not belong: Being, in the mean time, really against
Magistracy, further then it is serviceable to their own ends. Whereas, we
reckon Magistracy, not less Magistracy, no less the Ordinance of GOD, though
we suffer under it, and by it.

This Clergie-Antichristian power where ever it is, will still sit upon the
power of the Nation; the power of Antichrist, so domineering over the powers of
the World, that none but the power of CHRIST can cast it off. That will still
be uppermost, what power soever is supreme. Besides all the experience of
former Ages (which is the greatest wonder in the World, that men consider not)
GOD gives you sparklings enough of it, in this Age; some preaching, That the
government of the Church (which they make outward and visible, and over men's
estates, bodies, and lives,) belongs not to King nor Parliament, but to the
Ministers and their Elders: and better it is, there should be no government at
all (say they) then not in their hands by whom it should be. And here lies the
Mystery of Iniquity in this, That they make the whole Kingdom a Church, and
then require a power, authority and jurisdiction in their Church-Kingdome,
which the Magistrate is not to deal withal, but themselves. Whereas we
acknowledge the whole power of the Kingdom, to belong to the Magistrate, and
only give unto CHRIST the power of his own Kingdom, which is not of the
World, but spiritual and heavenly.

And here also, fully to deliver my self from misapprehensions, I understand
not by the Church of CHRIST, any company of men whatsoever, who under the
notion of a Church or Saints, or any other title, may plead privilege or
exemption of their lives, liberties, or estates, from the power of the Civil
Magistrate; for that were to justify the Papal, Prelatical, or any other
government of a newer name, which under pretense of Ius Divinum, shall set up
and exercise an outward and visible power and jurisdiction, free and exempted
from the authority and power of the civil Magistrate; which I utterly both deny
and detest, as Antichristian.

And therefore, I humbly represent, how prejudicial this may prove to you in
the end, to suffer a Generation of men in the Kingdom, under the name either
of Church or Clergy, whose power, preferment, and interest is different and
excentricall from the power, welfare, and interest of the Kingdom; and what a
balance they may prove against the State, where they live, in turning and
tumultuous times, as they themselves know, so (I hope) you clearly perceive it,
as well as they. How they already dare lift up the Head against you, who sees
not? How do they manifest their discontents against you, in Pamphlets and
Pulpits, in their Sermons and Prayers, because you have not settled the
Government, they have studied out for you, as Ius Divinum, and the certain and
unchangeable mind of GOD; though they can neither make it out, to your selves,
nor to any body else, by the Word, that it is so. And how do they labor to
instill, into the people, their own discontents; persuading them, you have done
nothing at all, because you have not done all that ever they would have you do,
though you can see neither Scripture nor reason for it. And for this cause,
rendering you every where odious to the people. Many other things besides, do
they scramble up, and use against you, which they conceive may make for your
disadvantage, and dis-interest in the people: because they think, they shall
never get much higher, except they make you a little lower; for they must
(according to the law of Antichrist) set their feet on your power, to get up to
their own.

Some discoveries of this spirit you might see in Mr. Loves Sermon, telling you
before your faces, and before the people; That some called you a Mungrell
Parliament: Indeed the King (as I understand) called the Parliament at Oxford
so, but Mr. Love was the first (for ought I can learn) that ever named you so,
and I wish he may be the last, (but any Doctrine is Orthodox, out of a man's
mouth of his Order) farther threatening you with a discerning people, to look
into your actions, and to spy out your boundless privileges; as if you must
do justice, not out of the love of Righteousness, but out of fear of Mr. Loves
discerning people. Telling you also, The Clergy had done as much service for
you in their Pulpits, as your Regiments in the Field: that by this means he
might mind you, what they can do against you, as well as for you, if you be
not servants to their designs; for they that have heretofore been for you, can
(if they please) turn to others against you, who shall be more for themselves.
And in many other things flying out against your worthy Commanders in the Army,
upon suspicions of his own; and against the Articles at Oxford, etc. For it is
no proper Presbyterial Doctrine, that does not (at least) meddle with the
affairs of the State, which in time they may hopefully come to order. In these
and diverse other things, he took his full swinge, all of them (no doubt) deeply
appertaining to the mystery of the Gospel.

The other things, he spoke, to the disadvantage of the ignorant and weak, and
neither to the Truths disadvantage, nor mine, I shall clear in a short Reply,
set after the Discourse; and so shall trouble you no farther, with any such
stuff, but only with a smart expression, from one (it seems) of some note in
the Assembly, who said, If the Parliament approved Mr. Dells Sermon, it were no
blasphemy to say, They were no Parliament. So that it seems you shall be no
longer a Parliament then you approve, what the Assembly approves; but the
Kingdom hopes you are built upon a better foundation. And to him (who has
been so bold with you) I shall only crave leave to Reply in your presence: If
the Assembly (which I hope they will not) should condemn that Doctrine of the
Gospel for the substance of it, delivered then by Mr. Dell; it will be no
blasphemy to say, They are the enemies of the truth of Christ: And (I hope) the
last prop of Antichrist in the Kingdom.

For your selves, Honorable and Worthy, I beseech you consider, that GOD is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working; and that all power is given to
CHRIST, in Heaven and in Earth, that he might give free passage to the Gospel.
And therefore take heed, after GOD has blessed your Power and Forces in the
field, and subdued that Malignant power that was against you, and has given
you a little peace and quietness in the Kingdom; you do not now begin your
affairs with discountenancing, disrelishing, much less condemning, the
faithful and true Word of GOD, witnessed in the Scriptures, and confessed to by
the faithful and Martyrs of Christ, in all Ages; and with the setting off from
you, that Ministry, that has most of the Spirit in it, lest the Lord withdraw
his presence from you, and your latter end be not answerable to your beginnings.

It might be easily showed unto you, how many great and wise Kings and
Magistrates, acting according to humane wisdom and prudence, and despising or
neglecting the wisdom of the Word; have with all their own wisdom, prudence,
and designs, destroyed themselves, and their Kingdoms: For it is written, He
takes the wise in their own craftiness: And again, The Lord knows the
thoughts of men, that they are but vain.

And therefore renounce the wisdom of the world, with all its fleshly Counsels,
and cleave close to the true, faithful, and sincere Doctrine of the Gospel;
and then, though you have many enemies and Kingdoms against you, you shall not
be moved, but GOD will yet establish you, in all the shakings of the World, and
your Enemies shall be as a thing of naught. I shall no longer detain you, but
only desire this, in the behalf of the faithful, GODS peculiar portion in the
Kingdom, That you would not suffer us to be oppressed by our Adversaries, who
would use your power against us, not for you, but for themselves: neither would
suffer them, thus publicly and shamelessely to call us Sectaries and
Heretics, who do believe and profess the truth of the Gospel in sincerity and
simplicity of heart, according to what we received from GOD; but that you would
suffer, yea, procure us, to live quietly and safely under you, in the faith and
practice of the Gospel, we in all things obeying you, as becomes Christians.

The Remainder is, to assure you, That there is no man shall serve the State
more sincerely, according to his place and calling; nor in more faithfulness
and humility tender the Truth of GOD, either to your selves or the Kingdom (as
occasion serves) according to the measure of the gift of CHRIST; Then,

Your Servant in the Gospel, VV. DELL.

To the Reader.
CHRISTIAN READER,
THE Times we live in, are dangerous times; it is dangerous to conceal the
truth, and dangerous to publish the truth; if we publish the truth, God has
taught us, and we have heard and lea^n'd from the Father we fall into the hands
of men; if we conceal it, we fall into the hands of God. And therefore, in
this case, in a contrary choice to David, I reckon it much better, to fall into
the hands of men, then into the hands of God; seeing the wrath of men can but
reach the body; but the wrath of God, body and soul. I shall therefore
willingly confess Christ, amidst an adulterous and sinful generation, not
doubting but Christ will confess me, before his Father, and before his Angels.
And for the reproaches of men, it is best conquering them, as Luther was wont
to say, Silendo and contemnendo, by silence and contempt of them, seeing a man
may as easily restrain Satan himself, in his various workings, as stop the
mouths of his instruments. And therefore it is good for us Christians, to do
the work of God, without so much as taking notice of such men: and if sometimes
we are sensible of these things, because we are flesh, yet as we are
Christians, we are above them, in the Spirit, and see already in certain says
and hope, all evils and enemies under our feet: And therefore for Mr. Love, and
other men of the same mold and metal, I am resolved neither now nor hereafter,
to take them into any more consideration, then the business it self
necessarily requires: and where they may be omitted, without prejudice to the
truth, to let them quite alone: being every day, through the use of affliction
enabled to patience, and through patience brought to experience, and so to a
proportionable measure of hope: And this carries me above the shame of the
world, in the strength of the love of God.

For the Doctrine contained in this Discourse, thou shall not find it New
light (as some men slanderously affirm) but the ancient light, that sprange
forth in the first morning of the Gospel, but was since obscured, by the New
darkness of Antichrist, which these men love better then that old light, and
will by no means exchange the one for the other. But this light, that now after
a long night, breaks forth again, in some of its first glory, let these menset
their hearts at rest, for they shall never be able to obscure it again; and the
fire of the Spirit that GOD has kindled in the Kingdom, they shall never be
able to quench, with any fire either of Earth or Hell. And therefore we fear
them not, though they breathe forth threatenings now, and ere long, are like to
breathe forth blood: For by all their subtle and industrious actings, in the
end, they shall not work the truths ruin, but their own. And these, as well as
their forefathers, of the same race and lineage, in whose stead they are now
risen up, shall in due time become a reproach and a shame, and their name shall
be for a curse to all Gods chosen.

READER, It is my earnest desire, that the Lord would deliver thee from this
new form of the Mystery of Iniquity, which in every Age puts on a several
form, when the old one is discovered by the light of the Word. And in this
present Age, it is become, so exceeding cunning, and so furnished with all
deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness, under the form of Righteousness, that it
seems to be the last and subtilest work of Antichrist, that is now in hand; and
he that prevails in this encounter, has Antichrist under his feet, for ever:
but none are like to prevail here, but the Faithful and Elect alone.

And therefore hold fast that which thou have, that no man take thy Crown; and
consider Christ's encouragement to this work, in the following verse; [Him that
Rev. 3. 11, 12.
overcommeth, will I make a pillar in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out, and I will write upon him, the name of my God, and the name of the
City of my God, which is, New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from
my God, and I will write upon him, my New Name.]

Christian READER, I commit thee, and the Word now offered to thee, in this
Discourse, to God and his powerful blessing and wonderful working; Remaining,

Thine in the Difficult, and Despised Service of JESUS CHRIST in the Gospel, W.
DELL.

RIGHT REFORMATION. OR The Reformation of the Church of the New testament
represented in Gospel Light.
HEB. 9. 10. Until the time of Reformation.
THe natural man (says Paul, 1 Cor. 2.) knows not the things of the Spirit,
neither can he, for they are spiritually discerned. Now a man that is not born
of God and his Spirit, with all his parts, abilities, reason, wisdom,
prudence, learning, is but a natural man still, and so has no right knowledge
of the things of God and his Spirit.

And hence it has come to pass, that the things of God and his Spirit have
been so grossly and dangerously mistaken by the world, and the carnal Church.
For all the spiritual things of God they have understood carnally, and have
apprehended the whole Scriptures not according to Gods mind, but according to
their own; not according to the sense of the Spirit, but according to the sense
of the flesh. And thus was Antichrists kingdom Antichrists Kingdom set up by
the carnal understanding of the Scriptures.
first set up, and thus it has been kept up and continued; even by the carnal
understanding of the Scriptures. For they have understood the Church, the
kingdom of God in the world, carnally; the rock on which it is built, carnally;
the door of this Kingdom carnally; the laws of it carnally; the liberties of
it carnally; the power, authority, government, glory, Officers, etc. all
carnally. And to this very day, which of the things of God does not the carnal
Church understand carnally? Faith, hope, love, it understands carnally;
Redemption, adoption, justification, sanctification, glorification, union with
Christ, communion of the Spirit, access to the Father, together with Christ
the Head, and the Church the Body, in their joint unction and Officers, and all
other things, they understand carnally, and have a fleshly sense and
apprehension of them.

And as they understand all other things of Gods kingdom carnally, so also the
Reformation of it; and there are not greater The Reformation of the Church
understood carnally.
and grosser mistakes about any of the things of God, then about this: men
imagining the Reformation of the Church, which is altogether a spiritual and
heavenly kingdom, after the manner of the Reformation of worldly States and
Commonwealths, which only stands in outward things, and is brought to pass by
humane councels, and humane power.

Now because this is not only a gross, but a general error, in all sorts of
people, both of high and of low degree, I shall endeavor, at this time,
according to the good hand of God with me, to represent in some Gospel Light to
this Honorable and Christian Auditory the true Reformation of the Church of
the New Testament: and blessed is he who shall not be offended at it.

For this purpose I made choice of the words now read, Until the time of
Reformation.

For the better understanding of which, we must read the Context:

Ver. 9. The first tabernacle was a figure for the time then present, in which
were offered both gifts and sacrifices that could not make him that did the
service perfect as pertaining to the conscience.

V. 10. Which stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal
ordinances (it should be righteousnesses, or justifications of the flesh,
(...)) imposed on them, (...), until the time of Reformation.

In which words, the Apostle shows the imperfection of The imperfection of the
worship of the old Law.
the worship of the old Law, because it stood in outward rites, ceremonies,
duties, performances, and so could not make him that used them and was busied
in them, perfect as pertaining to his conscience; and therefore God did not
simply and absolutely impose these things on the Church, to continue for ever,
but only until the time, wherein all things were to be reformed, not only
evil things, but imperfect. And then all that outward Religion was to be
abolished.

Now if the law of Moses could not make men perfect, as No outward law can make
men perfect as pertaining to the conscience, and so the Gospel abolishes all
such outward laws imposed on conscience, as well now as heretofore.
pertaining to the Conscience, much less can any new laws invented now. And
if any such laws should be imposed on the people of God now, the Gospel has
the same strength in it self to make them void, as the former; and also the
same ground from them, because all such laws and ordinances devised by men,
cannot make them that obey and practice them perfect as pertaining to the
conscience: and therefore are all to be at an end, when the time of Reformation
comes.

Quest. Now if you ask me, when this time of Reformation was.

Ans. I answer: It was when Christ came; not a servant, as Moses, but the Son
out of the bosom of the Father, the great Prophet of the new Testament, whose
doctrine was not letter as Moses was, but Spirit and life: And now when Christ
the Minister of the new Testament, came with the ministration of the Spirit,
now was the time of Reformation.

In the time of the Law there were outward duties, and performances, and
ceremonies, and sacrifices, and strict laws to enjoin the observation of these
things, carrying along with them the severity of death: and yet notwitstanding
all this, there was no true Reformation; but under all that outward Religion
men were inwardly as corrupt and wicked as the very heathen: for all their
circumcision in the flesh, they were uncircumcised in heart; for all their
outward washing, they were inwardly unclean; for all their blood of bulls and
goats, their sins remained in their natures and consciences; for all their
strict forcing of men to the duties of the outward worship of God, the people
still remained far from God even in all those duties. So that notwithstanding
the outward worship of Moses law, the people remained inwardly corrupt, filthy,
and unclean, and without any true Reformation before Goa; till Christ, who was
God in the flesh, came with the ministration of the Spirit, and then indeed was
the time of Reformation. Until the time of Reformation.

The thing then the Spirit would have us take notice of in these words, is this,

That the time of the Gospel is the time of Reformation.

Whenever the Gospel is preached in the spirit and power of Doctr.
it, that is (...), the time of Reformation.

For our more orderly proceeding in this point, we will observe this Method.

1. Show what true Gospel-Reformation is, and how it is qualified; that so you
may the better distinguish it from Political and Ecclesiastical Reformation.
Now both these I join together, because the carnal Church has always
interested and mingled it self with the power of the world, as being able to
do nothing without it.

2. I will endeavor to show to whose hands the work of Gospel-Reformation is
committed.

3. By what means he to whose hands it is committed, brings it about.

4. The advantages of such a Reformation where it is wrought.

5. The Use.

The first General.
What true Gospel Reformation is, and how qualified.
1. What it is. It is the mortiying, destroying, and utter Gospel Reformation:
1. What it is.
abolishing out of the faithful and elect, all that sin, corruption, lust,
evil, that did flow in upon them through the fall of Adam. Or,

It is the taking away and destroying the body of sin, out of the faithful and
elect by the presence and operation of the righteousness of God, dwelling in
their hearts by faith. This is true Gospel Reformation, and besides this I know
no other. This the Evangelicall Prophet Isaiah describes, Chap. 1. 27. Zion
shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with righteousness.

Now Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, as he discovers, reproves,
condemns, and destroys sin, so he is called Judgment: Christ Judgment.
and thus is judgment to be understood in the Gospel sense; and not terribly,
as in the sense of the Law: and this Judgment shall at last break forth into
victory; that is, though Christ in us has to do with many strong corruptions
and lusts in the soul, yet at last he prevails against them all, and
Judgment breaks forth into Victory, because Christ, the Judgment of God in
the soul, must needs in the end prevail against every sin of man.

Again, Christ the Righteousness of God, as he makes us righteous Christ
Righteousness.
with his own righteousness, and makes us the righteousness of God in him, so
he is called Righteousness, not in himself only, but in us: he is the Lord
our Righteousness: and by this Judgment and Righteousness is Zion and her
converts redeemed and reformed. And so true Gospel reformation is the
destruction of sin out of the faithful, by the presence of righteousness.

And therefore you see how grossly they are mistaken who take Gospel Reformation
to be the making of certain Laws and Constitutions by the sacred power or
Clergy, for external conformity in outward duties of outward worship and
government, and to have these confirmed by civil sanction, and enforced upon
men by secular power; when in the mean time, all that inward corruption and sin
they brought with them into the world remains in their hearts and natures as it
did before. After this manner the old Prelates reformed, who were wont to say
to the Kings, We will study out the faith, and you shall maintain it: and the
faith they studied and brought to the Kings, the Kings must maintain, and not
question but that it was Jure Divino.

And thus you see in general what Gospel Reformation is, and that it is a
clear different thing from Civil-Ecclesiasticall Reformation.

2. Now in the next place let us see how this Gospel Reformation is qualified,
whereby the difference between this and the other will appear yet more clearly.

First then, it is a spiritual Reformation. For as the Kingdom Gospel
Reformation is 1. Spiritual.
of Christ is a spiritual Kingdom, so all the things that belong to it are
spiritual things; and so the Reformation of it. A carnal Reformation is not
suitable to a spiritual Kingdom. And spiritual it is, because it proceeds from
the Spirit, and stands in spiritual things, as you shall see more fully anon.

But now the Reformation of the Civil and Ecclesiastical State, is but a
carnal Reformation, wrought by the power of flesh and blood, and stands in
outward and fleshly things, as you shall presently see.

Secondly, It is an inward Reformation. For as the Kingdom 2. Inward.
of God is an inward Kingdom, (the kingdom of God is within you) so the
Reformation that belongs to it is an inward Reformation. This true Gospel
Reformation lays hold upon the heart, and soul, and inner man, and changes,
and alters, and renews, and reforms that; and when the heart is reformed, all
is reformed. And therefore this Gospel Reformation does not much busy and
trouble it self about outward forms, or external conformity, but only minds
the reforming of the heart, and when the heart is right with God, the outward
form cannot be amiss. And therefore says Christ touching the worship of the
New Testament, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth: but speaks not one word of any outward form. So that God
in this Gospel Reformation aims at nothing but the heart, according to the
tenor of the new covenant, Jer. 31. 33. This shall be the covenant that I will
make with them after those days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their
inward parts, and write it in their hearts: so that they shall not only have
the word of the letter in their books, but the living word of God in their
hearts: and God intending to reform the Church, begins with their hearts, and
intending to reform their hearts, puts his word there, and that living word put
into the heart reforms it indeed.

But now Civil-Ecclesiasticall Reformation is only outward, and busies st
self in reforming the outward man in outward things; and so is very
industrious and elaborate about outward forms, and outward orders, and outward
government, and outward confession, and outward practice, and thinks if these
be put into some handsom^nesse and conformity; they have brought about an
excellent Reformation: though the heart in the mean time remain as sinful,
vile, and corrupt as ever, and so altogether unreformed.

And so this Reformation is like that Reformation of the Scribes and Pharisees,
notorious hypocrites, who made clean only the outside of the cup or platter,
leaving them all filthy and unclean within: and whited over sepulchers, to make
them beautiful Matthew. 23. 25.
outwardly, when inwardly they were full of rottenness and corruption. So
Civill-Ecclesiasticall Reformation makes a man clean outwardly, with an outward
Confession of faith, when inwardly he is all filthy through unbelief; and
whites him over with a few handsome forms of worship, when inwardly he is full
of ignorance of God, and Atheism.

Obj. Now if any ask, But must there be no change of outward things in the
Reformation of the Gospel?

Answ. I answer, Yes; an outward change that flows from an inward: but not an
outward change without an inward; much less an outward change to enforce an
inward.

3. It is a through Reformation, for it reforms the whole man; 3. Thorows
it reforms not the soul only, but the body too, and the very spirit of the
mind: the spirit as it animates, and quickens, and acts the body, is called the
soul; as it is in it self, in its own nature and essence, so it is called
the spirit of the mind: and this Gospel Reformation reforms all; that is, both
inward and outward, and outward and inward man; yea, the inwardest of the
inward man; and not only the operations of the soul in the body, but of the
soul in its self.

But Civill-Ecclesiasticall Reformation reforms by halfs, it reaches the body,
and orders that, but attains not to the soul, much less to the spirit of the
mind.

Again, Gospel Reformation reforms sin wholly, as well as the man; it reforms
all sin whatsoever, I will turn my hand upon thee, (says God by this Gospel
Reformation) and will Isa. 1. 25.
purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin. It reforms a man
not only of outward sins, but of inward. It reforms him of those sins that
seldom come forth into the view of the world, as Atheism, ignorance of God,
pride, vainglory, self-seeking, hypocrisy, carnal mindedness, and all the
evil desires of the flesh, and of the mind. Yea, it does not only reform all
evil things in us, but all imperfect things (...) doing away imperfect things
by the coming of perfect things, doing away our own strength by the coming in
of Gods strength, and our own wisdom and righteousness, by the coming in of
Gods wisdom and righteousness.

But now Civill-Ecclesiasticall Reformation reforms sin by the halfs, as well as
the man; and so only reforms outward and gross sins, such as run into the eyes
of the world, which are the least by a thousand times of the evils that a man
has and acts; but the greatest part of sin it still leaves within as it was.

Fourthly, It is a powerful and mighty Reformation: It is wrought in a man by
the very power of God, even by the right 4. Powerful.
hand of his Righteousness. And so no sin, lust, corruption, though never so
mighty, is able to refist this work of God by the Gospel; but it makes the
whole body of sin, and the whole kingdom of the Devil fly in pieces before
it: The power of God in creating and redeeming the elect may as well be
resisted, as the power of God in reforming them: for it is a power above all
power, that God puts forth in this work, and so is not to be made void by any
creature. In every stroke of this work the power of the Lord God Almighty is
put forth, as every rightly reformed Christian knows. And if the love of God
had not put forth this power in the soul, a Christian had never been reformed,
no not from one sin.

Now the power of this Reformation eminently appears, in that it changes the
very natures of men; it finds them lions, it makes them lambs; it finds them
wolves, it makes them sheep; it finds them birds of prey, it makes them doves;
It finds them trees of the forest, it makes them apple trees: In a word, it
finds them flesh, it makes them spirit; it finds them sin, it makes them
righteousness. Mighty indeed is the power of this Reformation.

But now, as this Gospel Reformation is mighty, so Civill-Ecclesiasticall
Reformation is weak. for as the former has the power of God engaged in it, so
this later has only the power of man; and so can do no such works as the
former. I appeal to all that are spiritual, what heart or nature was ever
changed by this sort of Reformation? For there is that corruption in the heart
of every man, that is able to stand out against all the Reformation that all
the powers in the world can undertake. And so the Reformation managed by the
mightiest and severest powers of men is weak as water in this business of
changing natures; and can only change some outward forms and postures, and the
like, leaving in the mean time a man's nature the same it was before. It only
puts sheeps clothing upon men, which is easily done; but still leaves them
wolves underneath.

Fifthly, It is a constant Reformation; a Reformation which being once begun,
is never intermitted again till all be perfected. 5. Constant.
For as long a Gods nature dwells in ours, it will ever be reforming our nature
to it self, till it be altogether like it. As long as the Spirit of God dwells
in the flesh, it will still be reforming the flesh to the Spirit, till the
whole body of sin be destroyed, and the natural man be made spiritual. So
that the whole-time of this life that is lived in faith, that is, in union with
Christ, is a time of continual Reformation, and a Christian is daily washing,
cleansing, and purifying himself, till he purify himfelf even as Christ is
pure.

But now Civill-Ecclesiasticall Reformation at first makes a great noise and
tumult in the world, and after lies as still as a stone. For such Reformation
reforms States and Kingdoms to men's own profit, honor, power-advantages; and
so to themselves, rather then to Christ. And when men have once attained to
their own ends, their activity ceases.

Again, it brings men to certain outward orders and conformities, and then
runs round as in a mill, and goes no farther.

Again, It reforms for a time, and not constantly, because the outward power
being taken away, nature returns to its own course again. For
State-Ecclesiasticall Reformation only changes some outward works, leaving the
nature the self same that it was (as you have heard).

Now where the works are contrary to nature, nature by degrees returns to it
self again, and puts an end to those works; and so there is an end of that
Reformation.

And thus you see what Gospel-Reformation is, and how qualified, whereby you
see it clearly differenced from Civill-Ecclesiasticall Reformation.

And oh that that Prophecy might here be fulfilled, Isa. 32. 3. The eyes of
them that see shall not be dim, and the ears of them that hear shall hearken.

The second General.
To whose hand this work of Reformation is committed.
Now that is only to Jesus Christ, the great and only Magistrate Christ the
Reformer.
in the Kingdom of God; and who only is to do all that is done in the Church
of God: he is the Dominus fac totum (as they say).

If the Church be to be redeemed, Christ must redeem it; if it be to be
governed, Christ must govern it; if it be to be protected, Christ must protect
it; if it be to be saved, Christ must save it: All that is to be done in the
Church of God, Christ only is to do it; and so among other things to reform it;
that is, to wash it, sanctify it, purify it.

Christ then is the only Reformer of the Church of God. For, Note.
First, God has committed the care of the Churches Reformation 1. The care of
the Church given to Christ.
to Christ only, and to no body else: and this is a thousand times better for
the Church, then if he had committed it to all the Princes and Magistrates in
the world. All things are given to me of my Father, says Christ; and the
Church above all other things: Thine they were, and thou gave them me; thine
they were by election, and thou gave them me, that I might redeem them, and
reform them, and present them to thee again without spot. So that the Father
has committed the care of the Reformation of the Church to Christ.

And secondly, Christ has taken this care upon himself out 2. Christ takes it.
of obedience to his Father, and love to his Church.

1. Out of obedience to his Father: for he says, I came not to do 1. Out of
obedience.
my own will, but the will of him that sent me: and this is the will of him
that sent me, that of all that he has given me I should lose none. And so
Christ reforms all, that he might lose none, out of obedience to his Father.

2. Out of love to his Church he takes this care and charge on 2 Love.
him. For such is the love of Christ to the Church every where so gloriously
discovered in the Gospel, that he does not only give himself for us, to
redeem us; but also gives himself to us, to reform us. Christ dying for us, is
our Redemption; Christ dwelling and living in us, is our Reformation.

Thirdly, This work of Reformation is only suitable to, and 3 The work of
Reformation only suitable to Christ.
convenient for Christ the Head, as having so near and deer interest in the
Church his Body. And so he is full of love, and bowels, and tender compassions
to the Church: he will not deal roughly, ruggedly, and boistrously with the
saints; he will not grieve them, and vex them and oppress them, and crush
them in pieces: but he being their Head, will deal meekly and gently with them,
He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax. When he is
reforming the sins and corruptions of the faithful, he deals with them in the
very love and goodness of God, and will not put them to more sorrow then needs
must; and when he must needs put them to sorrow in the flesh (for flesh cannot
choose but mourn to part with it self utterly in this reformation) yet he is
present with the comforts of his Spirit, and when he has smitten them, is
ready to heal them, and to bind them up as soon as he has broken them. He
deals with every Christian in this reformation as tenderly as a man does with
one of his own members that is in grief and anguish; he regards and handles him
as his own body, as his own flesh. And so the reformation of Christ is
altogether for edification, and not at all for destruction: for it is his own
body he reforms, and so does it with the love of the Head.

But when strangers, whose the Church is not, set upon reforming it, what
havoc do they make of the Church of God? how do they wound, and threaten, and
punsh, and destroy it, and have no regard at all to the weak, infirm,
sorrowful saints, that are wrestling with many doubts, fears, agonies,
corruptions, temptaetions, till they are overtaken with very shadow of death?
how do they yersecute them that are already smitten, and grieve them more that
are already wounded?

And so you see that he only that has an interest in the Church as being the
Head of the Church, is only fit to reform it; whereas the reformation of
strangers has more cruelty in it then love, and more destruction then
edification.

Fourthly, Christ is only able for this work: for the Reformation 4. Christ
only able for the work of Reformation.
of the Church is as great a work as the Redemption of it: and he only that
could do the one, can do the other. Christ must die to redeem the Church, and
he must live to reform it: and so as the Government of the Church only lies
upon his shoulders who is the Head; so the Reformation of it only lies upon
his hands, and his hands only are sufficient for it. If all the Angels of
heaven should undertake the work of Reformation, they would sink under it; how
much more the powers of the world?

For, the taking away transgression for us, and from us, which is the only
Reformation of the new Testament, is a work agreeable to none but the Son of
God, as it is written, His name shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins: where you have both the Reformer, Christ; and the
Reformation, shall save his people from their sins: now he must needs be the
Righteousness of God that must save people from fin.

And he must needs be God in the flesh that must reform the flesh; none else
can do it.

To conclude this: None but the Power of God, and Wisdom of God, and the
Righteousness of God, which is Jesus Christ, can reform the Church, which is
the kingdom of God: and the power, wisdom, and righteousness of men have no
place at all here, except they will turn the Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness
of God out of his office; for so speaks the Spirit by the Prophet Isaiah, chapter
2. 17. The loftiness of men shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men
shall be made low, and the Lord alone all be exalted. Now what is the
loftiness and haughtiness of men, but the power, wisdom, and righteousness
of men? and all this, says the Lord, shall be bowed down and laid low; and the
Lord alone shall be exalted, that is, Christ alone, who is the Power, Wisdom,
and Righteousness of God; and that in the day of the Churches Reformation, as
well as in the day of the Churches Redemption. And thus you see that Christ is
the Reformer of the Church his Body, which is the City and Kingdom of God.

And therefore the Reformation of the Church is certain; for Christ will as
surely reform it, as he has redeemed it; and all that the Father h^th given
him he has redeemed, and all that he has redeemed he will reform, that he may
make them fit to present to God: That so all that the Son has received from
the Father, having redeemed and reformed them, he may give them back to the
Father again.

So that I doubt not of the Churches Reformation, because it is Christ's own
work, and he has under taken the doing of it. And as none of the powers of the
earth could help him to reform the Church; so none of the powers of hell shall
be able to hinder him, but as many as he has redeemed unto God by his blood,
in his due time he will reform them all by his Spirit, as belonging to his care
and charge. And therefore let us look to Christ for the reformation of his
Church, that is, of his faithful people: the rest of the world that lies in
wickedness, he lets remain in wickedness, as not belonging to his care and
charge. This Reformation is the work of Christ's care and love, and he being
faithful in this business, I am at rest and quiet, seeing Christ is as able for
the reformation of the Church, as for the redemption of it.

And therefore (Honorable and Beloved) I say to you touching this work of the
reformation of the spiritual temple of the New-Test. as God once said to David
touching the building of the material Temple of the Old Test. 1 King. 8. 18.
Where as it was in thine heart (said God) to build an house to my Name, thou
did well it was in thy heart. Nevertheless, thou shall not build the house,
but thy son that shall come out of thy loins he shall build an house unto my
Name. And elsewhere he renders the reason of it, why Dav. should not, and
Solomon should build this house, because, says he, thou have bin a man of war,
and have shed much blood: but Solomon, he shall live and flourish in eace, and
he shall do it.

So say I to you touching this work of Reformation; You did well in that it was
in your hearts to reform the kingdom of God, and the spiritual Church, which
is Christ's own dear body. Nevertheless you shall not reform it, for you have
been men of war; that is you have managed a great and mighty war against great
and mighty enemies, and have shed much blood; for the Lord has given you the
necks of your enemies, and has subdued them under you that rose up against
you, and you have trod them down as mire in the streets. And therefore you
shall not do this work, having been men of war; but Christ the Prince of
peace, he shall reform the Church of God: For this is not a work of men of war,
but of the Prince of peace, seeing this is not a work of humane might or
strength, but of the Spirit. So that you did well, that you thought to reform
the Church: but when you understand the Reformation of the Church is as great a
work as the Redemption of it, you will acknowledge the work is too great for
you, and that it belongs only unto Christ, seeing the Father has committed
the care of this work only to him; and he has taken this care and charge upon
himself, and it is only suitable to him, as being the Head of the Church: and
he only is able for it, as being the Son of God, and equal to God.

The third General.
By what means Christ brings this Reformation about.
And that is, by these two, and them only; to wit, the Word, and the Spirit.

The first means whereby Christ reforms the Church is the Word.

By this Christ does all, that ever he does in his Kingdom: 1. The Word.
by this he calls and rejects; by this he binds and loses; by this he
comforts and terrifies; by this he enlightens and makes blind; by this he kills
and quickens; by this he saves and damns; and all that ever he does in this
Kingdom he does by his word, and without this he does nothing of all that he
does. Christ does all in his Kingdom by the word only; but Antichrist does all
things without the word, even by the Decrees and Constitutions of men.

Now as Christ does all other things in the Church by the word, so he reforms
too: Now are ye clean through the word that I have spoken to you. All the
powers in the world cannot reform the Church as the word of God can do; for
this is quick and powerful, and sharper then a two-edged sword, piercing even
to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and
is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart, and does change, and
renew, and reform all.

and therefore Christ, when he comes to reform the Church, comes with no
worldly power or weapons, but only with the word in his mouth; yea, though God
set him King upon his holy hill of Sion, yet he reforms not by outward power,
but by preaching, saying, I will publish the decree whereof the Lord has said
unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And again, The Spirit
of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me to preach the Gospel. And
again, The Redeemer shall come to Sion: and then follows the Covenant of God
with the Redeemer, My word shall never depart out of thy mouth, Isa. 59. 10.
and in Psalm 45. the Church says by the Spirit to Christ, Ride on prosperously
on the word of truth, meekness, and righteousness, which is the word of the
Gospel.

And so Christ, when the time of Reformation was come, went up and down
preaching the word. And thus he brought to pass the glorious Reformation of
the New Testament, by preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and nothing else.

And when he was to leave the world, he sent his Disciples to carry on the
work of Reformation, as he himself had begun it, as he says, As my Father
sent me, so send I you; not with the power of the world, but with the power of
the word: and so he bid them go teach all Nations, and preach the Gospel to
every creature: and by teaching and preaching to the world, to reform the
world: and so accordingly they did Mark 16. ver. 20. They went forth and
preached every where, the Lord working with them. So that Christ sent them not
forth with any power of swords, or guns, or prisons to reform the world, or
with any power of States, or Armies: but sent forth poor, illiterate, mechanic
men, and only armed them with the power of the word; and behold what wonders
they wrought by that power alone: They turned the world upside down; they
changed the manners, customs, religion, worship, lives, and natures of men;
they carried all oppositions and difficulties before them; they won many in
most Kingdoms unto Christ, and brought them into willing subjection and
obedience to him: and all this they did (I say) not with any earthly or secular
power, but by the ministry of the Gospel alone, Christ's great and only
Instrument for the conquering, subduing, and reforming of the Nations. And so
the power appeared to be Gods only, and not the creatures.

And thus you see how the word is one means Christ uses for Reformation.

And this word only works a right Reformation: For this reforms truly and
indeed; all other power reforms but in appearance. So that there is no true
reformation of any thing but what is wrought by the word: but what ever evil
is reformed, and not by the power of the word, it is not truly reformed; it is
only reformed in the flesh, and not in the spirit: it is only suspended in the
outward operation of it, but the seed and nature of it still remains in the
heart, to grow up and work again, as opportunity serves. And therefore
whatever evil or corruption is reformed in thee, see it be reformed by the
power of the word: if the word has killed it in thee, it is killed indeed; if
not, it is alive in thee, though it seem to be dead. The outward power of the
world may set up an image of Reformation, but it is the word only can work
true Reformation.

And therefore let us learn to rely on the word for the Reformation of the
Church.

For this is much for the honor of the word (which God has magnified above
all his Name) when we can neglect the power of the world, and leave the whole
work of Reformation to the power, working, and efficacy of the word alone,
which is almighty, and able to bring off the heart from all things to God. As
on the contrary, it is a great dishonor to God and his word, when men dare not
rely on the word alone to reform the Church, though it be stronger then men
and Angels and all the creatures; but will needs be calling in the power of the
world, and rest and rely on that, for this work, as if the power of the word
were not sufficient. But let such men know, that if the power of the word, will
not reform men; all the power of the world will never do it. And therefore well
said Luther, Praedicare, annuntiare, scribers volo, neminem autem vi adigam, I
will preach and teach and write, but I will constrain no body.

Oh therefore that our civil and Ecclesiastical powers would so much honor
Christ's Word, as to trust the reformation of his Kingdom with it; and that as
it is sufficient to reform the Church, so you would be pleased to think it
sufficient; and thus shall you give Christ and his Word due honor, as well as
declare your own faith.

And if you would commit this work to the power of the word, to which only it
belongs, you should soon see what the Word would do. There is no such glorious
sight under heaven as to see the Word, in the spirit and power of it, come in
to an unreformed world, and to observe the changes and alterations it makes
there.

And thus you see that one means that Christ uses for the Reformation of his
Church, is the Word.

But here I must further declare to you that this Word by which Christ reforms
the Church, is not the Word of the Law; The Gospel Reformes.
for the Law made nothing perfect, but the Word of the Gospel; This, this, is
the only Word, that works Reformation.

For first,
1. This Word works faith; and therefore it is called the word of faith,
because faith comes by hearing of this Word, 1. Works faith.
Romans 10. ver. 8. and v. 17. Now as the Word works faith, so faith apprehends
the Word, even that Word that was with God and was God; this living and
eternal Word, dwells in our heart by faith, as the Apostle says, That Christ
may dwell in your hearts by faith: And this Word dwelling in us by faith,
changes us into its own likeness, as fire changes the Iron into its own
likeness, and takes us up into all its own virtues.

And so the word dwelling in the flesh, reforms the flesh, and it dwells in us
through faith, and faith is wrought by the Gospel.

So that the Word whereby Christ reforms, is not the Word without us, as the
Word of the Law is; but the Word within us, as it is written, The Word is nigh
thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; and this is the word of Faith: If
thou live under the Word many years, and if it come not into thy Heart, it will
never change thee, nor reform thee. And therefore the reforming Word is the
Word within us, and the Word within us is the Word of faith.

2. The Gospel reformes, because it does not only reveal 2. Communicates
Righteousness.
Christ's righteousness, as it is written, The righteousness of God is
revealed from faith to faith; but also it communicates it to us: And therefore
it is called the Word of righteousness, because it works righteousness. So
that Christ, the righteousness of God, is conveyed to us through this Word of
righteousness. And when the righteousness of God, revealed in the Gospel,
comes and dwells in us, what Reformation of sin does this work? all sin
perishes, at the rebuke of his countenance, for the righteousness of God will
endure no sin in us; And so the Gospel reformes by working righteousness in us.

3. The Gospel reformes, because it shows us Christ, and by 3. Shows Christ.
showing us him, it changes us into his Image: the more we see Christ in the
Gospel, the more are we made like unto him, that as we have born the Image of
the earthly, so we may bear the Image of the Heavenly Adam.

2. Yea the Gospel shows us God in Christ in all his glory, and 2.
changes us into that glory of God which is shown us; we all says Paul with
open face, beholding as in a glass (and this glass is the Gospel) the glory
of the Lord, are changed into the same Image from glory to glory, even as by
the Spirit of the Lord: so that the Gospel by showing us God, changing us into
the Image of God and God through the Gospel, arises on us, till his glory be
seen upon us.

And thus you see the grounds of the Gospels Reformation.

So that now the Word of the Gospel, is the only Reforming Word: and if there
be never so much preaching, if it be but Legal, it will reform no body aright;
because there can be no working Faith, nor communicating righteousness, nor
changing men into Gods Image, and so there can be no true Reformation.

And thus much for the first Means of Reformation which Christ uses, which is
the Word, and this Word the Gospel.

2. Means, the Spirit.
For the Spirit accompanies the Word in the Ministry of the The second means
Christ uses to reform the Chureh withal.
Gospel; and therefore the Gospel is called the Ministration of the Spirit,
that is, the Word and Spirit in union and operation. In the Law there was the
Letter without the Spirit, and so that could do nothing; but in the Gospel the
Word and the Spirit are always joined: and therefore says Christ, The words
that I speak are spirit and Life, that is, they come from the spirit and carry
spirit with them.

And this Spirit that is present in the word of the Gospel, and works in it,
and is given by it, reforms mightily; and therefore it is called the spirit of
judgment and burning: And the Lord looking to this time of reformation,
promised long before to pour out his Spirit upon all flesh, and so to reform
all flesh.

Now the Spirit poured forth upon the flesh, reforms it two ways.

1. By taking away all evils out of the flesh. 2. By changing the flesh into
its own likeness.
1. The Spirit poured forth upon the flesh, reforms it all by taking all evil
out of the flesh; As first, all Sin and Corruption; says Paul, If you mortify
the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit ye shall live; the deeds of the flesh are
not to be mortified by any power, but by the Spirit; all pride and envy and
lust and covetousness and carnal mindedness and all other evils of the flesh,
are reformed by the presence of the Spirit in it, and no other way.

2. The Spirit reforms not only all Sins in the Church, but 2. All errors.
all Errors, and Heresies, and false doctrines, as is evident by that of Paul 1
Cor. 1. 12. If any man, build upon this foundation gold, silver, precious
stones, wood, hay, stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest; for the day
shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the fire shall try
every man's work of what sort it is, etc,

So that a man may lay Christ for a foundation, and yet build wood, hay, and
stubble upon him, that is, humane doctrines and the inventions of men, and
false and wicked opinions.

2. The destruction of this hay, wood, and stubble, error, herefie, and humane
doctrines in the Church of God, that is, the people built on Christ, shall not
be by Laws of States, or Constitutions of Councels, but by the Holy Ghost which
is as fire.

The Spirit shall come into the Saints, and burn up all that corrupt and false
doctrine that will not endure the Spirit; and error shall never be destroyed, but
by the Spirit of truth. So that the Spirit reforms all error, as well as all
corruptions in the faithful.

2. The Spirit does not only reform the flesh by taking away all evil out of
it, whether corruptions or errors; but also it changes the flesh into its own
likeness: For the Spirit is as fire that changes every thing into its self;
and so does the Spirit in the flesh, make the flesh spiritual: like heavenly
fire it changes men into its own likeness, and makes them spiritual,
heavenly, holy, meek, good, loving, etc.

And thus the Spirit reforms indeed: When the Spirit is poured forth upon a
man, how wonderfully does it reform him? this works a change in him in
goodearnest, and no man is ever truly reformed, til he receive the Spirit.

And thus you see the means that Christ uses to work this Reformation, and
these are the only Means.

Object. Yea but I hope you will allow secular power too: Object.
May not the Spiritual Church of Christ be Reformed with worldly and secular
power.

Ans. I answer, by no means, and that for these Canses. Answ.


1. Forceable Reformation, is unbeseeming the Gospel* for 1. Unbeseeming the
Gospel.
the Gospel is the Gospel of peace and not of force and fury.
Civil-Ecclesiasticall reformation reforms by breathing out Though the truth
carry its evidence in it self, and the Word of God is greater then all the
testimonies of men; yet for their sakes that are weak, I have inserted the
judgments of some godly men (as I have accidentally met with them) who have
spoken of these things in the spirit; that so you may see the truth though it
has but few followers, yet it has some.

Melancton on Psalm. 110. v. 3. -- habebis populum, non coactum gladio, sed
verbo collectum, and laeto cord amplectentem evangelium, and te sponte
celebrantem. Discernit igitur ecclesiam ab imperiis mundanis, and externam
servitutem a cultibus cordis accensis voce evangelii and a spiritu sancto. --
Ag. Religio cogi non vult, doceri expetit. Immunitate non stabilitur, sed
evertitur. Polan.

-- This Charles to whom Leo gave the title of the most Christian King, was a
great conqueror, and overcame many Nations with the sword, and as the Turk
compels to his faith, so he compelled with Violence to the faith of Christ;
but alas the true faith of Christ whereunto the Holy Ghost draws men's hearts,
through preaching the Word of truth, he knew not, etc. Tindal. Fides sua sponte
non coacte agere vult. Luth. Christus non voluit^vi and igne cogere homines ad
fidem. Luth. Haereticos comburere, est contra voluntatem spiritus. Luth.

He has given in the Church the sword of the spirit to enforce with, and not
the sword of the Magistrate.

Prorsus diversa ratio est regni Christi and mundi. Mundani Magistratus quae
volunt imperant, and subditi coguntur obedientiam praestare. At in Regno
Christi, quod non est mundana, aut pontificia Dominatio, sed spirituale regnum,
nihil simile geritur, sed quivis alterius judex, and quilibet alteri subjectus
est. At tyranni and animicidae illi, nihil morantes vocem Christi, regnum meum
non est de hoc mundo, ex Ecclesia, Politiam civilem, seu potius pontificium
imperium constituerunt. ^uth.

-- Quare ipsam sedem Bestiae nego, nihil moratus sit ne bonus vel malus, qui
in ea se det. Seeds inquam quae sit super omnes seeds nulla est in Ecclesia
super terram jure divino, sed omnes sunt aequales, quia una fides, unum
baptisma; unus Christus, etc. Luth.

Where there is no worldly superiority over one another, there is no worldly
compulsion. of one another. In the natural body, there is no convocation of
many members to govern one, or of more members to govern fewer, but the foot
performs its office without being under the authoritative power of the hands,
yea each member performs its office aright, without being in subordination to
another, by the guidance of that head to which it is united, and of that Spirit
that dwells in it; each member having an immediate influence of the head upon it
self, though it may outwardly seem to be further from the head then another
member. And thus it is in Believers and Congregations.

-- Quid autem vi and coactione opus vobis est, qui hujusmodi certamen
decertatis, in quo cogi nemo debet? Ulrichus ab Hutten, to the Council of
Priests.

What need you the power of the Magistrate to defend the truth, who have so
many Scriptures to defend it? the truth of God being to be defended by the Word
of God, and not by the power of men. Idem.

I could produce many more Testimonies but these are sufficient to show; that I
am not alon in this point, against Forcible reformation; but have the Armory of
David, to defend it withal, on which there hang a thousand bucklers, all
shields of mighty men.


threatenings, punishments, prisons, fire, and death; but the Gospel by
preaching peace. And therefore it is most unbeseeming the gospel, to do any
thing rashly and violently, for the advancement thereof: for the gospel of
peace is not to be advanced by violence; and therefore violent Reformers live
in contradiction to the Gospel of Peace, and cannot be truly reckoned
Christians, but enemies to Christianity, since christianity does all by the
power of the Anointing, but Anti-christianity does all by the power of the
world.

2. Forceable Reformation is unsuitable to Christ's Kingdom; 2. Unsuitable to
Christ's Kingdom.
For Christ's Kingdom stands in the Spirit, and the force of flesh and blood can
contribute nothing to this.

2. Again the faithful, the Subjects of this Kingdom, are a Spiritual people,
and so they are without the reach of any outward force; You may as well go about
to bring the Angels of heaven under an outward and secular power, as the
faithful, who being born of the Spirit, are more spiritual then they. And what
has flesh and blood to do with them that are born of the Spirit, in the things
of the Spirit? And therefore touching this Kingdom which is spiritual, and
beyond not only the power, but the cognizance of the world, God has said,
There shall be none to kill nor hurt in all my holy mountain. Isa. 11. 9.
And again Violence shall no more he heard in thy streets, wasting nor
destruction within thy borders.

3. As they are a spiritual people, so also a willing people; Isai. 60. 18.
and what needs outward power to force a people made willing 3. A willing
people. Psalm. 110. 3.
by the Spirit? Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power: The very
day of Christ's power, is not to force men against their wills, but to make them
willing. The Spirit of God that brings them to this Kingdom, makes them willing
to obey God there, and gives them pleasure in that obedience, by shedding
abroad the love of God in their hearts. They that are not a willing people,
belong not to Christ's Kingdom, but to the world.

3. By this Forceable Reformation, human Institution is set 3. Humane
institution is set up.
up; for the power of the world reforms by the prudence of the world: and men
never use human power in the Church, but they first make human laws in it; and
human laws are the rule of human power. And so by this means, the authority of
men, is made to have power, not in the things of men, but in the things of God:
which is the great dishonor of God and his Authority.

4. It brings men into blind obedience and makes them obey what is commanded on
pain of punishment, though they 4. It brings men into blind obedience.
know not whether it be right or wrong; with the Word, or against the Word: So
that a man shall say, that which I do I am constrained to do, and therefore I do
it because I am constrained.

I read in Frithes Answer to the Bishop of Rochester, that a youth being
present at his fathers burning, the officers seeing him, resolved to examine
him also, to try if they might find him a Sectary or an Heretic: but the youth
dismayed at the sad fight of his fathers death, and fearing the like end
himself, being asked of one of them, how he believed? Answered, Sir I believe
even as it pleases you. And so the more outward and violent power is used upon
men, the more of this kind of faith and obedience you shall have: When men shall
see prisons, and banishments, and loss of goods, and death, walking up and
down the Kingdom for the Reformation of the Church, you shall at last have men
say, Sirs, we will believe and do, even as it pleases you: We will believe as
the State pleases, or we will believe as the Counsel pleases; And let them
make what confession they will, we had rather believe them, then endure them.

And thus by fear and punishment may men be brought to say and do that which
they neither believe nor understand: and how acceptable such popish faith and
obedience is unto God, all spiritual Christians know, and every man's
conscience, me thinks, should be convinced.

5. It makes men Hypocrites and not Saints; for it forces 5. It makes
Hypocrites.
the body, and leaves the heart as it was; for the heart cannot be forced by
outward power, but by the Inward efficacy of the truth* Now the hearts of men
being corrupt, what are all outward duties, they are forced to, but so much
Hypocrisy? So that forceable Reformation makes only Hypocrites and gilded
Sepulchers, putting a form of godliness, upon the outward man, when there is
no power of godliness in the innerman, but a power of ungodliness.

That Reformation with which the uncleanesse of the heart stands, is none of
Christ's Reformation.

What is the Reformation of the outward man, when the heart is full of Atheism,
Ignorance of God, Adultery, Pride, Murder, etc. and all the corruptions of
Nature? Call you this a Reformation of the Church of Christ? This Reformation
makes none Saints, but all Hypocrites, forcing men's actions contrary to their
natures.

6. It causes disturbances and tumults in the world; when 6. Causes
Disturbances.
men are forced by outward power to act against their inward principles in the
things of God, what disturbances and tumults this has bred in States and
Kingdoms who knows not? So that they that lay hold on the power of men, and go
about to Reform hearts and consciences, by outward violence, are never the
cause of Reformation, but always of tumult: And this renders the cause of the
Gospel grievous and odious to the world, rather then c^mmends it. And
therefore, let all that love the Gospel of Christ, abstain from outward
violence; for they that use the sword in this kind, shall in the end perish by
the sword.

A man when he sins not against the State, may justly stand for his
State-freedom; and to deprive a man of his State-Liberties for the Kingdom of
Christ's sake, as it causes disturbances in the world, so let any man show me
any such thing in the Gospel.

7. Christ uses no such outward force himself, for he is 7. Christ uses no
such outward force.
meek and lowly in Spirit; and not boisterous and furious in the flesh. And it
was foretold of him he should not strive, nor cry, nor lift up his voice in the
streets to call in outward and secular aid, power. He never used the power of
the world, but did all by the power of the Word; even his very punishments and
distructions, he executes by the Word; He shall smite the earth with the rod of
his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked: And
Antichrist himself, his greatest Enemy, he destroys by the Spirit of his
mouth, and the brightness of his coming.

2. Neither did Christ command his Apostles to use any such outward power, but
he sent his Disciples to preach, and bid 2. Neither commanded his Apostles.
them say into what house soever they entered, Peace be to this house; and if
men would not receive peace and the doctrine of peace, not to force them, but
to depart thence, and to shake off the dust of their feet as a witness against
them, that they had been there, according to the will of Christ and the Father,
and offered them mercy and salvation, which they refused. And this is all that
the Ministers of the Gospel can do to any that refuse their doctrine, and not
to go to the secular Magistrate to ask power to punish them, or imprison them,
or sell their goods, as is now practiced in some parts of the Kingdom, even upon
the Saints: and if men be wicked, is it not misery enough for them to refuse
eternal life, except also they inflict on them Temporal death? Is it not misery
enough for men to refuse the good things of heaven, except they also deprive
them of the good things of this present life? and yet as Luther said of the
Clergy, Quando non invocat brachium seculare? and morte utraque terrat mundum:
When does it not call upon the secular power, and terrifies the world with both
deaths? Surely Christ and the Word approved not these ways. For, Math. 18.
Christ imposes no other punishment on them, that would not hear the Church,
then that he should be reckoned as a heathen; and Paul, Titus 3. Teaches us
after once and twice admonition to avoid an Heretic, but not to imprison him,
or kill him, or banish him: and again they that do these things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God; and again, he that believer not shall be damned;
but not one word of outward or corporal punishment in all the Gospel.

3. Yea Christ reproves his Disciples, for discovering such a spirit of
tyranny as to punish men for not receiving him, Luke 9. when the Apostles of a
Prelatical and Antichristian Spirit, in that particular, desired fire to come
down from heaven upon them, that would not receive him, Christ did severely
rebuke them, saying, Ye know not of what spirit ye are, not of Christ's Spirit,
which is meek, but of Satan's, who was a murderer from the beginning, and of
Antichrists, his first begotten in the world: and he adds, the Son of man came
not to destroy men's lives, but to save them; and therefore to go about to turn
the Gospel, not to save men's lives, but to destroy them, and so to change
Christ himself from a Savior into a Destroyer, this is Antichrist Triumphant.
All these things show that worldly power has no place at all in the
Reformation of the Gospel.



Now I should have proceeded here to answer some Objections, as namely:

1. That of Luke 14. compel them te come in: this, I forgetting, 1. Object.
named not.

May a Christian then live as he list?

No by no means; for he has the Word and Spirit in him, to 2. Object. Answ.
keep him from living as he list; and he knows that no man in Gods Kingdom may
live as he wills, but as God wills.

But would you have no Law? 3, b ject. Answ.


No Laws in Gods Kingdom, but Gods Laws; and these are a thausand times better
then all the Laws of men: and they are these three:

The Law of a new nature. The Law of the spirit of life that is in Christ. The
Law of love.
But would you have no Government? 4. Object. Answ.


Yes, but the government of Christ the Head, and the Holy Ghost the Spirit, in
and over the Church the body. They that would govern the faithful the Members
of Christ's own body, make themselves the head of those Members; and so
Antichrist may as well be found in a combination of men, as in one single person.

But would you have no Order?

Yes, the best that is; even such an Order as is in the body of 5. Obj. Answ.
Christ; where every Member is placed by Christ, and none by itself; The Order
of the spiritual Church is a spiritual Order, and not a carnal.

But would you have sin suffered?

No, but more truly and thoroughly destroyed, then any power 6. Obj. Ans.
of the world can destroy it; even by the Spirit of judgment and burning.

But would you have sinners suffered?

No, but punished more severely, then any powers of the world 7. Obj. Answ*
can punish them; For he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and
with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked.

And as for those that are outwardly wicked, the Magistrate is to keep them in
order, for the quiet of the State, he having power over their persons, estates,
and lives.

I should also have proceeded to the next thing* The advantages of such a
Gospel Reformation where it is wrought; together with the Uses: but because I
would not be over long, I pass by these things, and so proceed no farther in
this Discourse.

But being brought hither by an unexpected providence, I shall crave liberty to
speak a few words to you in the behalf of two Kingdoms, that is, this Kingdom
and Gods.

1. That which I have to request of you for this Kingdom, is, that you would
regard the oppression of the poor, and the sighing of the needy: Never was
there more injustice and oppession in the Nation then now; I have seen many
oppressed and crushed, and none to help them. I beseech you consider this with
all your hearts, for many who derive power from you are great appressors. And
therefore I require you in the name of God, to discharge the trust that God
has put into your hands; and so to defend the poor and fatherless, to do
justice to the afflicted and needy, to deliver the poor and needy, and to rid
them out of the hands of the wicked; This is your business, discharge your
duty: if you will not, then hear what the Lord says, Psa. 12. 5. for the
oppression of the poor; for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise says the
Lord: and Gods rising in this case, would prove your ruin. If you will not do
Gods work in the Kingdom which he has called you too, he will do it hnmself,
without you; as it is written, He shall deliver the needy when he cries, the
Psalm. 72. 12.
poor also; and he that has no helper; he shall save their souls from deceit
and violence; the common evils of the times. And this is all that I have to say
for this Kingdom.

2. I have a few more things to say touching Gods Kingdom; 2. Gods Kingdom.
and the first is this.

1. That as Christ's Kingdom, and the Kingdoms of the world are distinct, So you
would be pleased to keep them so; not mingle them together your selves, nor
suffer others to do it, to the great prejudice and disturbance of both.

2. That you would be pleased to think that Christ's Kingdom (which is not of
this world) has sufficient power in it self to manage all the affairs of it,
without standing in need of any aid or help from the world; Seeing the power of
man is of no place or use in the Kingdom of God, which is not a Temporal, or an
Ecclesiastical Dominion, but a Spiritual.

3. That you would suffer, the little stone of Christ's Kingdom to be hewn out
of the Mountain of the Roman Monarchy, whereof this Kingdom is a part, without
hands, even by the power and efficacy of the word and spirit; seeing the hands
of men cannot help but hinder this work which is to be done without hands: And
that your might, and your power would please to let God do this work of his
without might and without power, and by his Spirit only.

4. That you would be pleased to suffer the assemblings of the Saints, both
publicly and privately, as occosion serves, seeing this can be no prejudice to
the State, but a great advantage; in as much as they meet peaceably and make no
tumults, and in their assembling pray for the peace and welfare of this divided
and distracted Kingdom. And also, that you take heed of scattering those
Churches, that meet in the Name and Spirit of Jesus Christ, (which are Christ's
own gathering together, least Christ so scatter you abroad that you never be
gathered together again.

5. That you take heed you do nothing to the prejudice of the faithful, Gods
own people; as he has warned you by the Spirit, saying, Touch not mine
anointed and do my prophets no harm; This place has been miserably mistaken:
for the Kings of the earth and the Clergy have shared it between themselves,
whereas indeed it belongs to neither, for Gods anointed are the faithful that
are anointed with the Spirit, the oil of God, and so are anointed as Christ
was anointed. And these anointed ones, are the Lords Prophets, and the Lord
has no Prophets but such as are anointed with the Spirit. Thus Christ was made
the Lords Prophet, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, for he has anointed me
to preach the Gospel; and thus are all his Brethren made Prophets; being
fellows with him in his Unction. And therefore take heed how you meddle with
the Lords anointed ones, and with the Lords Prophets; for as it is said, He
suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he even reproved Kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not, etc. So the Lord has still the same care of the same
people, and will suffer no man to do them wrong, but will reprove Kings and
Parliaments, and Kingdoms, and Cities, and Counties, and Committees, he will
reproove them all for their sakes, and say, Touth not mine anointed and do my
Prophets no harm: for they rhat are anointed with the Spirit are the flesh of
Christ, and the Prophets of God, and therefore touch them and harm them a^ your
own peril. It grieves me to see the rest of the Kingdom touching these
anointed ones of God, and doing harm to these his Prophets, abusing, and
spoiling and imprisoning them; It would gr^^ve me much more if I should see you
doing the same, for this would bring you as well as the Kingdom under Gods own
reproof, and the reproof of God who can endure?

Sixthly, and lastly, Takeheed you do not hinder the free passage of the
Gospel. When God has put his Spirit into the hearts of men, take heed how you
resist the Word in those men's mouths; for the Word of God in the meanest
instrument, can never be resisted, but will carry all before it, The Honor,
Power, Dignity, Authority, Nobility, Magistracy, of the Kingdom, if they
should once stand up to hinder the Word of God, the Word of God would carry
them all before it.

And therefore it grieves me to see how the City, Country, Country Towns,
Villages, do all rise up for the most part against the ministration of the
Spirit, for this is a certain sign of the undoing of them all: God will suffer
and endure any sin long but only the contempt and opposition of the Gospel:
but when men once rise up against the Gospel in the Spirit and Power of it,
they are sure to be undone by it, and to be shattered all in pieces, for this
brings swift Vengeance.

And therefore when I see the generality of the people of of all sorts, rise up
against the Ministration of the Spirit (which God has now in these days of
ours, set up even in every County for salvation to his people, but for a stone
of stumbling and a rock of offense to the rest) I am then exceedingly
distressed and pained at the very heart for thee O England, and for all thy
Cities, and Towns, and inhabitants; for thou that dashest against the Spirit in
the Gospel, how shall thou be dashed in pieces thy self, and there shall be
no healing for thee?

I could hope for Peace again and good days* suddenly in this Kingdom but for
this sin of the contempt and opposing the Gospel, and this makes my hopes, even
at an end; and the day of my fear, is come forth upon me.

But oh you honorable and beloved Christians, let not your soul enter into
those men's secrets, neither yet walk in their open and public ways; for ruin
and destruction are in their paths, and the way of peace they shall never
knnw, seeing God is about to enter into controversy withal flesh, for their
rising up against the Ministration of the Spirit. And therefore be Wise here I
beseech you, that in the shattering of the Nation (if there be no remedy) you
may be kept together as a blessed remnant and a hopeful seed of the following
geneation.

To Conclude.
Honorable and Worthy, we will be willingly contented, to do and suffer all
things with you; we will cheerfully run through honor and dishonor with you;
fame and infamy; gain and loss, trouble and quietness, War and Peace, life,
and death; and do desire to reserve nothing to our selves, Nisi unicum verbum
domini, but only the Word of God, in its own purity and liberty, to preach it,
and to publish it, and to profess it, and practice it for the glory of God and
his only begotten Son and for the good of his Kingdom and this Kingdom.

And thus much unto you from the Lord.
A REPLY To Mr. LOVE'S Contradictions.
Sir,
BEcause I would not wrong you in any measure in what you said, I went to one
who took your Notes in shorthand; and he gave me what I here set down for
yours, which I well remember are the things you then spoke, for the substance
of them: To which I give you this following Reply.

Mr. LOVE.
Cast your eyes upon the begun Reformation, though peradventure cried down with
Confidence, No such thing as the Reformation of the Church, etc.

Reply.
I taught indeed, That the Kingdom of Christ is a spiritual kingdom, and the
Reformation of it is answerable; and that Christ himself, who is the Lord, the
Spirit, is the Reformer of this spiritual kingdom by his word and Spirit: but
little thought that any man would have been so blind or worse, as to have
affirmed, the preaching of this spiritual and glorious Reformation, was to
preach against all reformation. Is the Reformation of Jesus Christ, which he
works by his word and Spirit in all the faithful, and in all the Churches of
the saints no Reformation at all? How durst you affirm this Mr. Love?

Mr. LOVE.
As if all were encompassed within the narrow heart of man.

Reply.
Yet I said plainly enough, When the heart is reformed, all is reformed; and
Gospel Reformation, though it begins in the inward man, ends in the outward.
Did you Sir, accuse me rightly then or no?

Mr. LOVE.
If this be so, Race out the first Article of the Covenant.

Reply.
I had rather the whole Covenant were raced out, then the least truth contained
in the word of God: Though I like the Covenant well enough, according to the
true intention of it.

Again, if the thing be truly considered, it will appear, that you are more
against the Covenant then I: for the Covenant engages us to reform according to
the word of God; but you (it seems) would reform without, yea against the word,
with outward and secular power; which you will not suffer in the Magistrates
hands neither, but will needs have it in your own.

Mr. LOVE.
If this Doctrine be true, That Gospel Reformation be only spiritual, then I
wonder how Paul was so out, who said, When I come I will set all things in
order? surely that was a Church Order.

Reply.
But pray, What outward or secular power had Paul, (who suffered not only much
from the world, but most from the false Apostles) to set the Church in order?
Did Paul (think you) use any worldly power to set the Church in order; or only
the power of the word and spirit? But these men think, if the Church be to be
set in order by the word and spirit only (which were sufficient in Paul's time)
it is like to be out of order for them.

Mr. LOVE.
To cry down all kind of Government under heartgovernment; and all Reformation
as carnal, because you have the Civil Magistrates hand to it, is against that
place of Paul, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Pray for Kings, and all that are in authority; that
we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.

Reply.
Well argued now indeed. Babes and sucklings, you shall come forth and answer
this Master i^ Israel.

The sense of this place is evidently this; That Christians should pray for
Kings and Governors, that God would so incline their hearts, that whilst we
live in godliness under them, they would suffer us to live in peace; and not
make us fare the worse in the world, for our interest in the kingdom of God.
And what one drop can Mr. Love squeeze out of this Scripture to cool the tip of
his tongue? For the meaning is not, That the Magistrate should enforce
godliness; but protect us in godliness.

Mr. LOVE.
To justle out the Magistrates power, is to justle out the first Article of the
Covenant; (What again?) and they that justle out that, will justle out you
shortly.

Reply.
Good Sir, Ascribe not your own work to ^^r hands. The justling out the
Magistrate, have you not made it the chief part of your business now for a
long while together? and are you not still so diligently acting it every day,
that now you think your work is in some forwardness, and you are pretty well
able to deal with him? And now because you would not be mistrusted your selves,
you publicly slander us with it. We see clearly through all your slender
disguises.

Mr. LOVE.
Ezra was of another mind, Ezra 7. 26. Whosoever will not do the Law of thy
God, and the Law of thy King, let Judgment be executed speedily upon him,
whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or
to imprisonment.

Reply.
Well, Sir, will you stand to this place, and shall this end the controversy?
Pray mark then: This was part of the Decree of Artaxerxes, a King of the
Nations, touching the Jews, for the rebuilding of the material Temple; That
they should have liberty to do it, and not be molested in the doing of it, but
should have what assistance the State could afford. The Decree was this: Ezra
7. 13. I make a Decree, That all they of the people of Israel, and of the
Priests and Levites in any Realm, which are minded of their own free will, to
go up to Jerusalem, go with thee; For as much as thou art sent of the King and
his seven Counselors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to
the Law of thy God that is in thy hand, etc. And ver. 21. ^ Artaxerxes the King
do make a Decree to all the Treasurers beyond the River, That whatsoever Ezra
the Priest shall require of you, it be done speedily unto two hundred Talents
of silver. And then, ver. 26. follows; Whoever will not do the law of thy God,
and the law of thy King, Let him be so and so punished, as you have heard.

1. Here then you see, That Artaxerxes made no decree to enforce all the Jews
to go build; but as the Text says, Those that were minded of their own free
will. See you not here, that even a King of the Nations thought it unreasonable
to force any man to go to build Gods material house, against his will.

2. And secondly, you see, How he gave them no laws how to build, but
permitted them to do it, according to the law of their God that was in their
hands.

3. And thirdly, you see, How he deterred any from hindering them from this
work, upon pain of death, banishment, etc.

Do you not perceive now by this time, how you then deceived the people, by
giving them the letter of the Word, without the true sense of it, as Satan
dealt with Christ in his temptations? Such Sermons bring an Hour of Temptation
upon the people.

This then is the force of the place:

1. First, That the Magistrate may make a Decree, for all that are minded of
their own free will, to build the Spiritual Temple of Jesus Christ, and to
gather up into a Communion of Saints.

2. Secondly, That he ought to permit this to be done, according to the law of
our God that is in our hands, or rather according to the law of the Spirit of
life* that is in our Hearts; and not to enforce upon us any Clergy
constitutions.

3. And thirdly, That he may deter you, and the rest of the Kingdom that are
of the like mind, from resisting and bindering this work, which has its
authority from Heaven. That so the Saints (the Kingdom of Christ) may pray for
the Magistrate, and Christ (the King of Saints) may bless the Magistrate, and
make him prosperous. And pray now what is all this to your purpose?

Mr. LOVE.
If it was good in your Hearts to think to Reform; its much better to do it.

Reply.
Does not GOD say, It was well, that David thought to build a Temple; and yet
for all that, he should not build it? And do you now dare to blame this very
thing? Cannot the Scripture it self be quiet for you?

Mr. LOVE.
You need not fear losing a Party.

Reply.
Yea, but how if God be in that Party? What then, sir? Is it not better keeping
a little, poor, despised Party, that has GOD in it; then a great and numerous
Party, without God?

Again, Did you preach before the Parliament, to make or cast off parties? Does
this appertain to the mystery of Christ and the Father? Reader, These men are
so over-busie in making, and marring Parties, that I much fear they will, in
the end, throw the Kingdom into more misery and blood than their Predecessors
have done.

Mr. LOVE.
Reformation is no forcing Conscience, it meddles not with Conscience, it
restrains Practice: If a Jesuit come from Rome to kill a great Person, he does
it in Conscience, but I meddle not with his Conscience, I restrain his Practice.

Reply.
Does not your Reformation meddle with Conscience, Mr. LOVE? Did you speak this
of your self, at random, as the rest, or is this the sense of your Brethren?
And does your Reformation only restrain outward Practice? Then to tie up mad
Dogs, and Bears, and Tigers, is your most excellent Reformation. You that will
not meddle with the Consciences of men, it is no wonder you are making so many
iron yoaks for their necks, and so many snares and fetters to hamper the
outward man, the proper subject (it seems) of your Reformation. And thus taking
upon your selves the Reformation of the outward man, you do indeed put the
Magistrates work to an end; And then the Assembly may serve, in the place of
the House of Commons; and Sion-Colledge in the place of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Counsel. See you not yet, Oh ye Powers of the World, how
the Ecclesiastical Powers would ^a^ you out?

And for your Jesuit, Did you ever hear me say or hint, That the Magistrate
should not restrain and punish outward wickedness? I wish therefore you would
unriddle your selves, and tell truly, if you dare, how far you would limit the
Magistrate, and enlarge your selves upon the outward man.

But certainly, if the Magistrates power has under it the whole outward man,
as indeed it has: And if Christ's power have under it, the whole inward man, as
indeed it has; what place then (I pray) is there left for your Ecclesiastical
power, when the outward and the inward man are disposed of before? Sure, when
the Magistrate takes his own proper power to himself, and Christ his own proper
power to himself; your power will be found to have no place, either in the
Worlds Kingdom, or GODS; but you must find out some third place for it; for I
will assign you none, left you prove too angry.

Mr. LOVE.
The Church of Thyatira might think she had new light, and yet God says, I
have a few things against thee, because thou suffer the woman Jezabel, etc.

Reply.
Truly Sir, when God shall make you a New Creature, you will be glad of New
light; for behold (says God) I make all things New, even the light as well as
the creature: the Old light will serve the Old man well enough.

And for the Spirits reproving the Angel of the Church, for suffering false and
erroneous Teachers; does this prove as you undertake that the Angel of the
Church had or exercised, civil and secular power in the Church of Christ? You
err not understanding the Scriptures; for then any thing is suffered in the
Church, when it is not reproved and condemned by the Word; the Word of truth,
taught and published in the Church, will suffer no error there; but you
understand this suffering, of outward and violent power. Do you not remember,
that I said at the beginning, that the carnal Church understands the whole
Scriptures carnally?

Mr. LOVE.
And now to hear such Sermons preached, and Books printed; if it had been at
Amsterdam, it had been no marveil: But at London, and at Westminster, etc.

Reply.
Truly, such a Sermon as mine might have been preached at Amsterdam, or any
where else where the Gospel has free passage: and such a Sermon as yours might
have been preached at Rome, or any where else where the precious Word of GOD is
under restraint, and Ecclesiastical power exalts it self, both above the power
of the Word, and the power of the Nation. Your Sermon savours as ill to the
Faithful, as mine to the World.

Many other weak, passionate, inconsiderate, erroneous things, fell from Mr.
LOVE, neither worth the troubling the Reader with, nor my self; and so they may
perish and rot in their own grave (if they will) for they shall never receive a
Resurrection from me.

And now at the close of all, I desire the Reader to observe the difference
between our Enemies and our selves, in this great point of Authority and
Jurisdiction, which is this: That We exalt Jesus Christ alone in the spiritual
Church; and attribute to the Magistrate, his full power in the world; But they
exalt themselves in Christ's stead, in the Church; and set under their feet the
Magistrates power in the world. And this is so evident, that there is some
apcration of Satan, more or less, upon him that sees it not.

FINIS.
-- Praesens malejudicat aetas, Iudicium melius, Posteritatis erit.

