To the Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Assembled in
Parliament.
The EAST INDIA Company's Answer to the Petition of John Jolliffe and Edmond
Harrison in behalf of themselves and others.
THE said Company say, That they believe the Petitioners and others might send
such a Ship as they mention, on an Interloping Voyage to India, but know not to
what Value the Cargo might amount, because no part of it ever came into their
hands or the hands of any of their Servants, to the Companies knowledge, though
they have heard the Cargo was consigned to one Boucher and others, whom the
Company had put out of their Service for breach of their Trust, who were Men of
Expensive Lives, took upon them to be Persons under a Public Character, and as
such, without any Commission from His Majesty assumed a Chargeable Equipage,
and addressed themselves to the Great Mogul's Court to make a Treaty of
Commerce, and procure a Phirmaund for the New Company, as they called the
Interlopers. By the charge of which Attempt and the weight of their own great
Debts before contracted, they were reduced to such Necessities, as disabled
them from making any returns of the said Cargoe.

The said Company have likewise been informed, That if the said Boucher, and
the rest, had been in any condition to load the said Ship with the returns of
her Cargoe, she might have come out of Surrat River while the Kings Ship
Phoenix was on a Voyage to Muscat, as well as after the Phoenix was come away
for England, as the China Merchant did.

The Company have also been informed, That the Judges of Admiralty appointed by
His Majesty's Commission, as well as by the Company, did according to their
duty condemn the Ship Adventure, and make demand of her from the Governor of
Surrat to the use of his Majesty and the Company, but have not heard that she
was delivered by the said Governor, nor any part of her Cargoe.

The Company have further heard, That Captain Goodlad died of a Lingering
Fever, and that Mr. Pettit, one of the Petitioners Factors was taken in an
East India built Ship by the Sangana's (being Native Pirates) his Ship blown
up, and himself wounded, of which wounds he dyed on shore in the Sangana's
Country. And Mr. Boucher their other principal Factor that had the whole Cargoe
in Possession, as the Company have heard was alive when the last Ship came from
Surrat. What the Petitioners mean by the scandalous suggestion of Poison or
whom they suspect, the Company do not understand, having never heard one word
of any such doubt or suspicion from Interlopers or others before they saw it in
the Petition.

To the Charge of advising his Late Majesty to send one of His Majesty's Ships
of War to suppress the Interlopers of India, as he did to the African Coast to
preserve the Royal Companies Interest from such injurious Attempts: The Company
think it is enough to say, It was their Duty Humbly to inform his Majesty of
the Disease, the Contagious Nature, the dangerous Symptoms and Prognostics of
it; His Majesty's own greater Wisdom and Foresight directed the Remedies he
found most necessary to conserve the reputation of this Nation, and the Trades,
Dominion, and Naval Power of this Kingdom in those remote parts of the World.


