THE DELINQUENTS PASPORT OR, A Plaintiffs Petitionary Plea, addressed to an
eminent Counselor of State: Upon his Highness Proclamation, commanding all
Delinquents, etc. to depart the City and return home to their own Native
Country.
COnfined Sir! For what? Where I do live
My precious Minutes are Contemplative.
My thoughts act not for Changes: My content
Is to dispose my Soul toth' Government
Of her Affections: He that has arrived
And seen as many years as I have lived,
Should make it his only Task his Soul to save:
And in each pace to measure out his Grave.
This is my Warfare: Ift be held unfit,
Teach me some other Trade, I Will practice it.
But to find out a Safer way then this
Trace Heaven and Earth I know not where it is.
This all Saints used; whereof were I but one,
I Would hold my passage happy to be gone,
Weak be my nerves, and arteries to fight,
"Heavens Ord'nance is the Shot gives me delight:
And in these aged-deafned Ears sound louder
Then any Shot that takes his Charge from powder.
From the First War I have not struck a stroke
But from the Camp betook me to my book.
Though I confess I had an itching hand
To work some Feat, but I took no Command.
For which my Composition has been paid,
Wherein his GRACE afforded me such ay d
That even in Gold-Smiths-Hall He did apply
His hand, and sought my Fine to qualify:
Had not a Ridge of Hasles stood in the way
And with a rough Obstruction raisd my pay.
"Burned Child fire dreads: My Penance has been such,
I acted little, but I fuffer'd much.
Had no man's hand been conscious of more guilt
Much blood had been preserved, that has been spilt.
I and my Horse may make an hundred years,
There Is no occasion then from me of fears.
Besides, a Justice I was called of late
Which Office would appear ill from a Grate.
Do not restrain me then: But let my Reason
Tell me my Body is the straitest Prison;
Which freedom got, whether I live or die,
He breaths not that injoys more peace then I.
Additionall Lines, in relation to these Injunctive times.
BEsides, Engagements hale me to the Fleet;
So that I cannot Northward use my Feet,
Unless I may procure sufficient Bail,
To free me from the thraldom of a Jaile.
Besides, the weakness of my constitution
Has threatened without Physic dissolution.
Besides, next week there is a Reference
Betwixt me and a Dame of Eminence,
One of such lively temper, lovely nature,
She Would make that Timon
Woman-haters teeth to water
And we are in Law toth' Ears; Now should I go,
My Cause might suffer by so fair a Fo.
Besides, I keep a constant family
Which may confer a Privilege on me.
"How should I presently dispose of ten,
"Unless I made them to be Highway men?
With women too so numerous in store
As my slow Rents will not discharge their score.
If Hous-rent, Debt, Law, Sickness move not pity,
Welcome unwelcome Country, farewell City.
Pray then, my Lord, some quick assistance make,
Else down I go just like a Bear toth' Stake.
From a Patient and a Cliant,
Who to your Commands is Pliant.
FINIS.

