CHRIST Held forth by the WORD, the only way to the Father.

OR a Treatise discovering to all, the difference between Laws, Bondage, and
the Gospels Liberty.

By JONAS DELL.

Romans 10.4. For Christ is the end of the Law, for Righteousness unto every one
that believes.

London printed by J. C. For William Learner, at the sign of the Blackamore in
Bishopsgate street, and are to be sold at his Shop.

1646

To my Honorable Colonel Rich..
RIght Honorable and Religious Colonel, grace, mercy, and peace be unto you
from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ. The cause of this my
writing unto you is: that I may be one of your Remembrancers amongst the rest
to the advancement of truth. Right Honorable Colonel, I have a little
opportunity, have gathered into a little book these scattered meditations: Not
but that you know much more then I am able to present before your view; but
having no better thing to present to your Honor; having confidence that you
will not despise the least Talent employed to the best of any power. I do make
bold to offer these weak meditations to your (...) hoping you will accept of
them; though weak, desiring God that he will fill, you with himself, and
empty you of all but his own glory, and if you find any thing therein that may
glorify God. I desire that all may be ascribed to him to whom all glory
belongs.

Your humble Servant in the Lord ever to Command. JONAS DELL.

CHRIST Held forth by the word, the only way to the Father.
GAL. 5.1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage.


THis Chapter is part of an Epistle of Paul to the Galathians, and in this
verse there is an express exhortation, or declaration unto the Church of the
Galathians, to stand fast in that Liberty wherein Christ had made them free.

Now that which I would have you to take notice of in Paul's writing to the
Church, is: that there is a distinction between the Church of God and the
people of the world, Io. 17.15.16. I pray not that thou should take them out
of the world; but that thou should keep them from the evil of the world,
they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world; this does show that
the Church of God and the people of the world, are two, for they are not of the
world; but they are one with Christ; speaking of the Church in another place;
he calls them the temple of God, 2 Cor. 6.16. for ye are the Temple of the
living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and and walk in them, and
I will be their God, and they shall be my people, so to distingvish between the
Church and the world, he says, in the world ye shall have tribulation, but in
me ye shall have peace. I did ask a learned man how the whole world became a
Church; he told me that I was an Independent, and he being a proud man, would
give me no other Answer; then I did ask another, and he told me that it was by
much teaching; but I told him that he was deceived. And so are all others that
think that the whole world is a Church: the world is not a Church, nor every
parish is not a Church, but a visible Church of Jesus Christ is a knowing,
believing, and a practical people, baptized into the faith of the Gospel. Now
I will give you to understand how every perish came to be a Church, or taken to
be so by the people of the world, but it is evident, if you do but read the
history of Eusebius, he tells us that every parish was made a Church by the
Proclamation of Constantine the first Christian Emperor, by which Proclamation
as is worthily set out by master Brightman upon the Revelation, that at that
time Ordinances came to be so corrupted; that according to that Orthodox man's
judgment, the Church then fled into the Wilderness, at which time that
prophecy then was fulfilled in Rev. 12.14. where the Church was to be
nourished in the Wilderness for a time, and times, and half a time from the
face of the Serpent; then in 13. Revel. The beast rising up, and the Dragon
giving his power to the beast ever since by that tyrannical power, overruling
by the power of Antichrist, that man of sin has forced the world and parishes
to be made Churches, as though that were now the Church of Christ; so as now
those members of those Antichristian Churches still standing to maintain that
worldly Church and the power thereof are as yet enemies of the Church of
Christ, for if Antichrist in his Infancy in the time of our Savior Christ, and
of the Apostles, did then oppose the Gospel much; as the Scripture plainly sets
forth, as in the 2 These. 2.4. In the former verses the Apostle exhorting the
Thessalonians to look to themselves and to stand fast lest they should be
deceived; for he tells them there that the man of sin opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God, so he as God, sits in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God. If he the^ could deceive so much as to
exalt himself above God, and be to be God, much more easily can he now being
in power, and in his Kingdom deceive many to make them believe that this world
is a Church, or that the parishes be Churches; As our savior says, if it were
possible he would deceive the very Elect; But they cannot so be deceived, for
they have a more perfect rule to walk by, as the Apostle Paul well commends
unto us, 1 Cor. 11.2. Looking upon the Church of Christ, seeing them to walk
according to the rule of God, and not after the rule of men, says (Brethren,)
I commend you (why) does the Apostle commend them? Because they had kept all
the things and the ordinances as they had received them from the Apostle; Now
if the Apostle does so commend those that walk according to the rule of the
Gospel, then all that do not walk according to this rule of the Gospel, they
are to be reproved: Why, because are all we to be judged if we believe
otherwise then the Gospel sets forth. But now all those that believe that the
world is a Church, or that parishes be Churches, they believe otherwise then
the Gospel declares, therefore all such ought to be reproved.

Now to come to the thing in hand as to prove the Church to be as I said it
was, a knowing, believing, and a practical people baptized into the faith of
the Gospel, it is knowledge, and faith, and baptism that makes us differ from
the world, John 2.3. the knowledge of God and true faith causes us to obey
God, and in obeying of God, we differ from the world. Romans 1.21. We see some
that knew God, but glorified him not; but they had not the true knowledge of
God; it is true faith and baptism that makes the difference; the world knew
not God until they do know him, and believe in him, they are not of the Church
of God. in the time of the Apostles, a knowing, believing, and a practical
people were baptized and so called the Church of God and the Temple of God, 1
Cor. 1.2. unto the Church of God which is at Corinth to them that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus called to be saints, with all that in every place
call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord both theirs and ours, 2 Cor. 6.16.
And when they did believe and separated themselves from the old corrupt ways
that they had lived in, to the Gospel of Christ, they were made members of the
Church, Romans 1.1. And then making themselves known what alteration is in
themselves to forsake the world, and then desiring to be in the fellowship of
the Saints, which is the Church of God, the Church perceiving this upon good
grounds, received them into fellowship, Act. 9.26.27. Heb. 4 5. One Faith, one
Lord, one baptism, Act. 8.37. If thou believe with all thy heart thou
may; so you see that here is faith to believe received before Baptism. Acts
22.15.16. and Acts 2.36.37.38. And I know of no power that was left to us to
alter the Ordinances of God as to turn baptising of believers to the
sprinkling of unbelievers, this is contrary to the Example of the Apostles, 1
Cor. 11.2. where the Ordinances were to be kept according as they were
delivered unto them. Now concerning the Liberty which the Apostle speaks of,
it is not such a Liberty as to change the Ordinances of God: or it is not a
Liberty to sin; for the grace of God which appears unto all men teaches us
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, and righteously in
this present world.

Again, it is not such a Liberty as to be free from persecution, John 15.20.
For if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you, John 16.32. Our
Savior tells them that they shall be scattered, John 16.2. Christ tells them
that they shall be put out of their Sinagogs, yea the time comes that
whosoever kills you will think that he does God good service. If then Christ
foretells that these things shall come to pass, it is impossible it should be
meant of such a Liberty.

Again, the Prophets were also thus in persecution, for it is said of David
that the drunkards made their songs of him, and Eliah being left alone, they
persecuted him to take away his life also. And in Heb. 11.36.37.38. shows the
great hatred and persecution against them, they were stoned, they were sawed a
sunder, were tempted, they were slain with the sword, they wandered about in
Sheepe-skins, and Goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented, whom
the world was not worthy of; much more might be said of these things, but in
proving these things I shall but light a candle to the Sun.

Furthermore, as we are freeborne in the Nation to stand for that our Liberty,
and freedom, this is not the Liberty. Neither as the Apostle here does command
us to stand fast in, though lawful.

Having now made way, we come now to the words stand fast: having already
showed what the Liberty is that we should not stand fast in. I will now come
and show what the Liberty is that we should stand fast in;

First, before I shall show what the Liberty is wherein we should stand fast, I
shall desire to speak a word or two of the bondage that we are inthrald in:

Briefly, the bondage that we all are in under the Law, is a miserable thing,
we are all by nature borne slaves under the bondage of sin, and Satan. But
from this bondage has Christ Jesus delivered us, Romans 10.4.

From whence will arise this observation, that is, that Christ is so our
Liberty that all which do believe he has fulfilled the Law for them, and has
taken away the curse from them, Romans 8.1, 2, 3. there is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus who walk after the flesh, but
after the Spirit, for the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made
us free from the Law of sin, and death, for what the Law could not do in that
it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh that the righteousness
of the Law might be fulfilled in us.

This is the Liberty of the Sons of God, that when they come to believe they
are no longer in bondage under the Law, Gal. 3.23. before faith came we were
kept under the Law, shut up under the faith which should afterward be
revealed; wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, that we
might be justified by faith; But after that faith is come we are no longer
under a Schoolmaster; for ye are all the Children of God by faith in Christ
Jesus, Romans 10.4. for Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every
one that believes.

Every one that does not believe is in Bondage, Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Now I say
that the heir as long as he is a Child, differs nothing from a servant
though he be Lord of all, but is under tutors, and Governors until the time
appointed of the Father, even so when we were Children, we were in bondage
under the Elements of the world, but when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his son made of a woman, made under the Law to redeem them that were
under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, as you may read
further in the Chapter, so you see the point is clear (Namely) that Christ is
so our Liberty that all which do believe, he has fulfilled the Law for them,
and they are no longer under it, Christ has freed us from the curse by being
made a curse for us, and therefore he calls us no longer Servants, but sons,
if sons, then heirs.

Again, we may see it is the drift of the Apostle, to take off the Galathians
from circumcition, and the Law, this we may see was the simplicity of the
Galathians, though professors; they did not know their Liberty, they were not
well grounded in the faith of the Gospel, and so the Apostle Paul had a great
deal of trouble with them as you may see, Gal. 4.9.10.11. but now after ye have
known God, or rather are known of God; how turn ye again to the weak and
beggarly Elements whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? and so he blames
them for observing days, and months, and times, and years, and stands in
doubt of them, and says, I am afraid of you least I have bestowed upon you
labor in vane, also in Gal. 3.1.2. says he, O foolish Gallathians who has
bewitched you that you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus
Christ has been evidently set forth and crucified amongst you?

Galathians 5.1. Stand fast in the Liberty whereby Christ has made you free,
etc. Where the Apostle still goes on arguing the cause, and reasons of the
matter with them, and says he, Gal. 3.2. this would I learn of you only: ye
received the spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith, are ye
so foolish having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?
have ye suffered so many things in vain? if it be but in vain; he therefore
that ministers unto you the spirit; and works miracles among you, does he it
by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith, Romans 10.3. for the being
ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God,
Gal, 2.16. knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by
the faith of Jesus Christ;

Even we have believed in Jesus Christ that we might be justified by the faith
in Christ, and not by the works of the Law; for by the works of the Law, shall
no flesh be justified: Read further in the said Chapter and ye shall see that
the Saints are delivered from the Bondage of the Law, into the glorious Liberty
of the Sons of God, Gal. 4.4.5. so I say they are at Liberty, 2 Cor. 5.19. to
wit, that God is in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not imputing
their crespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of
reconciliation, so this is the glorious Liberty the Saints so reconciled unto
God in Christ, and this speaks comfort unto the Saints of God that they should
so redound in glory; for which cause says he we faint not but though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day, this is that
which carries on the Saints so cheerfully; for (says he) our light afflictions
which is but for a moment works for us a far more weight of glory, therefore
though the Saints of God suffer in this Life; yet their Liberty is a glorious
Liberty, Romans 8.21. and they shall be restored into the glorious Liberty of the
Sons of God, Phil. 3.21. so we see the Saints have Liberty in this Life, and in
the Life to come. We are not only brought out of Bondage, but we are brought
out of darkness into light, 1 These. 5.4.5. but ye brethren are not in
darkness, that that day should overtake you as a thief, ye are all the
Children of light, and the Children of the day, we are not of the night, nor of
darkness.

Again, John 1.9. Christ is the light of the world, Psalm. 36.9. in thy light
shall we see light, this is a glorious state, it is a glorious Liberty, but
those that are without Christ are in a sad condition, they are in bondage under
the Law, as I said before, and they walk in dorknesse, knowing not whither
they go, Alas how soon is their candle out, as you may see, Job. 18.5. how
soon is the candle of the wicked put out, John 12.35. and Mat. 6.23.

To follow the words stand fast in that Liberty, as this Liberty is such a
Liberty that we who were the children of satan are by Christ become the
Children of God, we who were dead in trespasses and sins has he quickened, we
who in time past walked according to the course of this world, Ephesians. 2.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. And so throughout the Chapter all along setting forth the love of God,
and the free grace of Christ unto his Saints, who were in Bondage under the
yoke of sin, wounded and lay bleeding between Jerusalem and Jericho, Christ
was that good Samaritan that bound up our wounds pouring in Oil and wine for
the suppling of our griefs, so in Ezekiell 16.5. when no eye pitied thee to
do any of these unto thee to have compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out
in the open field to the loathing of thy person in the day that thou was borne
and when that I passed by thee and saw thee polluted in thine own Blood. I said
unto thee when thou wast in thy blood; live, in the seven and eight verses, and
so forward. Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold thy time
was the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee and covered thy
nakedness, yea I swear unto thee and entered into a Covenant with thee says
the Lord God: and thou becamest mine, then washed I thee with water, yea, I
thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with Oil,
thus the Prophet goes on, felling out unto us the love and free grace of
Christ. Notwithstanding Jsrael had played the whore with the Assirians, because
thou walt unsatiable, yea thou have played the harlot with them, and yet
could not be satisfied, at the 28. verse, thus when we were in misery and in
distress when no eye pitied us, then was the time of love, so when we were
going away from God, and after other lovers, then he allured us, Hosea. 2.14.
so the love of Christ out-bid all other lovers.

Is it so that Christ is so our Liberty, that all that do believe in him he
has fulfilled the Law for them, and taken away the curse from them; this may
instruct us to take notice of this Bondage, that every man is in by being under
the Law, it is a miserable thing, we all by nature are borne slaves under the
Bondage of sin and satan, but from this has Christ delivered his people; and
in respect of this deliverance it is glorious, and honorable, as in all times
when God delivered his people he does it with honor; so when God delivered his
Children out of Egypt, it was with honor in the face of all the world, and so
Christ delivering us from sin and from satan, how glorious was it even when he
being on the cross, did on that cross, by his death triumph over the devil and
over his Kingdom by the pouring out of his blood, he did work a most glorious
deliverance to the delivered; of slaves, men were made the servants of God; of
bondmen, adopted to be his Children; this Bondage which the Apostle speaks of
here is a Bondage under the Law, and under Ceremonies you may see Col. 2.8.
Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit after the
traditions of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; when
they do bind them to humain Ordinances, it is a leading of them captive from
Christ, are ye allured then, let this be instructions to you.

Has Christ delivered you from bondage and set you at Liberty, and has he
fulfilled the Law for you, and taken away the curse of the Law from you, art
thou allured and art thou brought to Christ, have thou taken Christ for thy way
to the Father, how comes it then to pass that thou art subject to human
Ordinances, this shows that you have no part in Christ so long as you are
subject to human Ordinances; for Christ's death has abolished all Ordinances
of the Law which were of Gods ordaining; much more the Ordinances of men in the
worship of God, this is a bondage under Ceremonies, but Christ's death has made
it void, therefore let us say with david, Psalms 53.7.8. Oh that the
Salvation of Israel were come out of Sion, when God brings back the captivity
of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Use 3. Is it so that Christ has delivered you from the bondage of sin, and
has set thee at liberty, this must still further instruct thee, that thou art
not to live to thy self, or to thine own lusts: For the grace of God that
brings salvation unto all men, has appeared, and teaches us that we should
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, and
righteously, and godly in this present world. And in the 14. verse, Who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge from us
sin, to be a peculiar people unto him, zealous of good works, Romans 13.11,
12, 13, 14 And that knowing the time that now is, it is high time to awake out
of sleep: for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed. The night is
far spent, the day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and put on the Armor of light. We that profess Religion, we that
have given our names to Jesus Christ, and are brought to believe in Jesus, let
us walk as in the day, not in riotting and drunkenness, not in chambring and
wantonness, not in strife and envying; but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,
and make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lust thereof. Have thou
Christ for thy Way to thy Father? have thou faith? Then show thy faith by thy
works. Art thou Christ's free man, and have thou the Spirit of God? If thou
have, then thou have the fruits of the Spirit, and the fruits of the Spirit
are, ( Gal. 5.22, 23, 24.) Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness,
Godliness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, against such there is no Law. And
they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts.
If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit. So he that is in Christ,
is a new creature. Old things are passed away, and all things are become new:
Old Drunkenness, old Swearing, old Uncleanness, 1 Pet. 4.1.^.3. All these are
not the fruits of the spirit, but contrariwise, these are the fruits of the
flesh, and tend to death; which things are to be done away in those that are
become new, and are to live no longer to the lusts of the flesh, but to the
will of God, who has redeemed us from this bondage, and set us from thraldom
to liberty, to serve him in newness of life.

Now in the next place, I will show you what kind of Liberty or Way he is for
us, and to us to the Father: that Christ is so our liberty, that he is the way
from the Father to the Soul, and from the soul to the Father: though Christ
has satisfied the justice of God for us, and so has made a way for us to the
Father; yet we cannot go to the Father, till Christ comes to us. The Reason
is, because there is no light in us by nature. Christ must come and set up a
light in the soul; and then in that light we shall see light, Psalm. 36.9.
Christ must come to us, before we can come to him: he must come and knock at
the door of our souls, as in Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand up
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Thus must Christ come and
awaken us; this is the way of Christ to to the soul, this is the liberty we
have by Christ to take away our darkness, and to give us light.

2. By nature we are all dead: and this is the way of Christ to quicken the
soul; so the soul being brought out from that sleep of death, does begin to
look up after Christ, and to take Christ for its way to the Father. Thus the
soul makes Christ a way, whereby it does suck comfort from the Father. Thus
Christ is the way for the soul to have acceptance with the Father: if we obtain
any thing of the Father, it must be in, and by, and through Jesus Christ. We
must not in our own names, or in the name of Saints or Angels, but in the name
of Christ. Then whatsoever we shall ask in faith in the sons Name, he will
give it us, Joh. 16.23. So you see what kind of way Christ is to us to give us
life, and to give us light, and so sets at liberty from the bondage of
darkness and death: and therefore having done these things for us, he would
have us stand fast in that liberty wherein he has made us free.

3. Therefore Christ is so our Liberty, that there is no coming to the Father
but by him. This will appear to be true, if we consider the present estate and
condition that every man is in by nature. All men have sinned, and come short
of the glory of God; that is, we come short of heaven, We are by nature the
children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. This is true, God made man in a good condition,
but man has sinned, and so has lost his first estate: he was made perfect,
and was to have lived for ever; but now he must not eat of that tree of life,
God has sent him forth from the Garden of Eden. So he drove out the man, and
placed at the East end of the Garden, a Cherubim, and the flaming sword, which
turned every way to keep the way of the Tree of life, Genesis 3.24.

Now here came in man's misery, he is cast out from God, and without the mercy
of God he must die unto all eternity. Here is now no coming to the Father, but
by Christ; no coming to have an oneness with God, without Christ, man must
perish, without Christ, man must die unto all eternity, Romans 5.12. Wherefore as
by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, death passed upon all
men, for that all men have sinned. The Devil has deceived Eve, he said unto
the woman, Ye shall not surely dye: But we see man shall die, and man does
die, and man is cast out of the presence of God, and there is no coming to the
Father, but by Christ, he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, Joh. 14.6. Now
concerning man's fall, it is irrecoverable: If man should have lived 10000.
years, and been thinking how to find out a way to the Father, he could not
find out a way, as in Acts 4.12. There is now no other name under Heaven
whereby we can be saved, bue only by Jesus Christ. Had not Christ been our
way, we had perished, and remained under the bondage of wrath. Galat. 3.23.
Before Faith came, we were kept under the Law; and so we were in bondage, shut
up to sin until Faith came. So I say, had not Christ been our way to the
Father, we had been miserable, we had still remained in bondage under wrath:
But Christ is the way from wrath, Romans 5.9. Much more, being now justified by
his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. There is no cendemnation
to them which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.12. For the Law of the Spirit of life
in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and death. But had not
Christ been our way, we had remained, as I said before, under wrath, without
any hope of recovery. This caused the Attributes of God to be set on work to
deliver us from this bondage: For man having eaten of the forbidden fruit, God
had said, In the day thou catest thereof, thou shall die. Then the Justice of
God stepped in, and said, Justice must be satisfied. But the Mercy of God not
willing that man should perish, Mercy stepped in, and said, O let not man perish,
whom thou have taken so great pains to make him for thine own glory, and all
things for his use.

Then spoke the Truth of God, and said, If man does not die, Truth will be at
an end. For Gods Truth has said, In the day that man does eat thereof, man
shall die: So that Truth silenced Mercy.

Then spoke the Wisdom of God, Is there no way to find out how Man may be
delivered, and that Justice may be satisfied, Mercy may have his request, and
Truth may be satisfied? So Wisdom said, Man sinned in the flesh, and if man
suffered in the flesh, then Justice would be satisfied, Mercy would have his
request, and Truth would be performed. And Wisdom then finds out a way how
that Christ should take flesh upon him, and so suffer in the flesh, and then
the satisfaction of Gods justice was fulfilled in Christ, as though man had
perished; and so the Attributes of God were all satisfied. And all this sets
forth the great love of God unto us in stooping so low, and taking off from us
the bondage that we were inslaved with, and having done this for us by the
shedding of his blood; and therefore he bids us to Stand fast in the liberty
wherewith he has made us free, and not to entangle our selves again with the
yoke of bondage.

Having now showed you what kind of way Christ is, I shall now come to show
you, that he is the Only Way. For there is no name under heaven that we can
be saved by, but only by the Name of Jesus, Heb. 10.4. For it is not possible
that the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, should take away sins. Wherefore when he
comes into the world, he says, Sacrifices and offerings thou would not,
but a body have thou prepared me: he is the Only way, there is none with
him, Esaias 63.3. He has trodden the Wine Press alone, and of the people there
was none with him, So he has born our sins alone, there is none with him,
Matthew. 1.21. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins. So, again, The Son of man
is come to seek and to save that which was lost: he does seek, and in seeking
he does find them, it is he alone, there is none with him, he is that good
Samaritan that had compassion on us, and bound up our wounds pouring in oil
and wine, there is none that can cure that wound of sin but he alone, there is
none that can comfort nor refresh the hearts of his people; but he alone,
Christ is the only way, none can take away sins but he, the Priests nor their
sacrifice could not save the people, as you may see, Heb. 10.1. and so forward:
They were to look to Jesus Christ. Now Christ is the highpriest, he is able to
save them from their sins to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 10.25. so it is he that does it
and no other, it is he that sets us at Liberty, and therefore we ought to stand
fast in that Liberty.

Christ is so our Liberty, that he is our way from a state of sin and wrath, to
a state of grace and glory: there is now no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus which walk not after the flesh but after the spirit, for the Law
of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus has made us free from the Law of sin and
death, Romans 8.2. that man that has Christ for his way to the Father, stands in
the sight of God as having no fault at all in him, the Kings Daughter is all
glorious within, her Clothing is of gold, Christ has put a comeliness upon
her, and so she is beutifull in the sight of God, Canticles 4.7. thou art all
fair my love, there is no spot in thee; Come from Lebanon with me my spouse,
with me from Lebanon, thou have ravished my heart my sister my spouse, thou
have revished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck,
thus God sets forth the Beauty and the comeliness of those who have Christ for
their Liberty, and way to the Father, says he, fair is thy love my spouse, how
much better is thy love then wine, and so all along he shows the beuty of the
Church and looks upon her without spot, he likens her to a frultfull garden,
and a spring, and a fountain, and fruitful plants; All these names set forth
the gloriousness of the Saints of God, thus set at Liberty by Christ.

And now it remains further to prove that the people of God are without spot^
I shall show that all their sins are done away by Christ, he has borne upon
his body the iniquities of us all, and so we remain without spot; behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, that is, the sins of those
that are sanctified by him, and so in Gods account are without spot, Christ
gave himself for his Church that he might sanctify and cleanse it, and that
he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrincle,
not any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blame, even as he is
holy, Ephesians. 5.27. so you may see that that man which is not in bondage under
the Law and Ceremonies, and humane Ordinances; but has Christ for his Liberty
and way to the Father, stands in the sight of God, as I said before, without
spot, and so is made free indeed, John 8, 36. If the Son shall make you free,
then you shall be free indeed without any contradiction, who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it is he, and he alone that justifies, and
who shall condemn them, now this is true? the Saints are made free; Christ has
taken away all our sins, and our sins shall not be laid to our charge, we read
of the scape-Goate in Leu. 16.21.22 that Aron did lay the sins of the children
of Israel upon the head of the Goat, and the Goat shall bear upon him all
their iniquities into a land not inhabited. This scape-Goate was a tipe of
Christ, Christ is come and has borne away all our sins, and so has made us
free and without spot; he has satisfied the Justice of God; for all our sins,
and so as we are considered in Christ, we are without spot, and so we are
lovely in his sight, as in Romans 3.24. being justified freely by his grace
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood; to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins, that is past through the forbearance of God, to declare. I
say at this time, his righteousness that he might be just, and the justifier
of him which believes in Jesus. Now who can say that the Saints of God are not
justified? Romans 6.18. Being then made free from sin ye became the Servants of
righteousness unto God; for he has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. And so you
see that that man which has Christ for his way to the Father, stands in the
sight of God as having no fault at all in him; to the praise of the glory of
his grace be it, and thus you see it is through him alone that we are set free,
and are delivered from bondage to stand fast in the Liberty wherewith he has
made us free.

Is it so, that Christ is so our Liberty, and so our way, that there is no
coming to the Father, but by him? is it so that there is no way to be
completely happy, and completely to be justified? as I said before; this does
hold out unto all men that there is a necessity that they all take Christ for
the way to the Father; there is no other way to the Father but by Christ; now
not to have Christ is to perish: he that has not Christ for his Liberty and
free pass, will be bid to stand, he will be shut out of the presence of the
Father; there is some that shall see Abram, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the
prophets and yet themselves shut out: it is a dangerous thing to reject Christ,
not to believe in Christ: this is the condemnation because ye believe not:
because ye do not take Christ for your Liberty and way, and let pass to the
Father, that man which has not Christ for his Liberty and way to the Father is
under the law, and so is under a curse that is unless thou can keep the
Law: for not the hearers of the Law are just before God but the doers of the
Law shall be justified as you may see, Romans 2.13. Now if thou have not Christ
for thy way to the Father thou must keep the Law or else thou will be
condemned by the Law, Gal. 5.18. if ye be led by the Spirit ye are not under
the Law, that is, if you have Christ for your Liberty and way to the Father; if
you do believe in Jesus Christ then you are not under the Law, Romans 10.4.
Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness unto every one that believes,
so then he that believes not is yet in bondage under the Law, and so is under
a curse; cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written
in the book of the Law to do them. But no man can keep the Law; therefore no
man can be justified by the Law, this is evident, this is true, Gal. 3.11.
therefore I say that there is a necessity that thou should take Christ for
thy Liberty to the Father, therefore I entreat thee to forsake all other ways
and to come to Jesus Christ and take him for thy way, do not deceive thy self,
lean not on thy one righteousness for that will deceive thee; that man which
presumes to go to God by his own righteousness, that way is too broad to lead
to the Father, Mat. 7.14. wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads
unto destruction, and many there be that go in thereat; the way of a man's own
righteousness, is the broad way to destruction, do not think to come before
God in thy own righteousness; for that is as filthy rags, and as a menstruous
cloth, thou must deny thine own duties, and put no worth in them, thou must not
think to be justified by thy prayers: were thy prayers crucified for thee? I
know they were not; then I must tell thee, that it was one that was crucified
that did satisfy the justice of God, (that was Jesus Christ) and thou must of
necessity forsake all other ways, and take Christ for thy way, as I said
before: if thou look after any other way, or usest any other means for thy
free pass to the Father; thou will not come into the presence of thy Father;
for the Father will not allow of any tickets, unless his Sons hand be unto
their pass, all other tickets be unlawful, therefore I pray you to look into
the third of John 14. And as Moses lifted up the Serpent into the wilderness:
Even so must the Son of man be lifted up; how was the Serpent lifted up, Numb.
21.9. 2 Kings 18.4. And Moses made a Serpent of Brass, and put it upon a pole,
and it came to pass that if a Serpent had bitten any man; when he beheld the
Serpent of Brass he lived; the Brazen Serpent is a type of Christ, There is
one thing which I would have you take notice of in this brazen Serpent when he
was lifted up to the people, if they did use any other means then to look
upon it they did perish; So Jesus Christ being the true Brazen Serpent is
lifted up, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life; for this was the end why God gave his Son, that poor lost
undone creatures might not perish; but whosoever seeks after any other means
then Christ shall perish. Even as those perished as looked on any other means
besides the Brazen Serpent: And yet me thinks I hear many say with the young
man in the Gospel, what shall we do to be saved; oh how feign would they be
doing of something to help to save themselves, but I tell thee that thou can
do nothing in it, it is all done already, he has trodden the wine press alone,
and of the people there was none with him that did any thing in it: therefore
thou must take Christ for thy whole Savior; therefore if any will go to God
they must deny themselves, and take Christ to be the only way to the Father,
do not think to be justified by thine own righteousness which is of the Law;
For Paul says by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be justified in his
sight; for by the Law is the knowledge of sin: that is all thou can attain
unto by the Law; thou may know thy self to be a sinner by it and so be under
a curse, but if thou mean to have life, I told thee where it is to be had;
thou must deny thy self and take Christ for thy way to the Father; though thou
may go to hell by the deeds; yet if thou go to Heaven, thou must go by
Christ, though the way to Hell be broad, yet the way to Heaven is straight,
Mat. 7.14. that is so straight that there is no entering but by Jesus Christ: so
then it must not be by thy duties, nor by performances, nor by thine own
righteousness, our Savior Christ did speak of some in his time, Mat. 7.22.
many will say, Lord, Lord, unto me in that day have we not prophesied in thy
name? and in thy name cast out divills and in thy name have done many
wonderful works? yet Christ will not own them, Christ will look upon thy
righteousness as filthy rags, and as a poluted cloth, Esa. 4 5.24. so Solomon
says, I saw a righteous man perish in his righteousness; Now for a man to
think to go to the Father by his own righteousness, it is to perish, and to
fall short of Heaven, and that Paul did know full well; for says he, I desire
not to be found in mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but the
righteousness which is of faith of Jesus Christ, so then it is plain that it
is Christ alone that takes us from Bondage and thraldom, and sets us at
Liberty, and then causes us to stand fast in that Liberty whereby he has made
us free.

Again, I will show you what kind of Liberty Christ is to the Saints, first,
he is a free way to the Saints: they may go boldly and freely to the Father by
Jesus Christ, Paul goes boldly to God being confident that God would hear his
prayers, Heb. 4.16. Let us come with boldness before the Throne of Grace that
we may obtain mercy, and find grace in time of need; so Christ says come and
take of the water of life freely, there is benefit by having Christ for thy way
he will give thee living water, whosoever shall drink of the water which I
shall give him shall never be more athirst; but the water that I shall give him
shall be in him as a well of water springing up unto everlasting life, John
4.14. so you see Christ is a free way, and a refreshing way, and therefore
behold with joy: may you draw water out of the well of salvation, Esa. 12.3.
Secondly, Christ is a free way to all comers, he is a way for drunkards, and
for swearers, and for unclean persons, and for the ungodly, Romans 5.8. thus God
commends his love to us in that while we were sinners, Christ died for us,
Christ died for sinners, there is not a bar set up against any person
whatsoever, though thou art a grievous sinner, yet if thou can believe that
Christ died for thee, he is as free a way for thee as for any other; for what
says the Scripture Abraham believed God and it was accounted unto him for
righteousness, Romans 4.5. but to him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted to him for righteousness;
for if thou can believe in Jesus Christ; and if the free grace of Christ does
out-bid all thy lusts, then Christ is thy way to the Father, Romans 5.6. do not
say thou art a great sinner, and therefore keep of from God, do not deprive
thy self of Christ, for Christ died for the ungodly, Romans 5.6. thou shall not
be condemned if thou do believe; this is that which is required of thee by
Jesus Christ, that is, to believe, Zack. 13.1. there is a fountain opened for
sin and for uncleanness, that is, there is a way opened for the worst of
sinners to come to God by Christ, those that do come unto him he will in no
wise cast of, and if thou do come he will make thee clean, Christ will
sprinkle clean water upon thee and thou shall be clean; therefore do not
trouble thy self so much with the greatness of thy sins that they should be
any bar in thy way to hinder thee from coming to Christ; this is needless,
we have seen as great sinners as thou, come to Christ: Even such as crucified
him: yet Peter said unto them repent and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, Act. 2.38. What greater sins
then these, they did despise Jesus Christ, they did spet upon him and put him
to death, what greater sin is there then this, to put to death the Son of God,
yet says he, repent: so say I, though thy sins be great yet if thou repent and
believe thou may have Christ for thy Liberty and thy way to lead thee to the
Father; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God, 1 Timothy 2.4. for
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus;
so large is the call of Christ that he invites all to come to him, and all that
do believe in him shall be saved be their sins never so great; O com to the
Lord Jesus though thy sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow,
though they be as red as Crimson they shall be as Wool; but some may object and
say from 1 Timothy 4.2. that there is power in man to believe and be saved if they
will, but I deny that, I deny that there is ability in any man by nature to
believe, Phil. 2.13. for it is God that works in you both to will and to do
of his good pleasure, Romans 8.16. it is not in him that runeth but in God that
shows mercy, as I said before; so I say still that Christ most be our
Liberty, and way, and let pass to the Father, and he it is alone that
delivers us from the bondage of the Law, from the bondage of corruption, from
the bondage of Ceremonies, from the bondage of humane Ordinances, which is the
bondage of the Conscience under Tyranny, Col. 2.20. you shall find that the
Spirit of God does by Paul blast all those services at one breath intended by
men, and imposed of necessity upon the conscience; in useing those prayers
which the service of God anulleth: the Apostle calls all such will worship, as
you may see, Col. 2.23. though they pretended humility in all these inovations
of men pretended to be loving and hamble; yet all this worship is a will
worship devised by man becoms a snare to Gods people, and then again this is
that our Savior Christ expressly condemns, Mat. 15.9. it is a vain worship,
Esa. 1. and what is the reason of this; what is the ground of all this but
because their fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men Esa. 29.13.
this is the very ground why the service devised by men is a bondage before God,
and as nothing but mere hypocrisy, when men draw with their lips, and honor
God with their mouths, and their hearts are far from them; many men would teach
how to serve God, and prescribe rules for the service of God, and to impose
this yoke upon Gods people; they would sit in Gods Chair, and do in this as
if the servant should teach his master what to do; God did not do it; nor
Christ did not do it, but man he will do it: by which it may appear that all
that will do such things would keep the Saints in bondage; But it is Christ
and he alone that is the Liberty of the Saints and he is delighted in them if
they hold fast their Liberty being thus set free by him.

Is it so, that Christ is so our Liberty and way to the Father, that he has
freed us from the bondage of the Law, and ceremonies, and human Ordinances;
What then shall we say to them that would keep us still in bondage? by what
power do they stand? or by what rule do they walk? It is not by Apostolical
Rule; Paul blames the Galatians for observing ceremonies and human Ordinances,
and for observing one day above another, and bids them stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free. Is it so that Christ has made us
free? what shall we then say to them that would fain keep us still in bondage,
those that would forcibly keep the people of God in bondage, endeavor still to
keep the world in darkness? But what shall I say of them, or what shall I liken
the unto? I shall therefore compare them to the Moon in the Eclipse, which
gives not her perfect light: or liken them to a dark Lanthorn, which gives
some light, but concealeth part of the light which is in it. Thieves do
sometimes carry a dark lanthorn, it is best for their hellish idesignes, profit
and worldly gain. What shall I say now of our Priests and Prophets under the
Gospel? I compare them to the Priests and Prophets in the time of the Law, Mica
3.11. The Heads thereof judge for reward, and the Priests thereof teach for
hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money, yet will they lean upon the
Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us, no evil can come upon us? Therefore
shall Sion for your sake be ploughed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become
heaps, and the mountain of the House, as the High places of the Forest. Our
Prophets and Priests are now in a great rage, they will make the people err,
they bite with their teeth, and yet cry peace; and he that puts not into
their mouths, they even prepare war against him, as you may see Mica 3.5.6.
I think the Prophecy is now fulfilled in our days, as in the sixth verse,
Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision, and it
shall be dark unto you, that ye shall not divine, and the Sun shall go down
over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them.

Again, those that would keep us in bondage under ceremonies and human
ordinances, they would have us walk by types, and shadows, that is, to walk by
Moonshine, when we may walk by the light of the Sun; pray bear with us, we
cannot but walk by the light of Jesus Christ, so far forth as we see the
light; Christ is the light of the world, and we must walk by the light of Jesus
Christ: for he is our way to the Father, and so the Apostle tells us, in 1 Thessalonians. 5.4.5. ye are the children of the light, and the children of the day;
we are not of the night, nor of darkness; we are not now to walk by types and
shadows, as the people of old; they did see darkly, and afar off, but we are
brought nigh to Jesus Christ, he is come nigh to us; they had the shadow of
good things to come: but we have the substance, therefore let us not sleep as
do others. Let us not be deceived by any means, let us not keep our selves in
bondage, since we are set at liberty by Jesus Christ. Alas! what enemies are
they, not only to us, but even to themselves, that would have us observe
ceremonies, and human ordinances? would they fain have full Barns, and become
rich in this world, and yet would they have us to be poor in Christ, and so
perish? Does not the Apostle say, that all such human ordinances are to
perishwith the using, after the commandments and Doctrines of men, Coloss.
2.22. which things (says he) have a show of wisdom in will worship and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of the
flesh. Therefore I shall say unto all that shall read this book, let your loins
be girt about, and your lights burning. Wherefore if ye be be dead in Christ
from the Rudiments of the world, be ye not subject to human ordinances, and so
far as the Sun has diiven away the Foggy mists of Antichrist, so far as
ye see the light, walk in it.

Is it so, that Christ is so our liberty, to redeem us from the bondage of the
Law, from the bondage of ceremonies, and from the bondage of human Ordinances,
then to conclude, and draw to an end; let this be a use of comfort unto all the
sons and daughters of God. We now see but in part, but the time shall come when
we shall see him as he is, even face to face, 1 Corinthians. 13.12. And although we
now know but in part, yet then shall we know him even as we are known. We can
cry from earth to heaven, Abba, Father, but we cannot as yet conceive of that
fullness of glory that is in Christ, and that fullness is yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3.23. Paul did see something, Philip. 1.21.
For to me to live, is Christ; and to die, is gain: but we cannot see that glory
that is in Christ: that glory that is in Christ, is hid, Coloss. 3.3. For ye
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our
life, shall appear, then shall we appear with him in glory. There will be a
glorious time for all the Sons and Daughters of God; when they shall enjoy
Christ: he shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, they shall say, Farewell
all my persecuters, farewell my enemies. I shall of you be persecuted no more,
I shall be now delivered from that bondage: I now go to the Father: Thus
shall the Saints of GOD come from the East, and from the North, and from the
South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom of Christ, and then we shall partake
of that glory and everlasting blessedness which is in Christ, to our
everlasting comfort for ever and ever; and then shall the Sons and Daughters of
God be freed from the bondage of the Law, from the bondage of Ceremonies, and
from the bondage of human ordinances; and seeing Christ Jesus has freed us
from all these alone, by himself alone, by his precious blood, let all the
Saints be careful be careful to live to the praise and glory of him that has
given us this freedom and liberty.

FINIS.

