AN ACT For Bringing in the Revenue of DELINQUENTS, And POPISH RECUSANTS.

Thursday, March 15. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



blazon of the Commonwealth

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.

AN ACT For bringing in the Revenue of Delinquents, and Popish Recusants.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament, and the Authority of the same, That
all and every person and persons, employed the two and twentieth day of April,
last past, as Receivers General of the Public Revenue arising out of the
Estates of Delinquents and Popish Recusants, shall and are hereby ratified and
confirmed in the several Offices of Receivers General, to exercise the same
within the respective Counties, Limits, and Places wherein they were so
employed as Receivers, the said two and twentieth day of April, one thousand
six hundred fifty nine, until further Order shall be taken by the Parliament or
Council of State, and the said Receivers are hereby empowered enabled, and
required, within their respective Counties, Limits, and Divisions, to Collect,
Gather, Receive, Demand, and Levy, as well the Arrears of the said Public
Revenues arising out of the Estates of Delinquents and Popish Recusants already
incurred, as also the said growing Revenues; And all other Rents, Revenues,
Duties, sum and sums of Money, which to them, have or shall from time to time
respectively be given in charge by the respective Auditors of the Exchequer.
And it is hereby Enacted, That they the said Receivers, for the better getting
in, and Levying the said Duties and Revenues, are and shall be enabled and
empowered to distrein for the same within their respective Limits and Counties,
and to use all other lawful means and ways for the getting the same in, as
fully to all intents and purposes as any Receivers of the Revenue of the late
King were enabled to do by any Law, Statute, or usage of this Commonwealth.
And the Auditors before whom the said Revenue was in charge the said two and
twentieth day of April, One thousand six hundred fifty nine last past, or at
any time since, are hereby authorized and required to proceed in the execution
of their several Offices, till the Parliament or Council of State shall take
further Order therein.

Thursday, March 15. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.


