THE Stumbling-Stone, OR, A Discourse touching that offense which the World and
Worldly Church do take against 1. Christ Himself. 2. His true Word. 3. His true
Worship. 4. His true Church. 5. His true Government. 6. His true Ministry.
Wherein the UNIVERSITY is reproved by the WORD of GOD. Delivered partly to the
University-Congregation in Cambridge, partly to another in the same Town.
Together with A brief touch in the Epistle (for the present) on the late
quarrelsom, weak, and erroneous Animadversions of one Mr. Chambers, called
Doctor in Divinity, and Pastor of Pewsy in Wiltshire. By William Dell Minister
of the Gospel, and Master of Gonvil and Caius College in Cambridge.

Mihi plane omnium jucundissima facies ista in rebus est, videre ob verbum Dei
studia and dissentiones fieri: is enim est Verbi Dei cursus, casus and eventus;
nam dicit, non veni pacem mittere sed gladium. Luther. LONDON, Printed by R. W.
for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the Blackspread Eagle at the West end
of Paul's. 1653.

To the Reader.
HEre I present thee with this Discourse, which met with such notable
Opposition and Contradiction from the University of Cambridge, to whom it was
delivered, and also from such of the Town then present, who are baptized into
the University spirit; And yet every point of this Doctrine will appear to
spiritual men, to be the Word and Truth of God, and if need shall require, I
can yet more fully prove it to be so, by the Scriptures of the Prophets and
Apostles, and by the Doctrine of Christ himself the Head of both, and that
against not only One, but All Universities, and also against the Gates of Hell
and Powers of darkness. And by this gross Opposition against the plain Gospel,
thou may judge and discern that this University, which has beeen counted one
of the Eyes of the Nation, SEEING SEES NOT; and which has been counted a
Fountain of Knowledge and good Learning, HEARING HEARS NOT, NEITHER
UNDERSTANDS; Whereby we may conceive that gray Ha^rs are upon it, and that the
time of its departure is near, except it REPENT.

I had thought also at this time to have given a farther Testimony for Jesus,
against the Mystery of iniquity which has hitherto prevailed in the
Ecclesiastical State, and in the Universities, the Head and Heart of it, but
that this work under my hands, multiplied into too great a Proportion for an
Epistle; And also because I intend to add threunto my Testimony against that
Mystery of Iniquity which has hitherto also prevailed in the civilState,
Antichrist having with his deceivableness of unrighteousness, seduced and
deluded both ever since the Reign of Constantine; And this twofold Testimony,
(through Grace given and hoped to be given) I intend very shortly to publish;
For I Judge it most necessary for the true Church to be acquainted herewith,
especially after so many of the Seals have been opened, and also seeing the
time of the Restitution of all things makes haste upon us, and we hope is even
at the doors. Wherefore we continually entreat that the Arm of the Lord would
awaken and put on strength, not only as in Ancient times, and in the days of
old, but more also, to wit, as his Spirit by his Prophets has foretold he will
do in the last time, when he will reveal his Arm for Christ and his seed, in
his greatest Might and Glory: And let the Remembrancers of the Lord not keep
silence, till the cursed Kingdom of Antichrist with all its Religion, Works,
Duties, Doctrines, counterfeit Law and Gospel, false Clergy, false Church,
false Power and Jurisdiction, or Discipline, false Ordinances, and false all
things, be utterly overcome with the Spirit of Christ's mouth, and the
Brightness of his coming; And till the true spiritual Church, that through
Faith, Hope, and Love, lives out of this World, and the Elements thereof, in
the Kingdom of Gods dear Son be made an Eternal Excellency, and the Joy of
Generations; and till they who have afflicted it, and domineered over it, be
made to come humbly bending to it, and to lick the dust of its feet, as the
Lord has promised.

Farther, I thought good at this time to advertise thee of the Animadversions
of Mr. Humfry Chambers, called Doctor in Divinity, and Pastor of Pewsy in the
County of Wilts, on a discourse published by me, entitled The Crucified and
quickened Christian. In which Animadversions (as he calls them; after Mr.
Christopher Loves Example, who was one of his Forerunners in this opposition to
the Truth) he has Doctor-like, contradicted the manifest Truth, and the very
Substance, Marrow and Mystery of the Gospel, which being made void (which yet
is impossible as to the true Church) there would be neither true Righteousness,
nor Life, nor Redemption, nor Salvation, nor the true Christ, nor the true God
in Christ left remaining to Believers; All which I make account in due time to
make appear by the Scriptures; (for I allow no Doctrine that is not according
Christ is the only Lawgiver, and the Spirit is the only Law Interpreter.
to the Doctrine of Christ, and the writings of his Apostles and Prophets,
which are a most sure and infallible word, if they be understood according to
Christ's mind, and not according to Man's.)

Now when I read those Animadversions, I found them very Captious, Slight,
Weak, and grossly erroneous, and somewhat like the Animadversions of the
Sorbonists on some of Luthers writings; And this has not been my Judgment
only, but also it has been represented to me from godly and understanding
Christians, that this great undertaking of this Doctor is judged such by them,
that it deserves no more Refutation; his Animadversions compared only with the
Discourse it self, being sufficiently for ever already confuted by it. And
truly I cannot but bless God, who has given his Truth so weak an Enemy, and
Error and Darkness so weak a Patron.

But by this the true Church may judge also, what a sad Ministry these poor
Nations have received from Antichrists Ordination, when the chief Doctors, the
very Scribes and Pharisees among the Clergy, do not know the very first
Principles of the Gospel, in any spiritual light, or by any Teaching from God,
but all their cold, faint, and uncertain. Doctrine they scrape from Fathers,
and Schoolmen, and from other Ordinary Systemes of Divinity, without any
presence of Faith, or anointing of the Spirit, whereby all their Doctrine
becomes carnal, and corrupt, and contrary to Christ's mind, and agreeable to
Antichrists; So that I cannot choose but conclude with John Hus, THAT ALL THE
CLERGY MUST BE QUITE TAKEN AWAY ERE THE Joan. Hus libr. de vita and Reg.
Antichrist. cap. 37.
CHURCH OF CHRIST CAN HAVE ANY TRUE REFORMATION.

Another thing has happened in this matter, which makes me wonder, and that
is, that those few Shreds of weakness and Error published by Mr. Chambers,
should be so honorably licensed by so famous a Divine, as the present
Vicechancellor of Oxford, a man of such excellent Mr. Owen.
Learning and Judgment; But truly such Doctrine deserved such a License, that
something at least might make it considerable; Whereas the true Doctrine of
Christ, the Word of Faith, the Word of the Kingdom, has a standing License
from Jesus Christ, and comes upon the World as the Rain and Dew, without asking
Prodiit ex adipe iniquitas eorum, transierunt in affectum cordis.
leave of Man or the Son of Man. But great Places are greatly dangerous to
those whose Faith is not stronger then their form; And so I leave this also to
the Wisdom and Judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, into whose hands God has
given all things.

Christian, acquaint thy self much with the Word of God, and be much in the
prayer of Faith, for some of the Angels are preparing to sound the Last
Trumpets, and to pour out the Last Vials on the very Seat and Throne of the
Beast; and we hope ere long, to hear that shout of Triumph in the Spiritual
Church, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, is fallen, and is now become the Habitation of
Devils, and unclean Spirits, which before was the Habitation of Hypocrites, and
false Christians, yet covered over with all the most glorious shows of Religion
and Holiness, that the Deceiveableness of Unrighteousness could put upon them.
And now (if thou please) read on, and let the Spiritual man judge, who judges
all things.

William Dell.

The stumbling Stone.
Math. 11. ver. 6. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.
THese words are the conclusion of Christ's Answer to that Question which John
the Baptist John's Question.
propounded to him by two of his Disciples, himself being in prison: the
Question was this, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?

Now it is much disputed, whether John Some say, John did not ask it for his
own sake;
himself did at this time doubt of Christ or no? and several men give in
several Opinions, which I shall not now stand to recite: but all almost, both
Ancient and Modern, do conclude, that John propounded this Question to Christ,
not that he himself did now doubt whether Christ were the true Messiah or no,
seeing He had before given so clear a Testimony to Christ, that he was the Lamb
of God that takes away the sins of the world, and had also Baptized him with
water, and had seen at that time the Heavens opening, and the Spirit of God as
a Dove descending and resting on Christ, and had heard the Fathers own voice,
saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: Wherefore they say,
that John himself could not possibly after all this, doubt of Christ; and
therefore that he did not propound this Question to him by his Disciples But
for his Disciples.
for his own sake, but for Theirs, that they who before had envied Christ for
their Masters sake, and would rather have had John to have been the Messiah
then him, might now be assured and fully instructed touching Christ, from
Christ Himself: Thus they.

But for my part, I do conceive that John did propound this The Authors
judgment.
Question to Christ for his own sake rather then for his Disciples: For though
when he lived in peace and freedom he had a clear Revelation from the Father
touching the Son by the Spirit, and had accordingly clearly spoken of Christ to
others, yet now being in Prison and Bonds, and near unto death, he is brought
by great Tribulation and Temptation, to doubt of all that Truth which before he
had been taught of God, and even to question whether Christ were the true
Christ or no? For thought he, If he be the true Christ, why does he not send
Redemption to me, who suffer for his sake, but suffer me thus to perish, whilst
he might help me, if he be the Christ? and if he work Miracles for others (as I
hear he does) why does he wholly neglect me, who have given such an honorable
Testimony to the world of him?

And truly, (brethren) we know not what place or power the Tribulation our
trial.
Gospel of God our Savior has in us, till Tribulation come: and so much of
the true knowledge of Christ, and of true faith in Christ we have indeed, as we
have strength in such hours. That truth which we confess freely in Prosperity,
we are fain to begin to learn it again in Tribulation: and Tribulation makes us
learn the Truth over again the second time: it makes us to learn that in
Experience, which before we had learned only in Doctrine.

And how hard a matter it is to hold fast in Trouble, that Truth Hard to hold
fast truth in Trouble.
which we well know and freely profess in Prosperity, we may see, not only in
John the Baptist, (who being in Prison, doubted whether Christ were the true
Christ, after he had been so clearly taught him, by God and his Spirit, and had
so plainly confessed him) but also in the Disciples of Christ, who though they
had heard all his Doctrine, and seen all his works, and had confessed him to be
Christ the Son of the living God, yet when the Highpriests were enraged, and
the People in an uproar, and when they beheld the Swords and the Staves, and
Christ was apprehended, and themselves in danger, they were all offended at him
and fled. Yea, we may see it in Christ himself, who though the Father had
testified touching him three times from Heaven; saying, this is my beloved Son,
etc. Yet when his suffering drew near, he exceedingly feared, and was amazed
and astonished, and on the Cross cried out aloud, my God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me?


My brethren, no man knows the grievousness and efficacy of Tribulation, and
the weakness and frailty of Humane Nature, but they who have had experience of
both: but this is the comfort of the faithful, that that knowledge of Christ
and the Gospel, which God has taught us, and we have heard and learned from
him, will certainly endure and hold out throughout all the greatest and longest
storms of Tribulation and Temptation, though with much striving and difficulty:
but they who have had much knowledge of the Truth, and have made a glorious
profession of it before men, and yet have wanted the true Teaching of God, and
true faith through that teaching, such when Tribulations and Difficulties have
risen up, have quite departed from the Truth, and have often renounced it.

We know not brethren (I say again) what we do believe aright, touching Christ
and his Gospel, touching the Love of God to us, and the Remission of our sin,
etc. till distress, and Tribulation and death come; and what we are then, we
are that indeed; Yea, at such times, we are to be judged according to our
faith, and not according to our sense and feeling.

Luther was wont to say, that in Temptation he could hardly make Luther.
use at all of that Doctrine of the free Grace of God to sinners, and of faith
in Christ crucified, etc. which at other times he did preach in much knowledge
and utterance. And he said another time, That if he were addicted to Gods word
at all times alike, and could find such love and desire thereto in his heart
always, as he did sometimes, he should reckon himself the happiest man in the
world.

Now from all these things I conclude, that John being in Prison, Conclusion of
this.
and being fallen into many Tribulations and Temptations, did send these two
Disciples unto Christ for his own cause, and for his own confirmation, as it is
said ver. 2. and 3.

Ver. 2. When John had heard in prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his
Disciples.

Ver. 3. And said unto him, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for
another?

Whence we are farther to observe,

Note.
That John in his doubting sends to Christ himself, and would not turn aside to
the Scribes and Pharisees, to take advice from them, or to demand their
judgment.

For true faith, in all doubtings touching Christ, goes to Christ himself for
Resolution, and will be satisfied from none but from Faith asks of Christ.
Christ.

And Christ is as ready to satisfy John, as John to inquire and ask; and so he
returns him this Answer by his Disciples. Christ answers faith.


Ver. 4. Go and show John again those things you see and hear.

Ver. 5. The blind receive their sight, and the lame walk; the lepers are
cleansed, and the deaf hear; the dead are raised up, and the poor have the
Gospel preached to them: and now let John himself resolve his own Question,
whether I am the true Christ or no.

Go show John the things you see and hear.

Where you see, that Christ does not say in plain terms that he was the Christ;
yea he often forbade men to say so; but he would Christ, how known?
have his Works and his Word declare what he was, that our faith might have a
sure foundation.

1. Christ would be known by his Works.

The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, etc. and so everywhere 1. Christ
known by his works. 1. In himself the Head.
in the Gospel, Christ would be known to be what he was, by his Works*
particularly in Ioh. 10. 24. when the Jews came round about him, and said, How
long do thou make us doubt? if thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.

Jesus thus answered them, ver. 25. I told you, and ye believed not; the works
that I do in my Fathers name they bear witness of me.

And ver. 37. 38. he says to them, If I do not the works of my father, believe
me not; But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works, that ye may
know and believe that the father is in me, and I in him.

Thus you see, that Christ will be known to be what he is by his Works.

For Christ, the Power, Wisdom and Righteousness of God, is a most lively and
active Principle, and cannot lie hid where he is present and dwells; but when
this Word was made flesh. i. e. came into the flesh, it did manifest it self to
be in that flesh, by doing the works of God; and without the works of God the
presence of the eternal word in the flesh of Christ had not been known.
Wherefore Christ is called God manifested in the flesh, and not hidden; and he
was manifest to be God in the flesh, by doing the works of God.

And as Christ is known by his works, in himself the Head, so also 2. In the
Church his body.
in the Church his Body: for wherever Christ's Presence is, there also are his
Works; and where his Works are not, there neither is his Presence.

If Christ be present in our hearts by faith, his Works will be undoubtedly
manifest in our lives.

But it is not necessary for every Christian to do the Works of Christ here
mentioned, to wit, to cause the blind to see, and the lame to walk, etc.

howeever there are other Works of Christ besides these, which are inseparable
from his presence, as the work of faith, and labor of love, and patience of
hope, together with the selfdenial of Christ, the Meekness, Lowliness,
Goodness, Long suffering, Heavenly-mindedness of Christ; as also his readiness
and d^ligence to do the will of God, and his cheerfulness to suffer it; these
works (I say) every one ought to perform, that is a Christian, that so Christ
may still be known by his works, as the Apostle says, Show me thy faith by thy
works, that is, let me know the presence of Christ in thee, by the works of
Christ.

And thus is Christ known by his works, both in Himself and in his Members. And
thus much touching the Works of Christ in general.

Now for the kind of the Works which Christ did, as, to give The Kind of
Christ's works.
eyes to the blind, and strength to the lame, etc. it is to be noted, that they
all are such works as the Prophets had foretold the Messiah should perform when
he came into the world, as Isai. 35. ver. 5. Behold God will come and save you;
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf that be
unstopped; then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the tongue of the dumb
sing: and He that did these things, thus foretold by the Spirit, must needs be
the true Christ: and these works were a demonstration of the efficacy of his
Unction.

And thus Christ does here describe himself by his own proper Christ's Kingdom
lies with the afflicted.
works, as one whose business, employment and Kingdom lies with the Poor, Lame,
Blind, and all sorts of Diseased, Afflicted, Sorrowful and distressed persons;
and these poor creatures he does not neglect and despise, but his proper Office
is among these, and these he comprehends in the greatest love, and pitties with
the tenderest bowels, and minds and tends with the greatest care and diligence,
and relieves, and helps, and saves them perfectly.

Whence first we learn, That Christ's Kingdom brings good to Christ's Kingdom
brings good to all.
all, but it receives nothing from any body; For it carries in it all the
unsearchable Riches of God, and stands in need of nothing that man can do.
Wherefore it entertains not the rich, and full, and noble, and honorable of
the world, and such as abound already, and have enough in themselves and the
creatures; but only the poor, and needy, and afflicted, and desolate, and it
supplies these freely and richly, and sends the other empty away. And this is
the true Nature of Christ's Kingdom.

Secondly, Seeing Christ in his proper Office has only to do Nothing but
goodness in Christ.
with the poor and afflicted people, we may learn to make a right judgment of
Christ, that is, that our Lord Christ is such a sweet Savior, that in him is
nothing but love, and mercy, and goodness, and compassion, and kindness to such
as are in distress, and in grievous fears and agonies from the sense of sin and
wrath, and from the presence of Death and Hell working in them. And we must
believe Christ to be such an one as the Gospel represents him, that we may come
to him with comfort, and put our whole trust in him, in all times of sin and
sorrow, and in all hours of darkness, and temptation: and let us never
entertain any other thoughts of Christ then these, but let us hold him
unchangeably for such an one as the Gospel reveals him, what ever the Law, or
our evil consciences, or the Devil shall suggest to the contrary; and then in
all our distresses we shall not be afraid of Christ as of a severe Lawgiver,
and an unexorable Judge, but may run to him as to our merciful and powerful
Savior, whose proper Office is among the afflicted.

And thus we see that Christ is known by his Works, and what kind of works
they are.

Secondly, Christ would be known by his Word. 2. Christ known by his Word.


And as Christ is known by his Works, so also by his Word, and therefore he
says, Go show John the things you see and hear; and the things you hear as
well as the things you see, and that is, that the poor have the Gospel preached
to them.

For Christ's works and Christ's Word do always go together. Christ's works and
word go always together.
Christ's Life is always accompanied with Christ's Doctrine, and his works with
his Word.

The best works that any man can do, without the word of the Gospel
accompanying them, are not Christ's Works; and the most glorius word that any
man can hold forth, without the works of Christ accompanying it, is not Christ's
word: but Christ's works and Christ's word go always together, both in himself
the Head, and in the true Church his body: Wherefore Christ says, Go show to
John the things you see, and hear: the things you see; the blind receive their
sight, etc. the things you hear; and the poor have the Gospel preached to them.

Now the Gospel is the free promise of God, in which nothing The Gospel, what
it is.
but mere love, mercy and grace is offered in Jesus Christ to them that
believe, though they be never so great and grievous Sinners in themselves. And
nothing is more joyful then this to the soul that is under the sense of Sin
and wrath: and he that receives this Word of Grace by true faith, does not
weigh a feather all the terrors of the Law, Sin, Death and Hell. So that all
the outward works of Christ are a small matter, if compared to the Gospel.

Now this Gospel is preached to the Poor, that is, to the Poor in It is
preached to the poor.
Spirit; and these are such, who do not love, nor desire, nor delight in
present things, but are so afflicted and oppressed in their heart and
consciences with the sense of sin and wrath, that they regard not the world,
nor the Riches, Pleasures, and Honors of it, but all they mind, or care for, is
Jesus Christ, and in Him, the love of God, and the Remission of sin, and the
gift of the Spirit. These are the Poor to whom Christ Preaches the Gospel, and
they only regard and entertain the Gospel, whilst the Lovers of this world,
and the Lovers of themselves and this present life, care not for it.

And thus is Christ known, by preaching the Gospel to the poor. Christ known by
the Gospel as Moses by the Law.
Moses his Ministry was full of wrath, terror, and death to sinners; but
Christ's ministry holds forth nothing to the greatest sinners in the world, that
are sensible of sin, but the free Grace and Mercy of God to them, even to them,
in pardoning their sin, and Christ known by the Word in the Church his body,
as well as in himself the Head.
giving them righteousness; and by this word Christ is well known, to the whole
true Church of God.

And as Christ is known by his Word in himself the Head, so also in the Church
his Body; for wherever Christ is present, there is his Word, as well as his
works; and where Christ's true Word is not, neither is his presence there.
Wherefore all the faithful, as they have received the Gospel themselves, so
they hold forth the same Gospel to others, upon all opportunities, according to
the Covenant which God made with Christ touching his Seed, which is mentioned
Isa. 51. ver. 21. As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord; my
Spirit which is upon thee, and the words which I have put into thy mouth (that
is, the Gospel) shall never depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of
thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from henceforth and for ever.
By which Scripture we may learn, that the Ministry of the New Testament is a
common Ministry, belonging equally and alike to all the seed of Christ, that
is, to all true believers: for when Christ dwells in their hearts by faith, who
shall hinder Christ in them, from speaking the Word of God by them?

For God does not consider men as the World does, to wit, as they are
Tradesmen, or Gentlemen, or Scholars, or Clergymen, but God considers men
either as Believers, or Unbelievers.
he considers men as Believers, or Unbelievers. And if they be Unbelievers,
then are they destitute of the true presence of Christ, and of the true Word of
Christ, what ever their outward condition be in the World, yea though they be
Scholars and Clergymen; and if they are Believers, then have they Christ's
true presence and word with them, what ever their outward condition is in the
world, yea though they be Gentlemen or Tradesmen; and every one of them says
with David and with Paul, I believed, therefore have I spoken.

So that we are not to conceive of the spiritual Church according The true
Ministry is only of Believers.
to any outward state or condition in the world, but according to Faith,
through which Christ dwells in the hearts of believers; and if Christ the
living word of God, dwell in them, he will not keep silence.

And this confession of the word before the world, Christ requires of all
believers alike, saying, He that confesses me before men, him will I confess
before my father, and before his Angels; and there is no true and right
confessing Christ without holding forth the word and Doctrine of the Gospel.

So then, every one that is of God, speaks Gods word; and he that speaks it
not, is not of God; for in all the true children of God, the Spirit of their
father speaks in them. And thus, the true presence of Christ is known by the
word of the Gospel in the Church his body, and in every one of his Members
as well, as in himself the head. This Doctrine, the carnal Church is a great
enemy to, and The carnal Church offended at this Doctrine.
will not suffer Christ to speak by whom he pleases, that so all men may be
necessitated to hear its Clergy, whether they speak the word of Christ, or no:
but of this more hereafter.

And thus you have seen, how Christ gives forth himself to be known by his
works and by his word; and without these two we can have no certain Testimony
of him, in the world.

Now Christ having returned this full and satisfactory Answer The Conclusion of
Christ's Answer to John.
to John, to declare to him who he was, adds this in the conclusion,

And blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.

For notwithstanding the works and word of Christ, which are The World offended
at Christ, notwithstanding his works and Word.
the works and word of God in the flesh, yet the Wisdom and Prudence of the
flesh, and the Religion and Righteousness of the World, which do not much
regard those things, do find much matter of scandal and offense in Jesus
Christ; wherefore Christ says, Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended
in me.

Now in discoursing touching the Offense, which is taken against This Offense
discoursed of.
Christ by men, I shall observe this Order; I shall show

1. Who they are that are offended at Christ. 2. What those things are whereat
they are offended, and why they are offended at them. 3. What a great evil it
is to be so offended. 4. What a great blessedness it is not to be so offended,
and* 5. Make some Use of all.
1. Point.
Who they are that are offended at Christ.

1. Who offended at Christ. 1. The whole World.
And here I affirm, first that the whole world in general is offended at Christ;
for they living without the word and Spirit of faith, must needs be offended at
Christ, by all those scandals which are raised up against Christ, by the Devil
and men; and they all having a false apprehension of Christ, do suck in as
readily as a spring does water, what ever aspersions and reproaches are raised
against him, and so must needs be offended at him: and therefore says Christ,
Mat. 18 ver. 7. woe be to the world because of offenses; for Offenses must needs
come, and the world will needs receive them, and therefore woe be to the world.

So that the whole World, that is, whosoever are not true believers, and born
of God, are all offended at Christ and his Gospel* and all the children of the
first Adam are offended at the second Adam, who is wholly unlike to them, yea
and in all things most contrary to them.

2. Yea secondly, Not only the common people of the World, And herein the chief
and choice men of the World.
vulgar and contemptible men, are offended at Christ, but also all the chief
and choice men of the world, Kings of the earth, and Rulers, and Judges, and
Magistrates, as in Psalm. 2. and all the best, and learned, and wisest, and
greatest, and most honorable men, these all are offended at Christ. 1 Cor. 2.
8. which none of the Princes of this world knew; he means it of Philosophers
as well as of secular Powers; and not knowing him, they Crucified him.

2. Not the World only are offended at Christ, but also the Worldly and carnal
Church, the Outward, Visible, National Church, 2. The Worldly Church.
this is very much offended at him. This we see in Christ's time, that the only
Visible Church of God in the World, the Church of the Jews, (for the Church of
the Old Testament, was a Visible Church, but the Church of the New Testament is
a Spiritual Church, and not visible) I say, the Jewish Church, which had the
Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, and observed all the outward
Ordinances of God exactly, they were all Offended at Christ, and made an Order
that whosoever acknowledged him should be excommunicated, and cast out of the
Synagogue.

And this Offense was foretold by Isai. chap. 8. ver. 14. where he says of
Christ, And he shall be for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of Offense to
both Houses of Israel, for a ginne, and for a snare to the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem. So that not Babylon only, but Jerusalem; and not the Heathen only,
but both the Houses of Israel were offended at Christ; and this makes the evil
yet more grievous.

And yet this is not all; but secondly, and not only the carnal Christians, but
the carnal Clergy are offended at Christ; and not And herein the Ministers and
chief Rulers.
only the common people of the National Church, but the chief Rulers, the most
eminent, and in appearance most Godly and Holy and Orthodox of the Clergy, are
above all others most grievously offended at Christ. This also we see done in
Christ's time, when the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Rulers of the People, men of
great reputation and renown, for Religion, and Righteousness, these were
chiefly, and above the rest of the Church, offended at Christ; and as Christ
everywhere was most sharp against them, and did most reprove them; so they did
most bitterly oppose Christ. And this also was foretold by the Spirit of
Prophecy, Psalm 118. 22. The stone which the Builders refused, is become the
Head of the corner: this rejected stone, is Christ himself; and these Builders
were the chief Rulers and Governors of the Church, and accordinly both Christ
and the Apostles applied this Scripture to them, as you may see Mat 21. 42. and
Act. 4. 11.

So that the Builders, that teach, and instruct, and govern the Church, and are
reputed the best, and most profitable and necessary men in it, yea the very
Pillars of the Church, so that all would come to naught, and to ruin without
them, these are the men that are most offended at Christ.

These are the Husbandmen mentioned by Christ, Mat. 21. that conspired against
the Son of the Lord of the Vineyard, and killed him; and these have been, and
still are, Nullus est alius Antichristus in mundo, neque venturus quam
Sacerdotes. 10. Hus. By Priests he means the Clergy, who challenge to
themselves a proper and singular Priesthood distinct and apart from other
Christians.
the chief and great outward Antichrist in the World.

Now when the People see the Rulers and Governors of the Church, who are
thought to have more Knowledge, Learning, Light, and Religion then others,
offended at Christ, this exceedingly increases their Offense; and when they see
the Builders rejecting and throwing away this Stone, this causes them to reject
him also with the greater indignation.

And thus you see that this Offense at Christ, is a great and a large evil, and
is spread over all the World and Worldly Church, and very few there are who do
escape it.

And this for the first thing.

2. Point,
At what things in Christ they are Offended, and why they are 2. General, At
what offended in Christ.
Offended at them.

Now the World and the Worldly Church are Offended

1. At Christ Himself. 2. At his true Word. 3. At his true Worship. 4. At his
true Church. 5. At his true Ministry. 6. At his true Government.
Of these things I shall speak in Order according to the good hand of God with
me, and shall desire to be so faithful to Christ as not to depart one hairs
breadth from his truth, though it may be it will come to pass that all or the
greatest part of you will be grievously Offended at it.

I begin with the first, and will show, that the World and Worldly Church are
offended

1. At Christ Himself. 1. At Christ himself, and in him


And they are offended at him in many regards, of which I shall mention these
five.

1. They are offended at the meanness of his ontward condition 1. At the
Meaness of his outward condition in the World.
in the World. For indeed he was in a very low, plain, simple, and contemptible
condition, in the days of his flesh, as any ordinary Tradesmen in this Town,
and lived with Joseph in his Trade of a Carpenter. Wherefore Paul says of him,
Phil. 2. that he made himself of no account, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in outward appearance as any other man. That is, he was
in the outward condition of any ordinary man in the World.

Now this mean condition of Christ, did much offend them; for thought they, is
this the Christ, of whom all the Prophets have spoke such glorious things? whom
all the Jews expect? and who is the desire of all Nations? Is this He whose
name is wonderful, Councellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace, of the increase of whose Government and Peace there should be
no end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order it, and to
stablish it with Justice and Judgment from henceforth and for ever? Is this
plain ordinary man the Messiah? how can this thing be? For they thought that
the true Christ, of whom such excellent things were spoken, should be some
great Prince or learned Priest; and that that form of a servant and mean
condition in which he was, could in no measure agree or be suitable to the true
Christ; And for this cause, they were greatly offended at him, and thought Him
not worthy to be in any place of reckoning.

2. They were offended that he being in so mean an outward 2. That in so low a
condition such high things were spoken of him.
condition, John Baptist should yet speak such high things of Him, and he of
Himself. John Baptist testified of him, that he was the only begotten Son in
the bosom of the Father; the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
World; the fountain of the fullness of all the Saints; the beloved Son unto
whose hands the Father had given all things; and that he that did believe in
him, had everlasting life; and he that did not, should not see life, but the
wrath of God should abide on him, etc. and these all were wonderful things, to
be spoken of one whose outward condition in the World was so plain and
contemptible.

And as John had spoken these things of Christ, so Christ everywhere gives
forth himself as the Son of God, and said, He and his Father were one. And this
exceeding offended the Jews, as you may see John 5. 18. The Jews sought to kill
him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, but also because he had said,
God was his Father, making himself equal with God. And John 10. 31. The Jews
took up Stones to Stone him, and said, we Stone thee not for a good work, but
for blasphemy, and because thou being a man make thy self God. And so they
were all offended at this Mystery, God manifest in the flesh, in the flesh of
so mean and despicable a person in the eye of the World.

3. They were offended at Christ, because in him was no humane 3. Because in
Christ was no merely humane nor carnal thing.
or worldly thing, which any Natural or Carnal man could possibly like of, or
delight in; He excercised no worldly wit, Wsdom, Reason, Learning, Parts, nor
any thing that might commend him to the World; neither did he live in any
outward forms of Religion or Worship which might commend him to the carnal
Church. There was nothing in Him but the presence and manifestation of God, the
Word of God, the Righteousness of God, the Nature of God, the Spirit of God,
the Works of God, and God was all in all in Christ; and God is wholly contrary
to the World, and the World to God; And so the World and worldly Church were
wholly offended at Christ, He being altogether in the Father, and the Father in
him, in such sort that the Father in him spoke all the words, and did all the
works, and he could neither do nor speak any thing of himself* he was taken up,
unto so near Union and Communion with God.

4. They were offended at the reproaches and misreports that 4. They were
offended at his Reproaches.
went commonly abroad touching Christ, raised for the most part by the Scribes,
and Pharisees, and Rulers of the Church, because they knew and were assured
that Christ's prevailing would be their undoing; Therefore they gave out that he
was a Sabbath-breaker, a Blasphemer, an unlearned and ignorant man, and that
made him err, a Vicious man, a Glutton and Winebibber, a friend of Publicans
and sinners, and that he had a Devil, and was mad; these were the common
reports that were commonly divulged abroad touching Christ, and that by the
Teachers of the best repute in the Church; and the common people reckoned them
to be very true, and thereupon were horribly offended both at Christ's Doctrine
and works.

And this was Christ a very sign to be spoken against, which Isaiah foreseeing
in the Spirit, speaks thus in the person of the offended Jewish Church, Isai.
63. 3. He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief, and we hid as it were our faces from him; he was despised and we
esteemed him not. And Christ himself by the Prophet complains of this usage,
saying, they laid to my charge the things that I knew not; But yet these false
reports so far prevailed, that he became a Stranger to his brethren, and an
Alien to his Mothers own Children.

5. They were offended at him because of his bitter and shameful cross and
sufferings; and herein lay the height, and depth of that 5. At his sufferings.
Offense for which the World and worldly Church look at Christ. For the
Ecclesiastical Power condemned him as a deceiver, and blasphemer, and they also
prevailed with the secular Power to condemn him as a Seditious person, an Enemy
to Caesar, and a Rebel; And so after all the works of God which he had done,
and works of God which he had taught, they at last Crucified him between two
Thieves by the common consent of all the People, and destroyed the Son of God,
as if he had been the Son of Perdition: And in all this bitter suffering no
body afforded him the least pity or compassion, but the common People mocked
him, and said, he saved others but cannnot save himself; if thou be the Son of
God, come down from the Cross.

And this usage Christ complains of to his Father, Psalm 22. 6. where he says,
that He by his cries had no deliverance, which yet Others who had trusted in
God obtained, but (says he) I am a worm, and no man, a reproach of men, and
despised of the People; All they that see me laugh me to scorn; they shout out
the lip, they shake the head, saying, be trusted in God, that he would deliver
him, let him deliver him if he delight in him. And Isaiah says, that by reason
of this strange suffering of Christ, many were astonished at him, his visage
was marred more then any man's, and his face more then the sons of men; and
through this suffering of Christ, all the World were so extremely offended,
that Christ crucified was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness.

And thus was and is the World and Worldly Church offended at the true Christ,
whom the Scriptures hold forth. Indeed the false Church have fancied to
themselves such a Christ as flesh and blood can like of well enough, a Christ
fashioned after the mind and will, and Wisdom, and Prudence, and Righteousness
of man, and such a Christ they extol and magnify, to wit for their own worldly
advantage sake, as the Papists have fancied the por Virgin his Mother, who kept
Joseph's house, and provided his diet, and laid her hands to the performance of
his ordinary household affairs, to be a gallant Lady, and have clothed her in
Silk, and Satin, and rich attire; and such a Mother of Christ they do highly
esteem; whereas the poor Virgin, the true believer, who lived in the plain and
laborious employment of a Family, they would even scorn to regard such an one:
No more will the carnal Church regard or value the true Christ in his mean
condition and marred Visage.

And thus much for their Offense at Christ himself.

2. The World and Worldly Church are offended at Christ's true 2. They are
offended at his his true Word.
Word,

Because Christ under the New Testament, has given forth a New Word, which is
the Word of the Gospel; And this also they are offended at, in many regards;
as,

1. Because it is the word of Faith; the word of Faith, and not 1. Because it
is the Word of faith.
of Sense; the Word of Faith, and not of Works. For this Word of Faith is
wholly a Spiritual Word, and has nothing in it that is suitable to flesh and
blood; Nothing in it, that pleases the Fancy, or Reason, or Understanding of
man; it has nothing in it 2. Because it exalts Christ alone, and God in Christ.
wherein a Natural or Carnal heart can take pleasure, but is throughout a Word
of Faith.

2. They are offended at the New word of the New Testament, because it exalts
Christ alone, and in him the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, and the
Righteousness of God, and the Things of God; and cries down all the Things of
the World in which men trust and delight, and all the common Religion and
Righteousness of the World, and makes Christ all in all, and God in Christ, and
all other things nothing. So Paul 1 Cor. 1. preached to them that did believe,
Christ the power of God, and Christ the wisdom of God, and nothing else.

3. They are offended at this Word, because it cannot be learned as humane Arts
and Sciences can, to wit by the teaching of man, 3. Because it can only be
learned by the Teaching of God.
together with their own pains and endeavors, but only by the teaching of God
and his Spirit, as it is written, They (that is, the true children of the
Spiritual Church) shall be all taught of God; he therefore that has heard and
learned of my father, comes to me. All my divinity, (said Luther) consists
in this, that I believe that Christ only is the Lord touching whom the
scriptures speak, and neither my Grammar nor Hebrew tongue taught me this, but
it is the work of the holy spirit.

Now when God teaches us his word Himself, we have an other When God teaches
us his Word, we know it otherwise then other men.
understanding of it then other men who hear and read the same outward words,
and yet want that inward Teaching; For then have we the spiritual meaning of
the Word, and the very mind of Christ in it, which others want, that are not so
taught; And this offends the carnal Christians grievously, that the spiritual
Christians have another knowledge and understanding of the Word then they;
VVhereupon they thus break out, what (say they) are you the only men who have
the word of God, and is all wisdom and knowledge comprehended in your breasts?
and do you know more of the Mystery of of Christ then the grave and learned
men who have studied the Scriptures all their life? and will you with your
pretended teaching overthrow that Orthodox sense of the Scriptures that we have
had so many years? and thus they are greatly offended.

4. They are offended at this word because it discovers the 4. Because it
discovers the wickedness of the World, and worldly Church.
wickedness of the world and worldly Church at a very high rate. The world does
not seem the thousand part so wicked anywhere as it does where the Gospel
comes. For where this clear light of God shines, and the word comes in any
degree of truth and Power, there not only the wickedness of the world appears
out of measure wicked, but also the Religion, and Righteousness, and Works, and
Duties of the carnal Christians, are manifested to be gross hypocrisy, and the
deceivableness of unrighteousness, and wholly contrary to Christ, the
righteousness of God, and so nothing else but a more plausible way to Death,
and Hell.

Where the Word of Christ, or the Gospel of God comes in power, Many who seemed
good, are discovered to be very evil by the light of the Word.
there many who before seemed very Godly and Religious people, and very good
Christians, and very quiet and peaceable men, do presently become full of wrath
and rage, and cursed enmity against it, and call it Error, and Heresy, and
Blasphemy, and so do no less then spit in the very face of the Truth and Gospel
of Christ, which he has manifested above all his name: And no man could ever
have imagined they had been such children of the Devil, before the word came.

And thus by the coming of the Word in the Spiritual Sense and Doctrine of it,
many that did once seem to be Christ's Friends, are manifested to be his utter
Enemies. And this also was foretold by Simeon* Luke 2. Where he says, that by
the coming of Christ in his word, the thoughts of many hearts shall be
revealed, and then that unbelief and enmity against Christ, that before lay
hid, is discovered and brought forth by the Preaching of the Word, as we have
seen heretofore and still see by daily experience; And for this cause also they
are offended.

5. They are offended at the true Word, because everywhere so 5. Because so few
entertain it.
few entertain it and embrace it: As when Christ himself preached, there were
very few in all Judea and Jerusalem that entertained his Doctrine; and though
sometimes many thronged to hear him, yet at another time they were so offended
at his Doctrine, that they all forsook him; so that Christ said to the twelve,
John 6. Will ye also go away?

Now this makes many to be offended at the true Word, that when it comes to any
town or people, the far greater part should reject it, and speak evil of it;
and they for the most part, the greatest, wisest, and learned men, and that
only a few poor and contemptible people should receive it; this also
exceedingly offends.

6. And lastly, They are offended because the true Word of Christ 6. Because it
occasions troubles.
where it comes in any evidence, and demonstration of the Spirit* brings
Troubles, Tumults, Stirs, and Vproars in the World, ac to that of Christ; Mat.
10. 34. I came not to send peace but a sword; for I am come to set a man at
variance against his Father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law. For the true word of Christ, is such
a sword as cuts in sunder all Natural and Civil relations, and takes away the
peace of any place where it comes in power. Christ says also, Luke 12. 49. I
am come to send fire on the earth, and what will I if it be already kindled?
This fire that Christ sends is the word, in the ministration of the spirit, of
which the Lord says by the Prophet, is not my word as fire? and this word
comes to burn up all the corrupt Manners Fashions, Customs; Yea all the lusts
and sins of the world, and all the Antichristian Doctrine, and forms of
worship in the outward Church. And when this fire begins to burn anywhere,
presently all the people are in an uproar, and lay all their heads, and use all
their hands together to quench it.

So that wherever the true word comes, the heathen rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing; the Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Rulers
take council together against it, and say, Let us break these bonds in sunder,
and cast away these cords from us, which no flesh and blood, especially the
Rich, Wise, Learned, Honorable, would endure to be bound in.

Now this exceedingly offends; For say they, before this kind of word came in,
all things were better and more quiet: Under Episcopacy The world say, before
the Gospel came* all things were quiet.
all things were well, and in good order; But since this new Doctrine came in,
all things are full of trouble, mischief, wars and death; and therefore they
reckon this word the cause of all the evils we have and do endure.

But yet the cause of all these tumults, are not truly in the word, The word is
not properly the cause of these Tumults, but by accident.
but in the world, and in the Devil. Christ he will have his Christians to
publish his word, and thereby to gather together his elect unto him: now the
World, and the Devil, the Prince of it, will not suffer this to be done
quietly, and hence arise all tumults. The Devil who has the first possession
of the world, would have all things quiet, that he might keep his possession;
but Christ will not suffer it to be so, but he will have all those whom his
Father has given him, out of the Devils possession, by the might and efficacy
of his word; but the Devil will not endure that this should be done quietly,
but stirs us all the World against the word.

And so where ever the word comes in truth, there are always troubles and
uproares; but where the word is preached, and the world is quiet, that for
certain is not the true word of God.

Wherefore the dull and drousie Divinity of Synods, and Schools, The ordinary
Divinity of the Schools is none of Christ's Word.
cannot be the true word of Christ, for that meets with no opposition and
contradiction at all from the World, or worldly Church; it meets with no
enemies, and avengers amongst them, but it is rather praised and embraced, and
honored with degrees and Scarlet, and the Professors and Publishers of it are
in credit with men, and worldly Powers, and receive from them, riches, honor,
and quiet life; whereas the true Doctrine of Christ can never be published
without the offense of the world.

And thus much for their offense at the true word of Christ.

3. They are offended at his true Worship. 3. At his true Worship.


For Christ under the New Testament has instituted a New-Worship, and this the
World and worldly Church are also greatly offended at.

Because this Worship is wholly spiritual, and has nothing carnal Because it
is Spiritual. De instituendo cultu notanda est haec regula, Sine Spiritu Sancto
non est suscipienda ulla ratio, aut modus colendi Dei. Luther in c. 35. Genesis
Cultus Dei principaliter and vere consistit non in externis operibus, sed in
fide, spe and dilectione Dei. Luth. in cap. 25. Genesis
in it, but consists altogether of Grace and truth, according to that of
Christ, Ioh. 4. 23. The hour comes (says He) and now is, that the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit, and in Truth; For the Father
seeks such to worship him; God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must
worship him in Spirit and in Truth* and there is no worship in truth, but that
which is in Spirit. And Paul says of true believers, Phil. 3. 2. we are the
Circumcision, who worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the
flesh.

Now this spiritual Worship, stands in Faith, Hope, and Love, whereby our old
nature is mortified, and we bring forth spiritual fruit unto God, and to our
brother. And this Worship of the New Testament being wholly spiritual, is free
from Time, Place, and Person, as all spiritual things are; and so at all times,
and in all places alike, this worship may be performed by all persons alike,
who are true believers; And so accordingly do all true believers, at all times,
and in all places alike believe in God, and trust in him, and fear him, and
love him, and delight in him, and speak good of his name and also do good to
their brother, in Instructing, Teaching, Exhorting, Comforting him, and Helping
him as freely as Christ has helped them; And this is the chief and indeed the
only true Worship of the New Testament.

For the Gospel has taught us that Christ is the trueTemple, wherein the
Church of the New Testament, which is a Kingdom of Priests, are all alike to
Worship God without any difference, or distinction of persons: And also that
Christ is our Rest as well as our Righteousness; and it is as great a sin to
make another Rest then Christ, as it is to make another Righteousness then
Christ; For in him alone we are complete and furnished, to all things that
appertain to the Kingdom of God; And stand in need of nothing out of him:
Wherefore it is said, Heb. 4. 3. He which has believed is entered into the
rest, that is, into Christ and his Righteousness, and so has ceased from his
own works, as God did from his.

Now the World and worldly Church are greatly offended at this And because this
Spiritual worship, makes no great show.
Spiritual Worship; And that first, because it makes no great show, nor
presents no glorious outside to the World, to win their favor and applause,
and so they despise it as a Notional or Melancholic thing.

And secondly, because this is wholly, out of the reach and Power of the
Natural man, and no man by his free will, or Natural abilities And also is out
of the reach of the Natural man.
can attain thereunto. Wherefore they are offended at this kind of Worship,
and would have a Worship in the days of the Gospel, after the manner of the
Worship of the Law, a Worship standing in outward works, and Duties, and
Ceremonies, and in Observation of Days, Times, Places, Persons; And are much
scandalized at that Worship, which stands only in Faith, and Love, and makes
void all other things.

4. They are offended at the true Church of Christ. 4. At the true Church of
Christ.


Because Christ under the New Testament has set upon a New-Church, which is
not outward and visible as the Church of the Old Testament was; Neither carries
in it any worldly Pomp, Power, and Glory, as the Church of Antichrist does,
but it is wholly spiritual and invisible, and as utterly unknown to the World
as Christ himself.

The true Church under the New-Law is the Congregation of spiritual men,
gathered together, not in one outward place, but in What the true Church is.
one Faith, Hope, and Love, in one Spirit, in one Christ, in one God.

It is the company of the faithful, and elect, which have Christ for their Head.

And this Church is not known by any outward Orders or Forms, It is known only
by the Word of faith.
or Ceremonies, or manner of life, but only by the Word of Faith; seeing this
true spiritual Church is conceived and formed, is brought forth, and brought
up, is fed and clothed, is strengthened and adorned, is protected and perfected
by this word of faith alone; Yea the whole Nature, and life, and being, and
action of this Church, is in the word of faith.

2. They are offended at this Church because it is the habitation of God, and
his very Kingdom, wherein he himself is present, is manifested, 2. Because this
Church is the Habitation of God.
speaks, works, reigns, is glorified, and is all in all in it; And so it will
not receive unto it self any thing of the Power, Wisdom, and Righteousness of
Man. They are much offended to hear that this Church is the Temple of the
living God, and that God has said it himself, that he will dwell in them and
walk in them: And that God is in them of a Truth, and not by fancied habits of
created grace: And that they are filled with all the fullness of God: And that
they are living Stones in that Building, wherein Christ himself is the chief
corner Stone, and that they are all built together by the Spirit, to be the
Habitation of God: This does so exceedingly offend them, that is, causes them
to Blasphem, in crying out against this Doctrine of the Spirit of God as
Blasphemy.

3. They are offended at this New Church of the New Testament, 3. Because it
will be the true Church alone.
because it will be the Church of God alone, and will not acknowledge any to be
of it but such as are born of God, and have obtained like precious faith with
them: And so will have no constant communion with any, (how skilful soever in
the letter of the word, and how eminent so ever in outward forms of Religion)
but only with such who have true fellowship with the Father and the Son in the
Spirit.

4. They are offended at this Church because usually God calls unto it, not the
Great, and Honorable, and Wise, and Learned, but 4. Because it consists of
mean people.
mean, plain, and simple people, according to that of Paul, 1 Cor. 1. 26. You
see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called; But God has chosen the foolish things of
the world to confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty, and base things of the world and things which are
despised has God chosen; Yea and things that are not, to bring to naught
things that are. So that this true Church consists of a small company of Poor,
Mean, Simple, Base and despised men in the eyes of the World and worldly
Church; Yea of such, who in their judgment deserve to have no place nor being
in the World; And who now out of their own choice would willingly join
themselves to such a Congregation?

5. The great and worldly wise people are much offended at this 5. Because of
its outward afflicted condition.
Church, because of its outward afflicted condition in the World, it having
fellowship with Christ in all his sufferings; And so is always Reproached,
Despised, Slandered, Torn, Sp^t on, Buffeted, Crucified, and Mocked; And from
all, most, or some of these sufferings, the spiritual Church is never
privileged in the World: And by reason of these things, the visage of the true
Church seems foul deformed, and offensive in the eyes of men, whilst the
national and carnal Church is highly favored, esteemed, and preferred it self,
and has its chief Teachers honored with Scarlet, and Furrs; So that if Christ
were on the earth again, in his mean and plain condition, He would be ashamed
to own Them, and They would be as much 5. At the true Government of the Church.
1. Because Christ will force none but persuade all.
ashamed to own Him. And thus much for their offense at the true Church.

5. They are offended at the true Government of this Church.

Because Christ under the New Testament, as he has set up a New Church, so
also he has set up a New Government of this Church; and this also offends in
many regards.

1. In that Christ will have none brought to his Church, by outward In toto
Novo Testamento, non sunt praecepta urgentia, sed tantum exhortationes and
obsecrationes. Nec Christus nec Apostoli quenquam unquam coegerunt: and
Spiritus fanctus vocatur in hoc Spiritus Paracletus, ut exhortetur. Luth. 2.
Responso ad libr. Amber. Cathar. 2. Because an Equality in his Kingdom.
violence, and compulsion, though he have all Power in Heaven and in Earth; But
in the day of his Power, (that is, of the Gospel,) he only entertains the
willing People, and compells no body against their wills; seeing he seeks not
his own profit, but ours. Our Lord Jesus Christ gathers his true Church on
Earth, according to the Council and Mind of his Father in Heaven, and so will
entertain none but whom his Father draws, because he will have his Church not
one jot larger then the Election of Grace.

2. They are offended at his Government, in that in his true Church he makes an
equality between all Christians through Faith; and will have none over one
another, but will have all to serve one another in Love: And so he will have
him that would be the greatest, to be the least of all; and him that would be
the chief, to be the servant of all, as Himself came not to be served, but to
serve, and to give his life a ransom for many: And He was greater then all the
children of God, not through any worldly Greatness, Lordliness, or Dominion,
but through his teaching, and instructing them, and loving them, and serving
them, and suffering, and dying for them: And besides this Greatness, there is
nothing but Equality in his Church.

3. They are offended at his Government, in that Christ does 3. Because he does
all by his Word and Spirit only.
nothing in his Church, by the Decrees or Constitutions of Ecclesiastical men,
or by the secular Arm, and Power of the Magistrate, but he does all by his
Word, and Spirit, and nothing else: And these alone, without the addition of
any thing else, are infinitely sufficient, to do all that Christ would have
done in his Kingdom. 4. Because he will have us only to avoid heretics and not
to harm them.


4. In that he will have Us to love our Enemies, and to do good to them that do
evil to Us, and to pray for them that persecute Us and despitefully use Us; He
will not have us to be Enemies to any, or to do evil to any, or to persecute
and use despite to any: He will have us to beware of false Prophets, but not to
destroy them; And to avoid Heretics, but not to kill them; And will have
neither of them burnt with any fire, but the fire of Igne Charitatis comburendi
sunt haeretici, and quicunque impie sapiunt and docent. Luth. Tom. 2. 5. Will
have al done by the Law of Love only. In Novo Testamento ostenduntur omnia,
quae facienda omittendaque sunt, sed nemo cogitur; omnibus permittitur ut vel
pereant, vel salvi fiant. Luth. Respon. ad Ambros. Cathar. 6 At his true
Ministry. This Ministry made only by the Unction of the Spirit.
Love.

5. In that He will have all things in his Kingdom ordered and done only by the
Law of Love, and nothing by any Law of Violence or Compulsion.

Now this kind of Government of the true Church, does grievously offend the
World and worldly Church and the Governors of both; because They know no
Government of the Church at all, but that of the Ecclesiastical and Civil Power
intermingled, and if this be made void, they can do nothing at all in the
Government of the Church, but think according to their unbelife, all things
presently will come to Confusion; For they want Faith to commit the Government
of Christ's own Church to his own care; by his Word and Spirit. And thus they
are offended at this true Government also.

6. And Lastly (for I will name no more particulars at this time.)

They are offended at Christ's true Ministry.

Because Christ under the New Testament, has erected and constituted a New
Ministry, not through any Ecclesiastical Ordination, but meeerly through the
Unction of his Spirit, without any Regard at all to a man's outward calling or
condition in the World, but whether (as I said before) a man be a Scholar, or
Clergy man* or Gentleman, or Tradesman, if Christ call him, and pour forth his
Spirit on him, that, and that only makes him a true Minister of the New
Testament.

And of this New and Offensive Ministry to the World and worldly Church, Christ
himself was the first. For he was not of Christ himself the first of the New
Testament Ministers.
the tribe of Levi, as the Apostle says, Heb. 7. but of the tribe of Judah, of
which Moses speaks nothing touching Priesthood: how then did Christ become the
first and chief Minister of the New Testament? The Spirit of Christ tells us by
Isaiah, chap. 61. and Christ himse tells us Luke 4. saying, The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me; for he has anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, to
preach good tidings to the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted, etc. So that
our Lord Jesus Christ, being (according to the Dialect of Antichrist) a
Layman, and having never learned Lettters, nor been brought up a Scholar, but
being brought up with Joseph in the trade of a Carpenter, and not ordained
neitheir by the Church of the Jews, nor allowed by them, was yet the first and
chief Minister of the New Testament, through the Unction of the Spirit only.

Now the worldly Church were extremely offended at this very thing, as you may
see in the Gospel, Mat. 13. ver. 54. 55. Jesus came into his own country, and
taught them in the Synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, (for no man
spoke like him, for he taught with Authority, and not as the Scribes) but they
said, whence has this man (this Mechanic man) this wisdom, and these mighty
works? is not this the Carpenters Son? Is not his mother called Mary? And are
not his brethren and Sisters all with us? and they were offended in him: that
such a man that had no Degrees, nor Ordination, should yet be a Minister.

And as Christ himself was the first Minister of this sort, so he chose others
in the same manner: He chose Fishermen, and Tentmakers, He chose others like
himself.
and Publicans, plain men, and of ordinary employment in the world, and only
put his Spirit on them, and this was their sufficient Unction to the Ministry.
And thus it was foretold by Joel, chap. 2. ver. 28. And it shall come to pass
in the last days says the Lord, that I will pour out of my Spirit on all
flesh, and your sons and daughters shall prophecy. There needs nothing to the
Ministry of the New Testament but only Gods pouring out his Spirit: Wherefore
Christ bids his Disciples stay at Jerusalem till they should receive the
promise of the Spirit, and then they should go forth and Teach.

And so after, as Believers received the Spirit, so they became Ministers of
the New Testament, as we see in the Acts of the Apostles, and in the first 300.
years after Christ. For there is but one only Ministry of the New Testament,
which is common to all men alike who have received the Spirit of God, and to
none else, though never so excellently qualified with Natural Abilities and
Humane Learning.

For the things of the Gospel are altogether invisible things, and The things
of the Gospel cannot be known but by the teaching of the Spirit.
cannot be known but by the teaching of the Spirit, though a man have all the
Wisdom, and Knowledge in the World, as Paul declares 1 Cor. 2. ver. 8, 9, 10.
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor the Heart of man understood the things
which God has prepared for them that love him; but God has revealed them to
Us (believers) by the Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, yea the deep
things of God. For what man knows the things of a man, but the spirit of a
man that is in him? even so the things of God knows no man but the Spirit of
God. Now we have received, not the Spirit of the World (which for its highest
perfection has only humane Wisdom and Knowledge) but the Spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God.

Where we learn that the things of the Gospel and of the Kingdom of God, are
not known at all, nor discerned in the least measure, but by Gods Spirit; which
Spirit is given to all that believe, and this Spirit alone is sufficient, both
to enable us to know clearly and certainly the things of God, and also to
publish them unto others, and nothing of Man or the Creature can add to it.

Wherefore when Christ chose his Ministers according to his Fathers Council, he
chose not the Wise and Learned, but plain, simple men; that it might appear to
all the World, throughout all ages, how infinitely able the Unction of his
Spirit alone is, without any addition of any thing else, for the Ministry of
the New Testament: and Christ upon the serious consideration of this strange
choice of God by Him, breaks forth into this Thanksgiving, Mat. 11. 25. I thank
thee Father Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things (that is,
the Word of Faith and Mystery of Christ and his Kingdom) from the Wise and
Prudent, and have revealed them to babes; even so Father because it pleased
thee. And David admiring this wonderful dispensation, speaks thus in the joy
of his heart, Psalm. 8. ver. 1, 2. O Lord our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in
all the World, who have set thy Glory above the Heavens! and then showing
wherein this high Glory of God appears, says, Out of the mouth of babes and
sucklings have thou ordained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou
might still the enemy and the avenger. God uses no other Instrument to
overcome the greatest Enemies and Avengers, that arise in the World and worldly
Church, then the strength he ordaines out of the mouths of babes and sucklings,
that is true believers, who live only on the sincere milk of the Word.

The Lord had all the World before him, to have chosen out of it whom he
pleased to be the Instruments by whom he would hold forth his Word and Gospel
to all Nations; Yet in his infinite wisdom, and gracious Council, and good
Pleasure, he would pass by the Wise and Learned men, and great Philosophers,
and subtle Disputants, as Paul affirms 1 Cor. 1. 19. that God has said, I
will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and bring to nothing the Understanding of
the Prudent. God is so far from making use of Humane Wisdom, and Prudence in
the Gospel of his Son, that he quite destroys it, and brings it to nothing:
Wherefore Paul adds v. 20. Where is the wise? where is the learned, or lettered
man? where is the (...).
Disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
For after that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe. By the
foolishness of preaching, that is, by the Word of Faith out of the mouth of
Babes and Sucklings, which the World reckons foolishness: by this alone, does
God bring about the Salvation of the Elect.

Now at these things how grievously are the Worldly wise, and deep learned ones
(as they esteem themselves) offended? that Gods Spirit alone should be a
sufficient Unction for the Ministry of the New Testament, and that God should
on set purpose lay aside the Wise and Prudent men, and choose babes, and out of
their mouth ordain his great strength to set up Christ's Kingdom in the world,
and to destroy Antichrists? Yea this Doctrine will chiefly offend the
University and all in it of all Degrees. Objection By the Univerty.
University.

For you will say; If this be so, What need is there then of our Philosophy,
and of our Arts and Sciences to the Ministry of the New Testament? And what
need is there of our Acts and Cle^ums? And what need is there of our Scarlet,
and Tippets? And what need is there of our Hoods and Caps, etc. If the Unction
of the Spirit alone be sufficient for the right Ministry, and Christ do perfect
his praise by the mouths of Babes and sucklings, then what need is there of all
these things?

I Answer, No need at all, as to Christ's Kingdom, and the Ministry Answer to it.
of that: For it is one of the grossest errors that ever reigned under
Antichrists Kingdom, to affirm that Universities are the fountain of the
Minsters of the Gospel, which do only proceed out Quo indubie taxat Academias
in quibus tales homines creantur, e quibus prodicrunt omnes in orbem
praedicatores etc. Totus enim orbis in hac sententia est, hos fontes esse, e
quibus scaturiant qui docere populum debeant. Hic est error horrendus and
abominandus, ut nihil aeque aversandumulla ex re, quam ex Academiis prodierit,
etc. Luth. in loc. Objection.
of Christ's flock.

And because you will be greatly offended at me for speaking thus, you shall
hear what Luther says to this matter on 2 Pet. 2. 1. upon these words, but
there were false Prophets among the people, as there shall be false Teachers
among you; the word Peter uses here, is (...), false Doctors, or false Masters;
and Luther says it came to pass by the singular Council of God, that our
Teachers should be called Doctors and Masters, that it my appear to all, whom
Peter here means: and he farther says, that Peter hereby does undoubtedly tax
the Universities, in which such men are created, and out of which have
proceeded all the Preachers in the World, so that there is no Town or City
under the whole Kingdom of Antichrist, which has not such Doctors and Masters
as are Created in the Universities. For the whole world (says he) is of this
Opinion, that the Universities are the fountains whence they should flow who
ought to teach the People. Now this (says he) is a most horrible and
abominable error, so that nothing has proceeded in all the world, out of any
thing, so much to be opposed, as out of Universities: wherefore (says he)
Peter says that all these are false Masters, and false Doctors. Thus Luther.

Now if any say, This Doctrine being commonly taught and received, will throw
down the Universities.

I answer. If the Universities will stand upon an Humane and Answer.
Civil account, as Schools of good Learning for the instructing and educating
Youth in the knowledge of the Tongues, and of the liberal Arts and and
Sciences, thereby to make them useful and serviceable to the Commonwealth, if
they will stand upon this account, which is the surest and safest Account they
can stand on, and will be content to shake hands with their Ecclesiastical and
Antichristian Interest, then let them stand, during the good Pleasure of God;
but if they will still exalt themselves above themselves, and place themselves
on Christ's very Throne, as if they had ascended up on high to lead captivity
captive, and to give gifts to men for the work of the Ministry, and so will
presume to darken the Glory of Jesus Christ and his true Ministry which He
sends forth, as his Father sent Him, then let them in the Name of Christ
descend into that darkness out of which they first sprang, that the Glory of
Christ may fill the World.

And thus have I declared how the World and worldly Church are offended at
Christ and his Word, and Worship, and Church, and Government, and Ministry, and
so consequently at all his things.

And now I proceed to the third General I propounded; to wit, to show

3. Point.
How great an evil it is to be thus offended at Christ and his Things. The
third General. To be offended at Christ. 1. Its a sign men are ignorant of
Christ.


And this appears in many particulars.

1. One Evil is, That to be offended at Christ and his Things, is a certain
Evidence that men are wholly Ignorant of Christ and of God, though they be
called Christians, and have the Name of God always in their mouths: For if men
knew Christ aright, and God in Christ, it were impossible they should be
offended at Him; and inasmuch as they are offended, it is certain they do not
know Him by any revelation from the Father. Wherefore Christ tells his
Disciples, Joh. 16. 3. that the chief ground of that offense which the World
and worldly Church should take against them who are his true Members, and have
received the same Word and Spirit with him through true faith, is, because they
have not known the Father nor Him. For he that knows Christ in Christians, is
not offended at them; and he that knows God in Christ, is not offended at Him:
But they that are offended at Christians, know not Christ; and they that are
offended at Christ, know not God.

2. When men are offended at Christ and his things, it is a sign 2. That they
are Unbelievers.
they are real Unbelievers, what ever forms of Godliness they may live under,
and though it may be they have been old Professors: for Peter says, Christ is
precious to them that believe; wherefore they that are offended, are destitute
of Faith.

3. They that are offended at Christ, lose all that spiritual and eternal
advantage that comes by Christ to true believers, and so 3. They loose all
advantage by Christ.
fall short of the Love of God in Christ, of Reconciliation with God in Christ,
of the Righteousness, Wisdom, and Power, and of all the fullness of God in
Christ, of eternal Redemption from the Law, Sin, Death, and Hell by Christ, and
of all that great Salvation that is in and by Him; And Jesus Christ is wholly
in vain to them.

4. When men are fully and irreconcileably offended at Christ 4. Are manifest
Reprobates.
and his things, it is a Sign they are of the wicked one, of the seed of the
Serpent, and very Reprobates; as Christ told such offended Jews; Ye are of your
Father the Devil; and my sheep hear my voice; but you hear it not (but are
offended) and therefore you are none of my sheep, that is, none of the Elect:
And again says Christ, all that my Father gives me, shall come to me;
Wherefore they that come not to Christ, but are offended at him, are not given
to him of God, and consequently are Reprobates.

5. They that are offended at Christ, are utterly ruined through 5. Are utterly
ruined.
such offense: Wherefore Christ is called a stone of stumbling, and rock of
offense to them that are disobedient and stumble at the Word; And he is said to
be set for the fall and ruin of many in Israel; and Mat. 21. 44. Christ says,
Whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken; but on whosoever it shall
fall, it shall grind him to powder.

For whoever stumbles, or dashes against this Stone, dashes against God himself
in the nature of Man: He dashes against the Council and Decree of God, against
the Wisdom and Understanding of God, against the Love, Mercy, Righteousness,
Truth, and Power of God; against the eternal Word and Spirit of God; and no man
perishes like that man: For he incurrs all that Wrath, Vengeance, Destruction,
Damnation, which the Lord God himself in all his infinite Wisdom, Knowledge,
Righteousness, Justice, and Power, can inflict on him to all eternity, and so
he is indeed ground to powder.

Yea farther, that man that stumbles against Christ, is not only Ruined without
remedy.
ruined by such offense, but ruined without all means or hope of Recovery: They
that are broken against Him, and by Him, are broken in pieces like a potters
vessel, which can never be made up again; They that fall against Him, never
rise again; they that are ruined by him, are never repaired again. If a man
were dashed in pieces by Moses, he might be repaired again by Christ; but he
that is destroyed by the Savior, by whom shall he be saved? He that was
condemned by the Justice of God for Sin, might recover again by the Love and
Mercy of God in Christ; But he that is destroyed by the Love and Mercy of God,
is past all Hope and Remedy.

Wherefore I entreat you to consider this thing with all your hearts; For
nothing makes such ruins in the world as this Sin, Men's being offended against
Christ and his Gospel. This is the sin that ruined Jerusalem of old, and
Germany of late; and if any thing undo this Commonwealth, this will undo it,
the offense that is taken by mean men, and by men in Place and Authority
against Christ and his Gospel.

And this is the sin also that is like to undo and ruin the University, and to
race it down to the very ground, even your horrible The University admonished.
Envy, Enmity, and Opposition to the truth of the Gospel: When Christ's word, or
the Truth as it is in Jesus, is hated, opposed, derided, and scoffed at in your
Colleges, in your Schools, in your Meetings, yea sometimes in your Pulpits,
this sin will dash you in pieces, that you shall find none to recover you. This
sin will engage against you the Son of the living God; and when his wrath is
kindled against you not a little, but to the very utmost, for so great
wickedness, shall then your Certum est, Aristotelem mortuum and damnatum, esse
Doctorem hodie omnium Vniversitatum magis quam Christum. Luth. Respons. ad
Libr. Ambros. Cathar.
Masters, Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, etc. wretched Heathens, who with all
their wisdom knew not Christ, but are dead and damned, many hundred years ago
be able to deliver you? Or shall Thomas, and Scotus, and other Schoolmen with
their cold, vain, and Antichristian Divinity help you? Or shall the Secular
Arm, and worldly Power (whom you have seduced for many Ages) be able to shelter
you in such an hour? No certainly; but if you continue in your bitter Emnity
against the true and spiritual Word and Gospel of Christ, Christ lives and
reigns to bring you down wonderfully, and to make your Name a shame and a
Curse to the whole true Church of God.

And this poor contemptible Doctrine of the Gospel which you hear to day, and
(it may be) most of you despise and esteem of no more then a straw for
strength, this very Word shall prevail against you, and triumph over you: And
the poor People of God, that small handful of believers that are amongst you,
whom you despise in your hearts, and reckon but as the filth and offscouring
of the place, even they shall see your downfall, and shall say, Thou art
righteous O Lord, who have judged thus, and shall say again, Even so Lord God
almighty, true and righteous are thy Judgments.

And this now have I spoken in faithfulness to Jesus Christ, and The Conclusion
to the University.
in faithfulness to his true Church, and in faithfulness also to the
University, that they might hear and avoid that Ruin with will otherwise
inevitably befall them for their offense at Christ and his Gospel. And now let
them that can receive it, receive it, and let them that cannot, deride and
reject it; But whether you receive it, or whether you reject it, sure I am I
have spoken the Truth, which God himself in his due time will witness to: and
so much also for this Point.

The fourth Point, is, 4. General.

The blessedness of them that-are not offended at Christ, according The
Blessedness of those who are not offended.
to Christ's word here,

Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me.

Now those very few that are not offended at Christ and his things, when the
whole World and worldly Church are offended, their Blessedness appears in many
particulars.

1. As first, in that its evident that they all are taught of God, 1. Such are
taught of God.
and have heard and learned from the Father himself touching the Son; And they
that see Christ by the Revelation of the Father, are not at all offended at
him, when all other men are. For such do clearly see Christ's Power in his
weakness; his Glory in his Reproach; his Exaltation in his Abasement: his
Divine nature in his Humane; they see his Sufferings were for our sins, his
stripes to heal Us, his Death to deliver us from death; and all this they know
not only by the Letter of the Word, but also by the Revelation of the Father in
their hearts, and so they cannot be offended at Christ, who see him thus.
Wherefore when the World and worldly Church had many several Opinions of
Christ, and Peter notwithstanding acknowledged him to be the Son of the living
God, Christ replied, blessed art thou Simon; for flesh and blood has not
revealed this to thee, but my Father which is in Heaven: and this is thy
blessedness, that thou know me by the Revelation of the Father, and so
know me aright, and art not offended.

He then that is not offended at Christ when all other men are, has for
certain the Fathers Teaching, and sees Christ far otherwise then the World and
worldly Church do; He sees Christ in all his Mystery, and in all his Glory;
and when we see him thus, we value him never the worse for the form of a
Servant, nor for all his reproaches and sufferings from the World, but we
rather behold these things with the greater wonder and comfort; seeing for our
sakes he humbled himself from the form of God, to the form of a servant, and in
that form to the death of the Cross.

2. They are blessed, because through this Revelation of the Father, they have
true Faith in Christ wrought in them. For true 2. Through this Revelation have
true Faith.
Faith in Christ does necessarily follow the Fathers Revelation; and when God
teaches us Christ, we must needs believe in him; and through this Faith we know
him by Experience: and he that knows Christ through the Experience of Faith,
finds and feels Christ to be all that to him, which the Scripture speaks of
him: He through this faith feels Christ to be made unto him of God Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, and all things; and Christ being
through Faith made all that to him, which he is in Himself, it is not possible
he should be offended at him.

Farther, through this Experience of Faith, Christ becomes precious to him, as
Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. 7. to you who believe he is precious: That very Christ,
which to others is a Stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, is precious to
them who have Faith, and know him by Experience; So precious that they esteem
all the greatest and most excellent things in the world but dross and dung in
comparison of Him: and such believers have chosen to part with their Liberty,
their Estates, their Relations, and their own Lives, all which are precious
things in themselves, rather then they would part with this infinitely more
precious Christ.

3. They are blessed in that through this faith they have establishment, as
Christ says, on this rock I will build my Church: And he 3. Through this faith
have establishment.
that has Christ for his only Foundation, is never offended at him, what ever
scandals the World and the Devil raise up against him: But he that has another
Foundation then Christ, to wit, either his own works and Righteousness, or the
World, and the Things of the World, when scandals come, they are presently
offended, and their offense against Christ declares they are not built on him.
But they whom nothing can offend, they are surely built and established on
Christ, and in this they are blessed.

4. They who have received the Revelation of the Father, and 4. Through this
establishment, are free from perishing.
through this Revelation, true Faith, and through this true Faith, firm
Establishment, are farther Blessed, in that all such are past perishing; For he
that cleaves so inseparably to Christ that nothing can offend him, and is so
firmly built on Christ that nothing can remove him; It is impossible for him to
perish by any thing: Wherefore it is said, behold I lay in Sion a chief corner
stone, Elect and precious, and he that believes on him shall not be
confounded: And Mat. 16. says Christ, On this rock I will build my Church, and
the gates of Hell shall not prevail.

5. And last of all, They that have escaped the Offense of Christ, are sure of
Salvation: For such do truly partake of all that infinite 5. Are sure of
Salvation.
and everlasting advantage that is by Christ; they partake of his own
Righteousness, and Wisdom, and Truth, and Power, and Nature, and Life, and
Word, and Spirit, and of all his fullness, and thus they have true possession of
the beginnings of eternal life, as John says, These things have I written to
you that believe, that you may know ye have eternal life abiding in you. 1 John
5. 13. and Christ says, I give unto my sheep eternal life; that very life
which was in the Father, and was communicated to Christ, and manifested in his
humane Nature.

And in all these Regards are they blessed that are not offended at Christ, as
Christ affirms, blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me. And so now
I proceed to some Uses. 5. General. The Uses.


5. The Uses.
1. To warn all of all men sorts, that they take special care that they 1. To
admonish men to take heed that themselves be not offended at Christ.
be not offended at Christ, and the things of Christ; You have heard that the
World, and the wisest, and greatest of the world, and that the worldly Church,
and the holiest and most religious in that are offended at Christ; And you have
heard also how great an evil it is to be offended, and how great a blessedness
it is not to be offended; Wherefore I do advise you from the Word, to take care
that you be not found amongst them who are offended at Christ.

We hope we are not offended at Christ, but we do love, honor, and embrace both
Christ and the things of Christ.

many do usually say they are not offended Many are offended at Christ, who say
they are not offended. 1. They that are offended at the Word, are offended at
Christ.
at Christ, and it may be some may think so too, who yet indeed and before the
Lord are grievously offended at Him: as may thus appears For.

1. First, He that is offended at the true Word of Christ, is offended at
Christ himself: For Christ is the Word, the Gospel Word, the Word that was with
God, and was God, and came into the flesh, and that spoke, and did, and
suffered, and overcame all in that flesh; and Christ said it was expedient for
the Church, that he should withdraw his flesh or bodily presence, and only
continue that presence of his with them which is by the living Word of God
through the Gospel; And this is that Jesus Christ who is present with believers
to the end of the World.

And so he that is offended at the true spiritual Word held forth by the
confession of Faith, is offended at Christ himself, who is present in that
Word; Wherefore says Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 8. He is a stone of stumbling and rock
of offense to them that Stumble (...) the Word. The most people adore the
outward name of Christ, but yet cannot endure the true Word of Christ. Now all
that are offended at the true spiritual Word of Christ, and right Doctrine of
the Gospel, are offended at Christ himself, and stumble at that stumbling
Stone. And thus multitudes are offended at Christ, who do think themselves very
free from this sin.

2. They that are offended at true Believers, are offended at Christ 2. And
they who are offended at true Believers.
himself. For they are in the World as He was, and Walk as He did Walk; And
they are one flesh and Spirit with him; They are his Members, They are Himself;
And whosoever is offended at Them, is offended at Him. For Christ is the self
same both in Himself the Head, and in Believers his Members. And These are the
Children of God, together with Him the first born, and These are comprehended
in the same Love, chosen with the same Choice, called with the same Calling,
Sanctified with the same Holiness, Kept by the same Power, and Glorified with
the same Glory; These partake of the same Divine Nature, and have the same Word
and Spirit dwelling in them, in the same Righteousness, Wisdom, Grace and
Truth, and there is no difference between Christ and them, but what is between
the Head and the Members, the firstborn and his Brethren. And so, they that are
offended at These, would as certainly and necessarily be offended at Christ
himself, if He had lived in their time, or if They had lived in his time.

It is manifest then that They who are offended at the Word of Christ, and at
the Works of Christ, at the Nature and Life of Christ in Believers, would have
been offended at them in Christ Himself: Yea, they who are offended at Christ
in Believers, would much more have been offended at Christ in Himself; because
what is in a Christian but in part, was fully in Christ; And what is in a
Christian in a small measure, was in Christ without measure; and there was in
Christ a far more glorious presence and manifestation of God, then in any
Christian; and proportionably would they have been offended at Him in Himself,
who are truly offended at Him in his Members.

3. They who are offended at the Sufferings which come on 3. And they who are
offended at the sufferings of Christians.
Christians for Christ's sake, are offended at Christ Himself, because they
suffer not on their own account but on Christ's, and the Cross they take up and
bear is His, and not their own. If They would live as other men in the common
Religion of the Nation, and make use of the form of Godliness without the
Power; and comply with that Doctrine and Discipline which the Clergy shall
allow for Orthodox, and the Magistrate accordingly approve and confirm: then
might they live as quietly and prosperously as other men: but because they
cleave only to Christ, and take Him for their only Master in the things of God,
and do receive his Word in Faith, and then hold it forth to others, therefore
the World hates them, as Christ said, I have given them thy Word, and the world
has hated them, because they are not of the world, as I am not of the world.

Wherefore every true Christian who speaks and professes the Word of Faith,
the Word which exalts Christ alone and his things, and throws down all other
things of the World, though in the highest esteem with men, must needs meet
with his enemies and avengers, his Scribes and Pharisees, his Herod's and
Pilates: And now when the carnal Church which has the favor and countenance of
the State, sees poor Christians for the Words sake suffering all the hatred,
malice and rage of the world and worldly Church, they are greatly offended at
them; and in being offended at them, they are offended at Christ Himself; for
it is his cause in which they suffer, and not their own, and it is he who
suffers in his cause more then they, as is evident by that complaint of his,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? I say, as it is Christ, that is, and does
all in his true Saints, so also it is he that suffers all in them; and they who
are offended at these Sufferings of Believers which they suffer in and for
Christ, are offended at Christ himself.

And in these three regards it does plainly appear that many who pretend to
honor the outward Name of Christ, are yet indeed grievously offended at Him.

second Use is another Caution to warn all men to take heed, as not to be
offended themselves at Christ, so also not to be Caution, not to be offended
through the offenses of others, by considering, 1. That it is no new thing for
men to be offended at Christ.
troubled nor offended with the offenses of Others: But when we see the whole
world and worldly Church offended at Christ and his things, let us take care
that we be not therefore offended also, but let us consider.

1. That it is no new thing that Christ and his Gospel should be stumbled at,
and contradicted by the World and worldly Church; For thus it was foretold by
the Prophets, and thus it has been done ever since Christ was manifested in
the flesh. In the days of his Ministry, his Doctrine was so contrary to carnal
reason and the humane apprehensions of men in matters of Religion, that many of
his Disciples said, This is a hard saying, who can bear it? Joh* 6. Yea many of
his Disciples murmured at his Doctrine, and went back and walked no more with
him; And all along during Christ's Ministry, many were snared, and stumbled, and
fell, and were broken thereby: and he that is troubled and offended at this,
must get him another Christ, and another Gospel; For the true Christ is set for
a sign to be spoken against, and the true Gospel is set for a Word of
contention and contradiction to the carnal Christians, and to the whole World.

Wherefore when we see in our time the World and worldly Church offended at
Christ and his Gospel, let us know that thus it has been from the beginning;
and let u^ know that as Christ and his Gospel are the same now as they were
then, so the World and Antichrist, and the Devil, the Head of both, are the
same also; and therefore it cannot be but Christ and his Gospel must suffer the
same 2. Christ and his Word are not the worse for the offense of the World.
contradiction in our time, as they have done in all former times.

2. That we may not be offended with the common and general offense of others,
let us consider that Christ and his Gospel are never the worse for the offense
which the World takes at them, but Christ is still the Son of the living God,
and the Gospel is still the Power of God to Salvation, to every one that
believes, and Christ and his Word do still remain a sure foundation for the
true Church of God; That Christ crucified, which is to the Jews a stumbling
block, and to the Greeks foolishness, is notwithstanding to them who believe,
Christ the Power of God, and Christ the Wisdom of God. 1 Cor. 1. So that Christ
is not the worse for the Worlds being offended at Him, neither do the faithful
think him the worse: Nay the more vile he is to others, he is still the more
precius to them.

3. Let us consider that notwithstanding all the offense of men, Christ and his
Gospel still remain and continue what they are, and 3. Christ still remains,
for all such offense.
cannot be prevailed against. Men may be offended at Christ and his Word, but
they cannot destroy and extinguish them, but they still remain, and do always
prevail against all things that oppose them.

Wherefore, to deliver us from the scandal of all Men's being offended against
Christ, we are to consider, that as all the World have been, are and will be
against Christ, so Christ and his Kingdom shall rise up and increase against
all the World, and against all their thoughts and endeavors; And all their
Councels, Contrivances, and industrious Actings shall not be able to hinder the
Kingdom of Christ from prospering and growing great; But it shall arise and
stand up in all its Glory, out of the midst of all the offenses and
contradictions in the world. Wherefore Christ and his Kingdom are called a
Tried stone; for he has long ago endured whatever the World and worldly Church
could do against Him, and whatever the might and malice of men and Devils could
do against him, and yet has overcome all: All that have opposed Him have been
dashed in pieces by him, in the several Ages of the World; and He and his
Kingdom still remain, and shall remain for ever; For He is a sure tried stone.
And they in this Town and University, who are the most grievously offended at
the Word, shall not by all their subtilty, Malice, Slanders, evil speaking, nor
by any thing they can say or do, design or undertake, be able to prevail
against it, but they must shortly die and depart out of the World, and in
despite of them, leave this Word of God behind them, to live, and flourish, and
overspread the World. And these considerations, if entertained by Faith, may
keep us from being offended at the offense of the whole World: And this for the
second Use.

third place, I shall show you how believers ought to Direction, how to carry
our selves in the midst of offenses. 1. To abide in Christ.
carry themselves in the midst of those offenses that are taken against Christ,
and against themselves for Christ's sake, that is, for his Life and Doctrines
sake.

1. First then, We ought to be careful to abide in Christ, and to walk in
Christ; To speak all our words, and to do all our works, and to live our whole
life in Christ, and in his Spirit, that so the World may not be offended at Us
who are nothing, and do nothing in our selves, but at Christ in Us, who is and
does all in us: And then as we shall certainly be established and preserved in
Christ, through our abiding in him: so they shall as certainly perish and be
ruined through His abiding in Us, and their dashing against Him in Us.

2. To carry our selves aright in the midst of offenses, let us be sure that
the Word we believe and hold forth is Christ's Word, 2. To be sure the Word we
confess is the true Word of God.
and then we may be very confident that this truth and cause shall and must
remain, how many Adversaries soever it may have; and though the World and Devil
may rage against it, yet (as has been said) they shall never be able to
overthrow it, much less to root it out.

A true Christian must be able to say, I know the Word which I believe and
profess, is the only Word of the Lord God, and his everlasting and unchangeable
truth, and the last manifestation of his will by his own Son; and what ever
Word agrees not herewith, is false, and of the Devil, and Antichrist; and
therefore by this Word will I stay, though all the World be against me.

And when we are thus certain of the Word of God through Faith and the Spirit,
it comforts the heart and makes it glad, and settles it in inward Peace and
Rest, in the midst of all outward Oppositions and Troubles* as through Gods
goodness we have found by Experience. For when we know that the Word which we
have received and profess, is the very Doctrine of the Son of God, then also we
know that it shall prevail against all Kingdoms, Commonwealths, States,
Governments, Societies, Universities, against all Laws, Orders, Decrees, Acts,
and against all sorts and degrees of worldly and Ecclesiastical Powers which
are contrary thereunto, and shall in the time appointed by God utterly consume
them, and bring them to nothing.

And by these Means, to wit, by abiding in Christ, and being all in Him; And by
being sure that the Word we believe and profess is His Word, we may live safely
in the midst of all offenses without the least prejudice.

Lastly, I shall speak a few words to those in this University and Town who are
offended at Christ and his Gospel; and also a few words to those who (through
the Grace of God) have escaped this offense, and so shall conclude this matter.

And first, for you who are offended at Christ and his Word, 1. A Word to them
who are offended.
which (we must needs say) is come amongst you in Truth, and in plainness, and
are angry at it, and storm at it, and reproach it, and think and contrive how
to resist it, and to hinder the free course and passage of it in this place,
because it is not only contrary to the Philosophical Divinity of the Schools
and University, and the common carnal Religion of the Nation, but does also
reprove and condemn them, and will have the haughtiness of men bowed down, and
the pride of men laid low, and the Lord Jesus Christ and his things only
exalted, and that here where the Wit, and Wisdom, and Parts, and Learning,
and Accomplishments of men, have ruffled it, and reigned hitherto. I say, you
that are thus offended for this cause, are offended at Christ himself, and at
God in Christ, and you do stumble at the stumbling Stone, and shall so fall
thereby, as to be broken in pieces; Yea this Stone it self shall fall upon you,
and shall grind you to powder, and you shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his power, and
this destruction shall be poured on you with the greatest severity and wrath,
that God himself can inflict in all his Infiniteness and Eternity; For if (as
the Penman of the Epistle to the Hebrews says) the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and every trangression and disobedience received a just recompense of
reward, what escaping can there be for them who neglect that great salvation,
which was published at first by the Lord Christ, and after confirmed by the
first believers, and witnessed to by Signs and Miracles, and gifts of the
Spirit, by God himself? Heb. 2. 2, 3. and if (as the same Believer says) he
that despised Moses Law died without mercy, of how much sorer punishment shall
he be guilty who treads underfoot the Son of God? etc. And assuredly it had
been much better for you, that you had lived among the Heathen and Pagans,
where the Gospel of God our Savior had never been heard, then to hear this
joyful sound which manifests the Love of God, and brings along with it
Remission of sins and the gift of the Spirit, through faith in Christ, and to
be offended at it, and so to be destroyed by the word of salvation, and to be
immediately punished with eternal death by him who is the true God and eternal
life. And this is the heavy burden which the Word of the Lord has laid on
your shoulders, and you cannot remove it.

2. And then for you true Believers, you little flock, you few chosen out of
the many called, who hear the Word of Christ and 2. A Word to them who are not
offended.
are not offended at it, though you hear it everywhere, and that with both ears
in this University and Town, Contradicted, Misreported, Reproached,
Scandalized, and called Error, Heresy, New Light, Faction, Schism, Sedition,
and hear all manner of evil spoken against it falsely, not only by the rude and
ignorant People, but also by the Scribes and Pharisees and Hypocrites of this
place, and yet for all these offenses you are not offended at it, but own it,
and love it, and embrace it, notwithstanding all the extreme disadvantages it
has from this Place, which is counted by carnal people the very fountain of
Religion and the Ministry, knowing by Gods own teaching, that it is the Word
of Righteousness and Life, and the Truth as it is in Jesus, though contrary to
the sense of the University and Schools, who have generally their teaching from
man; To all such, I say by the word of the Lord, blessed are ye, of the blessed
of the Lord, for you are all taught of God touching Christ, and have heard and
learned the Son from the Father, and through this teaching you have true faith
in Christ, and so know him by experience, whereupon Christ is most precious to
you; and through this faith you are established on Christ, so that nothing from
Earth or Hell can remove you: And being so established through Union with
Christ, you can no more perish then Christ can perish, and you shall as
ce^tainly be saved as Christ is saved.

This is your blessedness from the Lord; and the World and the Devil shall
never be able to make it void; And therefore go and eat your bread with
cheerfulness, and lie down and rise and live in safety under the shadow of the
Almighty, though in this World, and in this Place, you dwell among Bears and
Lions, and have your conversation in the midst of Scorpions; for Christ himself
has blessed you in himself, and you shall be blessed for ever; Blessed is he
whosoever shall not be offended in me.

FINIS.

