At a General Court of the Adventurers for the General Ioynt-Stock to the
East Indies, Holden at the East-India-House.
November the 16th. Day, 1693.
Whereas Their Sacred Majesty's, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, by Their Royal
Charter under the Great Seal of England, bearing Date the Seventh Day of
October, now last past, have been Graciously pleased to Confirm and Establish
the Present East India Company* under the (...)

(...) Lords of Their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, have by another
Charter under the Great Seal of England, bearing Date the Eleventh Day of this
Instant November, been likewise Graciously pleased, to Ordain, Lawful Money of
England, shall, and may be added to the General Joynt-Stock of the said
Company, by the New Subscriptions of such Persons, who shall be minded to
Adventure any Share in the said General Joynt-Stock; And that a Book or Books
for the said New Subscriptions, shall be provided by the said Governor and
Company, within Six Days after the Date of the said last recited Charter,
which are to lie open every Day in the Week, (Sundays excepted) At the
East-India-House in Leadenhall-Street, London; from the Hour of Eight, to the
Hour of Twelve in the Morning, and from the Hour of Two, to the Hour of Six in
the Afternoon, until the Tenth Day of January next Inclusive; In which said
Book or Books, It shall, and may be Lawful, to and for any Person or Persons
whatsoever, being Natural Born Subjects of this Their Majesty's Realm, or
Persons Naturalized or Indenized, to Pay and Subscribe, on or before the said
Tenth Day of January now next ensuing, such Sum or Sums of Money, to be added
to the said Joint Stock, as they shall think fit to Adventure in the said
Trade, so as no one Person shall Subscribe more than Ten Thousand Pounds: And
that in case the said New Subscriptions shall exceed the Sum of Seven Hundred
Forty Four Thousand Pounds, The Governor, Deputy, and Court of Committees
shall Lessen and Reduce the said New Subscriptions, to the said Sum of Seven
Hundred Forty Four Thousand Pounds Rata pro Rata, and in proportion to the
Respective Sums so newly Subscribed; And that every Person so Subscribing,
shall at the time of their Subscriptions make Oath, That the Moneys by him or
her Subscribed, is his, or her own Proper Money, and Subscribed for their own
Use, and not in trust for any other Person whatsoever: And that every Person at
the time of their Subscriptions, shall Actually and Bona Fide pay down to the
Committees of the Treasury for the said Company or their Cashire, one Entire
Third part of the Sum of Money, by each of them Respectively so Subscribed, and
the Remainder thereof on or before the Tenth Day of January now next coming.

NOW in Conformity to the said last Recited Charter, It is hereby ordered by
this General Court, That the Accomptant-General do forthwith provide one or
more Book or Books made of Vellum, for taking of the said New Subscriptions for
Seven Hundred Forty Four Thousand Pounds, That the same may be laid open, as is
Directed by the said last mentioned Charter: Wherein any Person or Persons
qualified as aforesaid, may Subscribe such Sum and Sums of Money as they shall
think fit; not exceeding in the whole the Sum of Ten Thousand Pounds, according
to the Direction of the said Charter.

And for the better Encouragement of the said New Subscriptions, and bringing
in of the Sums of Money so to be Subscribed, This Court think fit to Declare
and Agree, That for every Hundred Pound of the said Additional Stock, that
shall be Subscribed and Paid in, on or before the 10th. Day of January next,
Every Person so Subscribing, and Paying in the same, shall have Credit in the
Companies Books for a Hundred Pound Stock, and so proportionably for anyother
Sum.

And in case any Person shall Subscribe any Sum of Money, as before is
Directed, and pay in the One Third Part, or any greater Part of such his or her
Subscription, on or before the Tenth of December next, Every such Person and
Persons so Subscribing and Paying in as aforesaid, shall have Ten per Cent.
allowed for Prompt Payment of the Moneys by them so paid in.

Any Person or Persons Subscribing any Sum of Money as before is Directed, and
Paying in One Third, or any greater Part of such their Subscription, on or
before the Twentieth of the said Month of December, shall have Six per Cent.
allowed or Prompt Payment of the Moneys so paid in.

Any Person or Persons Subscribing any Sum of Money as before is Directed, and
Paying in One Third, or any greater Part of such their Subscriptions, on or
before the One and Thirtieth of the said Month of December, shall have Four per
Cent. allowed for Prompt Payment of the Moneys so paid in.

Any Person or Persons Subscribing any Sum of Money as before is Directed; and
Paying in One Third, or any greater part of such their Subscriptions, on or
before the Tenth of January, shall have Three per Cent. allowed for the Moneys
so paid in.

Which said several Allowances of Ten per Cent. Six per Cent. Four per Cent.
and Three per Cent. to be made to the several Persons Subscribing and Paying in
their Money, on or before the several Days and Times before mentioned, shall be
paid to them, and every of them by the Governor and Company, on or before the
last Day of February next: In Proportion to the several Sums of Money, for
which the Respective Subscribers shall have Credit in the Companies Books, upon
the Reduction of the whole Subscriptions, in Case they shall exceed the Sum of
Seven Hundred Forty Four Thousand Pounds, Pursuant to the Charter
afore-mentioned.

On serious Consideration had of the Proposals beforementioned, made by the
said General Court, We whose Names are Subscribed, do by these Presents Consent
and Agree thereunto, And do Promise and Oblige Our Selves, and Our Respective
Executors, Administrators and Assigns to the said Governor and Company, to
pay, or cause to be paid unto the said Governor and Company, or to the
Committees of the Treasury, or their Cashire, the several Sums of Money by us
herein Subscribed, at the Times before-limited by Their Majesty's said Charter,
to be added to the said General Joynt-Stock; That is to say, the One Third Part
thereof, at the Time of our Respective Subscriptions, and the Remainder on or
before the Tenth Day of January now next coming: And in Default of such
Payment, We do hereby Covenant and Agree with the said Governor and Company,
That it shall and may be Lawful for the said Governor and Company, to Deduct
and Retain for the Use of the Adventurers in the said Joynt-Stock, after the
Rate of Ten per Cent. of the Moneys by us so paid in, out of the first
Dividents to be made, or upon the Sale or Alienation of the same, which shall
first happen; And that we are to have no more Credit in the Companies Books,
than what shall be so actually paid in by us, on or before the said Tenth of
January next.


