The Building and Glory of the truly Christian and Spiritual CHURCH.
Represented in an EXPOSITION On Isai. 54, from verse. 11 to the 17.

PREACHED To His Excellency Sir Tho. Fairfax and the General Officers of the
Army, with diverse other Officers, and Soldiers, and People, At Marston, being
the Head-quarter at the Leaguer before Oxford, June 7. 1646.

By WILLIAM DELL, Minister of the Gospel, attending on His Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax in the Army.

Together with a faithful TESTIMONY touching that valiant and victorious Army,
in the Epistle to the Reader.

Matthew. 5. 11. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake.

Verse 12. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven:
for so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you.

Psalm. 69. 9. The reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for G. CALVERT, at the Black Spread-Eagle at the West End of
Paul's. 1646.

To the READER.
HAving obtained this grace from God, to be called into some friendship and
familiarity with Jesus Christ, so, as to hear and receive from him, something
of the mind and bosom of the Father, according to his free grace, who has
mercy on whom he will: and having after many tears and temptations (not unknown
to many yet in the body) obtained this further grace, to speak the Word of God
with boldness, I have also been counted worthy to be taken into some
fellowship with Christ in his sufferings, and to endure the contradiction of
sinners, and oft-times to encounter the rage and madness of men, yea, and to
fight with men after the manner of beasts, altogether brutish and furious. And
thus it has fared with me often, especially at two remarkable times. The one
at Lincoln, upon occasion of two Sermons preached there, on these words of the
Prophet Isaiah, chap. 9. 7. Of the increase of his government and peace there
shall be no end. Wherein giving unto Christ his own proper due, many were angry
I had taken too much from men, to whom yet nothing belongs, but iniquity, shame
and confusion; they could not bear this, that the Lord alone should be exalted.
But that Doctrine of truth the Lord has strongly upheld with the right hand of
his righteousness, and the glory of it has since shone into many hearts in
this Kingdom, much contrary to their desire.

The other time wherein I met with remarkable opposition, was lately at
Marston, the Head quarter at the Leaguer before Oxford; whither some coming out
of the City of London, in all probability out of some special design (seeing
the old malignity now acts in a new form, and is daily coming forth in a second
and more plausible, cunning, and deceiving edition) became exceeding angry and
headie against the plain and clear truth of the Gospel, delivered in this
following Exposition (wherein the whole truth and substance of what was then
delivered, is exactly set down, and nothing abated; but rather some things
farther pressed, Jer. 36 32.
adding (as Jeremiah in the second roll) many like words to the former. New
some of these men, seeing themselves and their new design clearly discovered
by the light of the Word, and made altogether naked, suddenly they grew fierce
and furious, contradicting and blaspheming, yea, some of them speaking the
language of hell upon earth (of which there are some witnesses) as became men
of such a generation. John 8. 44.
These men, according to the operation of that spirit which works mightily in
the children of disobedience, come and fill the whole City with lies and
slanders, laying to my charge things that I knew not; the falsehood and untruth
whereof, there are some hundreds, and some of them of great and eminent worth
and piety, ready to witness. Wherefore of mere necessity I was constrained to
publish this Exposition, as a witness to this present and the following
generations, of these men's resisting the Spirit, and acting against Christ
himself in the Word. And though the discourse be very plain, not savouring of
any accuratenesse of humane wisdom and learning, yet they that are themselves
spiritual, will acknowledge something of the Spirit in it, and for that cause
will relish and love it; though others will therefore be at the greater enmity
against it. But for my part, I have set down my resolution in the Lord, in this
Cause of Jesus Christ, not to weigh all the power of earth or hell, one
feather; but to put it to the utmost trial, whether the truth of the Gospel or
the slanders and lies of men shall prevail: whether the smoke of the
bottomless pit, that comes forth out of the mouth of these and many others,
shall be able to blot out or darken the brightness of Christ's coming in the
Ministry of the Gospel: yea, and whether the power and malice of the devil and
the world, shall be stronger then the love and protection of Jesus Christ. And
I doubt not, but the more the world acts in the Spirit of the devil, the more
will Christ enable us to act in his own Spirit, till all at last shall be
forced to acknowledge, that the Spirit that is in us, is stronger then the
spirit that is in the world. And what now have all these men obtained by all
their malice and fury, but a greater and more open discovery of the truth: and
to cause that that light of the Gospel, that only shone in one Congregation,
should, through the printing of it, have its beams scattered in many parts of
the Kingdom: and wherever the truth comes, the children of the truth will
entertain it, and ask no body leave. And thus through the overruling power of
Gods wisdom, do these men betray their own and their fellows cause, and
overthrow their own and their ends; and whilst they think to oppress the
truth, propagate it the more: and thus shall truths enemies perish, and the
truth it self flourish; yea, flourish through slanders, oppositions,
contradictions, blasphemies, and all the vileness and villainy in the world. And
all this confidence in us, arises hence, because Christ is not as a dead man,
but is risen and ascended, and sits at the right hand of God, and fills all
things, and does all things in heaven and in earth, in the world and in the
Church, among his friends and among his enemies, till these be made his
footstool: which is the very thing we are now in expectation of.

Now one thing more which I think fit to acquaint the world withal in this
Epistle, is this, That none of these thorny hearers durst after come to
discourse with me, or to look me in the face; but one among them, that seemed
of a better temper then the rest, upon the urging of a godly Citizen then
present, did speak with me: and the question he asked of me, was this, Whether
I thought that all Presbyterians were carnal Gospellers. I told him, I was far
from thinking any such thing; for I knew some of them very godly Christians,
and did acknowledge the grace of God in them; and that for mine own part, I did
not allow any such distinction of Christians, as Presbyterians and
Independents, this being only a distinction of man's making, tending to the
division of the Church; and added, that as in Christ's kingdom neither
Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumsion, but a new creature; so in
this same kingdom of Christ, neither Presbytery avails any thing, nor
Independency, but a new creature: and that the kingdom of God stands not in
Presbytery or Independency, but in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost; and that, if I saw any thing of God or Christ, or the Spirit in any
one, I reckoned him as a brother, not taking any such opinion into
consideration; and that the unity of spirit, and not of opinion, is the bond of
Peace in Christ's kingdom. The man then pretended to be satisfied, and to
rejoice in his satisfaction; but since (as is related) has showed his stomach
again* but because he seems to be a Christian, the Lord lay it not to his
charge.

And truly, reader, it is a sad thing, that ever these names of Presbyterians
and Independents grew up to this higth in the Church, and that these opinions
should be reckoned more in a man, then the presence and dwelling of God himself
and the Spirit in him. For my part, I utterly disclaim all such distinctions of
man's making, and will allow of no distinction of men, but what God himself has
made, and that is this, The world, and they that are taken out of the world;
or, The Church, and they that are without: and in the Church, the children that
are born after the flesh, and the children that are born after the Spirit: or,
which is all one, carnal and spiritual Christians. This distinction of men, God
has made, and this I do and must needs use, though the world (as it appears)
likes this worse then the other. For the distinction of seeds in the Church, is
the true distinction; and the more this is brought about by the Word and
Spirit, the more glorious will the Church be. Now, some spiritual Christians
may be among those that are called Presbyterians, and some among those that are
called Independents; and all these, though called by different names, are of
one spritual Church: and again, some carnal Christians may be among those that
are called Independents, and some among those that are called Presbyterians;
and all these, though called by different names, are of one carnal Church. And
therefore I could wish we had obtained such wisdom from God, as to let the
distinction and division of men lie only there, where God has made it, and
not where flesh and blood has made it; and so shall the true spiritual Church
be delivered from these distinctions of flesh and blood, and be separated from
the world, and be gathered together in it self, and be at unity with it self;
which will be Gods great glory, and its own strength, comfort and happiness,
and the great terror and dread of all profane men and formalists.

Another thing which I find my heart stirred up within me to do, is, to
testify to the world what I kn^w in mine own experience, touching the Army
under the command of that most faithful and worthy General, Sir Tho. Fairfax:
and that because I am not ignorant of the great undervaluing, and despising,
and reproaching of it, by many, even of those, whose blood runs warm in their
veins, and who enjoy all the comforts they have in the world, through the
faithfulness, diligence, activity, labors, hunger, thirst, cold, wearines,
watchings, marchings, engagements, stormings, wounds and blood of these men,
instruments in the hand of God, for the subduing that malignant power that rose
up against the State and Saints of God* yea, instruments of Gods own choosing
and calling forth to his foot, for this great and glorious service; which
after-ages will wonder and stand amazed at, as well as at the vile ingratitude
of this age, to such instruments as these; for which God will not hold it
guiltless. This then for mine own part I am most confident on, that there are
as many gracious and godly Christians in it, as in any gathering together of
men in all the world again: men full of faith and the Spirit, and the admirable
indowments of it. More particularly, there are these Six things most remarkable
in this despised Army.

1. Their Unity, which is admirable: it being more the Unity of Christians then
of men* more a Unity in the Spirit then in the flesh; in the Father and Son
then in themselves. And this has been one great means of their great success,
they being all both in Counsel and Action but as one man. The Lord has taken
them and knit them up in one bundle, and so their enemies could not break them,
but have been broken by them* Many of their matters of greatest moment, have
been carried in council with that unity, that sometimes not so much as one
has contradicted.

2. Their humility; which has been admirable as well as the former. For after
great and glorious victories, to the wonder of the kingdom and of the world,
when Kings of the Army did flee apace, and the men of might ran away as women,
I have never heard any of the worthy and godly Commanders or Officers ever to
say, I did this or that, or to boast of his own counsel or his own strength, or
to attribute any thing to himself, or any body else, of what God had done; but
every one to say. This was the Lords own doing, and it is mavelous in our
eyes; and it was not our own sword or bow, but the Lords right hand, and his
arm, and the light of his countenance. And they have been most willing to be
nothing themselves, that God might be all.

And this has been one means to keep them humble, because though God has been
much with them, yet the world has been much against them; not for their own
sakes, who have done the work of the kingdom faithfully and honestly; but for
Gods sake in them: because there is more of God among these men then among
other men, therefore are they so maligned by many men. For the world always
most hates, where there is most of God: and you may have a shrewd guess where
there is most of God, by observing where the greatest hatred of the world lies.

3. Their faith. There are many in the Army ^en of great and precious faith;
through which, they have wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the
mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword,
out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the
armies of the aliens. Through this faith, they have pursued their enemies and
overtaken them, and turned not again till they had consumed them: they have
beaten them small as the dust before the wind, and cast them out as dirt in
the streets. Through faith they have entered strong Cities; and I can truly and
particularly say (let them that will needs be offended, stumble and fall at it)
that Bristol ( among other places) was conquered by faith more then by force;
it was conquered in the hearts of the godly by faith, before ever they
stretched forth a hand against it; and they went not so much to storm it as to
take it, in the assurance of faith. Through faith, one of them has chased ten,
and ten put an hundred to flight, and an hundred a thousand. And this was
performed in the very letter of it, at that famous and memorable battle at
Naseby. Many more instances I could relate of the power of faith in this Army,
but that I should thereby grieve and afflict many too much.

4. The spirit of Prayer: and this the Lord has poured forth upon many of them
in great measure; not only upon many of the chief Commanders, but on very many
of the inferior Officers, and common Troopers; some of whom, I have by
accident heard praying, with that faith and familiarity with God, that I have
stood wondering at the grace. We never undertook any thing of weight, but God
was always sought to of us again and again: and we have found God near to us in
all things we have called upon him for. Yea, God has been found of us, whilst
yet we have been seeking him, and has given us the answer of our prayers into
our bosoms.

5. The special presence of God with them. I have seen more of the presence of
God in that Army, then amongst any people that ever I conversed with in my
life. There has been a very sensible presence of God with us: we have seen his
goings, and observed his very footsteps: for he has dwelt among us, and
marched in the head of us, and counseled us, and led us, and has gone along
with us step by step, from Naseby to Leicester, and from thence to Langport,
and Bridgewater, and Bath, and Sherborn, and Bristol, and the Devises, and
Winchester, and Bazing, and Dartmouth, and Exceter, and into Cornwall, and back
again to Oxford, and all along his presence has gone along with us, and he
has been our strength and glory. How often has fearfulness and trembling
taken hold upon the enemy? and the stout men been at a loss for their courage,
and the men of might for their hands, because of the presence of God with us?
yea, because of this, they have melted away in their strong Holds, and
delivered up their fenced Cities into our hands; and every place we have come
against, we have taken in, and every battle wherein we have fought, we have
prevailed. And because God has been in the midst of us, we have not been moved
our selves; and our enemies have perished (not by our valor, and weapons, and
strength) but at the rebuke of his countenance. This shall be written for the
generation to come (seeing so many of this present generation so little regard
it) and the people that are to be born shall praise the Lord.

6. The sixth remarkable thing in the Army is, their faithfulness to the
state. How have they gone up and down in wearines and labors, and dangers, and
deaths, to do the kingdoms work? when was it, that they sat idle? have they
not as soon as one field was fought, prepared to another? as soon as one city
was taken, advanced to another? and so gone on, from one strong hold of the
enemies to another, till all have been reduced? that peace might be hastened to
this kingdom if it were the will of God, and not come as a snaile, but as on
Eagles wings? yea, have they not been active, even all the winter long, in a
most cold and frosty season that continued so for two months together, beating
the enemy out of the field, and taking their strong Holds, when other Armies
use to lie still? Have they taken the pay of idleness, or lived the life of
luxury, upon the State-maintenance? Have they sought to lengthen the Wars, for
their own advantages? Have they not made even a short work? I challenge all the
former generations of the world to stand forth and to show so much work of this
kind done in so little time. And farther, by all this success, have they ever
been lifted up so much as to petition the Parliament in any thing, or to
remonstrate any thing proudly and undutifully to them, as some people surfeted
with peace and plenty have done? Or, though the Kingdom, next under God and the
Parliament, owes its protection, and deliverance, and freedom from Tyranny and
Popery, to this worthy Army, have they for all this, ever appeared to contest
against the Kingdom for any thing, or to stand with their swords in their hands
to make demands? Nay, I declare this to all the Kingdom, that as God has made
them glorious in doing, so he has made them contented to be perfected by
suffering, if it be the will of God. And most confident I am, that though some
men for private ends and interests are murmuring, and others speaking out
against this Army, as the perverse Israelites against Moses and Aaron, yet the
Lord in his due time, will take away the reproach of all his people therein;
and that we shall hear songs from all the ends of the kingdom, even glory to
the righteous. This I have spoken in truth and sincerity to the Kingdom: And to
that Army I shall say, Who is like unto thee, Deuteronomy. 33. 29.
O people? saved by the Lord, who is the shield of thy help, and the sword of
thine excellency; and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou
shall tread upon their high places.

I have been longer in this Epistle then I intended: but seeing there was such
a cause as this, no ingenious man will blame me.

Christian Reader, I am Lord, Gospel of his Son,

An EXPOSITION Of the 54 Chapter of Isaiah, from Verse. 11 to the end.
The words are thus:

Verse. 11. Oh thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted; behold, I
will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with Saphires.
12. And I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles, and all
thy borders of pleasant stones, etc. THis place of Scripture is very useful to
the Church of God in these times wherein we live: yea verily this Prophet did
not so much prophecy to his own age as to ours, nor to the Jewish Church as to
the Christian. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
For unto them it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us, they did
minister the things which are now reported unto you.

The Prophet Isaiah prophesied in the Spirit touching the Kingdom of Christ;
which stands not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, and delivers from the Father
by the Spirit many excellent promises to be fulfilled in the Son Incarnate,
head and members.

The first promise in this Chapter, is touching the great increase of the
Church, in the days of the New Testament; that whereas before, the Church was
to be found but in one kindred, and tongue, Revel. 5. 9.
and people, and nation; now it should be gathered out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation. And this is so desirable and comfortable a
thing, that in the beginning of the Chapter, he calls upon all to rejoice at
this; verse. 1. Sing, O barren, thou that did not bear; break forth into
singing, and shout aloud, thou that did not travel with child: for more are
the children of the desolate then of the married wife, says the Lord. Enlarge
the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine
habitations. Spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes: for thou
shall break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall
inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited. So that
there shall certainly be a most wonderful and numerous increase of the faithful
in the Christian Church, till they become as the stars of heaven, and as the
drops of the morning dew, that cannot be told, all of them assembled in the
beauties of holiness.

And therefore let us not be overmuch troubled, Use.
though at present we see, in a numerous nation, but few true children of the
spiritual Church; for God shall bless these few, and bid them increase, and
multiply, and replenish the earth: so that though the Assemblies of the Saints
be now but thin, and one comes from this place, and another from that, to these
Assemblies, and in many and most places of the Kingdom, these few are fain to
come together secretly, for fear of the Jews, that is, the people of the
letter; yet through the pouring forth of the Spirit, it shall come to pass, at
last, that they shall come in flocks, as doves to their windows. And it shall
be said to the Church by the Lord, Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold,
all these gather fellows together and come to thee: At I live, says the Lord,
thou shall surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and bind
them on thee as a bride does, etc. till at last the Church shall say in her
heart, Who has begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children and am
desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who has brought up these?
Behold, I was left alone; these where had they been?

Yea, these very promises are now in the very act of accomplishing among us;
for the spiritual Church has received a very great increase, within these few
years, and God has many faithful people, in many places of this Kingdom; and
of this my self and many more in this Army are witnesses: for having marched up
and down the Kingdom, to do the work of God, and the State, we have met with
many Christians, who have much Gospel light, and (which makes it the more
strange) in such places, where there has been no Gospel-Ministery; which has
put me in mind of that prophecy, Isai. 66. 8. Who has heard such a thing?
who has seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day,
or shall a nations be born at once? For as soon as Sion traveled, nay, before
she traveled, she brought forth her children. There was no outward Ministry
of the Gospel to travel or take pains with them, and yet Sion brings forth her
children.

And one thing that is remarkable touching the increase of the Church at this
day, is this, That where Christ sends the Ministration of the Spirit, there
many young people are brought in to Christ, as being most free from the forms
of the former age, and from the Doctrines and Traditions of men, taught and
received instead of the pure and unmixed Word of God: whereas many old
professors, who are wholly in the form, prove the greatest enemies to the power
of godliness: and thus the first are the last, and the last first.

Now this great and sudden increase of the faithful, is that which does so
exceedingly trouble the world, and makes them angry at the very heart. For, if
they were but a few, mean, contemptible and inconsiderable persons, whom they
might easily suppress and destroy, they would be pretty quiet: but when they
begin to increase in the land, as Israel did in Egypt, and notwithstanding all
the burdens of their taskmasters wherewith they are afflicted and grieved, do
yet increase abundantly, and multiply, and wax exceeding mighty, till they
begin to fill the land; and when they consult to deal wisely with them, lest
they multiply too much, do yet see them grow and multiply the more, that they
know not at what Country, or City, or Town, or Village, or family, to begin to
suppress them: this is that does so exceedingly vex and inrage the world, and
makes them even mad again, as we see this day. For the increase of the
faithful, as it is the glory of the Church, so it is the grief and madness of
the world. But these men in vain attempt against this increase of the faithful,
as the Egyptians against the increase of the Israelites; for none can hinder
the increase of the Church, but they that hinder God from pouring out his
Spirit; and according to the measure of Gods pouring forth the Spirit, is and
must be the increase of the Church, in despite of all the opposition of the
world.

And thus much touching the first promise, of the Churches Increase.

Now in the words I read to you, the Lord comes to another promise: so that the
Lord because of the Churches weakness, adds one promise to another; and these
promises are nothing but the outgoings and manifestations of his love, through
the Word Christ. But to look more nearly upon the words.

Oh thou afflicted.

Verse. 11.
Affliction in the world does so inseparably attend the Church, that the Church
even takes its denomination from it, Oh thou afflicted. The condition of the
Church, is an afflicted condition. For the Church being born of God, and born
of the Spirit, is put into a direct contrariety to the world, which is born of
the flesh, and is also of its father the devil. And so the whole world is
malignant against the faithful and spiritual Church; and all that are not
regenerate, set their faces, yea their hearts and their hands against the
Saints; and the unregenerate world is against the regenerate, and the carnal
world against the spiritual, and the sinful world against the righteous; and
all the people and nations in the world, are against that people and nation,
which the Apostle calls, a holy nation, and a peculiar people.

As the world cannot endure God in himself, so neither can it endure God in the
Saints, and so the more God dwells in the Saints, the more does the world
afflict the Saints: for they oppose not the faithful for any thing of flesh and
blood in them, but because that flesh and blood of theirs, is the habitation of
God, and the very presence of God himself is there, as he says, I will dwell
in them, and walk in them. Agreeable to this, is that of Christ, where he
says, All this shall they do to you for my Names sake; that is, when the Name
of Christ is called upon us, and we are taken into his Name, that is, into his
righteousness, and life, and truth, and wisdom, and holiness, and into his
Nature, which comprehends all this; then, when the world perceives the Name of
God in the Sons of men, and the nature of God in the natures of men, then
presently they fall a persecuting the Saints, for this Name and Natures sake;
and he that strikes at God in his Saints, would if he could strike at God in
himself. And therefore let the world take heed what they do in this point; for
while they persecute the Saints, they are found fighters against God himself,
because God is one with them, and they are one with God in Christ. And let the
Saints be admonished so to hide and retire themselves into God through Christ,
that whoever is an enemy to them, and opposes them, may rather be an enemy to
God, and oppose God then them, they living and acting in God, and not in
themselves.

Now this affliction the Church meets with in the world, is profitable for the
Church; it is good for it, that it should be afflicted: for the more it is
afflicted in the flesh, the more it thrives in the Spirit: this affliction
stirs us up to the exercise of our faith, and prayer; yea, then is our faith
most active and vigorous, and our prayers most fervent, till they fill the
whole heavens again; then are we most in the use of the Word; then are we set
off furthest from the world; then do we keep closest to God; then have we
nearest intercourse and communion with him: so that we could better want fire,
and water, and the sun, then want affliction, which God out of his mere love,
through his overruling power and wisdom, causes to work unto us for good, So
that we who are placed in the hand of Christ, are set in such a condition,
wherein nothing can do us any harm for ever, but evil it self must work good
unto us. But we proceed.

tossed with tempest.

Where we see that the Church is not only afflicted, but violently afflicted;
one wave comes against it after another, as in a tempest; and the more
spiritual the Church is, the more does the world become as a raging sea against
it; because the more spiritual the Church is made, it is set in the more
contrariety to the world, and the world to it. The Psalmist describes this
temper in the world against the Church; They came upon me like a ramping and a
roaring Lion: And again, They came upon me to eat up my flesh as they would eat
bread. When the Saints have appeared in the Spirit, and acted in the Spirit,
how violent and enraged has the world been against them? it would toss them
as in a tempest from place to place, from post to pillar, as they say, till it
has quite tossed them out of the world. Yea, men naturally meek and moderate,
how fierce have they become against the Saints, when there has appeared any
glorious discoveries of Christ in them. For the enmity that is in the seed of
the Serpent against the seed of the woman, will be still breaking forth: And
though it may for a time be covered under many moral virtues, and a form of
godliness, yet when God leaves them to themselves, and lets them act outwardly
according to their inward principles, how ernelly, and maliciously, and
fiercely, and desperately, do they act against the Saint of God? Yea, there is
not that enmity between Turk and Jew, as there is between carnac Gospellers
and spiritual Christians; the former hating these, and being angry against
these to the very death. And whenever the Lord shall suffer these to exercise
their enmity against the Church, then shall the Churches condition become such
as it is here described, afflicted and tossed with tempest.

and not comforted.

The Chuurch of God in all the evil it meets withal in the world, has not one
drop of comfort from the world: it has affliction, tribulation, persecution
from the world, but no comfort.

This we see in Christ the Head; you know what he suffered in the world in the
days of his flesh; he was despised and rejected of men, and so full of sorrows,
that he took his name from them, and was called A man of sorrows and acquainted
with grief: At last, out of mere envy and malice, they apprehended him, bound
him, buffeted him, spit on him, crucified him: and all this would have been but
a small matter to have suffered from the Heathen; but he suffered all this from
the only visible Church of God in the world, who put him to the most painful
and shameful death of the Cross, between two malefactors, to bear the world in
hand that he was the third and the chief. And in all this evil he had no body
to pity him, or have compassion on him; but they laughed at him, and derided
him, and mocked and jeered him; but no body comforted him.

And as it was with Christ the Head, so it is with Christ the body and members;
they in all the evils, and woes, and sorrows, and oppositions, and persecutions
they have from the world, have no body to comfort them, or take compassion on
them. Refuge failed me (says David) no man cared for my soul. Lover and friend
have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness, says Heman,
Psalm. 88. 18.

Brethren and Beloved, ye that are partakers of the heavenly calling and of the
divine nature, if ever the Lord suffer the world to prevail against you, to
afflict you, and toss you from one evil ^o another as in a tempest, to
reproach you, throw you out of your comforts. banish you, imprison you, etc.
you shall find no body to comfort you; no body will take notice of you, or
regard you, or own you, or pity you, or be so sensible of your condition, as
to say, Alas my brother.

You must look for affliction in the world, but you must look for no comfort
there. When God shall cast us into sorrows and sufferings, let us not look for
one worldly man to stand by us, no not of those that now smile upon us, and
pretend friendship to us; no nor yet of our near relations; but then that shall
be fulfilled, I was a stranger to my brethren, an alien to my mothers children.
Nay yet further; they that are weak or worldly Christians, will stand aloof
from thee, and will be shye to own, and countenance, and encourage, and comfort
thee publicly. The disciples of Christ, when he was led to the Cross, they
all forsook him, and fled, and left him to tread the wine press alone. And so
if you suffer in the righteousness and truth of God, you shall find little
comfort from men. O thou afflicted, toss^d with tempest, and not comforted.

Now this the Lord does in much mercy to his Saints; he leaves them destitute
of earthly comfort, that they may look for heavenly; he leaves them destitute
of all comfort from men, that they may look for comfort from God alone. And
therefore when thou art brought into such a case, to be afflicted and not
comforted, lift up thy heart to God, and expect all from him. Says Christ,
Joh. 16. The world shall hate you and persecute you, and shall put out of their
synagogues, and shall kill you; and in doing all this, shall think they do God
good service: But, says he, I will send you the Comforter. Christ knew well
enough, that among all these evils, they should have no Comforter on earth, and
therefore promises to send them ane from heaven.

And therefore when thy soul is placed in affliction, never look after any
earthly, or sensual, or creature comforts, for they will prove poison to thy
soul; but only look for heavenl^ comforts, such as the Spirit brings, such as
flow immediately from God; for these are pure, and sweet, and unmixed, and
refreshing, and supporting, and satisfying, and enduring comforts; comforts
that are able to make thee rejoice, not only in fullness, but in wants; not
only among friends, but in the midst of enemies; not only in good report, but
in evil report; not only in prosperity* but in tribulations; not only in
life, but in death: they will make thee go singing to prison, to the Cross, to
the grave: they are mighty comforts, infinitely stronger then all the sorrows
of the flesh: and hence it is that many Saints and Martyrs have gone cheerfully
to the stake, and sung in the very flames: the comforts of God in their souls,
have strengthened them to this.

Thou that art a believer, and in union with Christ, never doubt of this
comfort in thy greatest sorrows. When Christ had none to stand by him and
comfort him, God sent an Angel from heaved to do it: And so when we are left
alone in the world, rather then we shall want comfort, God will send us an
Angel from heaven, to comfort us; yea, the Spirit it self, which is greater
then all the Angels in heaven; and we shall certainly be comforted by God, when
we are afflicted and tossed with tempest, and not comforted by men.

Behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, etc.

The Lord sees the Church in its affliction, without all co^mfort in the
world, add then the Lord comes and comforts it himself; and this he does by a
Promise. They are the sweetest comforts, that are brought to us in the
promises. The promises are the swadling-clothes of Christ, they carry Christ
wrapped up in them; and Christ represented to the Church, has been the comfort
of it, in all its evils outward or inward.

And therefore whatever affliction takes hold on thee, have recourse to the
Promises, to draw thy comforts from Christ through them. Oh how sweet is that
life that is led in the Promises I a life led in the Promises, is the best life
in the world. Men that have estates in money or land, depend on those things
for their maintenance; but a Christian may have little or nothing of these in
the world, but he has a Promise, which is a thousand times better, and makes
his life more comfortable: I am God All-sufficient; and, I will not fail thee
nor forsake thee: whereupon he comes to this resolution, The Lord is my
portion, says my soul, I will trust in him. Oh how sweet a life is this life,
that knows no cares, nor fears, nor troubles, nor disquietments: here, says a
believer, lies my estate, and living, and the lot of mine inheritance, and this
is a thousand times better and more certain estate, then all the Manors and
Lordships in the Kingdom: for, my bread shall be given me, my waters shall be
sure: The Lord is my Shepherd, and I shall not want; no not then, when the
Lions (the great men of the Kingdom, to whom every poor man is a prey) shall
lack and suffer hunger. He that has given me his own Nature and Spirit, will
not leave me destitute of food and clothing.

Take another instance. A man feeling the bitterness of affliction to flesh
and blood, is ready to think, Oh how shall I ever be able to suffer this or
that, or to part with my relations, with my estate, with my life, and all that
is near and dear unto me? Why then a Christian lays hold on the promise, God is
faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that which we are able. O,
says a Christian, God will never bring me to any temptation or trial, but he
will give me strength proportionable to it, or above it: and so lives satisfied
with the truth, and goodness, and power of God. And thus you see in these
instances, that a life led in the promises, is the sweetest and best life; when
a man can draw all from God himself, through a promise.

And this in general, That God comforts his Church by a promise.

But to come more particularly to the words.

Behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and lay thy foundations with
Saphires.

Verse. 12. And I will make thy windows of Agates, and thy gates of Carbuncles,
and all thy borders of pleasant stones.

The promise relates to the Spiritual Church of the New Testament: and this you
shall observe, is often in Scripture compared to a building, and that to a most
stately, sumptuous, magnificent and glorious building; as being all built of
precious stones, and so more glorious then the first Temple, which was built up
of common stones: and it was prophesied that the glory of the second Temple
should far exceed the glory of the first. The first Temple was Solomon's, which
was indeed filled with the outward presence of God; but the second Temple is
the humanity of Jesus Christ, or, the flesh of Christ, both head and members:
this is the living temple of the living God, the Temple that God has built by
his Spirit, for his own ha^itation; wherein God dwells truly, really,
spiritually, and most nearly, by the way of the most near union, whereby God
and the creature are knit together: and this Spiritual Temple is more glorious
then the first material one, either according to the first edition of it by
Solomon, or the second edition of it by the Fathers, in the days of Cyrus,
Darius, and Artaxerxes.

Here then you see, that the Lord promises to build up the Church of the New
Testament, with stones of fair colors, with precious stones. I will not stand
to enquire particularly into the natures of the several stones here named; for
the Jews themselves do not fully agree about them. It shall be sufficient for
us to attain to the meaning of the Spirit in this place; and that is this:

That the Spiritual Church of the New Testament, is not to be built with
common, but with precious stones.

Now the full sense of these words I shall give you forth in several
particulars.

1. You see here the matter of which the Church of the New Testament is made,
and that is not of common, but of precious stones; elect and precious stones;
and such are the faithful: For,

1. They have a more excellent nature then other men have: for they are born of
God, and so partake of the nature of God; and so in this sense may be said to
come forth from God, as the child from the father: and the Lord Jesus did not
more truly partake of the nature of man, then these do partake of the nature
of God; and therefore says Peter, Great and precious promises are made to us,
that we should be partakers of the divine nature. Others have only the nature
of men in them, or, which is worse, the nature of the devil: but the faithful
have in them the nature of God communicated to them through a new birth.

2. They have a more excellent spirit then others have; as it was said of
Daniel, that there was a more excellent spirit found with him, then with all
the other wise men. Now the excellency of each creature is according to the
spirit of it: but the Saints have the Spirit of God, even the Spirit of the
Father and the Son dwelling in them; they have the same Spirit of God dwelling
in their flesh, as Christ had dwelling in his flesh: so that the very Spirit of
God, is found in the faithful, and therefore they are more glorious then the
rest of the world.

3. They have a more excellent luster then other men. One thing that appertains
to the excellency of precious stones, is the luster of them. Now this luster in
the faithful, is the glory of God upon them: The Lord shall arise upon thee,
and his glory shall be seen upon thee, says Isaiah, Chap. 60. And Paul says,
We all beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. So that as
Christ was taken into the glory of the Father, so are we taken into the glory
of Christ, as he says, Joh. 17. And the glory which thou gave me, I have
given them: for the head and members are taken into the same glory, according
to their proportion.

4. They have more excellent operations; for the faithful are not such precious
stones that are only for show, but they also have some virtue in them, even
the very virtues of Jesus Christ: for they having the same Nature and Spirit of
God as he had, are able according to the measure of the gift of Christ to do
the same works that he did: and so the Saints are excellent in the operations
of faith, hope, love, humility, meekness, patience, temperance, heavenly
mindedness, etc. and in this regard also are more precious then the rest of
the world. And therefore the Lord calls them his Jewels, In the day wherein I
make up my jewels: and elsewhere they are called the precious sons of Sion. The
people of God are a most precious people, men and women of a precious
anointing; though some wicked and scurrilous libellers against the spiritual
Church will not allow them this name; but (according to the anointing they have
received from Satan) reproach it. And yet still it is a truth, that the gates
of hell shall not prevail against, That the truly faithful are precious stones
in the building of the Church, partaking of the Nature and Spirit of God, and
of the luster and operation of both.

Whereas, on the contrary, other people are the vile of the earth, the true
filth and off scouring of all things; Psalm. 15. in whose eyes a vile person is
contemned: a man that is a natural man, a sinful and unregenerate man, who has
no other nature in him, but that corrupt nature he brought into the world,
though in this present world he may be a Gentleman, or a Knight, or a
Nobleman, or a King, yet in the eyes of God and his Saints, he is but a vile
person; and a poor mean Christian that earns his bread by hard labor, is a
thousand times more precious and excellent then he, according to the judgment
of God and his Word.

And thus much for the first thing, The matter of which the Church of the New
Testament is made, and that is of precious stones.

2. Now the next thing observable* is the variety of these precious stones. For
the spiritual Church is not built up of precious stones of one sort only, not
all of Saphires, or all of Agates, or all of Carbuncles; but of all these, both
Saphires, Agates, Carbuncles, and many other precious stones of fair colors.

And this notes the diversity of gifts in the Saints of God. For though all of
them are precious stones, yet they are of diversity of colors, and luster, and
operations: And this also makes for the greater glory of the Church: for the
variety of luster adds to the beauty and ornament of it. In the body of a man,
there is not one member, but many. If the body were all but one member, it
would be but a lump of flesh; but the variety of members, with their several
gifts and operations, are the glory of the body. And so it is in the Church,
the Body of Jesus Christ, wherein are diverse members, with diversity of gifts
and operations, excellently set forth by Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 4. etc. Now there are
diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit: and there are differences of
administrations, but the same Lord: and there are diversities of operations,
but it is the same God that works all in all. But the manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every one to profit withal: for to one is given by the
Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by the same
Spirit; to another faith by the same Spirit; to another the gift of healing by
the same Spirit: to another the working of miracles, to another prophecy, to
another discerning of spirits, to another diverse kind^s of tongues, to another
interpretation of tongues: but all these work^^ that one and the same Spirit;
dividing to every (...) he will. Here you see, are diversity of gifts, and
administrations, and operations in the faithful; but all proceed from one and
the same Spirit; and whatsoever gift proceeds from the Spirit, there is an
excellent beauty, a heavenly luster in it.

And therefore labor to distinguish between those gifts that are connatural to
thee, and flow from thy own spirit, and those gifts that are supernatural, and
flow from Gods Spirit. In all the operations of thine own spirit, in all thy
natural abilities, parts, wisdom, learning, actings, there is nothing but
ungloriousnesse, deformity, darkness, death, how specious soever they may
appear to the world: but in the gifts and operations that flow from Gods
Spirit, there is a heavenly beauty, and luster, and glory; yea, even in weak
Christians that are true Christians, you shall often see and discern an excellent
beauty in some gift or other, which they have received from the Spirit; which
shines not forth so clearly in some stronger Christians. And therefore let us
not expect all gifts in all men, and that every man should excel in every gift;
for then one would be saying to another, I have no need of thee. But God has
given diversity of gifts to diverse Saints, that each may acknowledge something
in another, which he has not himself, and may reckon his perfection to lie in
his union and communion with them; that so the Communion of Saints may be kept
up in the world, in despite of the world. One Christian has the gift of
Faith, another the gift of Prayer, another the gift of utterance in preaching,
another the gift of courage, another the gift of meekness, and the like; and
no man has all things in himself, that every man in the sight of his own wants
may be kept humble. And this is a glorius thing in this building, that the
luster of each stone adds to the luster of all; and the luster of all is
communicated to each stone: and so in the Spiritual building, what one has
from the Spirit, it is for all; what all have, is for each one. If thou have
the gift of utterance in the ministration of the Spirit, it is to build up me;
if I have the spirit of Prayer, it commends thee as carefully to God, as my
self: one watches over another, as over his own soul; and if any be weak, the
strong support them; if any be doubtful, they that have the gift of knowledge
direct them: if one be troubled, the rest mourn with him; if one be comforted,
the rest rejoice with him; and they are all so linked together in the body of
Christ, that the good and evil of one extends to all. Where thou can find
such another communion, there join thy self: but if this be the only excellent
communion in the world, who would not willingly join himself to that spiritual
people, where no man calls his grace his own, but all gifts are in common among
all, every one having a share in the faith, hope, love, prayer, peace, joy,
wisdom, strength of all, and all having a share, in these gifts and graces,
that are in any one? And thus much for the diversity of the stones, as well as
the preciousnesse of them.

3. The third thing that reveals the sense of the words, is to observe, that
this spiritual building of the Church of the New Testament, is made up all of
precious stones, without any mixture of common stones; is made up of Saphires,
Agates, Carbuncles; and adds* And all thy borders of pleasant stones.

Here then must be no mingling of the precious and the vile, the holy and the
profane, the faithful and the unbeliever, the spiritual and the carnal; but all
must be precious. If a man had a jewel that had here and there only a precious
stone in it, and all the rest common pebbles, there would be no great glory in
such a jewel; but the common stones would take off from the luster of the
precious ones: And so the Church is Gods jewel in the world, and it must be
made up only of precious stones, as you see here. And where are their eyes,
that perceive not this?

There be some that talk much against New Doctrine, which is the old reproach
of the Gospel; but surely, there was never newer Doctrine then this, That the
Spiritual Church of the New Testament, should be made up of all the people that
live in a Kingdom* and that all that are born in such a Nation, should
necessarily be stones for the building up the new Jerusalem. This is a new
Doctrine indeed, which neither the Old nor the New Testament owns; but was
conveyed into the world by the spirit of Antichrist. For God does not now make
any people, or kindred, or nation his Church: but gathers his Church out of
every people, and kindred, and nation: and none can be stones of this building,
but those that are first elect, and after made precious, through a new birth,
and the gift of the Spirit. And this Doctrine the Word will justify against
the world; for Paul writing to the Churches of Ephesus and Corinth, etc. does
he mean all the people that lived at Ephesus or Corinth? No; but the faithful
and elect children by adoption, Saints by calling, and says, So it was meet
for him to judge of them all. And if any were mistaken for a Saint that was
none, surely he carried himself very like one; he was outwardly in sheeps
clothing, or he had not been reckoned among the flock: and so if a stone be
taken into this building, that is not truly precious, yet it is so like one in
show and color, that it can hardly be discerned to be other, but a very
skilful Lapidary. And indeed such a mistake there may be in Christ's Kingdom
here, that a few counterfeit stones may be taken up among many precious ones:
but that is the mistake of a false Church, where a thousand counterfeit ones
are taken in for one truly precious; wherein for one faithful Christian, there
are many formalists, and many more profane. This is not such a building the
Prophet speaks of; for this is all of elect and precious stones. But I cannot
enlarge on these things, because this exercise I intend chiefly as an
Exposition: only I will add one or two things more, touching this particular,
and so go on.

1. If the Church of the New Testament is to be built all of precious stones,
what a building is that, where the only care is, to keep these stones out of
the building, lest by their glory and luster they should darken the rest?

2. Consider, when the Church shall be built up all of such precious stones,
what a glorious Church will that be, when the glory of the Lord shall shine
forth in every stone of this building? how will there be then glory upon glory,
till the glory of the Church first darken, and then put out all the glory of
the world?

3. Consider, what great enemies they are to the true and native glory of the
Church, that would have every man in a Kingdom a member of the Church, and
would have those taken into the flock, that are none of Christ's sheep; and
those taken into the Church of God, that are not of God; and would gather up
any stones to make up this Temple of God. These are the men that would keep off
those glorious things from being fulfilled in the Church, which are spoken of
it.

4. We are to take notice, who is the builder of such a structure as this, all
made up of precious stones: and you shall find in the Word, that the builder
and maker of it is God. I will do it, says the Lord, behold, I will lay thy
stones with fair colors, and I will lay thy foundations with Saphirs, and I
will make thy windows of Aggates; it is all Gods work from the beginning to
the end. For who can build unto God a living temple to dwell in but himself?
This the Prophet speaks plainly, where he says, the man whose name is the
branch, he shall build the temple of the Lord, even he shall build it. It lies
in the power of no man, to make such a building as this is; what wild and
woeful work do men make, when they will undertake to be building the Church, by
their own humane wisdom and prudence and counsel? when they think, we will
have the Church of God thus and thus; and we will make it up of such and such
men; and we w^ll govern it, by such and such Laws: and we will get the power
of the Magistrate to back ours; and then what we cannot do by the power of the
Word and Spirit, we will do by the power of flesh and blood: Poor men! that
think that these new heavens where in the Lord will dwell, must be the work of
their own fingers; or that the new Jerusalem must of necessity come out of the
Assembly, which is to come down from God out of heaven: or that they can build
the house of God all of precious stones, whereas this must be Gods own work and
his own doing; and no State or Council in the world can bring this about; and
after much trial and pains and weariness the Lord will at last teach his
own, that the gathering and laying these precious stones together, must be the
Lords own doing, even his own doing.

When the building of the Church is left to men, how woefully is it managed?
why says one, we must needs admit such an one, he is the chief man in the
Parish, or he is a man of good esteem in the world, or he is a Nobleman, or he
is my near kinsman, or is thus and thus related to me, or he is a good civil
fair dealing man, and we must needs admit him; and thus will flesh and blood
be ever making a carnal temple for God to dwell in, but Gods true habitation,
can never be framed but by the Spirit.

And therefore, for the building of the Church, let us look higher then the
highest instruments; for it must be the Lords own work by the Word and Spirit:
and though every man be against it, and oppose it, yet the Lord will do it;
when there are no hands to build it up, he will build it up without hands. I
will lay thy stones with, etc. It follows

Verse. 13. And thy children, shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be
the peace of thy children.

See here how the Prophet by the Spirit carries up the Saints above all visible
and sensible things, even as high as God himself; God ( says he to the
Church) shall build thee and God shall teach thee; all thy children shall be
taught of the Lord. The note is this, That all the true and genuine children of
the Church have Gods own teaching, in all the things of God; they have the
Father and the Son, to teach them by the Spirit. This truth Christ himself
confirms, where he says, It is written that they shall be all taught of God,
he therefore that heard and learned of my father comes to me. And again, the
spirit when he is come he shall lead you into all truth; Which doctrine John
after preached thus, 1 Ioh. 2. 27. The anointing which ye have received of him
abides in you, and ye need not that any man should teach you, but as the same
anointing teaches you all things.

Hereby now we perceive, how few true children of the Church there be, among
those who are commonly called Christians; for among all these, how few are
there who have the teaching of God? but most have their teaching only from men,
and no higher.

Consider therefore I pray, whether the knowledge you have be from the teaching
of God, or the teaching of man; you all pretend to know that Christ is the Son
of the living God, and that redemption and salvation is by him alone; but how
came ye by this knowledge? did you read it in the letter? or did some body tell
you so? or has God himself taught you this? For no man knows the Son but
the Father and he to whom the Father will reveal him; and therefore when Peter
said, thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Christ answered, flesh and
blood has not taught thee this, but my Father which is in heaven. And so
though all of you profess your selves Christians, yet none of you know Christ
truly, but only such as are taught of the Father. And this holds in all other
points, as touching calling, and faith, and union, and justification and
sanctification, and the gift and sealing of the Spirit, touching the spiritual
Kingdom of Christ and the Government of it; oh consider, whether you have the
teaching of God in these things or no; and if you have not the teaching of God,
you are none of the children of the Church; what ever truth thou know from
the letter, if thou have not the teaching of the Spirit, it will do thee no
good: thou know not any thing spiritually and savingly, wherein thou have
not the teaching of God. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord.

And therefore what a sad thing is it, when men look for their teaching no
farther then men? they only look to the Minister, or to such an able, learned,
Orthodox man, as they phrase it; or at the highest to the Assembly; and what
they shall teach them, they are resolved to stand by it, and build upon it, for
their foundation; in the mean time never regarding in truth, the teaching of
God: but say, what can so many grave, learned, godly men, err? and shall not
we believe what they determine? why now these are none of the children of the
spiritual Church; for they neither have Gods teaching, nor care for it: but
the spiritual Church is all taught of God.

Object. But you will say, does God teach without means?

Answ. I Answer no: God teaches, but it is by the Word, and that chiefly in
the Ministry of it: and he that pretends to be taught of God without the Word,
is not taught of God, but of the Devil. And therefore no man is to despise the
Ministry of the Word, which is Gods own Ordinance, and to depend upon I know
not what revelations and inspeakings without the word; seeing God teaches all
his children by the word and none without it. And therefore it is not the
Prophets meaning, when he says all thy children shall be taught of the Lord,
that they should neglect and despise the Word, and the Ministry of it; but that
we ought so use the Word and the means, as not to look for our teaching from
them, but from God himself in and through them; and when you come to hear,
not to think, I will hear what Mr such an one, or Mr such one will say, but
with the Psalmist, I will hear what the Lord God will say. And truly, I would
not care to hear what any man in the world would say, in whom Christ himself
did not speak.

Now much more might be said of this teaching of God (but that I intend brevity
in all) as namely, that this teaching

1. Is a clear and evident teaching, that you shall have certainty in what you
are taught: and shall be so taught of God no man or Angel shall be able to
unteach you again.

2. It is an inward teaching though by the outward Word; reaching to the inward
soul and spirit, to the hidden man of the heart.

3. It is a successful teaching; he so teaches as men learn; he that has
heard and learned of my father; hearing and learning go together: he teaches
faith, and we believe; humility, and we are humble; patience, and we endure,
etc.

But I cannot enlarge any farther in this point. It follows

And great shall be the peace of thy children.

That is, when men are taught of God, then there is nothing but peace among
them; when God comes and teaches thee and me and another, and many, then we
all agree, because we are all taught of God* and see all things by the same
light, and apprehend all things by the same knowledge, and perceive all things
by the same spirit, because all have the same teaching. And so they that are
taught of God, though one come out of the East and another out of the West, and
another out of the South, and never had any former communion together, yet they
all agree in the same truth, and think and speak the same things, and so there
is love and amity and peace and unity among them, because they are all taught
of God, and have learned the truth, not as it is in this or that man, or
assembly of men, but as it is in Jesus.

And truly, this is the true ground of all the differences and dissentions, and
heats that are in the Kingdom, at this time, to wit, because some are taught
of God, and some are not taught of God, but of men only: the carnal Church is
only taught of men and goes no higher; but the spiritual Church is truly
taught of God. Now they that are taught of God, and they that are taught of
men, see the same truths, with a great deal of difference, and hereupon arises
the Controversy and quarrel; for one will have the truth, as he sees it in
the light of God; another will have it, as he apprehends it in his own fancy:
and the carnal man, will not yield to the spiritual, and the spiritual man
cannot yield to the carnal. Says one, this is the mind of God, and I have
learned it from his own teaching; says another, this is not the mind of God,
for such a learned Minister, or Ministers, taught me otherwise, and so I
apprehend it; and thus as the flesh and spirit are contrary, so are their
teachings; and hence our divisions and troubles. But when men are all taught of
God, then they are all at peace one with another, and all do agree in the
substance of the truth of the Gospel; and if some do not know the same things
they do, they can wait with patience, till God also reveal that unto them;
for they know with all their hearts, that they themselves could never have
known those things, except God had taught them: and so they cannot be angry at
others, whom the Lord as yet has not vouchsafed to teach: and so they are
meek, and gentle toward all as beseemes the spirit, as well as at peace among
themselves. All thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be
the peace of thy children: For they know that no man is higher or lower then
another in the Kingdom of God, but all are equal in Jesus Christ; they know
that no man can challenge Christ more to himself then another, but all have
equal interest in him, and Christ is alike near to all in whom he dwells, yea
they all as willingly communicate their own things to the brethren, as they
themselves do partake of Christ's things; and so there is nothing but peace.
When men know that no man is any thing in h^mselfe, but every one is all that
he is in Christ: and when men love Christ merely for himself, and where they
see most of Christ, there love most, and if Christ be more in another then
himself, can love such a one more then himself, not for his own sake but for
Christ's sake; then there is nething but peace. Great shall be the peace of thy
children.

Verse 14. In righteousness shall thou be established, etc.

This spiritual Church had need of establishment; for when God has done all
this for it, when he has built it, and taught ^t himself, it shall not want
trouble and opposition and contradiction and persecution in the world, and
therefore it stands in great need of establishment. But how shall this be done?
Why says he,

In righteousness shall thou be established,

That is, not by any outward power or force, or armies, or fortifications, or
factions or confederacies, all these are but a staff of reed; but in
righteousness, and that is both in the righteousness of Christ received by
us, and working in us: the first is, the righteousness of justification: the
second is, the righteousness of sanctification, and our establishment lies in
both.

1. In the righteousness of Justification, which is called the righteousness
of faith, or Christ's own righteousness received into us; and in this sense it
is said, Except ye believe ye shall never be established: for by faith we
partake of the righteousness of God through Christ, and this is an infinite
and everlasting righteousness, that has neither spot nor blemish in it, this
is able to establish us for ever and ever; so that the Church has no more
establishment, then it has of the righteousness of Christ by faith; and as
the Church goes from faith to faith, so it goes from establishment to
establishment.

2. Our establishment lies, in the righteousness of our sanctification; which
is nothing but Christ working in us, as the former was Christ dwelling in us;
for the same Christ that is the righteousness of our justification, is the
righteousness of our sanctification. Now the establishment of the Church is,
when we let the righteousness of Christ work all in us, and we work all in
the righteousness of Christ; then are we established mightily and invincibly
indeed, and how much Christians swerve from this Rule, so much they become
weak and unsettled: sometimes Christians will be living out of Christ in
themselves, and they will be moving and acting and working according to humane
wisdom and prudence and the counsels and devises of flesh and blood, but in
all this they have no establishment at all. And therefore ye that are
faithful, see to it, that ye turn aside neither to the right hand nor to the
left, through any worldly hopes or fears, but do ye live and act in the
righteousness of Christ, and as the Lord lives, though you have Kingdoms and
Nations for your enemies, you shall not be moved, but shall be established
more firmly then the earth.

And therefore I pray consider your establishment where it lies, and that is in
righteousness, and in righteousness only. Some trust to this strength, and
some to that some to this aid, and some to that; but the spiritual Church
scorns to trust to any creature for establishment, but looks to be established
only in righteousness; and because of this, neither men nor devils shall
prevail against it. And therefore you that are of this Temple and building
which is made by God, seeing you have so many enemies on all hands, pray look
to your establishment, which is in righteousness: In righteousness shall thou
be established.

Thou shall be far from oppression for thou shall not fear, and from terror,
for it shall not come near thee.

The fear and terror he speaks of here, is inward fear and terror, from
which the Church shall be free, in the midst of all outward evils; for though
the Church be full of danger and persecution without, yet it is free from fear
and terror within; Nay the Church has trouble without, but peace within;
affliction without, joy within; weakness without, strength within;
imprisonment without, liberty w^thin; persecution without, content within:
against all the sorrows and suffering of the flesh, they have refreshings,
comforts, hopes, sweetnesses, rejoycings, triumphs in the spirit, and so in the
midst of evil, are free from evil, and in the midst of sufferings are free
from pain, yea they rejoice in tribulations, and in the midst of evil, are
filled and satisfied with good.

Verse 15. Behold they shall surely gather together, but not by me: whosoever
shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.

A very strange thing it is, that the spiritual Church, being thus builded,
and taught, and established, any should yet be so blind and mad as to engage
against it; and yet the world, and the carnal Church especially does this: yea
the more pure and s^irituall the Church is, the more enmity the world and
Formalists have against it.

Behold they shall surely gather together,

When they shall see the Churches gathering together into the true communion of
Saints, then will they gather themselves together against the Churches; And why
do these men blame the Churches for gathering together unto Christ, when they
themselves gather together against the Church, as we daily see? Indeed the
gathering together of the Saints, the world does most hate of all other things:
Oh, this is a dreadful and terrible thing to them, it makes their hearts ache
within them, and loses the joints of their loins; they think their
exaltation, will be their own abasement, and their gathering together, their
own scattering, and their glory their own shame, and their strength, their
own undoing; and cut of these conceits the world acts so strongly and
furiously to scatter abroad again Christ's own gatherings together. But the
Lord has decreed and promised to hew that little stone of Christ's spiritual
Church, out of the mountain of the world, without hands, and will certainly
accomplish it, and is now about this very business; but the world that never
looks beyond sense, they think this is surely a plot of ours, and that we have
a great design in hand, and so we have indeed; but the design is not our
design, but Gods, contrived in eternity, and discovered to Daniel chap. 2. and
this is the setting up a Kingdom of Saints in the world, under Christ the King
of Saints, wherein the people shall live alone in point of spiritual worship
and communion, and shall have nothing to do with the rest of the Nations. This
council of God begins to be accomplished, and the world thinks that we are
subtle, and we are mighty, whereas they are clearly mistaken in us; for the
wisdom and strength whereby this is done is Gods and not ours. For it is the
Lord must build this spiritual Church, and set it up in the world, and
preserve it against the world, and cause it to increase till it fills the
world; so that the design and the accomplishment of it, belongs to God and not
to us, and they that are displeased at it, let them go and quarrel against God:
and so they will certainly do, through the operation of the Devil; Behold,
says he, they shall surely gather together: As soon as ever the Church
separates from the world, the world gathers together against the Church.

Yea this place is not only to be understood of those that are open enemies
without the Church, but of a generation in it, that are not of it, and so the
gathering together against the Church, shall be in the Church: and so Calvin
interprets, and such a thing will assuredly come to pass, that the Church as
well as the Kingdom will have domestic enemies; it has been so in all ages,
and what wonder will it be, if it be so in this? The first division in this
Kingdom, was between common profession, and open prophannes^e, and if ever
there be another, it is like to lie between the form and the power of
godliness; and the children that are borne after the flesh, will up and be
persecuting them that are borne after the Spirit, and the deepest wounds we
shall receive will be in the house of our friends; not our friends indeed, but
of such who seem to be so; for they pray as well as we, and preach and hear,
and receive the Sacraments, and use the same ordinances with us; and yet their
enmity, of all other will be the greatest against us, and we shall receive
deeper wounds in the house of these friends, then in the streets of our
enemies. They shall gather together in thee, against thee.

But not by me.

The Saints gather together by God, having the Spirit of God to bring them into
union and communion: but the carnal Church gathers together against the
spiritual, not by God, but without him, for worldly base ends and interests,
and profits, and advantages. But mark the end of such gathering together:

Whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.

We have seen the accomplishment of this promise with our eyes; even a great
party of the greatest men in the Kingdom, as well as of mean ones, gathered
together against the Church, but all fallen: What is become of the great power,
and armies, that were in the West and the North, and other parts of the
Kingdom, are they not fallen through the strength of this promise? and if any
new party shall rise up again, they shall also fall in like manner,

For thy sake.

For the Lord loves the Church the body of Christ, even as he loves Jesus
Christ himself; thou have loved them as thou have loved me; he loves Head and
Members with the same love: The Lords people are his portion on earth, as he is
theirs in heaven, and so he will give Nations and Kingdoms for them, and has
said, The Nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish* yea those
Nations that be utterly wasted; On that this Kingdom in it self, and in its
representation, would avoid this evil as they would escape this end. The 4.
Monarchies for opposing the Spiritual Church, have fallen for its sake; and so
shall every other Kingdom and Common wealth, that undertakes against it.

Verse 16. Behold I have created the Smith that blows the coals in the fire,
and that brings forth an instrument for his work, and I have created the
waster to destroy.

Verse 17. But no weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper, etc.

Thou art says God to the Church, a small, weak, despised, contemned,
persecuted people; but thy safety, protection, blessing, lies in me, and in my
power, and wisdom, and lovs;

Behold I have created the smith, etc.

That is, I have formed him that makes the Sword and Gun and Pike, and that
prepares the Ammunition; and both he that makes the weapon and he that uses
it, are in my hands, and they shall only do what I would have them do, and no
more: and so

No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper:

God blunts the edge of the weapon, and weakens the hand, and puts fear into
the heart of him that uses it; and so no weapons that have been used have
prospered hitherto, and if any more weapons shall be used hereafter, they shall
be as unprosperous as these.

And every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment, thou shall condemn.

Two ways you see the enemies of the Church assault the Church, by their
hands, and by their tongues; and this latter way is the more dangerous of the
two: by the former they scourge the Church with rods, by this latter with
Scorpions. This weapon of the tongue is the most dangerous weapon that ever was
used against the Church in any age, and the last refuge of the Devil and his
instruments to annoy the Church. And thus when the enemy fails at the strength
of his weapons, he undertakes again with the malice of his tongue: and with
this, the enemy strikes against the Saints that profess the truth, and against
the truth it self professed by the Saints.

Against the Saints that profess the truth, clothing them with odious names,
and loading them with base aspertions, Independents and Sectaries and
Schismatics and Heretics; and some such there are indeed in the Kingdom, but
they abuse the precious Saints of God, with these and other reproaches, and so
crucify Christ again in his body, not between two thieves, but between two
hundred thieves, that so it may be the greater difficulty to discern him:
Their tongues rise up in judgment against them; it intimates, they shall have
specious pretenses against the Church, Oh these are the men that would turn the
world upside down, that make the Nation full of tumults and uproares, that
work all the disturbance in Church and State; it is fit, such men and
Congregations should be suppressed, and that they should have no employment in
Church or State; it will never be a quiet world till some course be taken with
them, that we may have truth and peace and government again. And thus they
have fair pretenses against the godly, and use the glorious names of truth,
peace and government, to the destruction of them all. And this is the sense of
these words, for their tongues to rise up in judgment against them.

Yea, me thinks this phrase intimates thus much, as if they would call in the
aid and power of the secular Magistrates against the spiritual Christians;
and then their tongues rise up in judgment against them indeed, and except
they engage the Magistrates power against the Saints, they think they can never
do them mischief enough. And thus their tongues rise up in judgment against
the Saints that profess the truth.

2. As the enemy strikes with their tongue, against the Saints that profess
the truth, so also against the truth professed by the Saints: and this they
call by way of reproach new light, as their predecessors, at the beginning of
the breaking forth of the Gospel in this Kingdom, called it, New learning:
yea, they call the truth, error; and the very mind of Christ in the word,
heresy; and the power of godliness, Independency; and the contending for the
faith once given to the Saints, faction, and sedition, and the like; and this
grieves the Saints a thousand times more then any personal reproaches, to
hear the truth and light and life and spirit of the Gospel, despised and
spoken against, and blasphemed; this is that, that fetches not only tears from
their eyes, but even drops of blood from their hearts: the truth of God being
much dearer to them then their estates, or names, or lives.

But see how God conquers this weapon of the enemies tongue to the faithful,
as well as the former weapons of their hands; every tongue that rises up in
judgment against thee thou shall condemn. All that speak, and rage and
rail, and reproach and slander and vilify and abuse the Saints, either by
their tongues or pens, thou by thy uprightness, integrity, innocence, truth,
faithfulness, shall condemn them: thy ways and thy works that are led and
acted in Christ and his Spirit, shall be the condemnation of all thine enemies;
and their misreports and slanders shall be done away as a mist before the Sun;
and thy righteousness and integrity shall break forth in that clearness and
brightness and strength, that they shall sit down astonished and amazed; and
they shall be condemned, not only by the word, and by the Saints, but by all
the common morality of the world, yea, and by their own conscience; so that
they shall carry their guilt with them night and day, and shall not be able to
look the godly in the face, whom they have so reproached; the very presence of
the Saints shall be the condemnation of their enemies, who have before so
unworthily judged them: yea the whole world shall see the faithfulness and
integrity of the Saints of God, and shall justify them and condemn their
enemies; and shall say, lo, these are the men, that the world judged for
Sectaries, and Schismatics, and what not; see how faithful they have been to
God and the true Church of God, and to the State, and surely they must needs be
bad men, that are enemies to these. And thus while our enemies judge us, they
shall be condemned themselves. And this shall certainly be done, as sure as the
word of God is true, and as sure as the Lord lives, to make good his word: For

This is the heritage of the Servants of the Lord.

That is, you shall have this by as sure right as any man has an inheritance
that is entailed upon him. This is your heritage O ye servants of the Lord, to
make void the force of every weapon that is used against you, and to condemn
every tongue that judges you. This promise is our portion, and the lot of our
inheritance, and in this we rejoice, that while we serve the Lord truly and
faithfully, neither the hands nor tongues of the enemy shall hurt us, but in
the end we shall be more then Conquerours over all. Let my portion fall in this
pleasant place, and I shall have a goodly heritage.

And their righteousness is of me says the Lord.

That is, these servants of mine are not men of a humane and moral
righteousness only, but they partake of the righteousness of God in Christ, Their
righteousness is of me; or thus, though they are sinners before the world (for
as the world reckons their own sin for righteousness, so it reckons Gods
righteousness for sin) yet they are righteous before me and in my eyes. So
that how ever the world reckons us evil doers, and not worthy to live in the
world, yet God reckons us righteous, and our righteousness is before him.

To conclude, seeing God has engaged himself to secure us in his ways both
from the weapons and tongues of men, Go and tell the Foxes that we will walk
without fear in the world both to day and to morrow, and the third day we
shall be perfected.

FINIS.

