THE DOCTRINE OF THE SABBATH, As it has been believed and taught, by ancient
and eminent Christians, Collected word for word out of their own writings, AND
Now Tendered to the Consideration of all the Godly, especially TO THE
PARLIAMENT, To direct them in their intended Act, for the due and strict
observation Of the Lords Day.

By a friend to Truth, and to the present powers of this Commonwealth, in the
way of Truth.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop, the Sign of
the Black Spread- Eagle, at the West End of Paul's. 1650.

The Doctrine of the Sabbath, etc.
THere is nothing more dangerous (and yet more common) among Professors, then
Zeal without Knowledge, for by this, men have many times run headlong, against
the power of godliness, pretending the Form, and against the Truth and Spirit
of the Word, pretending the Letter of it, yea through this they have killed the
Prophets and Apostles, and Christ himself, thinking thereby they did God good
service: And even godly men themselves, having in some things more Zeal then
Knowledge, have grossly erred and mistaken in very weighty matters; Peter of a
good mind (as they say) rebuked Christ, for saying he must go to Jerusalem, and
there suffer death; and the sons of Zebedee, out of the like blind zeal; would
have had fire to have come from Heaven to destroy the Samaritans, etc. And I
doubt not but the Parliament, out of a great Zeal are providing for the strict
Observation of the Lords Day.

Wherefore that they may take Knowledge along with their Zeal, or rather in the
head of it, as its guide and Leader, I have thought good to admonish them, that
they search the Word of God in this matter, and that without the Word they
presume to do nothing, though it seem never so glorious, seeing whatever is
done without the Word, though it seem never so holy and good, yet is nothing
else but plain Idolatry. And because none should say that I had perverted the
Word, and given a false sense of it, and am come forth to trouble the Church
with new Light and Notions, I have therefore produced in this matter only the
Testimonies of Others, yet such, whose names are precious in the Church for
their Wisdom and spiritual understanding in the Word, as well as for their
Faith and Love, who though dead, yet speak to this matter in these following
Quotations.

Testimonies gathered together by that precious Martyr, Doctor Barnes, which
are extant in his Works to be read page 367.
That the true Observation of the Sabbath consists not only in abstaining
from bodily labors; And that to a Christian man every day is the Sabbath, and
not only the Seventh day.
HIerome says, Super Gal. cap. 4.
Therefore be certain days assigned, that we should come together; not that
that day in the which we come together is holyer then another, but all days be
alike and equal. And Christ is not alonely crucified in Parasceden, and risen
only on the Sunday, but the day of Resurrection is always, and always may we
eat of the Lords Flesh, etc.

Augustine says, Epist. 19.
We must observe the Sabbath day, not that we should reckon our selves not to
labor, but that all things that we do work well, must have an intention to the
everlasting rest. Wherefore we must observe the holy day, not by corporal
idleness, and unto the Letter, but spiritually must we rest from vices and
concupiscences. Wherefore among all the ten Commandments, that of the Sabbath
day is alonely commanded to be figuratively observed, etc.

Tertullian says, Adversus Judaeos.
The carnal Circumcision is put away, and extincted at his time. So likewise
the observation of the Sabbath day is declared to be for a time, for we must
keep the Sabbath day, not alonely the Seventh day, but at all times, as Isai.
says, etc.

Augustine says, De Consec. Did. 3 cap. pervenit.
It is come unto me, that certain men, which be of an evil mind, have sown
certain evil things among you, and contrary to the holy Faith, so that they do
forbid that men should work on the Sabbath day. The which men, what other thing
shall we call them, but the Preachers of Antichrist, the which Antichrist shall
make the Sabbath day and the Sunday be kept from all manner of work, etc.

Testimonies proving the same Article, Translated out of his Book De Doctorum
Sententiis.
AND it shall come to pass from Moon to his Moon, Isa. 66. 23.
and from Sabbath to Sabbath, all Flesh shall come to worship before me, says
the Lord.

For the Son of Man is also Lord of the Sabbath. Mat. 12.


Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in part of an holy day,
Col. 2. 16.
or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to
come, but the body is of Christ.

After ye have known God, Gal. 4 9.
or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly
Elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage? Ye observe Days, and
Months, and Times, and Years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon
you labor in vain.

The Jews were commanded to celebrate the holy Sabbath one day in the week,
Ambrose ad Irenae. Epist. 77.
that they should be subject to no burden: but they being loosed from worldly
business, I would they had so passed, that they had carried with them no burden
of grievous sins unto the everlasting Sabbath of the world to come. Let the
Synagogue of the Jews observe the day, let the Church observe it to
Immortality. In the Law therefore was a portion, in the Gospel is the
perfection, etc.

Whosoever observes that day hitherunto, August. de Spiritu and Lit. cap. 14.
as the Letter sounds, judges carnally.

For if Christ has taken from us that grievous yoke of many Observances,
August. ad Bonifac. l. 3. c. 4. cont. 2. Ep. Pelag.
that we should not be carnally Circumcised, that we should not offer Sacrifice
for our sins, that on the Sabbath of the Seventh day we should not abstain from
necessary business, and other such like, if we observe them being spiritually
understood, and setting aside all shadows, signifying the true light of those
things. Let us take heed whether we shall therefore say that it pertains not
to us which is written, that whatsoever one finds of another man's, he restore
again to him that lost it: and many other precepts whereby we learn to live
well and godly, and especially that Decalogue which is contained in the two
Tables of stone, the carnal observation of the Sabbath only excepted, which
signifies a spiritual sanctification and rest, etc.

First, August. in Gal.
must a man know that the works of the Law be of two sorts, for they partly
consist in Sacraments, and partly in moral precepts. Unto the Sacraments are
referred the Circumcision of the flesh, the temporal Sabbath, the new Moon, the
Sacrifices, and all such like innumerable observances. Unto moral precepts are
referred these, Thou shall not slay, etc.

The Testimony of others in this matter.
TIndal the Martyr says, Tindal. p. 274
And to speak of the Sabbath, which was ordained to be their servant and to
preach and be a sign unto them, that God through his holy Spirit and Word does
sanctify them, in that they obeyed his commandments, and believed, and trusted
in his promises, and therefore were charged to leave working, and to come on
the holy day to hear the Word of God, by which they were sanctified unto it,
also they became captive and bound to serve it, saying that they were justified
by abstaining from bodily labor (as ours think also) insomuch that though they
bestowed not the holy day in virtue, prayer, and hearing the Word of God, in
almsdeeds, in visiting the sick, the needy and comfortless, and so forth, but
went up and down idle, yet whatsoever need his neighbor had, he would not have
helped him on the Sabbath day, as thou may see by the Ruler of the
Synagogue, who rebuked Christ for healing the people on the holy day, Luke 13.

Again the same Tindal says, Tindal. p. 287
And as for the Sabbath, a great matter, we be Lords over the Sabbath, and may
yet change it into the Monday,
or any other day, as we see need, or may make every tenth day holyday only, if
we see a cause why: We may make two every week if it were expedient, and not
enough to teach the people. Neither was there any cause to change it from the
Saturday, then to put difference between us and the Jews, and lest we should
become servants to the day after their superstition. Neither needed we any
holyday at all, if the people might be taught without it.

Bernardine Ochine says, Ochine in Dialog. cont. Pap.
Since Jesus Christ the Sun of Righteousness appeared to the world, we ought to
judge all times of grace to be a most holy Sabbath, and to take all the times
of our life, without putting diversity between one day and another, to be
altogether holy and so spend them altogether in the honor and glory of God. But
the Pope commands the contrary, that there shall be a diversity beween days
and times in holiness.

Luther says, Luther.
The eighth day signifies allegorically the life to come. For Christ rested in
the Sepulcher, the Sabbath day or whole seventh day, but he rose in the day
following the Sabbath, which is the eighth, and the beginning of a new week,
nec numeratur ultra eam alia dies, neither is any day numbered beyond that. For
Christ by his death conclusit hebdomadas temporum, has concluded the weeks of
times, and in the eighth day entered into another kind of life, in which there
are no more days reckoned, but it is one eternal day without any courses of
night.

Luther says, The Sabbath was commanded to the Jews in a figure, as the
Apostle expressly signifies, Col. 2. which is a shadow of future things, but the
body is of Christ. The Sabbath signifies, that very spiritual time which Christ
the Sun of Righteousness has illuminated, which has no night, whence Isaiah
says Chapter 66. month shall be from month, and Sabbath from Sabbath: and the
Apostle reproves the Galatians, that they observed days, and months, and
times, and years, according to the Jewish rite, that is only outwardly;
therefore that precept (yea all) is ceased to perfect Christians, for the Law
is not given to a righteous man. Notwithstanding the Church has retained
Feasts, because of the necessity of the word of God, for their sakes who are
unperfect, for a true righteous man is so like to God, that as God is
indifferent to all days, to all places, to all persons, so is he; every day to
him is holyday. But to the weak, who are not yet mortified according to the old
man, it is needful that they should be occupied in watchings, fastings, labors,
prayers, disciplines, etc. in the use of which, they may attain to the profit
of the inner man; but when the body is chastened and brought into servitude,
and the passions of it mortified, then they by degrees may cease, and be so
much abated, as the inner man is profited, in such sort, that if he should be
perfect, these things ought altogether to cease. This is that the Apostle
says, The Law is our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, for the Law made
nothing perfect, Luth. tom. 1. f. 116.

Luther on Isa. 66. Sabbath shall be from Sabbath, that is says he, I will
change the rites and Feasts of the Jewish Priesthood, and there shall not be in
the Church, the distinction of the Sabbath sed perpetua Sabbata erunt, but
there shall be perpetual Sabboths; but these are in the Spirit and in faith.
For because of this flesh of ours, there is need of certain days, wherein we
must meet together, for the handling of the word and the Sacraments.

Calvin says, Ad Colos. ca. 2. v. 16.
Such a division of days belonged to the Jews, that they should devoutly
observe the days commanded, by severing them from others: but amongst
Christians such a division is ceased. But some will say, we do yet retain some
observation of days. I answer, we in no way keep days, as if there were any
religion in holy days, aut quasi fas non sit tunc laborare, or as if it were
not lawful to labor then, but only respect is had of polity and order, not of
days. And a little after, on these words, The body is of Christ, he says,
That the substance of those things which the Ceremonies heretofore did figure,
is set before our eyes in Christ, because he conteines in himself what ever
they did foretell should be. And therefore he that recals the Ceremonies into
use, either overwhelms the manifestation of Christ, or spoils Christ of his
virtue and makes him void. And therefore if any mortal man shall usurp to
himself the office of a Judge in this matter, Let us not obey, seeing Christ
the lawful Judge absolves us.

Again Calvin, on Gal. 4. 10. says, when therefore proper holiness is
attributed to days by themselves, when one day is distinguished from another
for Religions sake, when holydays are reckoned part of the worship of God, then
days are observed amiss. We now, who have a difference of days, do not impose
the snare of necessity on men's consciences, we do not distinguish between days,
as if one day were more holy then another, we do not place therein Religion and
the worship of God, but we only provide for order and concord. And so the
observation with us is free and pure from all superstition.

Zuinglius says, Articul. 20.
Fides docet, operante Deo omnia bona fieri, and hoc est Sabbatum nostrum.
Faith teaches us that all good things are done by Gods working in us, and this
is our Sabbath.

The same Zuinglius says, ^^bel. ad Valentin, Comparem.
Now here my Valentine how the Sabbath is rendered ceremonial. If we would have
the Lords Day so bound to time, that it shall be wickedness in aliud tempus
transfer, to transfer it to another time, in which resting from our labors
equally as in that, we may hear the word of God, if necessity happily shall so
require: this day so sollicitously observed, would obtrude upon us a Ceremony.
For we are no way bound to time, but time ought so to serve us, that it is
lawful, and permitted to each Church, when necessity urges (as is usual to be
done, especially at Harvest time) to transfer the Solemnity and rest of the
Lords Day or Sabbath, to some other day; or on the Lords it self, after the
finishing of the holy things, to follow their labor, though not without great
necessity. Ad Valent. Compar. p. 254.

Picus Mirandula says, Christus finis legis, est nostrum Sabbatum. Christ the
end of the Law, is our Sabbath.

And Paul, Heb. 4.
Heb. 4. 3. We which have believed do enter into rest, and he that is entered
into rest cease from his own works, as God did from his.

These testimonies presently came to my hand, to which many more might have
been added, if time would have suffered, but these are sufficient to hint thus
much to men, That the Christian Sabbath is something more, and else, then the
world commonly does esteem it, And therefore it concerns the Parliament, to
take heed that they do not impose Jewish superstition on the Commonwealth,
under pretense of Gospel-Reformation.

1 Cor. 2. 15. The spiritual man judges all things, yet he himself is judged
of no man.

FINIS.

