THE City-Ministers unmasked, OR THE Hypocrisy and Iniquity of Fifty nine of
the most eminent of the CLERGY, in and about the City of LONDON. Clearly
discovered out of two of their own PAMPHLETS, One Entitled, A Serious and
Faithful Representation; The other, A Vindication of the Ministers of the
Gospel, in and about the City of London.

TOGETHER With a PROPHECY of John Hus, touching the choosing of a new
Ministry; And an ancient Prophetical farewell of Hildegards, to the old corrupt
Ministry.

Both very useful for the knowledge of the long deceived NATIONS.

By a Friend of the Armies, in its ways of Justice and Righteousness.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1649.

TO THE READER.
THis Reply comes forth late (for my occasions would not suffer me sooner to
read their Books) but yet seasonably. For it is fit the City and Kingdom should
be instructed aright, touching their Ministers. And if any shall think I have
been too rugged and sharp, with men of such reputation, I shall Answer much
after that manner Luther answered Erasmus, when he told him he had been too bold
and saucy with K. Henry the eighth; says Luther, if he was not ashamed to
reproach my heavenly King, Jesus Christ, I am not ashamed to reproach him,
being but an earthly King. In like manner, seeing these men have not been
ashamed to reproach and revile the righteous ways and works of God, together
with his own cause, and faithful people, unjustly; I am not ashamed to reproach
them justly, for these evil doings. Remember this, and read on, if thou have a
mind.

THE City-Ministers UNMASKED.
WHen I had read the City-Ministers REPRESENTATION and VINDICATION (two
Pamphlets lately set forth by them) and numbered at the end of the former
Pamphlet, forty six names of men; and threescore wanting one at the tail of
the latter; it minded me of that Scripture, Rev. 14. 4. where it was foretold,
That the Dragon should draw down with his tail, the third part of the stars of
Heaven, and cast them to the Earth: And of that Scripture also, Rev. 6. 13.
where it was foretold, That the stars of Heaven should fall to the earth, as
a fig tree casts her untimely figs, when it is shaken of a mighty wind; and
the figs fall in so great abundance, through the violence of the wind, that
scarce any are left behind. For have not many of the forenamed names, seemed as
the stars of Heaven, as bright and glorious lights in the Church? Has not
their Ministry seemed to shine and spa^kle in the City, and other places? And
do not they still give themselves forth, under the shining and starry names, of
Ministers of the Gospel, Ambassadors of Christ, etc. who do all Represcm. page
2. and p. 16.
out of zeal to Gods glory, care to discharge their own duties, and a hearty
desire of the comfort and salvation of men's souls; So that if a man should so
receive them, as they give forth themselves, he would be ready to say, sure
these do glister and glimmer like stars of Heaven. But yet if you seriously
mind their discourses, both preached, and printed, and can discern and judge
as spiritual men, and can take a true view of them, by the true light, that
shines in the Gospel of God our Savior, you shall find them no other then
the fallen stars here foretold, even stars fallen from Heaven to earth; from
the Church, to the world; from the Spirit, to the flesh; from the power of
godliness, which they once pretended to, to the form; and from Christ, whom
they once seemed to preach, to themselves, and this present world: a sad and
woeful fall indeed! and well worthy the tears, and astonishment of all the
truly faithful.

Now to let pass their pulpit-stuffe, which is nothing for the most part but
the cruel poison of Aspes; we will take a brief view of the most considerable
passages in their forenamed Pamphlets.

They say in the preamble of their Representation, That Represent. page 1. 2. 3.
diverse Applications were made to them, both by word and wriing, to invite them
to meet with the Officers of the Army, in their Consultations, about matters of
Religion, but that they did refuse to give any such meeting, because they were
not desired to give a resolution of their Judgments upon the matters, but to
cont^ibute their assistance in prosecution of what the Army had undertaken, out
of their own Sphere.

Where you see, these Ministers do acknowledge they were freely and friendly
invited by the Officers of the Army, to consult about matters of Religion;
which does clearly argue the ingenuity and integrity of the Council of the
Army, that in the things that might concern all, they desired the presence of
any, especially of those whom they conceived godly, and able; to hear what they
could say for, or what they could object against the things there propounded,
touching matters of Religion; which serves to silence their old slander, That
they would not admit Presbyterians into the Army, when yet they invite the
chief Ministers of them into their Council, to speak what they could in their
own cause.

But the Ministers say, they refused any such meeting as was proposed; for they
disdained (it may be) to be called to consult about matters of Religion, having
for a long time before, expected to be used in matters of State; and so took it
in dudgeon, that they were not called to resolve the Council of the Army,
whether the State way they were walking in, in reference to the Tyrant King,
and the treacherous members of the Parliament, were right or wrong. So that it
seems all Civil, as well as all Ecclesiastical affairs must still be
submitted to their Judgment, and they will be very angry if the Kingdom expect
not their determination in both.

But let us hear them out, they say, They refused to meet with the Council,
because they did not call them to hear the resolution of their Judgments, but
to desire their assistance in that wherein they were already resolved.

Yea, but whatever they called you for, you being come, might have discharged
your duty; and if you had wisdom and Spirit enough, might either have
reclaimed them, if they had been out of the way, or else have left them without
excuse. And if you had been confident of the presence, and mind of God with
you, you needed not have waved a conference, after so fair a call.

But you would not confer with them, but resolve them, that they were out of
the right way, what ever they could say for themselves to the contrary out of
the word of God. And thus still the Clergy will have their Doctrine become
Resolutions, against which no man may presume to dispute or argue: and they
that will not entertain them on these terms, it seems must want their company.

But why should the Army require your resolution in the work they were about,
they having before, better satisfaction in their own breasts then you could give
them; being better acquainted with the true sense of the Scriptures, and more
used to live by faith, (their life being placed in difficulties, when yours in
delicacies) and having more experiences of God, and his presence, power, truth,
faithfulness, love, mercy, Justice, all along in their course, and so being
better instructed in the cause of God, then your selves; which you (it seems)
have drawn back from, since you perceive it is not like to perform what you
first hoped for, and expected from it.

And truly, in my poor Judgment, it would have been a sad thing for the Army,
after such great and continued experiences of God, to have turned aside, to
have asked council of you what to do; whose councels many times heretofore, if
they could have prevailed (and most certainly in the former Summers work, about
the City Engagement, and peradventure in the last Summers war) the Army had not
now been alive, to have asked any Council at all.

But I was told, that the Army sent not to you, to receive any satisfaction
from you, in the work they were about, being satisfied already, that it was of
God, but (if it might have been) to have given you satisfaction, that you might
have been taken off, from reproaching and reviling that work and way of God
which he had engaged them in; and this also was for your own sakes, and not for
the works; seeing this work must have prospered, whether you would or no.

If you would have gone along with them in this work of God, they would
willingly have taken you by the hand, not desiring to have this Honor alone;
but you being unwilling to serve God in such difficulties, and for himself
only, they could as willingly let you alone; seeing Gods work depends on
himself only, and not on the Instruments, whether many or few, wise or unwise,
honorable or contemptible.

But why it should be suitable for private persons to desire your resolutions,
as you say, and not for public, you sure have some meaning underneath, that
durst not show its open face.

And that in some places you call them only private persons, and here reckon
them more then so; is it not because your Represent. page 6.
fancies and imaginations are inconsistent with one another, at several times.

But had they asked your resolution, you here tell them what your answer would
have been; which without any more ado, you bolt out thus, That they, instead
of proceeding further in Represent. page 2.
such unwarrantable courses, should testify their timely and godly sorrow for
what they had already acted. And I must needs say, you cut them very short,
telling them at first dash, their courses were unwarrantable, and they must
repent of them: And so you prove their courses to be evil, much after that
manner that the High Priests proved Christ himself to be an evil doer, before
Pilate. Why says Pilate (when the high Priests brought Christ before him, that
he might condemn him) what evil has he done? oh say they, if he had not been
an evil doer, we would not have brought him to thee: intimating, that Pilate
must take their words for that matter, for, say they, we are the High Priests
of God, and do you think that such holy men as we would have brought him to you
to be condemned, if we did not know he was an evil man? but Pilate not being
satisfied with what they said, they after undertook to make it good if they
could: which because they could not do with truth, they did with clamor and
violence. After this manner they deal with the Army, touching their present
courses, as they call them, telling them they are unwarrantable, and they must
repent of them; for if they had not been so, you would not have judged them so;
for are not forty six, or fifty nine able, learned, orthodox men to be believed
in their Judgments? and they tell your Officers and Army, that your courses are
unwarrantable, and you ought to repent.

But the light of the word has now so shined, that they cannot rest upon your
bare testimony, what ever names you have clothed your selves withal: but they
will expect that you prove what you say by clear Scripture, in a sound sense,
or you may be confident they will never believe you.

Lastly, you tell them in your preamble, That they move out of their Sphere;
and sure this is very ill done, if you say true, which you are seldom guilty
of throughout these discourses: but it is plain to them, and to all other
honest, and sincere hearted men, that they move, and act in that very place and
sphere wherein Gods own hand has both set and preserved them, maugre all your
Sion, or rather (as you now use it) your Babylon College, conventicles, and
conspiracies. And if you moved as regularly in your sphere, as these have done
in theirs, you had been more spiritual in the Church, and less turbulent in
the world; you had preached the Gospel of peace more, and blown the bellows of
sedition less. And if you plead in your Vindication, that you Ministers, as
Subjects, Vindicat. page 2.
and members of the Commonwealth, might intermeddle with the affairs of the
Kingdame, might not the Soldiers, as Subjects, also do the like? but it seems
that Souldier-subjects meddling with the affairs of the Kingdom, wherein they
have interest, are out of their sphere; but Minister-Subjects, meddling with the
like affairs, are in their sphere; and sure it is so, because the Kingdoms of
the world are now become more natural to these Ministers, then the Kingdom of
God. But this would be worth your minding when you are in your pulpits; that
you are not there as Subjects (for then every one of the Parish might be there
as well as you) but as Ministers, and so you ought to do the work of Ministers
only there, that is, to preach the gospel of Christ, and not to kindle flames
in the State: and when you are to appear as Subjects, you must do it so, as
others may stand on equal ground with you, that are in the same capacity, and
that sure is out of your pulpit, or way of ministry.

But you who challenge other men for moving our of their Sphere, let all
rational men in the Kingdom judge, if there be any men so irregular as your
selves, in this particular.

And if the Army have been called forth by God, to act high and strong in this
matter, as his own arm and power in the Kingdom, for this purpose; do not you
quarrel them for moving out of their sphere, for so it may be you may quarrel
Gods work more then theirs. If you say, you cannot see it to be so: I answer,
how should you, when you first, and after some body else has shut your eyes?

But I shall not follow you further to every particular, where your pen has
halted, and stumbled, and fallen down, for then I should too much trouble my
self, and every one that reads; wherefore I shall only content my self to
gather up the chief crimes you charge upon the Army, and to enquire upon what
good grounds you have done it: and to see if you your selves be not most guilty
in these very things, which you so boldly lay to other men's charge.

Now the crimes you charge on the Council and Army, in your forenamed
Pamphlets, are chiefly these.

1. Their attempts against lawful authority. 2. Their seizing and imprisoning
the person of the King. 3. Their changing the Laws of the Kingdom. 4. Their
endeavoring an universal Toleration.
We will take a brief view of them one after another.

The first crime the Ministers charge upon the Army, is,

Their attempts against lawful Authority. And if you Represent. page 3.
could make this good, you would say something indeed.

But what is lawful Authority? do you understand this thing? or if it shall
appear you are all of you ignorant of it, will you not disdain to be taught?
Lawful Authority then is the power that is ordained of God, as Paul says,
Romans 13. 1. there is no power (that is, lawful power) but of God; the powers
that be, ar^ ordained of God. For this is most certain, that it is the most
high God that is to reign in the Kingdoms of men, and who ever are his
instruments in governing, must draw their power from him; and the power they
exercise, must be Gods power, and neither their own, nor the Devils. Do you
understand this now? Well then, the power that is of God, or the lawful
Authority, how shall it be known? the Apostle tells us in this very place,
quoted by your selves, which yet you passed by unregarded, as the Priest and
Levite did the man in distress; he says, The lawful Authority is not a terror
to good works, but to evil, and the right instruments of it are Ministers to
the people for good, and revengers upon them that do evil; This now is the
lawful Authority, which word you name, but understand not the thing; and
whosoever do resist this power, resist the ordinance of God, and shall receive
Judgment (...).
to themselves.

But now that power, that is not Gods own power, but is humane or devilish;
that is, That power that does punish them thot do well, and reward them that do
il; that countenances and protects the evil, and discourages and destroys the^
good; that seeks its own private good, to the evil and prejudice of all others;
that makes laws plainly and directly against the common peace, safety, and
welfare of the people. This is not lawful, but unlawful Authority; this is not
the power ordained of God, but a power set up by the devil, which is to be
resisted by every man that will not give his consent, that the Regiment of the
world should be wrested out of Gods hands, and placed in the devils.

And thus are you Teachers, taught your selves what lawful Authority is. And
now show if you can, what such lawful Authority the Army has resisted.

Yea, say you, For they have taken away many worthy Members of the House of
Commons; men of eminent worth and integrity, Represent. page 3.
and who have given most ample testimony of their real affections to the good
of the Kingdom.

Thus you City Clergy say; but the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland are a
little more honest and ingenuous, and do affirm, That these Members accepted
such Concessions from his Testimony against Tolerat. p. 12.
Majesty, in the Treaty at Newport, as were dangerous and destructive, both to
Religion and the Covenant: And these sure were worthy Members indeed. They were
called ^^^th by the people, and entrusted to do things for the peace, welfare,
and safety of the Kingdom; and behold! they sit many years together, and mould
themselves into a faction, that they may be able to act all things contrary;
they sit to further their own private gain, and to confer such and such places*
and sums of money upon themselves and their friends, and to enrich themselves,
whilst the poor Kingdom is exhausted, and utterly undone, they sit to hinder
the doing of Justice, the establishment of Righteousness, to oppress and
destroy the well-affected, who had stood by them with their Fstates and Lives;
to claw with the Malignants; and lastly, having drawn in the honest people of
the Kingdom, to cleave to them against the King, upon specious pretenses, they
by their evils being become odious to the people, Council a Treaty, to
ingratiate themselves with the King; and to pacify his wrath toward
themselves, prepare to offer up, as a Sacrifice to his will and lust, all the
godly ^artie in these Kingdoms, together with all our Laws, Estates, Liberties,
and Lives. These sure were worthy Members indeed, at whose unparallel^d
falseness, covetousness, fearfulness, baseness apostasy, and treachery, all
after ages, as well as this present age, will stand wondering.

Now to take away these (...) thy Members out of the House, say these Reverend
Ministers, was to resist lawful Authority. But it seems their doctrine i^ no
more Orthodox in Civil; then it is in Ecclesiastical matters.

Yea but say they, When the King with a multitude (...) ^^ed men, demanded but
a small number of the Members of Parliament Represent. page 5.
in comparison of those now secluded by you; it was deemed such a horrid
violation of the Privileges of Parliament, etc.

And cannot all you distinguish between taking away a few honest men, by a
multitude of evil doers; and the taking away a few evil doers, by a multitude
of honest men? Can you not distinguish between taking away men that act
honestly and well in the Parliament, and men that act corruptly and
treacherously ^^* Is it no^ a great evil to do the one, and a great good to do
the other? Because honest men that are faithful to their trust, and seek the
welfare of the Kingdom, ought to sit free in Parliament, must therefore there
be no remedy to remove evil men; who having multiplied themselves into the
greater party, sit there to contrive the ruin of the Kingdom? Is there any
such evil in a Kingdom, for which God has provided no remedy? And had it not
been much better at first to have subjected our selves to the lusts of one man,
as after, to the worse lu^^ of many men?

Is it so heinous a thing, to take thirty wolves from among tweenty sheep, that
the sheep may the better make Laws for their own safety and welfare; which the
wolves, whilst remaining among them, being the major part, would never have
suffered them to do? Of such an horrid act as this, the Army is guilty, and
this is the worst you charge them with in this matter, if you would deal
honestly.

Wherefore the Army have been so far from destroying the Parliament, as they
have perfected it, and raised it to that ^^ act and excellent constitution,
that now it can work the welfare of the Kingdom with greater strength, freedom,
and speed, then ever it could do heretofore. So that so much justice and
righteousness has not been accomplished in many years before, as God has n^w
brought about by them in a very few weeks. So that (...) glory of this second
House, or Parliament of England, is far greater them that of the first; for
though there be not so many Robes and Titles in it, yet there is more honesty,
integrity, (...), and righteousness, which are (...) greatest glory the
Parliament can be capable of. And yet you learned Orthodox men, call this the
destroying of Authority and Magistracy, which is as clear as the Sun, to be the
strengthening and perfecting of it. But your mistakes are everlasting.

But because you have been so busy in charging the Army with this crime, who
yet appear to be innocents: Notwithstanding all that you have said, we will
consider a little, whether you your selves be not guilty of that crime that you
have sought to fasten on others.

And seriously, who are there, who have resisted lawful Authority, as you the
pretended Ministers of the Gospel have done? Yea, the more lawful the Authority
has been, the more have you resisted it. The more the Parliament, as it had
power and opportunity, has appeared against (...) Interests, and all
treacherous compliances, the more they have tendered the just freedom of the
people of God, and the true welfare of the Commonwealth, the more have you
oppose^ them: How have you consulted and plotted against them in private, as
your Babylon College can witness? and how have you prayed and preached against
them, as your Pulpits and Congregations can witness? and how have you
endeavored, by all means you and your confederates could devise, to discourage
their hearts, and weaken their hands in the work of God, after you perceived
they were like to prove too honest and righteous, to further your Antichristian
designs, and would not suffer you to inslave both themselves, and the people,
by your Ecclesiastical Judicatonies? Since that time, how have you sweated* by
your own, and the Malignant party* in both Kingdoms to oppress them? and if the
former Summers City-Malignant* Ingag^^^^^, and the last Summers fierce and
sharp War in England* and the (...) from the trusty Covenant-k^epers of
Scotland, did (...) out of this Fountain, many are much mistaken; but (...)
did, the Lord will not hold you (...)* but the (...) will cry, till it has
cried you down* (...) blood of diverse faithful Christi^^^ (...) whereof the
Lord, holy and (...) men may ^light (...).

And (...) of lawful Authority, (...) do you, being (...) use the (...)
Parliament of England, in your (...) are not satis^^^d in (...) present ^ot^ngs
at W^stm^nster ((...) the (...) the (...) worthy (...) no (...) of Parliament.
I remember that (...) body once told you. That you would no longer (...) for a
Parliament* then they did the things yo^ l^ked* (...) you have (...) good,
whether he would (...). And thus (...) y^^ the open, and angry Enemies
^^^^ority; and so the Scripture you brough^ (...) Army, prove your own portion,
^s (...) of (...) despise (...) Represent. page 10.
(...) for you have gone (...) his worship (...) accepted of G^d, but ^is own
carnal, (...) after the error of Balaa^* (...) (being (...) the people of Numb.
16. Represent. page 10.
God, for (...) own advantage) and so are like (...) perish* in the (...)
instruments raised up by God, for the deliverance of his people.) And this
leads me to that other Scripture, produced by you against the Army, which yet
does most truly turn its point and edg upon your selves* it is touching the
forementioned Rebellion of Corah, and his confederates, who said to Mos^^ and
Aaron, You take too (...) upon you, seeing all the Congregation (...) lift you
up your selves above the Congregation of the Lord.

Mark here now, you strange Interpreters of Scripture, who always make it
sound after your own fancies; Moses and Aaron were as mean as any of the people
of Israel, till the Lord appeared to them, and called them forth to the great
work of Isreal's deliverance from the Egyptian Tyrant; and this presence of God
with them made them great. Now Corah and his accomplices thought every one of the
Congregation as good as they, not understanding how the presence of the Lord
had made a difference, and so tell them, they took too much upon them, etc. and
this Moses calls truly, a gathering themselves together against the Lord. So
you, not seeing the presence of God with the Army, nor understanding that he
has called them forth, and sanctified them, to deliver the people from the
English Tyrant, think every one of the people as good as they, and tell them,
they take too much upon them, and are but private men; and thus like Corah, you
have gathered your selves together against the Lord, in his chosen and
sanctified ones. There were two hundred and fifty Princes in that Rebellion
against God, and there are nine and fifty Priests in and about the City of
London in this, besides the rest of the same confedracie all the kingdom over:
they then, and you now, rebel against God himself in his chosen instrumnets;
and therefore let all good people depart from the Congregations of these wicked
Priests, as the Israelites were commanded to depart from the tents of those
wicked Princes, lest they be consumed in their sins. And now it appears, why
you were so willing to put off these Scriptures to the Army, to wit, because
they lay such load on your selves, as is likely to sink you under them.

The second crime you charge upon the Army, is, Their seizing and imprisoning
the person of the King, in order to his trial.
And here also you scrape together those very Scriptures which the Prelaticall
Clegry were wont to use in the beginning of these times, as, Fear thou the Lord
and the King, and Represent. page 14.
meddle not with them that are given to change: and again, Put them in mind to
be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, etc. and
these Scriptures these Presbyterian Ministers handle with the same spirit as
the Prelaticall, and to the same end and purpose; and never a barrel the
better Herring.

Besides, they tell of many Declarations of Parliament, touching Represent.
page 8.
the preservation of the person of the King; and above all, they rehearse the
solemn league and Covenant, (that Systeme of Presbyteriall Religion,) wherein
say they, We do in the presence of almighty God promise, vow, and protest, that
we will sincerely, really, and constantly, in our several vocations, endeavor
to defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the preservation and
defense of the true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdom, etc. and therefore
to meddle with his person, is, to break the oath of Allegiance, the
Protestation of May the fifth, and the Vindicat. page 5.
solemn league and Covenant; from all, or any of which engagements, we know no
power on earth able to absolve us, or others.

O glorious pretenders to conscience! we have Covenanted to defend and preserve
the person of the King, and therefore no man upon any terms must meddle with
him. But why then did you encourage men at first (whilst the hope of Bishops
lands was rooted in your hearts) to go forth and fight against him, and used
all the Scriptures you could devise to this purpose; did you mean they should
fight against his Person, or against his shadow? but now I mind it, his Person
was then but the shadow of Regal power, for Mr. Pryn published a book in those
times, that the Parliament and Kingdom were the supreme Power themselves.

But to return back to the Covenant; You did covenant to defend and preserve
the Kings Person and Authority, not absolutely, (good men) but in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion, and liberties of the Kingdom: do
you mind this now? for would any men of Religion or Reason in the world have
covenanted to maintain the person of a man, what ever ways and wickedness he
should walk in, or to protect a man further then God himself promises
protection to any? which is only in his ways.

O most excellent Covenant-takers, and Covenant-expou^derslto covenant to give
a man a blessing, where God has d^nounced a curse against him; to covenant to
defend and preserve a man in those ways, wherein the most righteous God has
threatened destruction to him, etc. to covenant to defend a man in his
wickedness, treachery, curelty, murder, tyranny, and in the constant and
manifest breach of all the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations: Be astonished at
this, O all ye people! that these Clergy men, of the highest form, should take
so good a Covenant, in so ill a sense, and according to this perverted and
evil sense, should lift up their hand (as they say) to the most high God;
would any man in England have thought these men shauld have so little
conscience in taking this oath, if themselves had not discovered it; yea, would
any man have thought, that they should so strangely forget themselves, as to go
about to make the world believe that they have taken an oath of God, to uphold
the Kingdom of the devil in the world, and to maintain the open enemies of
God, against God himself? No wonder now you should be so strict against
Toleration, which, let it be what it can, yet is righteousness to this sworn
and covenanted sin of yours.

But I pray you, who take upon you to catechize all others, I pray suffer your
selves to be catechized a little, for I perceive you stand in need of it.

To whom did God give the Moral Law, and whom meant he, when he said, Thou
shall do no murder? did he mean men of low degree only, and excepted men of
high degree, or no? Pray answer.

And when God said, He that sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
that is, he that sheds man's blood unjustly, by man shall his blood be shed
justly: Do you find any Kings name excepted here? And have not the general
Assembly of the Church of Scotland declared the King to be guilty of the
innocent blood shed in England and Ireland, even an ocean of innocent blood?

And did not you your selves quote this Scripture in your own discourse, out of
Romans 2. That there is no respect of persons with God? which I wonder how you
would suffer it to show its face among the rest of your Writings.

Wherefore, if there be any light of the Scriptures yet shining in your hearts,
or any sparks of right reason remaining in you, you may soon perceive how
grossly and odiously you have prevaricated in this matter, and how you have
turned backward and forward for your advantage; first preaching, Curse ye
Meroz, because they went not forth to help the Lord against the mighty, and
after, curse Israel, because they did go forth to help the Lord against the
mighty. So that hard it is for the best men at all times to escape your curse;
but the best of it is, it will do as little harm now, as the Popes.

That which you talk of, the tenants and practices of Jesuits, Represent. page
11.
the worst of Papists, in killing and murdering Kings, is but a fallacy, to
entangle simple people.

It is true indeed, that some Jesuits have taught, and others have practiced
the private killing and murdering of Kings, but what is this to the present
case of the Parliament and Army, calling the King to public trial for his
treasons and murders, and judging him according to the known Law of God, and
the Kingdom? and what is this so much as in one tittle to the Jesuits killing
of Kings? But you must be meddling, though you talk no reason.

And whereas you say, The tenor of the Scriptures is against this Represent.
page 11.
thing, and the constant Judgment and doctrine of protestant Divines at home
and abroad. I shall make it appear you mistake in both.

First you say, The constant tenor of the Scriptures is against this thing; But
you err, neither knowing (as it seems) nor understanding the Scriptures. For
the Scriptures say, that they that do such things shall be punished with death,
and are any of you, or all of you, who have subscribed your names, or all of
your generation, able to give any man an Indulgence in this matter, or to
dispense with the unchangeable Laws of God? yea, in this case the Scripture
privileges a King no more then a beggar, what ever your flattery can pretend
to the contrary. Besides, the Scriptures show, how ten Tribes together did
revolt from Rehoboam for his threatened tyranny, in matter of exactions and
unjust taxes, how then would they have dealt with him in case of cruelty and
murder? And also 2 Chr. 25. 27. it is written, That after Amaziah King of Judah
turned from following the Lord, they bound themselves in a bond, or covenant
against him (which our translation, calculated for the (...)
Meridian of Kings, renders conspiracy) whereupon he fled to Lachish: but they
sent to Lachish after him, and slew him there; and having done so, they brought
him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers, in the City of Judah; which
shows, it was Ligavit.
not done privately, but by the public Justice of the Kingdom; And to pass
by many other Scriptures which might be named, how clear is it in Dan. 2. that
the best Monarchy, which Daniel calls the Kingdom of the God of Heaven, shall
smite the feet of the Image of worldly Monarchy, and dash all the toes of it,
that is, the ten Kingdoms in pieces; which is foretold again by John, Rev. 17.
12. etc. And where he says, the ten horns, that is, ten Kings of Europe, all
which have one mind, and give up their strength and power to the beast; shall
all of them wage war with the Lamb, and the Lamb should overcome them; for he
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and they that are with him are called, and
chosen, and faithful. When Christ shall call together such a company of people
as these about him, then shall the Tyrants of the Earth come down apace, the
first fruits of which, the godly people of this Nation are counted worthy to
reap; And so they say, with the Angel of the waters, that is, the Ministers of
the true Doctrine; Just art thou oh Lord, which have judged thus, for they have
shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink,
for they are worthy; and with the Angel, out of the Sanctuary, it is the holy,
faithful Christians they say, even so Lord God almighty, true and just are thy
Judgments. By all which, and much more that might be said, it may appear, that
these men are not well and thoroughly acquainted with the Scriptures, though
they make it their only profession.

And secondly, they are much mistaken in the constant Judgment of Protestant
Divines: for the Divines at home, it may be they may say true; for the terror
of Kings kept men so in awe, that they durst not whisper of this matter; but
for Divines abroad, it is evident that they were of this very Judgment with the
Parliament and Army. The judgment of Pareus Par^us.
in this point, is sufficiently known, in his Comment on Rom 13. whose book for
this cause suffered martyrdom in this Kingdom, because his person was in
another. Zuinglius also, a very godly man, does largely handle this very matter
Zuinglius.
in his 42. Article, which is well worth the reading. He shows there, how
Kings may be put from their Office, for misgovernment, and does prove by clear
Scriptures, how God punished the people of Israel, for permitting their King
Manasseh to be so wicked, whom they ought to have restrained, and removed; and
also he shows by whom evil Kings should be punished, saying, Quum consensu and
suffragiis totius aut certe potioris partis multitudinis, Tyrannus tollitur,
Deo fit auspice, etc. When a Tyrant is taken away, by the consent and
suffrages, either of the whole, or of the better part of the people, it is done
by the conduct and disposition of God. So the children of Israel, if they had
discharged Manasseh from his office, they had not been so grievonsly punished
with him. If you ask how that may be done, that the greater part of the people
should consent to that which is good? To this (says he) I say, as before, If
they do not agree to take away the evil, let them bear the yoke of the Tyrant,
and at last perish with him. Neither let them complain that injury is done to
them, when through their own fault, they deserve to suffer any thing: And a
little after, Non ergo desunt viae, per quas Tyranni tollantur, sed deest
publica justitia. i. e. There are not then ways wanting, by which Tyrants may
be taken away, but there wants public Justice. Thus he: and so no question
diverse more, if a man had time to search after them.

And yet you tell the people, that no godly Ministers are of this mind; and
therefore it is a wicked and damnable attempt for the Parliament and Army to
travel in this untroden path; and yet you see here are two godly men, and
Orthodox, forthwith witnessing against you in this matter. So that the Army is
freed from any guilt in this matter, as well as in the former.

Now it seems to me, the chief business you aim at in these two weak, and
absurd Pamphlets of yours (and it is easy also to guess your ends) is to
testify to the world, that you were enemies to this public Justice (as
Zuinglius terms it.) And to let this present, and the following ages know, That
God in the year 1648. had a great and glorious work to do, even a high example
of impartial Justice to show to the world, and there were fifty nine who called
themselves Ministers of the Gospel, that under color of Religion, and the
Word, stood out in opposition, and open defiance against it, to have hindered
the Justice and Righteousness of God, if it had been possible, from prevailing
in the world: Wherefore it is evident, that these men are as well enemies to
the Justice of God in the world, as they have been to the Righteousness of
Christ in the Church; and who now can make void that Scripture? the name of the
wicked shall not.

The third Crime they charge upon the Army, is, Their framing a new Agreement,
and changing the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom.
The Fundamental Law of this, and all Kingdoms in the World, is, Salu^ populi,
The safety and welfare of the people; and the Army is so far from going about
to overthrow this Law, That their whole drift and Council is to establish it;
and all that they have done, through so many hazards, and so much blood, and
all they are yet doing, is to maintain this Fundamental Law, unto which all
other Laws are to give place; and which alone, being preserved, the Nation will
be both free and happy, though the outward forms of Law be changed a thousand
times.

But how are these Clergy men wedded to the empty forms of things, not only in
the Church, but State too? and because they are not able to rise up to the
first pure principles of right reason and equity, they content themselves with
the muddy puddles of dead forms, as if all Law were comprehendin them.

What strange Notions have the vulgar people of Laws? they consider no^, that
Civil Laws were first made by men, and made for the welfare of the people; and
that when once they become prejudicial to it, they cease to be Laws; and they
that made them, have power to alter them.

Wherefore, let all that are not of the brutish among the people, know, That
since but few Laws among us, are the pure results of right reason and equity,
but there is something of humane darkness, or lust, or humor, or interest
cleaving to them; therefore as men grow up into more reason, they may change
the Laws which themselves have made; and as succeeding generations grow up into
more clear and refined reason, then their Ancestors; so may they change the
former Laws, as less suitable to them, seeing Laws are to be suited to the
peoples reason, and not the peoples reason to the Laws in this case.

Right reason and equity carry all Laws in their bowels, and will at all times
be a fruitful womb of them for the peoples good, when the tyranny of form is
done away: And it is much better for people to go to Reason for Laws, then to
Laws for Reason.

Each generation can judge better what is for its own good, then their
forefathers, who could not foresee what was to fall out in the world, after the
revolution of so many providence* and for men of this age to depart from their
own reason, and to live in the reason of former ages, or it may be in their
folly and mistakes, is the greatest bondage mankind can be brought into, and
has kept the world in the ignorance and rudeness of a child, to its old age.

The Laws of former ages were answerable to that measure of reason and equity,
which men that made them had attained unto; but when men attain to higher and
purer reason, the Laws must be proportioned thereunto, as the shadow to the
body, and the clothes to the man.

It is one of the great evils of this age, for men to admire and adore Laws,
and yet not to understand or mind the reason and equity of them; and hereupon,
to prefer Laws above the safety and welfare of the people, as though men were
made for the Laws, and not the Laws for them.

Our Ecclesiastical men, not well understanding these things, cry out against
changing the Fundamental Laws, and bringing in a new Agreement of the people,
which they think will be prejudicial to them, who never prospered so well, as
by the peoples disagreement; and therefore have they still stirred up such
broyls and troubles in the world: And therefore the peoples Agreement, so much
desired by all honest men is ready to break their hearts.

Again, they see more right reason, and equity appear in this Agreement, then
they think they shall be well able to master.

Besides, it shows a more righteous way of Government, then will stand with the
profit of their Ecclesiastical Kingdom, which can never be maintained by Laws
of right Reason, but only by the Authority and Tyranny of Kings.

And hereupon, both these of England, and those of Scotland, cry out so much
against this Agreement of the people, which as the Proverb is, Will mar their
market.

But pray suffer me to ask you but one question here, and I will no longer
exercise your patience in this matter.

Why may not the Parliament and Army as well change the Government of the
State, as you of the Clergy the Government of the Church? Why might not they
as well change those Laws that were the slavery of the people, into the
Agreement of the people, as you change Prelacy into Presbytery? Why might not
they propound as well a new Agreement, as you a new Directory, Catechism,
Confession, and Discipline? You said heretofore, there might be a better
Government then the former for the Church; and they know assuredly, that there
may be a better Government then the former for the State: Wherefore then do you
deny them that liberty which your selves contend for? But it has been your
ancient way, always to approve what is for your own commodity, and always to
disapprove what is for the peoples; to ease your selves of your own burdens,
but to endevor to continue theirs: But this is not to fulfill the Law of
Christian love, but the lust of self-love.

Fourthly, You farther declaim here and there against Toleration, which yet the
Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland have allowed, in a case, not their own,
viz. in the Agreement of the people; and what they plead, to exempt all men
from compulsion in this matter, may equally be pleaded, to exempt them from
compulsion to their Government. Let therefore but the word Government be put in
the place of the peoples Agreement, and observe then, how notably they plead
for Toleration in their own book against it, their own Pen betraying their own
cause. Their own words are these. How Testimony against Tolerat. page 9.
comes it to pass, that a few take upon them to impose this Government upon
others, and that it is desired the opposers may be punished. -- Let it be
yielded, that some at first may condescend unto the moddel, without the
knowledge of the whole body; yet when it is offered to them, what if the one
half, or the greater part shall refuse to consent, or submit thereto? Shall
they be compelled by others to do it, and be destroyed, if they will not obey?
Is not this to take power over those, who have equal power with themselves, and
to incroach over the freedom of those, who are as free as themselves? If they
say they impose in things necessary -- We demand who are judges of these
things? Have not those that refuse, as much power and freedom to judge, as those
who would impose it upon them? And if they judge it to be contrary to their
freedom, who can control them herein, without incroaching thereupon, and
offering violence to their Consciences, who may conceive such a way, neither to
suit with Religion, nor Righteousness. So that if the case be but altered, who
can speak more clearly against the enforcing the Scotch Government, then the
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland: And so, in the snare they have laid
for others, is their own foot taken. But by the way, What have the
Commissioners of the Church of Scotland to do with the Agreement of the people
of England? Why are they so busy to impose their own Church Government on us,
and to hinder us from our own State Agreement? Reader, do you think yet, they
are out of their sphere, or no? Or are they yet become our Lords and Masters,
that they thus set themselves over us? Can the Church of Scotland thus
commission them, to deal, and trouble, and then after fish in the State of
England? O the boundless privileges of the Church! But I hope the
Commonwealth of England will not long allow them any such Toleration as this
is.

Well now, because you are so hot against Toleration of Sects, I will make it
appear, that there can be no Sect so prejudicial to any State, as the grand and
dominecring Sect of Presbytery, which is the third disguise of Antichrist, as
the Papacy, and Prolacy, were the first and second. And in all these three
grand Sects of Papacy, Prelacy, and Presbytery, (which make up the triple crown
of Antichrist) these things are notably remarkable.

1. That they were set up, and preserved, and established by the power of the
Mgistrate, but not one of them by the bare power of the Word.

2. That each of them in its season, would endure no Sect besides themselves,
but would sit as Queen, alone.

3. That they all would have an outward and visible Kingdom, and Dominion in
the world, and yet this should be independent on the worldly Kingdoms, wherein
they lived. All which things have made this Antichristian Sect, which is but
one and the self same, though under three disguises (Antichrist having this
policy, that when he is discovered in one guise, presently he goes off the
stage, and puts on another, and being discovered in that, he withdraws again,
and puts on another) I say these three things, make this Sect the most
dangerous Sect in the world.

For (to insist only on the last) how dangerous a thing is it to any State, to
have two outward powers, or two outward Kingdoms in one Nation?

But would Presbytery have so?

Art thou a stranger, that thou know not this? Why, all their Writings are
stuffed with this; particularly, the Commissioners of the Kirk of Scotland
(which corrupt fountain has filled all the Clergy of England with its impure
streams) do blame the Parliament of England, for incroaching upon the Royal
Sco^^er of Jesus Christ (as they call it) in denying to him any Testimony
against Toleration. page 12.
external government over his house, but such as is dependent upon them.

See here, they would have an external Government ^f the Church, not depending
upon the civil Magistrate; and for such a government the Pope pleaded first,
the Prelates next, and last of all the Presbyters, these three Sects making up
the NVMBER OF HIS NAME.

Now how unsafe this is for this State, or any other, to have another outward
Kingdom, besides its own, with its power, laws, and government, joined and
mingled with it, which is not at all of it, let any wise or rational man
judge. For where there are two different outward powers in a Kingdom, to wit,
Civil and Ecclesiastical, each will be striving for precedence, as we see all
along throughout the periods of Popery, and Prelacy; for the Ecclesiastical
State will think fit to take place of the Civil; and the Civil will think much
to have another outward Kingdom and Power above it self, and so heart-burnings,
and contentions, and wars arise, as appears in all former Histories.

And so likewise, for this new Sect of Presbytery (which is the last round in
the triple crown, and so the least, which is the comfort of it;) suppose the
national Assembly of the Church, an outward Society, should excommunicate the
Parliament, an outward Society; and the Church power, with their adherents in
this and the neighbor Kingdom, set against the State power, (for when they are
able, no doubt, but as they have been, they still are, and will be willing to
uphold their Kingdom by force) what work, I pray, would this soon be?

And if the Clergy now, before they are masters of their much desired, and
longed for power, are thus impudent and troublesome against the State, what
would they be, if they sat upon their throne?

And therefore I desire the State would well consider it, that it cannot be
safe for it, to have two external Kingdoms, Powers, and Dominions in one
Nation, or Common wealth. For it was never known yet, but the Ecclesiastical
Kingdom did exalt it self above the Civil, as oil above the water; and so it
has bridled, and sadled, and rode upon the Nations for many hundred years
together. But now its hoped this Kingdom will ca^^ off its proud rider, and
suffer him to get up no more.

And thus now it is plain, that Presbytery is the most dangerous Sect of any
other, to be tolerated in the State, it not being s^fe for the power of the
Kingdom, to suffer any external power in the same Kingdom, that shall not slow
from it, and depend upon it. And the power that flows from a State, must be
State-power, it cannot be Church Power, seeing nothing can give that which it
has not it self first.

Whereas, they that hold Christ's Kingdom to be spiritual, and not of this
world, and that it is only to be managed by a spiritual power, flowing from
him, whose Kingdom it is; these people can neither be dangerous, nor in the
least measure troublesome to any civil State in the world.

And thus now I proceed from the reproaches they cast upon the Army, to the
Council they give them. And their Council branches it self into three
Particulars.

1. That they be not too confident of former successes, seeing Represent. page
12.
God in his great judgment suffers men to prosper sometimes in sinful courses,
etc.

Now for my part, I must profess, I greatly wonder, that these could never yet
see the most manifest presence and hand of God, in the most admired and
constant successes of the Army, and have not hitherto been so convinced, as to
say with the Egyptian Sorcerers, Sure the finger of God is here, yea the right
hand of his power and righteousness. But it seems blindness is come upon them,
not in part, but fully; so that these above all others are the men, who when
the hand of God has thus gloriously been lifted up, would not see it; but God
in due time shall make them see, and be ashamed for their bitter envy at his
people.

But because they are so unlearned, and ignorant in these successes and
providence, the manifest and mighty works of God, I will mind them of
something in this matter, if yet any thing might at last prevail to do them
good.

God had a great work to do in this Kingdom, for the true and real
Reformation both of Church and State; and when this Council of his first began
to take place amongst us; the King, and all his Clergy, and corrupt party of
all sorts throughout the Kingdom, being far the more numerous, rise up in
all the strength they could make to hinder this work. And yet this work being
of God, prevails, through his power and wisdom only, and all that is opposite
to it, is thrown down. Hereupon say the unbelievers, this cause prevailed, for
behold what helps it had! the major part of the Parliament, the City of London,
the Scotch Army, and above all, the eminent Clergy of the City, and else where,
who said of themselves, they had done the Parliament as good service in their
pulpits, as their Armies in the field; and therefore a cause thus supported and
strengthened, must needs prosper. Hereupon the Lord, because his work was thus
hid by these instruments, so that he had not the honor due unto his name, he
proceeds in another way and method, and turns the hearts of those to hate his
cause, who before had outwardly appeared for it; so that now all the former
friends of Gods cause, are become the most deadly enemies of it, the former
enemies being still the same; and so if God uphold his cause and people now,
sure all the world must acknowledge his hand: for now the major part of the
Parliament is directly against it, and the rich and populous, and proud City of
London, and a Scotch Army comes in against it, more numerous then that which
came in for it; and the Clergy, for causes well known, tooth and nail against
it; and all these join in one work and Council with the malignants, though
upon different ends, against the work and cause of God: and now alas, what
will become of it, how can it escape perishing? Yes, it is Gods cause still,
though left never so desolate, and so prospers as well, all these being at last
against it, as when they were first for it.

And so the Malignants are overcome every where, in field and City; the
numerous Scotch Army vanquished by a few, the City subdued, the Parliament
purged, and the Clergy confounded, and the work of God like the Sun in the
Spring, appears with beauty and comfort; and yet these men cannot see the mind,
and council, and hand of God in all these things, as if the fullness of outer
and inner darkness were fallen upon them at once.

And yet a little farther (for I take pleasure to mention the righteous acts of
the Lord;) the last Summer, when so many enemies rose up at once, in so many
several places; in Wales, Kent, Essex, Lincolns^ire, Huntingtonshire, Surrey,
etc. Some of which were at first quite shattered in pieces, and others driven
into fenced Towns and Cities, and the poor Army (...) without in the fields;
the Summer proved like a winter, more cold and unseasonable, and wet almost
constantly, yet for all the showers of Heaven, as well as all sorts of
disvantages from men, their courage was in no measure cooled, but rather
kindled: and was not this like Eliahs sacrifice, who being to offer sacrifice
without earthly fire, to make it evident that God was the Lord; he first poured
many buckets of water upon the wood, till he filled the trench, yet the
heavenly fire came down and licked up all the water, and burnt up the wood,
etc. and then the people, when they saw that, said, the Lord he is the God. But
our Clergy will not be brought to see and say any such thing, notwithstanding
such clear appearances of God: seeing they conceive all these to be to their
prejudice.

And so, though they council the Army to deny the experiences of God in all
former providence, and not to own his council in them: yet we will sing the
song of Moses, and of the Lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord
God almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou King of Saints: who shall not
fear thee oh Lord, and glorify thy name; for thou only art holy, for all
Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made manifest.

Now in this matter of Providence, they hook in the example of David, who
though he had through a providence, an opportunity Represent. page 13.
to have killed Saul, yet refused to do it, because he was the Lords anointed.

But this is a far different case from that of the Parliament and Army: for why
did God reject Saul? viz. not for levying war against the people of Israel, and
murdering and slaying those whom he should have protected, but for his
unbelief and disobedience to God; therefore was he rejected of God, as you may
see, 1* Sam. 1. 5. and Samuel told him that the Lord had sought out another
man, after his own heart, to be Captain of his people, who should manage the
Kingdom in the strength of faith, and that was David. And now David had no
cause, nor call, to take away Saul's life, for his sin that immediately
concerned God, having done the people no harm: no nor yet for his seeking and
hunting after David's own life; for a man in his own particular cause is not to
avenge himself, though he have opportunity, seeing God has said, vengeance is
mine, I will repay; and also if David had then slain Saul in the Cave, he had
slain him as a private man, in his own cause, and without the supreme Authority
of the people: And so this of David and Saul suits not to this case. But
suppose Saul had waged war against the people of Israel, whom he ought to have
protected, and killed many thousands of the choifest of them, and the Lord had
delivered him into the peoples hands; whether or no might not the people, and
heads of the Tribes have justly tried him for his life, and put Saul to death
for a murderer? there is no question at all to be made in this matter, among
just, reasonable, and unbyassed men. But you are miserable interpreters of
Scripture, who will needs make them serve your own turn, though their sense be
clean contrary.

The second piece of your Council, is, That it is not safe Represent. page 13.
or them to be guided by impulses or pretended impressions of Spirit, without,
or against the rule of Gods written Word.

This in it self is good Council, but falsely applied: For, their impulses and
impressions (to use your own words) were apparently from God and his Spirit,
and that according to his written word, and to moral precepts, as has already
been sufficiently declared. And those of them that are godly, are better able
to judge of the virtues and influences of the holy Spirit, which dwells in them,
and is truth, and no lie, and manifests it self to be so, by its own light,
then they can that are destitute of the Spirit themselves, and yet will be
judging of the operations of it, in others. And for the rest of the Army, that
are not godly, it is a wonderful thing to consider, how God by a special
influence of providence, has spirited them to the same work with his own
people, making the earth to help the woman, as was foretold.

And so you might have reserved this part of your Council also for a fitter
occasion.

The third fragment of your Council, is, That they sh^^^^ not pl^^d necessity
for doing thus. Represent. page 14.


If God had indeed brought them into a necessity of doing this, why should
they not plead it, yea, and act accordingly God had strengthened them with his
own power, and subdued* and brought down every person and party, both in this,
and the other Kingdom, by their hands, who did or might stand ^^ opposition to
this work, and so prepared the way for them, ^^ execute this high and impartial
piece of Justice; and if after all this, they should have started aside like a
broken bow, how should they (as much as in them lay) have utterly made v^^^
all Gods former works, which he manifested from Heaven, (...) this self same
purpose.

Yea, how had they also betrayed all the honest (...) the Kingdoms, and among
them the honest Presbyte^^^^ themselves (who have been seduced into this Sect,
in the simplicity of their hearts) into the bloody hands of an inrag^^ Tyrant.
Wherefore, to preserve themselves innocent from the blood of all the godly and
well-affected in this Kingdom, they were absolutely necessitated to this work.

Besides, they were not at their own liberty, to do this, or not to do it, but
their hearts were so inclined by God to this work, That they could not get off
from it, though they had (...) desire.

And this blessed necessity, as they were brought into it, so might they well
plead it.

You indeed (according to your wonted ingenuity and candor) call it a necessity
to sin, and a pretended necessity, and a necessity contracted by their own
miscarriages: But you are used in speaking much, to speak so little truth, that
hereafter but few will regard what you say.

Upon the whole ^^tter, You exhort them to recede from their evil ways; you
like the false Prophets, your predecessors, calling good evil, and evil good,
all along. But they see what you say, and are resolved not to take your
judgment for infallible, who have deceived both your selves, and the Nations,
for so many hundred years together. But God has now remembered your iniquities,
and the reward of your works is at hand.

And therefore men shall name you no more, the Priests of the Lord; you shall
no longer be called, the Ministers of our God; but you shall be cast off as the
degenerate plant of a strange Vine, even as the Vine of Sodom in the fields of
Gomorrah; whose Grapes are Grapes of Gall, whose clusters are bitter; whose
Wine is the poison of Dragons, and the cruel venom of Asps. And the Lord shall
choose a new Ministry, out of a new people, formed by the Spirit, who shall
stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, and in the majesty of the name of
their God.

And of this rejection of the old Clergy, and choice of a new Ministry, John
Hus, that faithful servant and martyr of Jesus Christ, prophesied long ago, in
these words, Ex istis, ulterius John Hus his Prophecy.
adverte incidentaliter, quod Dei ecclesia nequit ad pristinam suam dignitatem
reduci, etc. That is, Moreover hereupon note by the way, that the Church of God
cannot be reduced to its former dignity, or be reformed, before all things
first be made new: The truth whereof is plain by the Temple of Solomon* Like as
the Clergy and Priests, so also the people and laity; or else, unless all such
as be addict to avarice, from the least to the most, be first converted and
reclaimed, as well the people, as the Clergy and Priests. Albeit, as my mind
now gives me, I believe rather the first, that is, That there shall rise a new
people, formed after the new man, which is created after God: Of which people,
new Priests and Clerks shall come and be taken, which shall hate covetousness,
and the glory of this life, hastening to a heavenly conversation.
Notwithstanding, all these things shall come to pass, and be brought about by
little and little, in order of times, dispensed by God for the same purpose.
And this God does, and will do, for his own goodness and mercy, and for the
riches of his great long-suffering and patience, giving time and space of
repentance to them that have long lain in their sins, to amend, and fly from
the face of the Lords fury; whilst that in like manner, the carnal people, and
carnal Priests, successively, and in time, shall fall away, and be consumed, as
with the moth. Thus far he. Where you see he foretells of another kind of
Church-Reformation, then our Presbyters imagine; even such a Reformation, where
the whole Church must be made new, both people and Ministers: And there shall
arise, says he, A new people, formed after the new man, which is created after
God; and of these people the Ministers shall be chosen, who shall hate
covetousness, and the glory of this life, and hasten to a heavenly
conversation. A glorious people, and a glorious ministry indeed; and these make
up a truly glorious Church: And the corrupt and carnal professors, and corrupt
and carnal Ministers, such as the generality and multitude now are, and have
clearly discovered themselves to be, shall be cast off, and consume as a moth.
And so, as this new people that are born of God, and his Spirit, shall arise
and increase; so shall they cast off this old carnal ministry, and will have
nothing to do with it; but they will choose themselves Ministers out of
themselves, even a spiritual ministry out of a spiritual people.

And thus must this present corrupt, carnal, worldly, ministry be certainly
cast off, and thrown away.

And when these false Prophets, and Antichristian Ministers, shall have
finished the course of their iniquity, and shall be discovered to the world,
through the bright shining of the Gospel; the world shall take its leave of
them, in the words of Hildegards Prophecy, who speaks of the ruin of Rome,
Hildegards Prophecy.
and its Priests, and Friars, in these words. And when as their wickedness, and
deceit shall be found out, then shall their gifts cease; and then shall they go
about their houses hungry, and as mad dogs, looking down upon the Earth, and
drawing in their necks as doves, that they might be satisfied with bread. Then
shall the people cry out upon them; Woe be unto you, ye miserable children of
sorrow; the world has seduced you, and the devil has bridled your mouths;
your flesh is frail, and your heart without savor; your eyes have been
unstedfast, and your minds delighted in much vanity and folly; your dainty
bellies desire delicate meats, your feet are swift to run into mischief.
Remember the time, when you were apparently blessed, yet envious; poor in
sight, but rich; simple to feel, but mighty flatterers; unfaithful betrayers,
perverse distractors, holy hypocrites, subverters of the truth, overmuch
upright, proud, unshamefast, unstedfast Teachers, delicate Martyrs, Confessors
for gain; meek, but slanderers; religious, but covetous; humble, but proud;
pitiful, but hardhearted liars; pleasant flatterers, but persecutors; thought
merciful, but found wicked; liberal, but lovers of the world; plausible among
men, but seditious conspirators; lowly, but desirers of honor; religious in
appearance, but maintainers of mischief; robbers of the world, unsatiable
Preachers; men-pleasers, seducers of women, sowers of discord. You have builded
up on high, and when you could ascend no higher, then did you fall, even as
Simon Magus, whom God overthrew, and did strike with a cruel plague. So you
likewise, through your false doctrine, naughtiness, lies, distraction, and
wickedness, are come to ruin. And the people shall say unto them, Go ye
Teachers of wickedness, subverters of truth, brethren of the Sunamite, fathers
of heresies, false Apostles, yea, sons of iniquity; we will not follow the
knowledge of your ways, for pride and presumption has deceived you, and
insatiable covetousness has subverted your erroneous hearts: And when you
would needs ascend higher then was meet or comely for you, by the just judgment
of God you are fallen back into perpetual opprobry and shame. And therefore you
Nine and fifty of the Clergy, and all the rest of your spirit, ways, works, and
interests, throughout the Kingdoms; repent indeed, and not fainedly, and break
off you pride, hypocrisy, treachery, ambition, covetousness, envy,
distraction, abuse, and perverting the Scriptures; reproaching and opposing the
people of God; contradicting and blaspheming the righteous ways of God, with
all the rest of your iniquities, or else you see how the hand of God will
shortly and certainly overtake you; and what a sad farewell the people generally
will give you: The faithful having begun to take their leave of you already.

FINIS.

