The English CATHOLIC CHRISTIAN, OR, The SAINTS Vtopia: By THOMAS de
Eschallers de la MORE, an unprofitable Servant of Jesus Christ: Of Graies-Inne
Barrister, and Minister of the Gospel of eternal salvation.

In the Year of Grace and Truth, 1649.

A Treatise consisting of four SECTIONS.

1 JOSVAHS Resolution. 2 Of the Common LAW. 3 Of PHYSIC. 4 Of DIVINITY.
Josh. 24.15. As for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord. Deuteronomy. 32.45, 46,
47. Luke 6.31. 1 Pet. 4.8. Prove. 19.29. Heb. 13.1. 1 John 4.7, 8. Eccles. 12.
verse. 13, 14. Romans 12. Chap. and Chap. 13. Read these Chapters and texts of
Scripture with diligencehumility and integrity of heart, in the name and fear
of God. S^^^^. Amen.

LONDON, Printed by R. Leybourn, in Monks-well street, and are to be sold at
Graies-Inne. 1649.

To his most excellent MAJESTY, CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland.
DRead Sovereign, my Lord the King; may it please your Highness only once to
look over this ensuing Treatise (and it will not repent thee, o King, to peruse
it, and read it again, and again) entitled, a Protestation concerning the
Church, and Commonwealth of England, written almost six years since ( viz. in
June, 1641.) by a loyal-hearted subject, and a faithful servant now in all
humility prostrate; beneath your Majesty's feet: May your favor descend as dew
upon the grass; and let me not behold the messengers of death in your
countenance. A shrub may grow near unto a Cedar; High and low, great and small,
The rich and poor meet together: The Lord is the maker of them all. I would put
a knife to my throat; were I man given to appetite, or desirous of dainties; I
am not called to sit and eat with a Ruler: but to attend and wait, until I
have delivered mine errand to the King; it behooves me therefore to consider
diligently, what to say. Many will entreat the favor of the Prince: and every
man is a friend to him that gives gifts. But I was born for adversity (have
bin trained up in afflictions, and have eaten my bread in sorrow) and do desire
to appear my self a true Nathanael, an upright Loyalist at all times. Not
subjection alone, but duty my dread Lord, comandest my greatest observance, and
most obedientiall gratitude: for I am a branch spronted from a root, this many
ages has grown, spread, flourished, lived and revived in the light of the
countenance, and sunshine days of diverse Kings of England, your Royal
Progenitors, whose Princely bounty, and most munificent constant favors unto
mine Ancestors, has been as a cloud of the latter rain: ( videlicet, Sir Hugh
de Pounts un chivaler, que vint de Normandy ove le Conqueror; and transacto
regimine Regis Haroldi Secundi, Laurentius de la More qui erat in exercitu
Willielmi Bastardi Regis in Conquestu suo Regni Angliae, etc. and Dominus
Galfridus de Scalariis miles; and Sir Thomas de Eschallers, and Sir John de
Chalers, Knights: ( Scalarii isti sunt editi atavo Galfridi senioris Hardwino
de Scalariis Domino totius Baroniae de Caxton in Comitate Cantabrigiae tempore
Willielmi Regis Angliae, etc.) And Sir Thomas de la More Knight, who was a
Courtier in the Reigns of Edward the First, Edward the Second, and Edward the
Third, and was a Servant (and wrote the life) of King Edward the Second: And my
Grandfather who was Servant to King Henry the Eighth: and diverse others of my
Ancestors, who received most Princely rewards, and gifts from their Masters the
Kings of England, and had great possessions and lands given unto them in the
County of Oxon. etc.) Now, therefore, if I should not in most humble manner,
acknowledge this great munificence, and pay my due tribute of Loyalty for such
Royal favors; I should be branded with the blackest note of Infamy, and be
chronicled ungrateful. Moreover, as I am a member of the body of Christ my
supreme Head; Christian duty binds me, not only to pray for Kings, and all
that are in authority: but to labor with my hands, and assay all lawful means
possible, for the building up and repairing of the breaches, which all our sins
have made in that mystical Temple, the Church of God. If David has committed a
great wickedness, and sinned secretly, and the Prophet tell him, Thou art the
man, he must presently confess, I have sinned against the Lord, and the Lord
will put away his sin, and he shall not die, Psalm. 51. 2 Samuel 12. If Peter
deny his Master, and the Lord look back (in mercy) upon him, he cannot but
go forth immediately and weep bitterly. If God has humbled Ahab King of
Israel, Nebuchadnezar King of Babylon, the Ninivites, and Manasseth King of
Judah (that Mirror of mercy, and miracle of Gods unchangeable love and
everlasting kindness, and good will toward sinful men) they shall make an
humble acknowledgement of their transgressions, repent and turn unto the Lord,
with fasting, weeping, and mourning: And the Lord will turn away his fierce
wrath, he will cancel his decree of temporal punishment, and reverse his
judgments denounced against them. If that wise King Solomon multiply his
whoredoms, commit Spiritual Fornications and Idolatry, he must become an
Ecclesiastes in recantation of his vanities. If King Saul make an unadvised
adjuration to hinder the victory, to retard the success, and weaken the hands
of those that fight the Lords Battles: Shall Jonathan die, who has wrought
salvation in Israel? God forbid, the people may rescue him that he die not. If
Joab, Captain of the Host advise a disconsolate son-lamenting King to speak
comfortably unto his Princes, his people, his friends and servants, that being
ashamed have gotten themselves by stealth into their Cities and habitations:
The Ki^^ will presently arise and sit in the gate, that all the people
throughout all the Tribes of Israel and Judah may be at strife to bring the
King back to his house. If the people say unto him, Thou shall not go forth to
Battle, for if we fly away they will not care for us, neither if half of us
die will they care for us, but now thou art worth ten thousand of us, therefore
now it is better that thou succor us out of the City, the King will give them
a gracious Answer, and say unto them, what seems you best I will do. If the
Prophet Jeremy counsel the captived King, by yielding to save his life, let
him obey the voice of the Lord, so it shall be well unto him, and his soul
shall live. A wicked man hardens his face, but as for the upright he
directs his way. There is no Wisdom, nor Understanding, nor Counsel against
the Lord. Let no man presume to touch Gods people, the Servants, the Prophets,
the Anointed of the Lord: for he reproved Kings for their sakes. Let no man
speak evil of those things which he knows not, lest he perish in the
gainsaying of Core. Let no wicked Pharaoh exalt himself against Gods people,
lest the Lord harden his heart, and speak thus unto him in the fierceness of
his wrath, Even for this same purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show
my power in thee, and that my name might be declared throughout all the earth.
Think thou, o man, that do these things that thou shall escape the
judgment of God? or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance and long-suffering? not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
unto thy self wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God; who will tender to every man according to his deeds, for
there is no respect of persons with God. O, that we knew the time of our
visitation, and that we could see in this our day, the things that belong unto
our peace, least the Lord withdraw the light of his countenance from us, and
least the mercy and loving ki^^ness of our God be hid from our eyes! Thus
says the Lord to Israel, I have spread out my hands all the day unto a
rebellious people, which walks in a way that was not good after their own
thoughts, a people that provokes me to anger continually to my face, that
sacrifices in Gardens, etc. And our most holy Redeemer and blessed Savior
Jesus Christ thus compassionately bemoaneth a stif-necked, disobedient,
hard-harted, gainsaying people. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee. How often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a Hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not? Behold, your house is left unto you desolate, and the
Apostle exhorts us, Whilst it is said, To day, if ye will hear his voice
harden not your hearts, as in the provocation. Take heed, brethren, lest there
be in any of you an evil heart of belief, in departing from the living God,
but exhort one another daily, whilst it is called to day, lest any of you be
hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3. Let us therefore provoke the
Lord to wrath no more, by our sins, but let us enter into a holy Covenant with
God, to walk uprightly before the Lord, as Noah, Abraham, Moses, Joshua, Job,
Daniel, King David, and all the Prophets, Apostles, and servants of the Lord
have done before us, and let us resolve to serve the Lord our God with all our
hearts, with all our souls, and withal our might: Then shall our captivity and
all our sufferings and afflictions work together for the best, for the Lord
will set his eyes upon us for good, and he will bring us again unto our Lands
and to our huoses, and he will build us, and not pull us down; he will plant us,
and not pluck us up, and he will give us an heart to know him, that he is the
Lord, and we shall be his people, and he will be our God, for we shall return
unto him with our whole hearts, and we shall be like Trees planted by the
Rivers of water, that will bring forth fruit in season, our leaf also shall not
wither, and whatsoever we do shall prosper. The ungodly are not so, but are
like the chafe which the wind drives away. The Lord will deliver them to be
removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth, for their hurt, to be a reproach
and a proverb, a taunt and a curse in all places whether he shall drive them.
And he will send the Sword, the Famine, and the Pestilence among them, till
they be consumed from the Land that he gave unto them and their Fathers. For
the Lord knows the way of the righteous, but the way of the ungodly shall
perish. Your Majesty may read in the Chronicles of holy Writ, That King Asa did
that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, as did David his Father, and he
took away the Sodomites out of the Land, and removed all the Idols that
(Abijam) his Father had made, and also Maachah his mother, even her he removed
from being Queen, because she made an Idol in a Grove, and Asa destroyed her
Idol, and burnt it by the Brook Kidron, but the high places were not removed:
nevertheless, Asa his heart was perfect with the Lord all his days. Also King
Azariah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all
that his Father Amaziah had done, save that the high places were not removed:
the people sacrificed, and burnt incense still on the high places. And the Lord
smote the King, so that he was a Leaper unto the day of his death, and dwelt
in a several house, and Jothan the Kings son was over the house, judging the
people of the Land. And King Hezekiah did that which was right in the sight of
the Lord, according to all that David his Father did. He removed the high
places, and brake the Images, and cut down the Groves, etc. he trusted in the
Lord God of Israel, so that after him there was none like him among all the
Kings of Judah, nor any that went before him. For he clave to the Lord, and
departed not from following him; but kept his Comandements which the Lord
commanded Moses. And the Lord was with him, and he prospered whither soever he
went forth: and he rebelled against the King of Assyria, and served him not.
And King Josiah did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked
in all the ways of David his Father, and turned not aside to the right hand or
to the left. And the King sent, and they gathered unto him all the Elders of
Judah, and of Jerusalem, and the King went up into the house of the Lord, and
all the men of Judah, and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem with them, and the
Priests, and the Prophets, and all the people both small and great: and he read
in their ears all the words of the book of the Covenant which was found in the
house of the Lord. And the King stood by a pillar, and made a Covenant before
the Lord, to walk before the Lord, and to keep his Comandments, and his
Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all their heart, and all their soul, to
perform the words of this Covenant, that were written in this book: and all the
people stood to the Covenant. And the King commanded all the vessels that were
made for Baal, and for the Grove, and for the Host of heaven, to be brought
forth out of the Temple of the Lord, and he burnt them without Jerusalem in the
fields of Kidron, and carried the Ashes of them unto Bethel. And he put down
the Idolatrous Priests, whom the Kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in
the high places, etc. Moreover, the workers with familiar Spirits, and the
Wizards, and the Images and the Idols, and all the abominations that were spyed
in the Land of Judah, and in Jerusalem, did Josiah put away, that he might
perform the words of the Law which were written in the Book that Hilkiah the
Priest found in the House of the Lord. And like unto him was there no King
before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart and with all his soul,
and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, neither after him
arose any like him: 2 Kings 22, and 23. Chapters.

Now, therefore, my Lord the King arise, and be doing, and the Lord be with
thee. And command all your Children, your Confederates and Allies, your Nobles
and your Commons, and all the people of your Kingdoms to help you, saying, Is
not the Lord your God with you? And has he not given you rest on every side?
for he has given your enemies into your hands, and the Land is subdued before
the Lord, and before his people. Now set your heart and your soul to seek the
Lord your God: arise therefore, and build ye the Sanctuary of the Lord God,
establish Religion in its purity according to Gods Word: settle the Church
government, compose the differences, and heal the distempers that our sins have
made, repair ye the breaches, and build up the waste places in the Church and
State, and do you Judgment and Justice throughout all my Dominions. And
command all the people to gather themselves together as one man, and to make
confession saying. O Lord the great and dreadful God, keeping the Covenant,
and mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his Comandements. We
have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, and have
rebelled, even hy departing from thy precepts and from thy judgments. Neither
have we harkned unto thy servants, the Ministers and Preachers of thy Word and
Ordinances, which spoke in thy name, to our King, our Princes, and our Fathers,
and to all the people of the Land. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face,
because we have sinned against thee. To the Lord our God belongs mercies, and
forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him. O Lord, we have been
disobedient and rebelled against thee, and cast thy Law behind our backs, and
have slain thy servants which testified against us to turn us unto thee, and we
have wrought great provocations: therefore thou deliverest us into the hands of
our enemies, who vexed us, and in the time of our trouble, when we cried unto
thee, thou heardst us from heaven: and according to thy manifold mercies thou
gave us Saviors, who saved us out of the hands of our enemies. But after we
had rest, we did evil again before thee, therefore leftest thou us in the hand
of our enemies, so that they had the dominion over us, yet when we returned,
and cried unto thee, thou heardst us from heaven, and many times did thou
deliver us, according to thy mercies. Thou did not utterly consume us nor
forsake us; for thou art a gracious and a merciful God. Now therefore our God,
the great, the mighty, and the terrible God, who keep Covenant and mercy:
Let not all the trouble seem little before thee, that has come upon us, on
our King, on our Princes and Nobles, and on our Ministers and Elders, and on
our fathers, and on all thy people; since the time of the Kings departing from
his Parliaments, and people unto this day. Howbeit, thou art just in all that
is brought upon us, for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly.
Neither have, our King, our Princes and Nobles, our Elders and Ministers of thy
Word, nor our Fathers kept thy Law: nor hearkened unto thy Commandments, and
thy Testimonies, wherewith thou did testify against them. For they have not
served thee in their Kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gave them;
and in the large and fatland which thou gave before them, neither turned they
from their wicked works. Behold, we are servants this day; and for the land
which thou gave unto our Fathers, to eat the fruit thereof, and the good
thereof, behold we are servants in it. And it yields much increase unto them,
whom thou have set over us, because of our sins: also they have dominion over
our bodies, and over our cattle at their pleasure; and we are in great
distress. And because of all this, let us make a sure Covenant, and write it;
and let the King, our Princes and Nobles, our Elders and Ministers of Gods Word
and Ordinances, our Fathers, and all the people of your Majesty's Dominions
seal unto it. And finally, may it please your Excellent Majesty, to attend unto
the doctrine and exhortations of the Apostle. 1 These. Chap. 5. and Hebrews
13.20, 21. Quench not the spirit: despise not prophesyings: prove all things:
hold fast that which is good: abstain from all appearance of evil. And the
very God of Peace, sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole spirit, and
soul, and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Faithful is he that calls you, who also will do it. Now the God of
peace, that brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of
the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Make you perfect in
every good work to do his will, working in you that which is pleasing in his
sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever. Amen. I have not omitted
for many years together (my Sovereign Lord) daily and constantly to pray, for
the temporal and eternal happiness of the King, the Queen your Consort, and
Royal Progeny; with that integrity of heart, zeal, and devout affection, as I
pray for the Church of God, and the salvation of my own soul. Thus rejoices
evermore, to pray without ceasing, Royal Sir,

Your Majesty's humbly devoted Orator most dutiful, loyal and faithful
Subject, and Servant in the Lord: Thomas de la More. Cornet to his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of England, etc.
From my Quarters at Spaldwick in Huntingdonshire, Feb. 22. 1646.
Note. * Mistakes in the imprinting may be thus amended. Page 1. line 7. read
unrighteousness. p. 4. line 23. blot out neither. p. 5. l. 3. read weed. p. 7.
l. 11. blot out so. p. 17. l. 13. read conveying. p. 20. l. 10. read butt, and
line 12. blot out the second but. p. 24. l. 8. read we are sold, we were sold.

Imprimatur.

John Downame.

A Protestation concerning the Church, and Commonwealth of ENGLAND: Composed
1641, By Thomas de la More, of Graies-Inne Esquire revised and published in the
Year of Grace and Truth, 1648.
The first Part.
SECT. I. JOSVAH'S Resolution.
JEHOVAH our King, who rules the Host of Heaven, and scepters the hearts of
Princes, and great Potentates on earth, with the powerful Arm of his Justice,
mightily defends; and with the sovereigne hand of his mercy graciously
preserves these our Kingdoms of great Britain and Ireland, from desolation
and miserable confusion. Satan rages, and his ministers fight against Christ,
they take the weapons of righteousness, and smite their Reprovers like the mad
Prophet with obloquie, and murtherous intentions. They malign, revile, and
persecute (the beloved Spouse of Christ) the Church: But the Lord has reserved
a peculiar people to himself, that h^ve not bowed the knee unto Baal. God has
selected a faithful, and obedient flock, that follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes. These the Lord our God, the God of Israel, who keeps covenant for
ever, has blessed; and they are blessed: and no adversary power is able to
curse them: When Jesus Christ was upon earth, he prayed thus for his Elect,
Holy Father, keep through thine own name those whom thou have given me, that
they may be one as we are, John 17. But he is entered into Heaven it self, now
to appear in the presence of God for us. And this man because he continues
ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. Wherefore he is able also to save them
to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Moses verily was faithful in all his house, as a
servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after, but
Christ as a Son over his own house, whose house are we, if we hold fast the
confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. Let us not be
slothful, but followers of them who through faith and patience, inherit the
promises. For God is not unrighteous to forget the work and labor of love
which his servants have showed toward his Name. The earth which drinks in
the rain that comes often upon it, and brings herbs meet for them, for whom
it is dressed, receives blessing from God. But that which bears thorns and
briars, is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose and is to be burned. Let
us labor therefore faithfully in Gods Vineyard, the Church Militant, least we
fall in unbelief for an ensample of a rebellious and stiff-necked people. My
hearty desire, and continual prayer to Almighty God, is; that every one of us
in our several places and callings, do show all diligence, in the Work of our
great Lord and Master, the God of our Fathers whom we serve; and that we labor
to advance the truth, and purity of doctrine, taught and delivered by our
Savior Jesus Christ, and his Apostles: and to resist, convince, and silence
the gainsayers and enemies of the Gospel. Let us be strong and very
courageous, that we may observe to do, according to all the Law that God has
commanded us: let us not turn from (...) to the right hand, or to the left: for
then the Lord shall make our ways, our endeavors and works prosperous, and
then we shall have good success. Let us take good heed therefore unto our
selves, that we love the Lord our God. Else if we do in any wise go back, and
cleave unto the remnant of Idolatry that remains among us. Know for a
certainty, that the Lord our God will no more be merciful unto us; will no
more be among us, and deliver us: But those Idol-worshippers, false,
bloudy-hearted Papists, shall be snares and traps unto us, and scourges in our
sides, and thorns in our eyes, until we are restrained from all the good
things which the Lord our God has given us. Would God, that we had the courage
and resolution of Joshua, and that this charge of his from the Lord unto the
people of Israel, were written in our hearts. Now therefore fear the Lord, and
serve him in sincerity, and in truth, and put away the gods which your Fathers
served on the other side of the Flood, and in Egypt: and serve ye the Lord. And
if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose ye this day whom ye will
serve, whether the gods which your fathers served on the other side of the
Flood, or the Gods of the Amorites in whose Land ye dwell. But as for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord. See the 24th. of Joshua, and the 2d. of Judges,
both remarkable Chapters, for this purpose.

O Eternal, and most Gracious God, inflame thy Messengers, the Ministers of
thy Word, with a holy Zeal, and arm thy servants the Civil Magistrates, with
a godly courage; that they may demolish beat down, and root out Popery,
Superstition, Heresy, and Profaneness, out of these Isles, and Dominions of
our Sovereigne Lord King Charles.

The toleration of Massing Religion, is against the grounds of true Christian
Religion, against reason, and against the policy of the Commonwealth; as I
find at large in an Answer to the Mass Priests presumptuous Supplication
directed to our late King James, of renowned memory, and published 1604. Our
Adversaries themselves declare, that indifferency of Religion, or toleration of
two contrary Religions in one Kingdom, is intolerable, Possevin. Biblioth.
Select. lib. 1. c. 26. says, 1 It is a divelish invention: 2 that it is
contrary to Gods Ordinance: 3 that it repugneth against the Laws of Moses, of
nature, and the Gospel it self. 4 That it is contrary to the substance and
proprieties of Christian faith: 5 That it takes away the truth and certainty
of Christian faith: 6 That it takes away the certainty of Gods divine Worship,
and of the Church: 7 That it takes away Christian Discipline: 8 That it
cutteth asunder the unity of the Church: 9 That it is contrary to the Word of
God. 10 That it is repugnant to the practice of the Primitive Church, the
authority of Fathers, and Decrees of Emperors: And finally, that it provokrth
the wrath of God against the Authors of it. If then the Adversaries themselves
see Liberty of diverse Religions to be so pernicious, where they have wind in
pupp; I hope they will pardon others that will not admit their lewd,
pernicious, and fantastical opinions. We read in our Histories; when
Ladislaus son of Albert, King of Bohemia, about the year, 1440. went to
Bohemia, there to be crowned, (where Pogtebracius had the Governance,) that
during all the time of his being there, though being much requested, yet would
the young King neither enter into the Churches; nor hear the service of them,
which did draw after the Doctrine of Hus. Also before he departed thence, he
thought first to visit the noble City of Uratislavia in Schlesia. In the which
City the aforesaid King Ladislaus being there in the high Church at Service,
many great Princes were about him, among whom was also George Pogiebracius, who
then stood nearest to the King; unto whom one Chilianus playing the Parasite
about the King, (as the fashion is of such as feign themselves fools, to make
other men as very fools as they) spoke in this wise, as follows: With what
countenance you do behold this our Service, I see right well, but your heart I
do not see. Say then, does not the Order of this our Religion seem unto you
decent, and comely? Do you not see how many, and how great Princes, yea, the
King himself, do follow one Order and Uniformity? And why do you rather follow
your Preacher Rochezana, than these? Do you think a few Bohemians to be more
wise, then all the Church of Christ besides? Why then do you not forsake that
rude and rusticall people, and join to these Nobles, as you are a Noble man
your self? Unto whom thus Pogiebracius sagely again does answer. If you speak
these words of your self, says he, you are not the man, whom you feign your
self to be, and so to you I answer, as not to a fool; but if you speak this by
suggestion of others, then must I satisfy them. Here therefore, as touching
the Ceremonies of the Church, every man has a conscience of his own to follow.
As for us, we neither use such Ceremonies, as we trust do please God: neither
is it in our arbitrament, to believe what we will our selves. The mind of man
being persuaded with great reasons, is captivated, will he, nill he; and as
nature is instructed and taught, so is she drawn, in some one way, and in some
another. As for my self, I am fully persuaded in the Religion of my Preachers.
If I should follow thy Religion, I might perchance deceive men, going contrary
to mine own Conscience; but I cannot deceive God, who sees the hearts of all:
neither shall it become me, to frame my self like to thy disposition. That
which is meet for a Jester, is not likewise convenient for a Noble man. And
these words, either take to thy self, as spoken to thee, if thou be a wise man:
or else I refer them to those which set thee a work.

To this learned and discreet answer of Pogiebracius, let me add a word or
two, concerning our Protestant Religion.

In the gravelly shallows of men's fancies and traditions, every Atheist, and
Papist, may wade, and dabble in; but no humane reason can sound the depths of
Religion, it may delve, and dive, to find Utopia's Land, and Purgatories
nowhere bottom, and lose it self; or at least besmeere, and mu^ it self, in
a hood-winked, muffled scrutiny, and never rise again: but wrapped in a Noli
me tangere, Pesthouse weeds, doomed to pollution, and perpetual shades: only
faith wrought in the hearts of Gods Children, by the Spirit of Adoption, can
apprehend the great mystery of godliness, and apply the sweets and comforts
of Salvation in Jesus Christ. A true saving faith, only (I say) can distinctly
and perfectly see that life of the Soul, which is hid with Christ in God,
which the blear eye of sense, or reason, can in no wise discover, or discern.
There is but one true Religion, Man has but one way to walk in. Howbeit,
there are many bypath, etc. and those too, inscrutable. In the large Maze of
Religions professed in Amsterdam; (I had almost said London.) Surely, the short
thread of man's life will scarce clew him through the several Conclaves of them
all; and so guide him to the right. Variety unhindges the door of the heart,
and for eagerness of giving more speedy entrance to all in-commers; it blocks
up the passage, and dispels the timely motions of the spirit; and the seeds of
of sanctity, that would root and settle themselves in the soul. In this
necessitated coarctation, whether shall fickle man betake himself? The choice
of Religion is of some consequence, and moment, not instantly to be resolved
upon by the best judgment. This stumbles a man of riper years. There is an
awing superior, and a sovereigne Diety, that scepters the hearts of men.
Religion carries a confutation along with it, and tongue-ties inquisitive
nature. Propound many things we may, and revolve with our thoughts a while;
uncouth conceits may startle us, and unsettle the affections of the mind: and
yet when we have done all we can in thinking, the best of us sit down
astonished; and as men hurried in a Wilderness, our Pilgrime-speculations
amazedly gaze after we know not what. And it is well, if we can subside to an
holy Admiration. If with reverence, we prostrate our selves, certainly the
Spirit will erect us; direct our steps, and guide us in the way everlasting.
What our reason cannot reach, let the hand of faith apprehend. Where the depth
of our judgments may not fathom, let us trust the mercy of the waves
supporting us; lest we merge our selves in despair. Where God commands, do we
must. And therefore since we are all made for the service of God Almighty, the
Maker of all things; let us walk in all holiness of conversation, during this
our Pilgrimage here upon earth: so shall we find rest unto our souls, in the
Haven of Felicity. It Is true, Happiness is the Scope, whereunto naturally all
men do level their thoughts: but it is the just man that attaines the end of
his desires; that has the fruition of his hopes: his best intentions only
arrow the white. Una omnes voco, all of us in the Optative Mood can say; Feign
would we be in that Paradise of Joy, and place of Bliss, where Crowns and
Palms are given. And I could wish that all men (I mean the Converts of all
Nations) would follow (...) and the same way of life, Christ our forerunner.
Surely then, (maugre the petty differences of Church-Rites and Ceremonies)
there would be as unanimous consent, a Diapason, and perfect harmony, in the
substance of Religion; upon which ground we may safely place the prop of our
Salvation. We are not of them who draw back unto perdition: but of them that
believe to the saving of the Soul, Heb. 10.39. Now faith is the substance of
things hoped for the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. And we read in
another place of the same Epistle, There remains a rest to the people of God.
For he that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased from his own works,
as God did from his. Let us labor therefore to enter unto that Rest, lest any
man fall after the ensample of those to whom the Word was first preached, which
entered not in, because of unbelief. For the Word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper then any two edged sword piercing even to the dividing
asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner
of the thoughts, and intentions of the heart: Neither is there any creature
that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and open unto the
eyes of him with whom we have to do. Seeing then that we have a great High
Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast
our profession, Heb. 4. For my own particular, I shall ever anchor my self
upon the Faith, Doctrine and Religion, professed, and protected in the Church
of England; and other Christianly Reformed Churches; For I have a sure
testimony, and am certainly persuaded, that the Protestant Religion, is
grounded upon the Word of God. And for this reason, I think it to be the safest
of all Religions, because it most magnifies God: it attributes most to the
praise of his glory; and makes most for the peaceable Conversation of men.

Now as touching the Grand Case of Episcopacy, which has exercised so many
wits this Parliament, I shall give my opinion, thus; I have been resolved, and
settled in my judgment of a long time; that the Supereminencies, Prerogatives,
Temporal Dignities, Barronies, intermedling in Secular Affairs, and the
Lordly Monopolizing of Titles, Jurisdictions, and Functions, by Archbishops,
and Bishops above the Pastors and Teachers of Gods Word, their
fellow-latourers; and that the High Commission, with the whole Regiment of it is
subordinary Offices; likewise Deaneries, and Chapters, with their dependencies,
are all contrary to Gods Word, unlawful, and unwarrantable in themselves,
pernicious, and destructive of the peace and godly unanimity, which ought to be
in a true Christian Church, and Commonwealth. But, I confess, the many
learned Books, and Writings, which I have seen, and diligently perused, since
this question has been moved, and thoroughly debated of late by many sage,
acute Doctors, and other learned men of diverse Nations, and Kingdoms, have not
only much confirmed; but instructed me also in this point. It Is true, that ex
gratia Regis, by the favor of the Prince, and for Government sake, the Order
of Bishops has stood a long time in our Nation, supported by the Laws of the
Realm; and confirmed by Parliaments: And so I see no reason, why by the same
legislative Power it may not be altered. Now whereas by the gracious
providence, and disposing of Almighty God, the Honorable Court of Parliament,
are zealously affected, with a magnanimous, and godly care, of establishing the
True Religion in his Majesty's Dominions; which consists in pure, and sound
Doctrine, in a settled Government, in a good and decent Discipline, agreeable to
the Gospel of Christ; and to the rules and ensamples of the Apostles, and
Elders of the Church, in the Primitive times: From the first sitting of this
great Assembly, my hearty desires and prayers have been, and are continually;
that in every Parish, Country, Town, lesser Village, and Hamblet, within the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, a Religious, painful, and learned
Preacher may be placed with a Competent Livelihood, and Maintenance; for the
faithful and true discharge of their Calling. I shall forbear to insist upon
this matter, or to press it as large; for that Mr. Marshall, that worthy, and
laborious Minister of Gods Word (by whose preaching and exhortations, thousands
of souls have profitted much, and as I may probably say, many have been
converted) has fastened upon this Subject already; as I find in a learned
Sermon of his preached before the Honorable House of Commons, November. 17th.
1640. and published by Order of the said House. But I protest in the truth of
my heart, were I of riper years, had I been blessed with a convenable estate,
and fortune; had I been of judgment, or had the honor and abilities, to have
supplied a room, as the meanest Member of that Noble, and great Assembly; in
all humility, by a discreet observing of the Countenance and Order of that
Court; I would have used my best endeavors for the promoting and furtherance
of this Motion: and I would have labored, and assayed all honest ways, and
direct courses in this weighty, and only special affair, for the security and
happiness both of Church, and State; had I seen any hopes of effecting it.
Whence come Heresies, Breaches in Religion, Schisms, Sowings of strife between
brethren, Backslidings to Popery, Superstition, Ignorance, and blind zeal,
False worship of God, Profaning of his holy Name, Word and Ordinances, and
polluting of his Sabbaths? And whe^^ comes the cursed dishonor of Parents,
despising of Government, the reviling of Magistrates, vilifying the Pastors of
Gods Word, and contemning of Superiors? Whence come evil thoughts,
adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness? Whence proceed
all these impieties (I say) but out of the impure hearts of profane and
ungodly persons, not cleansed, through the Word of Christ? The Apostle St. Paul
wrote to the Corinthians, not to keep company; If any man that is called a
brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner: with such a one, no not to eat. I am persuaded
that many of Gods dear Saints do mourn in secret, to behold the crying sins
of our Nation, which they would; but know not how to remedy. But the wise King
Solomon, tells us for our instruction and comfort, If the Spirit of the Ruler
rise up against thee, leave not thy place; for yielding pacifieth great
offenses: There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, as an error which
proceeds from the Ruler. Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in
low place. I have seen servants upon Horses, and Princes walking as servants
upon the earth, Eccles. 10. If thou see the oppression of the poor, and
violent perverting of judgment and justice in a Province, marvel not at the
matter; For he that is higher then the highest, regards, and there be higher
then they, Eccles. 5.8. Verily, as touching my self; my spirit groaneth, and
my heart lamenteth, and even bleeds within me, to hear and see the horrible
blasphemies, rash oaths, cursings, and evil speaking, lying, hypocrisy,
dissimulation, envy, malice, corrupt communication, drunkenness, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, riot, gluttony, idleness, chambering and
wantonness, filthy lucre, pride, with many more like sins, which even now do
reign among us Protestants, that profess the Name and Gospel of Christ.
Wherefore, me thinks, we should lay our hands upon our hearts, and consider
with our selves; that we are become dead to the Law, by the Body of Christ,
that we should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead,
that we should bring forth fruit unto God. For when we were in the flesh, the
motions of sins which were by the Law, did work in our members to bring forth
fruit unto death: But now are we delivered from the Law, that being dead
wherein we were held, that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in
the oldnesse of the letter Romans 7. Shall we continue in sin, that grace may
abound? God forbid: how shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer
therein? Know ye not, that so many of us, as were baptized into Jesus Christ;
were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of the
Father: even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death; we shall be also in the
likeness of his resurrection: knowing this, that our old man is crucified with
him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not
serve sin. Also let us mind the Exhortation of Saint Paul to the Ephesians,
Chap. 4. This I say therefore and testify in the Lord, that ye henceforth
walk not, as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind. Having the
understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart: who being
past feeling, have given themselves over unto lasciviousness, to work all
uncleanness with greediness. But ye have not so learned Christ: if so be that
ye have heard him and have been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus; That
ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt
according to the deceitful lusts: and be renewed in the Spirit of your mind;
and that ye put on that new man, which after God is created in righteousness,
and true holiness. And the same Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6. Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived: neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God. And such were
some of you: but ye are washed but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. Now if these and such
like places of Scripture, will not work upon profane worldlings, and excite
them to repentance, and amendment of life; I mean such riotous persons, as have
been lately posted in our Streets, being styled the Sucklington Faction, or
(Sucklings) Roating boys: I leave them to that dreadful doom pronounced by the
Preacher, Rejoice, O young man in thy youth, and let thy heartche are thee in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes: but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee unto
judgment. Eccles. 11. Because sentence against an evil works is not executed
speedily; therefore the hearts of the sons of men, is fully set in them to do
evil. Though a sinner ^o evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged;
yet surely I know, that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear
before him. But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days which are as a shadow, because he fears not before God. There is a
vanity which is done upon the earth, that there be just men, to whom it
happens according to the work of the wicked; again, there be wicked men to
whom is happens according to the work of the righteous; I said, that this
also is vanity, Eccles. 8. But yet, for the comfort of the godly, which suffer
for the Name of Christ, and for righteousness sake; we read in the 2 Pet. 2.
When the Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, being made an ensample
unto those, that after should live ungodly: that, God delivered just Lot, vexed
with the filthy conversation of the wicked (for that righteous man dwelling
among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day,
with their unlawful deeds:) The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of
temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished: But chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanness, and despise Government. Presumptuous are they: self-willed: they
are not afraid to speak evil of dignities: whereas Angels which are greater
in power and might, bring not railing accusations against them before the Lord.
I am persuaded that if godly, understanding Preachers, were sent abroad into
the several parts, and corners of his Majesty's Realms, to tell the people of
their sins; and if good laws were put in execution for the punishing of
offenders; wickedness and profaneness would not be so much in fashion, as it
is. I have often wondered, that albeit the Parliaments of England, which like
learned and wise Physicians, have always been very diligent to provide choice
Antidotes against the distempers of the Commonwealth, by making good Laws and
Statutes; yet they never truly took into consideration, and seriously weighed
the miserable and deplored state of the Church; so as to apply apt remedies for
the redress of those grievances, before mentioned. Surely, I am even ashamed
to think, what horrible contempt, and disgrace is cast upon the meaner sort of
the Clergy, those Reverend Pastors that have the charge of our souls, and whose
Callings are sacred. How vilely are they accounted of in the Country, by
ignorant, scoffing, irreligious, vain persons, who can afford them no better
titles then these, viz. poor journey-men scholars, ragged priests,
sillyratts, and the like? But I am so far from casting the least blemish, or
aspersion of infamy upon the noble Professors of the liberal Arts and
Sciences; and especially I am so far from dishonouring of the Tribe of Levi,
the lot of Gods own inheritance; that, the Elders which rule well, I account
worthy of double honor, especially, they who labor in the Word and Doctrine.
For the labourer is worthy of his reward, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. I could wish, that
the large possessions, and the superabundant, extravegant revenues of Bishops,
Deanes and Chapters, (or at least, that part of them) were bestowed toward the
erecting of Churches and Chapels of ease in the several parts, and places of
our Kingdoms, where they are wanting; And toward the maintaining of learned
and godly Preachers; for the better growth and increase of Religion. And I
could wish, that those lay Parsons that hold Impropriations; that, the Lords
and Tenants of Abbey Lands who pay no tithes; and that, That Ignavum pecui, the
Fraternity of sluggish Drones in our Universities, I mean those Masters and
Fellows of Colleges, who mis-imploy their wealth, which their Founders endowed
them with all, for the advancement of Learning, and Religion; And they
themselves are no better than Sots, whose filthy, and ungodly lives, I compare
and parallel with the wickedness of the Monks and Epicures of old; And I hold
them fitter subjects to serve such a Master, as that beast, and monster of men
Heliogabolus was, than to lead such Frier-like and Monastic lives, as they do
(making a vain profession of piety and learning) under the most religious,
Christian Prince in Europe. To say no more. These men are guilty of one very
soul fault, which I will not mention for shame: But they may guess at my
meaning, in these old Verses (as I find them in Chaucer, in the Monks
Prologue) which each of them may apply to himself, as the case stands with him
in particular: And it is thus. Thou would be a trede foul a right,
Had thou as great leave as thou have might
To perform all thy lust in ingendrure,
Thou had begotten many a creature.


In truth, I could wish that all those abovementioned especially; and that
every one of us besides, according to our several abilities, etc. would
contribute cheerfully and freely to this pious work of providing things honest,
for our spiritual Pastors; and give them due honor, and necessary allowance,
who do labor in the word and doctrine. And last of all, I could wish, that the
honorable Court of Parliament, by the direction of almighty God, would consult
about the promoting, establishing and maintaining a faithful, learned, painful,
preaching Ministry; that, every Candlestick may have a Candle; and that every
flock may have a faithful shepherd to guide them: And I am persuaded, that
this work done would prove a Catholic remedy for all our evils, and the
greatest means for the lengthning out our tranquillity, and the healing of all
our distempers. O Eternal and most gracious God, send forth Laborers into the
harvest of our Nation, that may boldly and faithfully dispense thy Word; and
duly administer thy holy Sacraments: and grant, that in singleness of heart,
without grudging we may give them their hire. O shed abroad thy holy Spirit
into our hearts, that we may love as brethren, and be of one mind in Christ
Jesus, as, thou our heavenly Father art one.

SECT. II. Of the Common Law of ENGLAND.
NOw to this discourse of Religion, I will only add a line, or two concerning
the Common Law of England, which I have undertaken for my profession and
calling: And (by Gods assistance) I shall propose this, as the main end in all
my studies and endeavors, the honor of God, the service of my Prince, the
profit of my Country, and the good of the Church. England has been inhabited
always with a virtuous and wise people, who ever embraced honest and good
customs, full of reason and convenience, which being confirmed by common use
and practice, and continued time out of mind, became the Common Law of the
Land. And though this Law be the peculiar invention of this Nation; and
delivered over from age to age by Tradition (as well as by Books) yet may we
truly say, That no humane Law written, or unwritten has more certainty in the
Rules or Maxims, more coherence in the parts thereof, or more harmony of
reason in it: nay, we confidently aver, that it does excel all other Laws in
upholding of a free Monarchy, which is the most excellent form of Government,
exalting the Prerogative Royal, and being very tender and watchful to
preserve it; and yet maintaining with all the ingenuous liberty of the subject.
Moreover, all men, at all times, and in all places do stand in need of
Justice, and of Law which is the rule of Justice, and of the Interpreters and
Ministers of the Law, which give life and motion unto Justice; for Cassaneus
well observes, that, Justitia periret, si deesset qui justitiam allegaret. Our
Counselors and Advocates are the language of the Law: Our Judges are the ear
of the Law. For the Law it self is dumb and speaks not, but by the tongue of a
learned Lawyer; she is blind and sees no enormities, but by the eye of a
watchful and diligent Officers and she is deaf and hears no complaints, but
by the ear of a grave and patient Judge. Those Honorable persons, whose true
mind has advanced them to the most transcendent places of honor, that can
possibly be attained in our profession, that is, to be Hearers, Judges and
Determiners of causes, in Courts of Justice: let them take heed diligently unto
themselves, that no favor nor whatsoever respects move them from the right.
And let them remember, that they sit not in judgment for rewarding of friends
or servants, for crossing of contemners, but only for doing of Justice. Plato
in Pol. Arist. 1. Rhetor. I purposely forbear, either to rub upon the sores;
or to lay open the issues, and infectious maladies that have tainted some great
Sages of the Law in our times; for that, the Lord Viscount Falkland in his
learned speech of the Judges, has plainly described certain symptoms of their
diseases, and manifested them to the eye of the Kingdom, the high Court of
Parliament. And I hope that great Counsel of Physicians, will either purge them
of their noxious and pestilent humors; or prescribe them a more certain and
present cure. It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shall be to
the workers of iniquity. Prove. 21.15. and 29.4. The King by judgment
stablisheth the land: but he that receives gifts overthrows it. Memorable is
that speech of Moses to the children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 1.16, 17. And I charged
your Judges at that time, saying, Hear the causes between your brethren, and
judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is
with him. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment, but you shall hear the
small as well as the great: you sha^^ not be afraid of the face of man, for
the judgment is Gods: and the cause that is to hard for you bring it unto me,
and I will hear it. See Levit. 19.15. Deuteronomy. 16.19. and 1 Samuel 16.7. Prove.
24.23. The properties noted by Jethro, to be in Magistrates and Governors are
worthy much observation. Provide men, says he, of courage, fearing God, men
dealing truly and hating covetousness, Ex. 18.21. and read Ex. 23. Observe the
great pains of Moses in sitting to judge the controversies of the people, even
from morning, unto even. Exodus 18. What a commendation it is of him? What an
example unto al those whom God in mercy has raised to any like government over
their brethren? Surely, diligence in the charge committed to us, is ever sweet
unto God, and good for our selves. He that is diligent in his work, shall
stand before, Princes Prove. 22.29. L^^r^ to do well, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow, Isai. 1.17. Ye shall not
do unjustly in judgment. Who can be safe in lift or limb, in lands or goods,
if affection be Judge? Booteth it to be honest, or just, or blameless, if not
truth, but sancietry me? No, no. And therefore blessed be God for Law and
Justice, and woe to the Land where affection rules. Honestius est cum
judicaveris amare, quam cum amaveris judicare: It is far better to love when
thou have judged, than to judge when thou love. The poor cries, and no man
hears; the rich man cries, and every man praises and smootheth. O, heavy
Countries case, where thus it is. Do the thing that is just to the rich and
poor, and that shall give thee peace at the last. If Judges will be free from
respect of persons, then needs must they be free from gifts; for gifts will
lead their affections, will they, nill they, the old saying being true.
Beneficium accepisti? libertatem amisisti: Have thou received a gift? then have
thou lost thy liberty and freedom. Thou shall not take no gift: for the gift
blinds the wise, and perverteth the words of the righteous. Exodus 23 8. And
(...) all Judges followed this course Hesiodus should not need to fain, that
Astrea has left the society of men, and is flown up to Heaven. But it is to be
feared, that as Ulysses servant when he was asleep, opened a Bottle which
Aeolus had given him, wherein the Winds were all enclosed; and so let the Winds
out, they thinking there was treasure in the Bottle, which as well at Sea, as
at Land they loved: so, some Judges opening men's purses whilst they look for
gain, let truth escape from them to their own hurt, and the Commonwealths. This
learned, and pithy application, etc. I find in Babingtons notes, upon Exodus
23. If any do so (says he) God make his Word profitable to them, and so I
leave them to him. Now, if there should be any faults or blemishes rarely found
in some of the Judges, or other Ministers and Professors of the Law: let not
this cast any sinister imputation, or black note upon the Law it self, or the
Profession. For the Common Law is defined to be. Sanctio sancta, jubens
honesta, and prohibens contraria. Again, the Law is nothing else, but a rule or
lesson of justice, that is made to measure the actions of men. And how needful
is the service of upright, sage and learned men in the Law, without which
justice it self cannot possibly stand? Therefore though Jupiter (as Protagoras
in Plato tells us) did first invent, and give the Law, yet was Mercury sent
with that heavenly gift, to deliver it ever unto mankind. So as it is
manifest, that without the Ministry of these Mercuries, of these Interpreters
of the Law, namely, the learned Professors thereof; there can be no use, or
application of the Law, and consequently the Law, or Justice it self cannot
consist without them. What a meritorious work is it, to resolve those many
troublesome questions which arise in the civil life of man, either by laying
open the truth of the fact, or by clearing the doubtful point in Law, that
speedy and equal justice may be done unto all, and every one may have and
enjoy his own in peace? How often would the truth be concealed, and suppressed?
How often would fraud lie hid, and undiscovered? How many times would wrong
escape, and pass unpunished, but for the wisdom and diligence of the
Professors of the Law? Does not this Profession every day comfort such as are
grieved, prevent the ruin of the improvident, save the innocent, support the
impotent, take the prey out of the mouth of the oppressor, protect the Orphan,
the Widow, and the Stranger? Is she not Oculus coeco, and pes claudo, as Job
speaks? Does she not with all many times stretch forth Brachium Seculare, in
defense of the Church, and true Religion? All which are works of mercy, and
singular merit. Again, does she not Register, and keep in memories the best
Antiquities of our Nation? Does she not preserve our ancient customs and
forms of Government, wherein the wisdom of our Ancestors does shine far above
the policy of other Kingdoms. Why may we not then affirm confidently, and
conclude that the profession of the Law, is to be preferred before all other
humane professions and Sciences, as being most necessary for the Common and
continual use thereof? For do not all persons, at all times, and in all
places stand in need of justice. When without her rule, The Prince himself
knows not how to rule, nor his people how to obey? When we can neither travel
safely by day, nor sleep securely by night without her protection? For we
cannot without peril make a Voyage by sea, unless she waft us; nor a journey
by land unless she convoy us. We should be oppressed by force in the Country,
if she did not defend us; And undone by fraud in the City. if she did not
relieve us. She incloseth every man's garden and field, and makes every man's
Cotage his Castle of defense. So as we have not such an universal and
continual use, neither of the light of the Sun nor of fire and water; as we
have of the light and heat, and comfort of justice: For a man may remain alive
some hours, without the use of those common benefits; but a Commonwealth,
wherein each private man's weal consists, cannot stand and continue one minute
of an hour, if justice which is her soul be departed from her. And, again, is
not the Profession of the Law most meritorious for the good effects it does
produce in the Commonwealth? For does not all out peace, plenty, civility, and
moral honesty depend upon the Law. Quid sunt regna nisi latrocinia sine
justitia? Saint Augustine faith, Without justice, the Land would be full of
Thieves: the Sea full of Pirates. And I may add; The Commons would rise against
the Nobility, the Nobility against the Crown: we should not know what were our
own, what another man's, what we should have from our Ancestors, what we should
leave to our children: Major haereditas venit uni cuique nostrum a jure and
legibus, quam a parentibus, says Cicero.

In a word, there would be nothing certain, nothing sure, no contracts, no
commerce, no conversation among men; but all Kingdoms and States would be
brought to confusion: and all humane society would be dissolved. And lastly, is
not the profession of the law most noble, for the matter and subject thereof?
For what is the matter and subject of our Profession, but Justice, the Lady,
and Queen of all moral virtues? And what are our Professors of the Law, but
her Counselors, her Secretaries, her Interpreters, her Servants? Again, What
is the King himself, but the clear Fountain of Justice? and what are the
professors of the law, but conduit pipes deriving, and covering the streams of
his Justice unto all the Subj cts of his several Kingdoms? So as if Justice
be rightly resembled to the Sun in the Firmament, in that she spreads her
light and virtue unto all creatures: How can she but communicate part of her
goodness and glory, unto that Science, that is her handmaid, and waits upon
her? And for as much as Kings be Gods Scholars, (as Homer writes) and that
the rules of justice, be their principal lesson; and we read in the Psalms,
of that Kingly Prophet David, that God does honor Kings and Magistrates with
his own Name; Dixi quod duestis; Psalm. 82. Specially for that they sit upon
Gods own Seat, when they minister justice unto the people. And Psalm. 95.3. The
Lord is a great God, and a great King above all Gods: that is, above Angels,
Princes, or false Gods. Psalm. 8.6. and 82.6. and 96.4 5. And whereas we read,
that Kings shall be the nursing fathers, and Queens shall be the nursing
mothers of the Church, Isai. 40. And we be taught by the holy Scriptures, that
the hearts of Kings are in the rule and governance of Almighty God. Let us pray
pray therefore for Kings, and for all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness, and honesty. 1 Timothy 22. And let
all loyal Subjects, and faithful servants of our Sovereigne Lord King Charles,
join with me in the words of David praying for Solomon, Psalm. 72. Give the
King thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness unto the Kings son. He shall
judge thy people with righteousness, and the poor with judgment. We know by
the Maxims, and Rules of the Common Law, that Rex est caput and salus
reipublicae and a capite bona valetudo transit in omnes: The King is the head,
the life and health of the Commonwealth; and from the head this spirit and
vivacity of health is transmitted and conveyed into the several parts and
members of the body. And again (we say) that, the King can do no wrong. Rex
enim vere dici potuit, vbique transfer, and perpetuo secum portare Scaccarium
Justitiae in scrinio pectoris sui; Atque veram intelligentiam perfectamque
legis notitiam in animo suo semper habere. For the King may truly be said
every where to transfer, and always to carry about with him the Exchequer or
Treasury of Justice in the casket of his breast; And ever to have the true
understanding and perfect Theorie, or knowledge of the Law in his mind. And
the Kings Prerogative (we know) is bounded with the Rules of Gods Word, and
impaled within the limits of the Laws of the Realm. For it is the honor and
wisdom of a Prince to judge his people with righteous judgment; and order his
steps, actions, and whole course of life by the justice and equity of law and
conscience. For this is an old, and true rule, Neminem oportet esse
sapientiorem legibus. No man (out of his Own private reason) ought to be wiser
than the Law, which is the perfection of reason. And albeit the King be (as it
has been said) the Fountain of Justice: Yet this spring head may either be
overgrown, and shadowed by the weeds of natural corruption, and inbred
infirmities always aspiring and advancing themselves against the perfect law of
liberty, erected in the heart by the holy Spirit. Romans 7.23. James 1.25. or it
may be stopped by the rubbish of cares and troubles; or at least the water of
this Fountain may run thick sometimes by mixture of the gravel of a
pre-conceited, high opinion of the affections and hearts of the people: or
lastly, this well, or springhead of Justice in the Sovereign may be so deep;
as that squint and blear'd-eye of the monstrous-sighted multitude (I mean the
gross ignorance of the Common people) cannot always discern, and discover
where it lies; only those who believing Gods Word, and confidently relying
upon the truth of his promises, do in humility of heart come unto the true Well
of life, and head indeed of the Church Jesus Christ our only Mediator and
Redeemer; they only (I say) by the bucket of grace shall be able to sound the
depths of Gods mercy toward his Elect, and continually do they cry: God be
merciful unto us, and bless us: and cause his face to shine upon us. Selah.
That thy way maybe known upon earth; thy saving health among all Nations. Let
the people praise thee, o God, let all the people praise thee. O let the
Nations be glad, and sing for joy: for thou shall judge the folk righteously;
and govern the Nations upon earth. Selah. Albeit in the scorching heat of
Seditions, Divisions, Tumults, Rebellions, and Distractions of a Kingdom, those
streams of grace and favor that issue from (that subordinate and inferior
fountain of justice) a pious Prince, provident, and careful of the welfare of
his people, are not so visibly and plainly perceived (for in truth they do not
run so clear then as at other times) by the vulgar sort of men: yet the best
Christians his Majesty's most faithful and obedient Subjects, under the
protection of whose powerful Arm they live, and are governed, do acknowledge
Gods watchful providence over them: and these do jointly confess, and say
with the Psalmist. God stands in the congregation of the mighty, he judges
among the Gods. For if the Angels are all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation; Heb. 1.14. Much more are
the Potentates and Princes of the earth, the servants of God to minister
justice unto his people. Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? Thy
throne (o God) is for ever, and ever: and the scepter of thy Kingdom is a right
scepter. Righteousness and judgment are the habitation of thy seat: and thy
mercy and truth shall be our shield and buckler, Verily there is a reward for
the righteous; Doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. The Lord says,
Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom: I am understanding, I have strength. By me
Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even
all the Judges of the earth. I love them that Love Me, and those that seek me
early shall find me. Prove. 8. Mercy and Truth preserve the King: and his Throne
is upholden by mercy. Prove. 20.28. When the Prophet Jeremiah by a false
suggestion was put into the Dungeon of Malchiah: (For Zedekiah the King said
unto his Princes, behold, he is in your hand; for the King is not he that can
do any thing against you). And when Ebedmelech, afterward by suite had gotten
him some enlargment. Then Zedekiah the King sent and took Jeremiah the Prophet
unto him into the third entry, that is in the house of the Lord, and the King
said to Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing: hide nothing from me. Then Jeremiah
said to Zedekiah, if I declare is unto thee, will thou not surely put me to
death? and if I give thee counsel, will thou not harken unto me? So the King
swear secretly to Jeremiah, saying, As the Lord lives that made this soul, I
will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of these men
that seek thy life. Hereupon Jeremiah counsels the King by yielding to save
his life, as you may read at large in Jer. 38. This worthy pattern of humility,
gentleness, and meekness in King Zedekiah who so courteously, and friendly
entreated the Prophet that sorewarn'd him of the evil impending over Judah and
Jerusalem, and his own person, if he went not forth to the King of Babylons
Princes, according to the Prophets counsel; and who likewise was so gracious
and indulgent unto his Princes, notwithstanding they were wicked Counselors,
and none of his best friends, as it did afterward appear by the event of
their false suggestions: This, (I say) may be an example for all godly
Christian Kings to imitate, and follow him in these and the like virtues. Read
2 Samuel 18. and 19. Chap. Ezra 1.6. and 7. Chap. Nehem. 1. and 2. Chap. Ester
5.6.7. and 8. Chapters. That famous, and renowned Prince of ever blessed memory
James King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, in his (...) gave this in
charge to Prince Henry: I require you my son, as ever ye think to deserve my
fathers blessing, to keep continually before the eyes of your mind, the
greatness of your charge, making the faithful and due discharge thereof, the
principal, but ye shoot at it in all your actions: counting it even the
principal, and all your actions but as accessories, to be employed but as
middesses for the furthering of that principal. And in another place of his
golden precepts, and instructions He says thus: And to the end my estate anent
the Churches, Cherish no man more then a good Pastor, hate no man more then a
proud Puritan, thinking it one of your fairest Styles, to be called a loving
nourish father to the Church, seeing all the Churches within your Dominions,
planted with good Pastors, the Schools (the Seminaries of the Church)
maintained, the Doctrine and Discipl ne preserved in purity, according to Gods
Word, a sufficient provision for their sustentation, a comely Order in their
policy, pride punished, humility advanced, and they so to reverence their
supetiours, and their flocks them, as the flourishing of your Church in piety,
peace, and learning may be one of the chief points of your earthly glory,
being ever alike way with both the extremities; as well as ye repress the
vain, Puritan, so not to suffer proud Papal Bishops: but as some for their
qualities will deserve to be preferred before others, so chain them with such
bonds, as may preserve that State from creeping to corruption. And again, in
his preface to that excellent book, He says, I charge you as ever you think
to deserve my fatherly blessing, to follow, and put in practice as far as lies
in you, the precept, hereafter following, and if you follow the contrary
course, I take the great God to record, that this book shall one day be a
witness betwixt me and you; and shall procure to be ratified in heaven, the
curse that in that case I give unto you. For I protest before that Great God, I
had rather not be a Father, and childlesse, than be a Father of wicked
children. This weighty charge of a most godly Prince, and a careful, loving
Father, so faithfully diligent, and very industrious to provide for the safety,
and welfare of his posterity, and Kingdoms, will assuredly take deep
impression, and firm root in the heart of the King, and the Kings Son. The
Lord said of Moses, Numb. 12.7. He is faithful in all my house, And of Abraham
Genesis 18.19. I know him that he will command his chidren, and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that
the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that which he has spoken of him. Childrens
children are the Crown of old men: and the glory of children are their fathers,
Prove. 17.6. A wise son hears his fathers instruction: but a scorner hears
not rebuke, Prove. 13.1. and Prove. 4. Hear ye children the instruction of a
father: and attend to know understanding. For I give you good doctrine; forsake
you not my law. For I was my fathers son, tender and only beloved in the fight
of my mother. He taught me also, and said unto me, let thine heart retain my
words. Keep my Comandements and live. Take fast hold of instruction, let her
not go; keep her for she is thy life. Read the whole Chapter, Prove. 4. My son,
keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee. Keep my commandments and
live: and my law as the apple of thine eye. Bind them upon thy fingers, write
them upon the table of thine heart. Prove. 7. The father of the righteous shall
greatly rejoice, and he that begets a wise child, shall have joy of him. Thy
father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare him, shall have joy of
him. My son give me thine heart, and let thine eye observe thy ways. Folly is
to him that is destitute of wisdom: but a man of understanding walks
uprightly. Without counsel purposes are disappointed: but in the multitude of
Counselors they are established. Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine
ears unto the words of knowledge. Hear thou my son, and be wise, and guide
thine heart in the way. H^arken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise
not thy mother when she is old. Prove. 22.22. and Prove. 15, 21 22. Now if we are
bound by the Laws of God, and Nature, to observe the godly precepts, and to
hearken unto the good instructions of our earthly fathers; How diligently
should we keep the Comandements of our Father which is in Heaven? How ready
should we be to do his Will, to attend, and obey his voice, calling unto us in
his Word; and to say with Samuel, Speak Lord, for we thy servants do hear?
Again, We have given the fathers of our flesh reverence: shall we not much
rather give hon^ur, and obedience unto the Father of Spirits, and live? Heb.
12.9. We read in Deuteronomy. 6. After that Moses had repeated the ten Comandements,
he taught the people, that the end of the Law was obedience, and he exhorted
them thereto, saying, Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God, is one Lord. And thou
shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy might. And these words which I command thee this day, shall be in
thy heart; and thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children; and thou
shall talk of them, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall
bind them for a sign upon thine hands, and they shall be as frontlets between
thine eyes, and thou shall write them upon the p^sts of thy house, and on thy
gates, See Deuteronomy. 4.9. and Chap. 10.12. and Chap. 11.18, 19. and Chap. 30.15,
16. and Chap. 32.46 47. The Lord our God, who is a God full of compassion, and
gracious, long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth, spoke of the people
of Israel, saying, O that were such a heart in them, that they would fear me,
and keep my Commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with
their children for ever, Deuteronomy. 5.29. If the wicked will return from all his
sins, that he has committed, and keep all my Statutes, and do that which is
lawful and right, he shall surely live, and shall not dye. All his
transgressions that he has committed, they shall not be mentioned unto him:
but in his righteousness, that he has done, he shall live. Cast away all your
transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed; and make you a new heart, and a
new spirit: for why will ye dye O house of Israel? Ezekiel. 18. verse. 21, 22, 31.
Wash ye, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil. Learn to do well, seek judgment, etc. Come now, and
let us reason together, says the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool, Isai. 1.16, 17, 18. This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be
received, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15.
Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden; and I will give you rest.
Mat. 11.28. They that be whole, need not a Physician, but they that are sick.
Go ye, and learn what that means, I will have mercy and not sacrifice: for
I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. Mat 9.12, 13.
And in the 13th. Chap. of Isai. Almighty God himself speaks most graciously,
and particularly to his distressed people, with most sweet, and comfortable
words, saying: But now thus says the Lord, that created thee, O Jacob, and he
that formed thee, O Israel, fear not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called
thee by thy name, thou art mine. When thou passest through the waters, I will
be with thee, and through the floods, that they do not overflow thee: thou
shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the the
Lord thy God, the holy One of Israel, thy Savior, etc. Can a woman forget her
child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget;
yet will not I forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my
hands; thy walls are continually before me. Isai. 49.15, 16. Like as a father
tieth his children: so the Lord pittieth them that fear him. For he knows
our frame, he remembers that we are but dust, Psalm 103.13, 14. Me thinks,
these, and the like places of holy Scripture, should work a saving compunction
in our souls, and cause our hearts not only to burn, but even to melt within
us. Let us therefore hold fast the things which we have learned, and are
assured of; and let us search the Scriptures which are able to make us wise
unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. For whatsoever things
were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience
and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. 2 Timothy 3.14, 15. Romans 15.4. and
John 5.29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: but those things
which are revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do
all the words of the Law. Deuteronomy. 29.29. What man is he that fears the Lord?
him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. His soul shall dwell at
ease, and his seed shall inherit the earth. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him: and he will show them his covenant. Psalm. 25. The froward is
abomination to the Lord: but his secret is with the righteous. Prove. 3.32.
Teach me thy way O Lord, I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy
name. Psalm. 86.11. Man's goings are of the Lord, how can a man then understand
his own way? Prove. 20.24. It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the
honor of Kings is to search out a matter. The heaven for height, and the earth
for depth, and the heart of Kings is unsearchable. Prove. 25.2, 3. If we have
forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange God:
shall not God search this out? For he knows the secrets of the heart. Psalm.
44.20, 21. Blessed be the name of God, for ever and ever: for wisdom and might
are his: and he changes the times, and the seasons: he removes Kings, and
sets up Kings: he gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that know
understanding: He reveals the deep and secret things: he knows what is in
the darkness, and the light dwells with him. Dan. 2.20, 21, 22. and Amos
3.6, 7. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Surely,
the Lord God will do nothing; but he reveals his secrets unto his servants,
the Prophets, O how great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them
that fear thee: which thou have wrought for them that trust in thee, before
the sons of men. Ye that love the Lord, hate evil; he preserves the souls
of his Saints: he delivers them out of the hand of the wicked. Psalm. 32.10.
and Psalm. 97.10. The Lord is a buckler to them that walk uprightly; and he is
a shield unto them that put their trust in him.

This is the Lord still and still that preserves the godly and evermore
stands in the behalf of his; so that, there is nothing so wickedly, and
craftily imagined, and so secretly plotted and contrived to their harm, which
some way or other comes not out. Thus has thy power, O Lord, appeared
mightily, and thy Name in this Kingdom; and thy protection of thy faithful
Servant, our dear, and gracious Sovereigne King Charles. O Lord, how have thou
opened the darkness of sin conceived against his Royal Person, his beloved
Consort, our Queen, and their Princely Issue; against this Land, and the life
of those that fear thy Name. For we are sold, we are sold, O Lord, by many
bloody minds; the King thy sacred Servant first, as our Head and Stay, under
thy Maj sty, and then the Queen, and the Royal Progeny, and likewise we, his
Majesty's poor people and subjects, living and breathing under his shadow, not
to be for servants, and handmaids, as complained that Queen Hester to
Ah^suerus, for then they had not been so cruel, but to be destroyed after many
miserable and monstrous torments, with bloody Sword of murdering minds, that
should have licked us up, and drunk our blood, till they had vomited again for
fullness with the same. And from all this thine own self has saved us, and
set us free, giving them their portions, either by Sea or Land, by one means or
other, as they did deserve. Thou broughtest out the conspiracies the
mischievous plots, and intentions of the bloody Spaniards, and the massacring
French, and of the Hellish Gunpowder, English Traitors, toward this our Island
of Great Britain, all times to this day; and thou savedst our Religious Queen
Elizabeth, our late renowned, and blessed King James, and thine anointed
Servant, our now Sovereigne, whom thou have set up amongst us, and over us, to
our unspeakable comfort ten thousand ways. Some or other heard of those
spiritual wickednesses, and infernal machinations; of those Jesuiticall
murtherous, wicked plots and devices, and were instruments of wisdom,
counsel, and service to prevent them. Blessed Lord, we thank thee with the
very souls of our souls, we thank thee, craving mercy, that we cannot ^o it as
we should. O Lord, continue thy mercy for thy mercies sake, and let the soul
of our Sovereigne be still dear unto thee; write him (dear Father) in the
palms of thy hands, and regard him ever as the apple of thine eye: Continue
thy Gospel to his Kingdoms, and the light of thy countenance still in o^r
days, blessed for ever and ever for what is past. There are many devices in a
man's heart: nevertheless, the counsel of the Lord that shall stand. Prove.
19.21. O love the Lord all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves the
faithful, and plentifully rewards the proud doer. Be of good courage, and he
shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the Lord, Psalm. 31.23, 24.
The Kings heart is in the hands of the Lord, as the Rivers of water: He turns
it whether soever he will, every way of a man is right in his own eyes but the
Lord pondereth the hearts: to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to
the Lord then Sacrifice. A wise King scatters the wicked, and brings the
wheel over them: Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come
forth a vessel for the Finer: Take away the wicked from before the King, and
his Throne shall be established in righteousness, Prove. 21.1, 2, 3. and Chap.
20.26. and Chap. 25. 4, 5. What a blessing Justice is to the people, and what a
praise to the careful Executor of it, who knows not? Heathen Aristotle could
say, Nec Hesperus, nec Lucifer formofier justitia, that no star is so
beautiful in the Sky, as Justice on the Earth. Men's wisdom may make them
reverenced, and their power may make them feared, but justice, justice is that
which wins men's hearts, and makes them beloved, and the more faithful and
painful they are in doing thereof, the more honored alive and dead: And as
justice is a blessing, so are good Laws and Ordinances in a Kingdom, in the
praise whereof, much more then I have already written might be said, as not a
little against idle, superfluous, and hurtful Laws, against obscure and
deceitful penning of them, leaving holes and gaps in them, for all the good
intended by them to run out at, and never be seen: but I leave it to the pious
meditation, and the discreet consideration of the great Council of this
Kingdom, men of learning, wisdom and godliness, into whose hands, the
faithful disposing and ordering those weighty affairs and concernments are
put: Read Sir John Fortescus, Knight, and Chancellor of England, his
commendable Book, de laudibus legum Angliae: and Sir Edward Coke Chief Justice
of England, and Sir John Davis Knight, who have treated very learnedly of the
Common Laws of England, in their prefaces to their Reports.

SECT. III. Of the Profession of PHYSIC.
THus having lightly touched some few points in that sacred Science and
profession of Divinity, and having briefly run over some considerable things in
that noble profession of the Common Law of the Realm: It remains that I should
write somewhat of that faculty and profession of Physic, honorable for the
use and necessity thereof amongst men: But for as much as I have been a mere
stranger in a manner to that Art and Science, for in truth I have employed but
very little time in the study thereof, only for that I would quit and shift my
self of the vulgar imputation, and that Ignoramus leaden conceit of those (who
very fain would have it, that others should (...) thought to be as egregious
dotards, and very fools as themselves) that have turned it into a Proverb, That
every one of necessity must either be a Fool a Physician: I will therefore with
as much perspicuity in brevity as I may speak a word or two of that
profession. 1 The Wise man tells us That we ought to honor a Physician with the
honor due unto him, for the uses which we may have of him: For the Lord has
created him, for of the most high comes healing, and he shall receive honor
of the King. The skill of the Physician shall lift up his head, and in the
sight of great men he shall be in admiration. The Lord has created Medicines
out of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them. Was not the water
made sweet with woo^ that they (...) thereof might be known? Exodus 15.25. And
he has give^ men skill, that he might be honored in his mavelous works,
with such do^^ he heal (men) and take away their pains. Of such does the
Apothecary make a Confection, and of his works there is no end, and from him is
peace over all the earth, Eccles. 38. But this is to be understood of
Archigenists, or principal chief Physicians, such as are learned and skilful
in their profession, and not of those (Medici circum-feranti) Physicians that
go above the Country keep Fairs, haunt Markets and public meetings, and so
become juglers of men's purses, if not Empiricks and made practisers upon their
persons: I shall not conceile a mystery which these men have attained unto in
their faculty, which is this; that whereas most men themselves of all other
professions, do commonly (as we say) pay for their learning; these men by
reason of their preproperous practice, do make others pay very deny sometimes
for experiment sake only, and not for any learning of theirs, which they never
had, nor knew what did belong to it. Surely the learned professors themselves
in that faculty or Science of Physic, in one respect have the advantage of the
Sages of the Common Law; for good Lawyers have not with us that liberty which
good Physicians have: We know a good Physician may lawfully undertake the cure
of a foul and desperate disease; but a good Lawyer cannot honestly undertake
the defense of a foul and desperate cause. Secondly, I have observed that the
King and the Parliament in the Act of 14 Hen. 8. in making of a Law concerning
Phisicians, for the more safety and health of men, therein pursued the Order of
a good Physician, for Medicina est duplex, removens and promovens,
removensmorbum, and promovius ad salutem: Physic is twofold, removing the
disease, and promoving and furthering health. And therefore five manner of
persons (which more hurt men's bodies then the disease it self, of whom one
said of one of their patients, fugiens morbum incidit in medicum,) are to be
removed, viz. 1 Improbi. 2 Avari, qui Medicina^ magis avaritia f^^^ causa,
(...) ullius bon^ conscientia fid^era profitentur. 3 Malitiosi. 4 Te^^^ (...).
5 Inscii. That is, 1 They that are dishonest wicked Physicians. 2 That are
covetous, who profess Physic more for covetousness, and for lucre sak^^ then
by any persuasion or testimony of a good conscience. 3 Those that are
malicious. 4 Those that are unadvised young practisers. 5 Those that are
ignorant and unskilful. And of the other part five manner of persons were to
be promoted, as appears by the Act, viz. 1 Those that were profound. 2 Sad. 3
Discreet. 4 Groundly learned. 5 Profoundly studied. And it was well ordained
that the professors of Physic should be profound sad discreet, etc. and not
they that are (...), which have no gravity and experience, for as one says, In
juv^ne th^^^ ^onscientia d^^ in^^tum, in juv^^^ legist a b^rsa decrementum, in
juvent medico c^^^^^^ in^r^^^^^um. In a young Divine there is Shipwreck, and
loss of conscience, in a young Lawyer, a decrease or waining of the purse: in
a young Physician a Monticulosity, or increase of graves in a Churchyard. And
it ought to be presumed, every Doctor of any of the Universities to be within
the Statute, that is, to be profound, sad, discreet, groundly leathed, and
profoundly studied, for no man there is to be Master of Arts (who is Doctor of
Philosophy) under seven years study there, and he may not be Doctor of Physic
under seven years more in the study of Physic. And let this suffice to be s^id
at this time of the faculty and Science of Physic, a profession I confess,
that is altogether out of the Sphere of my Theory; and out of the Verge of my
activity and practice.

SECT. IV. Of the Science of THEOLOGY.
BUt finding my soul in greater need of Physic, than my body; I shall pass
by the other Schools, and read my last Lecture in Divinity. Remember now thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the
years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Eccles. 12.1.
Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return
to God that gave it. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. And moreover because
the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge, yea, he gave good
heed, and sought out, and set in order many Proverbs. The Preacher, sought to
find out acceptable words and that which was written, was upright, even words
of truth. The words of the wise are as the goades, and as nails fastened by the
Masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd. And further by these
my son, be admonished: of making many books, there is no end, and much study
is a weariness to the flesh. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter:
Fear God, and keep his Comandements: for this the whole duty of m^n. For God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil, Eccles. 12. 8, 9, 10. etc. True Christians
endeavor to go forward toward the mark of Christian perfection. But if we
should return back into Egypt, or desire to live in Babylon, we should declare
our selves neither studious of perfection, nor of Christian Religion, nor
careful to maintain the reputation of our Nation. How long shall we waver
betwixt two Religions? If God be God, and his written Word be Truth, then we
are to follow him, and to found our faith upon his Word. If the Pope, be the
supreme God of this world, and his determinations true; then we are to follow
the Pope, and his Decretals. No man, Certes, can allow Popery, but he must
condemn the Apostolical Religion of Jesus Christ, professed in this Church of
England. What communion (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.) has light with
darkness? what concord has Christ with Beli^l? what agreement has the Temple
of God with Idols? As many therefore as believe that the Papists walk in
darkness, and follow Antichrist, living in idolatry and infidelity, wound
their consciences, if they grant any toleration, or consent to it. The test
trust needs run into the same danger, unless they can answer the reasons,
brought to prove the Pope Antichrist, and Papists to be false worshippers of
God, or else plain Idolaters. See 2 These. 2. and 1 Timothy 4. And the 13.14.17.
and 18 Chap. of the Revel. we are to pronounce them Anathema, which preach
beside that which the Apostle preached, as himself teaches us, Galat. 1. But
the Papists preach the Pope, and his decretaline doctrine, which is both
besides and contrary to the Gospel preached by Paul. Christian Religion never
called the Pope the foundation, the head, or the spouse of the Church, as
Bellarmine in his books, de Pontif. Roman, and other Papists do. It is not
therefore safest to retain Christian Religion, built on Christ Jesus, and to
reject Popery built on the Pope? No religion is to be tolerated, that leaves
the rule of faith, that is the holy Scriptures, which of all are called
Canonical, and seeks defense and succor out of other rules, as Traditions,
popish Determinations, School-mens Distinctions, and such like leaden, and
Lesbian rules. But Papists deny Scriptures to be the only rule of faith, as
Bellarmine l. 4. de verbo Dei, Cap. 4. and others commonly teach. Thus we see
how miserably the Papists are deluded, and led into vanity by their blind
guides. But touching faith, and assurance of our salvation, we Protestants with
a joint consent hold this Doctrine; that, True faith is a knowledge, firm and
certain, of the good will of God toward us: which being founded upon the
truth of his free promise in Christ, is both revealed to our minds, and sealed
in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost. This is Eternal life to know thee to be the
only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, John 17.3. Again, which
mystery has been hid (says Saint Paul, Col. 1.36.) since the world began,
and from all ages, but now is made manifest unto his Saints. And Col. 2.2. That
their hearts might be comforted, and they knit together in love, and in all
riches of the full assurance of understanding to know the mystery of God, even
the Father of Christ. And 2 John 3.14. And we know that we are translated etc.
We know, All which places you see evidently prove faith to be a knowledge; so
does even reason: for how can we believe things which we know not? Saint Peter
knew it could not be, and therefore joyneth faith and knowledge, saying; And we
believe and know, that thou art That Christ the Son of the living God. For he
yeildeth a reason, why he, and other of the Apostles believed in Christ;
namely, because they knew that he was the Son of God. Which being so, it
necessarily follows, that they believe not, to whom those things are unknown,
that he has revealed in his Word. And therefore that tale of Popery concerning
implicita fides, an ignorant faith, is most foolish: for faith and knowledge
are so knit together, that they cannot be separated. Trust perfectly in the
grace that is brought unto you in the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.13.
Perfectly to trust, excludes doubting. 1 John 5.13, 14. We know, we know, etc.
excluding doubting. I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, etc. shall be
able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Romans 8.38. The knowledge which we have by hope grounded upon Gods promises, is
so sure, that it cannot be deceived: as it is plain, Romans 5.5. The persuasion
that the Apostle has in other places, is also grounded upon good Arguments;
but here, Romans 8. upon the immutable Decree of God. And it is good reason to
prove, that every Christian man which is endued with faith and hope, may and
ought to be infallibly assured, that he is justified, and shall be saved;
because the Word of God, and his promise to all that believe in him (and in
faith call upon him) cannot fail, but be most infallibly true. That we shall
also persevere in the favor of God, and so consequently, that we are
predestined to eternal life; the Apostle does most plainly prove in this
Chapter: wherefore by the Spirit of Adoption, and the effects of Gods grace
agreeable, we may have certain knowledge, that we shall inherit Gods Kingdom;
which none shall do, but they that continue unto the end, and were appointed
unto it, before the beginning of the world. And this is true humility, when we
presume nothing upon our own strength, or worthiness, but depend wholly upon
the truth of Gods promises. Moreover mark the Commandment of the Apostle to
the, Cor. Prove your selves, whether you are in faith, examine your selves,
know you not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ dwells in you? except ye
be reprobates, 1 Cor. 3.5. Know y^ not, (says the Apostle) know ye not, that
is, assuredly, and certainly, without doubting. etc. The Prophet Nathan said to
David, 1 Samuel 12. Thy sin is done away. And our Savior Christ said, Son be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, Mat. 9. And thy faith has made thee
whole, has, has, not shall, shall, it is done, doubt not, etc. Therefore, we
justly conclude, out of the stable Word of God, That faith is a knowledge firm
and certain. But Popery does cross this plain truth, That knowledge ought to
go with faith. There is nothing more hateful in that Kingdom of darkness,
than to hear of knowledge, and in this particular most they abide it not: For
Nic Cusanus Epist. 2. ad Baron. a great pillar of their Church is not ashamed
to write, that, Obedientia irrationalis est consummata obedientia and
perfectissima, quando obeditur sine inquisitione rationis, sicut i^mentum
obedit Domino suo: Obedience without reason, is a full and most perfect
obedience, when thou obeyest without asking any reason, as the horse does his
Master. Upon these words Bishop Babington in his Exposition upon the first
Article of the Creed, says thus, A most strange speech, and fitter for a
horse, or Baalams Ass, than for a man: surely most ill beseeming a Cardinal,
but that; error will often be most gross. Yet he stays not here but again,
in the same Epistle, answering to this Objection. What if the Church command
contrary to Christ, whom must we obey? with as great grosnesse, he says
again, Ab hoc est omnium praesumptionum initium, etc. This is the beginning of
all presumption, when particular men think their own judgment, to be more
agreeable to Gods Comandements, than the judgment of the Universal Church.
Whereby you see, that he utterly disliketh the people should any way seek to
know what they believe, or what they obey unto, but simply and sillily to
follow blind guides, whithersoever they please to lead them. The very self
same darkness does Doctor Smith (and other of their Catholic teachers) again
deliver in one of his Books, where he says, That albeit a man do by the
commandment of his Bishop or Priest, a wicked thing yet this very cloak of his
simple obedience shall excuse him. But the blessed Apostles knew no such
obedience, when they answered; Whether it is better to obey God or man, judge
you, etc. Sir Thomas Moore, and other of that side, not unlearned, boldly
avoucheth, that, If ten should preach in a day, and every one contrary to
another, yet shall he never thrive that will search, who says true; directly
contrary to the Commandment of our Savior Christ, John 5. Search the
Scriptures; and to that notable example of the men of Berea, so commended, and
liked by the Holy Ghost, that believed not even Saint Paul himself, without
trial, but searched the Scriptures whether those things were so. Acts 17. And
we further read in the Scriptures, 1 These. 5. and 1 John 4.1. and 1 Cor. 11.1.
Prove all things, hold fast that which is good; believe not every spirit, but
try the spirits whether they be of God, or no: be ye followers of me, (but
how?) even as I am of Christ: Mark this example well, and consider in your own
heart, whether any Priest or Prelate under heaven, may challenge more obedience
of Gods people, than the blessed Apostle might: but the Apostles will be obeyed
no further than he obeys and follows Christ, which he leaves us ever to
try him in. As this Doctrine of Proving all things now in question, does
reprove the palpable ignorance, and blind zeal of the Papists; so it does
comend the activity and diligence of many of the Laity, as of the Clergy in
those last times, that have attained unto a great measure of knowledge of Gods
revealed Will, by an industrious and frequent reading of the Scriptures, joined
with prayer, and hearing of the Word, not omitting conference with the learned,
and using other good means, for the right understanding of them. This Doctrine
I say, does approve the labors of some, that in humility of heart s^eke the
Lord: but withal it condemns the arrogance, and over-boldnesse of others,
that have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. That boast
much of the spirit; but can they show the fruits thereof in their words, and
actions? If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. Let us not
be desirous of vain glory, provoking one another. The Apostle tells us, The
fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law. Galat.
5.22, 23.

Moreover the Papists are more blind in their belief; than they are grossly
idolatrous, in their worship and service of God. It shall be worth our time and
pains to consider the worshipping of Images, whether it be lawful for a
Christian man or woman cringing, kneeling, creeping, crossing, kissing,
lighting up candles to it, and such like, as we see done in the Church of Rome,
with great observation. In the Scriptures of God we have a plain Commandment.
Thou shall not make any graven image, etc. Read the 4.5.6. and 7 Chapters of
Deuteronomy. Neither shall thou set thee up any graven image, which the Lord thy God
hates, Deuteronomy. 16. Cursed be the man that makes any graven or molten image, an
abomination unto the Lord, the works of the hands of the craftsman, and
puts it in a secret place, Deuteronomy. 27. See Exodus 23.24. Levit. 26.30. and
Isai. 41.29. and 44.10. and Jer. 43.13. and Psalm. 97.

Let it fall then even in the fear of God, what man's head inventeth against
the Lord in his own duty; and at the last, let us see it to be a vain mocks to
think we can worship God in an Image, and by it, or under it. Our Adversaries
have a shift for defense of Images in the Church; but it is a very ill favored
one. They are (say they) Laymens books, and stand in very good stead to put us
in mind of God. Now that they are no good Books, but very dangerous and
deceiving sights, for laymen, or other whatsoever, let the Word of the Lord
himself be Judge. The Prophet Jeremie in Zeal of Spirit detesteth such books,
and refuses to be put in mind of God, by any such deceitful means. For the
Stock (says he) is a doctrine of vanity, yea, they are vanity, and the work of
errors, and in the time of their visitation, they shall perish Jer. 10. The
Prophet Habakuk again says, That the image is a teacher of lies, though he
that made it, trust in it, etc. Habak 2.18. Shall then the Book full of lies,
vanities and error, be so good a book and remembrance to Laymen? Shall that
which endangereth the learned, nothing hurt, think we, the unlearned? O, that
we knew not by experience, into what fond and wicked opinions of God, poor
people have been brought by these painted and carved books? How many hearts
lament their folly, and how many tongues to the praise of Gods mercy in
visiting them with his light, can and do tell, what fond conceits they had of
the Lord, and heavenly matters, seduced by the sight of their eyes? Therefore
since God has said it, and experience found it, that they are so dangerous,
let them be books for Pagans and Heathens: Surely for Christians they should
not be. Which of the Prophets or Apostles went about ever to have Images made,
either to put themselves in mind of any thing which the Lord had taught them,
or the people of any thing which they delivered to them from the L^^d: But they
used the admonition of their brethren, and especially by writing down what they
taught, they helped this infirmity of ours: signifying even by that their
practice, what means ought now to be, to put us in mind of God, and heavenly
things, chiefly his word. The Lord himself says, Ye saw no Image, but heard a
voice only: therefore make no Image. And again, You saw that I spoke to you from
heaven, therefore you shall make no Gods of gold, nor silver, Deuteronomy. 4. As if he
should have said, my practice in speaking to you by voice, and not by image,
should teach you, that by my Word, and not by Image; I am to be remembered. And
it is a notable place in Esaias, That when the Word shall take place with his,
then they shall abhor images. Isai. 30.21. Now hereupon it follows, that we
ought to serve the Lord, according to that Rule, which himself has laid down,
and prescribed only. You shall not do every man what seems good in his own
eyes, for in vain do men worship me with traditions of men, says the Lord.
Deuteronomy. 12. Moses did nothing in building the material Tabernacle, beside that
was commanded, and showed him, Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron died, for
presuming of themselves to serve the Lord, with strange fire, Levit. 10. The
very heathenish Romans had this reason with them, that it was better for them
to be quite without Christ, than to worship him, and others with him against
his will and liking. And, ad placandum Deum in opus habent homines quae ille
jubet, that is, To please the Lord (says Lactantius) men have need of those
things, that he himself comandeth. And a Christian mind does not find a sure
stay, but when it hears, Hoc dicit Dominus, Thus says the Lord If Saul
break the course that God does appoint, and of himself devise to serve the
Lord, be his necessity to do so, as he thinks, never so great, and the intent
of his heart never so holy-like, certainly, Samuel both must, and will tell him
to his face he has done foolishly; for the Lord has more pleasure in that his
will is obeyed, than in all the fatlings of the Amalekites offered up unto him
of our own wills and heads, 1 Samuel 13. and 1 Samuel 15. Intents will not serve;
neither voluntary religion stand accepted. And therefore let us even weigh and
follow the counsel of Solomon, and look to our feet when we enter into the
house of God, being more ready to hear, then to offer the sacrifice of fools,
Eccles. 4. Read Babington upon the second Commandment. Thus we see that Popish
Religion is grounded upon unwritten Traditions. But no man is to follow or
admit a Religion, whose grounds are either contrary to Scriptures, or to
themselves, or are new and uncertain, or else depend on the credit of man, as
most of their Traditions do. Whosoever therefore either regards the Laws of
God, or abhors falsehood and heresy, cannot choose but abhor all the
abominations of the Massing Religion, and never suffer any such thing within
the Realm of England, if he can hinder it: Those Kings of Israel, that together
with the Law of God retained Groves, and hill Altars, and other Relics of
superstition, never prospered. The mingled Religion of the Samaritans to the
ancient Jews was most odious. Emanuel Commenus that linked himself with the
Turk, and cancelled the curses publicly set out against Turkish Religion,
became afterward in all his action, most unhappy, and after his death most
infamous. If we may have no good Conditions in Spain and Italy, the Papists
may do well, to forbear to speak of England, where Christians are better
resolved of their Religion, than Papists can be of their new Superstitions,
especially considering the diversity of our grounds. And albeit France does
threaten their Protestants, with like measure, as is meted unto Papists here in
England: yet we believe, and know that the same God which delivered our Nation
from the bondage and slavery, and the Egyptian darkness of Popery; The Lord
which does continue his mercy unto us, and the liberty and light of the Gospel
unto this day amongst us, is both able to preserve those that are godly, and he
will deliver his people out of the jaws of the Lion, when, and wheresoever they
do call upon him in truth. Me thinks, that fatal end of Sennacherib, King of
Assyria, who sent such a reviling Message by Rabshakch, unto Hezekiah King of
Judah, should be a warning unto all proud spirits, and vain boasters of their
Arm of flesh, 1 King. 18. and 19. Chapters. Thus having finished this
Treatise, which I composed in fourteen days, (I (...) on the whole discourse;
for I have laid a side two or three sheets of the Original Copy, not having
leisure, nor occasion for the present to transcribe them) I shall humbly pray
thee (charitable Reader) to interpret favourebly this birth of mine, according
to the integrity of the Author; and not looking for perfection in the Work it
self And I hope by this modest, and humble profession of my piety, and good
intentions to the Republique, aut laudatus ero, aut excusatus, I shall either
be approved, or excused: and by thy candide, and impartial judgment of me, and
thy pious censure of these my labors, I shall be held either worthy of praise,
or not blame worthy; or at least, if I shall be no gainer, let me be no loser
by thee: For in truth, I deem it far more unseemly, and indigne to lose
praise, than praiseworthy to attain it. This being admitted, I may
confidently averte (under correction) and say with Tacitus, Verba mea
arguunt^r; adec factorum innocens sum. Tacit. l. 4. Annal. I shall only now in
the last place clear an Objection, and so conclude. It may be objected thus,
What have young heads, novices in Religion, Learning, and Knowledge to do, to
meddle in the weighty affairs of the Church and Commonwealth? Why such a one as
I, so obscure to the eye of the world, and so mean in many respects, would
adventure, or dare once to peep forth among the press of Wits, that justle
abroad by whole Troops and Bands, like so many Armed Soldiers fit for
Rencontre, in this understanding, eagle-ey'd, literate, knowing age? To this I
answer, First, albeit, I am of green years, and it is true, I am of a weak and
raw judgment, of small experience, learning and ability, yet it is now almost
thirteen years since I was admitted a Scholar into the University at Oxford,
where I continued six years and upwards, and sithence, I have been resident for
the most part in London, and a Student in the Municipall or Common Laws of the
Realm, and some knowledge I have gained in Travel. Secondly, I have met with
great oppositions and contradictions of the Religion which I profess, by
Papists, Arminians selfe-knowing, conceited men, and others popishly affected
in the Society wherein I live, and in other places where I have been
conversant. And herein I would gladly quit my self of the prejudice and
misprisions of mine Adversaries by protesting against them and their Tenets.
And thirdly, only for holding and defending the Doctrine of the Reformed
Protestant Religion, as it is expressed in the 39 Articles of the Church of
England, and agreeable to Gods Word, and for my obedience thereunto: and
likewise for maintaining the honor, the Wisdom and Justice of the proceedings
of the High-Court of Parliament, against the malice and force of Ignorance and
blind Zeal, against the rash opinions of unsettled vain-heads, and against the
intoxicating poisonous breath of malevolent Tongues: This, I had for my pains;
I was counted and esteemed of, as a Time-server, a Puritan, a Brownist, an
Ignoranius; if not, a Separatist, a Schismatic, an Heretic, and one that had
the spirit of giddiness. These things (I say) were strong motives unto me, to
make this Apologeticall profession of my faith; and the sincerity of mine
intentions, and actions. But the chief reason indeed, that moved me to write
this my Protestation, was the faithful and true discharge of my conscience.
For where God has given a mind, a will, (and in some measure) abilities;
there ought not to be an unprofitable doing nothing: But the Talents of Grace,
according to our Saviors precept, are to be well employed; that, when we are
called to give an account of our Stewardships, our Master Christ Jesus, may
receive from us his servants the glory and praise of his own grace. And since I
might not, and in truth, it were unseemly, that I should bring a rough, and
unpolished Talent to the Common Gazophilacy, or Treasury of Religion, I deem it
meet to cast this Mite into my Spiritual mothers lap, the Church of England.
And though I am no Pilot to guide, or to steer the course of our Church, which
(like a ship tossed, and blown to and fro with storms and tempests) is floating
in a Sea of Errors, Schisms, and Heresies: yet as a Passenger, being on
shipboard, I may put forth a hand, to help take in Sails, when this great
Vessel is either in danger of running a ground, upon the quickesands of
profaneness: or of being bruised by clashing against the Rock of Popery, and
Superstitions But I know that our Savior Jesus Christ, our only Mediator,
our merciful Redeemer, Head and Governor, is both able to keep, and he will
preserve his Church, the pillar and ground of Truth, from a final merging and
sinking. Now that I may draw to a period of this my Discourse, I will cast
anchor upon a Resolve: Notwithstanding all the pestilent. and wicked
oppositions, the malice, envy, and hellish projects whereby any Adversary
powers do endeavor, and plot our ruin, and destruction: yet let us be strong,
and very courageous; let us resolve, and say with Joshuah, we will serve the
Lord. And let us pray, O Eternal God, our heavenly Father, graciously hear
us, that those evils, which the craft, and subtilty of the devil or man
works against us, be brought to naught, and by the providence of thy
goodness, they may be dispersed, that we thy servants being hurt by no
persecutions, may evermore give thanks unto thee, in thy holy Churh, Through
Jesus Christ, our Lord. I will conclude with the usual prayer of Martin
Luther. Confirm, O God, in us that thou have wrought, and perfect the work,
that thou have begun in us, to thy glory, So be it. Now, unto God alone, who in
his own Substance, is Original in, and by himself, the very Essence of all
natural created existences, and beings; and the Author of all Order and
Authority, be ascribed all due Honor, Majesty, Might and Dominion, by men
here; by Saints and Angels, in the Heaven of Heavens. Halelelujahs be sung
evermore, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

