THE PRODIGAL RETURNED TO SCOTLAND, OR, A Letter, Written by a Gentleman, to his
Friend at Montrose, Wherein he Represents, The Lover's Warfare, the vanity of
reposing Confidence in Rich Friends, a short History of his own Misfortunes,
the desireableness of Conversation, And lastly, the true Character of
Magnanimity, and a noble Ambition, and the Uncertainty and Contempt of Riches.

Hebrews, 12 Chap. 7 and 8 Verses. For whom the Lord loves He Chasteneth, and
Scourges every Son whom he receives.

If ye endure Chastening, GOD deals with you as with Sons: for what is he
whom the Father Chasteneth not? But if ye be without Chastisement, whereof all
are Partakers, then are ye Bastards and not Sons.

James 2 Chap. 15 and 16 Verses. If a Brother or Sister be Naked, and destitute
of daily Food, and one of you say unto them, depart in Peace, be you Warmed and
Filled: Notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the
Body; What does it Profit? 1. Epistle General of John, 2 Chap. 15 Verse. Love
not the World, neither the things that are in the World; If any Love the
World, the Love of the Father is not in him. Dulcia non meruit, qui non
gustavit amara. Si quid novisti rectius
Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum.
EDINBURGH, Printed in June 1700 by John Reid Printer, and are to be Sold at
John Vallange's, Mrs. Ogstoun's and Thomas Carruthers Stationers in Edinburgh,
their Shops

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY To the Virtuous and Honorable Young Gentlemen
attending the Honorable Faculty of ADVOCATS, And Others who have their
Dependence upon the Parliament House, the Seat of Administration of Justice at
Edinburgh, my Fellow Commerads and Acquaintances.
Ye justly challenge all Respect and Love
From me, who do in that same Body move
With you, who by the Pen and Ink Command
The attendance here of Nobles of the Land.
Here by this Letter I present you Love,
How richest Friends Unnatural often do prove;
How I have run a little piece of Fate
By rash procedure, and my now Estate:
Sweetness of Converse, and the Divine Man
Contempt of Riches hereby you may Scan.
The Matters Flat, Unpolished; but it is true:
Receive it kindly in it is Natural hew:
I have not Homer's, Pindar's, Virgil's flight 's
Dryden's nor Cowley's, these Terrestrial Lights;
Neither could I by this rude, vulgar Letter
Better things write than taught me GOD and Nature:
I have not Cicero's nor Demosthenes wits,
Nor fluent Raptures and Diviner fits
Of a Commanding Eloquence, to dare
And damp the Vulgar, else you would had a Share:
Nor Soaring Flights of Poetry to give,
Or write with more Success than I can Live.
The Prodigal Returned, receive with Charms,
Of Love, and take him kindly in your Arms;
For as the Romans by their Wit and Sense,
More than by Force, contrived a strong Defense;
So Love and Friendship by Mysterious Arts,
Vanquish the hardest Adamantine Hearts.
GENTLEMEN, This is all from Your Humble Servant, George Dempster.

To my Familiar and Intimate at Montrose. Kirktounhill, May 24th, 1700.

Dearest Commerad,
THough I have had as yet but little Correspondence with you, yet I have found
so great Satisfaction already in your Desirable Company, that the thoughts and
Consideration thereof, have influenced me to offer my Respects to you by a
Letter. Some (perhaps) will be apt to carp at my putting the same to the Press;
But who ever wrote yet with that Successfulness, as not to meet with Censures:
And I did not design to Emit it to public View, in hopes of obtaining the
Suffrage and Applause of others, (seeing it wants the Ornament and Flourishes
of Eloquence, which might make it more pleasant and Desirable) but to satisfy
partly the Curiosity of some of my Acquaintances and your self: And if I obtain
their and your Approbation, I shall not be grieved, whether it be Condemned or
Commended by the Multitude.

The World is a Comedy, where every Man acts that part which Providence has
assigned him, and seeing my Talent consists mostly in Writing, (though very
meanly) I thought fit to produce and give you a Swatch of i^, and not to keep
it tied as in a Napkin, or to lock it up in the dark like a Candle set under a
Bushel. For Man is not born to be only useful and helpful to himself, but also
to disperse his Gifts, (as GOD has blessed him) to the Common Good of others.

Though you are more Capable to give than to receive an advice from me, I have
nevertheless used that Freedom to Write you my Thoughts anent the several
Occurrences of Providence which I have already been Trysted with; (I shall not
wish you to be so Unhappy as to meet with the like) and what my carriage was,
or should be, if I be trysted with worse any time hereafter.

Dear Soul,

It Is impossible to secure our selves against Envy and Competition, for
distance of Place cannot Protect us from her Malignity; You have a clear
instance of this in the Trium^viri at Rome, (whereof Marcus Antonius was one)
who rather chose to endure the greatest hardships, before one of them would
Succumb in Power to another, and so it came to pass; For Cleopatra with her
Beauty Vanquished the Magnanimous Soul of Marcus Antonius, and made his Valor
become Eff^minate, by giving way to his Love Passions, And she (that she might
not adorn the Romans Triumph and Victory, by her being carried a Captive)
Applied Snakes to her Body to draw her Blood, and to prevent the comeing of
Death by her Preparation. So you may see, That three Suns could not all shine
at once; For such is the Ambition of some, That to prosecut their bad designs,
they would hire the Devil himself, before they could not get them effectuate.

But on these Occasions, (where Malice rather than Emulation carrys the Van) we
should (as Seneca advises) with flying color manage our Retreat. Proverbs
Chap. 27. Ver. 4. Wrath is Cruel, and Anger is Outrageous: but who is able to
stand before Envy. It Is hard to discern an Honest Man; for what was the Subject
of this days Conference, will be the Subject of ane Accusation to Morrow, and
that secret which we did but la^ely Depositate in Our Friend's Breast, will
shortly fly in our Faces from the Mouths of our Enemies: But though our Friend
were Real and Secret, yet his inconstancy may make these either no Verat all,
or ineffectual and Unprofitable Ones: Such is the baseness of some, who, for a
small Compliment, will be Tempted to betray Secrets, to become Rivals to their
Friends, who put Confidence in them, and assisting to their Enemies; Such a Man
was the Perfidious Judas, who betrayed our Savior for 30 Talents. And that
which Aggravates the crime of such, is because (possibly) they are our Dearest,
(yet Hypocritical) Familiar Friend, who acts thus Treacherously under color
and a pretext of True Love. After this manner, The famous Renowned Caesar was
dealt with, who with all the Prudence of his Court, could not avert his Massare
in the Senate, especially being contrived by his Confident Brutus.

And when our own Relations, (neither out of piety or naturality) cannot
conceal nor obliterate our offenses or misfortunes; How may we expect to be
made the vox populi, especially when such misrepresntati^^s flow from such a
Fountain; Which (commonly) are more easily believed and Intertain'd, when they
are vented by such, whom others may be ap^ to believe, ( through ignorance of
their disposition who speak thus) That they talk so as having no dislike or
prejudice against us. But I being persuaded you know perfectly well what, and
of whom I write this, I leave them to their own fate, and the just reward of
providence.

As distress makes men run, where they may expect he^p; And as that must be the
securest harbor, to which distrestest vessels make their application; So I fly
to the choicest of your wholesome advices as the only Asylum and Sanctuary for
my aid and safety.

If misfortunes could make men Philosophers, as Afflictions are said to make
real Christians, I might expect to become wise by experiencing so many; But
such is the innate rudeness and dullness of my genius that it cannot look
through the right end of the perspective, and see the Wise hand of Providence
directing them.

Dearest Familiar,

I know the Premises and Preceding Discourse stand in no need of a Commentar
to Explain the Genuine Sense thereof, you knowing exactly well, that it is not
propper to be too plain by Discovering my Thoughts to all, who may have
Occasion to see me in Print, but I have Endeavored alse much as possible
Clearness and Ingenuity. And because you have (possibly) met with the like
Dispensation of Providence in your Amors, that I met with some Years ago I
have therefore (to comfort you and me) taken so much Leisure from my other
Bussiness, as to set apart one Afternoon, and write you my following Thoughts.

The Design of Lovers should be als Latent as the Springs which do inwardly
move Mechanic Machins; if you either consider the Nature of it, or the
Inconveniences that attend a Disappointment, I fancy Love proceeds from a
Vehement desire of the Object, in hopes of a full Satisfaction of pleasure and
content therefrom; Which pleasure we fondly dote upon, and this Love proceeds
from Contemplation.

But Love may be compared to Hunger, which though it is once Satisfied,
continues no longer so, than it has for a little time preyd upon what was at
first presented to it: And like the fire, is so far from being Satisfied with
what is thrown into it, that it is by that new Fuel, not only enabled to
destroy, but likewise forced to seek more Aliment for sustaining it is wasting
Rage.

Pleasure in Men is ane Act of the Fancy, and Cons^quently of the Soul, and
certainly these pleasurs which do more immediately affect the soul must needs be
the most Active pleasures, and such are those which arise from Contemplation:
For Contemplation does often drive our souls into Ecstasies, and is so charming,
that it may be rather said to Ravish then Please, committing so open a Rapture
upon our Souls, that it pulls them almost into a State of Separation.

Dear and kind Soul

You have known these things (doubtless) by sad experience, if ever Love had
the Commanding Faculty of your Soul; For by Love we go nearest the Image of GOD
and the Imitation of our Savior. 4. Chap. 1 Epist. general of John 7 and 8
verses. Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of GOD; And every one
that loves is born of GOD, and knows GOD. He that leveth not, knows not
GOD: For GOD is Love.

The greatest Inconveniency that attends Lovers, while they Sail upon so
Unknown and Tempestuous Seas, as the instability and unconstancie of a Woman's
fancy, are the false Reports whereunto they may be exposed by Bussie Bodies,
who may tale a Thousand Lies of them: For who can promise that they shall never
drop one word in Passion, act any thing without a previous Deliberation, or
never fall under Misinformation; And which is yet worse, when
Misrepresentations are forged against them, they are not acquainted by such as
either give or receive them, and so their Defense becomes wholly imprstable.

But why need I expect to teach you what Love is, or what discouragments Lovers
may propos^ to themselves before they arrive at the conquest, seeing you have
traced those Paths far more succesfuly than I have done; And it has added no
small Commendation to your Character, That Fancy rather than Ambition or Riches
were your choice: For what could you have proposed reasonably to your self in
so doing; For little can defend us against our present necessities, and nothing
can defend against the Future: And when Riches are piled up, they serve either
to satisfy Nature, and that is easy, or to satisfy Fancy, and that is
Impossible. Riches are realy (though they remain) but like the Manna in that 16
Chap. of Exodus 18 verse Whereof he that gathered much had nothing over, and he
that Gathered little had no Lack. Ecclesiasties 5 chap: 10 and 11 and 12 verses.
He that Loves silver, shall not be satisfied with Silver; nor he that Loves
abundance with Increase: this it also Vainity. When goods increase, they are
increased that eat them: And what good is there to the Owners thereof, saving
the beholding of them with their Eyes? The sleep of the Laboring Man is Sweet,
whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the Rich will not suffer
him to sl^ep.

Such was the Insatiat desire of that Rich King Craesus, (who wa^ said to have
had Mountains of Gold and Vast Treasures) that he took a great deal of pleasure
to see his Gold, and thefore called in for all his Exchequer at once; whereupon
his Subjects finding him to have so Vast a desire for Gold, conspired against
him and Murdered him, And when he was Dead, they were pleased thus
Reproachfully to Triumph over him, Saying, he Loved Gold while he was on Life,
let him once have his fill of it before he be burried, and accordingly they
melted Gold and poured it down his Throat, that it might be known how little a
Portion of all his great Treasure would satisfy him when Dead, when all his
Dominions and the Riches therein could not Satisfy his vast Appetite when he
was Living. Solon. gave him this Advice, when he Enquired at him if he thought
him a happy Man, (which Sentence made him set King Cyrus at Liberty, when he
was Captivated by him) He gave him this Answer, That no Man could be called
happy till Death came, as you have it prettily expressed by Invenal thus ultima
Semper

Expectanda dies homini, Dicique Beatus,
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera debet.
The day of Death should still be thought upon,
And no Man can be happy till it come.
Dearest Familiar,

If at any time hereafter, either Fortunatly or Unluckily you six your
Contemplation upon a Woman, whom Providence has stored with great Plenty of
Earthly Blessings and a Number of Opulent Friends and cannot purchase the
Object of your desires, neither by Moyon, Civility, nor Love, let the Flame of
your Fancy decay. Moderatly as at first it took Vivacity, and let nothing here
below be able to Crush or dampt your Spirit: Proverbs 17 Chapter 22 Verse. A merry
Heart does good like a Medecin; but a broaken Spirit dries the Bones. But
other means and Methods might be Exerced, which probably might take effect and
influence the Heart of a Generous Lady to be Reciprocally Loving; such as
Fluent Oratory* (whereby Ulysses was preferred to Ajax) or by paying continual
sacrifices for her at the Altar in our Devotions: For who knows but GOD would
hear our Prayers. The Romans were als Famous for their Eloquence as for their
Conduct in W^r and Arms, and overcame their Enemies als freq^ently by their
Tongues as with their Swords: Their Generals Orations were so persuasive, and
had so great influence upon them (very frequently) That they enflamed their
Armies with a desire and hope of Victory, and made them attack their Enemies
with greatest Rosolution.

But ah! now in our Degenerate Age, when Literature and common principles of
Magnanimity and Virtue are like to be quite rooted out by-supine negligence or
ignorance, I know not how an aspiring Spirit can raise himself to preferment;
when cloged with the want of a Competent Patrimony; whereby he might Cultivate
his genius and aim at good things. For as the Poet Juvenal Expresses it,
Virtutibus obstat, Res angusta Domi; So, many good Spirits are either lost for
want of Education, Or, if they have the Fortune to attain to some smatter of
Learning, they must stop there, either because Providence lays it not in their
way to come by better, by reason of the obscurity of their Birth (which is
commonly attended with Poverty) or that if they have Friends or Brethren als
capable to serve them as Joseph was to serve and relieve his Brethren, yet
such a Veneration (or rather Adoration) they have to the perishing Riches of
this World, that they cannot get their hearts (which are glewed thereto)
separate from them, or persuade them to part with any thing, though it would
both preserve the duration and grandeur of their own Names; and (probably)
raise their necessitous Friend both to Honor and Preferment.

Dearest Familiar,

I could make an apposite Application of this to my own Friends and Relations,
who, if they had smiled upon me as Joseph did upon his Brethren, or as the
Father of the Prodigal Child, I would not have had ground to be emulous of, or
envy any Man's happiness in your City. But Blessed be GOD, I have been
wonderfully provided for from my Birth by the wise hand of Providence; and
particularly from the beginning of the late Revolution in the year 1689, at
which time my dearest Parent was neceffi^at to give over his Charge of the
Ministry, b^ing then misfortunatly trvsted to Preach and live in the West where
the Clergy were first Thurst out, and met with the first burnt of Persecution.

In the year 1690 I applied my self to my Studies, and entered the College of
Edinburgh, where I continued with als much Approbation, (I may say it without
vanity) as any one of my Rank or Character could expect, until February 1696:
And I wanted not good occasions for improving my self, it being my good Fortune
to have my converse and private Application of my Studies with two Learned Men
who were my Regents, Viz. Mr. L. D. and Mr. Alexander C. to whom I ow all the
Learning I have, nay Life it self; For when my Relations at Montrose would not
be at the pains to breed me a Merchant (for which I ow them very many thanks,
who like Joseph's Brethren, designing my hurt, have done me good) Mr. L: D:
took me by the hand and keept me at the College, may the Heavens reward him
for it.

But as a Ship at Sea, when all her Sails are aloft in a great storm, despises
to be managed either by the Prudence of of her Mariners or their Prayers,
unless almighty prividence order it; So I by the unexpected death of my Parent
(who dyed at Edinburgh in January 1694) being left to the Propensity of my own
inclinations; and my nearest Relations, upon several Addresses made to them for
their Counsel and Advice (and not for their means) not having honored me with
any return; Yea and when I came North to visit them, they not having any due
and Christian regaird to my then present Circumstances; I did upon the 22d of
January 1696 (when I wanted but two Months to complete my Course at the
College) take my Voyage for Flanders, where I continued only for 9 Months, the
Country Air not suiting my Nature and Disposition.

This I confess was the greatest piece of folly, That my Relations can upbraid
me with; and although my inclinations did not lead me to have followed this
present Government (if I had prosecuted my Studies) and that all the
Prodigality I had committed was but the mispending of these 9 Months, and not
any Patrimony; Yet such was the displeasur^ they had conceived against me for
it, or at least they made this pretext (perhaps of purpose to keep in their
pious affection and Kindness which I as their Relation might have expected, or
which might have prevailed with and influenced them to be generous) That my two
Patrui were pleased to say and Express themselves thus Charitably to others,
who were employed by me to interceed for me.

My Uncle Mr. J^hn ^he Divine, (who should have had a greater R^spect ^o Acts
of Charity and been zealous and forward for my further Adv^ncem^nt in
Lit^^ature) was pleased to signifi^ his kindness (some two three years before I
went from the Colle^ge) by the following words, Viz That he wo^ld not
Contribute the 19 part of a farthing for my Prosecution of my Studies; although
the p^ecedent year both he and his B^other Alexander at Montrose desired me to
inform Commissar Wiseheart my Mother Brother, that they were content yearly to
bestow a Guinie for that effect: What encouragment then had I to follow them,
if the consideration of my Circumstances had not induced me to it.

And at my return from Flanders, mere necessity (rather than choice) ob^iged me
to come to them to see what they would bestow, or if they w uld smile upon me
the Prodigal. But I found them of another T^m^er and of a quite different
Disposition with that of Joseph's or the Prodigal's Father: for having but
stayed but one night in my Uncle Mr. John's House at Monufuith (although he
knew perfectly well I wanted whereupon to subsist) He upon the Morrow als
earnestly as a Prince would expel an Hostile Enemy out of his Dominions, sent
me a pa^king, without so much as a kiss of his hand.

But any indifferent Person reading this, (may be) will be apt to say in his
Defense, That he did this, not that he thought himself not ^bli^ed out of (
barity and naturality to have cherished me, but because of my hurting of my
self and leaving my studies, and of purpose to harden me by affliction. In
answer to this objection please consider, That he should have first chall^eged
me, and then smiled upon me.

But I cannot deny, but that he is (otherways) a Man of Good parts Learning and
Piety; but (it seems) when the Graces and Virtues which he enjoys were a
dealing, he has been als much Hurried with joy of the conquest of a few Talents
as the Roman Generals were when they rod in Triumph with their Opima Spolia,
and (Possibly then) he ha^, in his have lost out of the Number of the
Foundamental principales of Religion two of them Viz. Love and Charity
(perhaps) by the way.

I cannot but Admire how he never has fallen upon tha^ 58 Chap. of Isaiah 7.8
10. and 11. verse^. Is it not (Isaiah speaking of Charity) to deal they bread
to the Hungry, and that thou bring the poor that a^^ cast out, to thy House;
When thou see the Naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self
from then own Flesh's Then shall thy light break forth as the Morning, and
thine health shall Spring forth speedily: And thy Righteousness shall go before
thee, the Glory of the LORD shall be thy Reward, 10 and 11 verses. And if thou
draw out thy Soul to the Hungry, and Satisfy the Afflicted Soul? Then shall
they Light rise in obscurity, and thy Darkness as the Noonday^ And the LORD
shall guide thee Continvally, and satisfy thy soul in draught, and make fat
thy Bones; And thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a spring of Water
whose waters fall not 1. Epistle General of John 3 Chap. 17 verses. But whosoever
has this World's good, and sees his Brother have need, and shuts up his
Bowels of Compassion from him, how Dwells the Love of GOD in him?

But to pass in silenc how much he has in him (besides the want of Charity)
that may eclipse his other Enduments and Ornaments of his Life, And that he
wants not enough of Pride (which does neither become a Minister not a
Christian) which is said to come before Destruction; and a haughty spirit
before a fall; I shall not express how P^ejudicial, it has been to him to have
been br^d at Court, where^rom he has taken so much of the Lesson of Pride with
him. But seeing Wise Providnce (I cannot tell why) has sufficiently sent a
cross and an Humbling circumstance to his own Family, by the Afflicting his
second Son John (who has passed his Course at the College) with the want and
^re use of his Reason, I shall not add affl^ction to the afflicted; Though he
dealt far otherwise with me.

But as GOD never sends a Cross without the least tincture of Sweetness and
Comfort, so I (when I had passed through the Territories of his Inhumane
Barbarity and Selfishness) at last arrived at a more safe Harbor, and in stead
of a Morose and Serley carrage (which I met with from him then and lately in
your City) I found a person of a Tranquil Hospitable and Charitable
Disposition. viz. my Uncle in Law Mr. H. L. Minister at Dunnightin, who was
Generously inclined to quarter me for 3 Months till the Storms of the Winter
were passed, and carried such a respect toward me, that he honored me as if I
had been a Son of his own Family. If it were not Tedious to decant in his
praises, I would (as I am obliged) Proclaim his Bounty toward me als much as I
have Discommended the procedure of the former. But I being confident, that any
indifferent man reading this subject, and reflecting upon my Misfortunes (which
rendered me then an object of their Benevole^ce, which is the saddest thing
that can befall a man here below to be in suc^ Circumstances as may make him
Troublesome to his Friends) will Disapprove of the carriage of the former and
highly approve and commend the Hospitality of the Latter.

By the said Mr. H. L. his Advice, I was prevailed upon to come the lenth of
Montr^se to see my Uncle Alexander; (who is a Merchant about 24000 merks of
Stock) But I being formerly acquainted with the Nature and Disposition of his
Bedfellow, who would hardly Smile upon me even when in Prosperity; I thought it
most proper to take up my Lodging in another House viz G. C. whom I sent to
him, and did inform him of my Circomstances: But (it seems) he had so little a
Compliment to bestow, or rather so little and Narrow a Heart to give, That he
sent me back this return with him, That he would not give me on Two pence to
carry me on the Rod; or to keep me from Starving.

Pardon me for this Digression, and for giving so long a History of my
Misfortunes; but the true reason I did it upon was to let those who may be
curious to know what was or may be the reason. That my Relations did not then,
nor yet do give me the Favorable Aspect of their Countenance; Therefore, I
thought sit to lay op^n to them the Mystery of my Offense, and let others Judge
of my Merits as they think fit.

But now I hope. That as the Sun in a Rainy Day after the Rain is past,
becomes much clearer than formerly he was, So I may become (out of the Furnace
of my past Afflictions) both a better Christian, and by sad Experience a better
Divine; And learn, That it is not the Miserableness of the Condition of the
Object but the Tenderness of the Compassionate and Simpathysing Heart; that
moves Men to Acts of Charity and Bounty. This is sufficiently cleared by the
forgoing History. But virescit vulnere virtus.

Some persons, who, perhaps, cannot suffer to hear the Truth, will be apt
(possibly) to say and Enquire, what necessity was there for my Penning such a
Letter, or discovering, either my own Frailties, Miscarriages, or Misfortunes
to the World, or the bad or good Treatment that I have met with from Friends,
or that I have Loved without Success; I will give them no other Answer, but
that if it offend them by reading the same, so it pleased me to write it, and
who can hinder the Press to serve Occasions for Money.

Yet, Dear Friend, The most Convincing Motive that Excited me to Write to you,
was to provoke your Pen to write me an Answer, and to let you taste how a sweet
a thing it is to Converse by Intercourse of Letters; For as the Light not only
makes us known to each other, but also renders us Mutually useful; So
Conversation and Converse does Whet and Adorn our Good Parts; and the most
excellent Endowments, both of Nature, Industry, and Grace, would grow dull and
Stupid, without Culture and Exercise. We may be Employed, though we be not all
as Senators and Kings? every Wheel in a Watch has its Operation in the
Movement, without being all of them springs; So we, (who are not strained and
Oppressed with Business, and an Active course of Life so much that we cannot
reserve Vacant times of Leisure, whilst we expect the Returns and Tides of
Affairs) may Commendably enough Speak and Write to one another without Censure
of the Multitude. For I reckon not them who are readiest to Censure ^^hers, and
to Dispute upon every small Occasion, to be the most Knowing Men, but those who
Discourse Patiently and Pertinen^y of things, and who speak Modestly of
themselves, and are not in the least Discomposed with the Common Accidents of
Life, but that stand Unshaken amidst all Viscissitudes, and can with Moderation
support both Good and Adverse Fortune.

Dear Commerad,

As I spoke some place else where in this my Letter, That many good Spirits are
lost for want of Liberal Education: So there are als many Wits and Vituoso's
crushed, and cannot Aspire to great things fot want of Power: For I think,
there is nothing which more Distinguishes Man from Brutes, their Law and
useless Appetites, than an Honorable and Noble Ambition, For Ambition cannot
be Burried, Repressed, or Damped, it may be, but never extinguished. And
(doubtless) Advancement is either Attributed to the fancy of the Advancer, or
to Fate and Hazard: And in either of these eases, the person promoted is not
Honored, but his Fate.

I acknowledge, Men should not be too Rash, and take wrong means and Methods to
be great, but do as Antistheness said, who being demanded quomodo ad
rempublicam accedendum? How should a Man Address himself to public affairs,
Replied, he should do it as to come to the Fire, neither too nea^ for fear of
Scorching, not yet too far off, least he be starved with Cold; I know no
Mediocrity I can more deservedly Recommend to you, whom I so sincerely Love.
You may apply this Allegory to another Sense, well enough your self.

Men should not immoderatly press into Business, though it cannot be denied
that some Young persons are of early hopes, and have come to Preferment very
soon: May not men be early qualified and become great, if they be early fit for
it: 'Twas wittily said of one of the Scipio's (who was a Gentleman of early
maturity) se sat annorum babiturum si populus Romanus voluerit; That he should
be old (or wise) enough, if the People of Rome pleased; And accordingly they
thought fi^ ^o send him General into Spain, which he reduced into a Roman
Province by his Valor and Discretion, which other Generals who went there
before him could not effectuat. Great men therefore or Rich men should not like
overgrown Trees, too much sh^de the subnascent Plants, ane young Imps, who
would grow modestly under their influence; But should Receive, Protect and
Encourage them. I confess it becomes not every one to aspire, so it is Glorious
to those who are Accomplished for it: But if those who have Qualified Genius,
cannot attain to preferment, let them solace themselves with this, that they be
Accounted worthy of the same.

Dear Familiar,

The greatest Rencounter that I suggest to my self to meet with by my putting
this Letter to the Press, and thereby consequently exposing it to the View of
others, is the loss of my two Uncles formery mentioned, their Counte^ance and
Favor, which I confess should be very Sacred to me, in Respect they are my
nearest Relations: But if you or they (into whose hands their Presents may
happen to come) weigh, and consider how little I have been obliged to them,
(Especially when I stood most in need of their Kindness) and with what
Disreguaird they looked upon my Exigent Circumstances, with what strangeness
and indifferency they nottice me, and as if I were not of their Blood, but of
a baser Extract; What Testimonies and Convincing Proofs of the little Respect
they have for me, which they have but very lately, more clearly than
Mathematically Demonstrated by their Carriage; If you think any of these would
not rather have convinced me to inform their Neighbors and acquaintances (who
fancy me to be their Favorite and a gainer by their good deeds) than to have
imposed upon them and caused them believe a lie; I remit that to your and their
Determination.

For I hope it is not their Countenance (for they cannot (as you may learn by
the preceding History of their Carriage toward me) part with one of the
Thousand to their dearest and nearest bosom Friends, let be to me) but GOD's
Providence that w^ll cause me come to be honored and preferred: And if GOD
think not ^it to gratify me with Riches, (as he has favored and Blessed them)
but rather to exercise my Patience by troubles and misfortunes, I hope he will
speak to me as he speaks to the Church of Philadelphia in that 10th Verse of
the 3d Chap. of the Revelation? Because thou have kept the word of my Patience,
I also will keep thee from the hour of Temptation. 19 Verse As many as I Rebuke
I Chasten. And if GOD in his wise Providence tryst me at any time hereafter
with Trials and Crosses, I pray he may also give me the Grace of Contentment
with them, and as they become Familiar to me, so give me Grace not to repine at
his Dispensations, and may bestow those Heavenly Graces upon me where with St.
Paul (as a Minister) was richly endued, as you may read in that 6 Chap: of the
2 Epistle of his to the Corinthians, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 Verses. But in all
things approving my self in much patience in afflictions, in necessities, in
distresses, in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors in watchings,
in fastings, by pureness, by knowledge, by long suffering, by kindness, by the
Holy Ghost, by Love unfeignied, by the word of Truth, by the power of GOD, by
the Armor of Righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honor and
dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers, and yet true, as
unknown, and yet well known: as sorrowful, yet alwise rejoveing: as poor, yet
making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.

Dearest Comerad.

I cannot enough admire the insatiate desire and appetite that some have after
Riches, and (like Craesus) think never to get as much scrap^d together as keep
up their Grandeur; and for securing them against Poverty: And which is yet
worse, when they have Wealth, Honor and Riches, so that they want nothing
(except Contentment) which their heart could wish, yet GOD gives them not power
to eat thereof, as you may read it in that 2 V^rse of the 6 Chap. of
Ecclesiaste^. But I am su^e no rational Soul, who knows, or Dreams of the
Treasures that are in Heaven, will so far esteem the Wealth of the World, as to
set such a high conceit upon it as rich Dives did, who would not let Lazirus
have the crumbs that fell from his Table; for certainly if the rich Man's
Wealth be his strong City, and an high wall in his own conceit. Proverbs 18
Chap: 11 verse. as the rich Man in the Gospel who said to himself, Soul, take
thy ease, for my Barns are full and I have Wine, Corn, and Oil laid up in store
for many years, yet that same n^ght he was forced to dye and leave it all: I
know no Argument to peaswade them to the contrary but this, That the Scripture
is express enough against the loving of Moncy inordinarly. Proverbs 23 Chap: 5.
Verse. Will thou set thine ever upon that which is not? for riches certainly
make themselves wings and fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven. 1 Epistle of
Timothy 6 Chap: 16 Verse. The Love of Money is the root of all evil; and in the
17, 18 and 19 Verses of the same Chapter you have the Apostles words against
pride; Charge them that are rich in this World, that they be not high minded,
nor Trust in uncertain Riches, but in the Living GOD who gives us richly all
things to enjoy: That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to
distribute, willing to Communicate, laying up in store for themselves a good
Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life.

Since then Rich men are but called GOD's Stewarts, they should disperse and
dispense with some of what God has Blessed them with to the necessitous Soul;
for they know not how long a Tack they have either of their Riches or Lives;
for boast not thy self of to morrow: for thou know not what a day may bring
forth, Proverbs 27 Chap. Verse 1. For Solomon gave a true Character of Earthly
enjoyments when he called them Vanity of Vanities; for from the hour we begin
to possess them, they begin either to fly away from us or we from them, and
amidst our greatest hopes they are either suddenly by a cross Providence
sweept away; or if they remain, even then they are attended with anxieties (for
what pleasure is there here below that has no mixture or the least tincture of
sorrow accompanying ^t if Solomon (who had all that heart could wish) called
all things Vani^. and Vexation of Spirit) or of a sudden in the full carreer of
their Grandeur and greatness, They are like Belshazzar in that 5 Chap: of
Daniel (whose death was Prognosticate by the hand writing on the Wall when he
was drinking out of the Golden Vessels taken out of the Temple of Jerusalem,
and was then worshipping the Gods of Gold) hurried away from them by death.

And certainly it is but the Just Reward of Ambitious Men's Merits who (as it
were Idolize their Riches more than they mind upon Death and Eternity) when GOD
takes either them from the World, or the Worldly Enjoyments from them. Psalm
37. Verse 35.36. I have seen the Wicked in great Power; and spreading himself
like a young Bay tree. Yet he passed away, and lo he was not: Yea, I sought him
out, he could not be found.

Dear Soul,

Now last of all, I beg pardon for this Prolix Letter, but in reguaird I have
eased you of the Trouble of Reading it in Write, I hope you will excuse the
Longitude thereof.

As I have met with some sharp Difficulties in my Youth and tender Years,
before I arrived to my Majority; So at length GOD in His Wise Providence,
(notwithstan^ing of all the Opprobries and Lies wherewith some Malevolous
Persons were pleased to blaicken my Fame and Good name with) has casten an Eye
of Compassion upon me as he did upon Joseph in that 41 Chap: of Genesis, and 14
Verse, When he was taken out of the Dungeon, and preferred by Pharoch. Or, as
upon Daniel in that 6 Chap. of his Prophesies, when Darius had shut him up, who
by the Malicious Advice of his Fellow Competitors Envyed him, because he had
the President and first place of the Kingdom, because of his excellent Spirit)
in the Den with Lions; who met with so great a Miracle, both of Power and Mercy
from GOD, that GOD sent an Angel and shut the Lions Mouths, that they might not
hurt him.

I might here apply some part of this Discourse to some of my Friends in your
City, whose Love, (or rather Hatred) Vents it self, and shines forth so
clearly, That by the Good Character they give of me to others, they plainly
declare they wish no good to us; but on the contrair (if their Testimony could
prevail and be Entertained) they industriously Combine both to render me
infamous, and to cause me loose the good esteem that I have gained already, But
I shall not say any more than what I have said already; Only, I must inform
them, that seeing I am the only Child on Life of my Fathers whole Family, who
was their eldest Brother, and (possibly) if they would restrain their Tongues
als closssy as they keep their Baggs of Money) I might be Respected as his Son,
and I think it is not Ch^istanly done in them to expose either my Miscarriages
or Misfortunes to the Plurality; But if they do continue so to disclaim agaim^,
and E^deavour to Speak Lies, which may be, others will believe to be true, when
talked by them, I only warn them that they will be Subject, both to the Censure
of others, [who will think it mean in them to Speak so of a Friend] and to my
Resentment, And lastly, let them Remember Solon's advice, that none can be said
to be happy till Death come, so if they die before their Children come to
Majority, They cannot well know but they may meet with Misfortunes, als well as
I have done.

Finally, To conclude my Letter, I must inform you, That I am very happily
Trysted with a Rational, Kind, and Discreet Gentleman to my Master, whom I hope
GOD has raised up [as another Joseph] for my support and Provision. He treats
me with all the Civility that any of my Education and Parentage could expect;
and I do not impute this to proceed out of any Merit of my own, or that I
fancy that my good and faithful Deportment is the Procureing Cause thereof,
but it proceeds merely from that Genuine and Innate Propensity and Disposition
he has to Communicate Good. And it is certainly that which makes Men Aspite to
an Virtuous Ambition, Magnanimity, and have a desire to be great, viz. To be
Capable to do good to those who deserve it. This goes als near the Nature of
GOD as can be, who takes pleasure to Dispense his Blessings upon them that fear
Him.

I need not Harrangue in Commendation of his Parts or good Nature, every Body,
and particularly your Citizens and Gentlemen of the Adjacent Country, [who are
acquaint with him] knowing perfectly well his Facetious and taking Conversation.

I wish GOD my preserve him for a Blessing to his Friends and Family, for the
good of others, and for my comfort and Satisfaction: And if he and I agree, [as
I hope there shall nothing fall out to occasion a Rupture] I shall be the less
Circumspect of keeping in with Friends, who are so Unchristian and
uncharitable, and who are so easily Disobliged, and of whose kindness I stand
not so much of need as of his. I hope GOD will continue Peace and Love betwixt
us, according to my Dependence upon his Providence.

The sharp Eye of any Indifferent and Vnpr^judiced Person, who reads this my
Letter, may sufficiently discern and understand by the S^^ain of my Discourse,
That I have penned the same after some particular Offense received by me, and
done me by my Friends; This was the true Reason that occasioned me to expose it
to the view of your Citizens, [for whom in particular I have taken care to
cause Print the same] and thereby to let them know, That a Brether offended is
harder to he won than a strong City, and their contentions are like the Bars
of a Castle: Prove. 18 Ch: 19 Verse.

There (may be) are some who will talk bad things of me, and threaten worse,
for doing the same, and for putting it to the Press: But if hereby I do not
incurr my kind Master his Displeasure, by exposing my self in Print (which I
hope and expect I shall not) I shall be very Indifferent of all the Censures I
meet with from others, He being the only man whom I now will be ca^fulest not
to offend, seeing I have and ow my Bread and Breeding to his kindness and Love.

I will take my hazard, seeing my offense can be reckoned nothing but a just
Vindication of my self, whom some of my Friends in in your City, have
endeavored Characteristically to disapprove and defame: For I am not afraid
that I can be treated either as Sejanus was by the Emperor of Rome, or as
Haman was by Abasuerus, both of which were great Favorites the one day, and
Hanged on the Morrow.

Dearest Familiar

Salute in my name my dear Commerads the hopfull Infantry in your City, whom I
sincerly Love; And if providence lay it in my way to serve their Honor, and
interest, either by my Pen or by my Tongue, assure your selves all of my
willingness. Salute my good Friend B. G. O. and all the nice Young Ladies of my
acquaintance with you; And Particularly the Gentlewoman who Loves me (whom I am
bound to Love) if there be any such in your City; I will not say whom I Love,
lest she love not me, for '^is in vain to bestow Love, and not to obtain
Reciprocal Love in Remuneration.

This with my intirest, Tenderest respects and Devotions to your kind self (I
humbly entreating that GOD may keep you from falling, and present you Blamless
before his Glory with exceeding Joy) shall be all that is thought necessar at
present from

Kind Familiar Yours while I am George Dempster.

The POSTSCRIPT,
Loveing Commerad,
MY Uncle Mr. John was pleased to say, when he had occasion to see me, (after I
had sent him any Letters persuasive to Naturality and Humanity) That I wrote
the same in my Caballs or the Taverns; although neither he nor his Brother
Alexander, ever Honored me with one return to any Letter, ever Written be me
to them: But I hope no Unprejudiced person; nor even they (although they (may
be) will Discommend and Disapprove of the putting of this Letter to the Press)
will take occasion to say, that I have Penned the same so Confusedly, as it
would have been done, if in Company, But may rather take it to have been
Written ex Industria, and with some Previous Deliberation.

Dearest Familiar,

I shall be sorry (as I have said else where in this my Letter) if the Printing
hereof occasion any breach 'twixt my Kind, Rational and Honored Master and
me, whom I am bound by many Obligations to Love; But if the offense be not
Justifiable nor Worthy of ane Appeal or Merit one word to be said in my
behalf, and that this be the Common Opinion of all who Read the same, Then I
must only Lament the Fate of my Fancy (which was so Prevalent as to induce me
to cause Print the same) and be Concerned and grieved, that the Printing hereof
should (if my Master and I must part for doing so) Demonstrate that he has a
greater respect for my Relations, than for me, by taking up the Quarrel, yet
not debateing the Contraversie betwixt me and them: Although I humbly conceive
it would not at all Reflect upon him not to take notice what Animosities or
Latent Wrongs, Jealousies or Debates be betwixt me and my Relatione. And I
hope that the same GOD who has Graciously provided for me from my Birth, will
(although Friends, Relations and Accquaintances forsake me) not leave me as ane
Ostrige in the Wilderness, but pity the Tenderhearted Pelican, and cause me
(as the Phoenix out of her burnt Ashes) rise more Glorious and Conspicuous
after the Sharp Storms of Afflicting Providence and Misfortunes are past: For
man is born to trouble, as the Sparks fly upward.

Cuncta prius tentanda, sed immedicabile vulnus
Ense rescindendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur OVID:
Spernere, mundum, spernere nullum, Spernere sese,
Spernere se sperni, quatuor ista beant
VALE.

