DENBIGH-CASTLE surprised for the KING By 60 Cavalliers that scaled the walls,
who were all after taken Prisoners, and the Castle secured.

With a LIST of the chief Officers.

ALSO The last fight at Colchester, brought in a Letter last night, The chief
Gunner slain and others, and diverse prisoners taken.

AND The Lord Gorings Proclamation published in Colchester on Friday last.

LONDON, Printed for the general satisfaction of moderate men. M DC XL VIII.

A Letter from CHESTER, of the Design about surprising of Denbigh-Castle for
the KING.
Noble Sir,
WE find the Kings party still very active in these parts, those in Anglesey
that revolted, will not accept of the indemnity, but resolve to keep the
Island for the King.

Sir John Owen is acting in Denbigh Castle, where with his confederates the
Castle was very near being surprised.

On Monday night last, the Captain of the Guard for Dehbigh Castle being gone
to bed, they began to act their design.

And there was engaged in this business for surprise of Denbigh Castle (where
Sir John Owen is prisoner) a Corporal and a Sentinel belonging to the Castle,
of the Parliaments Soldiers, who had (it seems) been wrought upon by those who
carried on the design, to whom large promises were made.

These men we have discovered, besides some others whom we cannot yet find
out, to have been corrupted by Sarjeant Major Dolton, Captain Cutler, Cap.
Parrey, Captain Charles Chambers, and some others, who were the chief actors in
this plot.

There was a party of the Cavaliers that came that night with scaling-ladders,
who came privately to the walls, without giving any Alarm at all, the Corporal
and the two Sentinels of the Guard being privy to their design, and
confederacy.

And about some 60 of the Cavaliers ahd scaled the walls, and were got over
without any opposition at all, and were within the walls at least an hour
before any Alarm was given, and it was an hundred to one, that we had not been
all surprised and ruined, but we were miraculously delivered.

The aforesaid threescore Cavaliers, that were got over, were so near entrance
into the inner Wards of the Castle, that they had but only one Horse-lock to
break, which the Corporal was ready to have assisted them in, to open one of
the Sally-ports.

It so pleased God that the Captain of the Guard could not sleep in his bed,
but was much troubled, though he knew not for what, and at last he resolved to
rise and walk the rounds with his Soldiers, for which purpose he did get up
accordingly.

When he had drawn out some Soldiers to walk with him about the rounds, he
went with them, until at last he espied a party got over the wall, and scaling
ladders upon the walls, whereupon an Alarm was given to the Castle; and the
Town also, by this means took an Alarm. But they all yielded themselves
prisoners at mercy, only some few that had got back again over the wall. And
upon search of the business, the Corporal was discovered to be going with
them to help them to open the gate.

I hope this will be a sufficient warning to them all to look well about them,
both in that Castle, and also in other parts about us.

Chester City this 8 of July, 1648.
A Letter from the Leagure before Colchester, of a notable Biush given to the
Cavaliers.
SIR,
ON Friday last we had some solemnity for the funeral of Lieutenant Colonel
Sanbrooke, whose death is much lamented, some vollies were shot off at his
solemnity.

The Lord Goring hereupon made Proclamation to the Officers and Soldiers in
the town, that now they should stand to their Arms, for relief was come from
London to them, And that they might be assured of the truth of it, this volly
was shot off at the raising of the seige, and that if they would be further
satisfied herein, they might go up to the top of the Steeples, and perceive so
much as would give them satisfaction herein.

It was also declared that the City of London appeared for them, and had sent
them a Regiament of Horse, which were coming in the Rear of these, then
already there, That the Parliament was broken up, and many Parliament Men and
committee men cut in pieces and destroyed, Also that all the chief Lords of
the Kingdom was in the head of an Army near London, and Prince Charles
coming over from France to joy a with them.

Hereupon diverse both Soldiers and Inhabitants went up to the top of
several Churches, and Steeples, and high houses to see if they could discern
relief to be come, and the Seige to be raised as it was declared.

They got with them a small brass gun to the top of St. Mary's Church,
wherewith they said they would give Fairfax a farewell, But chiefly to let
those whom they supposed were come to relieve them know, that they understood
that they were come, and so salute them.

There came some out of Colchester who advertised what was done within,

Hereupon the Lord Generals Cannons played against the Churches, and battered
down some chimnies near St Mary's Church and did some other small harm.

But this did so affright the people, that they came down the Steeples and
Churches cursing the Lord Goring The very boys earing at it.

Since which to be revenged of the Army, The great Gunner in Colchester,
reported to be the best in England, had commands to play upon the Army, which
he did.

And as he was by the Cannon a bullet came from the Army and hit him in the
belly, and flew him.

They have some 20 piece of Ordnance in Colchester, provisions are very scarce,
their horses eat Malt, They are constrained to green meal already in the
town.

They use Sir William Massum and the Committee worse and worse, keep them
before our Guns, bullets have come into their Chamber already, so they set
blindes, Their diet is extreme course, and allowed only three or four three
penny loaves a week amongst them all. It is not to be expressed how ill they are
used.

We take prisoners daily, and they are much divided within, some horse are
ready to dissert them.

Colchester Leagure 9 July 1648.
FINIS.

