blazon or coat of arms
AN ACT Touching Idiots and Lunatiques.
WHereas the persons of Idiots and Lunaticks have received much damage, and
their Estates been much wasted, spoiled and imbeziled, since the Four and
twentieth day of February, One thousand six hundred forty and five (on which
day, the Court of Wards and Liveries, which had the care and protection of such
persons, was Voted down) occasioned by the not settling of a way since the
dissolution of the said Court, for passing the Bills (formerly Signed by the
late King and his Predecessors) for the Custodies and Tuitions of the said
persons, and the preservation of their respective Estates; Which Bills were to
be Signed as aforesaid, before the said Custodies passed the Great Seal.

For remedy of which Grievances, and for prevention of all others in that kind
for the future, Be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by Authority of
Parliament, That the said Bills for the passing of the Custodies of the persons
aforesaid, under the Great Seal, shall be first Signed by the Council of State
for the time being: And the said Bills being so Signed, shall be sufficient
Warrant to the Committee or Commissioners for the Custody of the Great Seal for
the time being, to pass the same under the said Seal accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That the said Committee or
Commissioners for the custody of the said Seal, shall in all cases give relief
in Law and Equity to the said Idiots and Lunatiques, as fully and amply as any
Commissioners or Keepers of the Great Seal, or the late Master and Council of
the late Court of Wards and Liveries, might or ought to have lawfully done at
any time before the passing of this Act, Any Law, Statute or Act to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided, That this Act do continue in force until the First day of September,
One thousand six hundred fifty and four, and no longer.

Thursday the Thirteenth of October, 1653.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1653.


