THE Eating of blood vindicated: IN A brief Answer to a late Pamphlet,
ENTITLED, A Bloody Tenent confuted.

Mark. 7. 15. There is nothing from without a man that entering into him, can
defile him: but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile
the man.

Romans 14. 17. For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but
Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy, in the Holy Ghost.

LONDON, Printed for H. Shepherd, at the Bible in Tower-Street, and W. Ley, at
PAUL'S Chain, near Doctors Commons. 1646.

A just Defense of Christian Liberty, in eating things that are strangled.
FIrst, if nothing that enters into the mouth can defile a man, then blood in
things strangled or otherwise made into wholesome food for us cannot; but faith
Christ Jesus, that which goes into the mouth cannot defile a man, Mark. 7. 15.
Ergo, blood in things strangled or otherwise made into wholesome food for us
cannot, neither is it blood still when the fire has purged and changed the
property of it.

Secondly, if Christians may lawfully eat whatsoever meat is sold at the
Shambles, asking no qu^stion for conscience sake, then they may eat blood in
rabbets or fouls that are strangled, or the blood of some beasts, being made
into good and wholesome food; for all these are to be sold unto Christians: but
Christians may eat whatsoever meat is sold at the Shambles, asking no question
for conscience sake, 1 Cor. 20. 25. Ergo, Christians may eat blood in things
that are strangled, or otherwise, made into wholesome food.

Thirdly, if Christians may eat whatsover meat is set before them, asking no
question for conscience sake, then they may eat blood in things that are
strangled, or made into wholesome food, being frequently set before them: but
Christians may eat whatsoever is set before them, asking no question for
conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10. 2 Luke 10 7, 8. Ergo, Christians may eat blood in
things that are strangled, or made into wholesome food.

Fourthly, if it be a Doctrine of Devils, suggested by seducing spirits, whose
consciences are seared with a hot iron, who speak lies in hypocrisy, that
command to abstain from meats, then we must not give heed to them: but they
that would have us to abstain from meats are such, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 2, 3, 4. then
notwithstanding such doctrine we may lawfully eat blood in things strangled, or
made into wholesome food.

Fifthly, if every creature of God is good, which seducers would have us to
abstain from, and not to be refused in case it be meat for man, (...) both the
flesh and blood of the beasts may be eaten, and not to be refused, being (...)
for (...) but those creatures whom this seducer would have us to avoid ^^e
good, and nothing to to be refused, in case it be recived with thanksgiving,
for it is sanctified by the Word, and Prayer, Verse 3, 4, 5. then blood in
things strangled or otherwise may be eaten.

Sixthly, if Paul say to Timothy, If thou put them in remembrance of these
things, thou shall be a good Minister of Jesus Christ, nourished up in the
words of Faith, and good Doctrine, then he that teaches contrary is a bad
Minister, and destroys with bad Doctrine, in the same place, Verse. 6. and
says Christ, they are blind leaders of the blind, that say, meat defiles a
man, Mat. 15. 11, 14. then let us rather be nourished by good Doctrine, then be
destroyed by the false Doctrine of those that say, some meat defiles us.

Seventhly, if it was the prohibition of God that made some creatures unclean,
and not to be eaten while that prohibition lasted, then when that prohibition
is taken off, that creatures is clean unto them: but God has taken off that
prohibition to Christians which was upon the Jews, Act. 10. 10, 11, 12, 13.
14. then Christians must not now call those things unclean, that were unclean
among the Jews, because God has cleansed them: and although blood was not
clean to Jews, yet now it is made clean to Christians.

Eighthly, if it be a note of a weak faith to scruple at some meats, when as no
meat is unclean of it self, then we may not scruple at any: but says Paul,
he is we^k^ that eats herbs, when as nothing is unclean of it self; but to
him that esteems it unclean to him it is unclean, Romans 14. 2, 14. then he that
believes that he may eat blood he may eat it, when as this seducer may be
damned if he eat it, because he eats not of faith, Verse. 22.

Ninthly, if Paul blames it as a sin to judge others for eating those things
which themselves have not faith to eat, then it is a sin in this man to judge
others for eating blood, while he has not faith to eat it, but Paul blames it
as a sin in those that do so, Romans 14. 3. then they ought not to judge us,
lest themselves be judged for it, Mat. 7. 1.

Tenthly, if blood being the life of the beast was only forbidden before the
death of Christ, to make an atonement, tippifying the blood of Christ that was
to be shed to make atonement, and then the end ceased for which it was
forbidden, then Christians may now eat blood; but the blood of beasts was
forbidden to make atonement for the soul, Levit. 15. 11, 12. but Christ has
put an end to all bloody sacrifices in spilling his own blood to make
atonement, Heb. 10. 12, 14. then Christians may now eat blood.

Eleventhly, if the burnt offering which was a type of Christ, the flesh of it
was burnt, and the blood was sprinkled about the Altar at the Tabernacle door,
and now since the death of Christ he commands the type of his flesh to be
eaten, and the type of his blood to be drunk in the remembrance of his death,
till his coming again; then now we may not burn the type of his flesh, nor
spill the type of his blood, lest we commit that unpardonable sin. of
crucifying the Son of God afresh, and trampling the blood of the Covenant under
feet, Heb. 10. 29. but in the burnt offering, which was the type of Christ, the
flesh was burnt, and the blood sprinkled Levit. 1. and now since his death,
except we eat the flesh of the Son of God and drink his blood, we have no life
in us; for his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, He that
eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, has eternal life* Joh. 6. 53, 54,
55. although this I grant to be spiritually by faith, yet the type of his body
and blood we must now eat and drink, which before his death was to be burnt and
spilt, and not eaten nor drunk; then the blood which before was forbidden to
Jews may lawfully be eaten by Christians.

But this man has some Scriptures to prove it unlawful for Christians to eat
blood, such as these: Levit. 7. 26 where it is said, You shall eat no manner of
blood, whether of foul or beast in all your dwellings, for what soul soever
it be that eats any manner of blood, that soul shall be cut off from his
people. Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, that no soul of you
shall eat blood, nor any that so journe among you shall eat blood, they shall
power out the blood, and cover it with dust. Levit. 17. 10, 11, 12, 13 14. You
shall not eat the blood, ye shall power it upon the earth as water, the blood
is the life, and thou may not eat the life with the flesh; thou shall power
it out upon the earth as water, thou shall not eat it, that it may go well with
thee and thy children after thee, when thou shall do that which is right in the
sight of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 12. 16 23* 24, 25. I answer, all these precepts are
confined to Israel, and their Pr^sselites, that are in their dwellings, and all
the promises in case they obey, and do that which is right in the sight of the
Lord, and all the pennalties in case of disobedience, are only to Israel and to
their Prosselites that are in their dwellings; see all those Scriptures
mentioned by him, then this is not blinding to Christians, for all these
Ceremonies are void to Christians, then he would prove that Christians now are
forbidden to eat blood, because Noah the Father both of Jews and Gentiles had
this Law given him and his posterity, Genesis 9* 4 and all the world is his
posterity, and by this law are forbidden to eat blood: and says he, the
Ceremonial Law was given only to Jews and their Prosselites, but this Law of
prohibiting blood was given to the Gentiles in their father Noah, therefore it
is no part of the Ceremonial Law.

I answer, by this arguing the sacrifices of the Jews were not Ceremonial but
Moral, because they were long before* the ceremonial law was given, even from
Caine and Abell, and also from Noah, the father to those Jews and Gentiles,
Ergo, we that are the posterity of Noah, must now offer beasts in sacrifice,
because Abell and Noah did, the father of the Gentiles, but Christ our Messiah
has put an end to all bloody sacrifices, by that last and great sacrifice of
himself, unless we should look for another Savior, and uphold the Jewish
Ceremonies, till he comes to free us of those beggarly elements, Gal. 4 9. for
they were Jewish ceremonies, although they were in use long before the Jewish
Nation was in being, and Christ was that Lamb slain from the beginning of the
world, Revel. 13. 8. for suppose Abell had offered a dog or a swine in
sacrifice to the Lord, would it have been accepted, no it would have been
abominable to him, Isa. 66. 3. then from the beginning God made them know which
beasts were esteemed of him as clean and which unclean for sacrifice, for the
Lord said to Noah before the flood, take the clean beasts into* the Ark by
sevens, and he did so: then it is plain we know them, Genesis 7. 2. although
neither flesh nor blood was then to be eaten; yea, Abells lamb signified Christ
the Lamb of God to his faith to take way his sins, as well as the Jewish
sacrifices did, although he had this Ordinance but by tradition from his
Predecessors, when as the Jews had this in a written law for their own
Nation, yet all this ended at the sacrifice of Christ, then I say, all those
shadows of Christ seized, Heb. 10. 1, 13, 14. and I have showed blood was
forbidden to be eaten, because it was to make an atonement for souls, Levit.
17. 11. and the blood of Abells lamb did signify the blood of Christ that was
to make an atonement for sin unto his faith, and how Christ should redeem us to
God by his blood, and wash away our sins in his blood, Revel. 1. 3, 4, 5. and
9. Heb. 9. 14, 19, 20, 21. 22. and the blood of beasts was powered upon the
ground, to show how the blood of Christ was to be spilt for our sins, and if
any had gone about to save the blood of the lamb that was the type of Christ's
blood, it was all one as if he had saved the blood of Christ from being shed
for our sins: but when Peter made the least motion to keep the blood of Christ
from being shed, saying, this shall not be unto thee, that Christ turned him
about in a rage saying, get thee behind me Satan, thou savourest not the things
that be of God, Mat. 16. 22, 23, and when he struck at those that came to
apprehend Christ, he had him put up his sword, for they that smite with the
sword shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26. 52. but when all was finished, he
took the cup and gave thanks, and gave it to them saying, drink ye all of it,
for this is my blood o^ the New Testament which was shed for many for the
remission of sins, Mat. 26. 27, 28. so then although the Sacrament of the blood
of Christ before his death was to be spilt on the ground, yet now they* must
drink it, and it were part of that unpardonable sin, now to spill the blood of
the Covenant under feet, Heb. 10. 29. although it was to be spilt and sprinkled
upon the ground before his death.

But then he will prove this Law of prohibiting blood to be eaten to be Moral,
his reason is, because blood is the life of the beast, and it is extreme
cruelty to eat the blood when the beast is dead, which was the life of it when
it was living; a cruel thing to eat life it self: Therefore it is forbidden,
and not because it is an unclean thing, and forbidden by the Ceremonial Law;
but as a cruel thing forbidden by the Moral Law: Therefore he concludes, it
is not Ceremonial, but Moral; but here I would know of him, whether the
seventh Commandment which forbids uncleanness, be not as Moral as the sixth,
that forbids cruelty. Again, is a thing first unclean, and then forbidden of
God, or whether is it not first forbidden of God, and so becomes unclean? It
was Gods prohibition that made blood to be unclean to Noah and his posterity,
and to the Jewish Nation, being the visible Church of God; and for this man to
say Gods prohibition did not put uncleanness upon the things* prohibited, is
to put uncleanness upon the holy Law of God, and in stead of c^sting* the
unclean blood as water upon the ground, this man casts this holy Law of God
under feet as an unclean thing.

But he says, it is more cruelty to the beast, to eat the blood after the
beast is dead, than it is to kill it when it was alive; because (says he) it
is more inhumane to (...) the flesh of a dead man, or to kick it up and down
the streets, though the dead body feel no pain, than it is to kill a man by
hanging him, in case the Law has cond^^ned him, although he put him to pain,
and not the other: So says he, It is a greater sign of cruelty to eat the
blood of the beast after it is dead, than to kill a beast for food, by Gods
permission being delivered into our hands. But I say again, the prohibition is
taken off which bound the Jews from eating blood, so that now the beast is
wholly delivered into our hands for food, as well the blood as the flesh.
Again, blood is not life, it was only the seat of life, for if it were life,
it would act and move as well out of the beast as in it, like the soul of man,
but it cannot do so, then it is not life, though life was in it, Levit. 17. 11.
and sometimes too much blood will kill the beast, and must be let out to save
his life. Then is it as great cruelty to eat the place where life was, as to
destroy life by killing the beast. Again, now the prohibition is taken off,
who loves the blood most, he that eats it, or he that ^^^ples it under his
feet? In all wise men's judgment, he that eats it loves it most, and he that
casts it under feet to be trampled upon, shows most hatred and cruelty
against it. Again, is it true charity to the lives of Christians, that they
should ^ther be destroyed than to eat blood, being the place in which the life
of the beast was? But the life of the beast is gone, and no more hurt can be
done to it; but the life of ^ Christian is still in him, and may be refreshed
with that thing only: This man's charity is more to the blood of a dead beast,
than it is either to the life it self of man or beast. Much like the charity
of King Saul to Agag, and the best of the ca^tell, that he would not slay them
at Gods command, 1 Samuel 15: Or like Ahab, who would not slay Ammon at Gods
command, saying, He is my brother, 1 King. 20. 32, 42. But cursed be that man
that keeps his sword from blood when God commands it to be shed, Jer. 48. 10.
Thy life shall go for his life. Yet I must confess the Lord said to Noah, He
that eats the blood of a beast, being the life of it, I will require that man's
life at the hand of every beast, Genesis 9. 4, 5. But the prohibition is taken
off by Christ, who has made them clean that were not clean, Acts 10. Again,
Is this prohibition moral, because Noah was forbidden to eat blood, Genesis 9. 4.
I say, No: For in the same Text it is plain, that from the beginning of the
world it was not so; for till then the green herb was their food, according as
God had said to Ad^^, Genesis 1. 29, 30. and 9. 4. I say till the flood man did
eat that which grew of it self, neither did beasts prey one upon another, but
went lovingly into the Ark: But after the flood it was permitted to men to eat
the flesh of some beasts and fowls, but no^ their blood; so then this
prohibition began but at Noah, and was to end at the death of Christ, then this
Law was not Moral, we know both when it began, and when it ended. From Adam to
Noah they were to eat what grew upon the ground, and from thence to the death
of Christ they might eat some beasts and fowls, but not the blood; and from the
death of Christ to the end of the world we must not call any thing unclean, for
God has cleansed it, Acts 10.

But then he says there is a Text in the New Testament, Acts 15. 28, 29. where
it is said, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no
other burden (...) th^se necessary things, that ye abstain from meats
^ff^red to Idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from
fornication, from which if you keep your selves, ye shall do well. Here (says
he) you see that neither the Old nor New Testament can scarce mention the
forbidding to eat blood, but it annexeth a blessing to them that abstain, or a
curse to those that practice it.

I answer: There was a great controversy at Antioch between the Jews and
Christians, the Jews said, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of
Moses, ye cannot be saved: Hereupon they came to the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem about this question, verse. 1, 2. then James the Moderatour of the
Synod said, My sentence is, that ye trouble not the Jews which are among the
Gentiles turned to the Lord; but if they will abstain from pollutions of Idols,
and from fornication, then we will yield to them to be circumcised after the
manner of Moses, and according to Moses Law let them abstain from things
strangled, and from blood. Hereupon Paul took Timothy and circumcised him,
because of the Jews which were in those quarters, Acts 16. 1, 3. And when the
Apostles heard that Paul taught the J^wes which were among the Gentiles,
saying, that they must forsake Moses, and that they ought not to be
circumcised, nor to walk after their customs; they told him saying, We have
concluded that they observe no such thing, as to say they must not be
circumcised, nor to walk after their customs, save only that they keep
themselves from things offered to Idols, and from fornication, and we will
yield to them, to observe Moses Law, in keeping themselves from things
strangled, and from blood. See Acts 21. 21, 25. where the Apostles tell Paul
what they have done at the Synod at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 25, 29. and 26. 4. Then
the Apostles persuaded Paul to go in with four men that had a vow, and purify
himself, and so he did, signifying the accomplishment of the days of
purification, until that ^n offering be offered for every one of them, verse.
23. 24, 26, 27. Thus unto the Jews be yielded, to gain the Jews; so he was
two years at Ephesus, and never spoke all that time against their Diana, that
he might gain them also to the Christian faith, Acts 19. 10. So then the
Apostles did ^eare with them in some things, that they might the better
persuade them from fornication, and from things offered to Idols; but for any
man to say, from this Text that blood is* forbidden to the worlds end, they may
as well say that Circumcision must yet r^^aine; for when Paul said, that they
ought not to circumcise their children, the Apostles tell him, that they have
written and concluded, that they observe no such thing, Acts 21. 21, 25.

Then he says, that we object saying, to bind them from things offered to
Idols, and from blood, are but indifferent things: Hereupon he insults over it,
saying, Eating of blood is against the Law of God, and is punished with
damnation, for it is joined with fornication.

I answer: To abstain from blood was then a thing indifferent, being between
the ending of the Old Testament, and the beginning of the New, but it was not
so before nor afterward: So also was Circumcision before, if any Male was not
circumcised, he was to be cut off from the people, for says the Lord, He has
broken my Covenant, Genesis 17. 14. But when they would have circumcised Titus,
says Paul, I would not give place by subjection, no not for an hour, Gal. 2.
3. 5. Yet he consented to the Apostles conclusion, though he had preached
against it, Acts 21. 21, 25. and he did circumcise Timothy because of the
Jews, Act. 16. 3. so the prohibition of blood was only at that instant a thing
indifferent, for before the penalty was, to be cut off from Israel, Levit. 17.
10. but now since we must not say any thing is unclean, for God has cleansed
it; Act. 10. 14, 15. and for him to say eating blood is a sin against the
Moral Law, as fornication is, it is not true as has been proved, although it
was given to Noah, and practiced before him, but it is not so now for the time
limited is past.

Then he faith, that we obj^ct saying, we must not eat flesh and blood
together, but asunder; and he says, it must be powered upon the ground, and
covered with dust, Levit. 17. 13. but I say that command was to Israel, and not
to us, unless he can fasten all the Jewish ceremonies upon Christians.

He says we object, unto the pure all things are pure, Tit. 1. 15. and nothing
is unclean of it self, but to him that esteems it so: Romans 14. 14. but he
says, we are not so mad to think nothing unfit for food, or unclean, as
to^ds, man's flesh, stones and trees.

I answer, will it follow because the prohibition is taken off, and so things
that were unclean are now clean for food, that it must needs comprehend such
things as these.

He says, we object, that every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, 1 Timothy 4. 5. but he says Paul must be understood of things not
forbidden, so all things are lawful, 1 Cor. 10. 23. he says this does not
extend to things unwholesome, or unlawful for food, all this I grant, for blood
is neither unclean, nor unlawful, since the prohibition was taken off, Act. 10
15. and how wholesome it is, thousands can daily witness.

He says we object, this Law was Jewish, and not Moral, because the Jews
were forbidden to eat any thing that died of it self, when as aliens and
strangers might eat it, Deuteronomy. 14. 21. to this he says, strangers and aliens
might eat it; here he contradicts himself, for he said before, that none of
the posterity of Noah ought to eat flesh with the blood; but the meaning of
this Text is this, those without the Church were without government, but
neither the Jewish Church, nor the Church before the flood might do so, Genesis 9
3. then he grants it not uniawfull to eat some blood with the flesh, but he
should have set down his quantity, or else we shall think it as lawful to eat
all as some. Thus he is moild in his own Channel, and knows not how to come
clearly out of it, the mean time we may lawfully eat blood in things
strangled, or made into wholesome food for us.

FINIS.

