AN ADDITIONAL ACT For bringing in all Arrear, and also the Growing Duke of
Excise, New Impost, Customs, Subsidies and Prize-Goods, until the first day of
October 1659.
BE it Enacted by this present Parliament and the Authority thereof, That all
and every the Arrears of money for Excise and New Impost, Customs, the Farms
thereof, Subsidies and Prize-Goods, or of any other Revenue due to the
Commonwealth, by any Person or Persons, upon or before the sixth day of May,
One thousand six hundred fifty nine, shall be forthwith Collected, Levied and
Paid for the public use; And that the said Revenues of Excise and New Impost,
Customs, Subsidies and Prize-Goods, shall be, and hereby are Enacted to be
paid by all the people of this Commonwealth, from the said Sixth day of May,
until the first day of October, in such manner, and according to such Rules,
Rates and proportions as the same was paid, or payable at any time within six
Months, next before the said Sixth day of May last. And all Acts, Ordinances
and Powers, made and exercised by, or under any Power whatsoever, for, or
concerning the Paying, Collecting, Levying and enforcing of the said Arrears
and Duties, since the Twentyeth day of April, One thousand six hundred fifty
three, are hereby Enacted, Appointed and Declared to be, and shall be in full
force for Paying, Levying, Collecting and bringing in the same Arrears and
Growing Duties, to all intents and purposes, in as large and ample manner, as
if the same had been Enacted and made by Authority of this present Parliament.
And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, that all and
every person and persons, employed as Commissioners, Sub-commissioners or other
Officers, on the Sixth of May last past, for the Managing, Collecting and
Levying the said Duties, shall Remain and continue in their several
Employments, in such manner, and under such Regulations, Alterations and
Comptrols, as by the said Acts, Ordinances, or Powers, is Declared and
Appointed. And the Commissioners nominated in one Act of this present
Parliament, Entitled, An Act for appointing Commissioners for bringing in the
Arrears of the Revenue due to the Commonwealth, and no others, are hereby
Authorized and Empowered to exercise and put in Execution, all and every the
Acts, Ordinances, Declarations and Powers aforesaid, for, or concerning the
paying, collecting or levying the said Arrears and Duties, in as full and ample
manner, as any Committee of Parliament for Regulating the Excise, or
Commissioners for Appeals, or Committee for Preservation of Customs, were by
the same appointed to do, or might have done. And all and every the Justices of
Peace, and all other Officers Military and Civil within this Commonwealth, are
hereby enjoined and required (being thereunto desired by the said
Commissioners, Sub-commissioners, or other Officers of Excise, in their several
Counties, Liberties and Jurisdictions) to put in speedy and effectual
excecution, all and every the said Acts, Ordinances, Orders, Declarations and
Powers whatsoever, so far as they, or any of them, are any way Concerned
therein Respectively.

Wednesday, June 22. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, that this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Thomas St. Nicholas, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Field and Henry Hills, Printers to the PARLIAMENT.

And are to be sold at the seven Stars in Fleetstreet over against Dunstans
Church, 1659.


