blazon or coat of arms
AN ACT For the Apprehension of Thomas Cook Esquire
WHereas Thomas Cook of Gray's Inn in the County of Middlesex, Esquire having been
Apprehended for Treason by Order from the Council of State, and brought before
them; and after Examination had, and Witness produced against him, Ordered by
them to be Committed to the Tower of London, in order to a Trial at Law to be
had aginst him for the said Treason; and being in Custody, has in sense of his
own Guilt made a voluntary Escape, thereby endeavoring to avoid a Just and
Legal Proceeding for the said Treason so committed: Be it therefore Enacted and
Ordained, and it is Enacted and Ordained by this present Parliament, and the
Authority thereof, That if the said Thomas Cook shall not within four days,
from the Twentieth day of March, in the year of our Lord One thousand six
hundred and fifty, render himself in Custody to the Sergeant at Arms attending
the Parliament, and submit himself to a Trial at Law for his Treason committed,
That then he the said Thomas Cook shall be, and is hereby Declared Guilty, and
Attainted of High Treason, and shall suffer and forfeit as in case of High
Treason. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person or persons whatsoever shall willingly and knowingly receive, harbor or
conceal him the said Thomas Cook, Such person or persons so doing, shall suffer
and forfeit as Traitors. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
and the Parliament does hereby Enact and Declare, That if any person or persons
shall by or before the First of May, which shall be in the year One thousand
six hundred fifty one, Apprehend the said Thomas Cook, and deliver him in
Custody to the said Sergeant at Arms, such person and persons for his care and
pains therein, shall receive the Sum of Five hundred pounds of lawful Money of
England; which said Sum the said Council are by virtue of this Act authorized
and directed to make payment of accordingly.

Die Jovis, 20 Martii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex be
Authorized and Required forthwith to Proclaim this Act at the usual times and
places within the City of London and County of Middlesex; And that the
respective Sheriffs of the several Counties be likewise Authorized and Required
to Proclaim this Act forthwith upon receipt hereof, in the several and
respective Cities and Market Towns within the several Counties of this
Commonwealth.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

Die Jovis, 20 Martii, 1650.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England, 1650.


