AN ACT For the taking away of PURVEYANCE, AND COMPOSITIONS FOR PURVEYANCE.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the 17th day of September, An. Dom.
1656.



LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.

AN ACT For the taking away of PURVEYANCE, AND Compositions for Purveyance.
WHereas the Kings of these Nations formerly by their Officers called
Purveyors, Victuallers, Buyers or Caters, and sometimes by their Commissioners,
by Warrants and Commissions, have usually at their wills and pleasures seized
and taken the Carts, Wagons, Carriages and Horses of the people, for Removal
of the Kings Household, and for other uses; And also the Hay, Straw, Oats, Corn,
Cattle, Victual, Flesh, Fish, Wood, Timber and other Goods and Chattels of the
said people for provision of the Kings Household, paying for the same what
prices they pleased, and many times paying nothing for the same; and taking
Compositions from Counties and other placs for Purveyance, to the great and
unsupportable Grievance of the said People of this Commonwealth; Be it
therefore Enacted and Ordained, and it is hereby Enacted and Ordained by His
Highness the Lord Protector, and the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, That from henceforth all such Commissions, Warrants and
Compositions for Purveyance shall be void: And if any Purveyor, Victualer,
Buyer, Taker or Cater, or any other person whatsoever, shall hereafter take any
Carts, Wagons, Carriages, Barges, Boats, Horses, Hay, Straw, Oats, Corn,
Cattle, Victual, Flesh, Fish, Wood, Timber, or any other Goods or Chattels
whatsoever, from any of the People of this Commonwealth, by virtue, color or
pretense of any Law, Statute or pretended Custom for Purveyance or Pre-emption,
or Composition for Purveyance or Pre-emption whatsoever, all such seizing,
taking or buying shall be Felony, and is hereby adjudged and declared to be
Felony; And the person and persons so offending, shall be adjudged guilty of
Felony, and be tried and suffer as Felons, according to the course of the
Common Law. And all Statutes, Laws, Customs or Vsages touching Purveyance or
Pre-emption, or Compositions for Purveyance or Pre-emption, are hereby
Repealed, and declared to be utterly void to all intents and purposes.

LONDON: Printed by HEN: HILLS and JOHN FIELD, Printers to His Highness the
Lord PROTECTOR. 1657.


