AN ACT for the SETTLING OF IRELAND.

Thursday 12 August, 1652.
ORdered by the PARLIAMENT, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen: Scobel, Cleric. Parliamenti.



LONDON, Printed by JOHN FIELD, Printer to the Parliament of ENGLAND. 1652.

And by special Command Reprinted at DUBLIN by WILL. BLADEN. 1652.

seal of the Commonwealth
AN ACT for the SETTLING OF IRELAND.
WHereas the Parliament of ENGLAND, after the expense of much Blood and
Treasure, for suppression of the horrid Rebellion in Ireland, Have, by the good
hand of God upon their undertakings, brought that Affair to such an Issue, as
that a total Reducement and Settlement of that Nation may, which Gods blessing,
be speedily effected: To the end therefore that the People of that Nation may
know, that it is not the intention of the Parliament to extirpate that whole
Nation, but that Mercy and Pardon, both as to life and Estate, may be extended
to all Husbandmen, Plow-men, Laborers, Artificers, and others of the inferior
sort, in manner as is hereafter declared; They submitting themselves to the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, and living peaceably and obediently
under their Government: And that others also of higher Rank and Quality may
know the Parliaments intention concerning them, according to the respective
Demerits and Considerations under which they fall; Be it Enacted and Declared
by this present Parliament, and by the Authority of the same, That all and
every person and persons of the Irish Nation, comprehended in any of the
following Qualifications, shall be liable unto the Penalties and Forfeitures
therein mentioned and contained; or be made capable of the Mercy and Pardon
therein extended respectively, according as is hereafter Expressed and
Declared: That is to say,

I. THat all and every Person and Persons, who at any time before the Tenth day
of November, One thousand six hundred forty two, (being the time of the
sitting of the first General Assembly at Kilkennie in Ireland) have Contrived,
Advised, Counseled, Promoted or Acted, the Rebellion, Murders or Massacres
done or committed in Ireland, which began in the Year One thousand six hundred
forty one: or have at any time before the said Tenth day of November, One
thousand six hundred forty two, by bearing Arms, or contributing Men, Ar^^
Horse, Plate, Money, Victual, or other Furniture (...) Habiliments of War
(other than such which they shall make to appear to have been taken from them
by meet force and violence) aided, assisted, promoted, acted, prosecuted or
abetted the said Rebellion, Murders or Massacres, be excepted from Pardon of
Life and Estate.

II. That all and every Jesuit, Priest, and other person or persons who have
received Orders from the Pope or Sea of Rome, or any Authority derived from
the same, that have any ways contrived, advised, counseled, promoted,
continued, countenanced, aided, assisted or abetted; or at any time hereafter
shall any ways contrive, advise, counsel, promote, continue, countenance, aid,
assist or abet the Rebellion or War in Ireland, or any the Murders or
Massacres, Robberies or violencies committed against the Protestants English or
others there, be excepted from Pardon for Life and Estate.

III. That James Butler Earl of Ormond, James Touchet Earl of Castlehaven,
Vllick Bourk Earl of Clanrickard, Christopher Plunket Earl of Fingall, James
Dillon Earl of Roscommon, Richard Nugent Earl of Westmeath, Morrogh O Brien
Baron of Inchiquin, Donogh Mac Carthy Viscount Muskerie, Theobald Taaff
Viscount Taaff of Corren, Richard Butler Viscount Mountgarret, (...) Roch
Viscount Fernjoy, (...) Montgomery Viscount Montgomery of Ards, (...) Magennis
Viscount of Iveah, (...) Fleming Baron of Slane, (...) Dempsey Viscount of
Glanmaleer, (...) Bermingham Baron of Athenry, Oliver Plunket Baron of Lowth,
Robert Barnwal Baron of Trymlets-town, Miles Bourk Viscount Mayo, Connor
Magwire Baron of Eniskellen, Nicholas Preston Viscount Gormanstown, Nicholas
Nettervil Viscount Nettervil of Dowth, John Bramhal late Bishop of Derry, James
Cusack Esquire, Thomas Tyrrel Esquire, Peter Clinton Esquire, Sir Phelim O
Neil, Sir George Monroe, Sir James Montogomerie and Sir Robert Stewart Knights,
Sir Con Magennis of the County of Down Knight, Sir Luke Fitzgerald of
Tecroghan Knight, Sir Richard Barnwal of Crickstown Knight, Sir John Nettervil
Knight, Sir Thomas Esmond of the County of Wexford Knight, Sir John Magragh of
the County of Tipperary, Sir Theobald Bourk son of the Viscount Mayo, Colonel
Thomas Preston, Hugh Buy O Neil, Luke Taaff Brother of the Viscount Taaff,
Geoffry Brown Esquire, Geoffry Baron, Patrick Darcy, and Nicholas Plunket
Esquires, (...) Fennel Doctor of Physic, Hugh Mac Phelim Birn of the County
of Wicklow, Florence Fitz-Patrick of the Queens County Esquire, Colonel John
Fitz-Patrick son of Florence, Roger Moore of Ballyna in the County of Kildare,
Tirlogh Roe O Neil Brother to Sir Phelim O Neil, Mulmurry Mac Swyne, Donnel Oge
Magennis, John Mortimer, Rory Magwyre of the County of Fermanagh, Rory Mac
Brien Oge Magennis, Even Magennis of Castle-vellan, Edmund Buy Magennis, Shane
Mac Brien O Neil, Tirlogh Magragh son of James Magragh, Tirlogh Mac Caffry O
Donnel, Brien Modder O Quynne, Brien O Mulcrevy, Patrick Groom O Mulcrevy,
Tirlogh Groom O Quynne of Monagowre in the County of Tyrone, Colonel Manus Roe
O Chahan, Tool Mac Machan, Malter Bagnal Esquire, Edmund Bourk, of Cloghan in
the County of Mayo, (...) Pursel of Tipperary, Baron of Loghmo, Thomas Cantwel
of Cantwels-Court in the County of Kilkennie, Edward Hussy of Moyl Hussy in
the County of Mead, Hugh Hussy of Galtrim, John Bellew of Willystown in the
County of Lowth Esquire, Philip Mac Hugh O Reyly of the County of Cavan,
Mulmurry O Reyly of the County of Cavan, Colonel Mac Brien Mac Mahown of the
County of Monaghan, Lysath Moore brother of Roger Moore before mentioned, Neil
Mac Kenna of the Trough in the County of Monaghan, Richard Belling Esquire son
of Sir Henry Belling Knight, Laurence Dowdal of Athlumney Esquire, Captain
Arthur Fox of Crumlin in the County of Dublin, Brien Mac Phelim Birn of the
County of Wicklow, Colonel Luke Tool of Castlekevin in the County of Wicklow,
John Crean of Sligo, Anthony Brabazon of Ballinasloe in the County of
Roscommon, Piers Fitz-Gerard of Ballisonan commonly called Mac Thomas, Lysagh
Demsey of the Kings County Esquire, Charles O Connor Dun of Ballintober in the
County of Roscommon Esquire, Dermot O Brien of the County of Clare, Richard
Grace Mac Jasper of the Kings County, Philip O Dwyre of the County of
Tipperary, Owney O Dwyre of the County of Tipperary, Murtagh O Brian of Annagh
in the said County, John O Kennedy of Dunnally in the said County, Murrogh ne
Mart O Flagherty of the County of Gallway, Teige O Flagherty of the said
County, Teige O Connor Roe of the County of Roscommon, Teige O Connor Sligo
of Sligo, Redmond Bourk Kilcernan in the County of Gallway, Thomas Bourk of
Anbally in the County of Gallway, John Brown of the Neil in the County of
Mayo, Charles O Connor and Hugh O Connor brothers of Teige O Connor Sligo, James
Dillon brother to the Viscount Dillon of Costillogh, (...) Touchet brother to
the Earl of Castlehaven, be excepted from Pardon for Life and Estate.

IV. That all and every Person and Persons (both Principals and Accessaries)
who since the first day of October, One thousand six hundred forty one, have,
or shall kill, slay, or otherwise destroy any Person or Persons in Ireland,
which at the time of their being so killed, slain or destroyed, were not
publicly entertained and maintained in Arms as Officers or private Soldiers,
for and on behalf of the English against the Irish; and all and every person
and persons (both Principals and Accessaries) who since the said first day of
October, One thousand six hundred forty one, have killed, slain, or otherwise
destroyed any person or persons entertained and maintained as Officers or
private Soldiers, for and on the behalf of the English against the Irish (the
said persons so killing, slaying, or otherwise destroying, not being then
publicly entertained and maintained in Arms as Officer or private Soldier
under the Command and Pay of the Irish against the English) be excepted from
Pardon for Life and Estate.

V. That all and every person and persons in Ireland, that are in Arms or
otherwise in Hostility against the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
and shall not within Eight and twenty days after Publication hereof by the
Commissioners for the Parliament, or Commander in Chief, lay down Arms and
submit to the Power and Authority of the said Parliament and Commonwealth, as
the same is now established, be excepted from Pardon for Life and Estate.

VI. That all other person and persons (not being comprehended in the former
Qualifications) who have born Command in the War of Ireland against the
Parliament of England, or their Forces, as General, Lieutenant General,
Major General, Commissarie-General, Colonel, Governor of any Garrison, Castle
or Fort, or who have been employed as Receiver-General or Treasurer of the
whole Nation or any Province thereof, Commissarie-General of Musters or
Provisions; Marshal-General, or Marshal of any Province, Advocate of the Army,
or Secretary to the Council of War, or to any General of the Army, or of any
the several Provinces, in order to the carrying on the War against the
Parliament or their Forces, be Banished during the pleasure of the Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, and their Estates forfeited and disposed of as
follows, viz. That two third parts of their respective Estates be had, taken,
and disposed of for the Use and Benefit of the said Commonwealth; And that the
other third part of their said respective Estates or other Lands, to the
proportion and value thereof (to be assigned in such places in Ireland, as the
Parliament, in order to the more effectual Settlement of the Peace of that
Nation shall think fit to appoint for that purpose) be respectively had, taken
and enjoyed by the Wives and Children of the said persons respectively.

VII. That the Commissioners of Parliament, and Commander in Chief, have power
to Declare, That such person or persons as they shall judge capable of the
Parliaments Mercy (not being comprehended in any of the former Qualifications)
who have born Arms against the Parliament of England or their Forces, and have
laid down Arms, or within Eight and twenty days after Publication hereof by
the Commissioners for the Parliament, and the Commander in Chief, shall lay
down Arms, and submit to the Power and Authority of the said Parliament and
Commonwealth, as the same is now established (by promising and engaging to be
true to the same) shall be pardoned for their Lives, but shall forfeit their
Estates to the said Commonwealth, to be disposed of as follows, viz. Two
third parts thereof (in three equal parts to be divided) for the Use, Benefit
and Advantage of the said Commonwealth, and the other third part of the said
respective Estates or other Lands, to the proportion or value thereof (to be
assigned in such places in Ireland, as the Parliament, in order to the more
effectual Settlement of the peace of that Nation shall think fit to appoint for
that purpose) be enjoyed by the said persons, their Heirs or Assigns
respectively. Provided, That in case the Commissioners and Commander in Chief,
or either of them shall see cause to give any shorter time than Twenty eight
days, unto any person or persons in Arms, or in any Garrison, Castle or Fort in
Hostility against the Parliament, and shall give notice to such person or
persons in Arms, or in any Garrison, Castle or Fort, That all and every such
person and persons, who shall not within such time as shall be set down in such
notice, surrender such Garrison, Castle or Fort to the power of the Parliament,
and lay down Arms, shall have no advantage of the Time formerly limited in this
Qualification.

(...)
