AN ACT For Repeal of two Acts for Sequestrations.

Friday March 2. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St. NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.



blazon of the Commonwealth

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament.
1659.

AN ACT For Repeal of two Acts for Sequestrations.
FOr the removing all Doubts and Fears concerning the late Actings in and about
August last in Cheshire and other parts of this Nation; And that the Minds,
Persons, and Estates of all People may be Quieted and Secured touching the
same, and whatsoever Related thereunto. Be it Enacted by this present
Parliament, and the Authority thereof, That all and every Person and Persons
whatsoever be and are hereby Acquitted, Pardoned, Released, and Discharged of
and from all Offenses, Crimes and Delinquencies of what nature soever they be
(Comprised or Mentioned in one Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for
Sequestrations, made in August last past) Committed or Done since the seventh
Day of May now last past: And that all Seisures and Sequestrations for and in
respect thereof be from henceforth Null, Void, and Discharged. And that as well,
the said Act, Entitled, An Act for Sequestrations, as also one other Act,
Entitled, An Additional Act for Sequestrations, made in February last past, be
from henceforth Repealed, Annulled, and Void to all Intents and Purposes
whatsoever. And that the Sequestered Rents and Goods, or Money remaining in the
Possession of the Commissioners for Sequestrations, or their Agents, or any of
them, this first Day of this instant March, shall forthwith be Restored to
those from whom they were taken. And that all Persons, either Imprisoned or
under Bail upon this occasion, shall forthwith be Discharged, and their Bonds
Delivered up.

And be it further Enacted, That all and every Person and Persons, that have
Acted or Done any Matter or Thing, in pursuance of the Acts aforesaid, or
either of them, or by Virtue of any Authority derived from the Parliament or
Council of State, be also Indempnified and Discharged against any Person or
Persons whatsoever.

Friday, March 2. 1659.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Act be forthwith Printed and Published.

THOMAS St NICHOLAS, Clerk of the Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, and John Macock, Printers to the Parliament,
1659.


