A DEFENSE Of sundry POSITIONS, And Scriptures alleged to justify the
Congregationall-way; charged at first to be weak therein, impertinent, and
unsufficient; By R. H. M.A. of Magd. Col. Cambr. in his Examination of them;
But upon further Examination, clearly manifested to be Sufficient, Pertinent,
and full of Power.

By Samuel Eaton, Teacher AND Timothy Tailor, Pastor Of The Church in
Duckenfield, in Cheshire.

Isai. 26.12, 13. LORD, thou will ordain peace for us: for even thou have
wrought all our works in us.

O LORD our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us; but by
thee only will we make mention of thy Name.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at
his shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1645.

To the Christian Reader.
IT was not our purpose, when these Examinations of our Reverend and beloved
Brother and neighbor came forth, to have made any Reply to them: First,
because we thought there was that already published to the world on both sides,
which was more weighty then either the Examinations or Answer to them were like
to be deemed. Secondly, because we apprehended some other persons, rather
called to this Work, then our selves; because their Positions and Scriptures
brought by them, are professedly and nominally opposed, as the margent
declares. Thirdly, because we were unwilling to engage our selves or others in
the Controversy, further then we should be compelled; knowing it to be one
evil under the Sun in men (and perhaps, in some good men) that they will
strive for Victory, rather then for Truth. And as it is with an unyeelding
spirit, it will contend for the-last word: So it is in publishing of books, who
shall Print last in his own Cause. We chose therefore rather to practice in
silence, according to our own light, and quietly to follow the Work we are
called to in these parts, then to implead those that should plead against the
Way we walk in. Therefore, when the Examinations first came down, though we
read them, yet we minded not to answer them; for three months almost, the
thoughts of intermedling in the Work (now effected by us) slept with us. At
last we were awakened to consider what was fit to be done by us. And after some
consultation, thought our selves bound to vindicate wronged Scriptures,
Positions, Persons; that which bred a change in our mind, was: First, an
expectation and earnest desire in these parts, that something might be answered
thereunto, or the Cause yielded. Secondly, the eyes of many were upon us rather
then upon others: First, because the Author of the Examinations is our
neighbor: Secondly, because many of these things have been discussed betwixt
him and us: Thirdly, because it is thought that some of the Positions have been
taken up by him, as in discourse they fell from us: Fourthly, because it is
believed by many, that there is so much strength in the Examinations, or
weakness in us, that we cannot answer them: Fifthly, because the Examinations
are magnified in Pulpits: Lastly, because the Person whom we most eyed to have
vindicated the Scriptures and Assertions built upon them, we hear, is called
away out of the kingdom. Hereupon we came to set upon the Work. And our
request (good Reader) is this, that the plainness of the style may be passed
over, and all weakness in expression; and if there be any strength of
Argument, that it be kindly accepted for the truths sake. We profess to be
friends to the Truth, so far as we know it, and shall think it the worst work
that ever we did in our lives; if we should make any to err from the Truth. We
entreat God, as we are able, to lead both thee and us into all truth.

S. E. T. T.


Mr. Prynne his Judgment, touching the only and speediest way for the present
Reformation, in his last Book, called A Vindication, page 57.
ANd if our Assembly and Ministers will but diligently preach against that
Catalogue of scandalous Sins and sinners they have presented to the Parliament,
and the Parliament prescribe severe temporal Laws and Punishments against the
same, and appoint good Civil Magistrates to see them duly executed, inflicted;
I am confident, that this would work a greater Reformation in our Church and
State in one half year, then all the Church Discipline and censures now so
eagerly contested for, will do in an age; and will be the only true way, and
speediest course to reform both Church and State at once: which I hope the
Parliament will consider of, and take care, that our Ministers (like the
Bishops formerly) may not now be taken up with ruling and governing; but
preaching and instructing, which is work enough wholly to ingrosse their time
and thoughts.

To our Reverend Brother, the EXAMINER.
Good Brother,
THough we often encountered one another within private walls, yet we little
thought to have been Antagonists in print; you have provoked us to it, and so
have those that are either so engaged to your person, or to your Examinations,
as to make their boast of them. We think you will confess our candor in
proceeding; we have not stepped out of the way, to intermeddle with bystanders
or by-matters; nor have we racked any thing: we entreat the like usage from
you. Take up the pith and substance of the Argument, and let alone expressions
and matters of that nature, and show us our error, and we shall not be
offended, but thankful. That deep heavy charge in the first part of your
Preface, whether it might have been spared, till you had seen how you had sped,
we leave for you to consider: As also whether you had honored your self more,
and wronged us less, if your Examinations had come forth without so cutting
and stinging a censure. Beware of giving such blows again in words, and do it
(if you can) in the weight of your Arguments, and you shall be blameless. We
will bear it, and amend by it, as being.

Your loving Brethren, SAMUEL EATON, TIMOTHY TAILOR.

The Contents of the Book.
The Scriptures opened, or alleged in this Treatise, you have in a Table at
the end thereof, and the page wherein they are cited.
The POSITIONS, as they are laid down by Mr. R. H. in his Examination of them,
are the sum and substance of the whole Book; as being the Subject herein
debated, whereof the most of them are explained and defended, (some, in some
proofs cited, are mistaken: as Position 20, and 25.)

The POSITIONS are these in order following.
POSITION 1. GAthering of Churches in the name of Christ, and setting up of
Church-ordinances, cannot be unlawful for want of a Commandment from man, as
appears by the Doctrine and Practice of the Apostles, Acts 4.19. and 5.29.
page 1 POSIT. 2. Seven, eight, or nine may make a Church. In Adams and Noah's
time there was not above seven or eight, will you deny them the being of a
Church? What will you make of Christ and of his Family, which were not above
twelve besides himself, and of the first foundationalls of the Church of
Ephesus, which were about twelve? the number in the first beginning of the
greatest Church was small enough in comparison, Acts 1.15. p. 9 POS. 3. A
visible Church in the new Testament consists of no more in number, then may
meet in one place, in one Congregation, 1 Cor. 11.20. and 14.23. p. 13 POS. 4.
A visible Charch in the new Testament is not National, as the Jews was; hence
we read of the Churches of Galatia, Macedonia, Judea, not Church of Galatia, 1
Cor. 16.1. 2 Cor. 8.1. p. 21 POS. 5. When a visible Chuch is to be erected, the
matter of it should be visible Saints and Believers, 1 Cor. 1.2. p. 31 POS. 6.
The form of a Church, is the gathering together of these visible Saints, and
combining and uniting them into one body by the form of a holy Covenant, Deuteronomy.
29.1.10, 11, 12. by which is plainly showed, that a company of people become
Gods people, that is, a Church, by entering into Covenant with God. If it be
said, they were a Church before; yet that was when the Church of the Jews was
constituted in Abraham's Family by Covenant. p. 37 POS. 7. Every Member at his
admission, does promise to give himself as to the Lord, to be guided by him; so
to the Church, to be guided by them; which is no more then the Members of the
Church of Macedonia did in a parallel case, 2 Cor. 8.5. p. 44 POS. 8. This
particular Congregation is a Church before it have Officers, Acts 2.47. p. 45
POS. 9. She has also full and free power to choose her own Officers, without
the help of Synod, Classis, or Presbytery, Act. 1.15. and 6.3. and 14.23. p.
46 POS. 10. The particular Congregation, though they want Officers, have power
and authority to ordain Officers, as the children of Israel did put their hands
upon the Levites, Numb. 8.9, 10. p. 52 POS. 11. When the Apostles were sent out
by Christ, there was no mention of Ordination in that Commission of theirs, but
only of teaching and baptizing, Mar. 16.15. Mat. 28.19, 20. If ordination of
Ministers had been such a special work, there would belike have been some
mention of in in their Commission. p. 56 POS. 12. The Church has power to
censure her Officers, if she see just occasion, Col. 4.17. p. 58 POS. 13. These
Officers are to be maintained by contribution every Lords Day, 1 Cor. 16.1. p.
60 POS. 14. The great Mountain burning with fire cast into the Sea, upon the
sounding of the second Trumpet, Rev. 8.8, 9. is applied by some good Writers,
to those times in which Constantine brought settled endowments into the Church.
p. 68 POS. 15. There must be in the Church, Teachers, distinct from Pastors, as
Apostles are distinct from Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11. p. 69 POS. 16. This
particular Congregation is Sion, which God loves, and he has promised to be
present, Mat. 18.20. p. 71 POS. 17. So long as a Believen does not join himself
to some particular Congregation, he is without in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor.
5.12. p. 74 POS. 18. The Elders are not Lords over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3.
nor do exercise authority, as the Kings and Princes of the earth do; remembering
our Saviors lesson, Mat. 20.25, 26. Luke 22.25, 26. p. 78 POS. 19. The Power
of Government is expressly given to the Church, where we are bidden Hear the
Church, which is a particular Congregation, Mat. 18. p. 85 POS. 20. Matthew.
16.19. Christ directs his Speech not to Peter alone, but to all the Disciples
also; for to them all was the Question propounded by Christ, verse. 15. Nor to
them as general Officers of the Churches, for that Commission was not yet
given them, but as Disciples and Believers. p. 90 POS. 21. 1 Cor. 5. Paul
himself, though an extraordinary Officer, yet would not take upon him to
excommunicate the incestuous person, without the Church; but sends to them,
exhorting them to do it, and reproves the Brethren of the Church of Corinth as
well as the Elders, that they did no sooner put him away. p. 95 POS. 22. The
Lord Jesus reproving the Angel of Pergamus, for suffering Balaamites, sends his
Epistle, not only to the Angel, but to the Church. The Spirit says not only to
the Angel, but to the churches, Rev. 2.11. And the Churchmembers are seen by
John in a vision, sitting on Thrones, clothed with white raiment, having on
their heads crowns of gold, Rev. 4.14. Now thrones and crowns are Ensigns of
Authority and governing power. p. 101 POS. 23. The particular Congregation
takes Christ for her only spiritual Prophet, Priest and King, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
Acts 7.37. Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 5.4. Isa. 9.6, 7. Rev. 15.3. p. 104 POS. 24.
Christ left but one way of Discipline for all churches; which in the
Essentialls of it is unchangeable, and to be kept till the appearing of Christ,
1 Timothy 6.13, 14. p. 107 POS. 25. The Church, or the Ministers thereof, must not
be (...), 1 Pet. 4. And therefore the Minister must not perform a Ministerial
act to another Congregation, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. p. 111 POS. 26. Gifted
men, viz. (so reputed by competent Judges, though) not called to the Ministry,
nor intended for it, may preach. They that were scattered abroad upon the
Persecution which arose about Stephen, were not Church Officers, at least not
all of them: yet these men did preach the Word; and Philip which was but a
Deacon, preached without the calling or privity of the Apostles, Acts 11.19.
and 8.14. p. 118 POS. 27. Jehosaphat sent Princes, who were neither Ministers,
nor intended so to be, to teach with the Priests and Levites, (viz.) at least
to encourage the people to hearken to the Priests and Levites, 2 Chronicles. 17.7,
8, 9. as Jehosaphat did, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. yea, and was their mouth to God in
Prayer, verse. 2.5. to 13. As we conceive something in that prophesying, 1 Cor.
1.4. to be extraordinary: so we conceive it to be ordinary, that some private
men, grown Christians of able gifts, who may have received a gift of Prophecy,
need no more extraordinary calling for them to Prophecy in the Churches, then
for Jehosaphat and his Princes to prophecy in the Church of Israel. p. ibid.
A Defense of certain Positions and Scriptures, against an examination thereof
by R.H. in which they are charged to be faulty.
POSITION I.
GAthering of Churches in the Name of Christ, See almost the same Argument
verbatim, in answer from New England to 32. q. p. 35.
and setting up of Church-Ordinances, cannot be unlawful for want of a
Commandment from Man, as appears by the Doctrine and Practice of the
Apostles, Acts 4.19. and 5.29.

THe Apostles never taught or practiced to gather or separate some Christians
from others, one part of this true Church, and another part of that,
(especially persons which themselves converted not) to make a purer Church,
neither with nor without the Magistrates Authority.

THe Apostles both taught and practiced the separating of some Jews from other
Jews, the people of God, Acts 11.19. and 13.46. And yet they had commanded
some to separate from the rest (as your self acknowledge) Acts 2.40. And their
communion they had with them in Jewish worships, shows that they counted them a
true Church. And some think, that their Church state ceased not while their
Temple stood. And yet before that time, many Jews were gathered into many
Christian Churches, as both the Acts of the Apostles, and their Epistles do
declare. And if they might gather out of one Church, they might as lawfully
have gathered out of twenty, or an hundred, had there been so many at that time.

Secondly, if the Apostles never taught nor practiced such a thing, what
warrant then have our brethren for their Presbyterian Church, which is gathered
out of many Churches? For they Interpret, Matthew. 18.17. Tell the Church, of a
Presbyterian Church, which consists of the Elders of many Churches.

Thirdly, why may not one Church be gathered of the members of many Churches,
as well as many Churches consist of the members of one Church? For we read that
the Church at Jerusalem was scattered upon Stevens persecution, and we read not
that they returned again, but fell into membership with other Churches, (as is
probable) which were planted in several parts of the world.

Fourthly, such a Church which consists of the members of many other true
Churches, has formerly been without exception in the days of the Prelates;
how comes it now to be questioned? For at least fourteen years since, such a
Church was extant in Wi^^all in Cheshire, (the vocal covenant being only
wanting) which consisted of the choycest Christians of many Parishes, who met
constantly together upon the Lords day, and enjoyed the Word, and Seals of the
Covenant, and maintained a Pastor to dispense the same unto them, and never, or
very rarely repaired to such Parishes where their habitations were. And we
think it cannot be denied, but Mr. John Angiers Church at Denton in Lancashire,
has of long time been such, and many other such there have been besides. And
it was accounted an high happiness to have liberty to make such a Church; but
was never accounted by the godly sinful before.

But if you should answer, That the Church consists of such as lived within
such a Parish, or Chapel, and that the rest were strangers: We reply, If
assembling constantly together, and participating in all the Ordinances that
the rest do partake of, and contributing with the rest in the maintenance of
the Minister of such a place, and an adhering rather to such a Minister and
people, then to any other in affection and action; if all these together make
members of a Church, then these persons of other Parishes were not strangers,
but members, and with the rest made such Churches; except it shall be said,
that habitation alone in other Parishes, when all the other are wanting, makes
membership, and constitutes Churches, which some of our brethren (who are
Presbyterians) have and do deny.

Fifthly, are not some Parish Churches constituted sometimes of members of
other Parish Churches, when many persons have left their own places, and
removed into other Parishes without any consent? Yet this has been judged
pious, at least honest, sometimes upon one ground, and sometimes upon another,
some to have liberty of conscience in such places whither they have removed;
others to have better preaching; others to meet with better society; and others
for better worldly accommodation: What Christian knows not well that this
has been common?

Sixthly, that a Church may consist of persons that have been members of other
Churches, if such persons have been orderly dismissed from such Churches, and
have come away with consent, will be granted of all: For none hold
Church Membership to be undissolveable. The question then will be, Whether the
members of Churches may depart without consent? 1. According to the present
constitution of Churches, they may: For they come in without consent, merely by
removing their habitations; therefore they may so depart. 2. If consent must be
had, from whom must it be sought? From the people, or from the Minister? That
the people have any power either to give or withold their consent, has not
been granted heretofore: That the Ministers consent should be necessary for the
departing of every member, when yet himself (it may be) has had his entrance
amongst them, without their consent, seems to be unreasonable. 3. Suppose
consent has been sought, and cannot be obtained, may not members withdraw
their membership in some cases without consent? Suppose some Ordinance be
corruptly dispensed, without all hope of redress, and that men must partake
therein without having any power so much as to witness against such
corruptions, unless they will be accounted factious, and disturbers of the
Churches peace; or that by remaining where such corruptions are, they be in
danger to be leavened with the corrupt lump of such a Church of which they be
members; 1 Cor. 5.6.
what must they now do? Does not that Rule that bids a Church purge out one
person that may endanger the leavening of the whole lump, (when there are no
other means to prevent such an evil) give warrant to every member that is
endangered to be leavened by the lump, to withdraw from such a lump, (because
power to purge out the lump they have none) when there is no other means to
prevent the evil? 2 Cor. 13.10.
Church membership is for edification of the members, not for destruction.

But you stumble at this, because they converted them not. To which we reply,
Persons whom the Apostles converted, were ordinarily committed to others to be
further edified, and the ordinary Pastors and Elders of the primitive times,
did almost perpetually build upon another foundation. The persons that watered
for the most part, were not the same that planted. In Acts 11.20, 21. we read
of a great conversion wrought by the preaching of the scattered Disciples, but
we read not that they were gathered into Churchstate, till Barnabas was sent
unto them; and both Barnabas and Paul assembled with that Church and taught it,
which yet they converted not. And in Acts 19.1, 9. Paul found twelve Disciples
(converted to his hand, though not fully instructed) and gathered them into the
Church which he planted at Ephesus. But (Brother) how comes this to be a stone
to stumble at? If you hold a succession of Pastors in the same Church, the
successors may feed a flock which their predecessors converted, and not
themselves. And if you hold transplantation of members from one Church to
another, then they may feed the members which were of other Churches, which
themselves converted not.

But you will say, This must be orderly done, and with consent. Answ. No such
order can be expected, where no such order has been wont to be exercised. If
any godly person has removed from one Country to another, and planted
himself in Manchester, have the Ministers or people whom he left, sent after
him, or challenged him as theirs? Or have the Ministers or people whom he has
come to, rejected him, as none of theirs, because not orderly delivered into
their hands? Suppose the end of his removal was communion with a better
people, or better ministry, Does this make it the worse, or more
unwarrantable? Is it lawful to remove to a fatter soil, when the place a man
lives in, is more barren? Is it lawful to remove to a purer air, when the
air one has lived in, is worse, and distempers the body? And is it not
lawful to remove to a purer Church? The purer any Church is, does not Christ
take the more delight in it? And does he not desire to be there most? And why
may not persons desire to plant themselves where Christ gives most of his
presence? And if one man may unite to such a Church that is purer, may not many
agree together to make such a Church that may be purer? And this is all the
gathering of Churches that we know of, that is either taught or practiced.

But the exception is, That there is a removal of persons to other Churches,
without the removal of their habitations. But why should this be blamed? 1. If
distinction of Parishes by bounds and limits, be not Jure divino, where is then
the fault? Seldom of Tithes.
2. Was there not liberty within this very Kingdom fromerly, for persons to
pay their tithes to what Minister they pleased? And consequently, they were not
tied to the Parish they lived in, but might choose their own society and Pastor
(and hence it is, that there are some pieces of Parishes in some places six or
eight miles distant from other parts of it, and whole Parishes betwixt.) Why
therefore now should there be an abridgement? 3. There are many inconveniences
both to Minister and people, arising hence: 1. The Pastors of Parish Churches
are only at certainty what houses they have under their Ministry, not what
persons: for they may go which way they will leaving their houses, but their
houses and lands are sixed, and they shall always find them there. 2. The
members of these Churches, though they have been bred up under the wing of such
Churches and Pastors thereof, and have taken a love and liking to the same, yet
if they remove from their habitation but a stones cast sometimes, they must be
broken off thereby from such Churches in point of Membership. 3. A man's
habitation may be nearer to some Church that is out of that parish, and so far
off from his own Parish Church that he cannot conveniently repair thereunto,
must he yet be bound to his own Parish Church by his habitation? 4. Suppose a
man have many houses in several Parishes, and would desire sometimes to live
in one, and sometimes in another, must he needs alter his Church membership as
often as he changes his habitation? Or can he be a member in all the Parishes
where he has houses?

The Apostles ( being not of men, nor by men, but by Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.1.)
This was proper to the Apostles, or Apostolic men Answ. to 9. Pos. p 76. T.W.
to W.R. p. 67.
did preach not only without but against the peremptory command and Laws of
the Magigistrate, Acts 4.17, 18, 21. and 5.28.

So did the ordinary Pastors and Teachers of those times, as well as the
Apostles, and many of them were martyred for their labor, which yet had not an
immediate call from Christ, as the Apostles had.

But you profess not such a latitude of opposition against Magistracy.

We profess subjection to Jesus Christ,

Nor do you hold (I suppose) that our godly non-conformable Brethren suspended
by the Bishops, or New England Ministers deposed by their Churches, (to say
nothing of Ministers deprived by the Parliament for Malignancie) are bound by
the Apostles example to execute their Ministry in the Churches,
notwithstanding such suspension or deposition, etc.

We conceive you have not equally yoked the Bishops, any just or true title to
it. Therefore though godly non-conformable Ministers, might in prudence give
place to violence (especially when their people deserted them, and Pulpit
doors were shut against them,) yet in conscience, and in obedience to such
suspensions and depositions, they neither did (neither ought to have done)
desist from the execution of their office. 3. Ministers that are censured by a
lawful power, where ever it lies (whether in their own Congregationall
Churches, or in a Presbytery (for we will not dispute that now in this place)
whether the censure be inflicted justly or unjustly,) ought to submit thereto,
and forbear the execution of their Ministry in that place, till they be
restored again; else Ecclesiastical government, which is Christ's ordinance in
the Church, (as Civil government is in the Commonwealth,) might come to be
undermined and subverted by pretense of unrighteousness in the managing of it,
or the peace of the Church be disturbed.

But wherein makes this against the Position? We conceive that those very
Pastors and Teachers of the Primitive Churches, which continued to preach,
though the express command of the Heathen Magistrate was against it, lest they
should offend Christ by desisting, were yet taken off from preaching when
silenced by their own Churches, and that upon the same ground, lest they should
offend Christ in persisting. But you go on to say:

Had you such an immediate commission sealed from Heaven, and such infallible
direction of the Holy Ghost, as the Apostles had, you might more boldly imitate
them therein; especially if the case of living under a Christian Magistrate
intending, endeavoring and consusting with Divines, about the Reformation of
the Church, and of living under a Heathen Magistrate, were not much different.

1. The warrantablenes arises not from the immediatnesse of the Commission,

2. We allow the case to be much different: For when we live under a Christian
Magistrate, inteuding and endeavoring Reformation, we are raised up unto an
expectation of having all the ways of Christ countenanced and confirmed by his
authority, (which would be a very blessed thing) which we have no such ground
to look for living under a Heathen Magistrate. But how the case is different in
your sense, we understand not: For the Christianity of the Magistrate, or his
piety and sedulity, in intending and endeavoring Reformation, cannot take any
person or persons off from their duty, which they would be bound unto, if a
Heathen Magistrate bore sway. The Magistrate and the Ministers, and the people,
must each do their part, because each stands engaged for himself to Jesus
Christ, unto the work of his own place. The impediments that come from any unto
other, cannot be a discharge unto any.

Would our Brethren in New England allow a Presbyterian Church, or but a new
Independent Church to be erected in New England, against the will and mind of
the Magistrates and Churches there? T. W. to W.R. p. 31.


1. The question is not what they would allow,

2. Our belief of New England is this, that they would suffer the godly and
peaceable to live amongst them, though they disser in point of
Church Government from them: Because so far as we could ever learn, they
never banished any, but unpeaceablenesse together with desperate
erroneousnesse, was the cause of it.

Our Brethren at London (I hear) do hold it (at least) unseasonable, to
gather Churches now: how their opinion and yours are reconcilable, I see not.

If you had said,

It may be the Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Familists, and other gross
Heretics and Schismatics in old or new England, do also pretend the Doctrine
and practice of the Apostles, for the setting up of their Churches; yet our
godly and conscientious Divines do therein oppose them.

If gross Heretics and Schismatics do so pretend, Ephesus tried them, and
found them liers, and rejected them; and yet accepted of those that were
Apostles of Christ indeed.

POSITION II.
Seven, eight, or nine, may make a Church. In Adams and Noah's time there was
not above seven or eight will you deny them the being of a Church? What will
you make of Christ and of his Family, which were not above twelve besides
himself, and of the first foundationals of the Church of Ephesus, which were
about twelve? The number in the first beginning of the greatest Church was
small enough in comparison, Acts 1.15.

The case of Adam and Noah was extraordinary: there were no more in the world,
and therefore could be no more in the Church.

You grant in an extraordinary case, seven, eight, may but make a Church in the
first foundation, or while there be no more persons sitted for membership. For
when more Saints by calling offer themselves, they are to be received, and so
the Church will be increased, Acts 19.7, 8, 9, 18.19, 20.

Adam and his wife, and first sons, yea Adam himself was the Church, if then
there was any; yet you hold not that two or three, yea one may make a Church.

We conceive that the Church is Christ's body, Adam could have been a Church, we
understand not. Put this we hold, that look how few have ever made a Church
since the beginning of the world, the same number may still make a Church. And
the reason is, because God has not precisely determined what number does make
a Church.

Cain lawfully married his own sister, may other men do the like?

Have we not a manifest prohibition of such marriages in the Scripture?

Twelve are more then seven or eight, and an hundred and twenty are a competent
number; yet it appears not that they were called or counted a Church, till
they were more increased.

First,

Secondly, the Scripture determines not what number is competent, and what not
competent to the being of a Church. How come you then so to pass your verdict
about it; when further you add, That it appears not they were called or
accounted a Church, till they were more increased? that is, till those three
thousand persons were added to them, Acts 2.41. If so, are you not then the
more presumptuous in saying, that an hundred and twenty are a competent number
to make a Church? Notwithstanding if you will, you may see them a Church before
they were so increased: For they performed one great act of a Church, in
electing an Officer to be over the Church, Acts 1.23. And when three thousand
were added to them, they came into their state; and if their state were not
Church state, then neither were they made a Church by this addition: for let
three thousand be added to no Church, and they are still no Church; which to
affirm, were slat against the Scripture, Acts 2.47.

If there were no more Believers in Ephesus then twelve ( as there was, and
Priscilla, which knew no more then John's Baptism, Acts 18.26. with 24.25. if
not others) yet there were more in ferusalem then an hundred and twenty, even
five hundred brethren at once 1 Cor. 15.6.
.

First, though Aquila and Priscilla were at Ephesus, Rome, sometimes at
Corinth, as appears from Acts 18.2. Romans 16.3. But to what place they did
belong, is not certain.

Secondly, your five hundred brethren at Jerusalem is as slightly collected
from 1 Cor. 15.6. For, 1. does the Apostle say, that he was seen of those five
hundred in Jerusalem? He showed himself in Galilee, and some other places, as
well as in Jerusalem. 2. Though the place of manifesting himself might be
Jerusalem, must the persons therefore be of Jerusalem? Why not appertaining
unto Judea? Or suppose of Jerusalem, why might they not be dispersed before
Christ's ascension? For present afterward, when they chose an Apostle, they
were not, which was yet a Church action: and without doubt, the major part of
the Church would have been present at it.

Adam and Noah with their Families, (if they were Churches) they were but
Domestical Churches, not Congregationall.

Domestical Churches enjoying Congregationall Ordinances,

What will ye make of Christ and his Disciples, a Church distinct from the
Jewish? You know Christ did not make a new Church, or gather men into it, but
lived and died a member of the Jewish Church. Answer to to 32. q. p. 14.
Had they been called a Church, as some households are in the new Testament
Phile. 2. witness T.W. to W.R.
, you had had some more pretext, and yet they are but a Domestical Church, etc.

1. Whether Christ died a member of the Jewish Church, Acts 1.14, 15.

2. For the denomination of Church, we pass not much, whether we meet with it,
or not; provided that we find the reality of a Church among any persons.

3. Many Domestical Churches may be in one Congregationall in your sense, but
not in ours. We deny and put you to prove that two or three converted in a
Family, enjoying some Christian Ordinances, but no Church Ordinances, are
called a Church.

It is an Argument you will not own; seven, eight, twelve, may make a
Domestical Church, therefore they may make a Congregationall.

We acknowledge not any such distinction of Congregationall Church, Abraham's
Family, was the same which was in the Families of all his sons, and in the
Families of their children after them, and which afterward grew up into a
nation. And though the Gospel Church is not now National, as the Jewish was,
yet a congregation of many Families may spring out of a Church of one Family,
more easily then a Nation did formerly. And if seven, eight, or twelve may not
make a congregationall Church in our apprehension, what have you been consuting
all this while?

If seven or eight may make a Church, then two hundred persons in a City may
well make twenty distinct Churches, and by consequence so many Independent
Judieatures.

First, this collection is made to bring an Odium upon congregationall
Churches; but it may be thus retorted, four or five in a house may make a
family, therefore three hundred in an house may make sixty distinct families.
Four or five in a family may make a Domestic Church (say you,) then three
hundred in a family may make sixty Domestic Churches; two thousand in a Field
may make an Army, therefore two hundred thousand in a Field, may make ten
distinct Armies under so many independent Generals.

Secondly, we have declared our selves before, that seven or eight may make a
Church in the first foundation, and whilst there are no more persons fitted and
that as more in that place shall be converted, the Church, of them, is to be
increased. And we are utterly against the unnecessary multiplication of
Churches, as conceiving such small Churches inconsistent to Christ's ends, which
is edification by Pastors, Teachers, Ruling Elders, Deacons, which he has
given to his Church. But that a Church of seven or eight should require so many
Officers, or be able to maintain them, we cannot understand. And we perceive
from the patterns presented in the New Testament, that Churches in cities
which at first were small, grew great by the daily addition of others to them,
Acts 1.14.15. with Acts 2.41. and 19.7, 8, 9, with 18, 19, 20. Acts 20.17.28.
So that we would not have believers of one city, be of so many Churches, if
one congregation will conveniently hold them, except there be some eminent
reason for it. But though there should be many Churches consisting of a few
members: yet without Officers amongst them, we do not assert them to be
Independent Judicatures.

POSITION III.
A visible Church in the new Testament consists of no more in number then may
meet in one place, in one Congegation, The like you have, Answer to 32 q p. 9.
1 Corinthians. 11.20. and 14.23.

If you seek for Congregations meeting for prayer, hearing the Word, Sacraments
in one place, or that they were called by the name of Church, or that all
Believers in some Cities and Countries (when they might) did meet in one place,
I will not contend.

We plead for congregations meeting together, Cor. 5.4. which you leave out, as
if Church censures belonged not to congregations, as those Ordinances you
mention do. And we say, that there is no sacred Worship or Institution,
prescribed in the Gospel, which may not be observed to have been exercised in,
or appertained unto the congregations. And these congregations are called
Churches in the Scripture. And further we say, not only that all believers in
some cities did meet together in one place, but that there can no instance be
given in all the new Testament, that Christians ordinarily meeting together in
diverse places, are yet called one Church, except where Church is taken
improperly, and in a distributive sense. And therefore in cities, where they
might and did meet together, they are called a Church, and in countries where
they could not all meet in one, but in diverse places, they are called Churches

Many such Churches or Congregations we have in England.

We say so too, England, or none at all. For what other besides such, can you
show us?

And the Believers in every Christian Church, even in the Church of England,
and in the Jewish Church also, might and did at first meet.

1.

2. If Believers in England ever met together in one place, it was when there
was but one congregationall Church in England. As for the Jewish Church in it,
Exo. 34.23.24 Deuteronomy. 16.2.16
both at first, and afterward, all the males wore to meet by special
appointment in one place, at some seasons, though not always, and in some
ordinances, though not all, to show that they were but one Church.

To say nothing that all the people of the Jews being about six hundred
thousand, are called one Congregation, and are frequently in the old Testament
said to come together, and that One Myriade is 10000.
Myriads did come together, Act. 21.22.

They were one church, and therefore did, and ought to congregate together, and
are therefore called one congregation; Myriads spoken of, Acts 21.22. did then,
nor can such a number now, ordinarily come together. Now our Position is to be
understood, that a Gospel visible church consists of no more then can
ordinarily come together into one place, nor of so many as sometimes in an
extraordinary way have met together.

How will you make out this Inference, The Church of Corinth did meet in one
place, and so did Antioch, Jerusalem, therefore no Church in the new Testament
must consist of more then can meet in one place?

You must take the Argument in the scope of it,

To say there was a Church in Adams house, and in Noah's, and also in Philemons,
Aquila's and Priscilla's houses, therefore the Church in the old and new
Testament must be domestical, is an inconsequent illation, contrary to plain
Scripture.

We confess it, and for the reason you render;

Is not the Argument as good, if it run thus? All the believing Corinthians
were of the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.1. 2 Cor. 6.11. The Smyrnians and
Laodiceans of the Church of Smyrna and Laodicea, Col. 2.1. and 4.16. Rev. 2.8.
and 3.14. Whether they were more or fewer. ( Hence in every city, and every
church, seem to expound one another, Acts 14.21.23. with Tit. 1.5. Acts 16.4,
5.) And it cannot be showed that any church, how numerous soever it grew, was
divided into two, or more churches, therefore the believers in any one city or
town, may be but one church, whether they can meet in one place or no.

No (brother) not so; Corinthians were of the church of Corinth (which yet you
seem to contradict in the after part of your Answer, while you say that Gaius
the Corinthian was the host of another church, besides that of Corinth, which
if true, then all believing Corinthians were not of the church of Corinth) and
though in all other cities all the believers of them, were of the church in
each of them, yet such an inference would be naught, because it was so for a
special reason, and in regions and countries where that reason took not place,
it was otherwise. All the Believers in Jerusalem were of one church there,
because they were not so many, but that they might come constantly together
into one place, and did so: But all the Believers in Judea were not of one
church there, but of many churches, because they could not meet constantly in
one place. And if believers in cities, meeting in diverse places, are yet but
one church, for this reason, because they were of one city (as you would seem
to infer,) then show but any probable reason, why believers meeting in diverse
places in countries, may not be one church, because they were of one country,
especially the believers of Judea being but a small country, and under the
same civil government. The reason why city and church expound one another was
this, because there was not more converted in a city then could meet together
in a congregation or church. And when you can show us out of the new Testament
that believers were so multiplied in any city, as that they could not all meet
in one place, then will we show you, that such churches were divided into more
churches.

Paul writes not only to them which might, and did meet in one place, but to
all that in every place (not throughout the world, at appears, 2 Cor. 1.1.
written to the same persons, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2. with 2 Cor. 2.1, 2. neither is this
a Catholic Epistle, but that in all Achaia) call upon the Name of the Lord.

Paul writes and sends this, Corinthianss, and to them alone, as appears,
almost in every chapter of the Epistle and in many of the verses of each
chapter. For all along, proper and peculiar things belonging to the
Corinthians, and not to the Achaians, nor Saints in all the world, are spoken
of in commendation and discommendation, and proper reproves, directions,
exhortations are given; yet he intended it for the use and benefit of all
Achaia, and of the whole world also. And it may as properly be called, a
Catholic Epistle, as an Achaian Epistle, for the use redounds to the world,
as well as to Achaia. And if it be not so, how can it be said to be Canonical
Scripture? And how comes it to be the foundation of our Sermons, that we
preach out of it?

Besides, does all in every place, and Saints in all Achaia expound one
another? What Commentator has ever said so? And does 1 Cor. 5.1. compared with
2 Cor. 2.1. enforce such an exposition? That which you would suggest, is that
he writes to the same Corinthians, in the second Epistle, that he writes unto
in the first, for more your Scriptures import not; and we grant it. But the
inference you draw is this, ergo, all in every place here, and Saints in all
Achaia, are all one; a strange consequence. If the second Epistle be written to
the same persons as the first, Why do you not expound the subject persons of
the second, by the subject persons of the first, and say, though the Saints in
all Achaia be mentioned only, yet under them the Salnts every where in the
world are meant, as in the first Epistle it is expressed. This would have been
a more natural exposition.

But we shall declare the Apostles naked scope, as we understand it. The
Corinthians (not the Achaians in general, for the Cenchreans joined not with
them, that we read of) had written to Paul, Chapt. 7.1. and Paul had received
sundry reports concerning them (not concerning all the Saints in Achaia, for of
the Cenchreans he had heard nothing, that we read of) chap. 1.11. and 5.1.
and hereupon he writes unto them; but because this letter might be of common
use and profit, and especially to the Saints which bordered next upon them,
therefore he would have the Achaians their neighbors to peruse it; yea, the
Saints every where to read it for their edification. Therefore in both his
Epistles he mentions the Corinthians, as the proper subject thereof; but the
Achaians he mentions but in one, and the Saints every where in another. And
he brings them in collaterally, rather then directly; it is to the church of
Corinth, but with the Saints in Achaia, and withal, that in every place call
on the name of the Lord Jesus, as it were on the bye. And this is Pareus his
exposition upon 1 Cor. 1.2. and he takes occasion of confuting the vain conceit
of Pighius and other Jesuits, because they would have Paul's Epistles to extend
to the particular uses of those times, and not to Saints in all places and ages.

And therefore those words, besides, that being but a supposition, they put
nothing in being, and may fitly be translated, in id ipsum, for the same, or,
in one, which, though they met in an hundred places, they might do, Acts 4.26.
with Psalm. 2.2. 1 Chronicles. 12.17.) prove no more that those to whom Paul writ,
were of one congregation, then James calling the twelve tribes seattered
abroad, one Assembly, Synagogue, or Church, Jam. 1.1. with 2.2. and 5.14. or
Paul's mentioning the Hebrews assembling themselves together, Heb. 10.25. does
prove that the scattered Hebrews were no more then one particular
congregation, which might, and did meet in one place.

1. in one thing, but not together in one place. But,

1. These words, (...), are sometimes conjoined with the Verb, (...), as 1 Cor.
11.20. and 14.23. and then I hope it will not be denied, but that place is
principally meant.

2. Except the words (...), do hold forth a coming together into one place,
their meeting at all (any of them) together, though in an hundred places will
come to be overthrown. For what gives more light to the coming together of any
of them at all into one place, then these words? If the words do carry any
respect to place, then seeing it is said, (...), the whole church, they will be
in force to prove, that the whole church came together into one place.

3. When these words are found without (...), as Act. 2.44. is not the sense
darkened, if not overthrown by such an interpetation? And all that believed were
together, and had all things common; shall it be thus rendered, And all that
believed were in one thing, or mind? So they might be, though every one were
in his own house, and none of them together in the same place. But how does it
cohere with the next words, and had all things common, if they met not together
in the same place?

Besides, will those words bear such an exposition in Acts 3.1. Now Peter and
John went up together into the Temple, shall it be thus translated, They went
up to the Temple for the same thing? not together in company, but for one end?
then they might go one after another, if they only met in an oneness of
business, and not of place; but several passages in the story do flatly
contradict it, and do show that they ascended together in company one of
another into the Temple.

But Acts 4 26. compared with Psalm. 2.2. is alleged to confirm the exposition
of (...). To which we answer, that we see nothing, but that the conspirators
against Christ, met in one place: For, Psalm. 2. says, They took counsel
together; and how can that better be done, then by meeting in one place? Acts
4.27.5. says, (...), which without (...), signifies, they came together into
one place; and they might do it easily, because all the persons mentioned were
in one city; and the story makes it plain, that the Rulers and the people of
Israel, and Pontius Pilate and the Gentiles gathered together; and there is
nothing repugnant, but that Herod might meet with them, especially, seeing that
we read that Pilate and he were made friends.

4. We do not stand in need of (...), to prove that the churches of the Gospel
met in one congregation frequently; for there are other words that carry it
clearly, as may appear from Acts 2.46. and 5.12. and 14.27. and 15.22.30. and 1
Cor. 5.4. and 1 Cor. 11.17.

2. Though you yield the translation of (...), it proves no more, that those
that Paul writ to, were of one congregation, then James's calling the twelve
Tribes scattered one Assembly; To which we reply, that there is a palpable
difference, betwixt the places alleged by us, to prove a meeting in one place,
and those alleged by you against it from James, and from the Hebrews: For,

1. Your places are not so full for a meeting in one place; and,

2. James 1.1. contradicts and makes impossible such a meeting of all the
Hebrews in one place: And therefore we must take it in a distributive sense,
If there come into your Assembly, that is, into any of your Assemblies; send
for the Elders of the Church, that is, of the church he is of. Not forsaking
the assembling of your selves together, that is, no one with his own church
that he is of, or each church with it self.

But there is no need of any such figure in the Texts which we allege, but
the literal sense may pass; and in some places must pass, or there will be
no sense: For,

1. The persons which we say came together, they might do it, they were
neither so many, nor so remote, but they might. And if the Holy Ghost say they
did, we must believe it, and not seek a figure, when we are not enforced to
it.

2. The Text, in 1 Cor. 14.23. says, (...), when the whole church comes
together; Now let the Reader judge, whether any of your Texts have any such
fullness of words in them to sway to a meeting in one place, as this one Text
has, which we have brought. Some of your own side have been convinced with the
evidence of this Text, that the church of Corinth was but one congregation, and
came together into one place.

Especially, seeing the Apostle writes to the Achaians, 2 Cor. 1.1. 1 Cor. 16.1
with 2 Cor. 9.2. and 11.10. Now there were other churches in that Region, at
least two, Corinth and Cenchrea, Romans 16.1. To say nothing of the church
whereof Gaius the Corinthian was the Host.

1. Paul writes to the Achaians no otherwise then he does to the Saints which
call on the name of the Lord Jesus every where, 1 Cor. 1.1. with 2 Cor. 1.1.

2. He writes not to them as making one church with the Corinthians, for he
mentions them with a note of distinction from the Corinthians, (...), etc.

The places which you would have compared, will not enforce any such thing.
For, he might have a scope that the other churches in Achaia, from the Epistle
he sent to Corinth, (which they were to peruse, as the Laodicean church was to
read the Epistle written to the Colossians) should be stirred up to the same
duty of contribution, etc. So that the oneness of the Congregation of the
church of Corinth is not yet infringed.

4. Does the Apostle write to the Achaians, and were there in that Region two
churches at least, Corinth and Cenchrea; why then does not the Apostle say, To
the Churches of Achaia? as in all other such cases he does, To the churches of
Galatia, The churches of Judea, Macedonia, Asia? Why is the church of Corinth
mentioned, and the church at Genchrea wholly silenced in the first Epistle, and
not mentioned directly and by name in the second?

Hence there is mention of churches to which the women he writes to ( for, he
says, Your women, not women, or all women) did resort. Or how else could they
keep selence in the churches? 1 Cor. 14.34.

1. These Epistles were written for the use and direction of all churches, and
therefore the Apostle names churches, Corinthian women, were primarily meant,
to whom the Epistle was sent; yet in regard of use, not they alone, but they
with the women of Achaia, and all that call on the name of the Lord Jesus in
every place. It was a command intended for universal direction for the women
of all other churches.

2. Women were wont to go from one church to another upon occasion, as Romans
16.1. Phebe from Cenchrea went to Rome, so might the Corinthian women go to
other churches, and in all churches must keep silence.

3. Though it he said your women, yet it is not said your churches, but in the
churches; that is, churches every where; and the verse before gives some light
hereto: For he had said, As in all the churches of the Saints. And he adds,
Let your women keep silence in the churches; What churches? The churches of the
Saints every where.

POSITION IV.
The visible Church in the new Testament is not National, as the Jews was;
hence we read of the Churches of Galatia, Macedonia, ludea, not Church of
Galatia, 1 Cor. 16.1. 2 Cor. 8.1.

We say not, that the Christian Church is National, as was the Jewish church,
viz. that it has a national Tabernacle, Temple, or House of God, and solemn
worship peculiar to it, to which all the members, or all the males must
sometimes resort, toward which the absent are to pray, and in which the
Priests in their courses do minister unto God.

1. Why do you yet find fault with the Position,

2. Why do you not lay down in what sense the Christian church is national,
and in what sense not national?

3. If in any proper manner of speaking you will have the Christian church
national, meaning by national, the Saints that live within such a nation, as
distinguished from the Saints of another nation, in country and place of
habitation, without any othertie amongst them, being all of them parts only of
the Mystical or Catholic church (as we know the Sea that washes the
British shores is called the British Sea, and that which washes the Belgic
shores, is called the Belgic Sea, though they be not distinct Seas, but parts
of the great Ocean; yet in reference to an adjunct of place they run by, they
receive distinct denominations, and by a Synecdoche, the parts carry the names
of the whole:) in this sense we do yield the exposition or phrase of national
church. But if you mean by national church, an instituted church of national
extent in point of power and jurisdiction, upon which particular congregations
within that nation do depend; we want light, that there is, or ought to be any
such church in the times of the Gospel.

For, if there ought to be such a national church, (for patterns we have none,
as your self do confess) then in this church there must be some national
combination, national place for convention, national Pastor upon which it
must depend, and national Ordinances.

For, seeing there was no such church extant, when the Gospel was written, nor
rules left (for you would have alleged them (we suppose) had there been any)
how all things must be carried in such a national church, what reason can be
showed (if such a church must be) why there should be a departing from the
pattern of the national church among the Jews, in which they had all these
things? Therefore those seem to do best, that in their moulding of their
national church come nearest to the example of the Jewish church.

Or, if you will have another model of this national church of your own
framing, viz. a nation of Assemblies combined together, and represented in
their officers, meeting in one place, and consulting the good of the whole, and
executing authority over the whole, then these persons must stand in relation
to all and each one of the Assemblies of the Nation under their jurisdiction;
and so they are National Officers every one of them, and the whole is the
flock of each amongst them, and each of them has as full power over the
assemblies that he never saw, as over that from which he came, and which sent
him; (as in the representative civil body every Knight and Buegesse has the
care of the kingdom upon him, and each has equal authority of inspection and
decision of matters concerning cities and countries, which he knows not, as
of those whence he came.) Now if it be so, the Question is, whether each be
not a Passor to every purpose, as well as unto one? And whether he be not to
feed by doctrine, as well as by the rod of discipline, all such assemblies
which are under his charge? (Which thing is yet impossible to be done.) And
what warrant there is of non-residencie with the flock unto purposes that do
most concern the flock, seeing themselves are Christ's Ministers and
substitutes, and have not power of appointing Ministers and substitutes under
them; and what ground there is, why they must jointly rule all the assemblies,
but severally teach each man the congregation to which he is designed, without
care of the rest?

Or, if there be any such combination of assemblies in a Nation, what is there
to warrant it more, then the combination of all Christian assemblies in the
world, represented in an oecumenicall council, the members of which must be
universal Pastors, having power over, and care of all churches under them?
For, if a Congregationall church must depend upon a National church, as the
lesser upon the greater, then a National church must depend upon the
universal, as the lesser upon the greater. For, look what a Nation is to a
Congregation, that the universal is to a Nation; and if Nations may be
independent of the universal, Congregations may be independent of the
National.

And if an universal visible instituted church be acknowledged, why are there
not universal representative conventions? What a defect is this in
Christendom? And what a fault, that all Christian nations do not endeavor it?
But we conceive that they are so far from the endeavoring it, that if there
were any such, though they might make use of them for advice, yet they would be
loath to subject themselves to the binding decrees of them.

Nor say we, that the Scriptures do mention a National church, for the
supreme Magistrate was an enemy to Christian Religion, and Regis ad exemplum,
etc. Believers (it is like) were not so many as to bear the name of a Land or
Nation, nor could they have liberty safely to meet in National Synods. Show
me a Nation of Magistrates and people converted, and I will show you a
National church. Ultra posse, non est esse, whether National churches be
lawful or unlawful.

1. Nation of Magistrates and people converted, and I will show you a National
Christian church, framed like the Jewish church, with one National Bishop over
it, one National Cathedral in it, etc. for so would Prelaticall men and the
Pope himself argue. No one Nation was converted then, and therefore there could
be no National Pastor. Many nations were not converted then, therefore there
could be no universal Pastor. But what hinders but that there might be
afterward, when a Nation and when the world should come to be converted?

2. Though there was no Nation converted wholly, and therefore (as you say) no
national church could be; yet Christ's will and mind in that matter, might
easily have been dictated in the Scriptures, had he intended any such Church
afterward; as Moses tells the Jews, Deuteronomy. 12.8, 9, 10. That they should not
do ( when they should come to Canaan) every man what he lists, as they did in
the Wilderness, but there should be a place appointed, and thither should they
bring their offerings and tithes; and though there were not Nations converted,
yet there were so many in a Nation converted, as made many Assemblies; In
little Judea there were Congregations, and why (together with the Church at
Jerusalem) might there not have been a Diocesan or Classical Church? There
were enough converted for such a purpose. But show the sootsleps of a Diocesan
or Classical Church, and it shall serve the turn; then we will yield there
might in time be a National.

Arguments taken from the appellation of the word Church, or Churches, are very
unsatisfactory, because of the various acceptations of the words Kahal, Gnedah,
Ecclesia, Synagoga, which we sometimes translate Church, but should always
translate Convocation, or Congregation, a company called out, or gathered
together.

In this answer you labor to overthrow our Argument; Congregationall churches,
setched from the appellation of the Apostle (when he speaks of Countries and
Provinces, where more Congregations were, he calls them perpetually churches,
in the plural number, and not church) by these suggestions rather then
arguments:

1. That the words, Kahal, Gnedah, Ecclesia, Synagoga, should always be
translated Convocation, a company called out, or gathered together; if this be
yielded, wherein it will advantage you we know not. A national Convocation or
Congregation, or gathering together, will sound harsher then a national
Church; for every one knows that we have no National Congregation in England:
But,

2. You suggest;

The English word church, Saxon, Cyrick, and Scots Kirk; are derived from
(...), as Cambd. Rem. or, (...), as Sr. Hen. Spelm. which ( as (...))
signifies the place of meeting. Hence we read of robbers of Churches or
Temples, Acts 19.37. Kahal ( whence our English word, call) is sometimes
Metonymically understood of the place. The Heathen enter into the Sanctuary,
which God has forbidden to enter into the Church, Lam. 1.10. with Deuteronomy. 23.3.
Nehem. 13.1. To come together, (...). is (if it be rightly translated) to come
together in one place, and so Ecclesia is opposed to the buildings, or houses
in which they did eat and drink, 1 Cor. 11.19, 20, 21, 22. Synagoga is
evidently taken for the place of meeting, Luke 7.5. Acts 18.7.

1. (...), or, (...), in the proper signification, appertaining to the Lord,
and may more properly relate to people appertaining to the Lord, then to place;
because the people do more appertain to the Lord, then the place.

2. Though Kahal once, perhaps, and Synagoga oftener, may be understood of the
place, yet Ecclesia never. That place in Acts 19.37. is (...) robbers of
Temples, not Churches: That place in 1 Cor. 11.18. When ye come together,
(...), is not to be rendered, in one place. Pareus upon those words utterly
denies it. And there is good reason, why they should rather be referred to the
people as a church, then to the place: For the meaning is, (when ye meet in
the church) when ye meet as the church, that is, to perform Church-work. For
they might meet in the place, even those very persons, and yet not meet as a
Church; as it might be said, when such meet in a Synod, it is meant, as a Synod,
to act some thing as a Synod. As convenire in Senatum, is to meet as a Senate;
not so much referring to the place, as to the persons: so meeting (...),
misacrum conventum, Beza, ibid. i. for a holy meeting, and Musculus in coetu
sacro, que^ li^vocat Ecclesiam. i. in a holy Assembly, which he calls the
Church. Item Pet. Mart. bid.
It referres not to the place, nor to the persons barely meeting, but to the
persons meeting as a Synod to act Synodically.

Besides, though Kahal and Synogoga may by a Metonymy be referred to place,
because there were places built and set apart for Church-services, yet (...) in
the new Testament cannot be so taken, because they had no set stated appointed
places for the Christian churches to meet in; your self assert so much, p. 26.
Nor is (...) opposed to the buildings and houses in which they did eat and
drink in 1 Cor. 11.19, 20, 21. The words are, or despise ye the Church of God?
which respects the people, the godly amongst them, which told them of their
fault, and other Churches also, as Pareus upon that place observes; Unless you
will say, there must be a reverent observance of the place where the Church
meets, more then of all other places. They met in Woods, Dens, Caves, many
times in times of persecution; and must those places be more respected then
men's houses, where they did eat and drink in? But what would you infer, if
(...) or Church were taken for the place? Would it profit you? Yes; for you say
afterward,

The Scripture calls them Church or Congregation often, and sometimes in
respect of their several Synagogues, Psalm. 74.4.8. No wonder therefore if that
Christians of one country meeting in several Synagogues, James 2.2. Heb.
10.25. Acts 19.8, 9. and 22.19. Acts 13.15, 16, 43. and houses, Acts 12.12.
Romans 16.5. do receive the denomination of Churches, which in Scripture phrase
is all one with Assemblies, many whereof we confess were in Galatia, Macedonia.

The place you bring from Psalm. 74.4.8. is impertinently alleged: Jews which
was one, is not called Congregations in verse. 4. in reference to diverse
Synagogues they met in, verse. 8. But Congregations there, is Metonymically
used, and is all one with Synagogues, and signifies the place, and not the
people at all; They roar in the midst of the Congregations, that is, in the
midst of those places where the Congregation met, which places were many, but
the Congregation but one, having one high Priest, for their chief Pastor;
though meeting in its parts in many places. So that the Church of the Jews is
not called Congregations, as Mollerus shows upon that place. Neither can you
show (as we suppose) that ever any one Church was called churches in the
plural number, either in the old or new Testament, in reference to plurality
of places they met in.

For, if it were so; how comes it, that a Church in a city, such as Jerusalem,
Corinth, Ephesus, and Rome, which met and assembled in many places (as our
Brethren of the Presbytery say) are never called Churches, but always Church?
And yet a Church in the country, meeting and assembling in many places are
called Churches, and not Church. And you say, there is no wonder of it, for
this reason, because the Houses and Synagogues in the country were many, in
which they met. See (brother) whether you do not in this assertion, cross your
self? In the city you can find many meeting houses, and but one Church, but in
the country you can find so many Churches, as meeting houses.

But the truth is, it is not place, but the combination of a Christian people
to meet together for Ordinances, that makes a Church: For the same Church may
meet sometimes together in one place for Church worship, and sometimes asunder
in many places, for Christian worship; but they are not therefore divided into
sundry Churches. And many distinct Churches, or parts of them may meet
occasionally in one place, yet they become not one Church hereby; but
combination to enjoy Church ordinances together in a constant way, makes a
Church; and all in a city were in this combination to enjoy ordinances
together, therefore they were a Church. But all in a country could not be in
such a combination to meet together constantly; therefore they were not a
Church, but churches. But you go on, and say,

The word Kahal and Gnedah, do signify a dispersed multitude, that never met
together; that the people of Israel, though divided into several domestical
assemblies to keep the Passover, are called one Church; That an Assembly is
all one with Kahal, Ecclesia, whether it be good or bad, less or greater; that
when the Israelitish men, women and children were together, they were but one
Congregation: And when all did not meet, (though searce half, or a third part
met) yet they were called all the Congregation. And when there was a great
Assembly, then the Scripture tells us, there was a great Church; accounting no
more persons of the Church, but those that were then assembled; Yea, Simeon and
Levi's assembly is called a Church; and those many which were gathered to pray
in the house of Maty, are called the Church, though many were absent. Yea, four
or sive in a Family joining in the worship of God, are called a Church.

But (suppose there be truth in all that is said) what are all these acceptions
of the words Kahal and Ecclesia to the purpose? one Church is called two, or
more Churches? For, except there can be brought instances of this nature, the
air is but beaten all the while, and our assertion stands immovable. We find
many churches in little Judea; in which of the ennumerations of acceptions of
those words, Kahal, Ecclesia, does it appear, that a Church that is really but
one, multiplies into many, and is called churches, and yet is but one? If you
find not this, we cannot believe that a whole Nation or Province of Believers
are but one Church in the days of the Gospel.

Besides, is your scope to confound and lose your Readers in the various
acceptions of the word Assembly, or Church; so that when they read the word
Church, or Churches, they shall not be able to know what to make of it? How
then will they understand your National Church, at which your Discourse
drives? It had been your part to have taken your Reader by the hand, and to
have showed him when the word Church is taken properly, and when improperly.

Both you in your National, and we in our Congregationall, understand a
people combined together into one body to worship God. And in the old Testament
(let the words, Kahal, Gnedah, be taken as they may) there was but one kind of
Church so combined, which was National: And in the new Testament we say; there
is no other combination, to enjoy all ordinances and worships instituted in the
Gospel but Congregationall; and we produce the small country of Judea,
containing a plurality of Churches; and thence collect, that they must be
Congregations, and that Congregations are therefore Churches. And this is not
weakened by what variety of acceptions is brought.

Furthermore, we do not know, that Church, or Flock, or Lump, or Body, when
referred to God and Christ, and is properly taken, is used otherwise then in
two or three senses: either for the mystical Church, Ephe. 5.25, 26. or the 2
Cor. 8.1.19.
Congregationall, 1 Cor. 1.1. (sometimes indeed, Rev. 1.4.
we read of it in a sigurative sense, as in 1 Cor. 12.28. Gal. 5.9. James 2.2.
1 Pet. 5.2. and many more places)

For though you say, That four or five in a Family joining in the worship of
God, are the Domestical Church spaken of by Paul, many times in his Epistles,
yet we conceive otherwise; for seeing usually when there were any heads of
Families converted, some of the household were converted with them, as we can
give many instances, we think that many, or the most that Paul saluted, had in
that sense churches in their Families; and therefore, Paul would not have
singled out, and with a note of distinction, have spoken of some persons, and
the churches in their Families, for that reason, if some other reason had not
moved him; either then these Families were large and great Families, and might
be as numerous as some Congregationall Churches; or the foundation of a Church
might be laid in the persons of a Family, but not so to continue, but to grow
to a Congregation; or else some Congregationall Church might meet in such
houses, which was ordinary in those days. And for the word Church in Acts 12.
either it is to be taken for the mystical church, or else for that particular
visible society of Believers, which was at Jerusalem, though some of them were
absent. But you proceed to give more particular answers, and encounter with a
part of the forementioned Position, viz. There were Churches in Galatia,
therefore they were Congregationall.

Galatia was a large country; in England a far less country, several
Churches have been heretofore and yet not merely Congregationall.

And why are Galatia and Macedonia taken hold of, Judea left out, which in the
Position was mentioned as well as they? Surely the reason was, because in both
those countries there was more room for your National Church, then in Judea.
You could not find breadth enough to make a plutality of Diocesan Churches, and
therefore durst not contend for National.

But grant we the largeness of those countries: (according as you speak) were
either of them too large to make one National Church? (we know you think not
so.) Why then does not the Apostle knit them all up into one National Church,
if he had so intended them? But you add,

The Churches of Galatia might he combined one to another, as the Churches of
England, Scotland, Holland, France, are respectively combined; for the Apostle
speaks of them as one lump, 1 Cor. 5.6. with Gal. 5.9, etc.

Such a combination we easily grant to be among the Churches of Galatia, as is
among the Churches of England, Scotland, none at all: or at the most a
combination without jurisdiction. But, if by respectively you mean a
combination, which each of these Churches has in it self, in all the
Congregations of and belonging to it; such a combination we deny to have been
in the Churches of Galatia. For all our Congregations have been united under
one Metropolitan Archbishop, of all England, and as yet there is none other
established; and for other combinations, such as in Scotland, Holland, etc.
without proof we cannot grant them in Galatia. And if Paul had intended by
saying, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, that we should gather thence,
that they were all one Church, he would never have called them churches in the
Preface of his Epistle; but in a distributive sense it is to be understood: For
suppose one speak in a literal sense, and say, a little leaven leaveneth the
whole lump, does he thereby make all the dough in a country one lump? No, but
of every lump (how many soever they be) it is to be understood, a little leaven
leaveneth each of them; so of churches, a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump, that is, the whole Church, every Church in which it is, this makes not
all the Churches in a country to be one.

And the Churches of Macedonia were not so several, but they joined in one to
choose a Brother ( which I conceive was an authoritative act) to go with Paul
for the managing of the Churches contributions, 2 Cor. 8.18, 19.

1. Officer is much more an authoritative act; which you grant to appertain
unto the people; then the people may act authoritatively, which is none of our
assertion, but yours, and the people are beholden to you for it.

2. A combination of churches without jurisdiction, will enable them to such an
act; nay, if there were no combination at all, yet when many churches are alike
interessed in a business, reason shows they ought to join alike to promove it.

3. They did not make him an Officer by this act of choosing him, but they
deputed him thereby to a particular work, which when accomplished, all was
ended.

The churches of Judea, consisting of Myriads of people, did come together,
Acts 21.20, 21, 22. to be satisfied of Paul, concerning an accusation that they
had received against him, and are called a Church, Gal. 1.13. Acts 12.1. and an
House, Heb. 3.4.

Not the Jews of Judea alone did gather together, Jews of all other parts; as
appears from Acts 21.27. But be it that they gathered alone, yet are they
called one Church? the place alleged is, Gal. 1.13. I persecuted the Church of
God. What Church? Churches in Judea? No, Paul says, he persecuted them unto
strange cities, and Damascus was one of them. The meaning is, them that were of
Jerusalem he persecuted to strange cities, or, he persecuted the Saints in
general. Who, as they are parts of the mystical Church, may be called by a
Synecdoche, the Church. And Herod stretched out his hands to vex certain of the
Church. What church? Either the mystical, or that at Jerusalem, or any Church
within his reach. And his house, Heb. 3.4. to be understood of the churches of
Judea? What strange mis-interpreting of Scripture is this? house in that place,
is all the churches that were then, or ever were to be in the world; Christ is
the builder of them all.

POSITION V.
When a visible Church is to be erected, This is not unlike the Answer to 32.
q. p. 8, 9.
the matter of it should be visible Saints and Believers, 1 Cor. 1.2.

True, so it should; when an Army is to be raised, a City begun, a Family set
up, much more when a Church is to be erected or continued, the matter of them
should be visible; yea, real Saints, beloved of God, elect, blessed, Deuteronomy.
38.14. Isai. 1.21.26. Acts 16.34. Romans 1.7. Ephesians. 1.1.2, 3.4. And we heartily
wish they were all such.

1. The meaning of the Position is this: Visibility of Saintship is requisite
to warrant the setting upon such an action as erecting of a Church; else the
action for the nature of it is naught, might not be performed; Better no Church
erected, then not of visible Saints: The rule is broken, sin committed. Is this
granted by you? If so, why is the position quarrelled at, seeing it is all that
is asserted?

2. But why do you jumble these actions together? The raising of an Army, the
erecting of a City, the setting up of a Family, and the erecting of a Church?
As if they were actions of a like nature? As if visibility of Saintship to them
all, were of like necessity? Do you conceive that the matter of an Army, must
either be visible Saints, or there must be no Army raised? The matter of a
city, visible Saints, or no city erected? Does the nature of those actions
necessarily require any such qualification in the subject persons performing
them, that without such qualifications the subject persons are in a state of
incapacity, according to Gods true scope and intention to set upon such
actions? We know you hold it not. Heathens may raise Armies, and wage war, and
not sin because they do so, if the cause be just. They may erect cities, (and
remain Heathens still) and not sin because they do so, for it may be their duty
so to do; but may they erect a Church to God, and remain Heathens, and not sin
in doing so? An Atheist and profane wicked person may buy and sell, and labor
in his Calling, and not sin because he does so, because it is his duty; but may
he be one to erect a Church of, and to partake in the seal of the Lords Supper,
and be an Atheist and visible person still, without sin? Men need not be
Believers and Saints to warrant them to perform civil actions, or some
religious actions, for irreligious wicked persons, while in that state, are
called to them; but to do them with acceptance, and so as to be accounted
righteous in the doing of them, they must be Believers and Saints. But to erect
a Church, which is Christ's body, and is called to have communion with Christ in
his body, and blood in that Supper which he instituted, is an action of another
nature, and requires faith and holiness in the persons that constitute it, to
warrant the constitution of it. For Church state being holy, and the Ordinance
of it holy, either the subject persons must be holy also, or all will be
grievously profaned, and God foully dishonored.

But why do you say, They should not only be visible, but real Saints; except
it be to cast another mist before the eyes of the ignorant? For, if an Army
were to be raised to fight on the Purliament side against the Cavaliers, you
would say, it must consist of visible friends which seem sincere and cordial,
else let it not be raised at all; but you would not say it must consist of
real friends, for then it would not be raised at all: For, if it must consist
of real friends, God must be the raiser of it, and not man, who alone knows
who are real friends: So of a Church, if it must consist only of real
friends, God alone must erect it, and man must not meddle with it.

And though we read these phrases, Beloved of God, Elect, blessed, yet either
they received these denominations from the judgment of Charity, because they
seemed to be such, as Phil. 1.7. or if there were infallibility, it was
applicable only to a party within the Churches whom the Apostle discerned to be
such, and not to the whole Church.

Yet we dare not use unscripturall ways and means for the procuring and
preserving of Church Members sanctity; To be wise and holy above the rule, is
to be foolish, profane, presumptuous, superstitious. Could you show us out of
Scripture, that the Church must examine persons that come to be admitted, and
that they must make any other declaration then professing of faith and
repentance: and that the Congregation ought to reject such, of whose sincerity
and sanctity they are not satisfied? and that the want of this care in the
first constitution of a Church, does nullify it or make it unlawful for men
to join to it, or continue in it, and that it is necessary to know, that a
Church was constituted of visible Saints, before he can in faith join to it, we
should not differ about the sanctity of the members.

Here is a deep charge of some things practiced by us, to be foolish, profane,
superstitious and presumptuous; And there are instances given, in examination
of persons, whether there be the works of Grace wrought in their hearts, or no,
etc.

We answer for our selves:

First, there are some things fathered upon us, which we hold not: as,

1. That there must be some further declaration besides profession of faith and
repentance. We contend for no such thing, but conceive profession of faith and
repentance, if in the judgment of charity it may be accounted real, if there
be any thing that may serve to give witness unto it, that it is not merely
verbal, may be judged sufficient.

2. That the want of care to try the sincerity and sanctity of men, does
nullify the Church; This is an opinion which we renounce as none of ours.

3. That we must know that a Church was constituted of visible Saints before we
can in faith join to it. We hold flatly against such an assertion, and do
believe a judgment may be made from the present faith and order which any
Church holds forth, whether it be safe or unsafe to join to it, or to continue
in it.

Secondly, there are other things which some Churches hold and practice, which
we think cannot be condemned: As that a Church must examine persons that come
to be admitted, whether the work of grace be wrought within them or not. Your
self will now admit none (of whom you doubt) to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, till you have first examined them of their knowledge; and why may not
we examine them of their grace? Is the Lords body discerned by knowledge most,
or by grace? Faith is a grace, and faith is the best discerner of the Lords
body; and if we can but find grace, we shall be sure to find knowledge: The
Scripture says, Let a man examine himself; yet you think not that sufficient,
unless you examine him; if it be no Scripturall way to examine others, why
will you be so soolish, profane, presumptuous, superstitious? A stranger comes
to the gate of a Garrison town, professes to be a friend, yet except there be
something to witness the truth of that profession, he is examined over and
over again; and it is strictness that shows faithfulness to the State: And
shall we be more remiss and careless when we receive persons into the Church,
then we are when we receive them into a town? Our too much credulity may show
too little fidelity in the matters of Christ, as well as in the business of
men.

Besides, if the Church be not a common receptacle of all persons, but that it
consist of a selected number, and some are received, and others rejected, then
there are certain rules of reception and rejection. And then there must be a
trial made by some, whether persons be qualified according to those rules; and
this the light of nature teaches, and the rules of Reason lead to it; though
there should be nothing in the Scripture expressly mentioning it. The most
suitable means serving most fitly to atchieve such ends, are always enjoined in
the ends, though they be not particularly expressed. But what think you? Is it
not as lawful to try persons that would be Churchmembers, and make some
profession in words of says and repentance, but hold forth nothing which may
probably give witness to the reality thereof, as it was lawful and
commendable in the Ephesians to try false Apostles, which professed in words to
be true Apostles? Rev. 2.2. And is it not as reasonable for a Church to seek
satisfaction, concerning the reality and sincerity of sanctity from persons of
whom they doubt, as it was just and equal for the Church at Jerusalem to seek
satisfaction concerning Saul, whether he were a Disciple in truth or in
pretense only? Acts 9.26, 27.

But you will say, there was cause of suspicion and jealousy in them,
concerning him, because they knew him formerly to be a destroyer of the Church.

And may not we say, there is cause of jealousy, when we know external
profession of faith and repentance to be so common, and the fruits which are
worthy of it, Mat. 3.8. to be so rare and scarce to be found?

If the Gospel and Christian Religion was brought into England in the Apostles
times, then it was like it was constituted of Saints, Church Covenant p. 37.
as well as the Church of Corinth, etc.

Because it is uncertain what Congregation was at first constituted of Saints
within this kingdom, and what was not, visible Saints (as doubtless there are
many in some Congregations, and united also amongst themselves,) we could wish
they were all such; and in the mean time, for the sake of those few whom we
see, so united, we acknowledge them a Church, and in all things so far as
they carry the ordinances uncorruptly we desire to have fellowship with them.

The Text in 1 Cor. 1. rather shows what the members of the Church of Corinth
were at the time of Paul's writing to them, then that they were on ought to have
been visible Saints, at the first erection of that Church; yet it shows not,
that all the Church Members he writes to, were visible Saints; for many known
evil livers were known Members; The denomination of Saints, is a parce
meliore, that is, from the better part, etc.

The Text shows what they either were at first, viz. sanctified in Christ,
called to be Saints, as Hemingius, Gualter, Pareus upon that place do note, for
they say, a definition of a Church may thence be fetched. And what rule soever
there is in Scripture requiring that any be Saints, the same rule requires that
all be Saints. And there may many Arguments be brought to hold it forth:

1. The end of Church Fellowship is not conversion, but edification, Ephesians.
4.11, 12. Acts 9.31. For if it were conversion, then all uncoverted ones,
whether they make profession of faith and repentance or no, might enter in,
that thereby they might attain one end for which they enter; as we know.
Because one end of the preaching of the Word is conversion, therefore all may
partake of it, Jews, Turks, Heathens, because they may attain one end whereto
it serves. It is supposed then that the persons that enter into the Church are
converted already.

2. Excommunication is an ordinance in the Church, and one end of it is, to
recover persons that are desperately sick, and ready to die; it is in the use
of it as physic, 1 Cor. 5.5. and therefore supposes the persons to whom
applied to be alive, therefore all Churchmembers are to be reputed in the
judgment of charity, to be living stones, 1 Pet. 2.5.

3. If excommunication be an ordinance to throw forth visible sinners, of all
sorts, then the Church should consist of visible Saints. 1. It appears that
all scandalous gross sinners ought to be cast out from 1 Cor. 5. and that all
other sinners which are not seandalous, if they will not be healed of their
lesser faults, and brought to repentance, ought to be duly proceeded against
until at last it come to an excommunication, Matthew. 18.15, 16, etc.

He writes to the Church called to be Saints, or called Saints, not to the
Saints called to be a Church, or to the Church constituted of Saints: which
expression rather of the two proves there was a Church, before they were Saints
( See verse. 1. Paul called to be an Apostle,) then that they were Saints before
they were a Church.

He writes to the Church of God; Church of God, before there be Saints? What a
Church of God is that, which had no visible Saints in it when it was first
constituted? Surely, except you will say, they were a Church of God while they
were Heathens, you must confess, that professing to be turned by the power of
the Gospel in a time of persecution from the service of Idols, to embrace the
living God in Christ, they must be judged visible Saints at the first when they
were a Church of God. And these words (Paul called to be an Apostle) will not
avail you; for Paul was a man, and a Christian too, before an Apostle; but what
would you have the Church of God to be before they were visible Saints?

But how appears it that all the honorable Titles and Epithets given Paul,
are given with relation to Church Members? The Corinthians were enriched by God
in all utterance, etc. Will you thence conclude, that all Church Members must
be so, etc.

There are some names which show the intrinsecall nature of the things to which
they are given, all of that kind. As if one should write to the Army of such a
General, called to be soldiers, this name shows the intrinsecall nature of
the thing to which applied. Such is the name Saint, when applied to the Church
of God; but there are other names which are extrinsecall, and superadditionall
to the nature of the things given to, and separable, and may be in some, and
not in other of that kind: As if one should write, to the Army of such a one
enriched with gold and silver, apparel, this is extrinsecall and casual, and
may agree to some Armies, and not to others; such are the Epithets, 1 Cor. 5.
enriched with wisdom, utterance, etc. Concerning the names, Elect, etc. we
have answered them before.

POSITION VI.
The form of a Church, is the gathering together of these visible Saints, and
combining and uniting them into one body by the form of a holy Covenant, Deuteronomy.
29 1.10, 11, 12. by which is plainly showed, that a company of people become.
Gods people, that is, a Church, by entering into Covenant with God. If it be
said, they were a Church before; yet that was when the Church of the jews was
constituted in Abraham's Family by Covenant.

You intend not that this Covenant does make a true Church, but a pure
Congregationall Church, as it is refined according to the platform of the
Gospel.

We intend that the combination of Saints into one body by some kind of
Covenant, either express or implicit, Ames calls it) does make a true Church.
The seed of Jacob, and the Sechemites could not make a Church together, Genesis
34.15, 16. but by becoming one, and they could not become one, but by coming
into the same Covenant, therefore they say (though deceitfully, for they never
meant it; yet therein they show how such a thing could only be done,) if you
will be as we be, that every male be circumcised, then we will become one
people; and we would demand, had those Sechemites been Believers, and had this
business been carried without guile, whether they had not by this doing become
one Church?

We conceive relation or combination into one unto domestic ends and purposes
is the form of a Family, and relation and combination into one unto politic
and civil ends and purposes is the form of a Commonwealth, and relation and
combination of one man and one woman unto conjugall ends and purposes is the
form of matrimonial state; and that covenant always makes this relation and
combination into oneness, where the persons are free from each other, and no
natural tie amongst them; and so relation and combination of so many Saints as
do, or may well meet in one place, unto religious ends, (...) the enjoyment of
Church-ordinances, does make a church; and because the persons are free from
one another, therefore covenant or agreement together (which is all one) must
make the relation.

A solemn express and verbal covenant or agreement (we assert) to be
necessary unto the purity and strength of a Church, and so consequently unto
the welbeing of a Church; for how Saints (and they alone) living promiscuously
in the world, should yet be severed from the world, with which they be in
habitation mingled; and how they (even they alone) should have communion
together in all holy ordinances, without express verbal consent, we cannot
conceive; which yet we judge ought to be, if the rule be well attended, which
says, Nothing shall enter into the holy city which defiles, Rev. 21.27. and
22.14. And how such looseness which is in our Parish-churches [from which any
may depart to another Parish Church, without rendering any reason (removing
their habitation, it may be but a stones cast,)] which we conceive to be a
great evil: (For the members in a natural body are not so loosly joynted, nor
stones in any house so loosly set, unto which yet a particular Church is
compared, Ephesians. 2.22. and 1 Cor. 12.27.) How this evil may be prevented but by
express agreement, we cannot apprehend; and therefore conceive such a covenant
to be necessary to such purposes.

A Church Covenant s especially in relation to Church Estate, and Church duties
( as a marriage-covenant is with relation to the marriage state and marriage
duties) but the Covenant here enentioned, was not entered into in reference to
Church estate, and Church duties, rather then to other duties of the moral
Law, and may be taken by two or three, though they be too few to make a Church,
or by persons of several Churches, in a ship or a journey, and yet leave them
in the same Church State they were before, and not make them members of a
distinct Church.

A Church Covenant is especially in relation to Church duties, Covenant in
Deuteronomy. 29.1.10, 11, 12. respects principally Church-duties, more then other
duties of the moral Law, as appears from verse. 16, 17, 18. for he warns them
of Heathenish worships, such which they had seen in Egypt, and among the
Nations, and would engage them by holy covenant to all Gods holy worships,
which were of his own institution, of which were the worship and service of the
Passover, and all the offerings of Gods prescription, which were to be brought
to the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; and the covenant of two or
three to perform such duties might not be taken, because some of them did seal
their union and communion with that body, and were to be celebrated when the
whole body was assembled. And though a covenant binding to the performance of
some of the duties of the moral Law, may be made by two or three, and by
persons of several Churches, and yet leave them in the same Church State, and
not make them members of a distinct Church from what they were of before, yet
not so a covenant that binds to Church-duties, as if a company of persons of
diverse churches should covenant to meet together, to pray one with another,
this would not make them a Church, nor change their state; but if they covenant
to walk together in the constant enjoyment of all Church-ordinances, which God
requires of a Church; this would make them a Church, and change their state,
that afterward they could not be of diverse Churches, but of the same Church
and Body.

A Covenant in general does not make a Church ( nor a marriage, a Covenant
betwixt this man and that woman makes it) but a Covenant with appropriation and
application to this, or that Pastor or people, but the Scripture covenants are
not with appropriation and application to this Pastor or people (viz.) that
they would serve God with this people or Pastor, rather then with that;
therefore they are not Church-covenants.

Who ever read or heard of any Covenant in general of duties to be done,
engaged to perform such duties? As a covenant of duties in a marriage would be
ridiculous without application to persons, this man, or that woman to be
engaged to perform such duties, so is any covenant. The covenants in Scripture
were no such covenants; they were applied to Israel, and to the Gentiles that
should join to Israel, and appropriated to them also: So that they were a
separated people from other Nations by covenant, Exodus 12.47, 48. the Passover
was a service which all the house of Israel was engaged to perform together,
and all that would join to them, and by circumcision they became one people
with them; but no stranger might partake with them, so that the Jews by the
Covenant of God, were to serve God, rather with this people, then with that.

That a covenant makes a Church with appropriation to this or that Pastor, is
denied: for we hold it a consequent privilege of a Church (whether constituted
by verbal covenant or not) to choose their own Pastor; therefore the Church is
first, before it has a Pastor: this is confessed by your self, page 13. if it
were not so, the Church would be dissolved at the death of the Pastor; there is
a covenant between the Pastor and people, but it is emergent, and grows out,
and proceeds from the Covenant among the people; the people must first be one
before they can agree in one, to choose their Pastor, with whom they afterward
enter into covenant: There was a covenant with Abraham and his house, by virtue
of which, Israel was the Lords people in Egypt, before there were any Pastors
to be over them; therefore Church Covenant there was in Scripture, without
application to Pastors. And it was so in the Wilderness also at the first
before Aaron and his sons were chosen.

To be Gods people, and Gods Church, is not all one in your sense. Forty
Believers of no Church, or of forty several Churches, are the Lords people,
but they are not an instituted Church.

To be one people unto God, in a professed solemn way, (which is done by
entering into covenant with God) and to be a Church, is all one. Now this is
that which is asserted from Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13. That thou should enter into
covenant with the Lord thy God, that be may establish thee this day for a
people, (or one people) to himself, in a professed way: So by the Covenant of
circumcision, (for so it was called, because it was the seal of it) the
Seehemites were to become one people to God, and to the seed of Jacob, Genesis
34.15, 16.

No Covenant in Scripture was at the founding of the Jewish Church, nor of the
Christian Church, nor at the adding any members to them: neither did they make
a Church more truly a Church, or politic Society, or more truly members, but
did make them or show them to be more pure and holy servants of God; even as
when single persons or families do covenant with God.

1. If there were no covenant at the founding of the Jewish church, entered by
the Seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision? does not the way of
augmentation of the Church show the way of the first constitution thereof? So
it may be spoken of Christian Churches: why are converted Heathens, and the
Infants of Church Members, brought into the Church by baptism? which is a
Church-ordinance, and the seal of the Covenant of grace, and of that part of it
principally which respects Church-society.

2. How do those which were many, become one among themselves, and distinct
from all other bodies of the same kind, (as Corinth was one in it self, and
distinct from Cenchrea: (for parishbounds were not then on foot) so that the
members of one were not the members of the other; nor the Officers of one the
officers of the other) if there be nothing that knits them together among
themselves, and divides them asunder from others? and if any thing combine
them, what can it be but some agreement or covenant express or implicit? Why
must circumcision the seal of the Covenant be used to make the Sechemites one
people with Jacobs family, if Jacobs family, or Isaak's, or Abrabam's before
that, were one unto all holy Church-worships among themselves without covenant?

3. Did the joining of the believing Gentiles to the family of Abraham by
circumcision, make them no more truly members of the church of Israel, then
they were before, only make them, and show them to be more pure and holy
servants of God? were they not accounted after circumcision of the Jews
Commonwealth, and were invested into all the Jews spiritual privileges?
which they had no right to before, though they were converted persons, and Gods
servants.

4. We conceive that Abraham and his family were not in Church state, and
professedly and openly separated from the world till the Covenant in Genesis 17.
at which time, by a mark in his flesh, he was distinguished from all the
nations, and became Gods household; if this be so then, Church state is founded
in Covenant, if it be otherwise, let it appear that he was in Church state
before that time, and we shall look out for a Covenant before that time: That
which induces us thus to think, is, 1. Because we read nothing of Abraham's
family, that they were a professed people unto God before that time. 2. We
read not of any Symbol of Church state by which Abrabam and his family were
separated from the rest of the world, before circumcision, which was a token in
their flesh to distinguish them from the nations round about them. 3. This
distinguished him and his family not from the world alone, but from other
believers of his time, Melchisedeck and Lot, which though holy men, yet not in
his state, nor had his privileges. But this Argument from circumcision is
encountered with in your answer that follows.


The Covenant in Genesis 17. is taken only for Gods part of the Covenant, or his
promise to Abraham, Gal. 3.16, 17. not for man's part to God.

While you charge us of mis-interpreting the Scriptures, you upon to be wary
that your self run not into that error. Paul, Gal. 3.16. with verse. 8. (as
Peter, Acts 3.25. (...), rendered well there, and in thy seed) seems to make
use of the promise of God made to Abraham and his seed in the Covenant, Genesis
12.3. and 22.16.18. The Apostle there had no occasion to speak of the
restipulation on Abraham's part, and in Genesis 17.1.9. it is manifest, that that
Covenant was reciprocal, as Junius and Pareus do observe upon that place; but
you check your self, as if overbold, and therefore say,

Indeed, receiving of circumcision does import a Covenant on Abraham's part, or
consent to the Covenant, as baptism also does: but it is held they were in
Church state before they had right to circumcision; therefore you should show
they made a Covenant before circumcision.

Circumcision (being but the sign and seal of the covenant betwixt God and
Abraham) does argue necessarily that there was a covenant before, sign and
seal: and we would demand, whether Isaac were not in covenant before he was
circumcised? and whether his circumcision did not seal so much? and always
this order is supposed: First, Gods promise: Secondly, man's faith: Thirdly, the
sign and seal of both in some Symbol of Gods institution, so in Baptism.

How prove you that Melchisedeck a Priest, and Lot, which were not of his seed
nor family, were out of Church State? That a believer is not a son of Abraham,
if he be not in Church state by covenant? which things you seem to imply, when
you say, the Jewish Church was constituted in Abraham's family by
Church Covenant; the family of Sem was the Church of God long before this.

1. We assert not that they were out of Church State; circumcised, (as we read
not that they were) they were not of Abraham's Church, nor had the Passover
been on foot, could they have partaked of it, any more then Believers could
afterward, who joined not to Abraham's family. Cornelius may be an example.

2. It is one thing to be a son of Abraham as a Believer, and heir of promise,
for so all Believers are, and an Heathen is, when converted, before joined to
any instituted Church; and another thing to be the son of Abraham as a
professed Covenanter with God, and bearing the Symbol of it in his flesh: in
the former sense, Abraham was the father of all Believers, though
uncircumcised, and in the latter a father of the circumcised, which were also
of his faith; as the Apostle shows, Rom 4.11.12.

3. Though it be probable that there was a Church in the famimily of Sem, yet
that place, Genesis 9.26, 27. proves it not: for, first, it is prophetical of the
posterity of Sem and Japhet, and respects not (so far as we can discern) the
persons of Sem and Japhet (at least not at that time) being both (as is
probable) in the family of their father Noah: Secondly, there might be a Church
in Sems family, and yet of another constitution then this in Abraham's family;
this hinders not, but that the church in Abraham's family might be constituted
by covenant.

POSITION VII.
Every Member at his admission, See the like allegation in Answer to Pos. 9. p.
73.
does promise to give himself as to the Lord, to be guided by him; so to the
Church, to be guided by them; which is no more then the Members of the Church
of Macedonia did in a parallel case, 2 Cor. 8.5.

The givers are not the Members of the Church of Macedonia, (as you for your
advantage phrase it) but the Churches of Macedonia; and therefore, if this do
prove Union or Covenant, it is of the members of several churches, and not of
one only.

1. The allegation in answer to the 9th Position, As to the Lord to be guided
by him, so to the Church (according to God) to be guided by them; these words
(according to God) are lest out; whether wilfully to make the practice of our
Churches the more odious, or by oversight we conclude not.

2. There was no intent to prove Union or Covenant of a Church, but subjection
of each member to the Church to which he is joined himself, and the officers
thereof; and the practice of the Churches of Macedonia (by way of allusion) is
made use of: it is said, it is no more, then the members of the Church of
Macedonia did in a parallel case: The Argument is fetched a comparatis: the
members of the Church of Macedonia did as much in a like case,; they gave
themselves to the Lord, and to the Apostle and Timothy, according to Gods will,
to be guided by the Lord, and directed by them; a whole Church, or Churches to
one or two persons gave themselves; and an Argument is fetched thence, thus,
then may one person that is to join to a Church, as fitly give himself to the
Lord, to be guided by him, and to the whole Church and the Officers thereof to
be directed by them, according to the will of God; and it is urged, that a
member should therefore promiseit; and to call it Church of Macedonia, or
churches, is neither advantageous nor disadvantagious; for though many Churches
gave themselves to be guided by one Paul, because he was Officer to them all,
yet a members subjection will be only required to his own Church, and the
Officers thereof, because there is no superiority of jurisdiction of one Church
over another, and the members thereof. We believe you would be ready enough to
make use of this pattern, to prove that the members of a Congregation must
submit to the guidance of their Pastors; and why do you except against it,
because subjection of each member to the Church, is endeavored to be proved
thence, seeing that the Church compriseth the Officers thereof?

POSITION VIII.
This particular Congregation is a Church before it have Officers, Acts 2.47.

In a general sense, a few private men without Officers; yea, a few women
without men; yea, twenty members of several Churches may be called a Church;
but a governing Church they are not; the Church has not received an office of
rule without her Officers, Cottons Keys, p. 16. Reply.


We take Churches for such churches, Acts 9.31. and unto which Pastors were
given to reside with them, and to oversee them, Acts 20.28. and these must be
Congregationall Churches; for Pastors cannot constantly feed any other. Or, we
take Church as Amesius defines it, A company of faithful ones by special bond
betwixt themselves joined together, to exercise the communion of Saints
constantly amongst themselves.
Coetus sidelium speciali vinculo inter se conjunctorum ad communionem sanctor
um inter se constanter exercendam, such an united company is the Church, before
it have Officers, for it is their privilege to choose their Officers, (as you
confess in your Answer to the next Position) in which sense (if in any sense
at all) a few private men, or a few women, or twenty members of several
churches, have never been called a Church.

Now whether this Congregationall church be a Governing church or not, because
it is not asserted in the Position, we have no occasion here of discussing it.

The Church in Acts 2. had Officers, and better Officers then any Church now
has, even the Apostles which were the Elders of all Churches, 1 Pet. 5.1. 2
Cor. 11.28. The Apostles were as Elders and Rulers of all Churches, Cotton Keys
p. 48
and particularly of the Church of Jerusalem; and did act therein as Elders; it
is not all one to want Elders now they are instituted, as before; ordinary
Elders were not appointed at that time.

There is a concession that the Church, bad no ordinary Officers, for none were
then appointed; and yet they were a church, and Acts 14.23. shows so much they
were churches before the Apostles ordained Elders in them, and this is all that
the Position drives at.

And though there were general Elders which had inspection over all Churches;
yet neither these, nor any other Elders do Come into the essence of Churches.
ingredi essentiam Ecclesiarum; nor is it any formal reason why a Company of
Believers are a Church, because they have Elders, whether extraordinary or
ordinary; for were it so, then their privilege to choose their Officers, would
be when they have Officers, for then they are a Church; and it would follow,
that they cannot choose Officers when they want them, and have most need of
them, for then they are not a Church, and so can have no such power; and it is
very uncomfortable; for the death of an Officer, might be the unchurching of a
people.

But that which may give more satisfaction in this matter is the consideration
of such Scriptures where the members mentioned apart from the Officers, are
called the Church of God, Acts 20.28. the Elders are the persons spoken to,
feed the flock over which the holy Ghost has made you overseers, the
believing Ephesians are the flock, who are also called the Church of God,
purchased with his blood. Acts 20. verse. 28.
So Phil. 1.1. So that a Christian people, united together with an intent of
constant congregating to enjoy Ordinances for their edification, are a church
without officers; or if they have them, yet without consideration of them.

POSITION IX.
She has also full and free power to choose her own Officers without the help
of Synod, This, though not so fully, is asserted by R.M. and W.T. to C. H.
Classis or Presbytery, Act. 1.15. Acts. 6.3. and 14.23.

In Church Affairs, of weighty and difficult common concernment, as election
and ordination of Elders, excommunication of an Elder, it is safe and wholesome
and an boly Ordinance to proceed with consultation and consent of the churches,
Prove. 11.14. Cottons Keys, p. 55. Reply.


This Position says not that a particular Congregation or Church of Brethren
have full and free power to choose her own Officers without asking or seeking
the help of advice and direction from Synod, Classis, or Presbytery: nor do we
think that there is any such meaning in it; but without authoritative help of a
Synod, Classis, or Presbytery; for in all those places of the Acts, the
churches had the help of direction: but they were not strengthened by the
interposition of the authority of the Apostles, or of any other.

You will not take upon you hastily to censure the many notable precedents of
ancient and latter Synods, who have put forth the Acts of power in ordination
and excommunication. Cottons Keys, p. 28. Reply.


1. The grave Author of this speech meddles not with election in that place
quoted, but this Position runs of election. 2. He keeps himself from an hasty
and peremptory censuring of ancient precedents, who have put forth acts of
power in ordination and excommunication; but he declares his opinion against
it, and we approve as well of his modesty, as we do agree with him in his
judgment.
We hold it a privilege of the people ( especially if they proceed wisely and
piously) to elect their Officers, and an injury to obtrude any on them without
their consent.

1. What people are these that have this privilege? Cottons Keys, page 12.
the Author whom you make use of so often, calls them Church of Brethren; is it a
people-priviledge, or a church-priviledge to choose Ecclesiastical Officers?

2. What if they do not proceed wisely and piously? is their privilege lost?
must it be taken from them? and then it would be no injury to obtrude an
Officer on them. It is an Officers privilege to rule the Church; but what if
he do it not wisely and piously? is the privilege then lost? it is a Master of
a Families privilege to rule his own house: but what if he do it not wisely
and piously, must it now be taken from him? or rather must he not be directed
and exhorted to do it rightly? and the privilege remain still with him? so of
the people; we have Junius of our mind herein. Junius Eccles. p. 1963 Answer.


But let us view your Scriptures.

Seeing that you agree with us in the substance of the Position, Scriptures
brought by us to strengthen the same into question, and none of them will pass
for current with you, it had been convenient, that you should have produced the
Scriptures which do sway you unto the asserting of the same thing, that it
might have appeared to the world, that you have found out some better bottom
to set such a tenet on, then we have produced: For we conceive, that if the
Scriptures you oppugn are not pertinent to prove the Position, there will be
none found in all the new Testament, but they will be more liable to exception
then these; and it is to be noted, that all our modern Writers (that we know
of) that grant any liberty to the people of choosing their own Officers, they
do it upon the evidence of these Scriptures which are excepted against; in so
much that we know not what should be the reason why you grant the thing
alleged, and bring no proofs of your own to confirm it; and yet allow not of
ours which we bring, except you be resolved to contradict all that comes from
us. But what are your exceptions? let us prove what weight is in them; you say,

The Assembly, Acts 1. it is likely was not a body politic, but occasional
only, no part of Church Government being as yet set on foot: here were not all,
but some of the sounder members of the Jewish Church; and they had no
commission to separate from the Jews, before Acts 2.40. the Company was not
without Elders: all the Churches and Elder at that time in the world were
present: if there had been any more Elders they must have conveened upon that
occasion; the choice was limited by the Apostle Peter; First, to the persons
present: Secondly, to those that accompanied the Apostles all the time, etc.
and was determined by God whose it was to choose an Apostle, by his directing
of the lot.

The meaning is, they were not a Christian Church, but some of the sounder
members of the Jewish Church; and not yet separated from the Jewish Church; and
then,

1. There is a contradiction unto some other of the exceptions which follow: If
they were no Christian Church, how were the Apostles Elders of it? and how was
it an Oecumenicall council, all the Churches and Elders in the world being at
it?

2. Is there not some mistake in point of truth? For those persons who were
commanded to separate, Acts 2.40. were they added unto such which were not
separated? The Text says, there were added to them, three thousand fouls: (to
them) to whom? to those who are yet members of the Jewish church? then these
separated ones, who were added, were members of the Jewish church by their
addition; for they came into their state to whom they were added; and so they
were separated, and not separated; which yet agrees not to verse. 47. where they
are all together called a Church.

3. It is impertinently alleged that the company was not without Elders, the
Apostles were present: For was the company straightened in their liberty by the
presence of these Elders? or rather were they not acquainted with their
privilege in this matter by these Elders? When as else they might not have
known it: but you say a little after they were limited; but what is this
limiting? nothing else but necessary direction: and the limitation is but in
one thing, though you would have it in two; the words are these, Wherefore of
these that have accompanied us, etc. For ought that appears, all that had
accompanied them were present; and who could be so sit to be an Apostle, as one
of those who had accompanied them, 1 John 1.1.

4. If the election of an Apostle did belong to God, in reference to the
particular person; yet they proceeded as far as they could therein, and agreed
in the denomination of two, and when the lot determined whether of the two
should be the man, the Text says, verse. 26. by the common suffrage of them
all, Matthias was numbered among the eleven Apostles.

5. If all Elders and Churches must conveen upon occasion of electing of an
Apostle, because he is Pastor of all Churches, why must they not be gathered
together upon occasion of ordaining an Apostle? But we read but of one Church
and the Elders thereof present at the onlaining of Paul, Acts 13.2.3.23.
whereupon Paul calls himself, (...), Romans 1.1.

As for the Deacons and Overseers for the power, though people may better
discern of men's sitnesse and ability for that Office then for the Ministry.

Why are Deacons and Overseers for the poor made Synonymies and confounded?
Deacons amongst us, because we have had Overseers for the poor? but if we have
had Deacons, when were they ordained? who ever put their hands upon them
according to the pattern, Acts 6.6. or are they called so, because their work
is only to oversee the poor? we conceive their office extends further: But of
that in its own place.

It is added, etc.

1. They had direction to enable them to discern aright in choosing Deacons,
direction they will be able to discern aright in choosing other Officers. 2. A
godly people or church rightly constituted for the matter, will be able to
discern of wholesome and powerful Doctrine: and if they want skill to judge of
humane learning, they may with little ado be informed. 3. If your meaning be,
that upon this ground the people may choose Deacons, but not other Officers;
you might have done well to have limited what you before granted, and in stead
of saying, We hold it the privilege of the people, to choose their own
Officers, you would have said; We hold it the privilege of the people to
choase their own Deacons, but no Officers else.
And their liberty of choosing was a good means at that time to abate their
discontentments because of former neglect.

1. Then it was granted to them of courtesy, We hold it the privilege of the
people? 2. Does any thing appear to make this a reason that this liberty was
granted to them? Would not they have been as well pleased, if the Apostles had
done it, if it belonged to the Apostles and not to them? they all knew the
Apostles were more able to choose then they, and what the Apostles did, gave
better content; for all magnified the Apostles; besides, is it likely that the
Apostles would nourish a sinful humor of discontent in the people, by giving
them a privilege that belonged not to them? Good brother, take heed how you
attempt to evade the strength of plain Scripturall proofs, by such dangerous
glosses as these.
Yet at their election, there were all the Churches and Elders in the world.

The meaning is, Church, and the Elders thereof, at that time in the world, and
they were there. It is true, the members were there, for the Brethren were they
that elected, and the Apostles were there, which were extraordinary Elders, for
they were the persons that directed; but what did they act further? Did they
interpose their authority in election? Did they take it out of the Brethrens
hards? Did they not manifestly put it into their hands? in commanding them to
look out seven men, etc. Acts 6.3.

Your selves acknowledge Synods an Ordinance of Christ in sundry cases.

Authority of Synods by way of jurisdiction in any case;

and Barnabas ordained Eders by suffrages given by lifting up and stretching
out of hands, (for so the Greek word signifies) but that the people did ordain
Elders by election, without the Apostles, it says not, but rather the
contrary, (viz.) that they stayed from election and ordination of Elders, till
the Apostles came to advise and assist them therein; the word (...) signifies
rather to give, then to gather saffrages; as (...) does imply the election of
more Churches then one, and yet it imports the election of no more Churches
then those there spoken of; so the phrase (Paul and Barnabas, (...)) does not
imply that any Church, or other person, besides Paul and Barnabas, did elect
these Presbyters.

1. We do not affirm that the people did it without the Apostles: Apostles
guided them, as at other times they had done other Churches.

2. Concerning their staying from election and ordination, we read not of it,
and therefore dare conclude nothing about it: concerning their advising, we
grant it; but what other assistance they assorded we understand not, unless it
be said, that they led the people by their own suffrage, and so they might give
their suffrage, as you say the word signifies, and yet gather the peoples also.
But that they should give their own suffrage, by lifting up their own hands,
without the peoples, seems unreasonable: For when has it ever been known, that
two persons alone, in the presence of many others have gone to voting, by
lifting up of hands? the one must gather the vote, and the other must give it;
that is, the one must say to the other, Paul to Barnabas, If thou be for such a
man to be Elder in this Church, manifest it by lifting up thy hand; and
Barnabas must say to Paul, If thou be for him, or for any other, dielare it by
lifting up thy hand; a most ridiculous course: was ever suffrages so gathered
and given, when but one man to gather, and another to give? might not two
persons better have gone apart, and concluded the business by counsel betwixt
themselves, then to have gone to it by suffrage and stretching out of hands, in
the presence of so many, except there had been some greater plurality of
persons? There is room enough without absurdity for Churches, though but two
or three to go to voting in a business, that is common to them; and therefore
(...) is applicative to them; but there is no place with any color of reason,
why two persons should go to voting: when any thing is put to vote, or lifting
up of hands, the end of it is, that the business may that way be cast; but two
persons may end it by agreement, when as by vote they cannot, if they be
opposite to one another.

POSITION X.
The particular Congregation, This Scripture is alleged by R. M. and W. T. to
C. H. and answ. to 32. q. p. 69.
though they want Officers, have power and authority to ordain Officers, as the
children of Israel did put their hands upon the Lovites, Numb. 8.9, 10.

That Congregation had Officers, the High Priest, and many other Priests, Numb.
3.4. But you hold not that people may ordain in the presence and plenty of
Officers.

1. Though they had Officers, Aaron and his Sons, yet those Officers could not
lay their hands upon them for a special reason; and therefore they were as
without Officers: the reason was this, the Levites were given to God, and they
were given to Aaron and his sons, they were given to Gods service, and they
were given to Aarons service, and therefore they must be presented not by Aaron
and his sons, but before them, Numb. 8.13. Aaron and his sons must be the
person that must (as it were) receive them, therefore not lay their bands on
them, for that was the work of those that offered them, and gave them, and not
the work of those that must receive them; this appears from Numb. 3.6, 7. and
Numb 8.13. with 19.2. Will it not hold, a majore, from the greater, that if in
the old Testament the people did ordain in the presence of Officers, then they
may in the new much more in the want of Officers?

All the children of Israel being about 600000, probably lay hands on the
Levites, but some in stead of the rest, which were more likely to be the Elders
then any other.

You might have said, could not possibly at once do it; some in stead of the
rest did it, and probably the Elders. But what Elders? Ecclesiastical Elders?
there were none but Aaron and his sans; and they did it not, as is manifest
from the Text, and for the reason rendered; they were therefore Civil Elders:
but not as Elders: For you hold not that it belongs to Civil Elders ( as
Civil Elders) to lay on hands in ordination: but as they were the chief and
principal men of the Congregation: and we hold the gravest and wisest, and
primest of the Congregation ought to do it, on the behalf of the rest, when
there is a want of Ecclesiastical Officers.

All the Congregation, and all the Elders of the Congregation are all one,
Exodus 12.3. with verse. 21.

1. It does not appear from the Text alleged, Officers, those as Members:)
For, when God says, speak ye unto the Congregation of the children of Israel;
he meant really that the Congregation of Israel should be spoken to, and not
the Elders only; for the ordinance was as well appertaining to the
Congregation, as to the Elders; and when Moses, verse. 21. spoke to the Elders
only, yet it was with reference to Gods command, in verse. 3. that all the
Congregation might be spoken to; they fulfill Gods commandment, speak to the
Congregation, but not immediately, but by the Elders. Does this confound
Congregations and Elders? For, if God had meant Elders by the Congregation,
then the Elders killing the Passover, though the people had not done it, yet
Gods command had been fulfilled; which is untrue.

2. Though the Congregation and the Elders should be all one; yet is the
Congregation and the Ecclesiastical Elders all one? if the Text you allege
prove not that, it is nothing to your purpose.

3. If the Congregation and the Elders should be all one in some places, yet in
Numb. 8.9, 10. they are not all one: For Aaron and his sons were the only
Ecclesiastical Elders; and they are mentioned distinctly from the Congregation
of Israel.

The Levites were separated to their work, ant taken from amongst the children
of Israel, cleansed and offered before the Lord by Moses and Aaron
respectively, according to Gods express appointment, verse. 6.7.8.11.13.14.
therefore this laying on of hands was either only obedientiall for approbation
of Gods election, or for oblation of the Levites to God in stead of their first
born, verse. 16.17, 18. as they laid hands on sacrifices, verse. 12. which was a
special reason, and peculiar to those times.

Obedientiall certainly it was, another reason (as we conceive) which you omit;
the service of the Levites was the service of the children of Israel; which
formerly the first born were wont to perform; now God had chosen the Levites in
stead of the first born, to do that service, which Israel should have done by
their first born; therefore Israel must lay their hands upon them, that is, put
that work upon them which was theirs: For as the laying on of the hands on the
sacrifice, did put the sins on the sacrifice, and so upon Christ; so the laying
on of hands, did put the service upon the Levites, see Numb. 3.7. and Numb.
8.18, 19. and herein there is a parity: for the service of the Ministry is the
service of the Church; and the Officers which the Church has, performs it for
the Church; and the Church when she puts her hands upon the Officers, puts the
service upon the Officers; and yet this reason would neither have been good
then in the presence of the Officers (had there not been a special reason for
it,) nor is it good now, when the Church has Officers; because the Officers
are to transact her affairs for her.

If the people did ordain the Levites, I am sure they did not choose them: If
this be a binding pattern, you will loose Election while you contend for
popular ordination.

Such a slight conclusion will not so soon wring away election from the
people. Testament for such a privilege, to settle it upon them more firmly
then so. We need not fly to the old Testament for patterns for it; if you can
but produce one instance from the new Testament that ever Elders of one Church
ordained Officers in another, or any good reason for it grounded thence; the
controversy about ordination shall be ended betwixt us; and the pattern of
Numb. 8. shall be waved.

You tell us that it is a pillar of Popery to proportion the Church now, to the
outward policy of Israel.

It is notoriously known, Antichristian Hierarchy is laid in the proportion
which some would have betwixt the Jewish policy, and the policy of the
Christian Church; yet this debarres not, but that use may be made of the old
Testament, where the new is silent. Do not you rest upon the new Testament for
the change of the Seal of the Covenant, and conclude Baptism is to be embraced
in stead of Circumcision, because the new is clear in that matter? and yet run
to the old, to find out the latitude and extent in the application of it to
the subject; and conclude, Infants must be baptized, not because the new
expressly says so, but because you find it in the old: The Jews children
were circumcised, therefore Christians children must be baptized.

You tell us, that Christ's faithfulness above Moses, consists in as full
determination of Gods worship in the new Testament; and that we are as strictly
tied to the Gospel-pattern, as the Jews were to the old Testament. Why then
should we in ordination of Officers, be guided by the old Testament, and not by
the new?

It is our Argument against those that hold that there is no platform of
discipline laid down in the new Testament, State will authorize: but it was
never asserted by us, that all things without limitation are directly
determined; for we have always restrained it to substantialls; neither have we
ever said, that we have had a perfect knowledge of all things that are revealed.

And why should we follow the ordination of Levites rather then of Priests for
a pattern, for the ordination of Elders; except to gratify you?

You cannot gratify us by following the one or the other, 1. If the people
laid their hands upon the Levites, there were no hands at all laid upon the
Priests: they were anointed and consecrated, and holy vestments put upon them,
but ordained by the imposition of hands, they were not: but you would not have
ordination of Elders turned into a consecration after the manner of the
Priests. 2. What was done to the Priests, was not performed by any
Ecclesiastical person, but by Moses the chief Magistrate of the people: but
you are not so weary of ordination, as to transfer it from the Presbytery to
the Magistracy. 3. The Elders of the new Testament are rather the successors
of the Levites, then of the Priests; because there is no Hierarchy amongst
them; and therefore the pattern of their ordination, is rather to be followed
then the ordination of the Priests, and yet not to gratify us. Consult better
the next time with Scripture, before you proceed to such triumphing.


POSITION XI.
When the Apostles were sent out by Christ, The words of the Answer to 32. q.
p. 71.
there was no mention of Ordination in that Commission of theirs, but only of
teaching and baptizing, Mark. 16.15. Matthew. 18.19, 20. If Ordination of
Ministers had been such a special work, there would be like have been some
mention of it in their Commission.

Neither is there mention of the celebration of the Eucharist.

The Eucharist is an ordinance, Covenant that Baptism seals; therefore the
Apostles having Commission for the one, could not want it for the other, though
it be not mentioned.

Preaching and Baptizing were first to be done to the Nations, therefore they
are there mentioned.

That is not the sole reason: subject persons about which they were exercised
more Apostolical; for they might preach and baptize in all the world: whereas
ordinary Officers, in an ordinary way, may not do such works in all the world,
but only in the Church.

We find the Apostles did practice ordination, and yet we suppose they went not
beyond their Commission, Acts 6. and c. 13. and 14. and a Commission to Elders
we read, 1 Timothy 5.

The Position says not, ordination was not within their Commission, but says,
That there is no mention thereof, when they first received their Commission,
and the page out of which the Position is exerted, makes mention of some other
works, within their Commission, not mentioned, viz. Prayer; and Acts 6.4. is
quoted for it.

But indeed, Brother, you are injurious to the Authors of those words of the
Answer to 32. q. p. 71. for Ordination is not denied to be within the
Commission of the Apostles, but those Reverend men do grapple with
Hierarchicall persons, in that place; and we see no reason why you should take
offense thereat, if you would not have your self judged to be one of them;
their words are these: Some, indeed, have so highly advanced ordination, that
they have preferred it above preaching, ministering of Sacraments, Prayer;
making it, and the power of excommunication, the two incommunicable
prerogatieves of a Bishop, above an ordinary Minister; who are these sons?
Prelaticall men's: against them, the Authors of the Position fight: And first
would beat them with the words of the Apostles first Commission, which was to
preach and to baptize; and afterward they do show, that preaching was the
great work that they were to attend upon; and do allege 1 Cor. 1.17. for it;
and next after preaching they mention prayer, and allege Acts 6.4. and then
they speak of the Sacraments, not of Baptism alone, but of the Lords Supper;
So that Brother, you had no reason to take such offense because of the
Eucharist, for they gave it its due place in the Apostles Commission; after
this, they render another reason, why preaching was a greater work then
ordaining, because Paul went about the work of preaching, and left Titus (an
inferior Officer to himself) to the work of ordaining.

Indeed afterward, when those Reverend men had proved that ordination was not
superior to Preaching, Baptism, etc. they then endeavor to show, that it is
not equal to those works, so as that none but those which may perform those
works, may ordain; and they bring this Argument: Ordination being nothing else
but the accomplishment of Election, it may be performed by the people of God, (
who yet have no office,) even as Election may upon whom it depends: and they
bring the testimonies of many Protestant Writers, among the rest, D. Whitakers
Answer to Bellarmine, If Bellarmine grant the calling of those Bishops to be
lawful, there is less cause why we should doubt of Ordination: For those who
have the authority of calling, they have also the authority of ordaining, if a
right ordination cannot be obtained; for Ordination follows Vocation: he that
is called ( by calling he means election) is, as it were, sent into the
possession of his function.

You intimate that special works which the people might not do, are mentioned
in that Commission, which if you stand to, you must deny the people power,
either to baptize or to preach; if these words be not a Commission to the
Apostles and Elders to ordain, I am sure they are no commission to un-officed
men to preach or to ordain.

We conceive we differ not much from you in this matter, un-officed men's
baptizing, and against their preaching in ordinary, except when they have been
trained up to learning, and to the knowledge of the Scriptures, and are
expectants of a call to execute the Ministry; and your selves in this case
grant it; and you put difference betwixt preaching and baptizing, though they
be joined together in the Apostles Commission, for in no case will you let an
un-officed man baptize, and yet for trial of gifts you think it fit to suffer
an un-officed man to preach, from 1 Timothy 3.10.

POSITION XII. If that need so require, she may admonish her Officers, and
excomunicate. etc. T. W. to W. R. p. 39.

The Church has power to censure her Officers if she see just occasion, Col.
4.17.

The Church at Coloss had other Elders besides Archippus, which might join with
the people in admonition.

1. Officers there were in that Church, or with that Church at that time,
appears not.

2. The command is directed to the Church without express consideration of any
Officers amongst them, and though there should be Officers, yet the Brethren
are not thereby excluded from joining with the Officers in that which is
commanded, Col. 4.17.

Paul bids Timothy fulfill his Ministry, Tim. 4.5. this does not suppose
Timothy to be faulty, or to be under censure: And it may be Archippus, Paul's
fellow laborer, (Philemon, verse. 2.) was not faulty, and then this admonition
was no censure; and therefore it is alleged to no purpose.

1. Zanchy upon that place.

2. The Apostle says to Timothy, make full proof of thy ministry, but bids
them say to Archippus, fulfill it. Now there is difference betwixt these two;
the former respects persons, himself and others, whom he should assure of it;
the latter respects the work it self in duties of it; and the one of these may
also be without the other.

3. It is one thing when the Apostle a superior, writing to a person and
inferior, and one who did depend upon him, gives him much good counsel, and
amongst other things, injoynes him to make full proof of his ministry, and
another thing, when the Apostle writing to a people, without any occasion of
such an exhortation, and without mingling the injunction of this duty with
other exhortations of like nature, does excite them in an abrupt manner, to say
to Archippus, see to the Ministry, etc. For the former we have many patterns,
which yet imply not faultiness, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Tit. 2. ult. For the latter,
where is there any parallel place? Though therefore Timothy, whom the Apostle
exhorts, may be without fault; yet there is strong presumption that Archippus
(whom the people ordinarily must hear in silence, but now are put upon it to
admonish him) was not.

Neither does admonition always suppose authority, for this may be an act of
charity as well as of authority.

Church-admonition is some degree of censure; censure, till at last it come to
excommunication; call it what you will, liberty, power, or authority, yet
censure it is, and that is all the Position does assert.

Private members cannot censure judiciously, or unchurch the Congregation,
though they be hidden; Plead with their mother, plead, Hosea 2.2.

If they may plead, then they may withdraw when the Congregation is obstinate;
and so from their Officers, judicial and positive censure, yet must be granted
to be negative.

The Colossians were as well to cause that Epistle to be read in the Church of
Laodicea, as to say to Archippus, etc. yea, the word cause seems more
authoritative, then say ye, yet our Brethren hold not that one Church has
power to cause any thing to be done in another Church; if it had been said,
Cause Archippus, etc. and say to Laodicea, you could have made notable use of
it.

Cause, in the original is, (...), not command ye, but work ye; it be read;
and so interpreted, it is not so authoritative as say ye; for say ye, take
heed, seems to be more imperative: if it had been said, Say ye to Laodicea,
see that you read this Epistle, and of Archippus, endeavor ye, that Archippus
fulfill his ministry (for the Greek word translated cause, imports no more) we
could have made less use of it.

Finally, the Church cannot excommunicate their whole Presbytery, no more then
the Presbytery excommunicate the whole Church, Cottons Keys, page 16.
only she may withdraw from them, etc.

This withdrawing is a negative excommunication, censure, though not so
authoritative as the positive; and more then this we plead not for.

POSITION XIII. This Text is much insisted on, and weekly contributions for the
Minister, grounded upon it.

These Officers are to be maintained by contribution every Lords day, 1 Cor.
16.1.

You do not maintain all your Officers, not your Ruling Elders, though the
Text, 1 Timothy 5.17. does as clearly hold out the maintenance, as the
lawfulness: The Apostles rule was not general, but only in the Churches of
Galatia and Achaia verse. 1. nor perpetual, for those gatherings were to cease
when Paul came; nor for any Officers, qua Officers, but for the poor; not their
own Church neither, but of the church of Jerusalem, which was a singular and
extraordinary case, etc.

We conceive you meet not with this Position (as you do not with some other) in
scriptis, This text is much insisted on, etc. in discourse we suppose betwixt
some one and your self; you should have done well to have named the person,
because some of us have had conference with you about this matter, and it may
be thought you intend us, but then you deal not fairly: for that Text has been
alleged by us, and more Texts with it, to prove another thing, viz. the
raising and maintaining of a stock of money in the Church, out of which may be
taken proportions for every good purpose; and so for the Ministers maintenance,
as need shall require; and our practice is suitable hereto.

Now to give better satisfaction, both of our opinion and practice, we shall
discover our present apprehensions: thus,

1. We do apprehend tithes to be Jewish maintenance, See Jo. Seldom of Tithes.
because they were settled upon the Levites, upon consideration of having no
inheritance amongst their brethren, and were appointed together with offerings,
Mal. 3.8. and had a particular respect to the Priesthood; for the tithe of the
Levites was to be tythed and given to the Priests, Nehem. 10.38.

2. Neither do we see ground for settled, slinted maintenance to last from
year to year, if it must arise from the Church, and not come from the state,
as in some countries it does; because, if the Church must maintain the
Ministry among them, as God blessed them (and a more equal rule then that,
there can none be found;) then except they could settle Gods blessing, and make
it to abide with men in an equal manner, without increase or decrease the
maintenance may not be settled; and this also is an argument against tithes:
There is a great inequality in tithes, and in all settled maintenance, if not
unrighteousness; persons whose estates arise from trading, and consist in
goods (not having any lands) in some places pay nothing to the Ministry out of
duty, and so the country maintains the Ministry of the town, though many
Chapels, perhaps, be robbed thereby, (we give instance in Manchester) whereas
the town is far more able to maintain their own Ministry, and the countries
also round about them; and persons who are much poorer in estate then others,
but have larger lands then they, though others ( less in lands) can buy them
twice or thrice over; yet pay more, because of their lands then they: and if
houses be rated, or men's present estate valued, and maintenance settled in the
just proportion; yet because men's estates are like the Moon, in the increase
some of them, and others of them like it in the decrease, it will soon grow
unto an inequality again; Besides, men's estates lie many times where their
persons inhabit not, neither can inhabit; and then their estates go to
maintain a Ministry to which they do belong not, and they are so much the more
disabled in supporing the Ministry to which they do belong. And this settled
visible maintenance can be the maintenance but of peaceable times, when the
Magistrate is a Christian, and countenanceth Religion; for in the Apostles
days, and afterward for three hundred years together, while the ten
Persecutions lasted, there neither was, nor could be on foot any such
maintenance. But the Church treasury duly kept up by contributions, according
as God blesses every man, will afford maintenance while the Church has any
thing, at all times; whether peaceable or troublesome; whether the Magistatre
be a Christian or a Heathen.

3. This maintenance out of the stock of the Church, we think we see most
warrant for from the new Testament, and as most probable we once disputed it
with you, and some other Brethren: but neither then, nor now, are we peremptory
in it.

1. We considered how Christ and the Apostles were maintained in the work of
the Ministry, and we find that they had a Stock of moneys, which came (partly
at least) by contribution, Luke 8.2, 3. and out of this stock was taken for the
poor also, as from Joh. 13.29. appears: see Junius Junius Ecclesiast. page
1954.


2. We consider what was done in the Apostles times, after Christ was taken
from them, in the days of the first Christian Church, Acts 2.45. and 4.35.
there was a stock then, but raised after an extraordinary way, and yet by free
contribution; they brought their whole estates, and put them into a common
stock; which was but a temporary business, and not astrictive unto all times.
Now out of this common stock, the Apostles themselves, and all others that had
need were maintained; and the Apostles had at first the oversight of this stock.

3. After this, upon the occasion mentioned, Acts 6.1. there were Deacons
chosen, which had the oversight of the treasure of this Church; for the
Apostles gave themselves to the Ministry of the Word, and to Prayer, Acts 6.4.
and neither meddled with receiving, nor with disposing of what was contributed:
The Deacons took that burden from off them; so that now they received all, and
disposed of all: Junius Eccles. p. 1954
if any brought their estate, they laid it down at the Deacons feet; and if any
distribution was made, the Deacons made it; the Apostles meddled with nothing.
So then the work was the same, which the Deacons managed, with that which the
Apostles had before managed, only it was in other hands, the Deacons came into
the Apostles place; hence it follows, that if the distribution was made as
every one had need, when the Apostles had the oversight, and if themselves had
a share, as their need required, and other laborers with them; then it was so
afterward, when the Deacons were entrusted in it; so then the Deacons Office
was to receive into stock, and to take out, and dispose as either the
laborers, or poor Saints had need; and their Office was not to oversee the
poor alone, as our Brother would suggest. Junius Eccles. p. 1954 Deacons do
distribute to the necessary uses of the Church, viz. the sustenance of the
Ministers of the Church.


4. This Office of the Deacon is not temporary, but perpetual in the Church,
as from 1 Timothy 3.8. appears, and our Brethren do acknowledge it; therefore the
work of receiving, and disposing the treasure of the Church is perpetual,
therefore there must be a constant stock, unto which the contributions must be
brought, and out of which distribution must be made; therefore though
contributing of whole estates lasted not, yet some other manner of contributing
came in the room thereof; else the Deacons Office would fall to the ground for
want of work; for they could not distribute out of nothing: Hence it is that a
commandment comes forth from the Apostle, Romans 12.13. to distribute to the
necessity of the Saints; and Hebr. 13.16. to do good, and to communicate; and
another commandment which respects the necessity of the Ministers, Gal. 6.6.
Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that taught him in all
good things; the word (though diversely translated in the English) is yet but
one in the Greek, and signifies to communicate.

5. But this comunicating or contributing, or distributing (for all these are
one) to the necessity of Saints, and to the necessity of the Ministers, which
will be granted to be a perpetual duty in all ages, does not uphold the
Deacons Office, except the Deacons do receive it; that so out of it they may
dispose portions of it, as need shall require; therefore to the Deacons this
contribution must be brought: and we are induced the rather to think so,
because it is commanded under a word, which often signifies Church Communion;
and the Apostles meaning may well be, that it should be upon days when the
Church meets in communion; and giving and receiving are actions of communion,
Phil. 4.15. and therefore suitable to such meetings in communion; (in the
interim, we would not be understood as though we meant to exclude all private
distributing, or communicating to the necessities either of Saints or
Ministers, though we conceive public contributions to be principally
intended.) Hence it is, that Deacons are called (...), 1 Cor. 12.28. which
being interpreted, may import a person that receives some thing for another;
and it may bear receiving of a just reward for another, and so a receiving not
for the poor Saints alone, but a reward for the laborers also. See Scap. Lex.


6. But how must the Deacons receive the Churches contribution? must they
gather it from house to house? that would be an endless toil, and
dishonorable also. Contribution or communication is called a sacrifice, Heb.
13.16. Now sacrifice was wont to be brought to the door of the Tabernacle, and
it comes most freely, when it is thus brought; but when must it be brought?
when the Church meets; and when meets the Church? constantly upon the Lords
Day; therefore, these contributions must be brought upon the Lords Day; but
upon which Lords days must this be done? upon those only upon which there is
occasion of distributing something? or at other times? surely at other times;
else it might come to pass, that they might have nothing in deposito, nothing
in the stock: then many a person that needs can many times have nothing; for
the case may be such, that the need cannot tarry till the Lords Day come, and
the person may be gone, that needs, before that time come; now there ought
always to be something in readiness to supply needs in cases of such
urgencie; therefore this contribution ought to be every Sabbath day: that as
there may be daily occasions of distributing, there may be constant supply in
contributing. To prove this, we have alleged 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. and so far as we
have made use of this Text, we conceive we have not wrested it.

1. We confess, that the occasion of this institution was collection for the
poor Saints; and not their own poor Saints neither, but the poor Saints at
Jerusalem.

2. We confess, that there are no other Churches mentioned upon whom this
institution was enjoined, but the Church at Corinth, and the Churches of
Galatia, which our brother says, was larger then England. Notwithstanding, if
we consider several particulars of the Injunction, we may probably conjecture,
that he had a further scope in the commandment, then the occasion does import.

1. He brings a great many of Churches, not to the doing of the duty alone, but
to the same way of doing it; the Churches of Galatia, which were many; and that
at Corinth; and there cannot be a reason rendered why all other Churches that
were called to the duty, should not be bound to the same manner of doing also,
and so the Churches of Macedonia, and that at Rome will be brought under this
Injunction; for they were called to the same work of relieving the Saints at
Jerusalem, as well as the Churches of Galatia and Corinth. Romans 15.26.27.


2. The Apostle binds the performance of this contribution to the Lords Day in
all these Churches, if he had had no scope to make this an Ordinance in all the
Churches, he might have pitched it upon some other day.

3. He says, every first day of the week (that is, every Lords Day,) so it is
translated in the Geneva Bible, and so the Preposition (...) is often rendered,
as Scapula observes, and give instances abundantly, (...), is in every year,
(...), is every month, (...), is every word, (...) is every person, (...), is
vicatim, (...), is domesticatim, (...), is viritim, street by street, house by
house, man by man; we have twice together the Preposition so taken, Acts 2.
ult. (...), day by day, (...), house by house; now what reason can be rendered,
why this contribution must be every Lords Day, in reference to the Church of
Jerusalem alone? for they might have given what they could have spared at once;
or if it were a great deal that they were to give, they might have had the
longer time allotted them, and yet have given it at once; or the richer and the
abler might have given it at once, and the rest at twice, or thrice, or four
times; but they must give it Lords Day by Lords Day, without missing one Lords
Day; this seems to hold forth, that Paul meant it for a standing Ordinance, and
that his scope was by weekly contributions, to raise a stock in the Churches,
out of which might be taken, without gathering.

4. They are bound under this Injunction of first days contributions, without
any time set them of ceasing the same; for though our Brother say, those
gatherings were to cease when Paul should come, and allege verse. 2. for it,
yet we find no such thing there; he says, verse. 2. That there may be no
gatherings when I come, our Brother gives this interpretation, that collections
may cease when I come, but is not he guilty herein of corrupting the Text, more
then we? for the true meaning is, that it may be in readiness when I come, and
that there may not be need to gather for it when I come; for when it is in the
stock already, there will be no need of gathering for it; and the Greek words
are against his exposition, but agree well with ours, (...), which words are
truly thus translated, that not when I come, then gatherings be made, he is
diverse (I think) from Paul, in his exposition of Paul's words, he would have
gatherings then to cease, Paul would not have them then to begin; for should
they then begin, there would be nothing in stock, and so nothing in readiness,
when use should be made thereof.

5. Consider the manner of performing this act: every one must put apart
somewhat, or lay by him; What? to keep it with him, and not part with it? not
so: for he must treasure it up, as the Greek carries it; or put it into the
treasury; What treasury? his own private treasury? no; for then it needed not
to have been upon the Lords Day, for any other day would have served for such a
private act; and then there would have been gathering together what every man
had put into his own private treasury when Paul came; and this would have been
unreadinesse, which Paul labors to prevent; it was then the common treasury
which the Church had when they met, into which every one did put what he
provided for such a business; thus a stock was raised in all these Churches by
an every Sabbaths contribution.

But it will be said still, that this respects the poor Saints at Jerusalem
only.

But every Church has, or may have poor Saints of her own; which way must they
be relieved? must not they be provided for the same way, as the poor Saints of
other Churches? What reason can be showed that the poor of other Churches must
be provided for by one way or rule, and the poor of their own Church by another
way or rule? or, if there be any difference; do not a Churches own poor, rather
require a weekly contribution for their relief, then the poor abroad of other
Churches? therefore we said, at the beginning, that we conceived the Apostle to
have a further meaning then the occasion did import.

Besides, seeing there are Lords Days contributions throughout the year, in
all the Belgic churches for the poor; upon what Scriptures do they bottom
them, if not upon this? there is par ratio, like reason without all doubt, that
look how the Apostle would have relief come in, to the Saints of Jerusalem; so
he would have it come in to the Saints of every Church that wants it; and that
is by raising a stock in the Church for all good uses by first days
contributions.

But wherein does this Stock or Treasury of the Church respect Ministers?

The stock raised by selling of estates, and laying them down at the Apostles
feet, respects not the Saints alone, but the very Apostles; why then should
not the stock raised by an every Sabbaths contribution respect Ministers? If we
will take Chemnitius his opinion, (whose harmony upon the Gospel is not a little
set by) Chem. har. p. 182 period. hist. de anno Christ. 12.
he tells us, the Doctors in Christ's time, that preached, were maintained by
contribution: he says the treasury into which Christ beheld many rich ones
casting in much, and the poor widow all her substance, was to maintain the
Doctors; he also joins the poor with the Doctors, and says, that the Treasury
was for both uses, see John 8.20. and compare it with Mark. 12.41.

Having given an account of our tenent and grounds whereupon built, and our
conceptions upon 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. we need not frame any other Reply unto your
Answer (Brother,) for the intelligent Reader will discern, what little truth in
some things, and little substance in other things there is in what you have
presented in that matter; only, because you charge us with unrighteousness,
and partiality in point of our not maintaining our Ruling Elders, we shall
clear our selves in a few words.

1. We conceive all Officers are to have some maintenance; the labourer is
worthy of his hire; provided that he either require it, or the Church be able
to give it.

2. We conceive that there is a difference in the works of Officers; some are
greater, taking up the whole time and strength of the Officers double work
being put upon them, ruling and laboring in the Word and Doctrine; so there
should be difference in the maintenance of Officers, some ought to have more
then others.

3. When the Church is not able to maintain her teaching Officers with an
honorable maintenance; then if the ruling Officers and the Deacons will remit
what ever reward from the Church their work calls for; it is no unrighteousness
nor partiality in the Church to maintain the teaching Officers, and not the
rest; because their works do not so require the whole man, but that they may
have other Callings to help themselves, by which means they may spare the
Church in her poverty, in point of maintenance.

4. Your self may do well to consider whether the ruling Elders and the Deacons
be maintained in the Presbyterian Churches; and if it be an error not to do it,
it is good to pull out that beam out of your own eye, and then you may see the
better to take it out of your brothers eye.

POSITION XIV.
The great Mountain burning with fire cast into the Sea, upon the sounding of
the second Trumpet, Rev. 8.8, 9. is applied by some good Writers to those times
in which Constantine brought settled endowments into the Church.

If it be so applied by some good Writers, who possibly bad in their eyes the
Lordly, and almost regal riches and pomp of Prelates; it is by as many, and as
good writers applied otherwise.

Our brethren speak modestly and moderately: applied so by some good Writers;
It is not therefore their own novell exposition; they present it as probable,
they force the interpretation upon no man. But what are your exceptions against
it?

For my part, as I sinde that Constantines donation, the foundation of this
exposition, is but a fiction, accounted by Gratian himself to be but palea (and
what is the chafe to the wheat?) So I find in the Prophecies, that Kings and
States are called Mountains, Zach. 4.7. Casting of Mountains into the Sea,
implies great commotions, Psalm. 46.2. Their burning with sire, signifies
their opposition and fierceness, whereby they become destroying Mountains,
Jer. 51.25.

1. Constantines donation of the Popes patrimony, be a Fiction and Palea; yet
we suppose it may be clearly evidenced from credible Authors, that Constantine
brought in great riches and pomp, settled endowments to the Clergy of the
Church, and that is all that is affirmed in the Position.

2. If Kings and States be called Mountains, so is prosperity in riches and
honors, Psalm. 30. Thou have made my Mountain so strong, (that is) my condition
so prosperous: And Sea in Scripture is the Church sometimes, or the Religion of
the Church, Rev. 13.1. and 15.2. therefore casting of a Mountain into the sea,
may be bringing prosperity, and casting riches and honors upon the Church: and
though Mountains should be taken in your sense for Kings, when almost regal
riches and honors were cast upon Prelates of the Church, may it not be said, a
mountain was cast into the Sea? And may it not well be said to be a burning
Mountain, when the ambition of Prelates after Church indowments and honors,
almost set the Christian world on fire? and the hot contestations of
Ecclesiastical persons for Church Livings do testify, that if prosperity in
wealth and honor be a mountain, then it was a burning mountain; and had such
effects following it, as the Prophecies in the Revelations speak of: But you go
on and say,

I find not that it is unlawful, either for a year, as in New England, (...).
to ^. R. p. 19. Reply.
or for certain years, or for term of life; much less do I find that it is
lawful for one, and not for a year and a quarter, or two, or three, or four
years.

Though T. W. speak of maintenance from year to year, yet it is not to be
understood that there is any compact betwixt Ministers and the Church, how much
the Ministers must have before the work be begun; but it is the consultation of
the Church after the work has been performed, or a consideration for the year
past, when they all agree; that if there be not enough in the slock of the
Church to raise it up to an honorable allowance, by the voluntary gift of
each; yet, according as God has blessed them, Otherwise were it an agreement
aforehand it would be as lawful for two or three years as for one. But how you
will answer your mis-interpreting and mis-reporting of T. W. in the page you
cite wherein he does express himself as we have showed, we understand not.

POSITION XV.
There must be in the Church Teachers, This for substance is alleged by Answ
to 32. q. p. 75. and many others.
distinct from Pastors, as Apostles are distinct from Evangelists, Ephesians. 4.11.

That Text proves not the same distinction between them; for he says, etc. but
not some Pastors, and some Teachers; but some Pastors and Teachers; or rather,
these Apostles, these Prophets, these Evangelists, these Shepherds and
Teachers, which words seem but to explicate one another; as Shepherd and
Bishop do, 1 Pet. 2.25.

You cross the opinion of many Orthodox modern Writers, contradictorily to us;
for it is not our tenent alone, but the judgment of many learned ones, that
they are distinct Offices. Whether you translate some Apostles, or these
Apostles, the matter is not weighty, nor are you advantaged by it.

The greater question is, who these Teachers be, and what their work is;
whether they be School Doctors, as Junius Jun. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 5. p 1955
thinks, and so their work to train up the youth of the Church in the knowledge
of Arts and Sciences, especially of Divinity for the service of the Church; or
whether they be Teachers of the whole Church, and their work to doctrinate the
Church by words of knowledge. The latter seems to be more consonant to the
Scripture then the former, Romans 12.7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.8. And Zanchy, Pareus,
Bucer, and many others, are of this judgment. Zanchy's words are these: There
are only five orders of Ministers in the Church, Zanc. de Feel. milit.
gubernatione, tom. 8. p. ^4^.
instituted by Christ; and then under this Position are these words, We
acknowledge not more kinds of Ministers then the Apostle expresses in Ephesians.
4.11. Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, Teachers. The three first were
not tied to places, but were sometimes here, and sometimes there, either to
gather Churches, or to govern them, to plant, or to water them: The two latter,
viz. Pastors and Teachers, he would have to be set apart for the conservation
and government of particular Churches: as also for the augmentation and
propagation of them. Pareus upon Romans 12.7. has these words: Now he under puts
two kinds of prophecies; the gift of teaching, which is proper to the Doctor
or Teacher; the gift of exhorting, which is proper to the Pastor of the Church:
for Paul, in Ephesians. 4. distinguishes Pastors and Teachers, and the gifts of
the Spirit were distinct; for to some were given a most clear revelation and
understanding of doctrine; these did attend to the explication of the heads of
Religion, and did form the faith of the Church: to others was given a faculty
of exhorting. Bucer also upon Romans 12.7. says thus: One man has the gift of
propecie, another has the gift of ministering; so the person that teaches,
having the gift of teaching, in doctrine, so the person that exhorts (the
person that teaches, he makes distinct from the person that exhorts) endued
with the gift of exhortation; and then he mentions the Deacon and Ruling Elder,
as distinct with their gift from the rest. So that if we do put any false
gloss upon the Scriptures, by mis-interpreting of Ephesians. 4.11. yet more modest
language had becomed you, (brother) seeing such Reverend, Learned men, whom
your self so much honor, have gone before us in the exposition.

POSITION XVI.
This particular Congregation is Sion, This Text is frequently alleged in
answ. to 32. q. and others.
which God loves, and he has promised to be present, Matthew. 18.20.

No Sir, it is not Sion, but one of the assemblies of Sion, Isai. 4.5. The
Hebrews which were divided in many Congregations, are not said to be come into
many mount Sions, but to Mount Sion, Heb. 12. The Scripture warrants not the
expression of an hundred, or a thousand Sions.

Sion was a mountain contiguous unto Moriah, Temple was built, in which God
vouchsafed a special presence, and unto which the Tribes went up; and by a
Metonymie, it is frequently put for the Temple that was built near to it; and
by another Metonymie, it is put for the people that repaired thither, and
assembled there; and so for the Church of the Jews, which Church, in the times
of the old Testament, consisted of many assemblies, and yet it self was but one
Church; and the Temple also was but one, which was called Sion; and so Sion,
while the Temple was to stand, and the Church of the Jews was to continue, was
but one. But in the times of the Gospel, there were to be no visible Temples
where God would dwell, but the visible Church, 2 Cor. 6.16. and the visible
Church is Congregationall, and not National, much less universal, as has
been proved; therefore the Congregationall church is Sion, therefore the
special place of Gods presence.

Yet this hinders not, but that the language of the old Testament, when it
speaks of things of the new Testament, may be used in the old Testament; yea,
in the new also: as in Zach. 14.19. Isai. 66.20, 21. So when Sion in the new
Testament is spoken of in Isaiah 4.5. there may be an allusion in phrase and
manner of speaking to Sion in the old Testament. We may as well read of the
assemblies of Sion, though there be no such thing, but each assembly is Sion,
as of the Feast of Tabernacles, when yet in the days of the Gospel there is no
such thing as a feast of Tabernacles, but it is spoken by way of allusion; the
things of the new Testament are set forth to us under the shadows of the old;
therefore, because Sion was then but one, it is spoken of as one still, and yet
it is more then one.

Now that there are many mounts Sions, your self does really confess, though
in words you contradict it.

1. We know you hold that the Church of the Jews in the days of the old
Yestament, was called Sion.

2. We know you hold, that the visible Church in the days of the Gospel is
Sion.

3. Is it not manifest therefore, that you hold, that look how many visible
churches there are in the times of the Gospel, so many Sions there are? Your
own words are, that the Hebrews, which were divided in many Congregations, are
said to be come to one mount Sion. If so, then the Congregations of the
Christian Gentiles may well be another mount Sion; And if the National church
of the Jews, with the assemblies thereof were mount Sion: why may not every
Nationall-church of Christians with the assemblies thereof (we speak now in
your language) be Sion also? and then there being many National churches, (as
you say) there are many Sions.

And what greater absurdity is it to say, there are an hundred, or a thousand;
Sions, then to say, there are an hundred, or a thousand Churches? Seeing Sion
and Church are all one. Now you know there were many visible churches in Judea,
Galatia, Macedonia, Asia, and many other places, and if (then) so many, how
many more now? therefore many Sions; and because those many churches then, and
these now, we believe to have been, and still to be Congregationall; therefore
every Congregationall Church we hold to be Sion.

But you ask an odd strange needless (to say no worse of it) question with a
great deal of vehemence, viz.

Have you not found God present in our Assemblies? Have you not by faith closed
with the promises in the use of the Ordinances among us? Speak out: I know you
dare not belie your selves, us, and God himself, etc.

Your question is bottomed upon a mistake; when we say, that God has promised
to be present in Sion; you give this gloss upon it, that we deny all your
Assemblies to be Sion, and will not grant Gods presence at all to be with you:
and that we appropriate Sion and Gods presence to our selves; which is a great
injury to us.

You also put this sense upon our words, that God is so present in Sion, that
he is present no where else, and so not present with holy men and women which
are out of Church Fellowship, nor present with members of many churches meeting
together, which either is a foul mistake, or a slander: For we think God to be
present with his people, when they meet in his fear, whether they be
Church Members, or not Church Members; whether they be of one, or many
churches; whether they be in our assemblies or yours, provided that his
Ordinances be carried according to his mind: yea, though there should be some
error, yet he might give his presence Rev. 2.1. with Rev. 2.14.20.
. Much rather do we think God will be present with persons whom he sets on work
to exalt him in the execution of some office, as he did the Apostles; and now
does ordinary Elders. Nevertheless, we conceive God to be most present with
his people gathered into a body, and compacted together in an instituted
Church, which we hold to be Congregationall; and the reason is, because the
more any people do fall into the order of the Gospel, and come into the way of
Christ, which he has appointed for Saints to walk in; the more Christ is
engaged to be present with them. Now to join to some instituted Church of
Christ is that way and order which Christ has directed to; therefore with them
in such a way (as so united and joined) Christ will more especially be present:
for he vouchsafes a special presence amongst such Churches, Rev. 2.1. he
styles himself one that walks in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks;
he walks in other places and people, but he would intimate thus much, that his
especial delightsome walk is among them, and the more golden the candlesticks
are, the more pure they be, the more delight he takes to walk in the midst of
them.

But Matthew. 18. you say is mis-interpeted; Your words are these:

Christ, in Matthew. 18. promises his presence to those that are not a Church;
for two or three will not make a Church; they (verse. 17) were to give the
second admonition, the Church the third.

There is a figure in the number, a certain number put for an uncertain; two or
three are put for a few; the paucity that may be in a Church, shall be no
obstacle of Christ's presence. Pareus upon this Text, has these words: It is an
argument that the judgment of the Church shall be ratified, because Christ
himself will be present in the Church as supreme Judge to ratify it: it is
also a general promise of the presence of the grace of Christ in his Church,
be it great or small. Now surely we shall less doubt our exposition having so
learned a Commentator so well approved of, to stand by us in the same.

POSITION XVII.
So long as a Believer does not join himself to some particular Congregation,
he is without in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 5.12.

Those without, of whom the Apostle speaks, were unbelievers, Pagans, and
Heathen; without Christ, as well as without the visible Church.

Let it be granted that those whom the Apostle speaks of were both without
Christ, without the visible Church, yet it may be securely affirmed that the
Apostle speaks of them under the notion of such as were without the visible
church, and not of those that were without Christ.

1. Singuli de sua familia judicant, non immittunt consuram in alienam
samiliam. Ergo, in Ecclesia similis servetur ratio ut singulae desuit membris
judicent, Aretius in 1 Cor. 5.
Because those (without) whom the Apostle had not to do to judge, stand in
opposition to those within, verse. 12. the latter part, whom the Church of
Corinth had to do to judge, and consequently (if this exposition of yours be
true) the judgment of the Church of Corinth extended as far as the ultima
Thule, the lands end of Christianity; and only ceased when it came to the
consines of Paganism; and consequently any one Church has power to judge any
one Believer in all the world, because (say you) he is not without in the
Apostles sense; that is to say, he is not a Pagan, Heathen, or unbeliever.

2. Suppose the Apostle had known a member of the Church of Corinth (what ever
he appeared outwardly in the frame of his conversation) to be indeed without
Christ, and in a state of enmity with God; if this man had committed a gross
sin, might not the Apostle have judged such a one to be excommunicated? We
suppose you will say, he might, and if so, we demand, why should a
Church-unbeliever be subject to the Apostles judgment, and an Heathenish
unbeliever be exempted from the Apostles judgment? If Church Membership did
not make the one obnoxious to that spiritual judgment more then the other?
For in the notion of unbelievers, and without Christ they both agree; and
therefore if a Heathen were exempted from judgment, because without Christ,
and not for this reason, because without the visible Church; why should not a
Church-unbeliever be exempted as well as a Heathen?

2. If we mistake not, a Believer not joined to any particular congregation, is
without, in reference to Church-judgement (and we suppose by virtue of this
Text) in your Presbyterian calculation of Ecclesiastical power. For
Classical, Provincial, and National Synods, have a power of judging, or
excommunicating those only, that are within the combination. Now these being
representative Churches, he that is of no particular Congregation, is without
the verge of Presbyteriall power; or else it will follow, that the
Presbyteriall Church has power to excommunicate a person that is not within
their combination; and if one, by the same reason a thousand, ten thousand, in
every quarter and corner of the world. But, say you,

The Apostle opposes Fornicators of the World, and Fornicators that are
Brethren.

Persecution in the Primitive times (as it is at this day) was chiefly (if not
only) levied against those who did join themselves to the Churches, to the
enjoyment of Ordinances, visibly (as Paul at his first conversion, by
preaching) declared themselves to be Christ's Disciples. Hence those to whom God
had given so much faith and constancy, as to be willing to expose themselves to
persecution; these did inlist themselves in the Churches, frequented their
meetings, (which were observable by the Persecutors) and professed themselves
of the fraternity of the Church, the Church looked on them as her members, and
accordingly dispensed ordinances and censures to them, as they had need. Others
there were, who, like Nicodemus, came to Christ by night; or like those chief
Rulers, spoken of, Joh. 12.42. who, though they believe in Christ, yet they
dare not confess him, by public joining of themselves, to run all hazards
with the Church. Hence it is, that no politic visible Church does look upon
these as of her fraternity; or does dispense all ordinances and censures to
them. Now the Brother that is opposed to the fornicators of the world, is not
he, that by the internal and invisible grace of faith is a Brother, and of the
mystical body of Christ, though peradventure he dare not openly profess
Christ. But such a one is (...), in the Church of Corinth, who is a named and
professed Brother; so looked upon, not only by the motherly eye of the Church,
but often times by the malicious eye of the world; though peradventure they be
not truly brethren, united with the rest of the faithful people of God, as
members of the mystical body of Christ. 2. With such a one not to eat,
presupposes in an orderly way, a forbearing of voluntary civil and spiritual
communion with the party upon this ground, that he is under censure in the
Church. Now the power of Church Censures is not to be executed by the
church-mysticall, but by the church-visible, as such; neither is it to be
executed upon the members of the Church-mysticall, as such, but upon the
members of the visible church, whether they be in truth or only in appearance
members of the mystical church. So then Fornicators of the world, are to be
understood of the world as it stands in opposition to the visible church, and
so those that are of the mystical church may be fornicators of the world in
that sense. And though by the laws of Christ, concerning Church Discipline,
every man be forbidden to eat with those that are known Fornicators, under
church-censure in their own church; and by virtue of church communion, with
those that are fornicators, under censure in any other church: yet if one that
is a member of the mystical, but dares not profess his subjection to Christ
in that particular, of joining himself to some visible church, shall be a
fornicator, we know no law of Christ precisely concerning church discipline,
that interdicts a man to eat, in point of voluntary civil communion, with such
a man, any more then if he were a Pagan, or Heathen.

But, say you, without are Dogs, and Sorcerers; such as the Apostle had not to
do with: What have I to do, etc. verse. 12. ( and yet he had to do with all
Christians, by his illimited apostolic power, whether they belong to that, or
any other Congregation or no;) such as God judges, or are left to the
immediate judgment of God: But this is not the case of Believers not joined
(especially in your sense of joining) to a particular Congregation; nor do you
(I hope) judge it to be the case of Believers in England and Scotland.

1. Dogs, in the Apostolic Churches, as well as without, Phil. 3.2. and with
such dogs Paul had to do with; Nay, he had to do with the dogs of the Gentiles;
he received a key of knowledge, by which he was to open the Kingdom of heaven
to them in case they would repent and believe, and to bind them under the
guilt of impenitencie and infidelity, in case they would not repent and
believe, Matthew. 28.19. with Mark. 16.16. But those that Paul had not to do to
judge, who are said to be without in this place, are all such as are
contradistinguished to those that are within, with whom the Church had to do,
by way of Ecclesiastical judgment. Now the church of Corinth had power of
Ecclesiastical judgment, over all, and only those which were within the
combination of that church; and therefore Paul had nothing to do to judge them
(that is to say, with the judgment mentioned in this place) which were out of
this combination. Now what was this judgment? Answ. The judgment whereby the
Apostle decrees, that the church of Corinth shall excommunicate fornicators,
and consequently shall not eat with them. Now the Apostle had received no such
power to judge those persons to excommunication, and that by the ministry of a
church, that were never in fellowship with the church: But such persons (though
for their crimes they may be subject to the judgment of the civil
Magistrate,) yet in respect of Ecclesiastical judgment they are left to the
immediate judgment of God. And if this be not the case of Believers not joined
to a particular congregation, by whom shall those Believers be judged? Why
shall this Congregationall, Classical, Provincial, National-church judge
them, rather then that? May they be judged by all, or any one? Certainly they
stand no more related to one then to another, which are members of none at all.
Where shall the fault be charged, if judgment be not passed? We said before,
if a church may judge one out the combination, why not a thousand, why not ten
thousand? etc. yet we are far from judging those Believers in England and
Scotland which are not joined in our Way of joining to a particular
Congregation, therefore to be altogether out of Church-combination, not capable
of the Ecclesiastical judgment of their Churches, and consequently subject to
the immediate judgment of Christ.

POSITION XVIII.
The Elders are not Lords over Gods heritage, 1 Pet. 5.3. nor do exercise
authority, as the Kings and Princes of the earth do; remembering our Saviors
lesson, Matthew. 20.25, 26 Luke 22.25, 26.

They are not so many Bishops striving for preeminence, as Diotrephes did, 3 John verse. 9, 10. These Scriptures are alleged to 32 q p. 59. and 76. though
not with such tartness against Presbyteriall government.


We will not say to you as Geta in the Comoedian Teren. in Phor.
Nihil est Antipho quin male narrando possit depravarier; tu id quod boni est
excerpis, dicis quod mali. For you do not only leave out (in reciting) that
which is good, but for want of an evil use made of these Scriptures by the
Elders of New England in the 32. Quest. you first insinuate, that such an ill
use is made of the Text, and then confute your own fiction; for you say,

To say nothing that the title (...) is sometime translated Sir, and sometimes
Lord, Joh. 12.21, etc.

You take up the Title (...), Sir, and Lord, and that it is sometimes given to
Elders amongst others, as if you had a mind to speak a good word for some
kind of Lordly power in Church Officers; but you lay it down again, and tell
us,

Though Elders be not Lords over Gods heritage, yet they are Leaders and
Guides; yea, Shepherds, Rulers, Overseers, Bishops, Governoure, and not only
Presidents of the Congregation, Moderators of her actions, or, as the fore-men
of the Jury.

And is not this to insinuate, Elders of New England say, that the Elders are
only Presidents of the Congregation, (I suppose you mean merely for orders
sake) Moderators of her actions, or as the fore-men of the Jury? Now there is
not the least expression in either of the places, that so much as seems to
smile upon such an assertion as you would father upon the Elders of
New England. Nay, do they not expressly say, that the Elders rule as Stewards,
as Shepherds, as Captains, as Guides, as Leaders? and does this amount to no
more (in your Arithmetic, then a bare presidency Moderatorship, or
Fore-manship of a Jury, which does not advance the person that carries the
stamp of it one hairs breadth above his Brethren in point of authority; But
only one step before them in point of order. Whereas the Elders do not only
state a Ministerial authoritative power in them, but also lay an obligation of
duty upon the people toward their Officers, by virtue of 1 These. 5.12, 13.
This is that that we judge to be your own fiction.

The other Text ( say you, forbids Kingly or Lordly power in the Ministers of
the Gospel: for the two Apostles still dreaming of a temporal kingdom, and
being kinsmen to Christ, did expect some temporal honor and advanaement.
Christ says not, there was inequality amongst the Priests of the Jews, and
amongst the Priests of the Gentiles, or between the Priests and the people;
but, it shall not be so among you: but very aptly and pertinently to their
Petition answers, The Princes of Gentiles, etc.

And would you indeed make the world believe by all this, Independents; when as
in truth, this Text is urged by the Elders to no other purpose, but to deny a
kingly, or Lordly power in Elders over their Brethren; but not to deny an
authoritative ministerial power in reference to their Congregations?
Therefore, they say, the Elders are forbidden to exercise authority as the
Kings and Princes of the earth do, and they quote Mr. Baynes his Diocesan
trial, Q. 2. p. 74. where he distinguishes power into natural, and moral;
moral into Civil, and Ecclesiastical; both into Kingly and ministerial:
asserting Kingly Ecclesiastical power to be in Christ; ministerial in the
Elders of the Churches; who, though they be Governors to the Church in the
descending line of power, yet are they but servile or ministerial Governors
in the ascending line that leads to Christ, from whom they receive the
Commission; because they do all ex mero alterius obsequio, by the mere will and
command of another.

I, but by this Text they deny a kingly spiritual power, whereas the Text
speaks nothing of spiritual; but only of kingly secular power.

Admit that not only the two sons of Zebedee, all the Apostles that had been
conversant with Christ, and heard his doctrine, from the beginning, were such
babes, as to imagine that Christ would lay down his spiritual Kingdom over
the souls and consciences of his people, and for their sakes over Angels,
wicked men and devils in a way of sovereign power, and would take up a
temporal kingdom, to divide inheritances, rule over the persons and estates
of men. Nay, admit that the sons of Zebedee, or any, or all of the rest of the
Apostles had their eyes so dazzled with the luster of this imaginary temporal
kingdom, that they desired an eminency one above another herein, nothing
regarding an eminency above others in the spiritual Kingdom: yet it will not
follow, that Christ speaks nothing by way of reproof of ambitious aspirings in
the spiritual, but only in the temporal kingdom of Christ. Neither needed
Christ, by expressing the inequality among the Priests, whether of Jews or
Gentiles, etc. amplify and express the equality which he would have amongst
the Ministers of the Church. For expressing the disparity betwixt civil
polities of the world, and the spiritual polity of the Church, he does that
abundantly: says he, It shall not be so amongst you as it is in the civil
polities of the world: There one, or more, rule with Lordly power, the rest are
in subjection; but in the discharge of your Apostolical Commission, there
shall be no such thing; but you shall be all of equal power; but if any will
aspire to greatness in point of authority, above his brethren, let him be your
minister, etc. as the Apostle taught afterward, 1 Cor. 12.5. There are
diversities of administrations, but the same Lord; Christ only rules with
Lordly power over the Church, one Apostle, or Minister, has no such power, nor
any authority at all one over another: but are all fellow servants, having a
ministerial authority in reference to the household of the Church.

2. It holds true in this case, optimi corruption fit pessima; though
Church Officers, and offices are excellent things, whilst they retain their
genuine vigor, and virtue according to the institution of Christ; yet are they
most dangerous, when they grow degenerate and corrupt, and no corruption so
dangerous as that which is Symbolicall in the common nature of Church Power,
with that from which it does degenerate. Hence it is, that corruption of
Church Governors, in an usurpation of exorbitant Ecclesiastical domination is
of more dangerous influence to the Church, then if they should usurp some
parts, or branches of civil power. For as in natural things we say, Elementa
symbolica facilius transmutantur, so in moral things, corruptions do more
easily change things in some thing symbolicall with themselves, into their own
degenerate property; like a disease that it most contagious to persons of the
same blood. And therefore if inequality of civil power be forbidden, how much
more inequality in power Ecclesiastical, which is the spawn; and rise of
Antichristian tyranny? Pastor, and Prel. p. 23. Answer to Mr. Down. See page
81. 82. Mr. Pagets Defense. part 2. p. 29 The learned Clergy in the days of
Hen. 8. confessed, there was no disparity of Ministers instituted by Christ,
Act. and Mon.


Diotrophes being but one, was liker to a Prelate then a Prsbyterie, etc.

These words are brought to vindicate, 3 John verse. 9, They (viz. the Elders)
are not so many Bishops, striving for preeminence, as Diotrephes did.

We must confess, we had almost said; we wonder that your ink did not blush,
to blot and blur such sweet, humble-spirited, holy and pertinent expressions,
as you do in this place. Let your self once more, and the Reader, take a
judgment of the passage, as it lies in its perfect luster, in the Answer to
the 32 Quest. The Question propounded by the Brethren of Old-Engand is this:

What authority or eminency have your Preaching-Elders above your
Ruling-Elders?

To which the Elders of New England frame this Answer.

It is not the manner of Elders amongst us, whether ruling only, or ruling and
teaching also, to strive for preeminence one above another; as remembering what
lesson our Savior taught his Disciples, when they were at strife among
themselves, which of them should be the greatest, Luke 22.24, 25. If Diotrephes
strive for preeminence, verily we abhor such striving; and by the grace of God,
respect one another as Brethren.

Brother, where lies the fault, for which they lie under censure? Is it a fault
that the Elders in New England strive not for preeminence? If so, we suppose it
lies in this, that their humble and brother-like walking, each toward other,
condemns the pride of those that will needs be striving for some kind of
preeminence, and Prelacy above their Brethren.

Juvtual. Satyr.
-- Patriam tamen obruit olim
Gloria paucorum, and laudis titulique cupido.
-- This formerly the country overthrew;
The lust for praise and titles, and the glory of a few.
Or, are they to blame to insinuate, that the Apostles censure upon Diotrephes,
does so frown upon those (whether Prelates or Presbyters) that strive for
preeminence, that it is a matter of abhorrency to them so to strive? Hinc illae
lacrymae; hence it is that you say, Diotrephes being but one, is liker to be a
Prelate then a Presbytery.

Brother, unity, being but one, is liker a Prelate then a Presbytrie that are
many. But what of that? Prelacy does not consist in unity, but in the
usurpation of undue (that is to say, unscripturall) spiritual power over their
Brethren; and in this capacity it is possible, that a Classical Presbytery
may be as like Diotrephes, as a Prelate; that is to say, if they take upon them
a preeminence over their Brethren, as he did. It Is as truly Prelaticall when
fourteen or fifteen exercise a jurisdictionall power over all their Brethren in
a County; as when one man shall take upon him to exercise the power aforesaid
in two or three several counties. Perhaps the fourteen or fifteen (being
better principled then the other) may do it with more gentleness and less
offense, but More and less do not alter the kind.
magis and minus, non variant speciem; and they may be both Alike, if not
equally.
aeque, if not aequaliter, Prelaticall.

Yet John dod not blame him simply for acceping or having preeminence; or for
taking upon him to answer in the behalf of the Church to which St John writ; or
for taking to him the power of commanding, forbidding, excommunicating; but for
loving preeminence, ( as Mat. 23.6, 7.) for not receiving the Apostles and
Brethren; and prohibiting what he should have required, and encouraged; and
excommunicating such as were the best members of the Church.

Reply. You might more properly have said, usurping, or exercising preeminence:
for accepting presupposes an offer made of the thing accepted: Now it is more
then probable, that the Church never offered him preeminence, both over the
Apostle John, and over her self, that he should overruled the Church, and cast
out her best members at his pleasure; neither if she would, had she any such
power.

Let it be granted that Diotrephes was an Elder of the Church of Corinth, Romans
16.25. 1 Cor. 1.14.
and so had a preeminence by virtue of Office over the Body of the Church, yet
this is not the preeminence here spoken of, but an exorbitant preeminence,
usurped over the whole; both the Elders his equals, in power, and the
fraternity (who though his inferiors, yet have a share and interest in the
passing of excommunication, and other weighty affairs of the Church) expressed
(as your self state it) in taking upon him to answer in the behalf of the
Church, commanding, forbidding, excommunicating. Now say you, he is not simply
blamed for accepting or having, but for loving preembrence, and exercising it
corruptly, in regard of the things done and performed by him. It is said of
corrupt Princes, Isaiah 1.23. Every one loves gifts: by the same reason, that
Diotrephes is excused from the guilt of solitary excommunication in regard of
the materiality of the action; by the same reason may these Princes be excused
from their bribery and corruption: And it may be said, the Prophet does not
reprove them for the receiving, but for the loving of gifts. When the thing is
evil, there love, how moderate soever, is faulty, in this regard, that it is
placed upon a wrong object. But where the thing is lawful, a moderate and well
tempered love of it is lawful also: As for the Scribes and Pharisees, so far
as they were men of chief rank and place, Mat. 23.6.
for them to possess and love to possess with a well bounded love, the
uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief seats in Synagogues, would not be
unlawful, but perhaps their ambition put them upon affectation of places undue
to them; and then their possessing them, and their (...), as Mark, (...), as
Matthew and Luke; or, as Christ speaks, Luke 24 7. (...), they choose the chief
rooms, and this (...), to be seen of men, being added to their possessing:

-- Digito monstrari, and dicier hic est To be showed by the singer, and to
have it said, This is such One.
is that which may justly be condemned by our Savior: But the case which
respects Diotrephes may be this; it is probable that John writ about
something that did concern Discipline, as the receiving of certain Brethren
either to constant membership, or by virtue of church communion; now this was a
business in which the fraternity had some interest, as well as Diotrephes and
the rest of the Elders; and therefore the Apostle writes not to Diotrephes, or
the Elders alone, but to the whole Church: also, because Quod omnes tangit, ab
omnibus tractari debet; that which concerns all, must be handled by all. But
Diotrephes rises up, and he alone commands, forbids, excommunicates, and what
can be more destructive of the power of the Presbytery and liberty of the
people, then such a course? and yet, say you, (or else you say nothing to the
purpose) he is not blamed for it. If Diotrephes were not to blame, being but a
particular Elder, to take upon him the power of the whole Eldership, yea, and
the whole Church, why may not a particular brother take upon him the power to
elect an Officer which belong to the fraternity, or one Elder to ordain an
Officer which pertains to the whole Presbytery? Or in your Classick Way, why
may not a particular Elder, a member of the Classis, exercise the jurisdiction
of the whole Classis? why may not a Classis exercise the power of a Provincial
Synod? that of a National; and the National of the Oecumenicall Synod; and
yet be blameless? the reason is, the same proportion that an Elder has to the
whole Eldership, the same, or far greater, have a brother to the whole
fraternity, an Elder to the Classick, a Classick to the Provincial, a
Provincial to the National, and that to the Oecumenicall Synod.

But peradventure it was not unwittingly done by you, to put in the word simply
for a retreat, in case you should be hotly charged for pleading the cause of
Prelacie, under the notion of Presbytery; and so you will say, you affirm not,
that John does not blame Diotrephes for having preeminence, but he does not
simply blame him for having preeminence. Now, if this be your meaning, and that
you indeed grant that Diotrephes was blamed for striving for preeminence; why
do you blame the Elders of New England, for saying, that the Elders are not (
i. ought not to be) so many Bishops striving for preeminence, as Diotrephes did?

But if it be said, that the force that is offered to the Text, lies not in
this; that the Elders of New England say, that if Diotrephes strive for
preeminence, verily they abhor such striving, (for these are their words) but
in this, that it is said, The Elders are not so many Bishops striving for
preeminence, as Diotrephes did; which, peradventure may have an oblique
insinuation, that Classick Presbyters are so many Bishops, striving for
preeminence; and it may be said, the text affords no such conclusion.

We answer; those words, so many Bishops, are no expression of the Elders of
New England, neither is the Text applied by them, to prove that Classick
Presbyters are so many Bishops striving for preeminence.

I, but M. D. says, a Classick Presbytery sets up many Bishops in stead of
one.

Peccat Aemilius, plectitur Rutilius. M. D. offends (if it be an offense,) and
the Elders of New England are beaten. Or, suppose that reverend, learned, and
holy man, M. D. have let fall words which reflect with some blemish upon the
Presbytery, from the sense of what himself had suffered, yet your professed
business is not to vindicate Presbytery, but the Text. Now M. D. (we
conceive, for we have not his book) does not urge 3 John verse. 9, 10. to prove,
that the Classical Presbytery sets up many Bishops in stead of one, and
therefore what thing soever he has said, which offends in reference to the
Presbytery; yet he is not guilty of wrong-doing in reference to the Text.

I will not tell you who said, All the Church is holy; ye take too much upon
you, etc.

Our consciences are unto us a thousand witnesses, Brethren, that are guided by
a different light in point of Government from us; and therefore it is less
grievous to us to be paralleled with Corah, Dathan and Abiram, those grand
incendiaries of the Congregation of Israel; yet it is not unworthy your serious
consideration, whether it might not be with good cause said to you, as
sometimes Christ said to one of the twelve, when he asked, Master, is it I? and
he answered, Thou have said.

POSITION XIX.
The Power of Government is expressly given to the Church, where we are bidden
Hear the Church, which is a particular Congregation, Matthew. 18.

Brother, we could wish you had signified the Author by whom, Sections, who
those be that presume that Christ did no more respect the Jewish, then they do
the Church of England; As your margent does not inform us, so in searching
those few books we have, we cannot find among all the Congregationall men,
therefore we take it as an unjust aspersion thrown upon them.

The Church, in the first and primary intent of these words, was a Church then
in being, which did abominate the Gentiles, ( for Heathens and Gentiles were
all one) viz. the Jewish church, which was not aparticular Congregation, but a
Nationall-church; having graduall judicatories and appeals; of which the
Apostles were at that time, and Christ lived and died an actual member, etc.

Whilst you your self say, the Church in the primarie intent of these words,
was a National church, then in being, do you not imply, that these words, tell
the Church, have reference to a Church, or churches, that were not yet in
being, which should afterward be invested with power of judging? and therefore
giving it for granted, that Christ saying, Tell the Church, sends them to the
Jewish Synagogues or Sanhedrin, whilst their authority did continue, (and so
Peter needs not stay three years, before he can acquaint the Church with his
offense) yet still the Congregationall church may be competitresse with
Classical, Provincial, National, and Oecumenicall churches for the power of
judging; and if she should come off victricious, then the guilt of wresting
this place (for you urge it to prove the power of your judging church) would
rest among your selves, and the Congregationall men, and their Way be
guiltless. Now, for our parts we cannot see the title of Congregationall
churches any way invalidated, by what has been hitherto said by your self or
others.

2. Whilst you say, that the Church in the first and primarie, etc. I suppose
your inference must be this; Ergo, those words, Matthew. 18. Tell the Church,
cannot be rightly applied to a Congregationall Church, which has no such
graduall judicatories and appeals; but Classical, Provincial, and National
Churches; for amongst these are found such graduall judicatories and appeals.
The sinew and strength of this reason is this: It is necessary that the judging
Church in the times of the Gospel, should answer in the manner of its
judicature the judging Church in the time of the Law: and ergo, if that Church
which was to judge then had graduall judicatories and appeals, such ought to
have the judging Church in the days of the Gospel: This main hypothesis upon
which the strength of all depends, is unsound: For,

1. It is necessary that the judging Church in the times of the Gospel should
be conformed to spiritual precepts and patterns left us by Christ and his
Apostles: but Christ has not appointed the Jewish church in matter of
government to be a pattern to Gospel Churches: For if so, then are not the
Churches that are of Presbyterian complexion to be understood in this place,
for there is a vast difference betwixt your Churches and the Jewish Church: For,

First, there is disparity in the manner of the calling of persons; for Synods
are made up of men, chosen and sent forth by particular Churches, but the
Sanhedrin did not consist of chosen men sent out by the Synagogues, but of
Priests and Levites, which the Synagogues did neither choose nor send forth.

Secondly, there is disparity in matter of power: In the Jewish Sanhedrin the
chief Priest was chief, by virtue of Office, 2 Chronicles. 19.11. but in the
Classical Way all are equal in point of Office.

Thirdly, in respect of the causes judged: the Sanhedrin dealt with matters of
civil nature, Deuteronomy. 21.5. but Synods only with Ecclesiastical.

Fourthly, in respect of the time of judicature. The Sanhedrin was a standing,
constant court; but Classical, Provincial, National and Oecumenicall Synods,
meet but once in a month, once in half a year, once in twelve months; or it
may be, not once in many ages is an Oecumenicall Synod gathered, and so those
appeals that are made from a National, are in little hope to find relief from
an Oecumenicall Synod.

2. If it were necessary that Church Government in the times of the Gospel
should bear conformity with the Jewish Government, then they must not only
have graduall judicatories and appeals, but they must have,

First, a stated Oecumenicall judicature, constantly to judge all hard
controversies between blood and blood, plea and plea, stroke and stroke, into
all Churches in the world.

Secondly, that this stated Oecumenicall judicature must have some stated place
which God should choose, Deuteronomy. 17.8. that so appellants might know whither to
repair for redress of their grievances.

Thirdly, that there must be one chief by virtue of office over all met in this
universal court, 2 Chronicles. 19.4. That he that shall do presumptuously, and will
not hearken to that Catholic council, that man must die, Deuteronomy. 17.12.

3. There may be good reason rendered, why the Synagogues should be under a
Juperiour judicatory; and the same cause there is why Congregationall-churches
should be under a Superior judicatory. The Synagogues were parts of a church
that had not power to dispense all Gods Ordinances amongst themselves, and were
branches of a politic Nationall-church, endued with power of government as
National: The Promise and Covenant of God extended to the whole Nation. But
there is no such power of government left to every or to any Nation in the
world; neither are particular Congregations parts of a Church, as the
Synagogues of the Jews were, but they are entire, and complete Churches; and
may transact all Gods Ordinances, walking in truth, and peace amongst
themselves, otherwise all Gods Ordinances could not be transacted, unless a
whole Nation were converted and brought into Church-society.

This Gospel was writ principally for the Jews some say in Hebrew, etc.

Admitting the Proposition were true, Congregationall men that are Christians,
use this place aright in applying it to Congregationall churches, because the
whole Gospel was writ principally for the Jews? Certainly the undiscernible
strength of this reason (at least by us,) will levy war against the
Presbyterians (except they will profess themselves Jews,) for applying this
place to Presbyterian Churches. The Epistles to the Hebrews and James, were
writ principally for the Jews; and yet Christians that are Gentiles, may make
a right use of them.

In it the spirit of God uses much the language and dialect of the old
Testament, in which Kahal ( and Ecclesia with the Seventy) do sometimes
signify the company of Elders, as well as the body of the people; a National
Church with graduall judicatories and appeals, as well as a particular assembly.

We cannot but despair of ever seeing the premises delivered of the
conclusion. Kahal, etc. signifies in the old Testament, sometimes a company of
Elders, sometimes the People; sometimes a National, sometimes a
Congregationall Church; yet it will not follow, that the Congregationall men,
in applying Mat. 18.17. to the Congregationall Church, have offered any
violence to the Text. For it will not follow, Kahal sometimes signifies a
National Church in the old Testament, (no, though to make it more strong, you
add; that the Spirit uses much the language and dialect of the old Testament)
I say, it will not follow therefore it signifies a National Church in Matthew.
18.17. for the Spirit may use (by your own confession) the language and dialoct
of the old Testament, and yet it may be understood of a particular Assembly.
Neither will it follow, Kahal sometime in the old Testament, Ergo Ecclesia
signifies a company of Elders, Ergo, it signifies a company of Elders in Matthew.
18.17.

Now there is not a word in the Text, to show either that the Church is not
here taken for the Presbytery, but for the People ( seeing when Christ says,
whatsoever ye shall bind, etc. he speaks to the Disciples, verse. 1. or
Apostles, which are elsewhere said, to have the power of binding and loosing,
Matthew. 16.19. Joh. 20.23. and were not ordinary Believers but Elders? 1 Pet.
5.1.) or, that it is meant of a parcular Congregation, without graduall
judicatories and appeals, etc.

These are the Premises; conclusion willingly to follow these Premises? which
must be this: Ergo, when the Congregationall men affirm, that the particular
Congregation is the Church, to which God has given the power of government,
and urge Matthew. 18. to prove the exercise of such power by the Church
aforesaid, they abuse that Text. For the Congregationall men may very securely
affirm, that those words, Tell the Church, send the offended Brother to the
Congregationall Church in the time of the Gospel (even as they sent the Jews
to the Sanhedrin whilst that was in force) and yet not send him to the people,
as they stand in opposition to the Presbytery, which are the most noble
organicall parts of the integrally perfect Church: For we do not seat the power
of the Keys in the people, as they are contradistinguished to their Elders; but
in the whole Church, by a most wise and divine dispersion of power unto the
dissimilar parts of the Church, according to their several capacities: For, as
the Elders have an authoritative power, so the people have a power of liberty
in point of censures: So that reclamante Ecclesia, there can be no
excommunication. So then, though it be not understood of the people only, no
nor chiefly, as they stand in opposition to their Guides; yet this place may
lawfully be understood of the Congregationall Church as it is contradistinct to
Classical, Provincial. National, and Oecumenicall Churches. The reason is,
we have presidents in the Word of God for the one, as in the Churches of
Jerusalem, Corinth, Cenchrea, etc. and rules prescribed to such a Church, Acts
6.3. 1 Cor. 5.4. chap. 11. chap. 12. chap. 1.4. chap. 16. but of any stated
Classical, Provincial, National, Oecumenicall Churches, there is a deep
silence in the Scriptures of the new Testament; no precept for the erecting of
such, and no laws nor Officers provided for such Churches. Now Christ, Matthew.
18. sends the people of God to such a Church, as should be in strength, by
virtue of a Charter from heaven to redress grievances, and heal offenses, and
therefore he sends us to the Congregationall Church, as it opposes those
churches I spoke of before, for these can show no such charter.

I read that the promise of binding and loosing is not given to a particular
Congregation when leavened with error and variance. But then a Synod of
Churches, or of their Messengers may judicially convince and condemn errors,
search out truth, etc.

All that we have to say to that, binding and loosing to be seated in the
particular Congregation, we shall not contend against it, (though we cannot say
that the Scriptures and reasons brought, are convincing to each of us to
enforce our grant) but that in ease of error or scandal that cannot be healed
in the Congregation; A Synod of neighbor churches, or their Messengers may
judicially condemn those errors and schisms, etc. and impose ways of peace
and truth; but yet not assume authority of censuring the delinquents, but leave
that to particular Churches to be performed. Cotton Keys, page 28.


POSITION XX.
Matthew. 16.19. Christ directs his Speech not to Peter alone, This seems to be
taken out of Answer to 32 q p 44.
but to all the Disciples also; for to them all was the Question propounded by
Christ, verse. 15. Nor to them as general Officers of the Churches, for that
Commission was not yet given them, but as Disciples and Believers.

In laying down this Position, Preface, when you say, If any of the Brethren
(amongst whom Mr. Cotton is deservedly the chief) seem in my apprehension to
come nearer the truth then other, Cotton Keys, page 4.
I willingly take notice of it, etc. Now Mr. Cotton must needs (in your
judgment) come nearer the truth then the Elders: for he does acknowledge that
Peter was considered in the several capacitles of an Apostle, an Elder, a
Brother; and so the power of the Keys was promised in him to Apostles, Elders,
and Brethren, according to their several proportions of that dispersed
spiritual power. Now had you dealt with this doctrine (with which we concur)
and told us your thoughts of it in reference to the place; we should have
acknowledged your answerablenesse therein to your profession. Now, though you
cite Mr. Cotton in the margent, yet so, as that the ordinary sort of readers
can hardly guess what his judgment is: and the whole frame of your Discourse
is such, that may well leave the Reader in this apprehension, That the Elders
of New England place all power of the Keys in Believers as such, which is
contrary to the very expressions of the Elders of New England and to the
judgment of the Congregationall men in general: For the Elders say, The
ministerial power of government is given to the Church, and consequently not
to Believers, unless they become a Church; yea, they say expressly, That the
Keys are committed to all Believers that shall join together in the same
confession, according to the order and ordinance of Christ, and consequently,
except Believers join into Church-societies (which is the Ordinance of Christ)
they have no share of the power of the Keys, much-lesse do they assert any such
power in women, who (though Believers, yet) are excluded from any share in
Church Government, by a positive law, 1 Cor. 14.34, 35.

Peter was an Apostle, in Office and Commission, though not yet sent out into
all the world: and an Elder, Matthew. 10.1, 2, etc. and doubtless the Key of
Authority, and Rule when it was promised to Peter, and given to him with the
rest of the Apostles, Joh. 20.23. is the same authority which is given to their
successors, whereby they are called to feed and rule the Church of God; as the
Apostles had done before, etc.

Let it be granted that the twelve Disciples (so called, Mat. 10.1.) are not
called Apostles (verse. 2.) by way of anticipation, Mar. 3.13, 14.
but in reference to their present state and condition: yet it will be
necessary still to distinguish the equivocall term of Apostle; as noting,

1. One authorized to dispense doctrine and discipline amongst all nations,
Matthew. 28.19. and in this sense Peter was no Apostle in Office and Commission,
as your self confess: And what the Elders affirm is true, That the Keys were
not given to Peter in this capacity; i.e. not as to one that was actually in
that estate and condition; or was hereby put into that estate and condition.

2. As one sent forth by a temporary Commission to preach and work miracles
amongst the Jews only. Mat. 10.23.
Now the Promise of the Keys, was not made to Peter under this capacity,
neither was he an Elder invested with authoritative power of government at this
time; he could neither vote in Synagogues, nor in the Sanhedrin, but only
preach authoritatively, and work miracles to confirm his Doctrine: and in case
that they did not receive him, he could not excommunicate them by himself, or
with all the rest of the twelve with him; but must shake Mat. 10 14, 15.
off the dust of his feet against them, and leave them to the great day of Gods
immediate judgment; for so runs the tenor of his Commission, and there is
deep silence of any other, then merely a doctrinall power of the Keys. So that
the issue is this; that though what you say be true, in the sense expressed,
yet it is nothing to the purpose for which it is brought; for still the
assertion of the Elders may be true, that Christ speak not to them as Apostles
in Office and Commission, whether limited to the Jews ( as you would
insinuate) or extended to all Nations; but as Disciples or Believers.

2. Neither will it follow, the Key of authority promised to Peter, and given
to him with the rest of the Apostles, Joh. 20.23. is the same which is given to
their successors; therefore Christ directs his Speech to Peter, not as a
Believer, but as an Apostle in Office and Commission; for what ever the import
of the thing promised may be, yet that hinders not but the promise may be made
to Peter under the respect and consideration of a Believer. For the thing
promised in this place may be considered two ways: First, as a reward in
general of grace and mercy. Secondly, as such a reward which imports a power
of opening and shutting the Kingdom of heaven.


Now the Power of the Keys considered as a reward of grace and mercy, is
promised to Peter as making such a glorious confession (...), and I say unto
thee, q. d. thou have made such a holy confession of me, that I say unto thee,
I will not suffer thee to go unrewarded: but I do promise that I will give thee
the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, etc. Now Peter did not confess Christ as a
general Officer, but as a Believer; and therefore the reward which is the
promise, is made to him, not as a general Officer, but as a Believer.

2. As importing a power of opening and shutting, and so though it be promised
to Peter as a Believer, and in him to all those that shall make the same holy
confession of Christ that he did; yet is it not to be executed either by Peter
himself, or any other, under the notion and consideration of a Believer only;
but imports also an Office, or State under the capacity and consideration of
which it is to be executed. Thus, when Christ says to Peter, I will give to
thee Keys, etc. he does thereby promise, that Peter shall be as a Member, as an
Elder, as an Apostle in the Gospel-churches; and in all these capacities should
have some share in the dispensation of the power of the Keys. The consequent
whereof is this; No Believer at this day, merely as a Believer; nay, nor yet as
a Believer externally confessing Christ with the mouth, may have any share in
executing the power of the Keys, unless he be a Brother, joined to some
Church, or an Elder set over some Church; (for children for their weakness,
and women for their sex, are excluded by a positive law) For as the power of
the Keys is promised; so the State under the consideration of which they shall
exercise such power, yea, and a Commission from Christ, by which they shall
exercise that power, is also promised. And thus Mr. Cotton may say, that Peter
may he considered as an Apostle, an Elder, a Brother; because together with the
power of the Keys, the state of an Apostle, of an Elder, of a Brother is
promised; and yet not clash with the Elders of New England, who affirm, that
the power of the Keys is promised to Peter ( i. e. as a reward of grace and
mercy) as a Believer. Neither need the Elders of New England dread your
threefold consequence, viz.

First, That the Keys are not given to any visible Church: And,

Secondly, That they are given to all Believers, in covenant or no; whether
males or females.

Thirdly, That Apostles and Pastors have no more power of the Keys, then
ordinary Believers: which, as they are false and absurd; so it may easily
appear by that which has been said, that they cannot shelter themselves under
any thing in the Position of the Elders of New England. Neither will that
Axiom, a quatenus ad omnevalet consequentia, ( i. from as such, to all such, a
consequence is of force: how?) bear you out in so unjust a charge. For though
it be true in such Propositions, where the specificall difference is predicated
of the Species, or proper Accident of the Subject, the proper effect of the
immediate cause; yet it will not hold when you speak of a Sovereign Lord,
acting in a transcendent way of liberty; no, nor of a rational creature moving
according to choice and election Suppose you should have a servant that should
prove faithful in his place (though one of the meanest places;) and therefore
you should promise to give into his hand all the Keys of the house, that he
should open and shut to all the rest; and this you should do, looking upon him
as faithful; A quatenus ad omne non valet consequentia, in such a case; it
will not follow, that every faithful servant in your house, has the power of
the Keys; neither will it follow, that the faithful servant, to whom the
promise of the Keys, much less every other faithful servant, as such, may
execute the power of the Keys: For though the promise be made to that servant
under the capacity of a faithful servant; yet the promise it self carries an
Office by implication, viz. the office of Steward; under which consideration,
and not under the consideration of a faithful servant, he is to manage the
power of the Keys. Phineas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron was zealous for
God, Numb. 25. and God gives him the covenant of an everlasting Priesthood,
because he was zealous; will you say, that A quatenus ad omnia valebat
consequentia, in this case, i. e. because an everlasting Priesthood was
promised to Phineas, because he was zealous, therefore every zealous person
has an everlasting Priesthood?

Lastly, that it was far from the purpose of the Elders of New England to
assert any such Doctrine as you would draw from their words, may appear in
this Answer, and elsewhere in this book, wherein they place the power of the
Keys, not in the body as contradistinct to the guides; but in the whole,
consisting of Rulers, and ruled; giving to the Rulers an authoritative power,
which they give not to the ruled.

POSITION XXI. 1 Cor. 5. Paul himself though an extraordinary Officer, yet
would not take upon him to excommunicate the incestuous person, without the
Church; but sends to them, exhorting them to do it, See also answ. to 23. q.
page 49.
and reproves the Brethren of the Church of Coriuth as well as the Elders, that
they did no sooner put him away, Cotton Keys, page 13.

To prove that this Doctrine is injurious to the Text, you thus reason:

He blames all women as well as men, that notwithstanding the notorious
fornication which was amongst them, they were puffed up, and gloried, etc.

1. We suppose this battery is raised against those words, and reproves the
Brethren as well as the Elders, etc. Now, if it might be any gratification of
strength to your Argument, we will grant, that the Apostle blames all in
general, and yet the Elders may without any show of wrong to the Text, affirm,
that he blames the Brethren as well as the Elders; for it will not follow, Paul
reproves the whole Church, Ergo, he reproves not the Brethren which are a part
of the Church.

2. If it be said, that the wrong lies in the scope of the words: For hence we
go above to prove, that the Brethren have ashare in the power of
Church Censures; Now the same argument will prove from this text, that women
have a power in Church Censures, because women are reproved in this place, as
being part of the Church. We answer, when an Epistle is writ to a whole Church,
it does respect particular persons, according to their several capacities: 1
Cor. 14.34, 35.
Now women are not in a capacity of dispensing Church Censures; therefore the
reproof is not extended unto them. If things indefinitly spoken to a whole
Church, because they cannot be verified of one who is not in a capacity to
receive them, may not therefore be affirmed of another; then because a liberty
in cutting off offenders, by virtue of Gal. 5.9.12.13. does not belong to
women, neither does it belong to Elders or Brethren; for the Apostle speaks
to all. Likewise because the Holy Ghost writes to the whole Church of Pergamus,
females as well as males, and blames them for not casting out the Balaamites
and the Nicolaitans; which women have no power to do; therefore neither does
the reproof import any such power, either in Elders or Brethren.

This it may be you intended but as a light velitation with these lusorious
expressions, Sed remove ista luforia, decretoriis opus est, i. remove these
Toys, there is need of Decrees.

Paul himself (say you) did excommunicate Alexander, and Hymeneus, 1 Timothy 1.20.
and it is not mentioned that he took the consent of the Church or Presbytery.

That Paul alone did excommunicate Alexander and Hymeneus is not so clear,
Negative. Paul says to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift of God which is
in thee, by the putting on of my hands; and yet Paul did but lay on hands with
the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. Now if the Apostle did not act in ordination, how
much less in excommunication without the concurrence of the Church? the rather
because Apostles concurrence with the Church, seems to make more,

1. For Gods glory in the universal humiliation of the whole Church.

2. For the Churches peace, who are more likely to subscribe to the equity of
those proceedings of which themselves have the cognizance, then if they were
carried on by a transcendent and superior motion of Apostolical power.

3. For the edification of the Church in seeing, and hearing, and concurring in
the whole business.

4. For the attainment of the end of excommunication, both the more immediate,
viz. Non-communion with the party; and the more nemote and noble end, viz. the
healing of the party, and of the offense.

2. Let what is assumed be granted; yet we suppose you will make no gain of it:
For,

1. It will not necessarily follow, Paul did excommunicate Hymeneus and
Alexander himself; therefore Paul did without the consent of the Church of
Corinth excommunicate the incestuous person: For it was but suitable to the
holy, and self denying frame of the Apostles spirit, Jure suo cedere, to remit
something of his own right.

2. Neither is it so much as probablely convincing, if we consider, that the
Holy Ghost makes the subject excommunicating, to be the Church of Corinth, 1
Cor. 5.4, 5. It Is the Church of Corinth whom the Apostle requires to purge out
the old leaven, verse. 7. It Is the Church of Corinth in which the Apostle states
the power of judging, verse. 12. do not ye judge them that are within.

The Apostle, says, (...), I have judged as though I were, etc. which imports
rather, that Paul himself would deliver him to Satan, then that he exhorts them
to do it. Indeed he commands them to put him away, as he writes to them to
restore him again, to see if they would be obedient in all things, 2 Cor. 2.9.

Brother, we cannot but observe, argument something tenderly, as if you did
suspect the ground you tread on; for you say not, that the words import that
Paul would deliver him to Satan himself, and not that he exhorts the
Corinthians to do it; but you say, that they import rather the one then the
other; and this amounts to as much as nothing to the purpose: For in regard of
the affinity the words may have with the one importment more then the other,
they may be said to import the one rather then the other, and yet in their
proper sense import neither. Luke 18.14.
The Publican is said to go away justified rather then the Pharisee, and yet
the words do not positively import that either of them were justified.

And yet you have a good mind to make your Reader believe that Paul himself
delivers him to Satan, and not the Corinthian Church, by their authority, and
this you prove,

From the Gammaticall Syntax of the words, (...) -- (...).

Answ. Doubtless there must be an Accusative case importing the subject
delivering, understood; and this must be either (...), with reference to the
Apostle, or (...), with relation to the Church. Not the first, as we conceive:

1. For if so, it is probable the Apostle would have said, (...), I have
delivered him that has so done this thing to Satan; and have commanded the
Church only to take notice of it, and to abstain from communion with him.

2. The Apostles judgment was such a judgment as was passed at the writing of
the Epistle; and therefore the Apostle says, (...), I have judged, or I have
judged already him that has done this thing, and therefore his judgment of
the man was not the actual casting out of him, but only a judgment, that the
Church should pass the judgment of Excommunication against him, assuring them
that not only his spirit, but the power of Christ should go along with them.

3. (...), To deliver to Satan, notes such a public and solemn transaction of
an Ordinance, as Paul was in no possible capacity to do (for he did nothing by
proxy) being absent. For it notes; 1. A public binding of the person under
the guilt of sin by the Key of Faith. 2. An observable exemplary ejection of
the person out of the fraternity of the Church, and a shutting of the door of
communion against him, until he repent by the Key of Church order.


Now must the whole come together, and look one upon another in silence, and
upon the incestuous person, imagining him to be thus excommunicate, because
Paul had judged to have him excommunicate, and so after this dumb show, depart
one from another: Therefore we conceive (...) must be understood as going
before the Infinitive (...) and to relate to (...), according to the rule of
Grammarians, Si infinitivus, and Participium praecedens pertinent ad eandem
persmam, non additur accusativus personae, sed subintelligitur.

But it may be you will say, you affirm that the Church is commanded to do it,
and therefore Paul alone did not do it.

Does Paul command the Church to deliver the incestuous person to Satan, whole
power to himself? as he must needs do, if (...), have reference to himself.
These things being spoken by you in reference to one individual act under one
and the same consideration expressed in the word (...), must needs be (...),
altogether inconsistent one with another, or with the truth.

2. If the Elders abuse the Text by saying that Paul exhorts the Church of
Corinth to excommunicate the incestuous person; how will you wash your hands
from all wrong offered to the Text, whilst you affirm that Paul commanded them
to excommunicate him? Yes, say you, Paul writes to them to see if they would be
obedient in all things. Is this your meaning, that Paul writes not to them,
requiring them to put forth a power given unto them (and all other Churches) by
Jesus Christ, but only to exercise an act of power, which did not of right
belong unto them, but to his Apostolical Function. And why by the same reason
might not the Apostle then, and the Ministers now in their Churches, call out
one, or more, and command them to preach, or administer Baptism, or the
Supper, merely to try their obedience? Now this must be your meaning, or else
your argument will never conclude the thing you profess to conclude: For we
willingly grant that Paul writ unto them to try their obedience, but the very
Text imports that there were other grounds of his writing as well as this; for
he says not, (...), therefore, for this I write, much less, (...), for this
therefore only writ, but (...), for this therefore also I writ unto you, to try
your obedience; intimating that there were other grounds. And therefore, that
Paul writ unto them to try their obedience, will never afford such a
conclusion; therefore he writ not to them to exercise an ordinary power
purchased for them by the blood of Christ: for obedience may be tried by that
which is both a privilege and a duty.

Paul bids the Colossians cause an Epistle to be read in Laodicea, they (its
like) did it in obedience to Apostolical authority; yet it will not bence
follow, that a Church has ordinarily the same power over another Church.

There is a twofold causing; by way of authority, moral swasion, or endeavor:
this latter, the Apostle speaks of, (...), (says he) work, or use your
endeavor; and the same power has every Church over other at this day for
their good.

2. Suppose you could obtain what you desire in all these, that Paul did
excommunicate, not the Church; or if the Church did, yet it is a wrong to the
text, to plead for the like power at this day: Do you not all this while fight
against the Presbyterians (whose Cause you pretend to advocate) as well as
against the Congregationall men whom you professedly oppose? For, if it will
not follow, The Church of Corinth (whether particular, or representative) is
commanded to deliver the incestuous person to Satan, therefore every true
Courch has the same power; then whilst the Presbyterian Brethren urge this
place to prove the power of a Classical Presbytery, they wrong the Text: For
though it may be a question, whether this Text gratify the fraternity of the
Church, with so much power as we would state upon them by virtue of this Text;
yet Presbyterians, and Congregationall men all, (except your self, that we
know) agree; That whatsoever power the Fraternity and Presbytery of the Church
of Corinth had, that the Fraternity and Presbytery of all true Churches have
to the end of the world.

He bids them purge out the leaven, and put away from them the wicked person,
etc. which must not be understood, as if Elders and People were equally
authorized thereunto, etc.

1. Elders of New England and Mr. Cotton affirm, that the Elders and People are
equally authorized to cast out the incestuous person, and not only quilibet in
suo gradu, every one in their degree? There is nothing in the place by you
alleged, that does import thus much. They say, the Apostle reproves the one as
well as the other: The King for a miscarriage in a Cause, may reprove the Jury
as well as the Judge, and yet there is no such implication, that Elders and
People, Judge and Jury, are equally authorized to the respective acts of
Judicature. The Elders of New England infer from hence, that all Church Power
is not in the Officers alone; do they therefore affirm that there is as much in
the people, as in the Elders? Whereas in answer to Q. 15. p. 60. they show
certain acts of power in the Eldership, which are not in the people; and Mr.
Cotton Cotton Keys, cap. 4. and 5.
expressly gives all authority properly so called, to the Eldership, allotting
only a popular power of interest and liberty to the people.

2. And lastly, (for the rest of your expressions about this matter, I take to
be but of the train and retinue of this grand misprision, and so pass them
over;) lastly (I say) when you say, that he bids them purge out the old leaven,
and put away the wicked person, which must not be understood, as if Elders and
People were equally authorized thereunto, but quilibet in suo gradu; a man
would think you did acknowledge, that the People in suo gradu are authorized to
purge out the old leaven, and put away the wicked person (which questionless
are acts of some kind of governing power) and yet in the Catastrophe of all
this Discourse you wipe the Fraternity of the Church clearly of all acts of
governing power, when you say -- So when he speaks of acts of governing power,
it is to be understood of Elders, and not of Believers. Are not these (...)?
Are purging out the old leaven, and putting away the wicked person, acts of
governing power? And are Believers authorized in suo gradu to perform these
acts? and yet does no act of governing power belong to the Believers of the
church? Let him assoyle this Riddle that is an Oedipus, able to do it; for our
parts we cannot. Thus much of your 21. Section.

POSITION XXII.
The Lord Jesus reproving the Angel of Pergamus, for suffering Balaamites,
sends his Epistle, This is alleged by Answ. to 32. q. 45. and 49.
not only to the Angel, but to the Church. The Spirit says not only to the
Angel, but to the Churches, Rev. 2.11. And the Church members are seen by John
in a vision, sitting on Thrones, clothed with white raiment, having on their
heads Crowns of gold, Rev. 4.14. Now Thrones and Crowns are ensigns of
Authority and governing power.

To make good your charge against the Elderss of wrong offered to these Texts
alleged, you say,

The Lord Jesus reproving the Angel of Pergamus, sends his Epistle (say you)
not to the Angel, but to the Church: I add, not to the Church but to the
Churches. As you gather that the suffering of corrupt persons and practices was
the sin of the Church and not of the Angel only; so I may gather that it was
the sin, not of the Church only, but the neighboring Churches also.

It is like you intended a consutation; Potter in the Poet: Horat. de Art.
Poet. -- amphora coepit. Institui currente rota, cur urcens exit?
qui amphoram instituens currente rota effingit urcoum. For in stead of a
consutation you have brought forth an addition otwo other inferences. Now, if
you should unto this inference of the Elders add a hundred more of your own;
yet this will not prove that the inference of the Elders is injurious to the
Text; For still it may be doubted, whether theirs, or yours, any of them, all
of them, or none of them be true, true inferences from the Text, yea or no;
especially considering that the inferences you bring, are of friendly
compliance with that that you pretend to confute. For you say, -- not to the
Church (I suppose you mean -- the Church only, for else you harp upon a harsh
string in the ears of rational men, to say, John writ to all the seven
Churches of Asia; Ergo, he writ not to Perganus, one of the seven) but to the
churches. Now can you say the Lord Jesus, writing to the Angel of the Church of
Perganus, sends his Epistle to all the seven Churches, and not abuse the Text?
and yet must we believe it, when you tell us, that the Elders of New England,
in saying Christ writ not to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus only, but to
the whole Church of Pergamus also, do abuse the Text? Again, if the suffering
of Balaamites in the Church of Pergamus was the sin of all the neighboring
Churches, and that this may be affirmed by you without wrong to the Text; then
the suffering of them in the Church of Pergamus it self was the sin of that
Church; and this may be affirmed by the Elders of New England without wrong to
the Text.

2. But let us look upon the words, not as they may afford matter of an
argument ad hominem, but as they are in themselves: Two things you affirm, 1.
That Christ reproving the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, sends the Epistle to
the Churches. We suppose you mean the other six Churches of Asia. 2. That
suffering Balaamites (which is reproved in the Church of Pergamus) was the sin
of the neighboring Churches also. For the first:


1. The book of the Revlation contains seven Epistles, which were of immediate
concernment in a distributive sense, to seven several Churches; and many other
glorrious mysteries that were of equal concernment to all the people of God.
These all being molded into one book (as we said) are sent to the seven
Churches of Asia. Now the Elders of New England affirm, that the Epistles sent
to the Angels of Pergamus and Thyatira, are sent by way of immediate
appropriation and concernment (for that is their meaning) to the whole Churches
of Pergamus and Thyatira. Now if in this sense you affirm, that Christ
reproving the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, sends his Epistle to all the
Churches, you speak to the purpose, but not according to truth: For,

1. What a Pleonasme and redundancy, if not a gross Soloecisme in discourse,
and absudity it is, in a book sent as an Epistle to seven Churches, two
several times to mention them together, verse. 4. John to the seven Churches of
Asia, verse. 11. What thou see, Rev. 1.4.11.
write it in a book, and send it to the seven Churches of Asia, and afterward
to write several things of a Heterogeneall nature to those seven several
Churches distributively. To the Church of Ephesus write thus, to the Church of
Pergamus thus, etc. commend one, condemn another; admonish a third, extol a
fourth, threaten a fifth, etc. and yet, that these several Epistles should be
of as immediate a concernment to all the rest, as to those to which they are
particularly directed.

2. It will follow, that Philadelphia was lukewarm with Laodicea, dead with
Sardis; and of these two lukewarm, dead Churches, may be verified the
Encomiasticks of Ephesus, Pergamus and Philadelphia, with many such
consequences. But if your meaning be, that the Epistle sent to the Church of
Pergamus, in respect of that remore, and general concernment, whereby it may
be of use to all Christians, is sent together with the rest of the Book of the
Revelations to the seven Churches; This (though a truth) will afford no
contribution toward the making good of your charge against the Elders of
New England, being that which they deny not.

2. For the second, it is undeniably manifest, that the assertion of the
Elders, viz. that the Church of Pergamus was guilty of suffering Balaamites,
and other wicked persons, is true; yea, the truth of this Text. But to have so
much faith as to believe, that all the rest of the six Churches of Asia (if
that be the utmost extent of neighboring Churches in your account) were guilty
of suffering Balaamites and Nicolaitans (yea, even Ephesus and Philadelphia,
that are commended for not suffering those that are evil, hating the deeds of
the Nicolaitans, and keeping the Word of Gods patience,) would require some
further proof then (...), your bare assertion for the manifestation of it. For
if the rest were guilty, why are they not blamed? Why is the burden laid only
(though it might be laid chiefly) upon one Church, when as the rest are guilty?
I suppose the building upon which you lay the weight of this roof, is this:
These seven Churches were a combined Presbytery, and therefore as the
government, so the neglect thereof concerns all.

Answ. If you may assume the (...), the thing in question, as if it were the
(...), a thing out of question, you may in time persuade the world, that the
Elders of New England have forced this, and many other Texts. But to prove that
the seven Asian Churches were governed by a joint and common Presbytery, hic
labor, hoc opus est, this is the business.

But suppose that such a common Presbytery there were, and that the Presbyters
of all the other six Churches did endeavor the casting out of these
Balaamites, etc. why were they then not cast out? Could the Elders of Pergamus
over-vote the Elders of all the neighboring churches in a Synod? And if all,
or at least the major part of the Elders of these seven Churches neglect, why
are the Elders of Pergamus only reproved?

Lastly, we cannot choose upon this consideration, but condole the sad
condition of Presbyterian Churches which is such, if wicked men be suffered in
any particular Congregation in the world, all the Churches in the world are
guilty of it. The reason is, the same obligation that lies upon a Classical
Church to reform the several Congregations in the Classis, the same lies upon
a Provincial Church to reform the several Classis in the Province; and the
same lies upon a National Church to reform the several Provincial Churches
in the Nation; and the same lies upon the Oecumenicall Church to reform the
several National Churches in the world: and therefore, though all the
inferior Churches should fail, yet the Oecumenicall is bound to see it
reformed; and if the Oecumenicall fail, all in the line of Oecumenicall
communion, that is to say, all Churches in any Nation in the world are guilty.

POSITION XXIII.
The particular Congregation takes Christ for her only spiritual Prophet,
Priest and King, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 737. Psalm. 110.4. Heb. 5.4. Isai. 9.6, 7.
Rev. 15.3.

To make good this charge, you say,

Seven or eight (you say) are the fewest will make a Church; but five or six,
yea, any one particular Saint, though out of Church Fellowship by
excommunication, may take Christ for his only spiritual Priest, Prophet and
King, etc.

How comes it to pass (Brother) that your margent that has in most places
born witness to your Text, reserves it self in deep silence, afraid to be
accessory to this wrong offered to the Brethren of the Congregationall Way?
That the Congregationall Way, eatenus, in that it is Congregationall, is
conformed to the will and laws of Christ appoined by him, as King of the
Church, delivered by him in his Word, as Prophet of the Church, we constantly
affirm, and shall be ready to justify before all the word, till we be
convinced of our error in that particular. That the stated Classical,
Provincial, National, and Oecumenicall Way of Church Government importing a
power of jurisdiction in point of Ordination, Excommunication, etc. over
particular Congregations, is not suitable to the Will of God delivered by Christ
as Prophet, nor to the Laws of God delivered by Christ as King of the Church,
as it is suitable to our light: So we shall endeavor pro virili nostro
according to our power, with all meekness and brotherlike affection to defend,
as God shall give opportunity. But that ever we have read in the writings of
any Congregationall man, truly so called, as they stand in opposition to others
of a different judgment, both upon the right hand, and on the left (with whom
alone you profess in your Preface to have to do;) I say, that ever we have
read in the writings of any Congregationall man, these places applied to prove
the Position, as it is by you controverted, that is to say, that the particular
Congregationall Church takes Christ for her only Prophet, Priest and King, (as
if in these his Offices he were so only hers) that no five or six, or one
particular Saint, though out of Church Fellowship; no Classical,
Presbyteriall, or National Church, no not the National Church of the Jews it
self, does (or notwithstanding some failings in government may) take Christ as
their only spiritual Priest, Prophet, and King, as we do not remember; so in
whose Sack soever this cup of abomination be found, yea, though it be in
Benjamins, let him suffer according to his demerits. But if any of us have thus
expressed our selves, whereby we have made all particular Believers, not joined
to some Congregationall Church, the renowned Scottish and Belgic Churches, and
all other reformed Churches not Congregationall, yea, the National Church of
the Jews it self, (at least as you would insinuate) strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel; yet are we unjustly condemned by you, we mean, in that
sense, in which Salvian, says L. 7. de Gub. Dec. p. 282.
Socrates, when he writ a book, persuading that all men's wives should be
common, was unjustly condemned by the Judges: Injuste damnatus dicitur, a
judicibus, and verum est; Rectius vuim haec talia praedicantem genus damnaret
humanum. In like manner we say, we should be unjustly condemned by you, for all
the Churches of God, yea, all the people of God might deservedly condemn us.

2. But suppose it cannot be made out by you, that ever any Congregationall
man, truly so called, held the Position you speak of in the sense insinuated in
your examination: where then is your ingenuity that you profess in your
Preface? viz. If any of the Brethren seem in my apprehension to come nearer the
truth then others, I willingly take notice of it? Is this your willing taking
notice of our nearest approaches to the truth, to fasten upon us an imputation
of wresting so many Scriptures to the maintenance of an opinion that never
entered (as we verily believe) into the hearts; and we are confident, is not to
be found in the works of any Congregationall man? which if it be said, and that
you cannot make out the contrary, it is well for you that you lived not in that
over rigorous age spoken of by Ludovicus Vives in Commentary upon Augustine,
Lud. Vives in August. de Civit. Dei, l. 2. c. 9.
de Civitate Dei, in which it was a capital fault, and punishable with death,
to write or act any thing derogatory to the good name of any man. For you have
endeavored to cast the odium of the most detestable pride and censoriousnesse
upon many thousands, Ministers and People, that are of a precious anointing for
learning, or piety, or both, and in particular, of a singular eminency for that
rich grace of humility; yea, such a blot have you laid upon them, whilst you
say, that we clearly him, that Christ does exercise his Kingly, Priestly, and
Prophetical Office only in Churches merely Congregationall; yea, that Christ
did offer himself a sacrifice for all the members of a Congregationall Church,
and only for such, (a thing of the greatest abhorrency to our thoughts, if it
fall on this side blasphemy against the Holy Ghost) such a blot I say you have
laid upon them, that you will not easily wipe off; for Machiavels rule is too
true, Calumniate fortiter, saltem aliquid adhaerebit, Slander boldly; at least
somewhat will cleave.

POSITION XXIV.
Christ left but one way of Discipline for all Churches; This is found in Answ.
to 32. q. p. 72.73. and the like is in R. M. and W. T. to C. H. page 8.
which in the essentialls of it is unchangeable, and to be kept till the
appearing of Christ, 1 Timothy 6.13, 14.

To prove that these words are injurious to the Text alleged, you say,

It seems by the words, Thou, O man of God, I give thee in charge, (viz. which
immediately precedes) concerning faith, and holiness in the Ministry of the
Word, to be directed to Timothy himself: or, if to his, successors, then it
must be to the ordinary Elders; ( for Evangelists that succeeded him we know
none) not to the Churches; for example, not to the Church of Ephesus, to whom
Paul writes nothing Do these words, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. nothing concern government.
of government; though in his Epistles to Timothy he writ almost concerning
nothing else; and charge the Elders to take heed to the flock, and look to
Wolves, Acts 20.28. But if you will need have the words this commandment
extended to this whole Epistle, you had need of good warrant for this
exposition.

If you will acknowledge that the things written to Timothy concern Elders,
Deacons and Believers out of Office according to their several capacities
respectively: We shall easily grant, that all the things contained in the whole
Epistle, are directed to Timothy himself, but not for his own personal use,
but for the use of the Church also. Now in this sense it will nothing befriend
you in making good your charge: For still the many rules contained in this
Epistle in reference to the Church in general, to Bishops, Deacons, Widows,
and Members in particular, may be in force, yea by virtue of this Text, to the
appearing of Christ.

2. If by these words, -- to be directed to Timothy himself, you mean that the
Commandment immediately preceding, concerns none by way of obligation, but only
Timothy, you heat upon a harsh string: For must none flee these things, fight
the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life (by virtue of this Text) but
only Timothy? Yea, your self seem to be jealous of this interpretation, when
you say, or if to his successors, then it must be the ordinary Elders, not the
Church; and yet you have not mended the matter: For will you restrain these
words, That thou keep this Commandment, verse. 14. to those, verse. 11, 12. Flee
these things, follow after righteousness, etc. and when you have done,
determine it to Elders only? Then it will follow, that only Elders must flee
envy, strifes, railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings, covetousness:
That Elders only, and not Believers (at least by virtue of this Text) must
follow after godliness, righteousness, faith, love, patience, meekness: That
Elders only, and not ordinary Church Members, must fight the good fight of
faith, lay hold on eternal life. Now, lest this (as well it may) should seem
incredible, to make it Testimonium side dignum, you tell us, that these words,
This Commandment, relate only to that which immediately precedes, and that
which immediately precedes, relates only to faith and holiness in the
ministry of the Word. I answer,

1. If you make these words, Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on
eternal life, the commandment immediately preceding, yet it is not necessary
they should be understood only of faith and holiness in the ministry of the
Word, which is but one part of the good fight of faith, whereas the good fight
of faith is fought in the universal conflict of an Evangelists conversation
against the world, the flesh and the devil, as well as in the dispensation of
his Evangelical function.

2. But with what good reason can these words, Fight the good fight of faith,
etc. be conceived to drink up the whole meaning, and utmost extent of those
words, That thou keep this commandment without spot, etc. For though I do
believe that your thoughts are ready to gratify you with all pleasing
accommodations, for overthrow of one only stated discipline out of the word,
yet I cannot but think it would seem too gross in your thoughts, to tear by
piecemeale the continued exhortation of the Apostle, verse. 11, 12. but thou, O
man of God, flee these things, follow after righteousness, godliness, faith,
love, patience, meekness: Fight the good fight of faith, etc. and to apply
only this latter part of the exhortaion to those words, That thou keep this
commandment. And therefore cannot but wonder, that you should affirm that the
Commandment Timothy is commanded to keep, should concern only faith and
holiness in the ministry of the Word.

Therefore, notwithstanding what has been said, we still affirm that these
words relate to the rules concerning Church Government in the former part of
the Epistle; and this will further appear,

1. If you consider the coherence of these words with the former: The Apostle
having in the former part of the Epistle insisted upon the several duties of
the Officers of the Church, he commands them in the latter end of the second
verse of this Chapter, to teach and exhort these things.

2. He arms him with instructions, how he should carry himself toward those
that should teach and exhort the contrary, giving at once the character and
censure of such men, verse. 3, 4, 5. and having made a digression, verse. 6, 7,
8, 9, and 10th. he falls on again to resume the former Argument, and to exhort
Timothy to flee the courses of these corrupt teachers, and both as a Christian
and Evangelist, to approve himself to God in all holiness of conversation,
verse. 11, 12. But thou, O man of God, flee these things, etc. q. d. Though some
others may prove corrupt in doctrine, and vicious in life, yet do thou walk
with God in the power of a holy conversation, and particularly, though others
will spot this doctrine, Bishops, Deacons, etc. yet do thou keep it without
spot and unrebukeable, and cause it to be kept so by others; for an Apostle,
Evangelist, or Bishop never keeps the faith as an Apostle, Evangelist, or
Bishop aright, unless he cause it as much as in him lies, to be kept so by
others; and so much is the import of the Apostles words, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have
kept the faith.

Now, lest the Evangelist, Demonstration of Discipline, p. 5.7.
or others to whom this Word of God might come, should conceive that these
things given in charge to Timothy, were of a temporary nature, and to cease
with the Primitive times, therefore he says, verse. 13, 14. I give thee charge
in the sight of God, who quickens all things, etc. -- that thou keep this
commandment unrehukeable, and without spot, to the coming of Christ, i. e. keep
them thy self, and deliver them in charge to the Church, and principally to the
Elders to be kept till Christ his second coming.

2. That which Dr Whitakers against Du^aeus urges, is not without strength,
That the Apostles have writ these Laws (speaking of Discipline) not for a day,
or for the first age, but to endure for all times to come, and therefore has
ratified them with a most earnest obtestation (says he) 1 Timothy 6.14. that
these commandments should be kept unto the day of the Lord.

That the Essentials of Discipline set down in Scripture, are unchangeable, I
grant; but whether any Essentials be in controversy, or how many, and which
they are, you tell us not, etc.

By Discipline (Brother) we mean the whole System, Rules, Precepts or
Precedents, for the external Eutaxie order of the Church, which are not of a
temporary, but of a perpetual use, and equity, till the appearing of Christ,
and by Essentials, we mean such particulars included in this System or
Comprehension, as if any of which be wanting, something is detracted from the
perfect and complete order of the Gospel. In this sense we say, that there are
certain Essentials in controversy. That only persons righly qualified, should
be admitted to society in the Church, is an Essentall. Isai. 5.6.6.7. 1 Cor
1.1. Phil. 1.1.
Now, though this in the general be not in controversy, yet whether this or
that be a right qualification is in controversy, and so an error in an
Essential is contended for, and made by the erring party; either by taking in
visibly false, or excluding visibly true matter. That the members of the
Church, be united by a right medium, is Essential Acts 2.41. Acts 5.13. 1 Cor.
12.
to Discipline, but whether this right medium be I know not what implicit
covenant, or whether it be an express covenant, or the legal bounds of the
Parish, is no small Question at this day. That ordination, excommunication,
etc. be done by the right Subjectum capax 1 Timothy 4.14. Titus 1.5. Acts 14.23.
of these ordinances, is certainly an Essential part or discipline. But
whether the Churches in some cases may ordain by Deputies no Church-Elders; or
whether in an ordinary way this power be in the Eldership of the particular
Congregation, or in a compound Classick Eldership, is a great controversy. But
that the holy kiss, oil, washing of feet, are Essentials, we hold not.

The remainder of your examination, though drawn out into seven particulars,
seems to us to be like the horns of the Beast, called Bonassus, Aristot. de
Not. Animal.
which are big enough; but yet they are ad pugnam inutilia unusefull to fight
withal. For though we cannot assent to every thing in your seven particulars,
yet shall pass them over, because they are all peaceably conditioned to the
Doctrine of the Elders of New England. For though they were all granted, yet it
may be clearly deduced from 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. that Christ has left but one way
of Discipline for all Churches, etc. the reason is, because these are no parts
of the discipline left by Christ to the Church, which in the Essentials of it
is unchangeable: spoken by Paul in the Epistle to Timothy. Horat. de Art. Poet.
Non semper feriet, quodeunque minabitur Areus.

Lastly, whereas you call for a Narrative of our Church Way, especially of what
we count Essentials, we had thought to have taken some pains to have satisfied
you herein, but that in the nick of time that work is done to our hands, by
Reverend Mr. Cotton: And further we hear, that a work of the same nature, by
the Brethren of the the Congregationall-way, members of the Assembly, is upon
the Anvile, and that by the request of the Assembly of Divines at London, and
we make no doubt, but the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim, are, and will be
better then would be the vintage of Abiezer. Yet we know not by what obligation
we stand bound to give forth a Narrative of our Way, more then the Brethren of
the Presbyterian judgment do of theirs, who though to this day they call
earnestly for a Narrative from us, yet have not gratified us with any Narrative
of what themselves hold. And therefore vouchsafe to touch at least with one of
your fingers, that which you are pleased to lay (though we count it not so) as
a burden upon us.

POSITION XXV.
The Church or the Ministers thereof, The like words are found, answ. to 32. q.
p. 11.15. answ. to 9. Pos. p. 76.77, 28.
must not be (...), 1 Pet. 4. and therefore the Minister must not perform a
Ministerial act to another Congregation, Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.

The Text in Peter speaks not of the Church, or of the Elders, more then of
any other men, nor of meddling with the affairs of other churches, but with
other men's matters; nor yet every meddling with them, but such a meddling, as
for which they suffered from the Heathens in those days, Let no man suffer as
a busie-body in other men's matters, etc.

Neither do the Elders say that the Apostle speaks of the Church, Elders
thereof, when he does dehort them from suffering as busybodies in other men's
matters; nor is the Text in Peter so much as mentioned in any of the quotations
presented in the margent, nor once intended to be made use of, to prove the
thing they were spoken of; therefore is it not a gross wrong, to make the
world believe that they made use of 1 Pet. 4. to any such purpose? Only in p.
11. they make use of the word (...), which Peter makes use of in 1 Pet. 4. but
of that Text they make not use, when their scope was to appear against
dispensing censures and Church Priviledges to Christians, joined to no
particular Church, they say they must not be (...), alluding to that place of 1
Pet. 4. where that word is used, but not intending to give the meaning of the
place.

Now they might well apply the word to Ministers intermedling without the
bounds of their calling, because the word (...), though it signify an
Over-seer, yet usually it is applied by the Holy Ghost, to a person over-seeing
in spiritual matters, and so to a Minister of the Gospel, and is translated
Bishop; therefore (...), is a person that plays the Bishop in another Dioces,
out of his own bounds most properly; therefore might be made use of in a way of
application to Ministers, though the Apostle speak not of Ministers in that
place.

But what inference do you infer after you have resuted your own fiction?

It is of no more strength ( meaning 1 Pet. 4. against a Presbytery over
particular Congregations then against the power of Parliament over other Courts
of Judicature.

You say true; Scriptures brought, which deny to Ministers that power over
other Congregations which the Parliament has over other Courts of Judicature,
within their own territories.

The inference supposes that the flocks mentioned in these two Texts, Acts
20.28. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.) were two particular Congregations, which is impossible
to be proved.

The inference supposes no such thing, Texts against Ministers their
performing ministerial acts to other Congregations, the truth of which we
shall make to appear:

The Texts in Acts 20.28. gives this charge: Take heed to your selves, and to
all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers to feed the
Church of God, i. their charge extends to none of them beyond the flock over
which they were made overseers in the work of feeding; now whether there were
more Congregations in Ephesus, or but one, yet no Elder could then, or can now,
feed any more then one Congregation, therefore they are Overseers only, each of
them, to one Congregation. Your selves will grant that they cannot feed in a
constant way by word and doctrine, and the Sacraments, (which are the
principal works of feeding) any more then one Congregation; therefore one
Congregation bounds their Commission; and consequently, if they feed
ministerially other Congregations, they go beyond their Commission, and are
(...).

2. It is more then probable, that the flock at Ephesus was but one
Congregation: First, Ephesus was a City, and we do not read of more
Congregations of Saints constantly meeting for the worship of God in any City,
then one: Secondly, we cannot think, but that the Church of Jerusalem, Corinth
and Antioch, were as numerous as Ephesus, and yet none of them were more then
one Congregation, if we be bound to rest upon the Holy Ghosts own testimony,
who witnesses that they ordinarily met in one place, as before was showed.

3. They are called one flock, one Church; now we have declared before, that
one instituted Church, and a Congregation are all one, when Church is properly
taken, and without a figure; and in this place there is no necessity of a
figure, for there is no improbability but that they might meet in one place;
therefore the charge runs to the Elders at Ephesus to feed the Church, viz. the
Congregation at Ephesus, and to that they are so limited.

The Text in 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. gives this charge: Feed the flock that is among
you. Now, neither the Elders to whom he writes were together, nor the Saints
whom they were to feed, but both the one and the other, scattered abroad
through many countries, Pontus, Galatia, Asia, etc. therefore flock in this
Text, is to be taken in a figurative sense, and distributively of necessity;
and the charge of feeding the flock is to be limited by the words (among you.)
And thus it must be understood, you Elders in Pontus, feed the flock among you;
and you Elders in Galatia, feed the flock among you, and you Elders in Asia,
feed the flock among you; and each of you in every place, feed the flock where
you be, in each place. And more distributively yet, because neither all the
Elders, nor all the Saints in Galatia, Asia, etc. were together, therefore it
is thus to be interpreted; ye Elders in this City of Asia, feed the flock among
you; and ye Elders in that City, feed the flock among you; and so of all the
rest; so that the restriction in the Commission is in these words (among you.)
Now the Saints in Galatia were not with the Elders of Asia, nor the Saints of
one City of Asia, with the Elders of another City of Asia; therefore the Elders
were by Commission to look to the Saints in every City and place where
themselves were, and not to others where themselves were not: So that if the
Elders in Asia should take authoritative inspection over the Saints in Galatia,
and in other countries, they should be (...), Bishops meddling in others Dioces
not belonging to them, because all Elders are bounded to the Saints among
themselves.

Peter bids the Elders of Pontus, etc. to feed the flock of God that is amongst
them; therefore you say the Elders of one Church of Galatia, must not feed the
people of another Church of Galatia. A communicant must examine himself; will
you thence infer, that none else must examine himself? The Thessalonians were
to know them that were over them, and labored among them, and esteem them very
high in love for their works sake; therefore must they not hear at all, or at
least not esteem highly for their works sake the Pastors of other
Congregations? 2 These. 5.12, 13.

Your reasoning is not good, (nor candid) by comparing things disparate, you
would cast an absurdity upon us, but it will light upon your self. You argue
from works of common Christian duty unto works of Office very improperly: As
suppose the matter were thus laid down; The Parliament writes to the Colonels
of Lancashire, to look well to, and rule and govern the soldiers and people
that is amongst them; an inference is drawn hence, the Colonels of Lancashire
are not to govern and rule the soldiery and people of Cheshire, for their
charge is over the soldiery and people amongst themselves; this inference is
good. But you to overthrow it, would bring such an argument as this: The
Colonels of Lancashire must agree amongst themselves, must they not therefore
agree with the Colonels of Cheshire? The soldiers and people of Lancashire
must respect and honor their own Commanders, must they not therefore respect
and honor the Commanders in other counties also? This is a weak argumentation
to overthrow the former inference; the fallacy lies in this, you would extend
duties of authority and office in such manner as duties of love and reverence,
and honor (which respect all men, all superiors) are to be extended.
Therefore, seeing that it is a feeding of office, and an authoritative feeding,
that is enjoined in those Texts alleged, it is limited to the people over whom
they are Officers, and may not be extended further. And yet the people of such
Congregations must love their own members, so as withal they must love the
members of other Congregations; and they must reverence their own Officers, so,
as withal they must reverence the Officers of other Congregations; yet their
own most, because relation there is strongest: And the reason is, because love
and reverence are not actions annexed to Office, but of a common nature
appertaining to men and Christians.

Take heed to the flock, and feeding it, does include administration of the
Word, and Prayer, as well as of Sacraments; yet you hold, he may,
notwithstanding this Text, preach and pray in another Congregation.

Taking heed to the flock, and feeding it, Word and Prayer, of the Sacraments,
and the exercise of Discipline; and yet your self does not place a parity in
all these. For you are apprehensive of a further liberty in preaching and
praying, then in performing the other actions. You will preach to the Heathens
as Heathens, but not give Sacraments to them; you may preach before Ordination
for approbation, but not dispense the Sacraments before Ordination; You may
preach to a Congregation in Scotland, and yet not act authoritatively in their
Synods among them. And now, what the reason of this should be, we cannot
imagine, unless you grant with us, a difference betwixt some acts of feeding,
and other acts of feeding, and say, some acts are so annexed to Office, and are
so authoritative, that they cannot be performed but where Office is, and
authority is; and other acts of feeding, though they they be authoritative to
that people over whom the persons performing them are Officers, yet they may be
performed by a gift without Office, to another people, and are not
authoritative to them. To this purpose speak the Elders in answer to the 8th
Position; and the reason will be good to us, till you yield a better.

The relation of Ministers and People is mutual; if the people my receive the
Sacrament from another that is not their Minister, then the Minister may
administer it to them that are not of his flock.

In one sense, all that you say is true; people may receive the Sacrament from
one that is not their Minister, being recommended to him; and the Minister may
administer the Sacrament to such as are so recommended to him; but then this
recommendation is, as it were, a dismission, differing not really, but only in
time: recommendation commends them for a time to fellowship with that Church,
and dismission commends them for continuance without returning: See Cottons
Keys Cottons Keys, page 17, 18.
, which you make so much use of against us. When persons of another Church do
orderly intermingle themselves with this or that Church, then they are as
members, and the Pastor is as their Pastor, and so he may dispense the
Sacraments to them. But it will not follow, that therefore he may act
Ministerially out of his own Church and People in and maong another Church and
People; nor will relation of Ministers and People being mutual, bring such a
conclusion about. Magistrates and Subjects are Relatives; and if any Subjects
of one county come to another county, and be wronged in the county whither he
is come, he may request justice from the Magistrate of the county where the
wrong is done him, and receive it. But yet this will not draw on another thing,
that hereupon, because a Magistrate may dispense justice to a stranger coming
among his people, he may therefore go from among his people to another county,
and dispense justice among them: so of Ministers, it may be said, They are
Pastors to their own people, and perform Pastoral acts to their own, and to
those that orderly are recommended to them as theirs; but when they leave their
own, they are not Pastors to other Congregations, to dispense Pastoral acts to
them.

By virtue of communion of Churches you may, and do receive known approved
recommended members of another Church, to the holy Communion. If you may
receive one, why not two, three, six, seven, eight, which it may be, are the
whole Congregation? Where does the Scripture allow the one, and not the other?

We grant all you say, one, two, seven, eight, do come by recommendation, they
must be received by virtue of communion of Churches; yet we demand, if these
seven, or eight be the whole Congregation, who shall recommend them? For
without recommendation, they cannot orderly be received. Or suppose they
commend themselves to the Communion of another Church, they are now sallowed up
in the fellowship of the other Church, and counted (pro tempore) as members
thereof, and have not the consideration of a distinct Church. And though it be
lawful for a Minister to dispense the Sacrament to them with his own people;
yet not lawful to go forth from his own people, and to give it to them alone:
If a whole town should come to live in another town, they might have the
justice of that town, and yet the Magistrate, though he might do justice to
them in the town, being mingled with his own people, cannnt notwithstanding
dispense it unto them, abiding in their own place. But you ask, Where the
Scripture allows the one, and not the other? We answer, the Scripture
allows the recommendation of the members of one Church to another, Romans 16.1.
2 Cor. 3.1. But can you produce any place where the Minister of one Church has
acted ministerially in another Church?

You grant that Elders have a calling to ordain Elders in other Churches
whereof themselves are neither Elders nor Members, by request of that Church
where the Elders are to be ordained. R. M. and W. T. to C.H. p. 48. Reply.


While Mr. Mather says they may entreat help, he holds by consequence, that
the Elders of other Congregations have no proper right of their own to ordain
in other Congregations, and that their power is derived to them from those
Congregations that entreat them; and then it will follow, that the help that
such Elders do afford, is not as they are Elders in reference to their Office;
but as better gifted, and in reference to greater ability which such Elders
have to carry on such a business. The reason is, because if such Elders acted
in Ordination as Officers in another Congregation, then they would have proper
power so to act without entreaty; for entreaty makes not them Officers which
were none before; and if they were Officers before, entreaty is not needful to
enable them. And if they act as Officers in another Congregation, then they may
in all Congregations; for they are Elders alike in all as in any, save only
where they are fixed. Now this is against Mr. Mathers principles; his meaning
therefore was, that as if in case a Church want Elders to preach to them, they
may entreat Elders of other Churches to preach to them, not because they
conceive that an Elder only may preach, but because they judge an Elder to be
more able to do it; so it must be understood in the business of Ordination. In
this sense we wholly concur with Mr. Mather, but in your sense cannot grant
it.

Whereras the 26. and 27th Sections concern one and the same head of
controversy, we shall make one defense for both.

POSITION XXVI.
Gifted men, This is but a little altered from Answ to 32. q. p. 80. and 73.
and T. W. to W. R. p 44. and 56.
viz. (so reputed by competent Judges, though) not called to the Ministry, nor
intended for it, may preach. They that were scattered abroad upon the
Persecution which arose about Stephen, were not Church Officers, at least not
all of them: yet these men did preach the Word; and Philip which was but a
Deacon, preached without the calling or privity of the Apostles, Acts 11.19.
and 8.14.

POSITION XXVII.
Iehosaphat sent Princes, who were neither Ministers, nor intended so to be,
See Answ. to 32. Quest.
to teach with the Priests and Levites (viz.) at least to encourage the people
to hearken to the Priests and Levites, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9. as Iehosaphat did,
2 Chronicles. 20.20. yea, and was their mouth to God in Prayer, verse. 2.5 to 13. As
we conceive something in that prophesying, 1 Cor. 14. to be extraordinary: So
we conceive it to be ordinary, that some private men grown Christians of able
gifts, who may have received a gift of Prophecy, need no more extraordinary
calling for them to prophecy in the Churches then for Iehosaphat and his
Princes to prophecy in the Church of Israel.

These Positions thus laid down, are by you accused of injury to the Text, to
which we answer.

1. Here also you fall short of that ingenuity professed in your Preface; for
doubtless Mr. Cotton, Ministry, cannot but in your judgment come nearer the
truth, then those that say (at least as you give it out) that gifted men, not
called to the Ministry, nor intended for it, may preach, which imply to be
meant in an ordinary and stated way. When you say -- yet that these did preach
ordinarily and usually to the Churches, like to Pastors -- is impossible to be
proved. Now, though you style Mr. Cotton deservedly, the Chief of the more
ingenuous sort of Congregationall men; yet you neither help forward
accommodation, nor honor Mr. Cottons ingenuity by the least mention of it, as
you profess.

2. You are so far from helping forward accommodation, that I know not how to
excuse you from making the breach greater then it was. For we have consulted
advisedly with 73. and 80th pages of the 32. Quest. and we can find no such
Position as you fasten upon the Elders: For page 73. they answer the 21. Quest.
viz. Whether do you hold it lawful for mere lay, or private-men to ordain
Ministers in any case? And having proved the Affirmative by reasons grounded
upon the Word of God, they come to urge the consent of some worthy Divines, and
learned Writers, as Doctor Willet, Morney, Whitakers, and others; and in the
Allegation of Morney, they show that Morney expresses himself, that some of
our men expected not the calling of those that under the title of Pastors,
oppressed the flock, but did at first preach without this formal calling, and
afterward were called to the Holy Ministry of the Word, by the Churches; and
for this we have examples (says Morney) First in the Acts, where we read that
Philip was but a Deacon, preached in Samaria without the calling of the
Apostles, yea, without their privity, who for all that gave their allowance to
that work. So that here he speaks not of an ordinary and usual course in
preaching to the Churches without Office, but an extraordinary case, of those
that because of the corruptions of the times preached to the people without the
calling of the Prelates in such places, where they had either no Officers, or
Popish Officers; neither does he speak of gifted men that intended not the
Ministry, but of gifted men, that because they durst not enter by the ordinary
door of Prelaticall ordination, preached to the people by virtue of their
gifts, and that internal Prothumie, or desire which God had wrought in them,
and so soon as by the blessing of God upon their endeavors, they had so far
prevailed, as that there were Churches giving them a calling, they embraced
that call: And this is that he proves lawful by the Allegation of Philips
example: So in the 80. page, their scope is to show, that the Word may be made
effectual to Conversion, though the man that speaks it be not a
Church Officer. For the people of which they allege the preaching of those
that were scattered by the Persecution of Stephen, Acts 8.4. and 11.19, 20, 21.
and Job. 4.39. where many of the Samaritans believed upon the saying of the
woman of Samaria, and that 1 Cor. 7.16. What know thou, O woman, but thou
shall gain thy husband? So that you do most miserably wrest their Allegations
quite to another purpose, then that for which they intended them; for they
never intended hereby to prove the lawfulness of preaching by virtue of gifts,
without Office, but only that those which do preach without Office, may be
instruments of conversion, much less did they intend, as you would make the
world believe, that these did preach ordinarily, and usually to the Churches
like Pastors, and received maintenance; for they speak of such a kind of
preaching, as may be done by a gifted woman, as the woman of Samaria, or the
believing wife, 1 Cor. 7. as well as by a gifted man. Neither do they speak of
the preaching of these that were scattered, as it was ordinary and usual, and
like unto Pastors, but only as performed by men, who (all of them at least)
[say they] were not Church Officers, and yet proved effectual for conversion.
When we read your marginall note, viz. This is but a little altered from Answ.
to 32. Quest. p. 80.73. we imagined at first sight, you had made some small
alteration in the language and phrase, which we could well have born with; but
we find that you have made an alteration in the very scope and subject matter
insisted upon by the Elders. You have taken away their living child, and laid
your own dead child in the room of it; so that in your margent we have you
(though in a mincing extenuating) what Ciecro desires his adversary, viz.
Confitentem re^^^^, confessing your own guilt, which is the greatest expression
of ingenulty of all others in this Section.

3. But that we may give satisfaction to you, and to all men, (if it be the
will of God;) we shall first declare our judgment concerning the point in
debate, and then answer your Arguments, so far as we conceive them invalid.

First, then we conceive that all the members of the Church (so far as their
occasions and calling will permit, should strive after ability by way of
prophesying; to speak to exhortation, edification and comfort, He Prophetiae
donum tanquamalus praestantms maxim commendat Apostolus, cuiom^es studeant, 1
Cor. 14.1, 2. Par^us in Romans 12. col. 1197. i. e. This gift of Propecie, as
more excellent then the other gifts, the Apostle most commends, for which all
should cover, 1 Cor. 14.1, 2.
1 Cor. 1 p. 1. and the Hebrews ought to have been teachers of others, though
they stood in need to be taught the very Principles of Religion, Hebr. 5.12.

2. There are for the most part, (and may always lawfully be) some in the
Church, who devote themselves to the study of the Scriptures, and other
profitable studies, that so they may be the better enabled to understand the
meaning of the Word: Such were those sons of the Prophets, bred up under the
Prophets, 1 Samuel 19.20. 1 King 20.35. 2 King. 2.3.5. Such were many of our
Saviors Disciples, who addicted themselves wholly to learn to be fishers of
men. Such (it is probable) were some of those Prophets which were in Corinth,
Antioch, and other Churches: For the Rules to be observed in the exercise of
Prophecy, were not proper to the Church of Corinth alone, but the same were
ordained in all Churches, 1 Cor. 14.33. And therefore Prophets, whom the Rules
concern, were, or might be in all Churches; for having no public Universities,
or Colleges for Christians, it is probable this was the way of training up men
for the work of the Ministry, under the Teaching Officers of the several
Churches.

3. That ordinarily God chose of those that were sons of the Prophets, to be
Prophets; yet this was not universal: for sometimes God raised up
extraordinarily from amongst the people. Thus Amos was a Heardsman, and yet
chosen to be a Prophet: And this has been done in an ordinary way in the
Churches, that men that have made great proof in holiness and knowledge, have
been called to public Office.

Spyridion a Shepherd, was called to be Bishop of Trimithous, Socrates Eccl.
Hist l. 1. c. 8. p. 232.
a City of Cyprus: Ambrose, a Consul (being yet but a Catechumenist) came into
the Church Assembly at Millain, and spoke much, and very powerfully by way of
exhortation to the dissenting Brethren, and was by an unanimous vote chosen for
their Bishop at that instant, before he was Baptized. Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l
4. c. 24, 25. p. 335.
So when God was pleased to make known his Will by immediate revelation, he was
pleased many times to make use of the sons of the Prophets. The sons of the
Prophets that were at Bethel, 1 King 2.3, 5.
and Jericho, could tell Elisha, that his Master should be taken from him; yet
sometimes God was pleased to reveal his will to those that were not sons of
the Prophets. Thus, though none were to be designed by the Church, as one of
these two or three that must prophecy in a Church-meeting, but Prophets; yet
if any thing were revealed to him that sat by, he had the liberty to express
it; so that it is well observed on the one hand by W. Musculus upon the place,
that the Apostle says not, Duo, vel tres prophetent, sed Prophetae duo vel
tres prophetent; that is, he does not say, Let two or three prophecy, but let
two or three Prophets prophecy: So on the other hand upon these words; If any
thing be revealed to him that sits by, let the first hold his peace: he has
these words, Non dicit, significet loquenti, ut ille hoc Ecclesiae proponat,
sed dicit, surgat and ipse, and loquatur: neque dicit, servet sibiipsi, sed
prior taceat: ne videlicet illicitum putetur ei loqui in Ecclesia qui non sit
in ordine Prophetarum, sed de numero sedentium and auditorum, i.e. He says
not, Let him signify it to him that is speaking, that he may prophecy the
thing to the Church; but he says, Let himself also arise, and let him speak;
neither says he, let him keep it to himself, but let the first hold his peace;
viz. lest it should be thought unlawful for him to speak in the Church, who is
not in the order of the Prophets, but in the number of those that sit by,
Aretius in 1 Cor. 14.26.
and are auditors. In like manner Aretius, Inde fieri potest, ut quos Ecclesia
deputavit ad munus interpretandi, non habent revelationem loci propositi, sed
alius in turba sedens: Hence it may come to pass, that those whom the Church
has deputed to the Office of interpreting, may not have the revelation of the
place propounded, but some other fitting among the multitude.

4. That now that extraordinary revelations are ceased, yet it may be lawful
for some members of the Church, which are not Officers, to preach or prophecy
publicly; and, 1. To those that are not in Church Fellowship. 2. To those that
are in Church Fellowship, and want Officers. 3. To those that are in
Church Fellowship, and have all Officers complete.


For the first,

First, it may be lawful for a Church, having persons endowed with parts fit
for the work, to send them forth as Messengers to preach to Heathens for their
conversion.

Reas. 1. By the same reason that the Church of Antioch sent forth Paul and
Barnabas to preach in Salamis, Paphes, Pergo, Antiochia, etc. for the
conversion both of Jews and Gentiles, by the same reason a true Church may
send forth men of excellent parts to preach for the conversion of Heathens; For
Paul and Barnabas did not now go forth by virtue of their Apostolical
Commission, by which they were enabled to preach to all Nations: for so they
should have had no need to have been separated by fasting, prayer, and
imposition of the hands of the Eldership; for that Commission they had long
before this separation: but they went as Messengers sent out of God by the
Ministry of the Church of Antioch; and when they returned, they render an
account to the Church of their service in the work to which they were
recommended by the Church, Acts 14.27. Now if Paul and Barnabas, who without
the recommendation of the Church of Antioch, might have preached in all these
places, were sent forth by the Church, what does this but demonstrate unto us a
power in the Churches, to send forth Messengers, though they be neither
Apostles, Pasters, nor Teachers, who shall preach as gifted men, sent forth by
the Church for that purpose? For, if Paul and Barnabas, who were Apostles, did
preach as Messengers sent of God, by the Ministry and recommendation of the
Church to such a work, by the same reason may persons gifted, preach by virtue
of such a recommendation.

Reas. 2. God has left a power to the Church, to propagate the Gospel, by
using means for the conversion of those that are unconverted. Now, because all
unconverted persons cannot come to hear in the Church Assemblies, therefore
Christ has left power to the Churches, to send out Messengers for this
purpose, to preach the Gospel to them; otherwise there were no means left by
Christ to be used by the Church, for the conversion of those that lie in a
state of Heathenisme, and cannot, or will not be at the charge and pains of
repairing to Church Assemblies.

If it be said, Let the Church send forth some of her teaching Officers.

The work of the Officers is properly to attend the flock, Church in the want
of other fit persons may send out one of her officers for a time, yet if she
have those that are not in office, that are endowed with eminent abilities for
the work, they are never the less fit, because not in Office: For, if they
were Officers they should act amongst Heathens, not as Officers to such a
Congregation, but as men sent out by such a Church, in the name of Jesus Christ.

2. Gifted persons not in the Ministry may preach to Churches wanting
Officers. That they may preach by way of probation, in reference to a Call, you
your self will grant, and there is the same reason, in case the teaching
Officers should die. Suppose an eminent gifted member, that has been bred at
School and University for many years, should be desired by the Congregation to
exercise his gifts amongst them, till God would enable them to choose another
Pastor and Teacher, this gifted person, though not in the Ministry, nor
intending it, might exercise his gift amongst them, upon this ground, which
shall appear in the confirmation of the third thing which is yet of a higher
nature.

3. Gifted persons not in the Ministry, may preach in a Church that has all
Officers complete: For the understanding of which, we will lay down certain
Positions:

1. No Believer as a Believer, may challenge a liberty to preach or prophecy
publicly: For though it were with Moses to be wished, that all the Lords
people were Prophets, Numb. 11.
and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them; yet for as much as God has
not endowed all them with parts fir for the work, all may not prophecy; some
there are that have need of milk, Heb. 5.13.
because they are unskilful in the word of righteousness, for they are babes,
and so not able to prophecy.

2. No Churchmember (though a Brother) merely as a Churchmember, may
challenge a liberty of public prophecy. This appears because the Apostle
exhorts the Corinthians to strive after ablitie to prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.1.
which shows, that they might not prophecy merely in the capacity of
Church Members; for if so, God would have entailed abilities upon all the
Fraternity of the visible Church at their first admission. There were in the
Church of Corinth, some that occupied the room of the unlearned, 1 Cor. 14.16.
that expressed themselves no otherwise then by saying Amen, with an audible
voice, when those that possessed the room of the learned gave thanks, as
Tertullian, and Justin Martyr tell us, and therefore, when the Apostle says, 1
Cor. 14.23, 24. If all speak with tongues, etc. but if all prophecy, etc. he
is not to be understood of the whole Fraternity, but only of those that were in
a capacity to speak with tongues, and prophecy. Now, that all were not endowed
with these gifts, appears, 1 Cor. 12.10.29.

3. Church Members, upon whom God has bestowed eminent parts, that are able to
divide the Word of God aright, and to weild the sword of the Spirit with
dexterous abilities, may lawfully preach publicly in the Assembly of the
Church. This may appear,

1. From the end of gifts, which is the use of them for the edification of
others, as well as of our selves. Now private or mean gifts are of private use,
but public or eminent gifts are of public use. When the young man told Moses
that Eldad and Medad prophesied, and Joshua exhorted Moses to forbid them, it
was because they exercised that office that was (as they thought) peculiar to
Moses; but Moses is well content, Numb. 11.29. I would (says he) all the Lords
people were Prophets, and God would put his Spirit upon them; ut contra nihil
tantopere expetam quam ut singuli qui in populo Jehovae sunt eodemspiritu
instrcti prophetare possint, Jun. Paral. Appen. par. 3. p. 353.
q. d. if God would put his Spirit upon all the people, as well as upon my
self, they might all lawfully prophecy, as well as my self: for together with
extraordinary gifts, there went along an extraordinary call to exercise those
gifts. So the Apostle speaking of the exercise of prophecy, Romans 12.6. Having
then gifts differing according to the grace which is given to us, whether
prophecy, let us prophecy according to the proportion of fatith: So that
where there is the gift, there may be a lawful exercise of the gift in an
orderly manner.

2. That which Church Members, not in Office, nor intending Office, may
lawfully strive after, that they may lawfully exercise, being once obtained;
But Church Members may lawfully seek after an ability to prophecy publicly,
1 Cor. 14.1. Follow after, etc. and v. 12. even so ye, for as much as ye are
zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that ye may excel to the edifying of the
Church. Those that are fit to be isntrumental in a public way, must not be
men of vulgar and trivial parts, but must excel, that they may edify the
Church; the conclusion is, some Church Members (though not in Office, nor
intending Office) may prophecy publicly.

3. From a like necessity at this day of the exercise of acquired gifts, with
that the churches had in those times of the exercise of infused gifts. If in
those times when the Apostles did often visit the churches, the Evangelists did
water the churches, and there were in the churches many Prophets, that not only
addicted themselves to the study of the Scriptures, but were also
extraordinarily many times, assisted by the Spirit of God; yet if a Brother,
that had a Revelation must have a liberty to utter his revelation for the
edification of the Church, how much more now, when there are neither Aposiles
to visit, nor Evangelists to water, nor Prophets extraordinarily gifted to
expound the Word? but in many Congregations not one teaching Officer, in the
most, but one Minister endowed with acquired gifts, if any Brother have an
excellency of acquired parts, he not only may, but should be stirred up to
inploy his talent, as God shall offer occasion for the good of the Church.

4. Church Members, how ever eminently gifted, may not presume to speak in the
Church-assembly, before they have a calling to the work by those whom it does
concern: Paul, though an Apostle, did not offer to preach in the Synagogue at
Antioch, in Pisidia, till the Rulers of the Synagogues had sent unto him for
that end, otherwise, through the corruption of men, there might be great
confusion in the Church, and the Officers much disturbed by the proud
interposition of Exthusiastick spirits (for such may arise in the purest
Churches) venting their frothy phantasmes, tanquant ex tripode dicta, as if
they were the undoubted Oracles of God Now, if there may be discerned a spirit
of erroneous pride in the men that desire to speak, they ought to be denied,
and admonished; but if they be holy, able, humble men, of whom the Church may
presume that they will speak to edification, in such a case the preaching
officers must have a spirit of humility, to give way unto them, 1 Cor. 14.32.
The spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, that is, the Prophets
have a command of their spirits, that they can easily give way to any to speak,
and themselves sit down as auditors, provided they be such as expound, divide,
and apply the Word profitably. And that this is the meaning of the place,
appears by that which follows, verse. 33. For, God is not the author of
confusion, but of peace.

Now we will consider your Arguments, with which you endeavor to prove these
Texts to be abused.

This Text cannot be generally understood of all that were scattered, your
selves explain it of men, not of women, 1 Cor. 14. Of gifted men, and called to
that work by the Church, not of ungifted and uncalled men; yet the words in
their indefinite latitude, will prove the preaching as well of ungifted men,
and uncalled, as others.

We understand not the Text of all as your self confess. Officers, we have
what we desire. Will it follow, The text taken in its indefinite latitude, must
needs be wrested; therefore it is wrested by us, who take it in a definite
latitude? especially since no reason is, or (we suppose) can be by you brought,
why we may not take it in a limited sense, and yet deny it to be taken in an
unlimited sense. Is not this an ignorance of the Elench? Can you ever infer
contradictorium propositionis negatae, with this medium? St John says, Christ
has made us Kings and Priests, etc. Because these words, Rev. 1.6.
Kings and Priests taken in their indefinite latitude, will infer, that the
people of God are temporal kings, having Sovereign power over others; and
Priests to offer up corporal sacrifices to God, as the Priests of the Law did?
Will it therefore follow, that he that shall expound these words in a definite
latitude, as importing only that in Christ they have overcome the Law, Death,
Sin, the World, and do triumph over them; that they are Priests by a special
sequestration of themselves from the world, to offer up spiritual sacrifices
to God the Father, do pervert and abuse this Text?

Questionless, there were Elders amongst them, it may be the Seventy Disciples
were not quite out of Commission, certainly Philip was amongst them, who was an
Evangelist, etc.

Suppose that amongst those that were scattered and preached, Elders, yea,
preaching Elders: Suppose the Commission of the Seventie (by virtue of which
they were to carry neither purse nor scrip, nor shoes, neither were to salute
any man by the way, Luke 10.1, 2. Nullos dum habes hic Apostolos, sed
Discipulos illorum, and Discipulori^ Discipulos, sic quovis medio utiliter Deus
uti potest. Aretius in Acts 11.
but to go before the face of Christ, two, and two into every city and place
whither Christ himself would come) were in full force at this time: Lastly,
Suppose that Philip were an Evangelist amongst them: Will it from hence follow,
that all that preached were Church Officers; and that none of them were gifted
persons out of Office; and consequently, that those that say, that all were not
Officers that went preaching, do abuse the Text? certainly this is a wide
consequence: But you say,

They were all filled with the Holy Ghost, which made them Doctors, the first
day, and gave both ability and a call to speak the Word, etc.

But did their extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost make them all Officers,
yea or no? (for you suppose that all received the Holy Ghost;) If so, then
there was a Church of Officers, and none over whom those Officers were set, and
that were under the authority of Office. If the gifts did not make them
Officers, then we have what we assume, viz. Gifted persons not in Office may
preach; yea, if all the members of a Church, had gifts fit for the work, all
might preach, Numb. 11.29. 1 Cor. 14.12.31.

If it be said, these were extraordinary gifts by immediate inspiration.

So were the gifts of the Officers in those times. Church Members, though
orderly called to the work, (we mean not to the Office) because eminently
gifted for it, a liberty to exercise their gift, because their gifts are not
extraordinary, as were those of the Primitive Christians; By the same reason
you may deny Officers, though both orderly called, and competently gifted, a
liberty to exercise their gift, because their gifts are not extraordinary, as
were the gifts of the Primitive Officers.

Again, if a Brother, gifted by immediate inspiration might preach or prophecy
publikly in those Churches where the Officers were gifted by immediate
inspiration; then a Brother eminently gifted by Gods blessing upon his labor
and industry, being orderly called thereunto, may preach in those Churches
where the Officers are gifted, only by Gods blessing upon their labor and
industry, without any immediate inspiration.

That these did preach ordinarily, and usually to the Churches, like to
Pastors, and receive maintenance for the same, as some do in London and
elsewhere, is impossible to be proved.

That which is not affirmed by the Elders, eminent gifted persons, being
orderly called thereunto, may lawfully preach, though not in Office; and if by
ordinarily and usually you mean, that toties quoties, as often as the Church
shall have need, (suppose by reason of the sickness, death, or just absence of
the Pastor, or any other lawful ground and occasion) and his calling and
condition will permit, we suppose the person eminently gifted may preach,
though for diverse months together. And if he do the work, why may he not
receive the wages, not in the capacity of a Pastor, but of one that has done
the work that deserves wages? Suppose he has spent his means in many years
painful study in the University, may he lawfully preach, and yet must he
necessarily famish, because he is not in the Pastoral relation? May he
lawfully dispense unto them his spiritual things, and may he not lawfully
receive of them a dispensation of their temporal things? May he (nay must he
by a conflux and concentering of all things that make up his Call to such a
work, for such a time) usually and ordinarily tread out the corn, and yet his
mouth be muzzled during all that space? May he lawfully communicate unto them
by teaching them in the Word, and may he not lawfully communicate with them in
receiving, who are freely willing to communicate with him in giving all good
things?

In the Church of Israel, none besides the Priests and Levites, did ordinarily
prophecy, either in the Temple, or in the Synagogues, unless they were either
furnished with extraordinary gifts of prophecy, as the Prophets of Israel; or
were set apart, and trained up to prepare for such a Calling, etc.

In case that either those whose Office it is in an ordinary way to prophecy
be unable many of them to the work; King, and certain choice men of the Princes
of the Realm be able, and in parts no way inferior to those able men, whose
Office it is to preach unto the people, they may, they ought to prophecy, as
well as Kings, Princes, Noblemen, being gifted, may sit in Ecclesiastical
Synods, and declare what they conceive to be the mind of God therein. And this
Jehosaphat and his Princes did, by virtue of that general equity which is of
perpetual use, whereby eminent gifts are to be put forth upon just occasion,
for the Public good, though by men not in Office.

Luther, and the first Preachers in the beginning of Reformation, were not
Church Officers, nor could be, unless we will say, that the Antichristian
Hierarchy could institute a Christian Ministry; and yet they preached
lawfully, as gifted persons, stirred up by God in a time of defection and
apostasy: And so Jehosaphat and his Princes preached, not merely as King and
Princes, for then all Kings and Princes might preach, but as King and Princes
gifted, and singularly stirred up to the work by Almighty God. That a King, and
Princes eminently gifted and stirred up by an internal prothumie and desire
wrought upon their spirits, to preach, is of perpetual use in all such cases
of defection, as was in Jehosaphats time: Nor will this confound the matters of
God, and the Kings matters: But still the Priests and Levites shall preach
ordinarily by virtue of Office, and the King and Princes only occasionally by
virtue of gifts. And as they may preach themselves in all such cases: so they
may send forth eminently gifted men, though the Churches through corruption
should neglect or refuse to call them; and this belongs to Civil Magistrates
as they are custodes utriusque tabulae. Neither are Kings, or those sent out by
them, limited to particular Congregations but may call the people to such
places, and at such times as they shall judge most to tend to edification. Thus
Joshua called all Israel to Sechem, Josh. 24.1.
and preached unto them before his death.

They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain; for the earth shall
be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover the Sea, Isaiah 11.9.

Thus says JEHOVAH, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way; and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls,
Jeremiah 6.16.

For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature.

And as many as walk according to this rule, Peace be on them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God, Gal. 6.15, 16.

A TABLE of the Texts of Scriptures, cited, Discussed, and cleared from
mis-interpretations, in this BOOK.
GENESIS 9. verse. 26, 27. Whether a Church in Sems family. page 43 Genesis 12.3.
and 22.16.18. with Gal. 3.17. as Acts 3.25. (...). p. 42 Genesis 17.1.9. Whether
it was a covenant only on Gods part. p. ibid. EXODUS 12.3.21. Whether the word
Congregation and Elders are all one there. p. 53 Exodus 12.47. Engaged by
covenant to serve God together. page 40 Exodus 34.23, 24. All the Churches males
must meet together for worship in one place. page 14 NUMBERS 8.9, 10. with
verse. 6, 7, 13, 14, 18, 19. All the Congregation must lay hands on the Levites,
how? page 52, 44, 55 Numb. 11.29. I wish all could prophecy. page 125, 128
Numb. 25. Phinehas his zeal. Hence Gods covenant with him and his. ergo? page
49 DEUTERONOMY 16.2.16. See Exodus 34.23. All males to meet. page 14 Deuteronomy.
29.1.10.12. Whether a covenant makes a Church. page 37, 39, 40 2 KINGS 2.3.5.
Gods will revealed by Prophets and others. page 122 2 CHRONICLES 17.7. Princes
sent to teach the people. page 118 2 Chronicles. 20.25.20. King Jehosaphat prays,
and teaches Israel. page 118 NEHEMIAH 10.38. Levites were tythed. Tithes are a
Jewish maintenance. page 61 PSALM 30.7. My Mount so strong. What? page 68
Psalm. 46.2. Mountains into Sea, what it signifies. ibid. Psalm. 74.4.8. Burnt
up Synagogues, What? page 26 ISAIAH 4.5. Gospel Church is called Sion. page 71
Isai. 61.20. Gospel in Old-Testaments language. ibid. Isai. 9.6, 7. Christ is
the churches King. page 104 JEREMIAH 51.25. Fire signifies oppositions. page 68
HOSEAH 2.2. Members may plead with the Church. page 59 ZACHARIAH. 4.7. What is
that great Mountain? page 68 Zach. 14.19. Gospel in Old Testaments language.
page 71 MALACHI 3.8. Tithes as offerings are Jewish. page 61 MATTHEW 16.19. Of
Church-binding and loosing. page 89, 90 Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church. What
Church it is. p. 2, 36 Not a Classical nor National church, etc. page 86-89
Mat. 18.20. A Church is Sion and has the promises to it. page 71, 73 Mat.
20.25, 26. Ministers are not Lords. page 78, 79 Mat. 28.19, 20. In that
Commission to the Apostles is no mention of ordination, nor in that Mar. 16.15,
16. page 56, 57 Was not given to them as Apostles. page 91 MARK 12.41. The use
of the Church treasury. page 67 LUKE 8.2, 3. Christ received contribution.
page 62 Luke 22.25, 26. Ministers are not as Lords. page 78, 79, 81 JOHN 8, 20.
Church treasury; for what. page 67 Joh. 13.29. From contribution was
distribution. page 62 Joh. 20.23. The Key given Peter, with the rest. page 92
ACTS 1.15. A few begin a Church. page 9, 12, 13 Act. 1.15.23. A Church has
full power to choose her own officers. page 46, 11, 9 Act. 1.26. By common vote
or suffrage. page 49 Act. 2.4.10. Gifts make not officers. page 128 V. 40. The
Church was separated. page 2, 48 Verse. 41. Whether they they were a church
before page 10, 13 V. 45. Whole estates put into the common stock page 62 V.
47. A Church before Officers. page 45 Act. 4.35. Selling whole estates not
binding to all times, but extraordinary. page 62 Act. 4.17.19.21. and 5.28, 29.
Preaching when men forbid to obey Christ. page 6 Act. 4.26. Took counsel
together, how? page 19 Act. 5.28, 29. Obey, and hearken to God most. page 1, 2,
3, 4, 6 Act. 6.1. Of the Deacons office. page 62 Verse. 3. The Church must look
out seven men. page 46, 51 Act. 6.4. Prayer, one work of a Minister. page 57,
62 Act. 8.4.12. Preaching without office. page 119 Act. 9.26, 27. Satisfaction
of members before they be received in. page 34 Verse. 31. The head of
Church Fellowship is not conversion, but edification. page 35 Act. 11.19. Jews
were first preached to. page 2 Ver. 19. Some not in office may preach. page 118
V. 20.21. Some converted, others gathered them. page 4 Act. 13.2, 3. Paul set
apart by God, and the Church. page 49 Act. 14.23. Churches before officers to
them. page 46 Act. 14.27. Paul and Barnabas sent by Church also. page 123
Officers ordained by peoples election. page 46, 51 Act. 18.2.26. Aquila and
Priscilla at Corinth. page 11 Act. 19.1.9. Paul separated such at himself
converted not. page 4 Verse. 37. Robbers of Temples, not of churches. page 25
Act. 20.28. Elders must see to the flock. page 107, 112 Act. 21.22. Myriads,
What; not all those of one Church, but of many churches. page 14, 15, 30, 31
ROMANS 4.11, 12. Abraham, father of the faithful, circumcised and
uncircumcised. page 43 Romans 12.6. Of prophecy. page 125 Romans 12.7, 8. Teacher
and Pastor are distinct. page 70 Verse. 13. Distribute to the necessity of
Saints. page 63 Romans 15.26. Romans to contribute to Jerusalem. page 64 Romans
16.1, 2. Recommending members to another church, to receive them. page 117 1
CORINTHIANS 1. v. 1. All Saints of Corinth of one Church. page 15, 16 Qu.
Whether this be writ to all Saints or no? page 16, 20 1 Cor. 1.1, 2.
Church Members to be visible Saints, and what trial of Saints herein. page 31
Verse. 17. Preaching is a Ministers great work. page 57 1 Cor. 5.5, 6. Purge out
the old leaven. page 29, 30, 36 Verse. 5. Excommunicating there, whether done by
Paul, or to be by the Churches power. page 95, 97, 98 1 Cor. 5.12. Whether some
believers may be said to be WITHOUT, in that sense. page 74, 75, 76 1 Cor.
7.16. Gifted men, or women, may convert. page 120 1 Cor. 11.19. The Church,
whether it is the place. page 25, 26 Verse. 20. A church meeting in one place.
page 13-31 1 Cor. 14.1, 2.3.33. All must covet the gift of prophecy. page 121,
124 V. 12.31. Such may. page 128 1 Cor. 14.23. This is discussed fully there.
page 13 to 31 V. 32. Spirit of Prophets subject. page 126 1 Cor. 12.8. Pastor,
and Teachers gifts distinct. page 70 1 Cor. 12.9.29. All had not all gifts.
page 125 V. 28. (...), Helps put for Deacons. page 63 1 Cor. 14.1.3.
Prophesying has something ordinary, something extraordinary. p. 118 Verse. 34.
Women to be silent in your churches. What churches means he? p. 21 Not to use
power in churches, page 91, 95 1 Cor. 15.6. Christ appeared to five hundred
brethren at once in Jerusalem. page 11 1 Cor. 16.1. and 2 Cor. 8.1. Churches,
whether National churches? page 21 to 31 1 Cor. 16.1. Ministers to be
maintained by the churches contributions every first day, scanned. page 60, 61
Verse. 1.2. Every first days contribution proved. page 64 Qu. Whether those
collections were to cease. page 65 Hence for maintaining the Ministers proved.
page 66 2 CORINTHIANS. 2.9. Church excommunicates, and not Paul alone. page 97 2
Cor. 3.1. Letters of recommendation to others. page 117 2 Cor. 6.16. A Church
is Gods Temple. page 71 2 Cor. 8.5. Such give themselves to the Lord, and to
them. page 44 2 Cor. 8.18, 19. Many churches may choose one to do them service.
page 30 GALATIANS 3.16, 17. And in thy seed; not to. page 42 Gal. 5.9.12.15.
Church to cut off offenfenders. page 95 Gal. 6.6. Opening the communicating to
Ministers. page 63 EPHESIANS 2.22. A house of stones united. page 38 Ephesians. 4.11.
Teachers and Pastors are distinct. page 69 Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Is of the Church
mystical. page 28 PHILIPPIANS 1.7. Churches to be of reputed Saints. page 32
Phil. 4.15. Giving and receiving are acts of communion. page 63 COLOSSIANS
4.17. A Church has power to censure her officers. page 58, 59 1 TIMOTHY 1.20.
Whether Paul alone excommunicated Hymeneus. page 96 1. Tim. 3.8. Deacons office
is not temporary. page 63 1 Timothy 3.10. One unofficed may preach. page 58 1 Timothy
4.14. Elders laid on hands. page 96 1 Timothy 5.17. Whether ruling Elders must be
maintained by the Church. page 60 1 Timothy 6.13, 14. That Christ left but one way
of Church discipline, which must be kept to the end of the world. page 107 2
TIMOTHY 1.6. Whether Paul laid on hands alone. page 96 JAMES 1.1. with Jam.
2.2. Whether all the twelve Tribes were one Church; or how called your
Synagogues. page 18, 19 1 PETER 2.5. A Church of living stones. page 36 1 Pet.
2.25. Shepherd and Bishop there are one and the same. page 69 1 Pet. 4.14.
Ministers not to be Bishops in another Dioces. page 111 1 Pet. 5.1. Apostles
were Elders of all Churches. page 46 1 Pet. 5.3. Elders are not Lords over Gods
Heritage. page 78 3d. Epist. JOHN verse. 9. Diotrephes that loved preeminence,
how blamed. page 78, 81 REVELATIONS 1.6. Kings and Priests distinguished. page
127 Rev. 2.11. The Spirit speaks not to the Angel alone, but also to the
churches. page 101 Rev. 4.14. The Church has Crowns, which implies it has
authority. ibid. Rev. 8.8, 9. A great Mountain cast into the Sea, what it
means. page 68 Rev. 13.1. and 15.2. Sea put for the Church, or the Churches
Religion. page 68 Rev. 15.3. Christ is the King of the Church. page 104 Rev.
21.27. and Rev. 22.14. Nothing shall enter into the Holy City (the Church) that
defiles. page 38
Some Greek words and phrases opened herein.
(...), Whether, in one place, or in one mind, page 18, 20 (...), Kak.
Synagoga; and Hebrew Gnedah, Kahal. What page 24, 25 (...), Every first day,
cleared, 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. page 65 (...), I have judged to deliver, What page 97,
98 (...), For this I wrote. page 99
Errata.
PAge. 35. line 4. a fine, read converted. p. 36. l. 5. a fine, given Paul, r.
given by Paul. p. 37. l. 9. r. 1 Cor. 1.5. p. 49. l. 10. a fine, 2, 3, 23. dele
23. p. 52. l. 4. a fine, 19.2. W. r. 19.2. p. 65. l. 9. Matthew. 18. r. 28. p.
83. circa med. Luke 24. r. 14. p. 110. l. 4. r. presidents. p. 114. circa med.
2 These. r. 1 These. p. 121. r. 1 Cor. 14.1.3.

FINIS.

