A DECLARATION AND ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT,
For the Seizing and Sequestring of the Estates, both Real and Personal, of
certain kinds of notorious DELINQUENTS, to the use, and for the maintaining of
the ARMY raised by the Parliament; And such other uses as shall be directed by
both Houses of Parliament, for the benefit of the Commonwealth.

With the names of the Committees who are employed in the several Counties of
this Kingdom, for the execution of this ORDINANCE.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament* That this Ordinance
be forthwith Printed and published.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum. Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.




LONDON, April 1. Printed for John Wright, and John Frank. 1643.

An ORDINANCE of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliamen, taking into their serious
considerations the heavy pressures and calamities which now lie upon this
Kingdom by this unnatural War raised against the Parliament; And that
notwithstanding all their faithful and uncessant endeavors, for the
preserving of His Majesty, and the whole Kingdom from the mischievous and
restless designs of Papists and ill-affected persons (whose aim is the
extirpation of our Religion, Laws, and liberties.) Yet their Counsels and
practices are still so prevalent with His Majesty, and the hearts of many
people so misled and beguiled by their false pretenses and insinuations, that
nothing can be expected but ruin and desolation, unless God in mercy prevent
it, and incline His Majesty's heart to the faithful advice of his great
Counsel of Parliament; which has ever been, and is (under God) the chief
support of His Royal dignity, and the security of all that we have or can
enjoy. And for that it is most agreeable to common Justice, that the estates of
such notorious Delinquents, as have bin the causes or Instruments of the
public calamities, which have been hitherto employed to the fomenting and
nourishing of these miserable distractions, should be converted and applied
toward the supportation of the great charges of the Commonwealth, and for the
easing of the good subjects therein, who have hitherto borne the greatest share
in these burdens.

Be it therefore Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the Estates as
well real as personal, of the several Bishops hereafter mentioned, that is
to say, Of William Archbishop of Canterbury, John Archbishop of York, Thomas
Bishop of Daresme, Robert Bish. of Lichfield and Coventry, Joseph Bishop of
Norwich, John Bishop of Asaph, Robert Bishop of Oxford, William Bishop of Bath
and Wells, George Bishop of Hereford, Matthew Bishop of Ely, Godfrey Bishop of
Gloucester. John Bishop of Peterborough, Morgan Bishop of Landaffe, John Bishop
of Worcester. And of all such Bishops Deans, Deanes and Chapters, Prebends,
Archdeacons, and of all other person and persons Ecclesiastical or Temporal;
as have raised, or shall raise Arms against the Parliament, or have bin, are,
and shall be in actual War against the same, or have voluntarily
contributed, or shall voluntarily contribute, not being under the power of any
part of the Kings Army at the time of such contributing any Money, Horse,
Plate. Arms, Munition, or other aid, or assistance, for, or toward the
maintenance of any forces raised against the Parliament, or for the opposing of
any force or power raised by authority of both Houses of Parliament; or for the
robbing, spoiling plundering, or destroying of any the Kings Subjects, who have
willingly contributed, or yielded obedience to the commands of both Houses of
Parliament: and of all such as have joined, or shall join in any Oath or Act
of association against the Parliament; or have imposed, or shall impose any
Tax or Assessement upon His Majesty's Subjects, for, or toward the
maintenance of any forces against the Parliament; or have, or shall use any
force or power to leavy the same, shall be forthwith seized and sequestered into
the hands of the Sequestrators, and Committees hereafter, in this Ordinance
named, and of such other persons as shall at any other time hereafter be
appointed and nominated by both Houses of Parliament, for any County, City or
place within the Realm of England or Dominion of Wales, Which said
Sequestrators and Committees, or any two or more of them in each several
County, City, or place respectively; are hereby authorized and required, by
themselves, their Agents and Deputies to take and seize into their hands and
custodies, as well all the money, Goods, Chattells, Debts, and personal
Estate; as also, all, and every the Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Rents, Arrerages of Rents, Revenues, and profits of all and
every the said Delinquents or persons before specified, or which they or any of
them, or any other in trust for them or any of them, or to their, or any of
their use or uses, have, has, or shall have, and also two parts of all the
money, Goods, Chattells, Debts, and personal estate, and two parts of all, and
every the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Rents, Arrerages of
Rents, Revenues, and profits of all and every Papist, or which any other person
has in trust for any Papists, or to the use or uses of any Papists, and to
let, set, and demise the same, or any part thereof as the respective Landlord
or owner thereof: may, or might have done, from year to year: And shall have
power to call before them, or any two of them; all Stewards, Bailyffs,
Rent-gatherers, Auditors or other Officers, or servants, as well of the said
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Prebends; Archdeacons; as of
all and every other of the said Delinquents, or persons before specified; and
to send for, or take any books of Accounts, Rentalls, Copies af Court, Roll, or
other evidences, Writings, or memorialls, touching the premises or any of them,
and thereby, and by all other ways and means, which to the said
Sequestrators, or any two or more of them shall seem meet and necessary to
inform themselves as well of the said several Delinquents and every of them,
as of their several estates, and possessions, Rents, Arrerages of Rents,
Revenues, and profits, Goods, and Chattels, Estates real, and personal, and
the true value thereof, and of all things concerning the same, or any part
thereof: and to appoint any Officer or Officers or other person or persons
under them for their present expediting of this service: Which said persons are
hereby authorized and enjoined to perform and execute all and every the
commands of the said Sequestrators, or Committees, or any two or more of them
respectively, in and concerning the premises? And shall have such allowances
for their pains and charges in that behalf, as the said Sequestrators, or
Committees or any two or more of them, shall think fit. And the said
Sequestrators or Committees, or any two or more respectively, their Agents, and
Deputies within their several limits shall have power, and are hereby
authorized and required to enter into all and every such Manors, Messages,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments; of all and every the said Delinquents, or
persons before specified; and to receive such Rents Arrerage of Rents:
Herriots, Issues profits, sums of money, debts, and other duties as aforesaid,
to them or any or them, due or payable, by their, or any of their several and
respective Tenants, or other person or persons: Which said Tenants and other
persons are hereby required to pay the same to the said Sequestrators or
Committees, or any two or more of them accordingly and not to, or to the use of
the said Delinquents, or any of them; yet so nevertheles, That in respect of
the hardness of the times, and the great charges, which otherwise lie upon the
said Tenants and others, by occasion of this present War, every such tenant
which shall pay to the said Sequestrators or Committees, or any two of them s
aforsaid, shall upon their obedience and conformity to this order, be
considered out of the said Rents, Revenues, and Profits, and shall be
discharged of his whole rent against his Landlord, or any other, to a whom the
same is due, being such Delinquents as aforesaid; and as well they the said
tenants, as every other person or persons, which shall pay any Rent, sum of
money or other thing, according to this Ordinance, shall be protected and saved
harmeles from any forfeiture penalty, or damage, which he or they may incur
by not payment of his, or their said Rent, sum of Money or other thing
according to his; or their lease, Copy, or other agreement, by the power and
authority of bo h Houses of Parliament.

And i^ any such Tenant or Tenants, shall refuse to pay his, or their Rent or
Rents, The said Sequestrators, or Committees, their Agents or Deputies,
according to this Ordinance, at such times and places as the same shall become
due and payable, The said Sequestrators or any two or more of them by
themselves, their Agents or Deputies, shall have power to distrain for the
same, and to take all other advantages for non-payment thereof, as the
Landlord might have done.

And the said Sequestrators, or any two or more of them, shall have power to
sue for, and recover any debt, sum of Money, or other duty owing to the said
Delinquents or persons before specified, or any of them; As also to give
discharges and Acquittances for any Rent, sum of Money, debts, duty, or other
thing, which they shall receive out of the Estates of the said Delinquents or
any of them; and shall be accomptable from time to time for the same, and for
all such other things as shall be had, or taken by them, their Agents or
Deputies; and for all their receipts and payments, and other Acts, for, or in
respect of the premises, to both Houses of Parliament, or to such as they shall
appoint; and shall pay in all such sums of Money, as they or any of (...) shall
receive out of the said Estates, unto the Treasurers at Guil^^^, London, and
shall keep Books of accounts; and shall be from time to time subject to the
further Orders and directions of both Houses of Parliament, for allowance to
the said Delinquents, or otherwise as cause shall require, of all their
receipts and payments. And the said Sequestrators or Committees, or any two or
more of them their Agents and Deputies, shall have power to call to their Aid
and Assistance, the Trained-Bands, Volunteers, or other forces, of, or within
their several Counties, Cities, or places respectively, or any other person or
persons, dwelling in or near the place, to compel obedience to this Ordinance,
where any resistance shall be made, or as often as need shall require. And shall
have power to punish such person or persons, as they shall find refractory,
negligent, or faulty in the said service, by fine and imprisonment, such fine
not exceeding the sum of twenty pounds; or to certify their names to the
Committee of Lords and Commons, appointed for this service: who shall have
power to send for them, or any of them, and to commit them to such prisons, and
places, and for so long time as they shall think fit. And the said
Trained-Bands, Volunteers, and other forces, their Commanders and Officers; and
also the several Constables, Headboroughs, and other Officers, and persons
within their Limits, are hereby required and enjoined to be Ayding and
Assisting to the said Sequestrators, or any two or more of them, as often as they
shall be thereunto required.

And it is further Declared and Ordained by the Lords and Commons, That all and
every of the said Sums, Rents. Revenues and Profits, Estate Real and Personal
of all and every the said Delinquents, or persons before specified, shall be
employed to the use, and for the maintaining of the Army and forces raised by
the Parliament, and such other uses, as shall be directed by both Houses of
Parliament, for the benefit of the Commonwealth.

Lastly, it is Ordained. That all and every the said Sequestrators and
Committees, shall have allowances for their necessary charges and pains in and
about the premises, as they shall be allowed by both Houses of Parliament; And
that as well they, as all others who shall be employed in the said service, or
shall do any thing in execution or performance of this Ordinance, shall be
therein protected and saved harmless by the power and Authority of both the
said Houses. And if any person or persons shall find him or themselves
agrieved with any Act done by the said Sequestrators their Agents or Deputies,
or any of them concerning the premises, and shall not be therein relieved by
the said Sequestrators upon complaint made to them, or any two or more of them;
then upon information thereof given to both Houses of Parliament, or to the
said Committee of Lords and Commons before mentioned, such further order shall
be taken therein, as shall be agreeable to justice. Provided, that where any
former Ordinance has bin made by both Houses of Parliament, for the seizing or
sequestring of the Estates of any of the Delinquents before specified, within
any County, City or place, and accordingly executed there, this present
Ordinance shall not be put in execution, till further order be taken by both
Houses of Parliament. Provided also, that all and every the said estates of the
said Delinquents, shall be chargeable and liable for their proportionable part
of such other public charges or duties to be set or allowed of by both Houses
of Parliament, as they ought to pay, if this Ordinance had not been made. And
to all such other charges, duties, payments, or other rights which are or shall
be due, or payable, or of right belonging to any other person or persons out of
the premises other then to such Delinquents as aforesaid, the same to be paid
and disbursed by these Sequestrators, or any two of them respectively.

Provided also, that where no Committees are named by this Ordinance, in any
City or Town which is a County of it self, there the Committees for the County
at large next adjoining may execute this Ordinance, within every such City or
Town, till other Committees shall be named and appointed for the same, by both
Houses of Parliament. And that where no Committees are herein named for any
County, City, or place, such other persons as shall be hereafter nominated by
both Houses, shall have the like power to execute this Ordinance in every such
County, City, or place, as the Committees in this present Ordinance named have.

Provided also, and be it further Ordained, That all and singular such
Revenues, Rents, Issues, Fees, profits, sums of money, and allowances
whatsoever, as have heretofore been, and now ought to be paid, disposed unto,
or for the maintenance of any College or Hospital, whose Revenues or any part
thereof, have not been employed for maintenance of the War against the
Parliament, Grammer-Schoole, or Scholars, or for or toward the reparation of
any Church, Chapel, Highway, Cawsey, Bridge, Schoole-house, or other
charitable use, payable by any the Corporations, or persons whose Estates are
to be sequestered by this Ordinance, which are chargeable upon, or ought to
issue out of, or be paid for, or in respect of their Estates, lands, or
possessions, or any of them, other then such Delinquents as aforesaid shall be,
and continue to be paid, disposed, and allowed by the said Sequestrators, or
any two or more of them, as they were and have been heretofore; Any thing in
this present Ordinance to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

FOr the County of Bedford, Sir Beauchamp Saintjohn, Bedford.
Sir John Burgoyn Baronet, Sir Thomas Alston Knight and Baronet, Sir Koger
Burgoyn Knight, Sir Oliver Luke Knight, Sir Samuel Luke Knight, Thomas Rolt,
Thomas Sadler, James Beverly, Humphrey Monox, Edward Osborn, Robert Stanton,
and Samuel Brown, Esquires.

For the Town of Bedford, the Major for the time being.

For the County of Berks, Sir Francis Pil^ Baronet, Berks.
Sir Francis Knollis junior, Knight; Peregrine Hobby, Henry Martin, Koger
Knight, Henry Powle, Thomas Fettiplace, and Tanfield Vachell, Esquires.

For the Town of Reading, the Major for the time being, Henry Martin, Tanfield
Vachell, Esquires.

Buckingham.
For the County of Buckingham, Sir Richard Ingolesby, Knight, Henry Bulstrode,
Thomas Terrall, Richar^ Greenvill, Esquires; Sir Peter Temple Baronet, Sir
Thomas Sander^ Knight, Anthony Ratcliff, Thomas Westall, Esquires, Sir William
Andrews Knight, Bulstrode Whitlock, John Hampden, Arthur Goodwyn Richard
Winwood, Esquires.

Cambridge.
For the County of Cambridge, Sir Dudley North, Sir John Cuts, Sir Thomas
Martin, Knights, Captain Symond, Dudley Pope, Esquiers; Sir Miles Sands
Knight, Francis Russell, Oliver Cromwell, William Fisher, Thomas Thompson,
Thomas Becket, Walter Clopton, Robert Castle, Thomas Bendish, John Welbore,
Robert Clark, Michael Dalton junior, Thomas Parker, Thomas Ducket, John Hobard,
Thomas Castle George Clapthorn, John Towers, Edward Leeds, and William Marsh
Esquires.

For the Town and university of Cambridge, the Major for the time being,
Oliver Cromwell, Master John Lowry, Master Willian Welbore, Talbot Pepys
Recorder, John Sherwood, Samuel Spaulden, Thomas French, Robert Robson.

Chester.
For the County of Chester, Sir George Booth, Knight and Baronet Sir William
Brereton Baronet, Thomas Stanley, Henry Manwaring, Henry Brook, John Bradshaw,
Robert Duckenfield, Henry Ver^on, John Crew, William Marbury, Esquires.

For the City of Chester, William Jaunce Major, John Alaersey, Peter Leigh,
William Edwards Merchants.

Cornwall.
For the County of Cornwall, Sir Richard Carew Baronet, Francis Buller,
Alexander Carew, John Trefusis, John Saint Aubin, Richard Erisey, John Moyl,
Francis Godolphin of Tremonegue, Thomas Gewen, John Carter, Thomas Arundell,
Esquires.

Devon.
For the County of Devon, Sir George Chudleigh, Sir John Pool, Sir John
Northcot, Baronets; Sir Edmund Fowell Knight, Sir Samuel Roll, Sir Shilston
Calmady, Sir Nicholas Martin, Knights; Sir Francis Drake Baronet, Robert
Savery, Henry Walrond, Francis Rous, Edmund Prideaux, Henry Worth, Hugh
Fortes^^e, Arthur Vpton, John Yeo, William Frye, George Trobridge, Esquires,
the Major of Plimmouth for the time being, Master John Waddon.

For the City of Exon, Christopher Clark Major, Richard Sanders, Exon city
Thomas Crossing, Walter White, and John Makewell, Aldermen, James Gould
Sheriff.

For the County of Cumberland, William Lawson, William Briscoe, Cumberland.
Thomas Lamplough, Richard Barwis, John Barwis senior, Esquires.

For the County of Derby, Sir John Curson Baronet, Derby,
Sir John Gell Baronet, Sir John Coke Knight, Francis Revell, Nathaniel
Hallows, and James Abney Esquires.

For the County of Dorset, Denzill Hollis, Sir Thomas Trenchard, Dorset.
Sir Walter Erl, Knights, John Brown, Thomas Treg^n^ll, John Bingham, John
Hanham John Trenchard, Dennis Bond, Richard Broder^p, William Sa^a^ge, Robert
Butler, William S^denham junior Esquires, Richard Rose, John Henley Thomas
^^ely, Thomas Earl Esquires.

For the Town and County of Pool, Henry Martin Major, George Skut, Poole.
William Skut, Anthony Wait, William W lliams, Aaron Durell, Richard Mayer, and
Havi^and Heely, Aldermen.

For the Town of Dorchester, the Major for the time being, Master John Hill,
Master Richard Bury.

For the County of Durham, Henry Warmouth, George Lilborne, Durham.
Thomas Mi^ford, Robert Hutton, Thomas Shadforth, Clement Fa^thorp Richard
Lilborne, Francis Wren, John Blakeston, Henry Draper, John B^akenbury, Esquires.

For the County of Essex, Sir Thomas Barrington Knight and Baronet, Essex.
Sir Henry Mildmay of Wansteed, Sir Martin Lumley Knight and Baronet, Sir
Harbott^e Grimston K^ight and Baronet, Sir Richard Everard Baronet, Sir William
H cks Baronet, Sir Thomas Cheek, Sir Henry Halcroft, Sir Will. Row, Sir Tho.
Honywood, Sir Will. Martin, Sir John Barrington Knights, Sir Will. Massam
Baronet, Will. Massam, John Wright, Oliver Raymond, Harbottle Grimston, John
Sayer, John Burket, Anthony Luther, Timothy Middleton, Thomas Cok^, Deane
Tyndall, James Herne, William Goldingham, I hn Atwood, John Sorrel, Richard
Harbackenden, Henry W^seman Robert Smith, Robert Brown, William Atwood,
Nathaniel Bacon, John Mead, Robert Wiseman o^ Mayl^n, Isaac Allen, Hasely,
Samuel Friborne, Peter Whitcombe, Robert Young, Jeremy Aylet, William Collard,
Robert Craine, Robert Calthrop, Arthur Barnardisto Esquires.

For Colchester, the Major for the time being, Harbottle Grimston, Colchester.
Henry Bar^ington ^^^t.

For the East Riding of the County of York, Ferdinando Lord Fa^rfax,
E^st-Riding.
Sir John Hotham Knight and Baronet, Sir William Strickland Baronet, Sir Philip
Stapleton, Sir Thomas Rymington Knights, Richard Rymington, John Hotham, John
Anl^bey, Richard Darley, Henry Darley, John Allured Esquires.

North Riding.
For the North Riding, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Hugh Cholmly, Sir Henry
Fouls, Sir Thomas Norcliffe, Sir Matthew Boynton Baronets, Sir William S^effield
Knight, John H^t^am B ^an Stapleton, Henry Darly, H nry Anderson, John W^stall,
Chri topher Perchey, George Trotter, Matthew S nel, John Legard de Malton,
Francis Lassels, Geoffery Gate, John Den^, Thomas Robinson, Francis Bointon,
Christopher W^ters Esquires.

West Riding.
For the West Riding, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Maleverer Baronet,
Sir William Lister, Sir Edward Rodes, Sir William Fairfax, Sir John Savill, Sir
Thomas Fairfax Knights, J^hn H^^ham, Charles Fairfax, Henry Arding on, John
Farrer, William White, Thomas M^leverer, George Marwood, John Robinson, Thomas
Stockdale, Thomas Westby, John Bright, Thomas Bosevile, Godfrey Bosevile,
Captain Edward Brigs, and John Ellis Esquires.

York city.
For the City of York, Sir Thomas Fairfax, and and Sir Thomas Widdrington
Knights, Thomas Hodgson, James Hutchinson, and John Vaux Aldermen, Sir William
Allanson, Thomas H^yles.

For the Town and County of Kingston upon Hull, Sir John Hotham Knight and
Baronet, Thomas Ka^kes Majo^, John Hocham, and Peregrine Pelham Esquires,
Lancelot Roper, John Bernard, Joshua Hall, Nicholas Denman, and William Fapple
Gentlemen.

Gloucester
For the County of Gloucester, and County of the City of Gl cester, Sir Robert
Cook-Knight, Nathaniel Stephens, John G orge, Edward Stephens, John Stephens
Esquires, and Thomas Pury A^dermen, Sir John Seymour Knight, Thomas Hodges,
John Caddrington Esquires.

Bristoll.
For the City of Bristoll, Richard Alworth M^jor, Joseph Iackson, and Hugh
Brown Sheriffs, Richard Hallworthy Alderman, Luke Hodg^s, and Henry Gibs.

Hampshire.
For the County of Southampton, and the Town and County of Southampton, and the
Isle of Wight, Sir Henry Worsley, Sir Will Lewis Baro. Sir Tho. Iervois, Sir
William Lisl, Sir John Leigh, Sir Henry Clerk, Sir John Compton, Sir Richard
Kingsmil Knights, Robert Dillington, Robert Wallop, Richard Whitehead, Richard
Norton, John Doddington, Richard Iervois, John Lisle, John Button, Edward Hopp
r, John Balkley, Thomas Clerk, John Kemp, Richard Major, Francis Saint Barbe,
Nicholas Love, John Fielder, William Whither, Thomas Chandler, James Tut, John
Pitman, and John Hook Esquires, George Gallop, and Edward Exon, Aldermen of
Southampton, and the Major of Winchester for the time being.

For the County of Hertford, Charles Lord Viscount Cranborne, Hertford
Robert Cecill Esquire, Sir John Garrat, Sir John Read Baronets, Sir Thomas
Dacres, Sir William Litton, Sir John Whitterrong Knights, Richard Iennings,
Ralph Freeman, William Lemon, William Priestly, John Heydon, Alexander Wild,
Richard Porter, Adam Washington, Esquires. For Saint Albans, The Major for the
time being, John Robtham, Ralph Pemberton, Gravely Norton Esquires.

For the County of Hereford, Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Hereford.
Sir Richard Hopton Knight, Walter Kirle, Edward Broughton, Henry Vaughan
Esquires.

For the City of Hereford, Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Walter Kirle,
Richard Hobson, John Flacket, Henry Vaughan, Esquires.

For the County of Huntington, Sir Thomas Cocton Baronet, Huntington.
Sir John Hewer Knight, O^slow Winch, Terrill Iocelyne, Thomas Temple, John
Castle, Oliver Crumwell, Abraham Burwell, Edward Montague, and John Bulliley
Esquire.

For the County of Kent, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Kent.
Sir Anthony Weldon Knights, Sir John Sidley, Sir Edward Hales, Sir Humphrey
Tufton, Sir Henry Heyman Knights and Baronets, Sir Michael Lewsy Baronet, Sir
Henry Vane Junior, Sir Edward Scot, Sir Edward Bois, Sir William Brook, Sir
Peter Worth, Sir George Sands, Sir John Honywood, Sir James Oxenden, Sir
Richard Hardresse, Knights, Augustine Skinner, Richard Lee, Thomas Selliard,
John Bois senior, Thomas Blunt, and Samuel Short Esquires.

For the City of Rochester, the Major for the time being, Sir Anothony Welden,
Sir William Brook, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Richard Lee, Esquire, The Major of
Tenderding for the time being, William Bois, William James, Mark Dixwell, Henry
Samford Esquires.

For the City and County of Canterbury, the Major for the time being,
Canterbury.
Sir William Man Knight, Sir Edward Master Knight, John Nut, Thomas Courthope
Esquires, Auerey Saving Alderman.

For the County of Lancaster, Sir Ralph Ashton, Lancaster
and Sir Thomas Stanley Baronets, Ralph Ashton of Downham, Ralph Ashton of
Middleton, Richard Shuttleworth, Alexander Rigby, John More, Richard Holland,
Edward Butterworth, John Bradshaw, William Athurst, Peter Egerton, George
Dodding, Nicholas Cunliff, John Stark, Thomas Brich, and Thomas Fell Esquires,
Robert Cunliff, Robert Curwen, and John Nowell Gentlemen.

Leicester.
For the County of Leicester, Henry Lord Gray of Ruthin, Thomas Lord Gray of
Groby, Sir Arthur Haslerigg Baronet, S^r Edward H^rtop, and Sir Thomas Harsop
Kn^ghts, William Hewet, John Be^oridge, Peter Temple, George Ashby, William
Roberts, Richard Bent, Arthur Stanley, W^^liam Danvers, John Goodman Esquires.

For the Town of Leicester, Richard Ludlem now Major, William Stanley Alderman.

Lincoln Lindsey parts.
For the County of Lincoln, Sir John W^ay Knight and Baronet, Sir Edward A
h^ough Knight, Sir Samuel O ld Knight, John W^ah, Willoughby H^rkm^^, E w.
Whitchcot, El no^d Anderson, Edw. Rositer, and John B^oxho^me E^qui^^, Sir
William Army, Baronet, Sir Ha^ond Whitchcot Knight, Sir John Brownlo^, Sir
Thomas Trollop Baronets, Thomas Harcher, Sir Christopher Wray, Thomas Grantham,
Thomas Lister, John Archer Esquires, Sir Will iam Brownlow.

For the parts of Holland, Sir Anthony Irby, William Ellis, John Harrington E
quires, the Major of Boston for the time being, Tho. Hall, Thomas Welby, (...)
W llesby.

For the City of Lincoln, and the close of Lincoln, the Major for the time
being, Thomas Grantham, John Brokholme Esquires, Robert Moorcrot^, William
Watson, and Stephen Dawson A^dermen.

London.
For the City of London, and all within the jurisdiction of the Lord Major, the
Lord M^jor and Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies, and Common-counsell m n of the
said City.

Middlesex
For the C^unty of Middlesex, Sir Gilbert Gerard Baronet, Sir Edward B^kham
Knight and Barone^, Sir Richard Springall Baronet, Sir John Franklin, Sir John
H ppesl^y, Sir William Roberts, Sir James Harrington, Sir Robert Wood Knights:
Lawrence Whittaker, Justinian Pager, William Swallow, John H^cksley, Thomas
Wilcox, John Morris, Richard Datton, and John Smith Esq^ires.

Westminster.
For the Liberties of Westminster, Sir Robert P^^, Sir William Ashton, Sir John
Corbet Knights, John Glyn, John Trenchard, and William Wheeler Esquires, John
Brigham, George Beverhasset, Anthony W^thers, and William Barnes Gentlemen,
Josias Fe^dall, William Bell Esquires, (...) Tu^key, (...) Colchester, Steven
Higgons.

For the County of Norfolk, Norfolk.
and the City and County of the City of Norwich, Sir Thomas Woodhouse, Sir John
Holland, Baronet. Sir John Pots Baronet, Sir John Hubbert, Baronet, Sir M les
H^bbert, Sir Thomas Huggen, Knights, John Cook, John Spelman, Philip
B^ddingfield, Samuel Smith, the Sh^riffe of Norwi. The Bailliff^ of Y^rmouth.
Thomas Toll, and John Percivall of Lyn, Thomas Windham, Francis Iermy, Robert
Wood, Gregory Ca^sell, John Haughton. Thomas Weld, Martin Sedley, Thomas
Sotherton, Esquires, Sir Edmond Mountford Knight, William Havingham, William
Cook, Robert P^ich, Esquires, Sir Richard Berne, Sir Isaac Asley, Sir John
Pulgrave Knights, and Br^gge Fountain, John Tooly Esquires.

For the County of Northampton, Sir Rowland Sain John, Northampton
Knight of the Bath, Sir John Norwich Knight, S r Gilbert Pickering Baronet,
Sir Richard Samuel Knight, John Crew, John Barnard, Edward Harvey, Edw Farmer,
John Norton, John Chappool^ E quires, S r John Drayden Baronet, and Richard
Knightly Esquire, Sir Christopher Yelverton, Knight and Baronet, Zouch Tate
E^quire, Philip Holeman Esquire, Thomas Pentlow Esquire.

For the Town of Northampton, the Major for the time being, Thomas Martin, and
John F^sher Alderm^n.

For the Town of Newcastle, J^hn Blakeston Esquire. New Castle. Northumberland.


For the County of Northumber^and, Sir John Fenwick Baronet, Sir Jo. Daleve^.
Kn ght, T^^mas Middleton, William Shaftoe, Michael Welden, and Henry Ogle E
quire.

For the Town of Barwicke upon Tw^ed, John Sleigh Major, Barwick.
Sir Robert Iackson Knight, Ralph Salkel^ E quire.

For the County of Nottingham Francis Perp^^ Esquire, Nottingham.
Sir Francis Thornhaugh, Sir Thomas H^^c^inson Kn^ght, Francis Thornhaugh
Joseph Wid^erpoole, Robert Reyns, Gilbert Millington, and John Hutchinson
Esquires, Sir Francis Molineux Knight, Charles White, and Henry Ireton Esquires.

For the County of the Town of Nottingham, the Major for the time being, James
Chadwicke Esquire, Huntington Plumtrey, Doctor in Physic, John James,
Alderman, and John Gregory Gentleman.

Oxon. Rutland.
For the County of Oxon.

For the County of Rutland, Sir Edward Harrington Knight. Evers Armyn, Robert
Horseman, John Osborn, Christopher Brown, Robert Horseman Junior, and Thomas
Wait Esquire

Suffolk.
For the County of Suffolk, Sir William Pleyters, Knight and Baronet, Sir
Nathanael Barnadiston Knight Sir Willi. Spring Baronet, Sir Roger North, Sir
Thom. Barnadiston, Sir William Soame, Sir John Wentworth, Sir Phil. Parker
Knights, William Heveningham, Natha. Bacon, of Froston, Nicholas Bacon, Maurice
Barrow, William Blois, Henry North, Robert Brewster, Brampton Gourdon, Francis
Bacon, Theophilus Vaughan of Beckles, William Cage, William River of Bilson,
Edmund Hervey, John Gourdon, Thomas Coal, Esquires, John Basse, Francs,
Brewster, Gentlemen. The Bailiffs of the Town of Ipswich that now are, John
Sicklemer, Richard Puplet, John Aldus Gentlemen, Nathanael Bacon of Ipswich.
For S. Edmonds Bury, Samuel Moody, Thomas Cole Chaplin, the Bailiffs of the
Town of Alborough for the time being, Thomas Gibs, Alderman, Thomas Johnson.

Surrey.
For the County of Surrey, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir William Elliot, S. Robert
Parkhurst, Knights, Nicholas Stoughton, George Evelin of Wotton, Henry Weston,
Arthur Onslow Esquire Sir Ambrose Brown Bar. Sir Anthony Vincent, Knight and
Baronet, Sir John Dingly, Sir Matthew Brand, Knights, Edward Sanders, Robert
Holman, Robert Houghton, George Evelin, Francis Drake, Thomas Sands, George
Mine, William Muschampe Esquire Sir John Howland, and Sir John Evelin Knights,
Robert Goodwin, George Fairewell, and John Goodwyn, Esquires, Richard Wright
and Cornelius Cook, Gentlemen.

Sussex.
For the County of Sussex, Sir Tho. Pelham Baronet, Anthony Stapley, Herbert
Morley, Thomas Whitfield, John Baker, Harbert Hay Equires, Herbert Springate of
the Broyle, Ralph Coper, Hall Ravenscroft, Edward Apsley, John Downs, William
Cawley, Edward Higgons, Thomas Chate, George Oglander, George Simpson, John
Busbridge, Thomas Midleton, James Temple Esquires, Cpataine Thomas Collins,
Captain Carl^ton, Captain Everton.

For the County of Somerset, Sir John Horner, Somerset.
Sir Thomas Worth, Sir George Farwell Knights, Clement Walker, Alexander Popham,
Edward Popham, William Strode, Richard Col, John Harrington, John Hippesly,
William Long, John Preston, Henry Henley, Henry Scamford, John Pyn, James Ash,
and John Ash^ Esquires, Roger Hill, George Serle, and Iesper Chaplyn Gentlemen,
Richard Capell, William Bull, Robert Harbyn, John Hunt, Robert Blake Esquires,
The Major of Bridgewater that now is.

For the County of Salop, Sir John Corbet Knight, Salop.
William Perpoint, Richard Moore, Thomas Witton, Thomas Nichols, Humphrey
Mackworth, Andrew Floyd of Aston, Lancelot Lee, Thomas Hunt, and John Corbet
Esquires.

For the City of Lichfield, Lichfield City.
The Bailiffs of the said City for the time being, the Sheriff of the said
City for the time being, Michael Noble Esquire, Richard Draffgate, Richard
Baxter, and Thomas Burns Gentlemen.

For the County of Stafford, Sir Rich. Skeffington Knight, Stafford.
Rich. Pyott, Michael Rydolph, Edward Manwaring, Matthew Morton, John Birch,
Ralph Rudyard, Michael Low, Michael Noble, and Edward Leigh Esquires, Sir
Walter Wortesley, Sir Edward Littleton, Sir William Brereton Baronets.

For the County of Warwick, Warwick.
the new Major of the City of Coventry, Sir Peter Wentworth Knight or the
Bath, Sir Edward Peyto Knight, John Hales, Godfrey Bos^ell, John Barker,
William Purefoy, Anthony Staughton, George Abbot, Thomas Boughton, William
Colemore, Thomas B^snet, William Iesson, Gam^iel Purefoy, and Thomas Willough^y
Esquir s. For the County and City of Coventry, John Bark^r, Isaac Bromick, and
Robert Phillips Esquires.

Wilts.
For the County of Wilts, Denzil Hollis Esquire, Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir
Edw. Baynton, Sir Nevill Poole, and Sir John Evelyn Knight, Edward Baynton,
Edward Tucker, William Wheeler, Edward Goddard, Alexander Thistlethwait junior,
John White, Edmund Poole, Thomas Moore, John Ash, and Robert Iennour Esquires.

Westmerland.
For the County of Westmerland, Sir Henry Bellingham, Knight and Baronet,
George Gilpin, Edward Wilson, Nicholas Fisher, Thomas Sleddall, Rowland Dawson,
and Allen Bellingham Esquires, Roger Bateman, Richard Branthwait, Robert
Phillipson, and Gervace Benson Gentlemen.

Worcester
For the County of Worcester, John Wild, Richard Creswel Sergeant at Law,
Humphrey Sallway, Edward Dingley, Edward Pit, Thomas Greves, and William
Ieffryes Esquires.

FINIS.

