The Prophetical INTELLIGENCER, Showing The causes why all corrupt Churches of
Christendom shall pass away, or depart; and all their Sees of corrupt
Doctrine and Discipline shall be abolished, and that the holy City of the
Church of new Jerusalem is now coming down from my God out of HEAVEN.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, and are to be sold by John Hancocke in
Pope's Head Alley, 1647.

The Prophetical Intelligencer, showing the causes why all corrupt Churches of
Christendom shall pass away, or depart; and all their Sees of corrupt
Doctrine, and Discipline shall be abolished, and that the holy City of the
Church of new Jerusalem is now coming down from my God out of Heaven.
Revel. 21.1. And I saw a new Heaven, and a new Earth, for the first heaven,
and the first earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea.
SOme falsely gather, that this is to be understood of the Church Triumphant,
after the resurrection, but what need the Church then to be described, to be
coming down from heaven? it should rather be seen going up to it. And what
need shall there be of gates, a Wall, and City, and a Tree, when all the Saints
shall be as the Angels of God in heaven? and equal unto them? Math. 22. Luke
20 But the Holy Ghost does not paint out unto us here, that Angelical
happiness of the Saints to come. For it is spoken of matters to be done in
this life upon earth, as the sequel shall declare, for it is spoken of a new
church that shall be upon earth. For the glory of the heavenly, and pure
Church, cannot be seen, nor conceived off the heart of a mortal man, 1 Cor.
2.9. Neither can it be set forth with words of comparisons of earthly things,
but seeing it shall be an heavenly Church, therefore the glory and dignity of
it, is commended in heavenly things, and yet the description thereof makes a
way to comprehend in our minds, heavenly felicity, for if the glory of the
Spouse be so great upon earth, what manner of things, and how excellent are
those which God have prepared for his Saints, in the fullness of joy? truly
our minds are too dull, and dim, to meditate of these things, let us turn
our eyes to contemplate of this blessed paradise, which shall openly be seen
in the world, as 2 Esdras 8.52. For unto you is paradise opened, the tree of
life is planted, Rev. 2.7. The time to come is prepared, plenteousnesse made
ready, the City builded, v. 18. and rest prepared, perfect goodness, and
absolute wisdom, the root of evil is sealed up unto you, Dan. 9.24. the
weakness, and moth is destroyed from you, and into hell flees corruption to
be forgotten, Rev. 21.8. Sorrows are vanished away, and in the end is showed
the treasure of immortality, v. 4. I follow him as he goes with Scripure.

Now the interpretation of the new heaven, may be taken out of Heb. 12.26.
whose voice did then shake the earth, but now he has denounced, saying, yet
once more will I shake, not the earth only but also heaven, where to shake
heaven and earth, is by the interpretation of the Apostle, to abrogate the
former Church worship, and Temple, to cast off the earthly people, of all
Nations, that would not receive him by a New birth, Joh. 1.11. Io. 3.3. And so
he will cast off all people that are earthly, of all Nations whether of the
Churches, or heathen, that will not receive his counsel to buy of him gould,
tried in the fire, to make them rich. 1. Rev. 3.18.
The lively faith of the merits of Christ's death in our baptism for remission
of sins, and white raiment (justification) to cloth them, that the shame of
their nakedness might not appear, and eye salve of the spirit in the
scriptures, that men may see Heaven is by a borrowed speech taken for the
Temple, the legal worship, and the Church of the Jews, whereof the Temple was
a seat and dwelling place, the shadow of heavenly things, Heb. 8.5. and we
know that the Church is called the Kingdom of Heaven, in many places of
Scripture, as Psalm. 107. Mar. 4.2. So that shake heaven, is to abolish the
visible Church, that were of the Jews, or are now of the Gentiles.

Matthew. 13.41.43. Luke 10.9. Col. 1.13.
For where God will shake the heaven (first of the Church) and the Earth (of
unbelievers) they shall be abolished, Heb. 12.27. but once more says the Lord,
will I shake the heaven. 1. Of the Church, and the Earth, 1. Unbelievers, Ergo
they shall be abolished.

By the Earth is meant in that place, men, corrupt unbelievers, as O Earth,
hear the word of the Lord. Hagg. 2, 27. as well as the Churches, For behold
says the Lord I have begun to plague the City which my Name is called upon,
and should you escape, you shall surely drink. Iere. Jews heaven of the
church, and the Earth of the heathen, because they received not one baptism
into Christ's death, for remission of sins, but despised the counsel of God
against their own souls, and to make a church, and therefore he shook them
down Luke 7.30. Ephesians. 4.5. Act. 2.38. To. 6.3. So that heaven you see is put
for the Church, and the earth, for all corrupt unbelieving people, Therefore as
God shook the heaven, and the earth after Christ's death, for their not
receiving of him by baptism into his death, as Ioh. 1.9.10. Gal. 3.27. For
every soul that will not hear that Prophet (1. To be baptized in his Name, if
he have not, for the remission of sins, Act. 2.38.) Shall be destroyed among
the people, and they were destroyed from being the church and people of God,
and became the Synagogue of Satan. Rev. 2.9. God rejected the old church of
the heaven of the Jews, and set up a new heaven of the Church of the Gentiles,
that did receive Christ by baptism, and faith, as the 3000. did, and the
Churches of all Nations. So when God shall have mercy upon the forlorn
forsaken Nation, and make them partakers of salvation by Christ, he shall shake
the former heaven of the corrupt, Idolatrous, dead, lukewarm churches of the
Gentiles, because they believe not one baptism into Christ's death, for
remission of sins, as Act. 2.38.22.16. Romans 6.4. and make the dignity and
honor of the holy City of the New Jerusalem, of Jews and Gentiles, to be so
glorious, as a new heaven and a new earth. Hence I gather this Doctrine, Esaias
65.17. For behold I am about to create, new heavens, and a new Earth, as if he
should say, I will institute a more pure church, faith and worship in spirit
and in truth, and I will take unto me a new people in the Assemblies, whereof I
will be worshipped, and honored, and I will make a new Earth of new creatures,
for if any man be in Christ he is a new creature, 2 Cor 5.17. For old things
are passed away behold all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. which shall be
most plainly verified, when the old churches pass away, and the new Jerusalem
appear, as Esaias 43.19. Behold I will do a new thing in the Earth, now it
shall spring forth, shall ye not know it, when may some say, Ans. Rev. 21.5.
Behold I make all things new, and he said to me write, for these words are true
and faithful, 1. There shall be a new heaven and a new Earth, a new church,
and people, for he that sat on the Throne, bad John write it, and he has given
me a mind to know him that is true, and for to write of things that are true,
for if it be true, as it is ^^th Behold I make all things new, then that must
be a new church, or else al things shall not be new for as the new heaven and
the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me says the Lord,
compare the place with this, and you shall find it agree with this, and cannot
agree to the former churches of Ephesus Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis,
Phyladelphia, Laodicea, for they shall pass away, but the church of new
Jerusalem shall remain, For to him that overcomes in the Churches, I will
make him a pillar in the Temple of my God, and shall go no more out, and write
upon him the Name of the new Jerusalem, that comes down from my God out of
heaven, Rev. 2.12. but when is this to be? when the lukewarm Angel that is
neither cold nor hot is spued out of Christ's mouth, Rev. 3.16.
in Laodicea of England this new Church is to appear, but now the lukewarm
Angels are spued out. Ergo. It is now to appear, I could prove this by many
Arguments but I set down but five.

Gentiles shall depart, and all their Sees of jurisdiction and the new
Jerusalem appear,

John saw the holy City, the new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven.
Rev. 2^.2. Ergo. there must be a new Church upon earth.

Matthew. 25, 34. Ergo it must needs be upon earth for there is no squares,
reeds, or Furlongs, or men measurers, in actual glory.

Israel, 3. to the East, 3. to the North, 3. on the South, 3. on the West, as
Rev. 21.13. Ergo, it must needs be a City, or Church upon earth, and ^t shows
it must be a Church of the Jews, baptized and made new creatures, for the
Gentiles have not twelve Tribes, and if there be any gates in heaven, they were
^t made long before their were any tribes of Israel. v. 12.13.

doctrine of the twelve Apostles, Matthew. 25. But the new Jerusalem shall have a
Wall, with twelve foundations, and in them the names of the lamb twelve
Apostles, as v. 14. Ergo. It must be a new Church upon Earth.

Rev. 21.24 (i. e. they shall account it their honor, and glory to be Citizens
of new Jerusalem, and bring their subjects to it.) Ergo it must be a new Church
upon Earth. I could give more reasons if these be not sufficient.

Anabaptists, Brownists, Seperatists, Familists, Adamites, Millenaries,
Antitrinitarians, Arminians, Socinians, Sectaries, and Selectaries. (all which
are commonly notable Pharisees, and by a superabundance of religion, Which have
no assurance of salvation, for out of the church is no salvation nor assurance
of it.
like scabs and warts, by the abundance of humors, grow out of the body of man,
so by the humors of their brain, do these grow out of the Church, and
separate from it.) then we will go make a New Church.

Answer. You are greatly deceived not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of
God, for first it must come down from heaven from my God, Ergo, man cannot
build it. 2. That which is of God, shall stand, for God is the builder and
founder of that City. Heb. 11. But the work or Church that is of man, shall
come to naught, Act. 5. Thirdly, The Church of new Jerusalem, must be built
12000. Furlongs in length, breadth and height you cannot build none so great.
Fourthly, The New Church must be built of pure gold, like unto clear glass,
but you have got none of that to build with, for the gold grows, in the Church
of Laodicea, Rev. 3.18. Which we have forsaken. Fifthly, You have no Jasper
stone for your wall, nor fine linnin which is bright and pure, the
justifications of the Saints, to trime your Church with, but your Bride has
got a menstruous garment of man's righteousness, that says stand a part I am
holier then thou, or I will stand a part, and separate from you, thus you have
neither gold, nor precious stones, nor white raiment to trime your Church, but
your builders are all divided, and your language confounded, before you begin
you shall build a Babel for the New Church comes from heaven, and the builder
and founder of it is God, and the government of it must come from God, before
we shall have one, as I told you, three years since in my Epistle to the
Book of the blood of the Lamb, but you believed it not, but thought you
should have had a better Reformation, and government before this time, but are
deceived, and not I. It follows for the first Heaven, and the first Earth,
are passed away.

Answer. We need not trouble our selves to prove it, for the divisions of all
Churches and people against themselves do show it, for they are sending one
another to hell as fast as they can, by sword, persecution, hatred, envy and
malice; dissension, heresies, sects and schisms and drunkenness, and
covetousness, they make post have to hell-ward. For where the heaven of a
Church is divided against itself, it cannot continue, Matthew. 12. But the
Church of the Lutherans, and of Calvinists, and of Papists, and of English, are
heaven of Churches that are divided against themselves. Ergo, they cannot
continue, they are heavens that are waxed old, as a garment and as a vesture
shall he change them The Pope and all his Idolaters, and his ceremonies, the
dead faith consubstantiated Lutherans, and the lukewarm faith of the English
and Calvinists, shall be spewed out of Christ's mouth, Rev. 3.10. And the
Heretics, Seperators from the Church, with the profane unbelievers, shall be
rooted out. For every plant which my heavenly Father planted not shall be
rooted out, Matthew. 15.15. Ergo, they shall be rooted out.

Romans 11.15. Answ. It is very plain, because the Apostle certifieth us in that
place, that there is a certain fullness of the Gentiles to be made up, which
is to be at the calling of the Jews, verse. 25. for if John saw the former
heaven and the former earth departed, then you must appoint them a time to
pass away in. And when the lukewarm Angels of Laodicea is spewed out of
Christ's mouth, i. e. which is the last Church of the Gentiles, they shall pass
away for being any more churches; for the former heaven are the Churches of the
Gentiles which he saw departed Ergo, they shall pass away.

Jerusalem?

Answ. Then they shall leave the candle-lights of the Churches of the Gentiles
(which are called Candlesticks, Rev. 1. they were of, and walk in the light of
the new Church that shall be on earth, and be one with them. For blessed is he
that does his commandments, that his right way may be in the tree of life,
that be may enter in through the gates of the City, Rev. 22.14.

Jerusalem.

An. This makes against you also: for if they do so, then they shall leave to
honor their old Churches, and their governments, and shall honor the holy
City, to be the only true Church. And as we have had Kings of England, that
above all the Kings in Christendom have been Kings of Jerusalem. So we shall
have again Kings of England, that shall be Kings of the Church of new
Jerusalem. Let our King hearken to this, for the Kings of the earth shall bring
their honor and glory both, verse. 14. The causes why the Churches of the
Gentiles shall depart, and their Sees and the Church of new Jerusalem appear.

Paul, If the casting away of the Jews were the riches of the Gentiles, or the
reconciliation of the world, what shall their assuming be life from the dead? I
answer, it is true; for the Lutherans that escape the bloody Civil war, and
turn, shall arise out of the dead faith, and the Calvinists and the English
shall arise out of the lukewarm faith, to walk in the golden street of the
lovely faith of the merits of Christ's death in one baptism for the remission
of sins, as the 3000. did, Acts 2.38. and so Papists and Heathens shall arise
out of their idolatrous and superstitious faith, and embrace the true faith of
the new Jerusalem of the Jews and Gentiles, v 24.

Out of which words we gather, that the fullness of the Gentiles is not a
certain end of their believing at the calling of the Jews, as if faith should
utterly fall away among the Gentiles; as nothing can be powered more into a full
vessel: but that there shall be a more plentiful coming in of all the
Nations of the Earth, leaving their old, dead, lukewarm and Idolatrous
Churches, and shall obey the true faith of the Church of the new Jerusalem, as
Zach. 14.9. The Lord shall be King over all the earth in that day, there shall
be one Lord, (and one faith, and one baptism says Paul, Ephesians. 4.5. whereas
now we have many) and his Name shall be one, i.e. and the name of his Church
shall be one, new Jerusalem, Rev. 3.12. God will write it on them, and one
Shepherd, and one sheepe-fold, John 10.16. and Isa 25.7, 8. And the Lord shall
destroy in this mountain the covering that covers all people, and the veil
that is spread upon all, i. e. the vail of ignorance of their baptism into
Christ's death for the remission of sins, Romans 6.3. Acts 2.38. For few have
this veil of infidelity removed, and the Lord shall wipe all away all tears
from their faces, and he will take away the rebuke of his people out of the
earth, i. e. at the calling of the Jews, as Psalm 77.9, 10, 11. For the Kings
of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents, whereof the King of England
and Scotland and Ireland is a King of the Isles, Ergo, he that is or shall be
King, shall bring gifts to the new Jerusalem, and the Kings of Sheba and Saba
shall bring gifts. Yea all Kings shall worship, all Nations shall serve him.
Ergo, the King of England, and the Nation of the English, or else all shall
not. For such a contradiction cannot be true, that all should serve him, and
some should not; that all Kings should serve, and all Nations, though it be not
said every particular man of every Nation, for many shall be cast into the lake,
as verse. 8. and 27. But all the Kings of the Earth shall be Citizens of the new
Jerusalem, for none shall be counted a true King, except he embrace the faith
of the new Jerusalem; that as heretofore the Kings of the Earth have counted it
their honor to be Citizens of Rome, and to have brought honor to Rome, and
crowned there, so they shall count it their honor and glory to be Citizens of
the new Jerusalem, and bring their Subjects to it. The King would have no
Presbytery, and the Parliament will have no Episcopacy, and the Independents
will have none of both. You may heave and shove, and plot by policy to set up a
government, but you shall set up none, as I have told you three years since,
until the Church of new Jerusalem appear, that shall have a government from
heaven: for all your labor will be but to pull down each other, for you are
divided, that your house cannot stand, much less set up a house or government
in such a division, and you will say hereafter I could see further into a
millstone then you.



Church amongst us Christians; for the church is called heaven, as in many
places of Scripture, as in page 1. The promise made to Philadelphia, of the
Calvinists, namely that it should be a pillar in the Temple of God, never to be
cast out, Rev. 3.12. It was, if they held fast that faith that they had, and
did not let any man take their crown from them, i.e. the crown of their
baptism, The gold of heaven.
which is made of the pure gold of heaven, the merits of Christ's death in one
baptism for remission of sins, which that church in many places have lost,
by taking a second baptism for no remission, but for discipline, and therefore
shall have a grievous destruction, as 2 Pet. 2.1. their peace with Spain which
procures it, for whilst they were at war with Spain, their Sectaries and
Heretics all held together against the common enemy: but now they will all
fall apieces as England does, and the sword destroy them.

Philadelphia, as a proper and peculiar benefit, if all the rest enjoy the same
together with her?

for what I say to you says Christ, I say to all, Mark. 13. so what I say to
one Church, I say to all; for the Lutherans few names, and the English, that
overcome, and bold fast that they have, and let no man take away their Crown of
baptism, shall be made a pillar of the Temple, and have the name of the new
Jerusalem written upon them as well as the Philadelphians. For all the promises
are yea and Amen to them that believe and are baptized, as well as to them. For
he that believes, and is baptized into Christ's death for the remission of
sins, shall be saved: and the Philadelphians shall be no more, Mar. 16.16. And
this appears to be so by the saying; Let him that has an ear hear what the
Spirit says to the Churches, not to the Church.



Rev. 2. and 3. chapter Ergo, their destiny is to be cut down, Con.
that another may be planted.

Matthew. 21.41. Luke 13.6. Rev. chapter 2. and 3. Ergo, the churches of the Gentiles
are Vineyards, that shall be taken away from them, and let out to others. i.e.
to the Jews. For the Kingdom of heaven shall be taken away from you (says
Christ) and let out to others. i.e. the Church, which is not only given to the
Jews, but also to the Gentiles, that have abused the Church as they. he will
destroy those murderers, and burn up their City. Rome, France, Germany, Ma.
Mi.
of the Lutherans, and of England, his Ministers have been killed, beaten, and
abused with sundry persecutions, Ergo, he will destroy those murderers, and
burn up their city, you see a shrewd argument, why Rome, Paris, and many
cities of the Lutherans, and London, should be burned.

Lutherans, Calvinists and English. Ergo, she will forsake them and go to
another people.

that wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall he change them, and they
shall be changed, shall pass away, because they are impure in his eyes, Job
15.15. Now this cannot be so properly meant of the starry heavens as of the
Churches; for how should they be impure in Gods eyes, which never sinned;
neither can any show, that God ever imputed any sin to them, or curse, as to
the Earth for Adams sake; for they are as God have made them, and they all
continue by his appointment.

But the Church of the old World waxed old, and the church of the Jews, and
the heaven of Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists and England, are waxed old,
because they are impure in his eyes, for he says he has some things against
them. Ergo, they shall pass away. For the heaven of the visible Churches of
England, Lutherans and Calvinists, are not only unclean at this day in a small
manner. (Now mistake me not, to think that I mean the justified people of
God of all these 3. churches, for I believe they are clean every whit.

The causes why the visible Churches shall depart, and the Church of new
Jerusalem appear perfectly righteous, and holy without spot before the Throne
of God. But of the outward visible Church, and all separate Synagogues, that
call themselves churches of Heretics, Sectaries, and Schismatics, which I
count far worse then the seven churches, because Christ wrote to these by
name, and has his Elect amongst these, but he writes not to the other; and if
the Fathers say true, he has not God for his Father, that has not the church
for his Mother; and the Scripture says, (God added to the Church such as
should be saved.) yet I say the visible church is unclean, not in a small
manner, though it be called by so glorious a name, as heaven, which is spoken
in respect of the dark dungeon of hell, of the Jews, Turks, Heathens, and
Papists, then for any heavenly clearenesse of the glory of God in gold of the
merits of Christ's death, in one baptism, for a perfect remission of sins, or
for the glory of the Lambs white raiment, justification for an everlasting
righteousness, Show me a church on Earth that is found in the faith of these
three, gold, white raiment, and eye salve, and Phillida solus habebis, let her
be thy Love.

he has some things against them, they are unclean in Gods sight, and shall
therefore be removed. For what foot steps of one baptism for remission of
sins, and of a white raiment, Justification do remain? For do not all
visible Churches hold they must go knock at heaven gates every day to get a
pardon for their sins, as if they were not forgiven, as Col. 1.14. Rev. 1.6.
And to wipe off old scores, as if God did score up sins every day, till they
pray; and they must go get God to cast all their sins into the bottom of the
Sea, as if they were not cast into the bottom of the red Sea of Christ's blood
already, Mic. 7.19. in baptism into Christ's death, Acts 22.16. And confess
God is angry with them for their sins, and see sin in them, and punish them
for the same: is not this to ser^e an angry God? as all heathens, Turks and
Jews do, and not a reconciled Father, which if it were to get remission of
sins to the conscience, I would not fault it but to the person, as if that were
not reconciled: it crosses Coloss. 1.21. And the article of the Creed. i. e. I
believe the remission of sins: as for the Lutherans of Sardis, they are in
the dead faith, and their works not perfect before God, Rev. 3.1.2. Their dead
works of hatred to the Calvinists declare their dead faith: And as for the
English lukewarm Laodiceans, they hold as the Bishop of Canterbury did at his
death, he said he hoped God would forgive him his sins. Now such as the faith
of the great Angel was, such is the faith of most people of the Church. What
heathen, Jew, Turk, Papist, or Devil, had not as good a faith as this, to say
I hope God is merciful, and will forgive me my sins; he might go to
Purgatory (if there were one) for all this faith. The decay in knowledge of one
baptism for remission of sins, and in the Articles of the Creed, they do not
preach or pray in this faith, that we have redemption, as Colos. 1.14. And that
our sins are forgiven us for his names sake, 1 John 2.12. It is an hard thing
to find a Minister, that has assurance of salvation, or that can tell where
he had remission of sins,; for few of them believe they were made in their
baptism members of Christ, children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of
heaven, or believe, that in the white raiment, they are so clothed, that God
beholds no shame of nakedness of sin in them. And seeing this faith is lost,
what new Errors spring up every day, and broached in many places, old ones
are called back from hell by heretics, Anabaptists, Papists, Familists,
Adamites, Arminians, Socinians, Brownists, Seperatists, all the profession of
unity and spiritual peace turned to bloody and civil War in all the
churches in Christendom. These are fearful signs, and evident
Prognostications, that the Churches are departing.

Remember from whence thou art fallen, Rev. 3.5. Or else I will remove the
Candlestick out of his place. Papists to idolatry, Lutherans to a dead faith
and works, Re. 3.1.2.
and the English and Calvinists to a lukewarm faith and reigning sin, usury
or drunkenness; for it was never known that the truth did continue in any one
church above 100. years, but they fell from it, as the homily of our church of
the peril of Idolatry. 3. p. c. it is 100. years since England received the
truth, and therefore the time is come by their own confession, that they
should fall from it. Ergo, it is an argument the church should be removed.

Matthew. 12. Mar. 1. Gentiles, are kingdoms, cities or houses divided against
themselves, witness the Papists, Lutherans, Calvinists, and English. You see
what fighting and writing there is now one against another. Ergo, they cannot
stand, but come to naught.

Candlesticks, Rev. 1.6. Jerusalem is as the light of the Sun, that shall
never go down, and their light of the Sun shall be 7. fold, and as the
light of seven days. Ergo, the light of the churches of the Gentiles must
vanish, because their light is but as candles.

Gentiles at all, but the legal worship of the Jews only. For a man may call
that the first heaven by right, as which was instituted by God himself in the
beginning of the World, a little time after the flood. But the Christian people
among the Gentiles was neither the first heaven, neither were their Ordinances
which are observed of them, the first Ordinances that were delivered from
heaven unto the church, so that some would have it taken in this manner, as if
it were said, although this people of the Jews did thirst after their old
rights and worship all this while of their rejection, and did make their
bragges of it, that the time would come when they should have power given them
one day to exercise their former worship freely, after their old manner, which
is the thing they have boasted of till this day. Yet in this restoring of the
Jews, they shall so wholly frame and apply themselves to the will of God, that
they shall willingly renounce their ancient customs, used in the service of
God, which they shall then acknowledge to have had their end in Christ, and by
this means they shall make it plain to all men, that the first heaven and the
first earth which they hoped to see again, was departed, was past for ever.

Peter's chair to remain to the end of the world, and all Sectaries that would
have their church way as they falsely call it, and all other that are loath
their churches should depart, like this interpretation best.

Gentiles; these are my Reasons.

John the Baptist and Christ were the first that preached the kingdom of
heaven to be at hand, therefore the first heaven must belong to the Gentiles,
for the last shall be first, and the first shall be last; i. e. the last Church
of the Gentiles shall be the first heaven, and the first church of the Jews
shall be the last new heaven.

Gentiles, ever since Christ's time. But only the first heaven has been among
the Jews all this while, and the Gentiles have had none in the 7. churches,
although Christ wrote to them, yet they were no heaven or church; too absurd.

Gentiles, because the Jews were broken off, as Romans 11.15.24. i. e. from
being a church, and the Gentiles graffed in, and made an heaven.

Acts 13.46. The Kingdom of heaven was taken away from them, and given to the
Gentiles above 1600. years, and therefore the Jews could not be the first
heaven, because they did not receive it when it was offered, but despised the
counsel of God, and therefore if the first kingdom of heaven was given to the
Gentiles, then the first heaven belongs to them. For as Christ came to his
own, but his own received him not: so the kingdom of heaven was preached to
them, but they received it not.

The causes why the Churches of the Gentiles shall depart and the Church of New
Jerusalem appear.

Note Fifthly, This cannot be meant of the Jews that they are now the first
heaven because as the Apostle speaks of Oxen, does God take care for Oxen. 1
Cor. 9.9. So does God take care for Jews, that are made the Synagogue of
Satan. Rev. 2.9. For that which is so is not an heaven. Therefore the first
heaven that passed away is to be understood of the Church of the Gentiles, for
the true Church of the Gentiles, was the Kingdom of Heaven Matthew. 3. and
Matthew. 13.

Now the causes why the first heaven of the Churches of the Gentiles depart are
these. Causes why the Churches of the Gentiles depart.


First the church of Ephesus was a famous heaven, watered with the blood of the
Martyrs, in the 10. persecutions, of the primative Church, built upon the
baptism into Christ's death, for remission of sins, and faith in the same as
Act. 2.38. Act. 8. Act. 10. Act. 16. and Act. 22.16. and on the love of God
showed in the Ephesians. 5.25. Tit. 3.5. Rev. 1.6. But because they forsook their
first love of Christ. 1. e. Their first Baptism, wherein the first love of
Christ was showed to take a second Baptism, which they did by the counsel of
the Heretics, Pelagians, and Donatists, that all that were baptized by
Heretics, must be baptized again, and because they did not know, who was
baptized by Orthodox men, they rebaptized the people, which was iniquity of so
high a nature, a sin against the work of the Holy Ghost, that Christ removed
the Candlestick of the church out of that place, by the Turk, and so that
heaven is departed.

2. The church of Smyrna, though a famous rich conquering and reigning Church,
in Constantine the great, for it was rich as the Lord said. Rev. 2.9. i. e. In
the faith of one Baptism for remission of sins, as the Article of the Niceen
Creed declares, but in time they followed after Ephesus, as all the other
churches of Greece, they forsook the truth of one Baptism, the first love of
God declared. Tit. 3.5. (as many now do in these days) by forsaking their
first Baptism into Christ's death for remission of sins, for it was never
known that the truth did continue in one place, above an hundred years, but
they forsook it, or fell from it into some false faith, or reigning sin.
Pergamus. 1. e. Of old Rome is departed from being a church, because they
maintained the doctrine of Balaam. i. e. Idolatry and fornication, and the
Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, by Stews and whoredom. Pergamus was such, Rev.
2.16. Ergo. Thiatira, of new Rome. is departed from being a true church,
because she suffered the woman Iezabel amongst them, which was a Witch, a
whore, and a murderesse, and though God has given her space, yea the longest
space to repent of any other, yet she repented not of her witchcraft, in
bewitching men to Idolatry. not of her whoredom and abomination, nor of her
murdering the Saints, for the scarled colored Whore is drunk with the blood
of the Martyrs. And therefore Christ has made her the Synagogue of Satan.
Rev. 3.9. because they (...) themselves Jews or a catholic church, and are
not, because they have had time to repent and did not, they shall be destroyed.
They are divided against themselves, France against Spain, and Spain against
it self, it must down. Now if any will account the Martyrs, and true
believers that lived for 200. years before Luther, that suffered the manners
of the Iezabel of Rome amongst them, that should have been put away out of the
church as Luther, and Calvin, and England did, I account it the truth, but that
which is spoken to Iezabel, is spoken to Rome, as their sins declare,

Sardis of the Lutherans, is departing because they are in the dead faith,
which brought forth dead works, that were not perfect before God. Rev. 3.1.2.
and dead in love to the Calvinists, and in love one to another, their faith of
consubstantiation is a dead faith, that believe not their works are perfect
before God, by justification, neither can they believe so that live in hatred
and persecution of their brethren the Calvinists, that church is divided
against it self, thus the Sweeds and Danes both Lutherans, were at War one
with another lately, which have shot down the one side of their church, from
within, and a Papist the Emperor, and a Calvinist is undermining the other
side, for both Papists and Calvinists fight against the Lutherans, and they
fight one with another, truly if one stone of a church should fight against
another, could it stand, no, it must fall. Sixthly, The Phyladelphian church of
the Calvinists, is passing away, because they have not held fast that they had,
for they had the true faith, and one baptism into Christ's death for remissions
of sin, taught by Calvin, and that doctrine established amongst them, but
many of them have not held fast that they had, but have let the Anabaptists
take Rev. 1.6.5 10.
with the crown of pure gold, of the merits of Christ's death, for remission of
sin, and made Kings and Priests to God their father, Rev. 1.9. for as no man
is a King, before he be crowned, so no man is a King and Priest to God, till he
be baptized, many of them have lost this crown, by turning Anabaptists, and
Sectaries, a Papist, a Lutheran, and an Anabaptist are pulling down the one
side of their church, and a Sectary and a Drunkard are cutting and beating
down the other side, therefore it cannot stand, for Anababtisme and
drunkenness, will destroy any church, wheresoever they grow, witness the
churches of Greece, and Munster, and many places in Iermany, for Heresy is
like Ivy, that kills an Oak by growing over it, and then men cut down Oak
and Ivy too, and so where Heresy is suffered to grow in a church, it kills
the church by overgrowing it, and then God will destroy the church, and heresy
too, as shall be seen by the church of Calvinists in suffering Anabaptists, it
will be the destruction of the church of Holland.

The church of Laodicea, of England is passing away, for Christ spues the
Lukewarm Scotland, and Ireland fights against them both, and divided against
it self, also, The Papists and Cavalleers, have shot great holes in the one
side of our church, to get an Episcopacy, but cannot, because Christ spues it
out of his mouth, an Anabaptist stands as it were with a rope to pull down the
steeple, for he called it first a Steeple-house, and the Heretics, Sectaries,
and Selectaries, have pulled up all the foundations, as instance, Baptism, the
Creed, the Lords prayer, the Decalog^^, the Eucharist, and Christmas day, and
the Eucharist which has bin as a foundation, of all the seven churches ever
since the Apostles time, and so divided as I know not whether the King and
Parliament will be reconciled ever, but the Presbyters and Independents will
never, for their quarrel is begun, and will never end, for they scould, can
such a church stand, no, it must depart and pass away, for the people have so
many frothings of religion in their brains, so many opinions and Heresies that
they will fall from being a church, to be a Babel, for as the Babilonians
having a strange fantasy, would begin to build a tower, to reach to heaven,
yet had no good materials, but made brick instead of stone, and had slime
instead of mortar, this was man's invention, and it came to confusion, for God
confounded their language, and scattered them, so many Heretics and Sectaries
have got a conceit in their crown, to go make a new church as a Tower to
reach to heaven, for they would all go to heaven, if they could go their own
way, and they have concocted brick of the Brownists brain, instead of
doctrine, and they have discipline of fantasy instead of mortar, I am not
against doctrine or discipline if they be from heaven, but our new
church-mungers have no good materials of gold, white raiment, and eye salve
from heaven to build with, but the new Jerusalem must be builded of pure gold,
like clear glass, Rev. 21.18 Of the gold of the merits of Christ's death in
regeneration, for remission of sins, and of white raiment, to make the Bride
trim, and eye salve of the Scriptures, that every thing may be done according
to the pattern showed in the mount of Gods word. But do you think blind men
are fit to build a church? you will say no, no more are all the Pharisees of our
time, of all Sectaries and Heretics, whose froathing faith, or fancy, makes
them boil out of the church, which are blind leaders of the blind for they
lead many from Christ's ordinance, for remission of sins, and blind in the
assurance of salvation, for they know not where they had remission of sins,
but run after every wind of Doctrine, and know not whether they shall be
saved or be damned, or go to heaven, or to hell, are you fit men, to build a
church that are all so blind that you cannot see spiritual things, so here
says one, we will build this way, so there says a second, we will build that
way, so here says a third, we will build another way, all of you say so, for
you cannot see the New Jerusalem, but are divided. Ergo. you cannot stand but
come to naught. Matthew. 12.

I proceed, of the overthrow, and departing of all corrupt Sees of Jurisdiction.

And there was no more sea, or the sea was extant no more.

Now what is meant by the word sea in this place? we must find out this ridle,
or enigmaticall metaphor, or else we shall fail to find the new Jerusalem,
for it must not be founded on a sea, for it comes down from heaven, from my
God, but the seas are upon the Earth or the Earth upon them, for they make but
one globe, as Cosmographie declares.

v. 24. And how should men go down to the Sea in ships and occupy their
business in great waters, if there were no more material sea of waters, to
fail in, wherefore as God made heaven and Earth, the Sea and all things
therein, so long as the Earth shall remain, there must be a material Sea, for
God has founded the Earth upon the Sea, and prepared it upon the floods, Psalm.
24.2.

Chron. 4.25. For the Priests to wash in, which shall not come into the new
Jerusalem, for that Sea of Brass, and that legal ceremony, or worship never
came into the heaven of the church of the Gentiles, therefore much less shall
it come into the holy city of the church of New Jerusalem, which shall be most
free from all legal cermonies, It is true that the Jews have a proper Sea of
their own of Brase, even till this day: which is most gross, foul and dark,
like to the rageing Sea, that the wicked Jews are like, which foameth out mire
and dirt, Esa. 57.20. for they cast out many forged doctrines, out of their
own brain, and legal devises, as touching a Messiah to come, and a legal
worship with sacrifices, and righteousness by the law, and many other heads of
corrupt doctrines which shall all depart from the Jews, and shall never come
into the heavenly Jerusalem, neither was this in the church of the Gentiles,
and therefore this Sea, here spoken of, must be such an one, as was in the
heaven of the churches of the Gentiles, that shall be no more.

Meyer notes, a metaphorical heaven, and a metaphorical sea, and that is the
sea of the Jurisdiction of corrupt doctrine and discipline or government, which
have been in the heavens of the churches of the Gentiles, in their seas, for
what has been more common for these many 100. years, then to talk of the
holy Sea of Rome, and for the church of England, to talk of the Sea of
Canterbury, and the Sea of York, and of the Bishops Sea, as such an
impropriation, belongs to the Sea of Norwich, and such a land to the Sea of
Eli, and appeals were made to the Sea of Rome, and so were our appeals from
one Bishops Sea to another, but there shall be in the new heaven and in the new
earth no more Sea, Ergo. there shall be no more Sea of Rome, or Canterbury, or
York, and of Bishops, or Lutherans or Calvinists Sea, for all Seas of
Jurisdiction of government, of a corrupt discipline, and doctrine, shall now
depart, and not enter into the holy Church of the new Jerusalem, and that this
is the meaning of the place, these are my Reasons.

Rev. 11.1. Ergo, so shall their seas of Jurisdiction, for if a Church depart,
then the government also must depart with it, and where the government of a
church depart, the church commonly departs with it, for if a Kingdom depart or
pass away must not the government depart with it? popedom, Episcopacy for
Presbytery or Independent, or any other government, for the Sea or discipline
of a church cannot remain, where the church depart, except you can make an
accident remain without a subject, for sublato subjecto tollitur etiam
accidens quta accidentis esse est inesse, for take away the subject and the
accident of it is taken away, because the being of an accident, is to be in the
subject, as true reason, and the best Philosopher shows.

Rev. 21 2 Ergo. we must have a new government, or else it will not be trim
long, for if it be true that God says, behold I make all things new, then
there can be no more a Sea of Rome, Jurisdiction, or of an Episcopacy, or
Lutherans or Calvinists, or of any other Church that shall pass away, for all
these are old, and in that he says a new covenant, he has abrogated the old.
He. 8.13. And that which is disanulled and waxed old, is ready to vanish, so in
that he says, I make all things New, he has abrogated the old churches, and
seas. But it is true that God says behold I make all things new, v. 5. Ergo,
there can be no more Sea of Romes Jurisdiction, or of an Episcopacy, or
Lutherans, Calvinists, or of another Church, that shall pass away for then all
things should not be become new.

For every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted
out. Matthew. 15.13. But of the Sea of Romes Jurisdiction, or discipline, or of
the Episcopacy of England, or of the Sea of Lutherans, or Calvinists, are
plants which my heavenly Father has not planted, if you say, they be, prove it
if you can. But you cannot, for the Sea of Rome, was set up by the Pope and
Papists, the Sea of the government of the Bishops, by the Protestants of
England, and the government or Sea of the Lutherans by the Lutherans, and the
sea of the Calvinists by the Calvinists, now if the counsel of Gamaliel
(approved on in Scripture) be true, then they must all come to naught. For
every counsel or work of man shall come to naught, but that which is of God
shall stand, Acts 5.28. But the Popedom or Sea of Rome, Sea of an Hierarchy
of Bishops, Sea of Lutherans and Calvinists, are counsels and works of men,
Ergo. they shall come to naught, but the church and government of the New
Jerusalem from God shall stand?

behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, there the church must be governed by
the Oracles of Gods word, and not by a sea of discipline of men, for the Oracle
is in the Tabernacle, but in the New Jerusalem there shall be a voice out of
heaven, saying, behold the Tabernacle of the Lord is with men, Rev. 21.3. Ergo,
there the Church must be governed by the Oracle of Gods word, and not by a Sea
of discipline of men.

Rome, Canterbury of Lutherans and Calvinists, for they lived and walked in
their Jurisdiction government, discipline, for as the Sea have drowned many
that have sailed in it, so that Sea of Rome, and of Canterbury, and of
Lutherans, and Calvinists, that have drowned many men's faiths in perdition,
that sailed in them, they are worthy to be no more, but the Sea of Rome have
drowned men's faith in Idolatry and purgatory, and the Lutheran Sea have drowned
men's faith in confustantiation, and dead faith and works to the Calvinists,
and the Sea of our Episcopacy, and sea of Calvinists, have drowned many faiths
in Lukewarmnesse. Ergo, they are worthy to be no more, all these have drowned
the faith of one baptism into Christ's death, for remission of sins, for if
this faith had swome in other Seas, what needed a Popes pardon a purgatory, a
pilgrimage, consubstantiation, and works not perfect before God, and a
lukewarm faith without assurance of salvation.

Rome by purgatory, pardons, and pilgrimage and the seas of Lutherans, and
Calvinists, and of our Episcopacy, by licenses, visitations, and courts, have
devoured abundance of substance of poor Christians, Ergo. they are worthy to
be no more.

Of the overthrow and departure of all the corrupt Seas of jurisdiction of the
churches of the Gentiles. For as the Sea compasses the Land, and sends
Springs or Rivers to all parts of the Land, to water it. So did the Sea of Rome
and of Canterbury, and of the Lutherans and Calvinists, pa^se through all the
parts of their Dominions, to water them with their Jurisdiction. For who was
free in any Popish kingdom from Saint Peter's pence, or Inquisition Court, and
Ma^se, and power of the Pope, and who was freed in our Hierachy of the
Episcopacy, from the high Commission, Chauncellor, or Commissaries courts,
Synods, Licenses, or Parators, or freed in the Lutheran or Calvinists Sees,
from their Jurisdiction and Discipline.

Now if the Sea of the Jurisdiction of the Hierarchy of England be so departed
that it can be no more; then the Sees of Lutherans and Calvinists, and of Rome,
must follow, because the Text says, there shall be no more Sea.

But by the decree of God, Rev. 3.16. and by the vote of Parliament, and the
Oath of the people, the Sea of the Jurisdiction of the Hierarchy of England is
so departed, that it can be no more. (For though King and Parliament were
agreed to set up an Episcopacy or Presbytery, but the Independents and
Soldiers would never endure it, for they rout them where they come) Ergo, the
Sees of Lutherans and Calvinists, and of Rome, must follow, because the Text
says, there shall be no more Sea. Judgment is begun at the house of God for
their See, what shall become of the wicked See of Rome, even that which came
upon old Babylon, shall come upon the new Babylon of Rome. I will maintain
thy cause, and take vengeance for thee. I will dry up her Sea, and make her
Springs dry for the people of Gods cause, Ier. 51.36. See O heaven rejoice of
her; for God will punish her to be revenged of her for your sakes. For when a
mighty Angel took up a great stone like a mil-stone, and cast it into the Sea,
saying, with such violence shall that great thy of Babylon be cast, and shall
be found no more, Revel. 18.20, 21. If the great city of Babylon of Rome shall
be so cast, what shall become of their See. He that believes not that Rome is
Babylon that shall be destroyed, has not so good a faith as the Devil, who
knows it is his habitation, verse. 2. and an hold of all foul spirits.

Ps. 46.3. But he breaks the raging of the Sea, when the waves thereof do
roar, Jer. 31.35. So when Martin Luther powered out his vial of Doctrine of
free Justification, how did the Sea of Rome, and Leo 10. roar against him with
his execrable bull: but the Lord brake off part of that See, and it became a
Lutheran, Calvinian, and Cantuarian See. And when the Lutheran See began to
roar against the Calvinists for consubstantiation, and persecuted them, the
Lord has broken that See with one breaking after another. And when the Sea of
Canterbury roared against the white-raiment christians, and Non-conformists,
suspending them, and cast them into prison. On worthy Prin, Doctor Bastwick.
And though a Shepherd got a piece of an ear out of the mouth of a lion, Amos
3. yet our Lion loved roast cheeks and ears so well, that he left never a
piece. Therefore the Lord has broken the waves of the Cantuarian and Episcopal
See when it roared, and that See shall be no more; and the Sea of Lutherans,
that have roared at the Calvinists, shall be stilled, and the Sea of Rome that
have roared and devoured the Martyrs of Jesus shall be dried up, and shall be
burn, and be no more. For as Christ rebuked the material Sea when it roared
against his Disciples, he stilled it. So because waves of the Metaphorical
seas that have roared against Esa 57.10. So have the troubled See of Rome
Lutherans, Calvinists, and of Canterbury, been like this troubled Sea, for when
any troubled their seas, by writing or preaching the truth, they conceived it
was against them, how have they foamed out mire and dirt of blood and
persecution.

Jerusalem, then no such miry di^ty Seas shall come into it, Rome, Lutheran,
Calvinian, or Episcopal See, for they are unclean. But there shall no
unclean thing enter into the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21. Ergo, no See of Rome,
Lutheran, Calvinist, or Episcopacie shall come into it, for they are unclean.
We find when the second Angel poured out this Vial upon the sea, and it
became as the blood of a dead man, and every living thing dyed in the Sea, Rev.
16.3. That is, when Calvin had powered out his vial upon the sea of Romes
corrupt jurisdiction and Doctrine, for a Calvinian government. For Luther a
former Angel had poured out his vial of Doctrine upon the earth. i. e. upon
earthly Papists, and there fell a noisome grievous fore upon the men that had
the mark of the beast, upon them, and worshipped his image ( i. e. upon
Papists, which worship the Pope, and call him their Lord) and made them sore.
i. e. in conscience, by hatred, malice, envy, railing and persecution of the
truth of Luthers Doctrine. But when Calvin I say had powered out a vial of
Doctrine upon the Sea of Romes corrupt Jurisdiction and Doctrine, then the Sea
of Rome became as the blood of a dead man; for then they began to fill their
See of Rome with bloody massacres, as of France, Germany, Netherlands, and the
blood of the Martyrs of England; that as when Moses stretched out his rod over
the waters of Egypt, and all was turned into blood, and all the fish in the
waters dyed, Exodus 7.20, 21. So when Calvin the second Angel had powered out his
vial of Doctrine on the Sea of Romes discipline and Doctrine, they became so
mad as to murder and massacre the Protestants, (for the Pope was more mad at
Calvin then at Luther, as the Papists more hate the Calvinists then the
Martinists) then all the fish in the Popes See dyed, for their Sea was become
as the blood of a dead man: for they made all the Catholics believe that they
should merit heaven by killing the Hugonits, and they must do all for the
Catholic cause, and sang a Te Deum for the murdering of multitudes of Saints,
and thus was the Sea of Rome become as the blood of a dead man, and thus all
the fish of Papists of the sea of Rome dyed in the faith and in conscience For
he that hates his Brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has
eternal life, or of faith abiding in him, 1 John 3.15. But all that lived in
the Sea of Rome hate their Brethren, and are murderers, by rejoicing at the
martyrdom of the Saints of Jesus. As for the massacres of France, Germany, and
now in Ireland, so that all Papists must needs dye, and cannot live by faith in
the sea of black blood, which is also a sea of Idolatry, by Idols of silver and
gold, and wood, and stone, by Indulgences, pilgrimages, purgatory, prayer for
and to the dead, a sea of whoredom, Re. 9.20
fornication, and witchcraft. How could any thing live in such a corrupt sea
of doctrine and discipline, when they made all guilty of the murder of Martyrs
under the name of Heretics: and they killed the life of faith into one
baptism into Christ's death, for remission of sins, by teaching no man could
have assurance of salvation: but he must go to Purgatory for his sins,
except it were such a fish as could bring up above twenty pence in the mouth,
or some great piece of money; so that as no fish can live mari mortuo, in the
dead Sea. So no true faith can live in the dead, bloody idolatrous See of Rome.
For all men may see, that per accidens, it was turned into a bloody, dead, and
rotten stuff, by rejoicing at the murders of the sanctified. And concerning
our lukewarm see of Jurisdiction and Hierarchy of England, You will grant,
that it shall be no more; for Christ has spewed out the Angel and his
Episcopacie out of his mouth for luke-warmene^se in faith and conscience. For
they made a net of 110. articles, to have ensnared many souls, and to have
catched many faiths in a new Oath of etc. to be Jure Divino, and to have tied
men's consciences to a rail, and to cringings, and to an high Altar, and to so
many Popes weeds of man's brain. How could any good fish live in such pudled
waters of a lukewarm sea, but would have dyed in faith or conscience;
therefore because Christ has spewed the Angel and his Hierarchy out of his
mouth, there shall be no more lukewarm sea. And the Sea of the Lutherans is
become naught, and shall pass away, for it has a name it lives, but is a dead
See, lies in a dead faith, that their works are not perfect before God; for
they hate their brethren the Calvinists, for consubstantiation. They sleep in
sin, for they will not be awaked out of the dead faith, though Christ become
upon them as a Thief, that is, by the judgment of a robbing, killing, and
destroying war; for the Thief comes not but to steal, and kill, and to
destroy, John 10.10. If thou will not repent, and remember what thou have heard
of ( i. e. by the spirit of Martin Luther) and received of the white raiment
justification, to make thy works perfect before God, and of one baptism into
Christ's death for remission of sins. Christ will never leave coming upon
thee as a Thief; for he has been upon thee as a Thief in judgment, to
plunder thee by a civil War, and as a Thief to kill thee sometimes, man,
woman, and child, and he will come upon thee as a Thief to destroy by the Turk:
For Christ threatened your church, that he would come on you as a Thief, and
now you see he is come; and now see Rev. 16.15. Behold I come as a Thief, and
therefore he will never leave coming on thee as a Thief: and therefore
repent, and buy gold, white raiment, and eye salve, or else the Turk will come
to destroy thee, because thou keep not Christ's garments, but walk naked
in sin. Also the Presbyterian See of Calvinists will be abolished for suffering
Drunkards, Usurers, and profane, and especially Anabaptists to swim in their
See. Do you not know, that the denying of their first baptism was the cause
why the Lord sent the Turk into the church of Greece, and removed the
Candlestick of the Church out of that place, because they forsook their first
love, i. e. their first baptism, wherein the first love of Christ is showed,
Ephesians. 5.26. Tit. 3.5.

Of the overthrow and departure of all corrupt Sees of Jurisdiction of the
churches of the Gentiles, for baptism is good enough by whomsoever a man be
baptized. If they have faith to believe they were then washed from their sins
in Christ's blood, Revel. 1.5. For he that believes, and is baptized into
Christ's death for remission of sins, shall be saved, Mar. 16.16. It is not
said in man's state, or in Infancy, baptized by a faithful Minister or a Judas;
for secum valet, if he believe: for baptism administered in the name of the
Trinity, the Father baptized, the Son baptized, and the holy Ghost baptized;
for if there come true faith that they are washed, sanctified, and justified
that evidence it. Now therefore if Christ be, and will come as a Thief with
the Turk, upon Germany, for that greatest Church destroying sin of the
Protestants, for denying their first baptism, what shall become of your Sees
then? my Text tells you they shall be no more, neither Episcopal,
Presbyteriall, or Independent, but a new Jerusalem, and a new government from
heaven.

I have thought fit to admonish our brethren the Lutherans and Calvinists, that
I conjecture by Scriptures that the Turk shall come and destroy Germany.
Reason says he is like to come, for his Empire from small beginnings has
risen to such greatness by the discord of Christians which you see to be in
Germany, and you know that Soliman the Turk did come with 250000. men, and
besieged Vienna, but the sins of Germany was not then full, and for the
Protestants sake the Turk was defeated and overthrown by the Protestants, and
driven out of Germany, (mark says Fox what victories God gives to reformers
of Religion.) But now your sins begin to be full; he will come again, for
your sins, and discord procure him. The conjunction not of stars, but of
Scriptures I judge by, are these, Rev. 3.1, 2, 3. Rev. 16.15. Dan. 11.41, 42,
43, 44. For the first of these, you know that the church of the Lutherans is
the counterpain of Sardis. For you, as they have a name you live, but are dead,
i. e. in the dead faith, that have no assurance of salvation by remission of
sins. For you believe not your works are perfect before God, verse. 2. for how
can you? when you live in hatred with the Calvinists, for the error of
consubstantiation, and they with you, v. 3. Remember both of you what you have
received, i. e. one baptism into Christ's death for remission of sins, and
heard of Luther out of Christ's word, of free Justification to make the tree
good, and the fruit good: but you have not held fast your first baptism, but
many among you have given heed to the doctrine of Devils, to deny your first
love, i e. your first baptism, and have not repented of this sin, as Ephesus
did not, i. e. the Church of Greece, for which God removed the Candlestick out
of their place by the Turk. Therefore because thou did not watch in the faith
of thy baptism into Christ, he is come upon thee as a Thief, and will come by
the Turk, and spoil thy Candlestick in thy place; and thou did not know
when he would come upon thee as a thief. Now you know that a Thief comes not
but to rob, to kill, and to destroy, as Joh. 10.10. You see Christ is come upon
you with a judgment as a Thief, first to rob you, because you have not kept
Christ's garments unto you by faith, that were given you in baptism, Gal. 3.27.
Therefore he has been upon you with a plundering, robbing, and spoiling civil
war, and he has been upon you as a Thief to kill you. For many places have bin
put to the sword, men, women, and children, by Tilly and others, and he will
come upon thee as a Thief to destroy by the Turk. For behold I come as a Thief,
and therefore will come all the 3 ways of John 10. I tell thee Christ will never
leave coming as a Thief to steal, kill, and to destroy, until thou awake
out of the sleep of this sin, and repent, and keep Christ's garments unto you,
that you walk not naked, without a wedding garment given in baptism, and they
see thy filthiness, Rev. 16.15. And for Dan. 11.41. at the end of time, ( i. e.
of the churches of the Gentiles now at hand) The King of the North ( i. e. the
Turk says Brightman, and I judge so too; for the Turk lies North of the
place that Daniel writ in) he shall enter into the pleasant Land (this cannot
be meant of the Land of Canaan, for the Turk has possessed that for many
years, Ergo, the pleasant Land must be the church of Christians in Germany,
where is a true Church) and many countries shall be overthrown, many churches
of Idolatrous Christians, beware Hungary, Poland, and Transylvania, that are in
his way to Germany: But these shall escape out of his hand, Edom, and Moab, and
the chief of the children of Ammon. Now this cannot be meant of the material
Kingdoms of these 3. spoken so often on in Scripture, for they were destroyed
long since, as the Scripture declared they should be, and those places are in
the hands of the Turk already, from Tauris to Syria and Egypt, and therefore
shall not escape out of the Turks hand, as if he should not come there, for
those places are in the Turks hands already, or waste, as Geography and
Scripture declare. But this is to be understood of the Spiritual Edom, Moab,
and Ammon, of idolatrous Christians: for the spiritual Edom is Italy. For 1.
as the Edomites came of Isaac, but were now Idolaters. So the Italians came of
the Church, but are Idolaters. 2. As the Edomites were always hateful to the
Israelites, so are the Italians to the Protestants. 3. As Edom would have
killed Jacob, and his posterity, was bloody minded to the Israelites: so have
the Italians killed, and are bloody minded to the Protestants. 4 As Edom
rejoiced at the day of Jerusalem, saving, down with it even to the ground. Ps.
50.
So have the Italians at the day of the Protestants, of the Palatinate,
Bohemia, and of Ireland, rejoiced to kill them, and say down with their Church
even to the ground, and yet shall escape out of the hand of the Turk; for the
destiny of Rome is to be burnt by the Protestants: for reward her as she has
rewarded you (i. e. Protestants, not Turks) give her double, and in the cup she
filled to you (of blood and fire) give to her, Rev. 18.6. And the spiritual
Moab is Idolatrous Spain. For 1. As the Moabites were afraid the Israelites
would ear them up, when they say over against them, Numb. 22 So have the
Spaniards been afraid the Protestants would e^t them up that lay over against
them. 2. As the King of Moab sent for Balaam the false Prophet, that was near
the children of his people, to curse the people of God, believing he whom he
blesses is blessed, and he whom he curses is cursed; so has the King of
Spain believed that the false Prophet Balaam of Rome that is nigh the children
of his people whom he blesses or curses, is so. 3. As the King of Moab fought
against the true church of the Israelites, so has the King of Spain against
the churches of Protestants. 4. As we have heard of the pride of Moab, his
stoutnesse and his arrogance, Esaias 16.6. Jerem. 48. So we have heard of the
pride of Spain, the proudest Nation in Christendom; for only by pride do
men make War. Pro 49.
5. The Moabites would not let the Israelites dwell with them. For the Lord
said, let my banished dwell with thee, Isa 16.6. but they would not. So the
Spaniards will suffer no Protestants to dwell with them. For in the Council of
Toledo, they made this Decree for the King; Nullum non Catholicum permittere in
suo regno degere: and he that breaks that Law, that none, that is not a
Catholic to permit him to live in his Kingdom, If any King suffer it, let him
be accursed, Maranatha, before the Eternal God, and be made the fuel of
eternal fire. I could give 20. reasons out of Scripture why Spain is the
spiritual Moab, and may hereafter. And the chief of the children of Ammon (i.
e. Of the spiritual Ammon of France) so that I cannot tell whether all France
shall escape the Turk. Blood may pursue some part of them for their bloody
Massacres, see Ez 35.6. Because thou hate not blood, blood shall pursue thee
For as the Ammonites would grant no life to the Israelites at Jabesh Gilead,
but upon condition of putting out their right eyes, so the Ammonites of France
would grant no life to the Protestants, but upon this condition of pulling out
their right eye of faith, and therefore slew them. Secondly, As the King of
Ammon abused the Ambassadors of David, shaved off half their beards, cut off
their garments by the butocks, and sent them away shamefully entreated, so has
the King of France dealt with the Embassadorus of Jesus Christ, the Ministers
of the Gospel, shaved off beards, and heads, and garments, and shamefully
entreated their. But Christ will avenge it. 3. As the Ammonites have been one
of the greatest enemies to the church of the Israelites, in fighting and
joining against them: so have the spiritual Ammonites the French been against
the Protestants. Witness the bloody Massacre of France, Dan. 11.42. And he
shall stretch out his hand on the countries, and the Land of Egypt shall not
escape. i. e. The spiritual Egypt of Germany shall not escape the Turk. For
1. as Egypt forgot Joseph, that had saved their lives by a great deliverance;
so Germany has forgot Fredericus Earl of Palatine, how he saved their lives,
and the Imperial City Vienna, by a great deliverance, from the Turk, 1529.
though he besieged it with 20. assaults. 2. As the King of Egypt said, come
let us deal wisely with the Israelites to keep them in bondage, least they be
too strong for us, and if there be War, to join with our enemies. So has the
Emperor and his Council plotted to deal wisely with the Protestants, to keep
them in bondage, left they should be too strong for the^, and join with their
enemies 3. As the Egyptians kept the Israelites in bondage to work in brick
and clay, and burn it, and made them weary of their lives; so have the Germans
made the Protestants consciences work in brick and clay of the Mass, and burn
them in the kill of Purgatory, and have made them weary of their lives in
serving the Papists Idols 4. As the Egyptians would not suffer the Israelites
to go serve the Lord according to the true Religion, nor sacrifice, nor keep a
feast to the Lord, lest he come upon them with pestilence or sword, Exodus 5.13.
so would not the Popish Germans suffer the Protestants to serve the Lord
according to his word, and keep a feast to the Lord, and sacrifice in both
kinds, for which he is come upon them with pestilence and sword. 5. As the Lord
sent 10. plagues on the Egyptians for oppressing, and not suffering the
Protestants to serve the Lord, so has he brought 10. plagues on the Germans,
because they oppressed, and would not suffer the Protestants to serve the Lord.
6. As the Egyptians pursued the Israelites into the red sea, and were drowned,
so shall the Germans that have pursued the Protestants into the red sea of a
bloody war, be drowned in a sea of bloody War. 7. As the Israelites when their
country was overthrown, went into Egypt to dwell there, contrary to the Word
of God, that said, you shall return to it no more, and served the Queen of
heaven. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, behold I will send and
bring Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, and he shall smite the Land of Egypt with
death, captivity and sword, and he shall array himself in the Land of Egypt
as a Shepherd puts on his garment, and depart in peace, Jer. 43 10, 11, 12.
So because many Protestants in Germany, when their countries have been
overthrown, are returned to Egypt to Idolatry, whereof God has said to the
Protestants, you shall return to it no more, 2 Cor. 6.17. But they have served
the Queen of heaven by Ave Mary's. Now because they agree in sin, the Lord
has a King of Babel the Turk, that will smite the Land of Germany, and array
himself with the land of Germany, as a Shepherd puts on his garment, and
return, for so Dan. 11.43. He shall have power over the treasure of gold and
silver, and over all things of the spiritual Egypt of Germany, and departed
but scarce in peace. For Daniel says that the ridings out of the East and
north shall trouble him, Dan. 11.44. That is, the tidings of the Eastern Jews
called first, for the 3. gates to the East show it, Rev. 21.13. and of the
Northern Jews converted. 2. that the river Euphrates shall be dried (as Rev.
16.12.) and make the last Jews a passage into the Turks Dominions, which
shall trouble him, and cause him to return: and he shall go forth with great
wrath to destroy (for it is the battle of God) and root out many: for Christ
will dip his garments in blood, Rev. 19.13. But he shall be overthrown, for he
shall come to his end, and none shall help him, Dan. 11.45. For at that time
Michael the great Prince that stands for the children of thy people, i. e.
the Jews. And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was, i. e. the
hour of temptation, Re. 3.10. and thy people (the Jews inwardly) shall be
delivered, every one that is written in the book of life, baptized into it, and
believe.

Now the word but, the tidings out of the East, that shall trouble him, must be
when he takes the spoil of Egypt, which must be at the time of the Jews
conversion. Therefore must be understood of another Egypt, then that which he
won, v. 5.13. When Zelimus going to war in Persia, and Gaurius King of Egypt
troubling him, he returned suddenly, through Syria, and slew the K. and took
the whole kingdom of Egypt, and possesses it to this day, and therefore shall
not go to take the spoil of his own Country. But it must be understood of
another Egypt that he shall take the treasures of, at the time of the calling
of the Jews, when the tidings shall trouble him, and that is Germany. For old
Egypt would be too near, and therefore he is like to be sent a further
journey, from the River Euphrates, that the new Christians may have better
opportunity to enter into his Dominions. And for Edom, Moab, and Ammon mentioned
in Scripture to come to destruction and desolation, Mal. 1.3. They lay upon the
borders of the Israelites, and always troubled them. So have Spain, Italy, and
France lain upon the borders of the Protestants, and troubled them For as the
Apostle says, does God take care for Oxen? So does God take care for Edom,
Moab, and Ammon, or those dragons that dwell in them? as Mal. 1.3. To make
mention of their escape from the Turk, when he shall array himself with
Egypt? for those Kingdoms never were Edom, Moab* and Ammon, to the Protestants
to trouble them. But he means of the spiritual Moab of Spain, as Amandus
Polanus calls it, of the spiritual Edom of Rome, and of the spiritual
Ammonites of France, which lay upon the borders of the Church of Protestants
(and have some people of God to go out of them) which have been as great
enemies and troublers of the Protestants, as these were of the Israelites For
what use should we make of the Scriptures that speak of Edom, Moab, and Ammon,
If there were not such Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites, to the Protestants as
they were. And thou London, I have been much troubled for thee, I could show
thee how thou have taken thy bane. Thy Episcopacy is fallen before Romes, and I
fear thy City will. For there are 3. things that mine heart fears, and my
face is afraid of the fourth. Treason in a City (as firing an house willingly)
the assembly of the people, and false accusation (of the brethren and truth)
these 3. are heavier then death, Eccl 26.5. Preludiums of ruin, but division
overthrows all. O thou City divided within and without: how can thou stand,
and Christ say true, Matthew. 12.25. O London wash thy heart from wickedness,
thou may be saved? how long shall thy wicked (and dividing) thoughts remain in
thee, Jer. 4.14. Labor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
Take Christ's counsel, to buy of him gold, white raiment, and eye salve, and be
zealous of these, and repent. For behold I stand at the door and knock, and
will not leave knocking at the door of thy heart, except thou open the door,
and hear his voice, let him in to sup with thee and thou with him, Rev. 3.18,
19, 20. You are divided for a Presbytery, and and Independent government, and
some for the old. I have counseled you to agree, but you will not, but will
have one. Well, upon these conditions I may consent. First you shall prove your
government to be from heaven, for it is prophesied that England shall have a
government from heaven, that shall last till the day of Doom. But I am sure the
new Jerusalem comes down from heaven, Rev. 21.2. and therefore the government
must come with it. 2. That you shall find above one good Preacher for every
Shire, to make your Classes or governors of, which if you can do, you will
shame all the Parliaments that have allowed our books of Homilies to be a good
and wholesome doctrine. For these are the words of the 3d. part of the peril of
Idolatry, p. 56. l. 23. It has been continually true, and will be to the
worlds end, and in our time, and herein our country too true, that every Shire
should scarcely have one good Preacher, if they were divided. Mark, if there
shall not be above one good Preacher for every shire, where will you find
governors for your Church. 3. That none shall be chosen for a Governor that
has no assurance of salvation. For how should he set other men to heaven,
which knows not whether he shall come there. 4. That no man shall be chosen a
governor of a Church that is an Usurer, or ambitiously desire it, for they are
most unfit for it, as Abimilech and Absalom were. Therefore agree, for you have
pulled down one government, and you shall not set up another, nor that again
that you had. For I believe my Text, though you do not: There shall be no more
Sea. I tell you plainly you shall not set up, but pull down each other, til the
new Jerusalems government come down from heaven and that shall be it that shall
reign. The Presbyters have overthrown the Bishops, and the Independents will
overthrow the Presbyters, and the Independents are divided, and shall overthrow
the Anabaptists. But the new Jerusalem shall overcome all, For there shall be
no more Sea. Written by I. E. Pastor of the New Jerusalem.

FINIS.

