AN ANSWER of Both Houses of Parliament TO His Majesty's LAST Message.

Agreed on Monday the 30 of Octo. 1648 to be sent by Sir Peter Killeygrew.

WITH Further Instructions to the Commissioners.

AND The Copies of several Votes of the House of COMMONS.

And Instructions concerning the Army.

LONDON, Printed for H. Beck, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.

AN Answer of both Houses of Parliament, to His Majesty's last Message.
Die Lunae October. 30. 1648.
FIRST. REsolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that His
Majesty's Paper concerning Episcopacy, of Newport 31 October. 1648. by which it
is said, that
HIs Majesty conceives that his former Answers to your Propositions concerning
the Church, would have given more sati faction to his two Houses then is
expressed in your papers of the 16 and 17. of this Instant, as containing in
them (if considered in their sull extent) Concessions of the most material
things desired, and therefore for a Declaration of his intentions by these
former Answers, as for a further and final Answer to the said Propositions and
Paper of the 19th, His Majesty says as follows:

That albeit for the reasons expressed in his former Paper, he cannot consent
to a Bill, and the Ordinance for abolishing of Bishops, yet for the
satisfaction of his two Houses, and settling the public peace he will consent
to a Bill for the taking away of al Archbishops, Chancellors, Commissioners,
Deans and Sub-Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons Canons, and Prebendaties,
all Chanters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers, Subcenters, and
Sacrists, and all Choral, and Choristers, old Vicars, and new Vicars of any
Cathedral or Collegiat Church, and all other their under Officers, but of the
Church of England, and Dominion of Wales, and out of the Church of Ireland, and
further, his Miesty will consent to suspend the exercise of all Episcopal
Government for the space of three years, and has consented and will consent to
confirm the form of Church Government now presented unto him, for the space of
3 years, and that no other shall be used during the said time; In which time
his Majesty continues his desire that a consultation with the Assembly of
Divines at Westmin. 20 of his own nomination being added, to his end his
Majesty and his two Houses may within these 3 years informs (...) the practice
of the Primitive Church in (...) Epis^^^^cy and may accordingly agree in
limiting the Bishops to the (...) and a^^ist^^ce of Pre^bitery, and in the
exercise of their jurisdiction, and ^ing their ^^^^er, if it be thought fit.
And his Majesty will consent, that in calen^ (...) shall be agreed on within
the said 3 years then after the said time, the power of ordination shall not be
exercised by Bishops, without the counccil and assistance of Prosbyters, and
that no other Episcopal Jurisdiction shall be exercised by Bishops without the
council and assistance of Presbyters, and that no other Jurisdiction shall be
exercised by Bishops, but such, and in such manner as shall be agreed on by his
Majesty and his we Houses of Parliament. And his Majesty does prosesse, that if
in that time he be convinced that the function of Bishops is not agreeable to
the Word of God, or that Christ commanded any other Government, he will
cheerfully embrace that, and take away Episcopacy, but until he be
convinced, he believes himself bound in conscience to uphold that function, as
is above expressed,

That this Answer ^from His Majesty is not satisfactory.

2 Resolved upon the Question, that His Majesty's, Paper of October. 21.
Concerning
The Ordinances for the settling the Bishops Lards upon Trustees, and so the
sale of those Lands, though his Majesty upon conscientious scruples (wherein h^
has the concurrent opinion of the Divines, as well of the Reformed, as other
Churches) has not consented thereunto, yet he has offered satisfaction to all
such as purchased any of those Lands, or disbursed money upon that security by
legal estates for lives or years (not exceeding 99 years) reserving only
the propriety and Inheritance of those Lands to the Church and Churchmen, and
the old rent, or other moderate rents for their maintenance; and that if those
Leases shall not suffice, his Majesty would propound and consent to some other
way for their further satisfaction, and therefore other satisfaction, for those
debts and engagements (which were the motives for the sale of those Lands)
being proposed, and his Majesty having herein condescended as fit as possibly
he can, he desires his two Houses would comply with his Majesty in this
particular.

His Majesty has offered by Act of Parliament to confirm the calling and
fitting the Assembly of Divines, as largely in the matter desired as the
Ordinance it self proposed for that purpose. He has likewise offered to
continue the pub ique use of the Directory in all Churches and Chapels, as is
desired in your Proposition: And to consent to the repeal of so much of all
Statutes as concern the Books of Common Prayer, and to take the same away out
of all Churches and Chapels, except his Majesty's Chapel, where he intends
the use thereof may be continued for himself and his household, until another
public Form of Prayer should be agreed on by his Majesty and his two Houses.
His Majesty has likewise consented to the Bill for suppressing Innovations,
wherein they (...) provision for the due observation of the Lords day; and
offered (if that was not sufficient) to consent to the matter of the Ordinance
for observation hereof, as fully as is desired: But for the Ordinances
presented to his Majesty which concern the Assembly of Divines, the Directory,
the taking away the Books of Common prayer, and the observation of the Lords
day, many expressions therein require nebessary alterations, in respect of some
things happening since their first framing, others reflect on former
established Laws, and other matters not necessary; and therefore though he
consented to the matter therein desired, yet he could not confirm those
Judicial Ordinances in ter^ini^, as they are penned, Whereas you conceive his
Majesty did not give his Assent to the Bill for the better advancement of the
Preaching of Gods Holy Word in all parts of this Kingdom his Majesty by his
former Answer did sufficiently express his consent thereunto by consenting to
the Bill for suppressing of Innovations (in which that for the advancement of
Preaching is included.) And his Majesty does again give consent thereunto; as
also to the Bill against enjoying Pluralities of Benefices by Spiritual
persens and non Residency, formerly delivered to his Majesty, as is desired in
the Propositions.

This Answer from his Majesty is not satisfactory.

3 Resolved by the Lords and Commons that His Majesty's Paper of October. 21.
Touching Reformation of Religion; Whereas you say his Majesty's Answer comes
far short of the Proposition which desires that his Majesty should consent;
that Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be settled, in such
manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon after Consultation had
with the Assembly of Divines, his Majesty says, That he has answered all the
particulars which are set dow^e as branches of that general Proposition, and
cannot thin^e that it will be expected that he should oblige himself gene
rally to what his two Houses shall hereafter agree touching matters of
Religion' before he be satisfied of the nature thereof.

His Majesty conceives that he had given a full answer to your Proposition for
an Act or Acts to be passed for a stricter course to be taken to prevent the
saying or hearing of Mass in the Court, or any other part of this Kingdom, or
the Kingdom of Ireland, he having consented thereunto, with exemption only of
the Queen and her Family (few whereof are of her Profession) according to the
Articles of Marriage agreed on betwixt the two Crowns, which his Majesty
conceives his two Houses will not advise him to break. And as for restraining
the access of all others but her Family, and in all things else his Majesty
consents to that Proposition as is desired.

This Answer from His Majesty is not satisfactory.

4. Resolved, etc.
Touching the Covenant, his Majesty answers as formerly, that he remains yet
unsatisfactory to take it, or impose it upon others, and conceives it not
proper to be insisted on at this time, and that the end thereof (without taking
it) will be obtained by this agreement, if happily concluded. For the Articles
of Religion presented to his Majesty, which are desired to be confirmed by Act
of Parliament, his Majesty has already answered, that he had not yet time to
peruse them with that deliberation as is requisite, before he bird up
himself and his subjects in mtters of Faith and Doctrine; and conceives his
Houses will think it not improper to respite the confideration of them to a
further tune, considering how perilous, definitions are in matters of Religion,
how long time he Articles have been in framing, and that since the beginning of
this Treaty, and not before, they came int^^ely to his Majesty's view.

His Majesty having so far consented to the several particulars of this
Proposition, that the remaining differences are very few, does therefore
earnestly desire his two Houses that they may be no obstacle to the settlement
of the blessed Peace now in hand.

This Answer from His Majesty is not satisfactory.

Die Lunae. 30 October. 1648.
SIR Peter Kileygrew is to carry the Votes at large from both Houses of
Parliament to the Commissioners, And a Letter to desire them to go on in the
Treaty with His Majesty according to their Instructions for a safe and
well-grounded peace.

Die Sabbati 21 October. 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Committee of
Sequestrations in London, be summoned to give an account to this House on
Monday morning next, what they have done upon the Order of this House, of the 7
of October. 1648. injoyning them to leavy the Arrears due by several persons for
the Assessement of the Army, mentioned in the said Order, upon their estates.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Die Sabbati, 21 October. 1648.
ACcording to former Order the Commons resumed the consideration of the Reports
made from the Committee of the Army in order to the taking off Free Quarter.
And the Instructions given the last year for bringing in the Arreares of the
Assessements, and the Ordinance for them passed concerning Free Quarter were
read.

1 Resolved, etc. That Members be employed to use their best endeavors to
bring in the Arreares of the Assessements for the Army, to the end Free Quarter
may be taken off.

2 Resolved, etc. That Members of this House be sent down to the General to
confer with him and his Officers such as they shall appoint, how the Army and
all other Forces may be redused to the establishment, and how those Forces that
are to be reduced may have satisfaction.

3 Resolved, etc. That this Committee shall have power to consider with the
General and such Officers as he shall appoint, how the Army may have
satisfaction, for the pay due since the 15th of January 1647. And that
consideration may be likewise had of the Free-Quarters taken upon the Country
since the said 15th of Jan. That satisfaction may be given them.

4 Resolved, etc. That the Committee have likewise power to confer with the
General, and such Officers as he shall appoint, how the Army may with the most
convenience, be quartered according to former Instructions, and directions.

Mr. Scawen. Sir Will. Litton, Sir Rich. Onslowe Mr. Preistley, Cap. Wingate,
Col. Birch, Sir The. Dacres, Mr. Lemmon.
This Committee or any three of them are appointed to go unto the General upon
the vote^ aforesaid.

H. Elsyinge Cler. Par. D. Com.

Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament.
1 THat the Committee of the Army do give their Warrant to the Treasurers of
War, to satisfy and pay unto the Members of the Committee of the Army employed
by this House into several Counties, upon the public service, The expenses
and charges they were at in the discharge of that employment.

2 That the Members of the Committee of the Army that were employed in the
several Counties upon the service of the house have the thanks of this house
given unto them for their good services. Mr. Scawen (then present) had
accordingly the thanks of this house given him by Mr. Speaker.

H. Elsynge Cler. Par. D. Com.

Resolved, etc. That it be referred to the Committee of the Army to bring in
the names of 10. Delinquents not yet engaged, whose estates or compositions may
be converted to the use of the Army,

H. Elsyng Cler. Par. D. Com.

FINIS.

