THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE COMMISSIONERS OF PARLIAMENT, AND HIS EXCELLENCY Sr.
THOMAS FAIRFAX, And his chief Officers, for disbanding all the supernumerarie
Forces of this Kingdom, for taking off of Free Quarter, and for drawing all the
Army into the several Garrisons of this KINGDOM.

Reported by the said Commissioners to the House of Commons, on friday the 17.
of December. instant.

And printed for the general satisfaction of the Kingdom.

Also a Petition from the Farmers of the County of Surrey: And his Excellencies
Answer thereunto, concerning the Landlords bearing equal burden with the
Tenant in Free Quarter.

Imprimatur

Gilb: Mabbot.



Dec: 18 London, Printed for Robert White, 1647.

At Windsor the 14. of December, 1647.
At a meeting of the General, and general Council of the Army, with the
Committee.
THe General and Council do declare, that as to such Officers and soldiers,
as have been added to the forces that are to be disbanded since the sixth of
August, required by the Order of the House of Commons, to be immediately
disbanded without money.

That as to any soldiers so added, the General above a week since, has
ordered the immediate discharging of all such, as of diverse of the scattered
forces, and none to be entertained in their rooms, and will give the like Order
for the rest, and take care that it be observed.

And as to Officers put in since the said sixth of August, in any vacant rooms
over any of the forces then in being, they were necessary to be put in, and are
still necessary to be continued for the ordering and government of the
soldiery, till they disband, as they conceive.

As to the accession of forces beyond the establishment, the General has
lately given strict order against the same throughout the Army, and is assured
there is none, and he will take further care as is required, that there shall
be no such accession, and if there be, that they shall be immediately
discharged without pay, or any oppression of the Country by their quarter.

As to the disbanding of the supernumerarie forces mentioned in the Order, the
general Council did declare, that they are no way against it, but to their
utmost will further the business of disbanding the supernumeraries, either in
the way propounded by the Vote, or any other way, and desire it may be done
within the time appointed by the Vote; but herein they desire to be so
understood, that before the disbanding of any forces engaged with the Army,
these things be drovided for.

That security be settled for the Arreares of the soldiery, for which they
will offer their further proposition within two or three days.

That their Accounts be stated, and defalcation made for free quarter,
according to the Votes of the Houses, offered for the Army from Putney, and
Debentures given for such part of their Arrears, as shall not be paid them at
disbanding, and a Register kept of the Debentures.

That indemnity, maimed soldiers, widows, and orphans of soldiers slain
in the service, freedom of Apprentices, and freedom from oppression be
provided for.

As to the pay of such supernumeraries as have joined with the Army, the
Parliament is desired to provide so much money as they may, and particularly it
is offered, that they would forecast for so much, as may make three months pay
for all, and in the payment thereof, at disbanding, they would distribute the
same in several proportions, to several parties, according to the several
proportions of their Arrears as near as may be, with respect to the timely
dispatch of the service, or that the Parliament agree with the private soldier
of the supernumeraries by the lump, what to pay them in full of all their
Arrears.

And thus it is presumed, that the security for the remainder being good and
clear, the Parliament providing what they can, and distributing it with as much
equality as they may (with respect to dispatch) there will be no
dissatisfaction upon the payment of what is received in hand.

As to the rest of the supernumeraries, and in what places they are, the
General and Council declare, that they could not at present give us an exact
account of them, or a more perfect one then was formerly tendered to the
Commissioners at Putney, and it would require time to make it so perfect as
might be expected, nor can they at present give a list of the forces that are
to be kept up, but will apply themselves to it, and will give a speedy Account
thereof, although it cannot be conveniently declared, until the House has
given some resolution to the matter of security, and things above mentioned, in
order to disbanding, and will take into the Army as many old soldiers as they
can, both to supply the the Companies, and Regiments that want, and of such as
have been, or shall be displaced out of the old Regiments, to the end that the
less present money may pay off the supernumeraries

As to the removing of the Army, and going into Garrisons and Towns;

That the Army and all the supernumerary forces so not disbanded, shall within
three weeks, if the Parliament think fit, be drawn into Garrisons, Towns, and
Cities, so as from thenceforth to take off all free Quarter, and there, within
fourteen days after, they may have constant pay for the time that they enter
into those places, until they be respectively disbanded.

Windsor December 15.
At the general Council of the ARMY.
AS to security for Arrears of the soldiery, we have formerly declared what we
did desire: and we have more lately expressed what of that we have continued, to
desire by way of addition, to what the Parliament has already voted, and we
still do desire earnestly the same, having good reason to believe, that all we
have desired (being put together) is more in danger to fall short of, then to
exceed the Arrears of the whole soldiery.

And as to that of Deans and Chapters Lands, (whereupon we understand the
greatest scruple lies) we have valued it at above a Million, we think it might
be nearer two; and we cannot offer any other in lieu of it, because we know no
other to be charged to such a value, which would not necessitate the
continuance of a burden upon the people for the soldiers sakes. But if the
Parliament can find any such to redeem Deans and Chapters Lands withal,
(after they are granted) it may be done, we desiring them but for security.

By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the general
Council of the Army. Io: Rushworth.
Windsor 15. December. 1647.
To his Excellency Sir Tho: Fairfax. The humble Petition of the Farmers in the
County of Surrey.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas your Petitioners, all rack-rented, have for nigh six years past,
born the charge of free-quartering soldiers, without any deduction of Rent of
the Landlords part, till now of late; since the Armies advance from London,
this charge doubles, and with some of us, trebles our Rent; so decaying our
estates, that little subsistence is (for our selves, for our families, and for
those many laborers employed by us) left us for the present; and for
afterward, likely none ^t all, unless your Excellency relieve us. For your
Petitioners, though rackt in their rents already, and unable to pay our rents,
and to continue to bear this charge of quartering, without allowance, are still
charged as Owners, and the Landlords as yet go free, and most of them refuse
absolutely to bear any part of this charge, upon tender of their rents, unless
they shall be enforced thereunto by Ordinance of Parliament; and many of them
have threatened, and some of them have already commenced suits in Law to recover
their full rents; and others of them, h^^e sealed Leases of Ejectment, for the
outing of such of their Tenants as desired deduction of rent for this charge,
which, as your Petitioners are informed, has heretofore in many other parts of
the Kingdom, been found by their Landlords, and whether their refusal now in
this kind will cause the Tenants absolutely to refuse to Quarter, (as of
necessity they must, if not hereby relieved,) which will certainly breed a
general disturbance in the Kingdom; the consequence whereof, we humbly leave
to your Excellencies consideration.

The Premises considered,
MAy it please your Excellency (in reference to a Petition of this nature
before, presented to your Excellency by the Tenants of Blethingly in the said
County, whereupon they were promised relief, if refused by the Landlords,)
effectually to move the two Houses of Parliament, that some speedy course may
be taken, that the several Landlords may for the times past, and for the
future, bear the charge of Quartering, either wholly, (as in other taxes they
have Ordered) or in some other proportion, as to your Excellencies wisdom
shall seem most meet, respecting the stock of the one, and the sea simple
estate of the other.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.
Mr. Speaker.
HAving received this enclosed Petition from diverse Inhabitants of the County
of Surrey, who have of late been very much oppressed with quartering, by reason
of the Kings being at Hampton Court, and therefore necessitated to have the
Horse, appointed for the guard, to Quarter in those parts, I thought fit to
represent the same to the consideration of the House, humbly desiring them to
give some present Order for the relief of the Petitioners, who are only
Tenants, and bear the sole burden of free quarter, far above the rent which
they pay to the Landlord, and yet have no allowance from their Landlords
toward their said charges: What Order the House shall be pleased to give
herein, may be a rule for others in the like condition. I shall add no more at
this time, but that I am,

Your most assured Friend and Servant, Tho: Fairfax.
Windsor 3. December. 1647.
For the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
BY Letters from York, dated December. 11. We had this Intelligence; On Thursday
last, the Council of War sat in this City, and also yesterdy several persons
were tried for misdemeanors. A foot soldier for being disorderly, and not
contented with his diet in his quarters, was adjudged to suffer a weeks
imprisonment with bread and water, to get him a better stomach. Another
soldier committing some misdemeanors at Stoakesley, in Cleveland, on a market
day, in offering to pull one Mr. Lisle out of his shop, for refusing to take
clipped money, offering violence to him, and other disorders, was censured for
his offenses, to be cashierd the Army, to stand in the market place at
Steaksley for two hours, with a paper, signifying his fault and punishment,
during the time of the market, and afterward to be whipped through the Town. One
Corporal Rampsay in Lieutenant Fosters Troop, was, for kiling a man at his
quarters, at Mr. Savils house at Merbrough, condemned to be shot to death.
Yesterday certain rules and orders were agreed upon at the Council of war, for
the Regulation of the inequality of quartering, and better redressing of
grievances of the country, and disorders of the soldiers, which will suddenly
be published.

FINIS.

