A DECLARATION And ORDINANCE Of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
For the seizing and sequestring of the estates, both real and personal, of
certain kinds of notorious Delinquents, to the use, and for the maintaining of
the Army raised by the Parliament, and such other uses as shall be directed by
both Houses of Parliament, for the benefit of the Commonwealth.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
middle Temple. March 30. 1643.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Taking into their serious
considerations the heavy pressures and calamities which now lie upon this
Kingdom by this unnatural war raised against the Parliament; And that
notwithstanding all their faithful and uncessant Endeavors, for the
preserving of His Majesty, and the whole Kingdom from the mischievous and
restless designs of Papists and ill-affected persons (whose aim is the
extirpation of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties.) Yet their Counsels and
practices are still so prevalent with His Majesty, and the hearts of many
people so misled and beguiled by their false pretenses and insinuations, that
nothing can be expected, but ruin and desolation, unless God in mercy prevent
it, and incline His Majesty's heart to the faithful advice of His great
Council of Parliament; which has ever been, and is (under God) the chief
support of His Royal Dignity, and the security of all that we have or can
enjoy. And for that it is most agreeable to common Justice, that the estates of
such notorious Delinquents, as have been the causes or Instruments of the
public calamities, which have been hitherto employed to the fomenting and
nourishing of these miserable Distractions should be converted and applied
toward the supportation of the great charges of the Commonwealth, and for the
easing of the good Subjects therein, who have hitherto borne the greatest share
in these Burdens.

Be it therefore Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the Estates as
well real as personal of the several Bishops hereafter mentioned, That is to
say, of William Archbishop of Canterbury, John Archbishop of York, Thomas
Bishop of Duresme, Robert Bishop of Coventry and Leichfield, Joseph Bishop of
Norwich, John Bishop of Asaph, Robert Bishop of Oxford, William Bishop of Bath
and Wells, George Bishop of Hereford, Matthew Bishop of Ely, Godfrey Bishop of
Gloucester, John Bishop of Peterborough, Morgan Bishop of Landaff, John Bishop
of Worcester, And of all such Bishops, Deans, Deans and Chapters, Prebends,
Archdeacons, and of all other person and persons, Ecclesiastical, or
Temporal, as have raised, or shall raise Arms against the Parliament, or have
been, are, or shall be in actual war against the same, or have voluntarily
contributed, or shall voluntarily contribute, not being under the power of any
part of the Kings Army at the time of such contributing any Money, Horse,
Plate, Arms, Munition, or other Aid, or Assistance, for, or toward the
maintenance of any forces raised against the Parliament, or for the opposing of
any force or power raised by authority of both Houses of Parliament, or for the
robbing, spoiling, plundering, or distroying of any the Kings Subjects, who
have willingly contributed, or yielded obedience to the Commands of both Houses
of Parliament; and of all such as have joined, or shall join in any Oath, or
Act of Association against the Parliament, or have imposed, or shall impose any
Tax or Assessement upon His Majesty's Subjects, for or toward the maintenance
of any forces against the Parliament; or have, or shall use any force, or power
to leavy the same, shall be forthwith seized and sequestered into the hands of
the Sequestrators, and Committees hereafter, in this Ordinance named; and of
such other persons as shall at any other time hereafter be appointed and
nominated by both Houses of Parliament, for any County, City, or place within
the Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales: Which said Sequestrators and
Committees, or any two or more of them in each several County, City, or place
respectively, are hereby authorized, and required, by themselves, their Agents
and Deputies, to take and seize into their hands and custodies, as well all the
Money, Goods, Chattells, Debts, and personal Estate; as also, all, and every
the Manors, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Rents, Arrerages of Rents,
Revenues, and profits of all and every the said Delinquents, or persons before
specified, or which they, or any of them, or any other in trust for them, or
any of them, or to their, or any of their use or uses, have, has, or shall
have; and also two parts of all the Money, Goods, Chattells, Debts, and
personal Estate; and two parts of all, and every the Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments, Rents, Arrerages of Rents, Revenues, and profits
of all and every Papist, or which any other person has in trust for any
Papists, or to the use or uses of any Papists, and to let, set, and demise the
same, or any part thereof, as the respective Landlord or owner thereof, may or
might have done, from year to year; And shall have power to call before them,
or any two of them, all Stewards, Bailiffs, Rent-gatherers Auditors, or other
Officers, or servants, as well of the said Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Deans
and Chapters, Prebends, Archdeacons, as of all and every other of the said
Deliquents, or persons before specified; and to send for, or take any Books of
Accounts, Rentalls, Coppies of Court, Roll, or other Evidences, Writings, or
Memorialls, touching the premises or any of them, and thereby, and by all
other ways and means, which to the said Sequestrators, or any two or more of
them shall seem meet and necessary to inform themselves, as well of the said
several Delinquents and every of them, as of their several Estates, and
possessions, Rents, Arrerages of Rents, Revenues, and profits, Goods, and
Chattells, Estates real, and personal, and the true value thereof, and of all
things concerning the same, or any part thereof; and to appoint any officer or
officers, or other person or persons under them for the better expediingt of
this service: Which said persons are hereby authorized and enjoined to perform
and execute all and every the Commands of the said Sequestrators, or
Committees, or any two or more of them respectively in and concerning the
premises; and shall have such allowances for their pains and charges in that
behalf, as the said Sequestrators, or Committees, or any two or more of them
shall think fit. And the said Sequestrators, or Committees, or any two or more
of them respectively, their Agents, and Deputies, within their several Limits,
shall have power, and are hereby authorized and required to enter into all and
every such Manors, Messages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, of all and
every the said Delinquents, or persons before specified, and to receive such
Rents, Arrerages of Rents, Herriotts, Issues Profits, Sums of Money, Debts, and
other duties as aforesaid, to them, or any of them, due or payable, by their;
or any of their several and respective Tenants, or other person or persons;
Which said Tenants and other persons, are hereby required to pay the same to
the said Sequestrators or Committees, or any two, or more of them accordingly,
and not to, or to the use of the said Delinquents, or any of them: Yet so
nevertheless, That in respect of the hardness of the times, and the great
charges, which otherwise lie upon the said Tenants and others, by occasion of
this present war, every such Tenant which shall pay to the said Sequ^strators
or Committees, or any two of them as aforesaid, shall upon their obedience and
conformity to this Order, be considered out of the said Rents, Revenues, and
Profits, and shall be discharged of his whole Rent against his Lord-Land, or
any other, to whom the same is due, being such Delinquents as aforesaid; and as
well they the said Tenants, as every other person or persons, which shall pay
any Rent, sum of Money, or other thing, according to this Ordinance, shall be
protected and saved harmless from any forfeiture, penalty, or damage, which
he or they may incur by not payment of his, or their said Rent, sum of Money,
or other thing according to his, or their Lease, Copy, or other agreement, by
the power and authority of both Houses of Parliament.

And if any such Tenant or Tenants, shall refuse to pay his, or their Rent or
Rents, The said Sequestrators or Committees, their Agents, or Deputies,
according to this Ordinance, at such times and places, as the same shall become
due and payable, The said Sequestrators, or any two or more of them by
themselves, their Agents or Deputies, shall have power to distrain for the
same, and to take all other advantages for non-payment thereof, as the
Landlord might have done.

And the said Sequestrators, or any two or more of them, shall have power to
sue for, and recover any debt, sum of Money, or other duty owing to the said
Delinquents, or persons before specified, or any of them; As also to give
discharges and acquittances, for any Rent, sum of Money, debts, duty, or other
thing, which they shall receive out of the Estates of the said Delinquents, or
any of them; and shall be accomptable from time to time for the same, and for
all such other things, as shall be had, or taken by them their Agents or
Deputies; and for all their receipts and payments, and other Acts, for, or in
respect of the premises, to both Houses of Parliament, or to such as they
shall appoint; and shall pay in all such sums of Money, as they or any of them
shall receive out of the said Estates, unto the Treasurers at Guildhall,
London, and shall keep Books of accounts; and shall be from time to time
subject to the further Orders and directions of both Houses of Parliament, for
allowance to the said Delinquents, or otherwise as cause shall require, of all
their receipts and payments. And the said Sequestrators or Committees, or any
two or more of them, their Agents and Deputies, shall have power to call to
their Aid and Assistance, the Trained-Bands, Volunteers, or other forces, of,
or within their several Counties, Cities, or places respectively, or any other
person or persons, dwelling in or near the place, to compel obedience to this
Ordinance, where any resistance shall be mrde, or as often as need shall require.
And shall have power to punish such person or persons, as they shall find
refractory, negligent, or faulty in the said service, by fine and imprisonment,
such fine not exceeding the sum of twenty pounds; or to certify their names to
the Committee of Lords and Commons, appointed for this service; who shall have
power to send for them, or any of them, and to commit them to such prisons, and
places, and for so long time as they shall think fit. And the said
Trained-Bands, Volunteers, and other forces, their Commanders and Officers; and
also the several Constables, Headboroughts, and other Officers, and persons
within their Limits, are hereby required and enjoined to be Ayding and
Assisting to the said Sequestrators, or any two or more of them, as often as they
shall be thereunto required.

And it is further Declared and Ordained by the Lords and Commons, That all and
every of the said Sums, Rents, Revenues and Profits, Estate, Real and
Personal of all and every the said Delinquents, or persons before specified,
shall be employed to the use, and for the maintaining of the Army and forces
raised by the Parliament, and such other uses, as shall be directed by both
Houses of Parliament, for the benefit of the Commonwealth.

Lastly, it is ordained, That all and every the said Sequestrators and
Committees, shall have allowances for their necessary charges and pains in and
about the premises, as they shall be allowed by both Houses of Parliament; And
that as well they, as all others who shall be employed in the said service, or
shall do any thing in execution or performance of this Ordinance, shall be
therein protected and saved harmless by the power and Authority of both the
said Houses. And if any person or persons shall find him or themselves
agrieved with any Act done by the said Sequestrators, their Agents or Deputies,
or any of them concerning the premises, and shall not therein be relieved by
the said Sequestrators upon complaint made to them or any two or more of them;
then upon information thereof given to both Houses of Parliament, or to the
said Committee of Lords and Commons before mentioned, such further order shall
be taken therein, as shall be agreeable to justice. Provided, that where any
former Ordinance has been made by both Houses of Parliament, for the seizing
or sequestring of the estates of any of the Delinquents before specified,
within any County, City, or place, and accordingly executed there, this
present Ordinance shall not be put in execution, till further order be taken by
both Houses of Parliament. Provided also, that all and every the said estates
of the said Delinquents, shall be chargeable and liable for their
proportionable part of such other public charges or duties to be set or
allowed of by both Houses of Parliament, as they ought to pay, if this
Ordinance had not been made. And to all such other charges, duties, payments,
or other rights which are or shall be due, or payable, or of right belonging to
any other person or persons out of the premises, other then to such
Delinquents as aforesaid, the same to be paid and disbursed by these
Sequestrators, or any two of them respectively.

Provided also, that where no Committees are named by this Ordinance, in any
City, or Town which is a County of it self, there the Committees for the
County at large next adjoining may execute this Ordinance, within every such
City, or Town, till other Committees shall be named and appointed for the
same, by both Houses of Parliament. And that where no Committees are herein
named for any County, City, or place, such other persons as shall be hereafter
nominated by both Houses, shall have the like power to execute this Ordinance
in every such County, City, or place, as the Committees in this present
Ordinance named have.

Provided also, and be it further Ordained, That all and singular such
Revenues, Rents, Issues, Fees, profits, sums of money, and allowances
whatsoever, as have heretofore been, and now ought to be paid, disposed unto,
or for the maintenance of any College or Hospital, whose Revenues or any part
thereof, have not been employed for maintenance of the War against the
Parliament, Grammer-Schoole, or Scholars, or for or toward the reparation of
any Church, Chapel, Highway Cawsey, Bridge, Schoole-house, or other
charitable use, payable by any the Corporations, or persons whose estates are
to be sequestered by this Ordinance, which are chargeable upon, or ought to
issue out of, or be paid for, or in respect of their estates, lands, or
possessions, or any of them, other then such delinquents as aforesaid shall be,
and continue to be paid, disposed, and allowed by the said Sequestrators, or
any two or more of them, as they were and have been heretofore. Any thing in
this present Ordinance to the contrary thereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

FOr the County of Bedford, Bedford
Sir Beauchamp Saintjohn, Sir John Burgoyn Baronet, Sir Thomas Alston Knight
and Baronet, Sir Roger Burgoyn Knight, Sir Oliver Luke Knight, Sir Samuel Luke
Knight, Thomas Rolt, Thomas Sadler, James Beverley, Humphrey Monox, Edward
Osborn, Robert Stanton, and Samuel Brown, Esquires.

For the town of Bedford, the Major for the time being.

For the County of Berks, Berks.
Sir Francis Pile Baronet, Sir Francis Knollis junior, Knight; Peregrine Hobby,
Henry Martin, Roger Knight, Henry Powle, Thomas Fettiplace, and Tanfield
Vachell, Esquires.

For the Town of Reading, the Major for the time being, Henry Martin, Tanfield
Vachell, Esquires.

For the County of Buckingham, Buckingham.
Sir Richard Ingolesby Knight, Henry Bulstrode, Thomas Terrall, Richard
Greenvill, Esquires; Sir Peter Temple Baronet, Sir Thomas Sanders Knight,
Anthony Ratcliff, Thomas Westall, Esquires, Sir William Andrews Knight,
Bulstrode Whitlock, John Hampden, Arthur Goodwyn, Richard Winwood, Esquires.

For the County of Cambridge, Cambridge.
Sir Dudley North, Sir John Cuts, Sir Thomas Martin, Knights, Captain Symonds,
Dudley Pope, Esquires; Sir Miles Sands Knight, Francis Russell, Oliver
Cromwell, William Fisher, Thomas Thompson, Thomas Becket, Walter Clopton,
Robert Castle, Thomas Bendish, John Welbore, Robert Clark, Michael Dalton
junior, Thomas Parker, Thomas Ducket, John Hobard, Thomas Castle, George
Clapthorn, John Towers, Edward Leeds, and William Marsh, Esquires.

For the Town and University of Cambridge, the Major for the time being, Oliver
Cromwell, Master John Lowry, Master William Welbore, Talbot Pepys Recorder,
John Sherwood, Samuel Spaulden, Thomas French, Robert Robson.

For the county of Chester, Chester.
Sir George Booth, Knight and Baronet, Sir William Brereton Baronet, Thomas
Stanley, Henry Manwaring, Henry Brook, John Bradshaw, Robert Duckenfield, Henry
Vernon, John Crew, William Marbury, Esquiers.

For the city of Chester, William Jaunce Major, John Aldersey, Peter Leigh,
William Edwards, Merchants.

For the county of Cornwall, Cornwall.
Sir Richard Carew Baronet, Francis Buller, Alexander Carew, John Trefusis,
John Saint Aubin, Richard Erisey, John Moyl, Francis Godolphin of Tremonegue,
Thomas Gewen, John Carter, Thomas Arundell, Esquiers.

For the county of Devon', Devon.
Sir George Chudleigh, Sir John Pool, Sir John Northcot, Baronets; Sir Edmund
Fowell Knight, Sir Samuel Roll, Sir Shilston Calmady, Sir Nicholas Martin,
Knights; Sir Francis Drake Baronet, Robert Savery, Henry Walrond, Francis Rous,
Edmund Prideaux, Henry Worth, Hugh Fortescue, Arthur Vpton, John Yeo, William
Frye, George Trobridge, Esquires; the Major of Plimmouth for the time being,
Master John Waddon.

For the city of Exon, Exon city.
Christopher Clark Major Richard Sanders, Thomas Crossing, Walter White, and
John Hakewill, Aldermen, James Gould Sheriff.

For the county of Cumberland, Cumberland.
William Lawson, William Briscoe, Thomas Lamplough, Richard Barwis, John Barwis
senior, Esquires.

For the county of Derby, Derby.
Sir John Curson Baronet, Sir John Gell Baronet, Sir John Coke Knight, Francis
Revell, Nathaniel Hallowes, and James Ab^ey, Esquires.

For the county of Dorset, Dorset.
Denzill Hollis, Sir Thomas Trenchard, Sir Walter Earl, Knights; John Brown,
Thomas Tregonall, John Bingham, John Hanham, John Trenchard, Dennis Bond,
Richard Broderope, William Savadge, Robert Butler, William Sidenham junior,
Esquires, Richard Rose, John Henley, Thomas Ceely, Thomas Earl, Esquires.

For the town and county of Pool, Poole.
Henry Martin Major, George Skut, William Skut, Anthony VVait, William
Williams, Aaron Durell, Richard Mayer, and Haviland Heely, Aldermen.

For the Town of Dorchester, the Major for the time being, Master John Hill,
Mr. Richard Bury.

For the county of Durham, Durham
Henry VVarmouth, George Lilborn, Thomas Mitford, Robert Hutton, Thomas
Shadforth, Clement Falthrop, Richard Lilborn, Francis VVren, John Blackston,
Henry Draper, John Brakenbury, Esquires.

For the County of Essex, Essex.
Sir Thomas Barington, Knight and Baronet, Sir Henry Mildmay of Wansted, Sir
Martin Lumley, Knight and Baronet, Sir Harbottle Grimston, Knight and Baronet,
Sir Richard Everard Baronet, Sir William Hicks Baronet, Sir Thomas Cheek, Sir
Henry Halcroft, Sir Will: Row, Sir Tho: Honywood, sir Will: Martin, Sir John
Barrington Kts. sir Will: Massam Bar: Will: Massam, John Wright, Oliver Raymond,
Harbottle Grimston, John Sayer, John Burket, Anthony Luther, Timothy Middleton,
Thomas Coke, Deane Tyndall, James Herne, William Goldingham, John Atwood, John
Sorrel, Richard Harbackenden, Henry Wiseman, Robert Smith, Robert Brown,
William Atwood, Nathaniel Bacon, John Meade, Robert Wiseman of Mayland, Isaac
Allen, (...) Haseley, Samuel Friborne, Peter Whitcombe, Robert Young, Jeremy
Aylet, William Collard, Robert Crane, Robert Calthrop, Arthur Barnardiston,
Esquires.

For Colchester, ^olche^^er.
the Major for the time being, Harbottle Grimston, Henry Barrington, Gent.

For the East Riding of the County of York, ^ast ri^^ng.
Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir John Hotham Knight and Baronet, Sir William
Strickland Baronet, sir Philip Stapleton, sir Thomas Rymington Knights, Richard
Rymington, John Hotham, John Anlabey, Richard Darley, Henry Darley, John
Allured, Esquires.

For the North Riding, North ri^ing.
Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Hugh Cholmley, sir Henry Fowls, sir Thomas
Norcliffe, sir Matthew Boynton Baronets, Sir William Sheffield Knight, John
Hotham, Brian Stapleton, Henry Darley, Henry Anderson, John Wastall,
Christopher Perchey, George Trotter, Matthew Smelt, John Legard de Malton,
Francis Lassells, Geoffery Gate, John Dent, Thomas Robinson, Francis Bointon,
Christopher Waters, Esquires.

For the West Riding, Westriding.
Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Maleverer Baronet, sir William Lister,
sir Edward Rodes, sir William Fairfax, sir John Savill, sir Thomas Fairfax
Knights, John Hotham, Charles Fairfax, Henry Ardington, John Farrer, William
White, Thomas Maleverer, George Marwood, John Robinson, Thomas Stockdale,
Thomas VVestby, John Bright, Thomas Bosevile, Godfrey Bosevile, Captain Edward
Briggs, and John Ellis, Esquires.

For the City of York, York city.
Sir Thomas Fairfax, and Sir Thomas VViddrington Knights, Thomas Hodgson, James
Hutchinson, and John Vaux Aldermen, sir William Allanson, Thomas Hoyles.

For the Town and County of Kingston upon Hull, Sir John Hotham Knight and
Baronet, Thomas Kaikes Major, John Hotham, and Peregrine Pelham Esquires,
Lancellot Roper, John Bernard, Joshua Hall, Nicholas Denman, and William
Fapple, Gentlemen.

For the County of Gloucester, Gloucester.
and County of the City of Gloucester, Sir Robert Cook Knight, Nathaniell
Stephens, John George, Edward Stephens, John Stephens Esquires, and Thomas Pury
Alderman, Sir John Seymour Knight, Thomas Hodges, John Caddrington, Esquires.

For the City of Bristoll, Bristoll.
Richard Alworth Major, Joseph Iackson, and Hugh Brown Sheriffs, Richard
Hallworthy Alderman, Luke Hodges, and Henry Gibbs.

For the County of Southampton, Hampshire.
and the Town and County of Southampton, and the Isle of Wight, Sir Henry
VVorsley, Sir William Lewis Baronets, Sir Thomas Iervois, Sir William Lisle,
Sir John Leigh, Sir Henry Clerk, Sir John Compton, Sir Richard Kingsmill
Knights, Robert Dillington, Robert Wallop, Richard Whitehead, Richard Norton,
John Doddington, Richard Iervois, John Lisle, John Button, Edward Hopper, John
Bulkley, Thomas Clerk, John Kemp, Richard Mayor, Francis Saint Barbe, Nicholas
Love, John Fielder, William Wither, Thomas Chaundler, James Tutt, John
Pittman, and John Hook Esquires, George Gallop, and Edward Exon, Aldermen of
Southampton, and the Major of Winchester for the time being.

For the County of Hertford, Hertford.
Charles Lord Viscount Cranborne, Robert Cecill Esquire, Sir John Garrat, Sir
John Read Baronets, Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir William Litton, Sir John Whitterong
Knights, Richard Iennyngs, Ralph Freeman, William Lemon, William Pristley,
John Heydon, Alexander VVild, Richard Porter, Adam VVashington Esquires. For
Saint Albans, The Major for the time being, John Robtham, Ralph Pemberton,
Graveley Norton Esquires.

For the county of Hereford, Hereford.
Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Sir Rich: Hopton Knight, Walter Kirle,
Edward Broughton, Henry Vaughan, Esquires.

For the City of Hereford, Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Walter Kirle,
Richard Hobson, John Flacket, Henry Vaughan, Esquires.

For the County of Huntington, Huntington.
Sir Thomas Cotton, Baronet Sir John Hewet Knight, Onslow Winch, Terril
Jocelyne, Thomas Temple, John Castle, Oliver Cromwell, Abraham Burwell, Edward
Mountague, and John Bulkey Esquires.

For the County of Kent, Kent.
Sir Thomas Walsingham, Sir Anthony Weldon Knights, Sir John Sidley, Sir Edward
Hales, Sir Humphrey Tufton, Sir Henry Heyman, Knights and Baronets, Sir Michael
Lewsey Baronet, Sir Henry Vane (...) Sir Edw: Scot, Sir Edward Bois, Sir
William Brook, Sir Peter Wroth, Sir George Sands, Sir John Honywood, Sir James
Oxenden, Sir Richard Hardresse, Knights; Augustine Skinner, Richard Lee, Thomas
Selliard, John Bors senior, Thomas Blunt, and Samuel Short Esquires.

For the City of Rochester, the Major for the time being, Sir Anthony Welden,
Sir William Brook, Sir Tho: Walsingham, Richard Lee Esquire; The Major of
Tenderden for the time being. William Bois, William James, Mark Dixwell, Henry
Samford, Esquires.

For the City and County of Canterbury, Canterbury.
the Major for the time being Sir William Man Knight; Sir Edward Master Knight,
John Nutt, Thomas Courthope Esquires, Avery Savine Alderman.

For the County of Lancaster, Lancaster.
Sir Ralph Ashton, and Sir Thomas Stanley Baronets, Ralph Ashton of Downham
Ralph Ashton of Middleton, Richard Shuttleworth, Alexander Rigby, John Moore,
Richard Holland, Edward Butterworth, John Bradshaw, William Ashurst, Peter
Egerton, George Dodding, Nicholas Cunliff, John Starkey, Thomas Birch, and
Thomas Fell Esquires, Robert Cunliff, Robert Curwen, and John Nowell, Gentlemen.

For the County of Leicester, Leicester.
Henry Lord Gray of Ruthin, Thomas Lord Gray of Groby, Sir Arthur Haslerigg
Baronet, Sir Edward Hartop, and Sir Thomas Harsop Knights, William Hewet, John
Bembridge, Peter Temple, George Ashby, William Roberts, Richard Bent, Arthur
St^nley William Danvers, John Goodman, Esquires.

For the Town of Leicester, Richard Ludlam, now Major, William Stanley,
Alderman.

For the County of Lincoln, Lincoln Lindsey parts
Sir John Wray Knight and Baronet, Sir Edward Ashcough Knight, Sir Samuel
Ofeild, Knight; John Wrah, Willoughby Hickman, Edw: Whitchcot, Edmond Anderson,
Edw: Rositer, and John Broxholme, Esquires; Sir William Armyn, Baronet; Sir
Hamond Whitchcot, Knight; Sir John Brownlow, Sir Thomas Trollop, Baronets;
Thomas Hatcher, Sir Christopher Wray, Thomas Grantham, Thomas Lister, John
Archer, Esquires; Sir William Brownlow.

For the parts of Holland, Sir Anthony Irby, William Ellis, John Harrington,
Esquires; the Major of Boston for the time being, Thomas Hall, Thomas Welby,
Willesby.

For the City of Lincoln, and the close of Lincoln, The Major for the time
being Thomas Grantham, John Broxholme, Esquires; Robert Moorecroft, William
Watson, and Stephen Dawson, Aldermen.

For the City of London, London,
and all within the Jurisdiction of the Lord Major, the Lord Major and the
Aldermen, Aldermens Deputies, and Common Council men of the said City.

For the County of Middlesex, Middlesex.
Sir Gilbert Gerard, Baronet; Sir Edward Barkham, Knight and Baronet; Sir
Richard Sprignall, Baronet; Sir John Franklyn, Sir John Hippesley, Sir William
Roberts, Sir James Harrington, Sir Robert Wood, Knights* Lawrence Whittacre,
Justinian Paget, William Swallow, John Hucksley, Thomas Wilcox, John Morris,
Richard Dunton and John Smith, Esquires.

For the Liberties of Westminster, Westminster.
Sir Robert Pie, Sir William Ashton, Sir John Corbet, Knights; John Glyn, John
Trenchard, and William Wheeler, Esquires; John Brigham, George Beverhasset,
Anthony Withers, and William Barns, Gentlemen; Josias Fendall, William Bell,
Esquires; Tuckey, Colchester, Steven Higgons.

For the County of Norfolk, Norfolk.
and the City and County of the City of Norwich, Sir Thomas VVoodhouse, Sir
John Holland, Baronet; Sir John Pots, Baronet; Sir John Hubbert, Baronet; Sir
Miles Hubbert, Sir Thomas Huggen, Knights; John Cook, John Spelman, Philip
Beddingfield, Samuel Smith the Sheriffs of Norwich. The Bailiffs of Yarmouth,
Thomas Toll, and John Percivall of Lyn, Thomas Windham, Francis Jermy, Robert
Wood, Gregory Causell, John Haughton, Thomas Weld. Martin Sedley, Thomas
Sotherton, Esquires, Sir Edmond Mountford, Knight, William Hevingham, William
Cook, Robert Rich, Esquires; Sir Richard Berne, Sir Isaac Asley, Sir John
Palgrave, Knights; and Brigg Fountain, John Tooly, Esquires.

For the County of Northampton, Northampton
Sir Rowland Saint John, Knight of the Bath; Sir John Norwich, Knight; Sir
Gilbert Pickering, Baronet; Sir Richard Samuel, Knight; John Crew, John
Barnard, Edward Harvey, Edward Farmer* John Norton, John Chappoole, Esquires;
Sir John Drayden, Baronet; and Richard Knightly, Esquire; Sir Christopher
Yelverton, Knight and Baronet; Zouch Tate, Esquire; Philip Holeman, Esquire;
Thomas Pentlow, Esquire.

For the Town of Northampton, The Major for the time being, Thomas Martin, and
John Fisher Aldermen.

For the Town of Newcastle, Newcastle.
John Blakeston, Esquire.

For the County of Northumberland, Northumberland.
Sir John Fenwick, Baronet, Sir Jo: Dalevell, Knight; Thomas Middleton, William
Shaftoe, Michael Welden, and Henry Ogle Esquires.

For the Town of Barwicke upon Tweed, Barwick.
John Sleigh, Major, Sir Robert Jackson, Knight; Ralph Salkeld, Esquire.

For the County of Nottingham, Nottingham.
Francis Pierpoint, Esquire Sir Francis Thornehaugh, Sir Thomas Hutchinson,
Knight, Francis Thornehaugh, Joseph Widmerpoole, Robert Reins, Gilbert
Millington, and John Hutchinson, Esquires; Sir Francis Molinox, Knight; Charles
White, and Henry Ireton, Esquires.

For the County of the Town of Nottingham, the Major for the time being, James
Chadwicke Esquire, Huntington Plumtrey, Doctor in Physic, John James,
Alderman, and John Gregory, Gentleman.

For the County of Oxon. Oxon.


For the County of Rutland, Rutland.
Sir Edward Harrington, Knight, Evers Armyn, Robert Horsman, John Osborne,
Christopher Brown, Robert Horsman junior, and Thomas Wait Esquires.

For the County of Suffolk, Suffolk.
Sir William Pleyters, Knight and Baronet, Sir Nathaniel Bamardiston, Knight,
Sir William Spring Baronet, Sir Roger N^^th, Sir Thomas Barnardiston, Sir
William Soame, Sir John Wentworth, Sir Philip Parker, Knights, William
Heveningham, Nathaniel Bacon of Froston, Nicholas Bacon, Maurice Barrow,
William Blois, Henry North, Robert Brewster, Brampton Gourdon* Francis Bacon,
Theophilus Vaughan of Beckles; William Cage, William River of Bilson, Edmund
Hervy, John Gourdon, Thomas Coal, Esquires, John Basse, Francis Brewster,
Gentlemen. The Bailiffs of the Town of Ipswich that now are, John Sicklemer,
Richard Puplet, John Aldus Gentlemen, Nathaniel Bacon of Ipswich, For St.
Edmunds Bury, Samuel Moody, Thomas Cole, Chaplin, the Bailiffs of the Town of
Alborough for the time being, Thomas Gibbs, Alderman, Thomas Johnson.

For the County of Surey, Surrey.
Sir Richard Onslow, Sir William Elliot, Sir Robert Parkhurst, Knights;
Nicholas Stoughton, George Evelin of Wotton, Henry Weston, Arthur Onslow,
Esquires; Sir Ambrose Brown, Baronet, Sir Anthony Vincent Knight and Baronet;
Sir John Dingly, Sir Matthew Brand, Knights, Edward Sanders, Robert Holman,
Robert Houghton, George Evelin, Francis Drake, Thomas Sands, George Mine,
William Muscamp, Esquires. Sir John Howland, and Sir John Evelyn, Knights;
Robert Goodwin, George Fairwell and John Goodwyn, Esquires; Richard Wright and
Cornelius Cook, Gentlemen.

For the County of Sussex, Sussex.
Sir Thomas Pelham Baronet Anthony Stapley, Herbert Morley, Thomas Whitfield,
John Bake^, Harbert Hay, Esquires; Herbert Springate of the Broy^^: (...)
Cooper, Hall Ravenscroft, Edward Apsley, John Downs William Cawley, Edward
Higgons Thomas Chate, George Oglander, George Simpson, John Busbridge, Thomas
Midleton, James Temple, Esquires; Captain Thomas Collins, Captain Carleton,
Captain Everton.

For the County of Somerset, Somerset.
Sir John Horner, Sir Thomas Worth, Sir George Farewell, knights; Clement
Walker, Alexander Popham, Edward Popham, William Strode Richard Cole, John
Harrington, John Hippesley, William Long, John Preston, Henry Henley, Henry
Stampford, John Pyn, James Ash and John Ash, Esquires; Roger Hill, George
Se^le and Iesper Chaplyn, Gentlemen; Richard Capell, William Bull, Robert
Harbyn, John Hunt, Robert Blake, Esqires; The Major of Bridgewater that now is.

For the County of Salop, Salop.
Sir John Corbet, Knight; William Peirpoint, Richard Moore, Thomas Witton,
Thomas Nichols, Humphrey Mackworth, Andrew Floyd of Aston, Lancelot Lee, Thomas
Hunt, and John Corbet, Esquires.

For the City of Litchfield, Litchfield City.
The Bailiffs of the said City for the time being, the Sheriff of the said
City for the time being Michael Noble Esquire; Richard Draffgate, Richard
Baxter and Thomas Burns, Gentlemen.

For the County of Stafford, Stafford.
Sir Rich. Skeffington, Knight; Rich. Pyott, Michael Rydolph, Edward Manwaring,
Matthew Morton, John Birch, Ralph Rudyard, Michael Low, Michael Noble, and
Edward Leigh, Esquires; Sir Walter Wortesley, Sir Edward Littleton, Sir William
Brereton, Baronets.

For the County of Warwick, Warwick.
the now Major of the City of Coventry, Sir Peter Wentworth, Knight of the
Bath* Sir Edward Peyto Knight; John Hales, Godfrey Boswell, John Barker,
William Purefoy, Anthony Staughton, George Abbot, Thomas Boughton, William
Colemore, Thomas Basnet, William Iesson, Gamaliel Purefoy, and Thomas
Willoughby, Esquires; For the County and City of Coventry, John Barker,
Isaac Bromick and Robert Philips, Esquires.

For the County of Wilts, Wilts.
Denzill Hollis, Esquire; Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir Edward Baynton, Sir Nevill
Poole, and Sir John Evelyn Knights; Edward Baynton, Edward Tucker, William
Wheler, Edward Goodard, Alexander Thistlethwait junior, John White, Edward
Poole, Thomas Moore, John Ash, and Robert Iennour, Esquires.

For the County of Westmerland, Westmerland.
Sir Henry Bellingham, Knight and Baronet; George Gilpin, Edward Wilson,
Nicholas Fisher, Thomas Sleddall, Rowland Dawson, and Allan Bellingham,
Esquires; Roger Batem^n, Richard Branthwaite, Robert Phillipson, and Gervace
Benson, Gentlemen.

For the County of Worcester, Worcester.
John Wild, Richard Creswell Sergeants at Law, Humphrey Sallway, Edward
Dingley, Edward Pit, Thomas Greves, and William Ieffryes Esquires.

FINIS.

