An Additionall ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT:
Concerning days of Recreation, allowed unto Scholars, Apprentices and other
Servants.

Die Lunae 28 Junii. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Lunae 28 Junii 1647. An additionall Ordinance concerning days of
Recreation, allowed unto Scholars. Appentices, and other Servants.
WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament, bearing date the eleventh day of this
instant June, 1647. It is provided and Ordained, That every second Tuesday in
every Month throughout the year, shall be allotted to Scholars, Apprentices,
and other Servants, for recreation, and relaxation from their constant and
ordinary labors, as formerly they have used to have on Festivals, commonly
called Holy Days, as by the said Ordinance more at large appears: and least
such days of Recreation might be abused, to the dishonor of God, scandal to
Religion, and detriment both of Masters and Servants, and for the more orderly
proceeding in the strict observation of the said day of Recreation, according
to the true intent and meaning of the said Ordinance; It is further Ordained by
the said Lords and Commons, That all windows of Shops, Warehouses, and other
places, where Wares or Commodities are usually sold, shall be kept shut on the
said day of Recreation, from eight of the clock in the morning until eight of
the clock at evening, on the said day; And that no Master shall wilfully
detain or withold his Apprentice or other Servant within doors, or from his
Recreation in his usual duty or service on the said day of Recreation, unless
Market days, Fair days, or other extraordinary occasion; yet so as such
Master shall allow unto such Apprentice or other Servant one other day instead
of such day employed in the Service of his Master, upon such occasion as
aforesaid. And be it likewise provided and Ordained, That if such Apprentice or
other Servant shall ryotously spend or abuse such day of Recreation, either to
his own hurt, or the damage of his Master, and being thereof lawfully
convicted and found guilty before any one Justice of the Peace; It shall and
may be lawful for such Master at his pleasure to detain and withold such
Apprentice or other Servant from their Recreation on such allowed days. And be
it also provided and Ordained, That if such Apprentice or other Servant shall
cause any ryotous or tumultuous assembly, to the disturbance of the Peace on
such day of Recreation, such Apprentice or other Servant being thereof lawfully
convicted and found guilty, upon the testimony of two Witnesses upon Oath,
before one Justice of the Peace in any County, City, or Town Corporate, where
such Offense shall be committed, or before the Chamberlain of the City of
London, for the time being, within the said City, who shall have power to
administer such Oath, such Justices of Peace, and the said Chamberlain of the
City of London respectively shall, and may at their discretion inflict on such
Apprentice, or other Servant so convicted as aforesaid any Corporal
punishment, by imprisonment or otherwise, so as the same imprisonment exceed
not the space of three days. And it is lastly Ordained, That all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other Officers and
Ministers are hereby Authorized to make, or cause to be made diligent Searches
for such Apprentices or other Servants in Tavernes, Alehouses, or
Gaming-houses, and such Apprentices or other Servants as shall be found in any
such place after eight of the Clock in the Evening, or being drunk, or
otherwise disorderly, or shall there remain after eight of the Clock in the
Evening on such day of Recreation, shall bring, or cause to be brought such
Apprentice or other Servant before any Justice of the Peace in any County,
City, or Town Corporate, or before the said Chamberlain of London within
their respective Limits as aforesaid, who shall cause the Statutes to be
executed upon them that are in such case provided for the punishment of such
Offenders.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliam.

FINIS.
The Apprentices Petition and Propositions, presented unto the Honorable House
of Commons in Parliament Assembled, June 22. 1647.
To the Right Honorable the Commons Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the well-affected Apprentices of the City of London,
etc.
Right Honorable,
Upon a due neglect and slight regard of certain Festivalls and Holy Days,
formerly authorized and observed, which was effected through their
superstitious use; we were emboldened (being hereby deprived of all times of
lawful pleasure and recreation) to Petition your Honors for an establishment
and confirmation of some other set times for the supplying our ordinary
pleasure, (which indeed though Your Honors were pleased in some measure to
satisfy us in this our request) yet your Petitioners find, and humbly
conceive, that so full satisfaction is not contained in that late published
Ordinance from this House, as is by the general expected; neither is an
observance of the day so firmly authorized, as, if Your Honors pleases, may be
vouchsafed. We are bold therefore to renew our desires, and humbly present unto
your Honors consideration, these following Propositions, or Heads, which we
desire may be specified and included in a renewed Ordinance from your Honors.

Which shall oblige us uncessently to pray, etc.

The Heads or Propositions presented to the Honorable House of COMMONS, etc.
1. THat every second Tuesday monthly be strictly observed with Shop-shutting,
and that no Master detain his Servant on such day or days in his usual
employment unless extraordinary occasion happen, (which if it shall so be)
that then the servant be allowed some other day in stead thereof.

2 That no Apprentice or Servant disobay his Master herein (when extraordinary
occasion shall require his service on such days.)

3. That whatsoever Apprentice shall be found to abuse such day or days, to
his own hurt, or damage of his Master, that then he be deprived of the benefit
of the next day.

4 That none exceed the usual hours of eight in the morning to eight at night.

5. That whatsoever Apprentice be found the cause of any tumultuous assembly to
the disturbance of the peace, or through his distemper shall cause any
disorderly rout, or seditious company, that upon examination before the next
Justice, if found notorious Offenders, Justice be duly executed upon them.

6 That all Constables and Officers, etc. be authorized to search all Tavernes,
Alehouses, and seize upon such Apprentices or Servants as shall be found at
unseasonable hours, either Gaming, Carding, Dice, or any other lawful Games,
whereby any disturbance may happen, or fallings out, to the great disquiet of
the City and such places, etc.

These and such like heads we leave to your honors prudence and judgment, to
be comprised in the renewed Ordinance, which we doubt not but will greatly
prevent distractions, which otherwise may arise.

Die Jovis 24 Junii, 1647.
AN Ordinance concerning days of Recreation for Scholars and Apprentices was
this day read the first and second time, and upon the question committed unto
Sir Walter Earl. Mr. Beddingfield. Mr. Wheeler. Mr. Edward Ash. Mr. Knightley.
Mr. Gell. Mr. Nelthorp. Mr. Love. Colonel Ven. Mr. Trenchard. Sir Robert Pie.
Mr. Scewen. Mr. Jesson. Mr. Vaughan. Mr. Dennis Bond. Sir John Curson. Mr.
Vassal. Col. Mountague. Sir Henry Mildmay. Mr. Francis Allen. Mr. Lawrence
Whittacre. Mr. Lemman. Mr. Reyonlds. Mr. Serjant Wild.


Or unto any five of them; who are to meet upon it to morrow in the afternoon,
at two of the clock, in the Queens Court. And the care hereof is more
especially referred unto Master Wheeler.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley. 1647.


