AN ADDITIONALL ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT:

To enable Sir THOMAS MIDDLETON Knight, Sergeant Major General for the six
Counties of North Wales, to take subscriptions for the raising of Forces, for
reducing of the said Counties to their due obedience, and prevention of the
Access of Irish Forces into those parts.

And further to enable the said Sir Thomas to put in execution all former
Ordinances made this present PARLIAMENT.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, that this Ordinance be forth with
Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl, Dom. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husbands, Feb. 21. 1644.

An additionall Ordinance.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into their serious
consideration the present condition of the Counties of Salop and Cheshire, and
the damage which may accrue to this Kingdom by the frequent landing of Irish
forces in the Counties of North Wales, and joining themselves with such
Delinquents and Papists as are now in Arms in those parts against the
Parliament, and his Majesty's Sovereign power and Authority therein residing,
which tends to the subversion of the sundamentall constitution, Government and
tranquillity of this Realm, the Liberty and Privileges of the Subjects and the
Protestant Religion, within his Majesty's Dominions, have thought sit that a
timely course may be taken for prevention of the access of any Irish forces
into those parts for the future, by the spedy reducing of the six Counties of
North Wales to their, due obedience to the Parliament.

For the effecting and completing of which work it is necessary that
fiveteene hundred foot and three hundred horse, be speedily raised and levied
with sufficient Arms, Ammunition, and money to pay them for six months next
ensuing.

To which end and purpose, the said Lords and Commons (being well asured of the
fidelity and resolution of Sir Thomas Middleton Knight one of the members of
the House of Commons and Sergeant-Major general of the parliament forces for
the said six Counties of North Wales) Have Ordained, and be it Ordained by the
s^ide Lords and Commons, that the said Sir Tho. Middleton shall have, and
hereby has, full power and authority, to take the subscriptions of all such
persons as will voluntarily lend or contribute any sum or sums of money
toward the raising and maintaining of the said forces, buying of Arms and
Ammunition, and ^^r other necessaries for the advancement of the said s^rvice,
upon such terms and conditions as the several lenders shall agree, which
sums of money so to be subscribed or lent as aforesaid, the said Sir Thomas
Middleton and his Assigns are hereby authorized to receive and employ for the
service aforesaid, and to give notes or acquittances for the several sums
foreceived; which said notes or acquittances shall be a sufficient sp^ciallty
and evidence for the several persons, that shall lend or contribute any money
as aforesaid, to demand repayment thereof, with such increase as shall be
agreed upon, so as the same shall not exceed 81. percent. And for the better
inabling of the said Sir Thomas Middleton to make repayment of such moneys as
shall be lent for the purposes aforesaid, and to perform such conditions and
agreements as the several subscribers shall agree unto, and for the
maintenance of the said forces and advancement of the said service. Be it
further ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the said Sir Thomas
Middleton shall have and hereby has, full power and authority to put in
execution, within the, several Counties of Flint, Denbigh, Mountgomery,
Merioneth, Carnarvan, and Anglesey, the several Ordinances of this present
Parliament hereafter mentioned, that is to say, the Ordinances for
sequestration of Delinquents and Papists Estates, the Ordinances for the
levying of moneys by way of excise or new impost, the Ordinance for the raising
of money by taxing such as have not at all contributo^^ or not according to
their estates, the Ordinance for the weekly Assessments, and all other
Ordinances made this present Parliament for advance of mo^^y through the whole
Kingdom and Dominion of Wales, for the service of the King and Parliament, and
for the more speedy raising of money for the repayment of such sums as shall
be raisedby subscriptions as aforesaid. Be it also ordained by the said Lords
and Commons, that the said Sir Thomas Middleton shall have and hereby has,
full power and authority to set, and let, the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, of Delinquents, which shall be seized and sequestered within the
said six Counties of North Wales, or any of them from year to year, or by
lease, or leases, until the said moneys so subscribed and paid be satisfied
and discharged, and the conditions and agreements with the several lenders
fully performed; And in case the said lenders, shall not receive full
satisfaction of their principal money to be lent as aforesaid wi^^ the
interest thereof out of the Delinquents Estates, or otherwise before said
expressed, that then the (...) lenders and every of them shall have the publ^^e
faith of the Kingdom for the payment of such sums of money as shall be due
unto them, and whereas the said Counties of North Wales are wholly subjected to
the power and Tyranny of the Commissioners of Array, by reason whereof no
Commissioners have been named in any of the said Counties, for the putting in
execution of any of the said Ordinances of Parliament

Be it also Ordained by the said Lords and Commons that the said Sir Thomas
Middleton shall have, and hereby has full power and Authority to name and
appoint Commissioners, Treasurers, Receivers, Collectors and Agents within the
said Counties of North Wales, for the putting in execution of all and every the
Ordinances of Parliament, before mentioned, and of all other Ordinances of
Parliament, wherein no Commissioners are named for the said Counties, which
said Commisioners and other persons so to be named and appointed by the said
Sir Tho: Middleton, shall by virtue of this present Ordinance, have as full
power and Authority to put the said respective Ordinances in execution, as if
they were named by the two Houses of Parliament, and their names incerted in
the said respective Ordinances. And be it also Ordained by the said Lords and
Commons that the several sums of money which shall be sent or advancement of
the said service, and such increase as shall be due for every respective sum
so let, according to the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance, shall be
satisfied and paid out of the first money that shall be raised within the said
Counties of North Wales by virtue of the forementioned Ordinances, and of this
present Ordinance: And the said Sir Tho: Middleton is hereby enabled and
authorized to require and take accounts from time to time of the said
Commissioners, Treasurers and other persons, of their doings and proceedings
therein, and to give such fitting and reasonable allowance unto such persons as
shall be employed in the execution of the Ordinances aforesaid, and of this
present Ordinance, or any of them, for their pains and charges therein, as the
said Sir Tho: Middleton shall think sit, provided, that such allowance shall
not exceed the respective rates allowed in the City of London and other parts
of the Kingdom; for the putting of the said Ordinances in execution. And be it
further Ordained that the rents and profits of the Waterworke brought to London
by Sir Hugh Middleton Baronet deceased, belonging to his Majesty, or to any
delinquent, shall from time to time be paid unto the said Sir Tho: Middleton to
be employed in the said service, and that Delinquents personal estates within
the Cities of London and Westminster; and the Suburbs thereof, not yet
sequestered nor discovered, and which shall be discovered by the said Sir Tho:
Middleton, within one month next after the publishing of this Ordinance in
print, shall be allowed unto the said Sir Tho: Middleton for the advancement of
the said service, provided always that the said concealed Estates do not
exceed the sum of 3000 pounds: And that the said Sir Tho: Middleton do not
possess himself thereof before he acquaint the Committee of Lords and
Commons for Sequestrations therewith, to the end they may judge of the
delinquencie of the person before his estate be sequenstred and taken away.

And the said Sir Tho: Middleton is hereby authorized to administer the
several Oaths specified in the foresaid Ordinances unto such Commissioners
and persons, as by the true meaning of the said ordinances, of these presents
or any of them) ought to take the same. And be it further Ordained, That
whatsoever the said Sir Tho: Middleton, or any other person shall do or cause
to be done in persuance to this or any other the said Ordinances of Parliament,
within the said Counties of North Wales; the same is ratified and confirmed by
the power and authority of Parliament: And that the said Sir Tho: Middleton
shall render an account of all his doings and proceedings in the said service,
to the two Houses of Parliament: And that he, the said Sir Tho: Middleton and
all other persons whatsoever, employed in the execution of the said Ordinances;
or any of them, shall be saved and kept harmless in their persons and Estates,
for their doings and proceedings in the premises by the power and authority of
Parliament.

FINIS.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament that this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


