THE TWO OLIVE TREES: OR, The Lords two Anointed ones, which always stand
before Him, the Ruler of the whole Earth, Zach. 4.

Described also Rev. 11. by the names Of Two Witnesses, Two Olive Trees, Two
Candlesticks, Two Prophets. And showing What they are in their own true
nature, differing from all the new fancied ones, and in what manner they
always prophecy. How they are said to finish their testimony. How they were
to be killed by the Beast, and when. How long their corpse should lie in the
streets of the Beasts great City, dead and unburied. And when the Spirit of
life from God should enter into them, and they stand upon their feet again. And
what great things should follow after the same to the end, and thence for ever.



Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1645.

To the Christian Reader.
ALthough there are many opinions at this day on foot concerning the two
Witnesses of God, described in Zach. 4. by the names of two Olive Trees, and
the two anointed ones which stand before the Ruler of the earth: as also by the
names of two Candlestickes, and two Prophets, Rev. 11. and much questionings
and doubts made about them, who and what they should be, etc. And that
therefore I may seem too bold, especially among men so learned and wise, and in
so great and difficult a cause as this is, to speak or publish what I have
heard, or may seem to understand; yet seeing things to be as they are, I
suppose I may with leave venture to do it.

I confess, the matter has already long before this time very truly been
unfolded, by some whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, if we could see it;
but that we are so naturally blind concerning the truth, and given to seek out
new inventions of our own, and such as may seem best to suit with the present
times and affections of the people; and withal serve to make for our temporal
advantages, which we are to repent of, as being very great evils.

That which I shall do herein, is only this, to express some things a little
more plainly to the plainer sort of Christians like my self, to remove some
objections, and clear some doubts. After which, I hope it will not remain to
the meek and humble in heart, a matter altogether so obscure and unknown, what
the two Olive Trees, the Lords two Witnesses, his anointed ones, are, in their
own true nature, differing from all the new invented ones, which some would
have us to entertain for them, or besides them.

I request the Christian Reader therefore to excuse my boldness herein, seeing
it is his good that I seek, as well as my own, desiring that we may all escape
the errors and evils of the times, and be led by the Spirit of truth into all
truth, and so Walk in the same to the praise of God, and our own salvation,
which is now near at hand to be revealed.

So I rest, His Christan friend, I. E.

Imprimatur. John Downam.

THE TWO OLIVE TREES: OR, The Lords two anointed Ones, Zach. 4. Described also,
Rev. 11. by the names Of Two Witnesses, Two Olive Trees, Two Candlesticks, Two
Prophets.

REV. 11. verse. 1. And there was given me a Reed like unto a Rod, and the Angel
that stood by me, said, Rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and
them that worship therein.


BEfore the Lord begins to describe his two Witnesses, (...) requires his
servant John to take a survey of his Church of Saints, the spiritual house of
God, consisting of living stones, built on the chief Corner Stone, Jesus
Christ, (they being the holy Priesthood, who offer up spiritual Sacrifices
acceptable to God by him) which he signifies by the Temple of Jerusalem, and
the Altar of Incense that was in the same, whereinto the Priests only might
enter through the veil, to sacrifice and adore.

These only are they that the Lord will have to be measured, and taken notice
of, as being his part and portion, his Tabernacle wherein he will dwell.

Verse. 2. But the Court which is without the Temple, cast out, and measure not,
for it is given to the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot
forty and two months.
BY the outer Court of the Temple, which John is bidden to cast out, and not
measure, we are to understand the common outward unregenerate Christians, who
(especially after the dispersion of the true Spouse of Christ from her
primitive viblsie estate) should become many in number, and attain to great
authority and power in the outward state of the Church, and take upon them, and
assume unto themselves as if they were the very true Church and Spouse of
Christ.

These, who notwithstanding all this their outward profession and taking much
upon them, are but Gentiles in heart, full of all uncleanness and abominations
(resembled here by the outward Court of the Temple where the Brazen Altar was,
and whereinto all the people of Israel might enter and sacrifice) are they whom
the Lord commands to be cast out, and forbids to be measured, or accounted
of as being any part of his portion, or inheritance.

And whereas these Gentiles are said to tread the holy City under foot forty
and two months, is foreshewed, that they should persecute, kill and keep down
out of sight, the true Spouse and her children, who are here described by the
name of the holy City, because they are the Tabernacle and Sanctuary of God,
wherein he will dwell for ever. And that this they were to do for the space
of forty and two months, which are to be understood months of years, taking
every day of each month for a year, according to Ezekiel. 4.6.

Verse. 3. And I will give to my two witnesses, and they stall prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.
BY which words the Lord by his Angel gives to his servant John, and unto all
his Church of Saints, to understand, that although those Gentiles unto whom the
outward Court was to be given, should tread the holy City of Saints under foot
so long as forty and two months of years; yet nevertheless he would so give
unto his two Witnesses, that they should prophecy all the while, even every
one of the days of those months, which according to the account of the
Hebrews, who had thirty days to every month, and twelve months to every
year, do contain, according as the Lord does here also intend it, a thousand
two hundred and threescore years. And shows also that their manner of
prophesying should be, as clothed in Sackcloth, that is to say, in mourning;
for so in the same kind of habit they always prophesied, although it would be
now much more abundant, by reason of the abundant cruelties of their enemies,
who should for their word and testimony sake, persecute those that in the
evidence of the Spirit, and the tears of true repentance, faith and patience,
testified the same against their Gentilisme, hypocrisy, and lies.

Verse. 4. These are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks, standing in
the presence of the Lord of the earth.
HEre the Lord now begins to declare unto his servant John, and so unto all the
Saints, what his two Witnesses are in their own true nature, in saying, These
are the two Olive Trees, and the two Candlesticks standing, etc. The two, as if
he had said, the only two, and the very same two Olive branches, the two
anointed ones, or Sons of oil showed before unto the Prophet Zechary, which
stood fructifying continually before the Ruler of the whole earth, not only in
the Prophets time, but also long before his days, and since, Zach. 4.14. for
so much do the words clearly imply, showing that they were not two new ones
not yet sprung up, but those that were of old; the Lord referring us as it were
to the testimony of the Prophet, which we are further to consider of.

As first, where he says, I have looked, and behold a Candlestick all of
gold, with a bole upon the top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and seven
pipes to the seven lamps which were upon the top thereof. And two Olive Trees
by it, one upon the right side of the bole, and the other upon the left side
thereof, verse. 2.3.

So the Prophet having seen these things, desires to know what they were, and
the Angel answered him, saying, This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel,
saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.
Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become ^plain, and
he shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shouting, crying, Grace, grace
unto it, verse. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. And the word of the Lord came again unto the
Prophet, saying, The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this
house, and his hands shall also finish it, and thou shall know that the Lord of
hosts has sent me unto you. For who has despised the day of small things? for
they shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, with
those seven, they are the eyes of the Lord, which run to and fro through the
whole earth, verse. 8, 9, 10.

Although the Prophet had seen and heard all these things, yet was he not
satisfied concerning the two Olive trees, but questions again, saying, What be
these two Olive trees upon the right side of the Candlestick, and upon the left
side thereof? verse. 11.

And again, What be these two Olive branches which through the two golden pipes
empty the oil out of themselves into the gold? ver 12.

And the Angel answered him, saying, Know thou not what these be? And he
said, No, my Lord. Then said the Angel unto him, These are the two anointed
ones that stand by the Lord of the whole earth.

Now the Prophet understood every thing, and accordingly as they were declared
unto him, he writ them down, to the end that other Saints also might
understand the same.

And yet (for all this, and notwithstanding all that Christ has revealed and
spoken by his Angel unto his servant John, and he left written to us) it
remains in doubt, and is still a great question with many at this day, what
the two Witnesses, the two Olive Trees, are.

Some saying they are Enoch and Elias whom they will have to come. Others say,
they are Zerubbabel and Joshua. And some say, they are other two men, or more,
whom they will have to stand up in these times. And others say, they are the
two Churches of the Jews and Gentiles, and the Ministers of both. And others,
that they are the Ministers of the Gospel since Christ; and some say, the
Magistracy and the Ministry. And others, the two Testaments and the
Ministers. And some say, they are the two Testaments only.

Now which of all these opinions is the truth that shall stand approved when
all the rest shall vanish like smoke, and come to nothing?

Surely, not to make any further demurring, the Two Witnesses are the Two
Testaments of God, without the adding or joining men or Churches unto them, in
that respect. For which of all those other may be said to empty the pure oil
and light of the righteousness and justice, grace and truth of God out of
themselves, through their golden pipes, into the golden Candlestick, which is
the Church of God, but his two Testaments only, who have the same oil in
themselves naturally, as the Olive trees have their oil in themselves
naturally.

It is true, the Church having received into her seven Lamps, of the pure oil
and light of these two Olive Trees and two Candlestickes, (as Christ also
calls them, because they have light in themselves as well as oil,) may
(through the sevenfold Spirit of Prophecy given her of God, those seven eyes
which Zechariah saw graven on the head Stone, Zech. 3.9. and were with
Zerubbabel, Zech. 4.10. and are the seven Spirits of God sent out into all the
earth, spoken of also Rev. 5.6.) The Church I say, having so received, and
being made partaker of these excellent graces and gifts, may and does by her
Prophets prophecy and hold forth the light of Gods two Witnesses, the two
Olive Trees, and two Candlestickes) and testify the same righteousness and
justice, grace and truth to the world, in all parts and places where they come.
For which cause it is said of her, O Jerusalem, which bring good tidings,
lift up thy voice with strength, O Sion, that bring good tidings, etc.

And again, How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of those that
bring good tidings of peace and good things unto us!

And St. Paul says of that holy City, that she is free, and is the mother of
all the children of God, because she ministers the glad tidings of grace and
peace unto them.

Although all this be true of the Church of God, and that she is so nearly
united unto his two Witnesses, as that they cannot be divided, nor parted
asunder; yet they may and must be distinguished so one from another, as that
the Church and her Prophets may not be the Witnesses, nor part of them, nor
the Witnesses the Church: For it can no more be so, then the woman mentioned
Rev. 12. which had the two wings given her, (wherewith she might fly into the
wilderness) can be the two wings, or the wings the woman; though without them
she could not fly, nor be clothed, nor fed when she was in the wilderness,
as the Text, Rev. 14. implies, (the two wings being also the two Testaments)
which contain in them the word of the Lord, wherewith she is in spirit clothed
and fed, and they are but two, not three, nor four, nor more, but only two,
which God in those days gave unto her (perfectly finished) to be her guide and
help every way upon all occasions, and in all places wheresoever she removed,
or should be dispersed. And therefore Christ her Lord, who was careful of
her, advised her beforehand, that then especially, when the time of trouble
(which he also foretold her of) should come, she should betake herself unto
them, as he also says, When ye therefore shall see the abomination of
desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, stand in the holy place, who so
reads let him understand, then let them which be in Judea flic into the
mountains, etc. Matthew. 24.

For this was the very time of the great persecution raised by the Dragon
against that admirable woman in her most excellent primitive estate, described
in Rev. 12.1. whereby she was necessitated to fly into the Wilderness to her
place which God had provided for her, to take some breath and live. She was now
to read and understand the written words of his two Testaments, and to betake
her self to them, and fly (they being the two wings of the great Eagle, even
the Lord himself, who gave them unto her to that end; and that she might be
also nourished by them (in that secret desert) for a time, and times, and half
a time, (that is to say, three years and a half of years) from the presence
of the Serpent, as verse 14. compared with verse 6. where these three times and
a half are decribed by 1260 days, and are to be understood for so many
years, it being also the full time of the reign of the Beast, which was to
rise after the Dragons fall. For St. John, as it seems, wrote this book of
the Revelation at the same time when all the Western Churches were (by the
persecution of Nero, and the rest of those cruel Pagan Emperors) dispersed,
and they of Judea also, John himself being now for the word of God, and
witness of Jesus Christ, in the Isle of Pathmos: only the seven Churches of
Asia remaining in their places undispersed, and that this was the reason why
John speaks not a word of any Churchelse, of any place besides those seven of
Asia, unto whom he was appointed to send the book when he had written it.

And although (notwithstanding that great persecution against all Christians in
general then under the Roman power, the name of Christ, and profession of
Christian Religion, increased, so that in short time it came to be very
generally entertained; yet did the true Church herself (being, in respect of
her Seed, dispersed amongst them) never recover her first and primitive estate
again; but all things grew worse and worse until the Beast rose, who brought
the mystery of iniquity to perfection, and set up the abomination of desolation
to the full, (which the Dragon had begun in Jerusalem, and Temple thereof) to
stand where it ought not, even in the Temple of the Christian Gentiles, the
seven Churches of Asia being now also by the Eastern Empire, subdued to the
Beast, and brought under the supremacy and power of his Church of Rome; and so
they wrought and brought to pass by degrees, that the eminent light and beauty
of the truly modest, and chaste virgin Spouse of Christ, might no more be seen,
till the forty and two months of the Beasts reign should be expired.

Therefore as Christ said, Matthew. 24. Who so reads, let him understand, etc.
So again, Rev. 1. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of
the prophecy of this book, and keep those things which are written therein,
for the time is at hand, verse 3.

Verse 5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth and
devoureth their enemies: and if any man will hurt them, so must he be slain.
HEre the Lord does further declare by his Angel, what his two Witnesses are
in their own true nature and power, in saying, If any man will hurt them, fire
shall proceed out of their mouth, etc. That is to say, if any man shall resist
their words and testimony, or seem to stop their proceeding, and pervert the
straight way of the Lord which they declare, as the Scribes and Pharisees, and
those false teachers in Antioch, and them of Galatia, Elymas the Sorcerer, and
many other more in the Apostles days, did; or shall wrest their words from
their true intention, to some other false and evil ends, and so turn their
prophecy and testimony out of the way, to maintain their blasphemous
opinions, abominations and lies, under pretense of truth, as Arius and his
followers did, and the Beast and his Clergy have done a long time, and as many
others do now amongst us at this day, to maintain their sundry erroneous and
corrupt opinions; which they have taken up, contrary to the intent and meaning
of the Spirit of God in these his two Testaments. Look what judgments they
have pronounced against such, shall surely, first or last, fall upon them, the
fire of Gods justice and wrath which proceeds out of their mouth, shall
certainly devour them.

And let no man marvel at this, that they being two, are described to have
both but one mouth: for although they be two in number, and are truly distinct
and differing one from the other, the one being the Law of sin, and of death,
(so called by reason of us, who are all guilty of the breach thereof, and so of
death) which is said to come by Moses: the other being the Law of the Spirit of
life, of grace and truth, and is said to come by Jesus Christ; yet do they not
speak or will things contrary one to the other, but do truly agree and speak
as with one mouth that which is holy and just, gracious and true. Therefore if
any man will hurt them, so must he be slain.

If any man shall make and love to make lies against them, or of them, and say
they speak that which they speak not, or mean that which they mean not: If any
man shall add to, or take from the words of their prophecy, see then what
their sentence is, even in the very finishing of their testimony; If he shall
add, God shall (then) add unto him, the plagues that are written in this
book. If he shall diminish, or take from, God shall take away his part out of
the book of life, and out of the holy City, and from the things that are
written in this book, Rev. 22.18, 19.

Blessed (therefore) are they that do his commandments, that they may have
right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the City:
for without shall be Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers,
and Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie.

Verse 6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy; and they have power over the waters, to turn them into blood,
and to smite the earth with all manner of plagues so often as they will.
THat these two Witnesses have power for to do all these things, I suppose no
man will deny, because it is (without question) true. And that whatsoever they
have prophesied against any Kingdom, Monarch, Nation, State, City, People,
for their wickedness against their testimony, and against the Prophets and
people of God, that stood to maintain the same, have and shall certainly come
to pass. If they prophecy of famine, either of the Word and knowledge of God,
which is the bread of life, or of common bread, signified here by shutting the
heavens that it rain not, etc. Or if they prophecy of destruction by the
sword, here signified by turning waters into blood, so giving them blood to
drink for their shedding the blood of the Saints, as it is expressed Rev. 16.3
4.5, 6. Or if they prophecy of pestilence, of earthquakes, or any other
calamity or judgment to come, signified by smiting the earth with all manner
of plagues so often as they will, their word is a law; such special privilege
and power they have, that what they say and denounce, shall stand, not one jot
nor tittle of their word shall fail, till all be fulfilled.

According as the Lord spoke of his Prophet Jeremiah, and by him saying,
Behold, this day have I set thee over Nations, and over Kingdoms, to pluck up,
root out, destroy, and throw down, build and plane, J^r. 1.9, 10. And in
another place, Therefore have I cut them down by my Prophets, and slain them by
the words of my mouth. Hos. 6.5.

And so Zerubbabel (concerning the power that opposed him) saying, Not by Army
nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts. Who art thou, O great
mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, etc. Zech. 4.

Now, what two men were there ever in the world, or what two States of
Magistrates and Ministers, or other, have there ever been, that had power to
do all these things, and by the word of whole mouth, all those judgments of
God already past and fulfilled on those former Monarchs, Kingdoms, Nations,
Cities, people, that have been the great adversaries of God, enemies to his
Word of Truth, and destroyers of his Saints, have been uttered and pronounced;
but the mouth of his two Testaments only, which the holy Prophets and Apostles
have been the witnessers and recorders of. In which respect the Lord did so
greatly honor Moses and the Prophets, they being dead, and their writings
only remaining to the people, saying, They have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them, etc.

And so to us now, we have Moses and the Prophets; yea more, we have John the
Baptist, the Elias that was to come, and Christ the Messiah promised, and his
holy Apostles, (insomuch as we have their Records and Writings of the great
things of Gods two Testaments, which they had seen and heard from the Lord.)
And if we therefore will not hear them, nor believe their record, then neither
will we believe, if Enoch and Elias, or Noah and Abraham, or any other two or
more of the holy Prophets and Apostles, should come from the dead, and preach
anew unto us: for so much do the words of the Lord imply.

Wherefore it concerns us greatly to read and consider, and to desire of God
to give us understanding. And blessed is he that reads and believes, and
keeps the sayings of Gods two Witnesses, which are his two Testaments: for so
I will now take it for granted of all that love the Lord, and delight in his
Testimonies.

Verse. 7. And when they have finished their testimony, the beast which
ascends from the depth, shall make battle against them, and kill them.
THese words in the opinion of some (I know) will seem to contradict that
which has been said of the two Witnesses, because they will understand their
testimony here spoken of, to be their prophesying in Sackcloth 1260 days,
mentioned in verse 3. and so as if the words of this 7 verse did imply the
killing of them by the Beast, to be at the end of those days, a little before
his own death; that he shall then get up again out of his consumption, and make
war against them, and kill them, and their carcasses lie in the streets of
his great City three natural years and a half unburied; that so the Beast
and his false Prophets, and those Kings and Nations, and the people that
worship the Beast, may yet rejoice and triumph over them before the Beast die,
and his Church come to desolation.

This they conceive and teach, and that the two Witnesses must therefore be
some two men of these times, as Mr. Burton and the other that suffered with
him, and were imprisoned (as they say) three years and a half just to a day;
and then set at liberty by the Parliament, and so raised from death to life,
and caused to stand upon their feet again: for so they have published in their
books: yet not giving the honor wholly to them alone, but joining also
together with them all those Ministers which had suffered and been suppressed by
the Bishops, for not conforming unto their orders and rules, who are now
restored to places and means. Some adding to these, the zealous Magistrates
and States now in place of authority.

But to answer these Teachers, not denying any of Gods faithful Servants,
Magistrates or Ministers, the least part of their due and right; only let me
tell them that so teach, They are utterly deceived in their imaginations
concerning the two Witnesses, and also much mistake the words of the text.

For first, it says not of the two Witnesses (which are the two Testaments
only, as has been sufficiently proved, and I now take it for granted) And
when they have finished their prophesying in Sackcloth, as if they should cease
so to do before the Be^st should kill them. Neither does it say, when the 1260
days of the Beasts reign shall be accomplished; then the Beast should make
war against them, and kill them. Nay, this were very contradictions and
unreasonable: for how could the Beast kill them when his days were ended? Or
if he could, what would it then avail him, the time of their prophesying also
being expired? Nay, it had been much more for his advantage, to have killed
them long before, seeing they were before, even in the Prophet Zechary his
time, though they had not yet finished their testimony till about three hundred
years before the beast rose.

And 2ly, the two Witnesses of God (being the two Testaments) cannot be said
to finish their prophesying in Sackcloth, till all Gods elect are called and
sanctified by their word, and that the sufferings of Christ in them his members
for his Word sake, are ended.

Neither did the two Witnesses ever otherwise prophecy then in Sackcloth, that
is, in mourning. All the holy Prophets, Apostles and S^ints, have in mourning
and weeping born record of them, and in faith and patience testified the truth
of their words to the world, and were hated and persecuted for their sake, not
their own; but because they testified and walked in the light of them: And in
this kind of habit they are to prophecy until the Lord come in his glory.

For although the Lord would (as he said) so give unto his two Witnesses, that
(notwithstanding all whatsoever the Beast could do against them) they should
prophecy the 1260 days, even every one of the days of those forty two
months of the Beasts reign, and the Gentiles treading the holy City under
foot; yet did he not limit their prophesying in Sackcloth within the compass
of those days: Neither is there a word in all the Scripture to such purpose;
only their being killed by the Beast, and their corpse lying dead in the street
of his Sodomiticall City, etc. are limited within that time, as we shall see
hereafter.

Neither is it said in the Text, the Beast which descends into the deep,
shall make war against them, and kill them; but the Beast which ascends
from the deep, etc. implying plainly, that he should make war against them
and kill them at his ascending or rising, or soon after, and not at his
descending or downfall. And that the finishing their testimony here spoken of,
was to be before the Beast should rise; which we are here duly to consider of,
as a thing that we ought to know and understand. And therefore the Lord
foreshewed, saying, And when they have finished their testimony, the Beast
which ascends from the depth, shall make war against them, and kill them.

That is to say, when the holy Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists had finished
their course, and written down all whatsoever they had seen and heard from the
Lord concerning his two Wills and Testaments, according as they were guided by
the holy Ghost; and especially his second or last Will of grace and peace by
Jesus Christ.

His wonderful conception, birth, life, death, resurrection from the dead,
foretold also by the Prophets.

His ascension into heaven, and his sending the holy Ghost unto them, the
Spirit of truth to lead them into all truth, and to enable them to prophecy
through the sevenfold gifts thereof.

Of John the Baptist, who was that Elias which God promised to send before the
great and terrible day of the Lord should come, the day of judgment and wrath;
and how he cried out unto the people of Israel, and so unto all the world in
the spirit and power of Elias, requiring every man (with strong persuasions,
great sorrowfulness of heart, much lamentation and many tears) to repent,
that they might obtain the forgiveness of their sins through faith in the
Messiah, the Mediator and Messenger of the Covenant, who was now also come to
his Temple. Which voice of this Elias cries out unto us all, even to this day,
that we should repent, that we may receive also the forgiveness of our sins
by faith in Christ, lest in that great day when he comes in power and glory,
we perish in his wrath, and he smite the earth with a curse.

And how Christ himself (also) preached, saving, Repent, for the Kingdom of
heaven is at hand, Repent and believe the Gospel, with many other heavenly
Doctrines, and most true and gracious sayings.

And of all his wondrous works, and the things (he had foreshewed them) should
come to pass. Of the destruction of Jerusalem, and wrath upon that people. Of
false Christ's and false Prophets that should arise. Of great tribulation that
should befall the Church of Christ during the time of his personal absence.
And of the signs of his coming, and end of the world.

And after his death and resurrection how he opened their understandings; and
(among many other heavenly things that he spoke of; and foreshewed them) said
unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to
rise from the dead the third day, and that repentance and remission of sins
should be preached in his Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem.

And then last of all, this book of the Revelation, wherein many great
mysteries (that were sealed up, and no man in heaven nor on earth was found
worthy to open, but the Lamb that was slain) are by him revealed.

1. The estate of his Church in her primitive time.

2. And what her great enemies should be, and what she was to suffer at their
hands.

The first being the great red Dragon Satan, reigning in the Pagan Emperors;
by whose bloody persecutions she was forced to fly into the wilderness to
escape from his fury, as in Rev. 12.3, 4, 5, 6, etc. described in Rev. 6.4. by
a red horse, and one fitting on him, that should take peace from the earth.

The second that of Arius and his followers, whose blasphemous doctrines and
malicious persecution against those that opposed the same, continued five
months of years, as in Rev. 9.2, 3, 4, 5. described by a black horse, Rev. 6.5.

The third, this of the Beast and his false prophets, and whorish Church; of
whose abominations and filthinesses of the cup of her fornications, Kings,
Princes, and people of all Nations, have been made to drink, and became
drunken, committing fornication with her, and so their souls became lost for
ever.

And her self also becoming daily drunken with the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs of Jesus Christ, whose bodies she killed, because they would not drink
of her cup, nor commit fornication with her. All which being to continue forty
and two months of years, as Rev. 11.2. and Rev. 13.5. described also in Revel.
6. by a pale horse, etc. ver. 8.

Then what plagues should be powered out upon them all for their murders and
wickedness. And what and when should be their end, and how great their
condemnation.

And which exceeds all (for the comfort of the Church of Christ, which was to
suffer all these things at her enemies hands) how she should be delivered
from her so great and violent oppressions.

And what and how great things her Lord has prepared for her, and promised and
foreshewed her, especially in this book of the Revelations, to be inherited of
her for eternity in the world to come, when he shall appear in his glory.

So, the holy Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists, having from the Lord
perfected his two Testaments (which are his two Witnesses) they having thus
finished their testimony, which was never to done before, nor (from thence
forth) could ever be so done after; and, which might therefore rightly be
called, Finishing their Testimony: and also, because no man, nor Angel from
heaven, might or may preach any thing as the testimony of Gods two Witnesses,
or his Oracles, but what is written and contained in them, it being the whole
counsel of God.

So I say, they having thus finished their testimony, and they being
prophesying in the plain demonstration of the Spirit and of power, turning the
hearts of Gods elect to repentance, that they might be justified from their
sins by faith through his grace in Christ, which by the Spirit, and word of
reconciliation, was ministered to their broken and contrite hearts: And also by
the same Spirit and power convincing the wicked perishing world of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment.

Of judgment, because the prince of this world, whom they serve and obey (he
ruling in their hearts) is judged already.

So those dwellers on earth, being tormented with their just and righteous
sayings, which the Saints and servants of God, the true successors of the holy
Apostles and Church of their time maintained against their ungodly,
superstitious, filthy, flesh-pleasing ways. And the beast, he being now risen
up and seated in the Dragons Throne; and there being nothing more tormenting or
grievous unto him and his false prophets, and those dwellers on earth, then the
true and righteous doctrines and prophecies of these two Prophets, Gods
anointed ones, the light whereof being so contrary to their ways and works.

Therefore as holding it their wisest and surest way, that they should torment
them no longer, they make battle against them, and kill them.

And this they effected and brought to pass, partly by belying their
testimony, giving most false and blasphemous expositions of their sayings,
making the world believe that so they meant; and partly by suppressing those
which stood to maintain their true intent and meaning; and partly by keeping
close their written words, forbidding them to be published or read in any of
the tongues or languages of the Nations, which were under the authority and
power of the beast, that the people should not come to the knowledge and
understanding of them, lest they should see and discover their false and
deceitful delusions.

So the beast and his false prophets, by putting out the light and true intent
of Gods two Witnesses (which was and is their life) they killed them.

Verse. 8. And their carcasses shall remain in the streets of the great City,
which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt; where also their Lord was
crucified.
Only their dead letter, or bare text of their testimony, they would retain
and keep, as we see they have done in their Cells, Temples, and streets of the
Nations and Kingdoms where the beast is worshipped, who with Rome their
chief, do make up that great City; which because of their spiritual
whoredoms and hardness of heart, are described by the names of Sodom and
Egypt, they answering in a spiritual manner unto them both.

And they are charged also with the crucifying of the Lord himself, (even as
the Lord had charged the Scribes and Pharisees of his time with the blood of
Abel) because, like as they imitated Cain in hardness of heart and
wickedness, in their killing the Prophets, as he did his brother: So these,
imitating those of Jerusalem, that crucified the Lord of life, in their
murdering his faithful Servants, his Saints and Martyrs, are justly charged
with crucifying the Lord; they making up one generation with all the Heathen
and wicked murderers, and shedders of righteous blood in the world. For which
cause he says, And in her was found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints, and
of all that were slain upon the earth, Rev. 18.24.

Ver. 9. And there shall of the Tribes, and People, and Gentiles, see their
dead bodies, three days and a half, and shall not suffer their Corpse to be
laid in Monuments.
ANd so, those Nations and Kingdoms, People and Gentiles, under the name of
Catholic Christians, having the dead bodies or letter of Gods two Witnesses
lying in their streets, could, and can yet handle and look upon them, while
those three days and a half, the time, times, and half a time of the beasts
reign lasts: That is to say, (not as the beast, and they of the Church of
Rome expound it) three natural years and a half, which they will have to be
the time of the reign of a great Antichrist of their imagining, (which they
pretend is yet to come) but 3 prophetical years and a half: that is, so many
years of years, which (according to the account of the Hebrews, are, 1260
years. A long time for Gods two Testaments to lie dead among them, and not
suffered to be so read, or heard, as they maybe understood and laid up in the
hearts of the people, where they ought to have been laid and kept, as in their
true and natural graves or tombs, where they should have been buried, not to
be forgotten, but to be kept in memorial to the praise of God, and salvation
of his people.

Ver. 10. And the inhabitants of the earth shall be glad over them, and shall
send gifts one to another; because these two Prophets tormented them that dwell
upon the earth.
NOw the beast and his false prophets, and all those worshippers of the beast
here named, (because of their great number) The Inhabitants of the earth: they
having attained their wills, and prevailed over Gods two Witnesses, and cast
his truth to the ground, (as the Prophet Daniel also foretold) are glad at
their hearts; and, in triumph over them, and for joy that they may now go on
quietly, in setting up and adoring their own inventions. They (as one well
observes) make themselves merry with bonfires, vigils, festivals, processions,
and in token of their joy (as the text says) send gifts one to another.

Kings, Princes and people present and endow the beast and his Church, with
donations, immunities, possessions, gold and silver offerings, etc. And the
beast on the other side requites their love and devotion with Titles, Bells,
Prayers, Pardons, Bulls, and such like.

And the reason of this their wicked and ungodly rejoicing, is, because they
had put out the eyes or light of Gods two Testaments, which are here named two
Prophets, and (before) his two Witnesses, and two Olive Trees, and two
Candlesticks, verse. 3, 4.) that their abominations and filthinesses of their
fornications, might not be discovered and reproved by them, as formerly had
been, which was so tormenting unto them, and is, and will be still, to all such
lovers and believers of lies, (whose hope and conversation, and dwelling, is
here on earth) as nothing can be more.

For so much do the words imply in saying, Because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwell upon the earth.

Ver. 11. And after three days and a half the Spirit of life from God entered
into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon all that
saw them.
ANd after three days and a half (that is to say) after the time and times,
and half a time of the Beasts reign, spoken of in Dan. 7.25, and 12.7. and
mentioned in Rev. 12.14. to be the time of the woman being nourished in the
wilderness.

And so, taking a day in this place, as a time is to be taken in Dan. 7.25.
and Rev. 12.14. Then these three days and a half, in a prophetical
understanding, are (as the three times and a half are) three years and a
half of years.

And therefore, not as they of Rome would have them, three natural years and
a half, which they make to be the time of their expected two witnesses Enoch
and Elias, and their being killed, and lying dead, etc. and of their Churches
desolation, and being in the wilderness, which they pretend they expect shall
come to pass upon the rising of their Antichrist, (a Jew of the Tribe of Dan)
and by him who is to be borne they know not where nor when, and yet must reign
those three years and a half, and do all these things.

Neither can any of those among our selves, which are so near of opinion unto
them of Rome, (concerning the three days and a half, of the two Witnesses
being slain) show any one sound reason why a prophetical year may not be
intended in this place by the name of a day, as well as by the name of a time
in Dan. 7.25. and 12.7. and Rev. 12.14. which I suppose they acknowledge.

And seeing also that a day is a time as well and truly as an hour is a time,
or a month, or a year. Under all which terms the time of the reign of the
great Antichrist is expressed, 1 Ioh. 2.18. Rev. 3.10. and 9.13, 14, etc.

Where John (having seen their great and terrible Army of horsemen, and heard
also the number of them to be twenty thousand times ten thousand) describes
them also to have breast-plates of fire, and of Jacinth, and of brimstone, and
their horses to have heads, as the heads of Lions: and that out of their
mouths issued fire and smoke, and brimstone, and having tails like Serpents,
with heads on them. And that all these (whose power is in their mouths, and in
their tails) were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year,
to slay the third part of men, verse 15, 16, 17, 18.

This is that last hour spoken of in 1 John 2.18. The hour of temptation,
which was to come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth,
Rev. 3.10.

So then if an hour may contain so long a time, why not a day? if a day, then
why not three days and a half as well as three times and a half, seeing three
days and a half are three times and a half?

Neither is it possible that all those things which are to be done within the
time of the two Witnesses lying dead and unburied in the streets of that great
City, should be fulfilled and done in so short a time as three natural
years and a half.

That the Beast and his false prophets (that great Army of enchanting horsemen)
with all those Kings, Princes, and Tribes, and people, and Gentiles, and
inhabitants of the earth, which worship the Beast and his Image, should so
universally, and so publicly in all places make those merriments with
bonfires, festivals, wakes, etc. rejoicing over their own inventions, (and for
that they had put out the light of the truth of Gods two Witnesses which so
troubled them in their ways) and send such great gifts also one to another for
joy thereof, chopping and changing, and making Merchandise of all things, even
of the very souls of men, as it is declared, Rev. 18.12, 13. and as experience
has sufficiently proved they have done, no short time slaying and destroying
with their enchantments and sorceries (the fire, and smoke, and brimstone,
which issued out of the mouths of those monstrous horsemen and their horses,
and the mouths of their tails) the souls of many thousand men, of all
degrees, high and low, and of all nations, even a full third part of the world;
and yet the rest that were not slain by these plagues, repented not of their
works, that they should not worship Devils, and Idols of gold and silver, and
brass, and stone, and wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor walk, nor
repent of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornications, nor
of their thesis.

I say it is not possible that all these things (which are to be done while the
two Witnesses lie slain in the streets) should be accomplished in three common
years and a half, but must have the full time of the Beasts reign for the
sam; the time of those Gentiles treading the holy City under foot, and of the
woman being fed in the wilderness even 1260. years.

After which (as the text says) the Spirit of life from God shall enter into
his two Prophets, and they shall stand upon their feet, etc.

God will then, in, and about that time especially, raise up faithful Scribes
indeed, and Shepherds of understanding hearts, whom he will teach and instruct
in the ways of his truth; and give them so to understand the words and
testimonies of his two Witnesses, as that they shall through the power of his
grace, declare the true intent and meaning of them, and set forth and divide
the same unto the people: (Like unto the good householder, or as the Scribe
taught in the Kingdom of God, that is always provided of things both new and
old, and is ready to minister upon all occasions, in, and at all due times and
seasons, according to the words of Christ, and as Paul once charged Timothy)
that they also may understand it, and walk in the light thereof to the praise
of God, and their own salvation.

And so, the true spiritual and heavenly meaning of Gods two Testaments, their
light and life, (which their enemies had taken away, and kept out of fight and
knowledge so long, being now restored) they his two Prophets walk upon their
feet again, as well to the terror and astonishment of all false and lying
interpreters, as to the reverend fear, admiration and comfort of all the
children and justifiers of wisdom; for so much do the words imply, And great
fear fell upon all that saw them.

And if any man shall marvel how the two Witnesses may be said to prophecy
all the time of the reign of the Beast, and their bodies lie dead in the
streets of his Sodomiticall City all the while, let him consider, that
although they lie dead in his streets, yet they speak and prophecy
notwithstanding, like as did the blood of Abel, and the bones of Elisha. And
whatsoever they have spoken or prophesied in the written words of their
Testimony, either against the Beast and his Church, and all other false
accusers and beliers of them: or as concerning their own restoration, and the
good of the Church and children of God, shall surely come to pass and be
fulfilled, let the Beast and all the rest of them do what they can.

Neither do nor did their bodies lie dead and unburied among the Saints, and
children of the woman that fled into the wilderness, they have been living and
prophesying with them all this while, and their enemies have heard their voice
from thence many and sundry times sounding in their ears, though they hardened
their hearts against it, and sought still by their cunning inquisitions to lay
hold of, shut up in their dungeons, and slay all those that testified the same.

Ver. 12. And I heard a loud voice from Heaven, saying, Come up hither, and
they went up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw them.
NOw the true meaning of the Scriptures contained in the two Testaments of God,
which had been so long obscured by false and lying expositers, shall be so
famously published and made known, and by such plain demonstration of the
Spirit and power of God, as that no power of wickedness whatsoever shall any
longer be able to stop or hinder the glorious course and prosperous proceeding
thereof: but that (as one well observes from the words, And I heard a loud
voice from heaven, saying, Come up hither) it should be more possible for them
to stay Elias Chariot from ascending, or to pull the wind back from pursuing
his point, then to resist the power and wisdom of the same, which shall
vindicate the abuse of the Scriptures, and by the same Spirit and power of God
in the ministry of his faithful servants (as in the strength of cloud) shall
hold them up, and restore them to their spiritual and heavenly meaning again:
And so as the beast with his false Prophets, Sorcerers and liers, (which have
been their long and ancient enemies) shall see the glory of their restoration,
and wonder thereat and die: for so much do the words imply in saying, And they
went up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies saw them.

Ver. 13. And in that hour there was made a great earthquake, and the tenth
part of the City fell, and there were slain in the earthquake names of men
seven thousand, and the rest were east into a fear, and gave glory to the God
of heaven.
ANd in the same hour (says the Spirit of God) there was made a great
earthquake: As much as to say, In the same very time when it should please God
to begin his work of raising up and restoring his two Witnesses to life and
strength again (as before is declared) there should be made a great disturbance
in the Christian world (where the Beast should reign) concerning matters of
religion: And that a tenth part of the City, that is, of the same Christian
world or State where the Beast is worshipped, should fall from the Beast.

And that in this great earthquake and disturbance, and fall of the tenth part
of the City, there should be slain many thousand men, signified here by names
of men seven thousand, for standing up to maintain the true doctrine of Gods
two Testaments against the Beast, and his abominations and lies; and because
they would not worship him nor his image any longer.

And that the rest (meaning those that were in their consciences reproved, and
in their minds enlightened by the evident light of the truth so witnessed) were
cast into a fear, etc. that is, into a reverend fear and admiration, and gave
glory to the God of heaven, praised his name, and used all means both by word
and deed to establish and support the same doctrine of truth, that it might be
yet more publicly known to the world. The words implying, that among these
rest so enlightened, which gave glory to the God of heaven, some were Princes
and Rulers of the people and Nations, who had civil power also to promote this
great work, and made use thereof accordingly.

And the hour or time in the which this great earthquake should be made, and
work of reformation begin, was (as it must needs be understood and
acknowledged) that very time when those great troubles, broils and
bloodsheddings were in Bohemia, Germany, France, Flanders, and others parts, as
also in England, for and concerning the institution of religion, whereof
histories do so clearly report.

Whereupon (as we have seen, and do see by experience) sundry Kingdoms and
States of Christendom (a tenth part at least) that were under the power and
subjection of the Beast, have fallen from him, and forsaken his abominations,
and have set their helping hands to the building of the walls of Jerusalem, and
to restore the morning and evening Sacrifice of praise and thankesgiving to God
in some part and measure answerable to that which was once in the former time,
and in the days of old. And so it is true, a tenth part of the City fell and
is fallen.

For we are to understand, that although the resurrection of the two Witnesses,
or restitution of the true meaning of the Scriptures, is not yet perfected, nor
so known and understood (in every part) and published, as God will have it to
be in this last age of the world; nor the woman, his true Church, come fully
forth of the the Wilderness, nor shall till after the three days and a half
of the beasts reign, mentioned in verse 11. yet the beginning of both was to
be before, and their light and brightness have increased ever since to this
day, and shall yet still more and more daily, even as Antichrist and his Church
with her abominations, consucmeth daily.

For like as the beast and his Church, with that mystery of iniquity, came not
to perfection at once, but by degrees, according as they could, and did by
degrees put out the light of the Scriptures, and extinguish the beauty and face
of the true Church of Christ (the life of the one depending (as it were) upon
the death of the other.) So on the contrary part, it is and shall be now, the
Lord Jesus Christ (with the Spirit of his mouth) is to consume the beast by
degrees, his two Witnesses are to stand upon their feet, and his Church is to
appear out of the wilderness in part and measure sometime before the end of
the beast, that they may by the truth of their testimony, discover him and his
abominations openly to the world, that so those ten horns, or Kings, and
Kingdoms which formerly gave themselves and their power unto the beast, might
by degrees also, some after other, fall from him, and come to hate the whore
with her filthinesses, and to devour her flesh by the Sword, and burn her with
fire, according to the word of the Lord, Rev. 17.6. And that also (for Gods
elect sake) those days (in respect of the evils and great tribulation of them)
might now even while the beast yet remains in his throne, be shortened,
according as Christ foretold, Matthew. 24.

Therefore let not now any of Gods chosen be dismayed at any thing they shall
hear of or see, though in their present apprehensions never so contrary, but
let them know there can nothing prevent God of his purpose, nor hinder or put
by the fulfilling of any part of his word; what he has spoken shall stand,
let the beast, and all the powers of wickedness in the world with him, do what
they can, the truth shall certainly prosper, and the beast with all his power
the Dragon bestowed upon him, of what kind soever, shall prevail no longer.

For who art thou, O great mountain Babel, the perfection and full
accomplishment of all the former Babels and mountains of confusion that have
been in the world? And what art thou before him that fitteth on the white
horse, whose name is called, The Word of God? He with the sharp sword that
proceeds out of his mouth, shall not only go on to consume thee even to the
last hour of thy days determined, but shall also take thee and thy false
prophets, those two hundred thousand thousand Clergymen, that wrought miracles
before thee, and cast ye both alive into the lake of fire, burning with
brimstone, according as it is written, Rev. 19.

And then shall his two Witnesses prophecy in their full strength more
publicly and freely then yet they do, and his Church come fully forth of the
wilderness, that her modest countenance, her holy and heavenly conversation,
may be more clearly seen then yet is or has been for these many hundred years
past.

Ver. 14. The second woe is gone, and behold the third woe will come quickly.
IN Chap. 8. mention is made of three woes that were to come upon the world,
and be within the time of the sounding of the three last of the 7 Trumpets
which the 7 Angels were to sound, v. 13. where John says, And I beheld and
heard an Angel flying through the midst of heaven, saying with a loud voice,
Woe, woe, woe to the inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the other voices of
the Trumpets of the three Angels which are yet to sound.

The first of these three woes being that of Arianisme before mentioned, which
is described in Chap. 9. from ver. 1. to ver. 11. and is said to continue five
months, ver. 5. meaning in the prophetical understanding, months of years,
which according to the Hebrews account, who had thirty days to every month,
and twelve months to every year) do contain the just number of an hundred and
fifty years, which was the time of the Arian persecution, and prevailing of
that heresy, as Histories do plainly report.

This, and no other thing, can rightly be taken for the first Woe; neither may
the persons or workers thereof, be thought to be Saracens, Arabians,
Mahometans, as some name them and would have them, nor any other heathen powers
or people without the outer Court or Pale of the Church: but Christians by
profession, and such as had great place and power in the outward state of the
Church, whereby to work their mischievous Woe in stinging and poisoning the
inhabitants of the earth with their hellish smoky blasphemous doctrine, and to
persecute the Saints of God that opposed the same.

The holy Ghost having from the first verse of this ninth chapter, to the
eleventh verse, made a full description of this first Woe, it being the least
of the three, and no more again to be mentioned, says here, ver. 12. One woe
is past. And because each of the other two would be far greater, he says,
And behold (as requiring all men to hearken and take special notice of it) two
woes more come hereafter. And then presently following, says, ver. 13. And the
sixth Angel sounded, etc. From which to the end of the Chapter, in a very brief
and general manner, is foreshewed not only the frightfull ugliness, and
monstrous deformed shapes of the creatures that should work this second Woe,
and cause that abominable mystery of iniquity to overspread the earth, and how
great the number of their Army of Horsemen should be; but also with what
Devilish weapons of hellish fire, smoke, and brimstone, issuing forth of their
mouths and tails, they should effect it, to the slaying of the the third part
of men.

Which strangely deformed great Army, are not nor may be thought to be that
of the Turks, which have invaded, and do now possess a part of Europe, as
some conceive and publish. Nay, but they are Christians also by profession, as
were the authors of the first woe, even the whole race and generation of the
great Antichrist of Rome, and legions of his false prophets. These are the true
authors and workers of this second Woe; who now began to show themselves in
their fashion when the sixth Angel began to sound, v. 13, 14.

And so in respect of that first Woe of Arianisme, which began with the
sounding of the fifth Angels Trumpet, and continued five months: This of
Antichrist, which was to begin with the sounding of the sixth Angels Trumpet,
and to continue forty and two months, is in Chap. 11.4. called, The second
Woe. Which woe although it was to be, and is more particularly, and much more
exactly and largely discovered in Chapters 13. and 14. and Chap. 17. and 18.
and 19. yet because it is here in Chap. 11. in a general manner fully
revealed, the Lord (to whom all things past and to come are present) says
verse. 14. The second woe is gone.

And because the third woe is to come very soon after, and it being the
greatest of all, he says again, And behold, calling unto (as it were) and
requiring all men to hearken and consider of it, saying, And behold, the third
woe will come; meaning the great day of the Lords coming in his glory to judge
the world, which will be a day of terror unto all those inhabitants of the
earth that repented not of their sins, and sorceries, and murders, etc. that
believed not in him, and of the greatest woe to them that ever came.

For all the woes as they are woes, do belong to the ungodly, and are so
called in respect of them, not of the just; neither will the day of the Lords
coming in glory, be a day of terror or woe to them; but rather on the clean
contrary, the day of their greatest joy, the day which they looked for.

And that they his chosen and faithful, should know and understand upon
certainty, that this great day of the Lord shall not tarry long, but come soon
after the desolation of Antichrist, he adds this word quickly, And behold the
third woe will come quickly.

Which very thing the Lord also confirmed before in another place, by the like
word, immediately, Matthew. 24. where he having spoken of the tyrannous reign of
the selfsame Antichrist, and his false prophets, verse 23, 24. says,
Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened,
and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of heaven shall be shaken, and then shall appear the sign of
the Son of Man in heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn,
and they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power
and great glory, and he shall send his Angels with a great found of a Trumpet,
etc verse 29.13.31.

And as concerning the length of the time that is to be between the end of
Antichrist and the day of the Lords coming in glory, intended by the word
quickly, and the word immediately. The Prophet Daniel (speaking likewise of the
reign of the same Antichrist, and number of his days, as also of the end of
the world, which is to be at the day of the Lords coming) declares it plainly
to contain forty and five years, according to the Chaldees account, Dan. 12.
his words being these; And from the time that the daily Sacrifice shall be
taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate, set up, there shall be a
thousand two hundred and ninety days. Blessed is he that wayteth, and comes
to the thousand three hundred and five and thirty days; (adding to the
thousand two hundred and ninety days, five and thirty days more, which make a
thousand three hundred thirty five) and then says (as being the words of the
Angel of God to Daniel) But go thou thy way till the end be, for thou shall
rest and stand up in the lot at the end of the days, verse. 11, 12, 13. The
Prophet (from the Angel) intending by days, years, and counting the years
after the use of the Chaldeans, and not of the Hebrews, between whom (in three
years and a half, there was as it seems, thirty days difference.

And so, if Daniel was to go his way and rest till the and be, and that he
shall stand up in the lot at the end of the days, then must the end of
necessity be at the end of the days. But Daniel was to go his way till the
end should be, and was to rest, and stand in the lot at the end of the days;
therefore the end of the days must needs be the end, even the end of the world.

And now therefore, if the time between the end of those days of Antichrists
reign, and the end of the world, will indeed for certain be so short as those
Scriptures declare, then where will there be time or place for that glorious
thousand years Monarch of Saints, which so many learned Ministers and zealous
people at this day look for, and hold as an Article of their faith, to be here
in this present world, before the end thereof? Surely, neither the Prophets,
nor Christ, nor any of his Apostles, do admit of such a thing.

Those people and Ministers whatsoever they are for zeal and learning, they
are herein utterly deceived, misunderstanding the Scriptures, which speak
indeed of a glorious Kingdom, and many great and excellent things the Saints
shall receive and possess, not for the limited time of a thousand years in
this corrupt world, but for ever and ever, a thousand and ten thousand times
ten thousand years, even for eternity in the incorrupt world to come, which
world and kingdom shall have no end, as the Scriptures declare, Esaias 9.7. Esaias
45.14, 15, 16 Dan. 7.14.25. Luke 1.32, 33. and sundry other places. Those
Ministers and people therefore which look for such a millenary Monarchical
kingdom in this world, may do well to renounce that Atticle of their faith, as
they call it, and in meeknes and humblenes of heart seek and desire of God, to
give them his holy Spirit of truth, whereby to understand with comfort his word
of truth.

The things that are to be between the end of Antichrists reign, and the end
of the world, are by Christ himself foreshewed in these words, Matthew. 24.
Immediately after the tribulation of those days, shall the Sun be darkened,
and the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven,
and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, etc.

Where the Lord intends by the Sun, the word of his truth, the Gospel of
salvation, which had been darkened by Antichrist, and should now toward the end
of his days, break forth and shine again, to discover his abominations, and
for the saving of Gods elect, (which the Lord also intended before, ver. 22. in
these words, But for the elect sake those days shall be shortened.) And
implying also that it should shine yet more brightly after the end of
Antichrist, and that the greatest part of the time of 45 years, intended by
the word quickly, and the word immediately, shall be for the prosperous
proceeding of the Gospel, and full accomplishing of all Gods elect.

And as the Sun thus shines, so shall the Moon, that is to say, the earth,
and the inhabitants thereof, whose light does depend upon the light of the
Gospel, as the light of the Moon does on the light of the Sun, she shall now
give her light, according also as a holy one in another place says, The Sun
shall suddenly shine again in the night, and the Moon three times in the day,
etc.

And the Stars of God shall appear in heaven, God will raise up in his
Church true and faithful Shepherds, that shall as stars in heaven hold
forth the light and truth of his two Testaments to the word, and so the powers
of the heavens spiritual, will be in their heavenly way and order again.

All these things are plainly implied in the words of Christ, else how can the
Sun be said to be darkened, and the Moon to lose her light, and the Stars to
fall from heaven, etc. immediately after the tribulation of those days of
Antichrist, if they did not, and should not shine forth and give their light
some time before the end of those days, and also after, more especially,
therefore all these things must be. And the true Church of Christ which had
been trodden under foot, and caused to hide her face, as it were, in the
wilderness so long, shall come forth and be seen near like as she was once
in her primitive state, clothed with the Sun, even Jesus Christ and his
righteousness; and having the Moon, that is, all earthly and corruptible
things under her feet, as disregarded, her conversation and affections being
far above them all, in heaven where her Lord is, and from whence she looks
for him to come, and bring all those his rewards with him that he has
promised: And having also on her head a Crown of twelve stars, the true and
sound doctrine of the Lambs twelve Apostles, and of the holy Prophets, walking
in the light and truth thereof, according as they walked with true love toward
God, and also toward men. And so be, as once she was (in these spiritual and
heavenly respects) truly visible, like a City set upon a hill, that cannot be
hid; and as a Candle in a Candlestick which gives light to all in the house,
her faith shining again throughout the world.

And when she shall be in this estate (like as at the first) when she was
traveling with child to bring forth her first fruits unto God and to the Lamb,
the Dragon stood before her to devour her child, and persecute the woman into
the wilderness, as Rev. 12.

So now, when she shall be traveling with child again, ready to bring forth
her last fruits unto God and to Christ, then the Dragon, that old Serpent,
being loosed out of his prison (where he had been bound so many hundred years)
shall go out to deceive the Nations that are in the four quarters of the
earth, Gog and Magog, and gather them together, and compass the camp of the
Saints about, and this the beloved City, till fire descend from God out of
heaven and devour them, as it is written, Ezekiel. 38. and 39. Rev. 16.21. Rev.
20.9.

For as the time of the Churches fairest beauty was but short before the Dragon
so cruelly used her: so shall this time of her renewed beauty be as short
before he shall be loosed to work this his last misehiefe against her.

Then shall the Sun be darkened more then ever it had been, it shall be as
black as Sackcloth of hair, and the Moon shall not only be darkened, but also
be turned into blood, as it is said, Rev. 6.12. according to Joel 2.31. For
great bloodshed shall be upon the earth at this time as the Prophet Esaias also
says.

And the Stars, that is, such as are in outward place and name, as stars
and lights in the Church, shall like untimely figs, fall from Christian
religion to Mahometisme, or other such like heathenish Apostasy, and then
shall the powers of the Heavens be shaken.

These are the signs that shall go before the great and terrible day of the
Lord, as those Scriptures before mentioned declare.

And then those Armies of Gog and Magog being destroyed by fire from heaven,
and the Devil that deceived them being cast into the lake of fire, the seventh
Angel shall sound the great and last trumpet, as follows.

Verse. 15. And the seventh Angel sounded with a Trumpet, and there were made
loud voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are made our Lords,
and his Christ's, and he shall reign for ever and ever. Amen.
MAny great things are to be done at the sounding of this Trumpet: For this is
it of which St. Paul says, We which are alive, and remain unto the coming of
the Lord, shall not prevent them that are asleep, for the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we which are are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet
the Lord in the air, and so shall we be even with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4.15, 16,
17.

And again, Behold, I show you a mystery, we shall not all sleep, but we shall
all be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump:
for the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we
shall be changed, etc. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52, 53.

And Christ says, Mat. 24. Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in
heaven, and then shall all the Tribes of the earth mourn, and they shall see
the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory,
and he shall send his Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall
gather together his elect from the four winds, etc. verse. 30, 31.

And again, Rev. 10. And the Angel which I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the
earth, lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and
ever, who created heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth, and
the things that therein are, and the sea and the things that are therein, that
there should be time no longer. But in the days of the voice of the seventh
Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the mystery of God should be finished, as
he has declared to his servants the Prophets, verse 5, 6, 7.

When this great and last trumpet shall sound, mentioned in all those places
before cited, and whereof the Prophet Esaias long before this, spoke, Esai. 27.13.

Then shall all those great things be done, spoken of in the same places. The
Lord shall come in his glory, and then he shall sit in the throne of his
glory: the dead both good and bad shall be brought before him, and be judged:
Then shall all the Tribes and kindreds of the earth, even the whole multitude
of the ungodly, that ever had been on the earth, and they also which pierced
him, see him, and mourn and wail because of him, and he shall send his Angels
with the sound of the same great Trumpet, and they shall gather his elect
together from the four winds, etc.

Then there shall be time for repentance no longer: but the great mystery of
God shall be finished, even that great mystery of the redemption of all Gods
chosen ones, the whole house of Israel spiritual, as he had declared to his
servants the Prophets, and whereof, they all (that have been since the world
began) have spoken, according as it is testified of them, Luke 1.69, 70, 71,
etc. Acts 3.21. and as their own written prophesies do show more abundantly.

And this is that redemption wherewith the Lord himself does comfort his
chosen, he having foreshewed all the sig^^^ that should go before the same,
saying, And when ye see these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads, for your redemption draws near. Then know ye that the
kingdom of God is nigh at hand, Luke 22.28, 31.

Now the kingdoms of this world so long time usurped by Monarchs and
Antichrists, shall be made the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he
shall reign for ever and ever.

The kingdoms of this world, in respect of the creation and works of God, for
so by right they did always belong to the Lord, and to his anointed the Prince
of the Covenant, though they have been usurped and polluted by Satan and his
powers of wickedness, which now shall be removed, and the earth and heavens
cleansed; all things shall be new, as it is written, Esaias 65.27. and 60.22. 2
Pet. 3.13. Rev. 21.1.5.

This corrupt world shall be purged, and made incorruptible, as these our
corrupt bodies shall, and instead of corruption and evil, righteousness and
holiness shall dwell therein. And so in this consideration (as the state shall
be in the restitution of all things, differing from that it is now) it shall be
another world, not this, and therefore the Scripture calls it, the world to
come, Heb. 2.5, etc.

This present world is not that world which was before the Flood, as Peter
says, The world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished, 2 Pet.
3.6. and yet we all know, and so did Peter, that (in respect of the works of
Gods creation of the heavens and the earth) it is the same, though in some
other kind of respect, it is not the same, but another.

So the world to come, though it shall be another world far differing from
this world in state and condition, yet in those respects of creation, it will
be the same.

And therefore it may rightly be said, in the day (when the Lord shall come to
reign) The Kingdoms of this world are made our Lords, and his Christ's, and he
shall reign for ever and ever. And because others, to whom they belong not,
do now possess them: And they with the whole earth, unto the utmost ends
thereof, by right of inheritance, are the Lords, as it is written, I will
declare the decree the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee, Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shall
break them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel,
Psalm. 2.7, 8, 9. And again, In his days shall the righteous flourish, and
abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures; he shall have dominion also
from sea to sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth, they that dwell
in the wilderness shall bow before him, and the enemy shall lick the dust,
etc. Psalm. 72.

And the Prophet Daniel declares, saying, I saw in the night vision, and
behold one like unto the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to
the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was
given him dominion and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations and
languages should serve him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which
shall not passaway, and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed, Dan.
7.13.14.

Again, he having spoken of the four Monarchs that in this world should usurp
the kingdom, says, But the Saints of the most High shall take the Kingdom
and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever, verse. 18.

And again, And the Kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom
under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of Saints of the most
High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all dominions shall serve
and obey him, verse. 27.28.

This Kingdom of Christ and his Saints is to be after the four Monarchs are
ended, as the Prophet does plainly declare: and that it being once set up,
shall continue much more time then they all, it shall not pass away, nor be
destroyed, but remain for ever, even for ever and ever: It is to have no end,
as the Angel Gabriel from heaven testified to Mary, saying, Fear not Mary, for
thou have found favor with God, and behold thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus, he shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him
the throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1.30, 31, 32, 33.

And according to all this spoke the Lord before by the Prophet Nathan to
David, saying, And it shall come to pass when thy days be expired that thou
must go to be with thy Fathers, that I will raise up thy seed after thee,
which shall be of thy sons, I will establish his kingdom, he shall build me
an House, and I will establish his throne for ever. I will be his Father, and
he shall be my Son, and I will not take my mercy away from him, as I took it
from him that was before thee: but I will settle him in mine house and in my
kingdom for ever, and his throne shall be established for evermore, 1 Chronicles.
17.11, 12, 13, 14.

And in another place the Lord God confirms it again, saying, Also I will
make him my first born, higher then the Kings of the earth, my mercy will I
keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand fast with him, his seed
also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven,
etc. Psalm. 89.27, 28, 29.

And again, My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone
forth of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto
David, his seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me, it
shall he established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in
heaven, verse. 34, 35, 36, 37.

And as one Apostle testifies from another Psalm, saying, But unto the Son
he says, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a Scepter of righteousness
is the Scepter of thy kingdom, thou have loved righteousness, and hated
iniquity, therefore God, even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows, Heb. 1.8, 9. Psalm. 45.6.

Many more great and excellent things are spoken of this glorious kingdom of
Christ, and his Saints, which (as plainly appears by all these Scriptures) is
to have no end, but is to endure for ever, even for ever and ever world without
end. And shall be manifested when the 7th Angel sounds the great and last
trumpet, even when Christ shall come in his glory, and all his holy Angels with
him, and then shall he sit in the throne of his glory, as himself says,
Matthew. 25.

And so it is plain, that it cannot be understood of this world, but must
needs be of the world to come, when all rule, all authothority and power, all
enemies, are subdued under Christ's feet, which in this world are not, nor can
be until the end thereof, as the Apostle yet further confirms, saying, For
unto the Angels ha^h he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we
speak, Heb. 2.5.

By which words he first shows plainly, that all their doctrine of the Gospel
tended to an estate of inheritance in a world to come, not this present world,
and that it was not to be in subjection to the Angels.

But as he says, One in a certain place testifies, saying, What is man that
thou art mindful of him, or the Son of Man that thou visitest him: thou
made him little lower then the Angels, thou crownedst him with glory and
honor, thou did set him over the works of thy hands, thou have put all
things in subjection under his feet, etc. ver. 6, 7. according to Psalm. 8.4, 5,
6, 7, 8, 9.

And then argues, saying, For in that he put all in subjection under him, he
left nothing that is not put under him.

But now we see not all things put under him (says he) But we see Jesus (who
was made a little lower th^n the Angels for the suffering of death) crowned
with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God might taste death for every
man: for it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in
bringing many sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation perfect
through sufferings, ver. 8, 9, 10.

Now is Jesus Christ crowned with glory and honor in the throne of God the
Father at his right hand in the heavens, where he is to fit and reign with him
until he has put all enemies under his feet, as in Psalm. 110.1,

Not only all the Monarchs and powers of wickedness, but also all enemies
besides, and death which now has dominion over the bodies of the Saints, it
being the last enemy, as in another place he proves, saying, For as in Adam
all died, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; but every man in his own
order, Christ the first fruits, then afterward they that are Christ's at his
coming.

Then comes the end (says he) when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom
to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down all rule and authority and
power. And then reasons from the words of the Psalm 110.1. For he must reign
until he has put all enemies under his feet: The last enemy that shall be
destroyed, is death, etc. 1 Cor. 15.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, etc.

Where the Apostle proves plainly, that the Kingdom which Christ at his
coming is to deliver up to his Father, when all his enemies are subdued under
his feet, is the Kingdom where he is now sitting in the throne of God the
Father at his right hand, of which David said, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit
thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool: and therefore
he calls it, The Kingdom, that is to say, The supreme Kingdom and throne
of God; not his own, which he is to receive and take possession of with his
Saints, in the world to come, when all things are put under his feet. Nay,
herein he is to be settled for ever, as God promised his Father David, I will
settle him in my House, and in my Kingdom for ever, and his throne shall be
established for evermore.

This is that of which himself speaks and promises, to his Saints, saying;
And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as the Father appointed unto me, that ye
may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel, Luke 22.29, 30.

And where he says again, To him that overcommeth will I grant to sit with me
in my throne, even as I also overcame, and am set with my Father in his throne,
Rev. 3.21.

And again, He that overcommeth, and keeps my words unto the end, to him will
I give power over the Nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron, and
as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers, even as I received
of my Father, Rev. 2.26, 27. According to Psalm. 2.8, 9. Where the Lord God also
says of him, notwithstanding all those his enemies his opposites, Yet have I
set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, verse. 6.

By which testimonies a plain distinction is made between God the Fathers
throne and kingdom, and the Sons kingdom and throne. In the throne of God
no man or Angel ever sat, nor shall sit, but Christ the Son of David (David's
and our Lord) he only obtained it till all enemies were subdued. But in the
throne of the Son, the Saints may and shall sit with him, as the Son has
promised.

Now is the Son to be substitute under God the Father, as his King, his
special anointed King and first borne, to sit upon his holy hill of Sion, in
the throne of his Father David, to reign over the house of Jacob, whereof
David is one. He and they his redeemed, ruling the Nations with a rod of Iron.
Which throne and kingdom God will so establish, as that it shall remain for
ever as the Sun, and as the Moon before him, even for ever and ever world and
kingdom without end, as he promised.

And so (God having thus put all things under his Son Christ (himself only
excepted) and the Son having resigned and delivered up the supreme kingdom and
throne wholly to God the Father) now is the Son also himself to be subject
unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.27, 28.

And herein shall the Son lose no honor: for as he is God he is the same for
ever, as before, when he was upon the earth; having taken our nature upon him;
he prayed and gave thanks, and was obedient: for although he were the Son,
yet learned he obedience, as it is written.

So now he with his redeemed, his Spouse the Church, is to be subject unto
God the Father, and to honor him as his head, even as the Spouse his Church is
to be subject unto him, and to honor him as her head.

And here now let me ask the Millenaries a question or two, and first this;
That if these things be so, and that the coming of Christ, and his delivering
up the Kingdom to God the Father, and the end of the world, and resurrection
of the dead, shall be so together at one and the same time, without any
distance of time, either days or hours between, as Paul, 1 Cor. 15.22, 23,
24, 25, 26, etc. in plain words expresses them.

Then I ask, Where they will have time or place for their thousand years
Monarch, which they expect shall be between the coming of Christ, and the end?

A second question is, That if at the very time of Christ's coming, the dead in
Christ shall be raised, and his elect that are living be changed in a moment,
and caught up together with them, to meet the Lord in the air, and so be ever
with the Lord, as the same Apostle also says, 1 Thessalonians. 4.15, 16, 17. Then I
ask, Where they will have more Saints to die and to rise again from the dead a
thousand years after, as they teach?

A third question, if Christ unto them that look for him, shall appear the
second time without sin unto salvation, as it is said, Heb. 9.28. Then I ask,
where they will have a third time of coming to such purpose, which some of
them imagine shall be?

A fourth question is, That if Christ at his appearing, and his kingdom, when
he comes in his glory, and all his holy Angels with him, and shall sit in the
throne of his glory, and all Nations and people both quick and dead, be brought
before him, and judged according to the words of Christ, Matthew. 25.31, 32, etc.
and Paul, 2 Timothy 4.1. Then I ask how they can put it off to a thousand years
after his appearing, or make it a thousand years a doing?

A fifth question which is this, And if they do believe, that although the
people and children of this world here marry, and are given in marriage, and
die, yet in the world to come, which is to be in subjection unto Christ, they
who shall be counted worthy to obtain the same, and the resurrection from the
dead, as Christ himself says, shall neither marry nor be given in marriage,
nor die any more, but be as the Angels in heaven, etc. Luke 20.34, 35, 36. Then
I ask how they will make this their opinion (That there shall be a multitude of
people of all sorts, as now, possess that world after the resurrection of the
just, which shall for a thousand years space successively marry, and be given
in marriage, and die,) to stand and agree with that which Christ speaks, and
not rather be clean contradictory to the same?

And as touching the first resurrection, and living and reigning with Christ a
thousand years, spoken of Rev. 20. it is clear by the very words of the text,
that the holy Ghost speaks of, and intends a resurrection spiritual of the
soul, which the Saints living here, did, and do partake of according to the
words of Christ, John 5. where he says, The hour is coming, and now is,
when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it
shall live, verse 25.

And then afterward says; Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming in the
which all that are in the graves shall hear his voyes, and shall come forth;
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil unto the resurrection of damnation, verse 28, 29.

Where the first resurrection which is spiritual of the soul, and the second
universal resurrection of the body, are both of them plainly and distinctly
described.

And the Apostle Paul to the Saints of the Church of Colossia, says, And ye
are complete in him which is the head of all Principality and power, in whom
also ye are circumcised with the circumcision made without hands, in putting
off the body of the sins of the flesh, by the circumcision of Christ, buried
with him in Baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of
the operation of God; who has raised him from the dead. And you being dead,
has he quickened, together with him, Col. 2.10, 11, 12, 13.

And Coloss. 3. he says, If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God, verse. 1.

So Rev. 20. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of
Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the Beast, nor his
Image, nor had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands, and
they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years, verse. 4.

And then says, This is the first resurrection, Blessed and holy is be that
has part in the first Resurrection: for on such the second death has no
power; but they shall be Priests of God, and of Christ, and shall reign with
him a thousand years, verse. 5, 6.

Where the Lord also speaks to living men, and of them, who having their part
here in the first resurrection spiritual, and suffering for the testimony of
Christ, and dying with him (as Paul in another place says; For the rejoicing
that I have in Christ Jesus, I die daily. And again, For thy sake, O Lord, are
we slain all the day long, and counted as sheep to the slaughter) may herein
be much comforted in respect of the promise, that the second death shall have
no power on them, according to that in John 5. He that hears my word, and
believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, but is passed from death to life, verse. 24.

So here, Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, on
such the second death has no power, but they shall be Priests of God, and of
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.

Whereby it is manifest the Lord speaks to men living in the body, and of
them: such as having their part here in this The first Resurrection (for there
can be but one first resurrection) who although now, during the time of the
reign of the great Antichrist especially, which was to be a thousand years at
least, they (as touching their bodies) should for the word of God) and witness
of Jesus Christ, be beheaded, slain, etc. and for the hope fake in Christ,
die daily: yet in the spirit as touching the soul, live and reign with
Christ, as Paul says, dying, and behold we live, etc. 2 Cor. 6.9. Again, for
ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.4.

And when the thousand years are expired, and Satan loosed out of his prison
to go unto the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to
the battle of the great day of God Almighty, according to Rev. 16.14. and
20.8.9.

Then the Lord coming in his glory, all that are in the graves, even every
one, small and great, shall hear his voice, and shall come forth. They that
through the grace and power of the Spirit of God in the new birth and first
resurrection, have done good, unto the resurrection of life eternal, in
respect of their body also, united now to their soul, they being found written
in the book of life.

And they that have done evil (those rest of the dead, that had no part in the
first resurrection spiritual from the death by sin, and so, not being found
written in the book of life) unto the resurection of condemnation in the lake
of fire burning with brimstone, which is the second death.

They now have a resurrection, and live again, though a miserable dying life,
body and soul for ever.

And that the first resurrection, Rev. 20. cannot possibly be meant of the
bodies of any that are to rise from the dead, as the Millenaries would have it,
we may perceive plainly by the words of the Text, verse 4. where John says
not, And I saw the souls that were he headed, as if that could be; neither
does he say, And I saw the bodies that were beheaded, and they lived, etc. But
his words are, And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded, etc. that is,
of those whose bodies were beheaded, of which souls he says, And they lived
and reigned with Christ a thousand years, etc.

The soul can no more truly be said to rise from the dead with the body when
it shall rise from the dead, nor for the body, then it can be said to be
beheaded with it, or for it.

For although in some other cases when bodies and souls are living together,
it may be said, as in Genesis 46. All the souls of the house of Jacob which
came into Egypt, were threescore and ten, verse 27. in such like cases as this,
the soul being the principal part of man, and the body living and moving
together with it, may rightly and truly be named for both; yet in other cases
not so.

And to name the soul and say, when a body is beheaded, or dies, the soul is
beheaded, or dies; or when the body shall arise from the dead, the soul
rises from the dead, it is to say and speak a very untruth.

When the bodies of those Saints which slept, arose from the dead at the time
of Christ's resurrection, it is not said their Souls arose, but their Bodies
only, Matthew. 27.52. And the graves were opened, and the bodies of many Saints
which slept arose, and appeared unto many.

The soul cannot with any truth or sense of reasonable understanding, be
named for the body, nor for both in those cases. Nay, all the Millenarians in
the world, how learned or orthodoxall soever they are accounted, are not able
to prove this thing, except they hold and can prove (as some have been so bold
of late to affirm and publish) that the soul of man is mortal, and dies
when the body dies; and so lies dead in the grave with the body, until the
resurrection of the body, and then so to rise with it, and be named for both.

For one corrupt opinion, or point of false doctrine, brings always more of
the like nature with it.

But I leave this to their consideration, and come again to the Text, to see
what it further says.

Ver. 16. And the four and twenty Elders which sat on their seats in the sight
of God, fell on their faces, and adoring God, said; We thank thee Lord God
omnipotent, which art, which wast, and which shall come; because thou have
received thy great power and brightness.
NOw, the seventh Angel having sounded the great and last Trumpet, the Lord
being come in his glory, and the Kingdoms of this world made his, who is to
reign for ever and ever world without end. Hereupon the four and twenty Elders,
which are Moses and the Prophets (as the four Beasts mentioned in Chap. 4.9.
are the four Evangelists) fall down on their faces before the throne of God,
adoring him for that his judgments against Antichrist and his worshippers,
which they by the sevenfold Spirit of Majesty given them of God, spoke of and
denounced from time to time against them, were now justified upon them. And the
everlasting Kingdom of the Lord their God, whose dominion reaches from Sea to
Sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth, is now set up for evermore,
according to all that he had foreshewed them, and by the same Spirit spoken by
them. Hereupon they falling down, and adoring the justification of God, break
forth into praises and thanksgiviving, saying; We thank thee Lord God
omnipotent, which art, which wast, and which shall come; because thou have
received thy great power and brightness, etc.

Ver. 17. And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of
the dead to be judged, and to render reward to thy servants the Prophets and
Saints, and to them that fear thy Name, little and great, and to destroy them
that have corrupted the earth.
ANd notwithstanding the rage and fury of those great Monarchs of the world,
that like wild Boares of the Forest, that rose up against the Lord, and against
his people and City Jerusalem; and of those Beasts of the field which said
against the Lord and his anointed, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast
their cords from us. And of all those Antichristian powers of so long
continuance, that have with the rest (to fill up their measure) rejected the
Lord, and trod his truth to the ground, and made the holy City of his Saints
as a street to trample upon. And of all that innumerable multitude of Gog and
Magog; which that old Serpent the Devil and Satan shall at last gather
together with their mighty men and chief Captains, against this great day of
the Lord; bringing them down and compassing the camp of his Saints about, and
the beloved City; intending to destroy, root out and take the prey and spoil
of all.

These all (who are here described, as they are also in Psa. 2. by the name of
Gentiles: And the Gentiles were angry, etc.) are now to endure the wrath and
judgment of him who with justice judges. The great day of his wrath being
come, and the time of the dead to be judged. Now the Lord, for whose glory this
day is made, will render unto every man justly and truly according to their
works and ways wherein their hearts have walked and delighted.

First, to his Servants, his Prophets, his Saints and Martyrs that through
faith and patience have overcome, their just reward which for his name and
promise sake is right and due unto them. And next, unto all those heathen
Gentiles and people of all nations and kindreds of the earth, under what name,
and of what profession of religion soever they pass, Jews, Catholics,
Protestants, or other, whose hearts are hard, unrepentant and unbeleeving, who
by their evil deeds have corrupted the earth; their just reward also, and
recompense which to their works and ways is rightly due unto them. For so
much do the words conclude in saying, And to render reward unto thy servants
the Prophets and Saints, and to them that fear thy Name little and great, and
to destroy them that have corrupted the earth.

And hereby it is also manifest, that at the same very time when the last
trumpet shall sound, and the Lord shall come in his glory, the dead both good
and bad shall be raised and judged without any distance of years or days
between, the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised, as Paul says.

And although the salvation of the just, and sufferings of the ungodly, shall
continue for a thousand, yea and ten thousand times ten thousand thousands of
years, even for everlasting, as the Scriptures declare; yet the judgment and
sentence passing, will require no longer time (in the hands of the Lord) then
one day, as the Scriptures always express it.

And that we should know for certain, that this day will come at the same time
when Satan with his Armies of Gog and Magog shall be upon Christendom,
compassing the Camp of the Saints about; and fire shall come down from God out
of heaven, and devour them.

The holy Ghost in Rev. 20.9, 10, 11, 12, etc. does plainly declare it. And to
the end that we should take notice thereof, he says, chap. 21.6. It is done,
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, etc. And in chap. 16. upon the
same coming down of the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world unto the
judgment of the great day, it follows, verse. 17. It is done. And in Ezekiel.
39. upon the same destruction of Gog and Magog, it follows also verse 8.
Behold, it is come, and it is done, says the Lord. This is the day whereof I
have spoken.

Which day will be the last day of this world, spoken of by Martha, Luke 11.24.
and whereof Christ says; But of that day and hour knows no man, no not the
Angelt of heaven, but my Father only. Matthew. 24. For although the Lord has
revealed, and men may know the year, yet the day and hour can no man know.

And as in this last day, this present world shall end; so in it shall the world
to come, and the kingdom of Christ and his Saints begin, as it is also
declared, Matthew. 25.31, 32, 33, etc. 2 Timothy 4.1. And then shall be the
restitution of all things which God has spoken by the mouth of his holy
Prophets that have been since the world began; as it is also written, Acts
3.20.21. There shall be new heavens and a new earth, and Jerusalem shall be
made a praise in the earth.

And great shall be the difference between the estate of this world to come
which shall be in subjection to Christ, and wherein he shall reign, and
righteousness shall dwell for ever world without end; and the now present
world wherein the heathen and Pagan Monarchs and Antichrists reign, and
iniquity bears rule, and dwells.

And for any to teach or persuade the Christian State now present, as some in
their Sermons and Printed books have done, and do, that the Kingdom of
Christ and his Saints whereof the Prophets have spoken, shall be in this
present world for a thousand years before the last day, is to teach and
persuade to a Doctrine against Christ, and not for him, whose Kingdom is not
of this world, which is not, nor will be, being corrupt, subject unto him.

Antichrist and his Clergy of false prophets, that have taken upon them as
much as ever did any, the name of the only true Church of Christ in the world,
have been as a great Monarch in this present world for a thousand years past
already, and let them take it for their portion of happiness. But let no true
Christian Ministers, state or people, be of such a mind to teach such
doctrine, or look for such a thing here again; But rather fly the glory and
shadow of this world, and look for the eternal Kingdom in the world to come,
ready to be revealed when Christ shall come at the last day, which I verily
believe (upon the grounds before mentioned) many thousands now living, shall
live to see. And so I rest their Christian friend, wishing them all true
happiness, grace and truth, and peace in Christ. Amen.

Now having here a little space, let me put a question or two more to the
Millenaries;

As first, if when God shall have created new Heavens, and a new Earth,
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, there shall be no more thence an
infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days, as the Prophet
Esaias says, Esa. 65.20. Then I ask, how there can thence an infant or child of
days, or an old man die, as they will have it in their Millenary estate?

Again, if the resurrection of the ungodly shall not be till the thousand
years kingdom of Christ (which the Millenaries make to be the day of
judgment) shall be expired, as they teach: Then I ask, what time they will
have for that great multitude of ungodly, not risen from the dead, to be
judged? and who they mean Christ shall be (all that time of a thousand years)
a judging? Or how he can judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and
kingdom, as Paul says, if the dead be not all raised at his appearing and
kingdom, and brought before him to be judged? or why he should need a thousand
years or days time of pawsing in judgment, or more then one true natural
day, though there shall be a thousand and ten thousand times ten thousand
years of execution and suffering; yea years and days, and nights
everlastingly, as it is written, Matthew. 25. and sundry other places.

FINIS.

