Die Jovis, 6 Januarii. 1647.
Additionall Directions of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, For
the Billeting of the Army, when they are upon a March, or settled in their
Quarters.
1 THat when soever any Forces shall be by virtue of an Order from the
General, or from such as he shall appoint, upon a march or removing Quarters,
they shall at the Towns or Parishes where they shall be ordered to quarter, be
billetted in the usual way by the Quartermaster or superior Officers,
according to the directions of the Constables or chief civil Officers of the
said Towns or Parishes; And the respective Inhabitants where any of the said
Soldiers shall be so billetted shall receive them, and for one night, or two
nights at the most, shall find them their ordinary family diet, wherewith the
Soldier shall be contented, and pay for the same at the rate of six pence per
diem for a Foot Soldier, and twelve pence per diem for a Trooper, and hay
only for his Horse.

2 That for the first fortnight after the Forces shall be drawn into
Garrisons, Towns and Cities, (according to the Directions of Parliament) and
until they shall be furnished with pay to enable them to maintain themselves,
they shall in the same manner be quartered, received and provided for, and at
the same rates aforesaid, by such Inhabitants upon whom they shall be billetted
by the Magistrate of the place, or by their own Officers, in case the Civil
Magistrate shall resuse to do it; the Officers engaging to the Inhabitants to
see the Quarters discharged at the said Rates.

3 That after the said fortnight is expired, or after the Forces shall be
furnished with pay as aforesaid, in any Garrisons, Towns, or Cities, where any
Forces shall come by Order, as aforesaid, to be at a settled Quarter, so many of
them as cannot be conveniently disposed of to Innes; Alehouses, Tavernes, or
Victualling-houses, shall be billetted at other houses by the chief Magistrate
of the place, or (if he shall refuse to do it) by the chief Officer present
with the said Forces; and in case of any abuse or inequality therein, the said
Magistrate, or next Justice of Peace, to have power to order and alter the
proportions of billetting to the several Inhabitants, as he shall find most
fit and equal: And the persons where they shall be so billetted, shall receive
them accordingly; but shall not after the two first nights from the Soldiers
coming thither (for which the Soldier is to pay at the Rates aforesaid) be
liable to find the Soldier any diet or Horse-meat (except by agreement
betwixt him and the Soldier, and at such Rates as they shall agree upon) but
shall only entertain the Soldier with lodging, stable room, and the use of
their ordinary fire and candlelight. And in case any such Inhabitants be
agrieved therewith, and desire to have no Soldiers at all in his house (he or
the Magistrate providing such Billet for the Soldier elsewhere within the
Town) or at any Village adjacent (within such distance as the chief Officer
commanding in the Quarter shall allow of) such Inhabitant shall have his house
wholly free.

Die Jovis, 6 January. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That these Additionall
Directions be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the old Bayley. 1647.


