ECCE THE NEW TESTAMENT OF OUR LORDS and SAVIORS, THE House of COMMONS at
WESMINSTER, And the SUPREME COUNCIL at WINDSOR.

Newly Translated out of their own Heathenish Greek Ordinances, with their
former proceeding; Diligently compared and revised, and appointed to be read in
all Conventicles.

Cum Privilegio.

Printed in the Year, 1648.

THE NEW TESTAMENT OF Our Lords and Saviors, etc.
CHAPTER I. The Genealogy of the Parliament, from the year 1640. to this
present 1648. The Conception of their brain by the influence of the Devil,
and borne of Hell and Damnation when they were espoused to virtue.
1 THe Book of the Generation of JOHN PIM, the son of Judas, the son of
Beelzebub.

2 PIM begat a Parliament, a Parliament begat Strowd, Strowd begat Hazelrig,
and Hazelrig begat Hollis.

3 Hollis begat Hotham, Hotham begat Martin, Martin begat Corbet.

4 Corbet begat Stapleton, Stapleton begat Lewis, and Lewis begat Clotworthy.

5 Clotworthy begat Glin, Glin begat Long, Long begat Waller, and Waller begat
Massey.

6 Massey begat Pointz, Pointz begat Skippon, Skippon begat Cromwell, and
Cromwell begat Fairfax.

7 Fairfax begat Rainsborow, Rainsborow begat Ireton, and Ireton begat Whaley.

8 Whaley begat Desborow, Desborow begat Hammon, Hammon begat Rich, and Rich
begat Watson.

9 And Watson begat Baxter and his Brethren, about the time that he was sent
for by the Houses to London, to carry away the spoils of the City.

10 And after they came to London, Baxter begat Wilson, Wilson begat Manby, and
Manby begat Estwick.

11 So that all the Generations, since Pim to Estwick, are three Generations;
the first Generation was, when this Parliament began to sit, and pretended a
REFORMATION; the second Generation was, when this Parliament had sat five
years, and made a perfect DEFORMATION; the third Generation now is, when this
Parliament must render an account of their Treasons, and their heads suffer an
EXALTATION.

12 Now the birth, or beginning of this Parliament, was on this wise: when as
their Mother, the Kingdom of England, was allied or espoused to a great desire
of reforming abuses; and had therefore nominated their Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses; who (as soon as ever they came together) were found with child of
Schism, Sedition, and Rebellion.

13 Then King Charles, being a just man, and not willing to have himself and
People ruinated, was minded to dissolve them.

14 But while he thought on these things, behold an Angel of darkness, in the
shape of an Angel of Light, appeared to him, saying; King Charles, these men
intend nothing but thine and the Kingdoms good, therefore fear not to give
them thy power, for what they now undertake is of the Holy Ghost.

15 And they shall bring forth a son, and shall call his name Reformation; he
shall save the people from their sins.

16 Now all this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken long
ago in the Prophecy of Ow^well ^ins:

When England does swimm^ in floods
Of Plenty, and grows proud of goods,
Then from their sleep they shall be waked,
To know themselves both blind and naked:
Christ's Church must know some misery,
There shall be a doleful Tragedy;
Then Goblers shall leave their Last
In Sermons up their G^ll to east;
Mag-pies and Parrats then shall prate
Both of the Eagle and the State,
Until they bring things in conclusion
To much Disorder and Confusion.
17 Then Charles being thus deluded, did as the Angel had bidden him, and gave
countenance to his Parliament, and knew not their evil Intentions, till they
had brought forth their firstborn, which was Rebellion, and he called his
Name Treason.

CHAP. II. The wise Conspirators direct the people to Petition to them; they
worship them, and offer their Presents: King Charles flies toward York, with
his Wife and Children.
1 NOw when this parliament began at Westminster, in the fifteenth year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, behold there came a company of
foolish men out of Buckinghamshire,

2 Saying, Where is he that is borne King of England? for we have heard that
he will not consent to his Ruin, and are come to scold with him.

3 When the Kings friends heard this, they were troubled, and all Britain with
them.

4 But when the King had gathered a chosen company together, he went and
demanded the five Members that were chiefly opposite against him.

5 But they said unto him, they are not here; for thus it was purposely ordered.

6 Then the King, when he had summoned his Privy Council, diligently
enquired of them, what was to be done?

7 And he called those that came out of the Countries, and said unto them, Go
home to your houses, and enquire of your own Consciences, whether these your
undertakings are pious; and you find they are so, bring word again, and I
shall willingly assent.

8 When they heard the King, they departed, and lo the same Spirit of Error
that first possessed them, went before them, till it came and stood over the
House where the Commons were assembled together.

9 And when they saw the Spirit, they rejoiced with an exceeding great Joy.

10 And when they were come into the House of Commons, they saw Pim, Hazelrig,
Hollis, and Strowd sitting together, and they fell down and worshipped them;
and when they had given them many thanks for their meeting; they presented unto
them that which they preferred above all things, to wit, Gold.

11 And being warned by their fears, not to go back and tell the King, they
departed into their own Country another way.

12 And when they were departed, behold the Angel of the Lord appeared to King
Charles, and said, Arise and take thy Princely Children and their Mother, and
fly into the North, for the Londoners joining with thy Parliament, will seek
to destroy thee and them.

13 Then the King arose, and took his Wife, and departed, accompanied with
some faithful friends.

14 Then the Houses being vexed they could not work their ends upon him, were
exceeding wroth, and sent forth and stirred up the minds of the people of
England to Rebellion, and slew and imprisoned all those that would not be
confederate with them.

15 But while these things were acting, behold an Angel of the Lord appeared to
the King, and said unto him, Arise and get the friends thou have together, and
arm thy loyal subjects for thy preservation.

16 Then he arose and strengthened himself, proclaimed his Rebellious
Parliament Traitors, and came to the City of York.

CHAP. III. The Sectarian Clergy incense the people against the King, the
Pharisaicall Common Council wish the rude multitude to come to be baptized of
them.
1 IN those days came Saltmarsh the Antinomian, and Dell the Independent, and
Preached to the Citizens of London,

2 Saying, Now is the time that ye ought to stand up for the truth, and to
help the Parliament forward with your Plate and money.

3 For these were they of whom Saint Peter Prophesied; That have eyes full of
Adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls, and
hearts they have exercised with covetous practices; cursed children, which have
forsaken the right way, and gone astray following the way of Balaam, the son
of Bozor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15.

4 And the same Saltmarsh and Dell had large Stipends allowed them, and were
clothed with Iniquity as with Raiment.

5 Then went out to them all the Inhabitants of London, and all the Region
round about.

6 And were by them seasoned with Seditious Principies, covering their sins.

7 And when they saw them, they said, O ye people of London, and the parts
adjacent, now arm your selves for the Battle, and go out and fight against
your King and his Adherers, bring also in your Plate and Jewels into
Guild Hall.

8 And think not to say within your selves, It is better for us to be quiet,
and sit still, rather then to run the hazard of loosing our lives and
estates; for we say unto you, That you shall be prosperous in your
undertakings, and shall soon accomplish the Work.

9 And now also the Axe of the Parliament is laid to every man's throat, and he
that will not be Rebellious shall not live.

10 We indeed gain only some few hundred pounds, and chastise you with words,
but your Parliament intend to purchase Lordships, and to whip you with gleames
of fire.

11 Their fan is in their hand, and they will thoroughly purge your purses, for
their Ambition burns like unquenchable fire.

CHAP. IV. The King tempted with unheard of Propositions, he resists the
temptation, and the People flock unto him, moved by the sound Doctrine of his
Declarations.
1 THen was King Charles permitted by God to be tempted by his Parliament, with
unreasonable Propositions many days.

2 And when Pembroke the Tempter came unto him, he said; If thou will still be
King of Great Britain, thou must set thy hand to these Propositions.

3 But he answered, and said; It is written in the Proverbs, Thou shall fear
God, and honor the King; the wrath of a King is like the roaring of a Lion,
and he that provokes him, sins against his own soul.

4 Then Pembroke the Tempter said unto him; Behold, thou shall be a more great
and glorious King then any of thy Progenitors; we will augment thy Revenues,
and enlarge thy Territories, if thou will but fall down and worship us thy
Parliament.

5 But he said unto him again, It is written in the Romans; Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers, but to the King as Supreme: Now therefore get
thee gone thou Rebel; For, in the Proverbs, Where the word of a King is, there
is power, and who may say unto him, what do thou?

6 Then the Tempter left him, and his own faithful Lords came and ministered
unto him.

7 Now when the King heard that his Parliament had entered into Covenant against
him, and had constrained his Liege-People to Swear their own and his ruin,
he caused his Standard to be erected at Nottingham.

8 And leaving the City of York, he came and kept his Court in Oxford, one of
the Eyes of England.

9 From that time there was deadly War between the King and his Parliament,
with an equal concernment on both sides.

10 And his Fame went throughout all the Quarters of England, the people
bringing unto him all such as were diseased with the Evil, and he healed them.

11 And there followed him great multitudes of his People Kent, from
Staffordshire, and from beyond Tine.

A Psalm, to be sung as the 15. of David's.
GOod Lord confound King Oliver,
and all his holy Crew,
With Rainsborow that Leveller,
and Pride that precious Jew.
Let Say once more, we do thee pray,
into a Saw-pit fall,
Let Martin purge his Pocks away
within some Hospital.
Let Hammon have his brains knocked out
with his own bunch of Keys,
Let Watson and his zealous rout
visit the Hebrides.
Let the two Houses fight and scratch,
like wives at Billingsgate,
And let them never a Peace up patch,
until it be too late.
That so upon each House of clay
King Charles may mount his Throne,
Hear us (O Father) we thee pray,
our hope's in thee alone.
FINIS.

