ALL THE ORDINANCES AND DECLARATIONS OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT, For the Assessing of all such as have not contributed upon the
Propositions of Both Houses of Parliament, for raising of Money, Plate, Horse,
Horsemen, and Arms, for the defense of the King, Kingdom, and Parliament; or
have not contributed proportionally according to their Estates.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament that these Ordinances
be forthwith Printed and Published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

ALSO Diverse Orders of the Committee of Lords and Commons for Advance of Money
and other necessaries for the Army: for the better execution of the said
Ordinances and Declarations.

Martin Dallison Clerk to the said Committee.

Printed at London for R. Dunscomb. Februar. 14. 1642.

An Ordinance and Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
WHereas the King seduced by wicked Counsel has raised an Army, and levied
war against the Parliament, and great number of Forces are daily raised under
the commands of Papists and other ill affected persons, by Commissions from his
Majesty; And whereas diverse Delinquents are protected from public Justice by
his Majesty's Army, and sundry outrages and rapines are daily committed by the
Soldiers of the said Army, who have no respect to the Laws of God or the
Land; but burn amd plunder the houses and seize and destroy the persons of
diverse his Majesty's good Subjects: And whereas for the maintenance of the said
Army diverse Assessements are made upon several Counties, and His Majesty's
Subjects are compelled by the Soldiers to pay the same; which said Army if it
should continue would soon ruin and wast the whole Kingdom, and overthrow
Religion, Law, and Liberty. For suppressing of which said Army and ill-affected
persons, there is no probable way, under God, but by the Army raised by
authority of the Parliament; which said Army so raised cannot be maintained
without great sums of Money, yet for raising such sums by reason of his
Majesty's withdrawing himself from the advice of the Parliament, there can be
no Act of Parliament passed with his Majesty's assent, albeit there is great
Justice that the said Monyes should be raised; The Lords and Commons in
Parliament having taken the same into their serious consideration, and knowing
that the said Army so raised by them, has been hitherto for the most part
maintained by the voluntary contributions of diverse well affected persons, who
have freely contributed according to their abilities.

But considering there are diverse others within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Suburbs of the same, and also within the Borough of
Southwarke, that have not contributed at all toward the maintenance of the
said Army, or if they have, yet not answerable to their Estates, who
notwithstanding receive benefit and protection by the same Army as well as any
others, and therefore it is most just, that they should as well as others be
charged to contribute to the maintenance thereof.

Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and
by Authority thereof; That Isaac Pennington Lord Major of the City of London,
Sir John Wollaston, Knight and Alderman, Alderman Towes, Alderman Warner,
Alderman Andrews, Alderman Chambers, Alderman Fow^e, Sir Thomas S^ame Knight
and Alderman, Samuel Vassell, John Venne, Morris Thompson, and Richard Warring,
Citizens; or any four of them, shall hereby have power and authority to
nominate, land appoint in every Ward, within the City of London, six such
persons as they, or any four of them, shall think fit, which said six so
nominated, or any four of them, shall hereby have power to enquire of any that
shall remain, or be within the said several Wards, that have not contributed
upon the Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the raising of
money, plate, horse, horsemen, and arms, for defense of the King and both Houses
of Parliament, and also of such as are able men, that have contributed, yet not
according to their Estates and Abilities. And the said six persons so
nominated, or any four of them, within their several and respective Wards and
Limits, shall have power to Assesse such person and persons, as are of Ability
and have not contributed, and also such as have contributed, yet not according
to their ability, to pay such sum or sums of Money, according to their
Estates, as the said Assessors, or any four of them, shall think fit and
reasonable, so as the same exceed not the twentyeth part of their Estates, and
to nominate and appoint fit persons for the collection thereof. And if any
person so Assessed shall refuse to pay the money Assessed upon him; It shall be
lawful to and for the said Assessors and Collectors, or any of them, to levy
the said sum so Assessed by way of Distress, and sale of the goods of the
person so Assessed, and refusing. And if any person so distrained shall make
resistance, It shall be lawful to and for the respective Assessors and
Collectors or any of them, to call to their assistance any of the trained Bands
of the said City of London, or any other his Majesty's Subjects, who are hereby
required to be ayding and assisting to the said Assessors and Collectors in the
premises; And it is hereby further ordained, that the respective Burgesses of
Westminster and Southwarke, together with the several Committees, appointed
for the Subscriptions of Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen, and Arms within the
said City and Borough, shall respectively have power hereby to nominate Sessors
for the said City and Borough, in such manner as the Lord Major, etc. has for
the City of London; and the said Assessors, or any four of them, to name
Collectors, as aforesaid; Which said Assessors and Collectors shall have the
same power respectively within their respective limits, as those to be
nominated within the said City of London, have hereby limited to them. And for
the Suburbs of London and Westminster, the respective Knights of the Shire
where the said Suburbs are, shall have hereby the like power to name Assessors,
and they so named, or any four of them, and the Collectors by them to be
nominated, or any of them within their respective limits, shall have the like
power respectively as the Assessors and Collectors fot London have by virtue of
this Ordinance. And be it Ordained that the sums so Assessed and levied, as
aforesaid, shall be paid in at Guild Hall London, to the hands of Sir John
Wollastan Knight, John Warner, John Towes, and Thomas Andrews Aldermen, or any
two of them; And the Assessors and Collectors to be nominated by virtue hereof,
shall weekly report to the Committee of the House of Commons for the
Propositions aforesaid, what sums of money have been Assessed, and what
sums have been levied weekly, according to the purport hereof. And the said
moneys so levied and paid in, shall be ^sslied forth in such sort as the other
moneys raised upon the Propositions aforesaid, and not otherwise.

Die Martis, 29. November. 1642.
Whereas a late Ordinance is passed by both Houses of Parliament for the
Reasons therein declared, for the assessing of all such persons within the
Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, with the Borough of
Southwarke, as have not contributed upon the Propositions of both Houses of
Parliament, for raising of Money, Plate, Horse, Horsemen, and Arms, for
defense of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, or have not contributed
proportionably to their Estates and Abilities. And whereas it is thought fit
that some additions be made for further explanation and better execution of the
said Ordinance: Be it further Ordained and Declared by the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, that such persons as shall be Assessed by the
respective Assessors, in the said Ordinance appointed, and shall within six
days next after notice given to them, or left at their several houses within
the said Cities, Suburbs, or Borough, pay in the one moity of the said sums
of money so Assessed, and within twelve days after the said notice given as
aforesaid, the other moity thereof, unto the Treasurers of money and plate in
Guild Hall London, or unto the Collectors appointed by the said Ordinance,
respectively to receive the same, that then the said Treasurers, or Collectors,
shall give Acquittances for the same, as has been done to such who have lent
moneys or Plate, upon the Propositions of both Houses as aforesaid. And the
said moneys so paid to the said Treasurers, or to the said several
Collectors, shall be repaid upon the Public Faith, as all other moneys lent
upon the said Propositions of both Houses. And as for those who shall so far
discover their disaffection, as not to bring in the several sums of money so
Assessed upon them to the persons before appointed, within the times limited,
that then their goods shall be distrained and sold according to the said
Ordinance. And if no sufficient distress be found, that then the said
Collectors shall respectively have power to enquire of any sum or sums of
money due, or to be due unto them respectively so Assessed from any person or
persons for any Rents, Tithes, Goods, or Debts, or for any other thing or cause
whatsoever.

And the said respective Collectors shall have power by virtue of this
Ordinance, to receive all or any part of the said sums due, or to be due unto
them or any of them so assessed, until the full value of the sum or sums
so Assessed, and the charges in levying and recovering of the same shall be
received and satisfied: And the said respective Collectors shall have further
power to compound for any of the said Rents, Tithes, Goods, or Debts, due unto
the said person so Assessed respectively as aforesaid, with any person or
persons by whom the said Rents, Goods, or Debts, are or shall be owing, as also
to give full and ample discharge for the money by them so received, upon
composition or otherwise, which discharges shall be good and effectual to all
intents and purposes. And if the sum or sums of Money so Assessed cannot be
levied by any of these means or ways, then the persons so respectively
Assessed, shall be imprisoned in such places of this Kingdom, and for so long
time as the Committee of the House of Commons for the Examinations, shall
appoint and Order: And the families of all such persons so imprisoned, shall no
longer remain within the Cities of London and Westminster, the Suburbs and the
Counties adjacent.

And be it further Ordained, that all and every the Assessors and Collectors of
the said several sums, shall have the protection of both Houses of
Parliament, for their indemnity in this service, and receive such reasonable
allowances for their pains taken and charges disbursed, or to be disbursed
therein, as the Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of Money and other
necessaries for the Army, raised by the Parliament, shall apportion and appoint.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
Die Mercurii, 7. December. 1642.
Whereas in and by a late Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, it is
Ordained for the cause therein expressed, that all persons of ability within
the Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs of the same, and also within
the Borough of Southwarke, who have not at all, or not answerably to their
Estates, contributed toward the maintenance of the Army raised by authority of
this present Parliament, shall be assessed in such manner and proportion as in
the said Ordinance is directed, of which the Lords and Commons now assembled in
Parliament, do expect a vigorous and speedy execution: but finding some doubt
to be raised upon the point of time, whether that clause of not contributing at
all, or not in proportion to their Estates, be meant of not contributing
before the passing of the said Ordinance in both Houses of Parliament, or to
be extended to any time before the assessing of them, and giving them notice
of it, in such manner as in the said Ordnance is appointed. We the said Lords
and Commons in Parliament assembled, do hereby Declare, That if any person or
persons who have not contributed at all, or not answerably to their Estates,
shall before any assessement of them be made, and notice thereof left at their
Houses, according to the said Ordinance, contribute toward the maintenance of
the said Army, by loan or otherwise, according to their several and
respective Estates, as others well-affected have already done, without evasion
or collusion, every such person so contributing, shall be accepted as doing an
acceptable service to the Commonwealth, and be freed from the payment of all
and every Tax and Assessement of him to be mad by the Assessors, authorized by
the said Ordinance for that purpose, as likewise from all Distresses,
imprisonment, and other Punishments to be inflicted by virtue of the said
Ordinance, or any addition to, or explanation made of it, for the not paying of
any such Assessements; And hereof all such Assessors and Collectors, are hereby
required to take notice. And for this end, It is Ordered by the said Lords and
Commons, That this Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

Votes of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for better enabling of
the Lord Major to put their late Ordinance in execution.
Die Mercurii December. 1642.
Resolved upon the Quession.

That the Lord Mayor and other persons named in the Ordinance, shall have power
to nominate and appoint six other persons to be Assessors in the several Wards
of Farringdon without, and Cripplegate, and as many in other Wards as there
shall be cause.

Resolved upon the Question.

That the Lord Major, and the other persons named in the said Ordinance, shall
have power to nominate two persons to be Assessors in the several privileged
places, within the several Wards.

Die Mercurii. 14. December. 1642.
An Ordinance, made by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, for the
better and more speedy execution, of the late Ordinance of the 29. of November,
1642.
Whereas according to an Ordinance and Declaration of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, of the 29. of November last, the persons whose names
are subscribed are appointed and since approved of by both Houses of
Parliament, to be Assessors and Collectors of (...) It is now ordered by the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. And the said persons are hereby
required and authorized, upon the Receipts of this order, forthwith to proceed,
effectually and diligently, to execute the said Ordinance, according to the
tenor hereof, in every behalf, without omission, favor, dread, malice or any
other thing, to be attempted, by them, or any of them, to the contrary thereof:
And for that end, It is further Ordained and Declared: That the said Assessors,
shall hereby have authority to call before them, as well such persons, as they
shall think fit to their assistance: as also, all or any such persons, as are
to be assessed. And the said Assessors shall appoint the said Collectors, in
their several Divisions and Precincts, for the gathering the sums that shall
be assessed; And give notice of the sum and sums of money, at which every
person, in their divisions and Pr^cincts, shall be particularly assessed. And
whereas it is expressed, in the said Ordinance, (So as the assessement exceed
not the twentieth part of the estates of the persons to be assessed) It is
hereby Declared, for prevention of all inequality in the said assessement: That
if the said Assessors, or any four of them, proceeding in their assessement
according to their Judgments, and best Information, shall assesse any person
above the twentieth part of his estate; And that the person so assessed, does
find himself grieved, with the same assessing or rating: That then the party
so assessed, (paying one moiety of the sum he shall be assessed at, within
six days next after assessement, and notice thereof given, or left, at the
dwelling house of the party so assessed) may, (during six days, after his
having paid the said Moiety, as aforesaid) have liberty, and may address
himself for remedy and relief, unto the persons nominated by the said
Ordinance, to nominate the Assessors, or any four of them, and may tender his
voluntary Oath, or Protestation, to such persons, that he is over-rated, and of
the true value of his estate (if he please:) and after due examination, and
perfect knowledge thereof had, and perceived; the said Persons authorized to
nominate Assessors as aforesaid, or any four of them, shall hereby have power
to Order such abatement of the said assessement, according as shall appear
unto them just, and equal upon the same examination. And it is hereby further
Ordained and Declared, that the person so assessed and sworn, shall within
three days next after the Order of abatement, in that behalf made, pay unto,
or be repald by the Treasurers who received the other moiety of such
assessement, such sum or sums of money, as by the said Order of abatement
shall be appointed: And in case the said person, so sworn and assessed, shall
not pay within the said three days, next after Order of abatement made, the
sum thereby ordered to be paid; That then the same sum shall be recovered
by distress, or otherwise, as is provided in the said Ordinance of the 29. of
November last, in case the sums assessed shall not be paid into the
Guild Hall London, according to the true meaning of the same.) And if it be
proved by witnesses, or by the parties own confession, or other lawful ways
or means, within six months after any such Oath made, that the same person so
rated, and sworn, was of any better or greater estate, in Lands, Goods, or
other things above specified, at the time of the making the said Ordinance,
then the said person so sworn, did declare upon his Oath: that then every
person so offending, shall lose and forseit so much lawful money of England,
as he the same person so sworn, was first assessed at, or taxed to pay, by
virtue of the Ordinance aforesaid: To be recovered by Distress, or otherwise,
as is provided, in the said Ordinance of the 29. of November last, (in case the
sums of money to be assessed by virtue of the said Ordinance shall not be
paid into the Guildhall London, according to the true meaning of the same.) And
it is hereby further Ordained and Declared, That the said Assessors and
Collectors shall incur no damage by ^^ason of their over-valuing the estate
of any person assessed, or to be assessed, or recovering or receiving the same,
by virtue of the Ordinance aforesaid, unless some corruption or indirect
carriage therein, shall be proved in Parliament against them.

Die Veneris, December. 16. 1642. Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament that this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published. Jo. Brown
Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, December. 16. 1642.
Whereas several Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament of the 29. of
November last, and the seventh and foureteenth of this instant December are
passed, concerning assessing such persons as are of ability, and have not
contributed, or not according to their ability, as in the said Ordinances do
and may appear; It is now further Ordained and Declared by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament Assembled: That the several and respective Assessors
shall not assesse any of the Members, of either of the Houses of Parliament, or
the Assistants of the House of Peers, any thing in the preceding Ordinances,
or any of them, to the contrary notwithstanding. But that the Members of either
House, shall be assessed by that House, whereof they are Members, and the
Assistants of the Peers by the House of Peers.

Ordered that this Ordinance shall be Printed.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Ult. Januar. 1642.
At the Committee of Lords and Commons for Advance of money and other
necessaries for the ARMY.
IT is Ordered that all such persons as already are assessed, or hereafter
shall be Assessed upon, or by virtue of the Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament, of the 29. of November last, do immediately from and after payment
of the sums at which they are assessed (unto the Treasurers at Guild Hall)
repair unto Haberdashershall, in the afternoones, and there produce and show
their Acquittances unto the Clerk of this Committee, who is entrusted with the
keeping the Accounts of that business, and is appointed to Register the same
Acquittances. And it is likewise Ordered that this be Printed and published.

Martin Dallison, Clerk to the said Committee.

Die Veneris 3. Feb. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that
the Collectors made upon the Ordinance of the 29. of November, for
Assessements, shall have power to break open any Chests, Trunks, Boxes,
Doors, or other things, whereby to take a Distress for the sums of money
assessed upon any person, and unpaid; And the time limited for payment by the
said Ordinance elapsed; And also if they find any Chests, money, or other
Goods in the hands of any persons, which shall be proved or confessed to belong
to any person assessed, that has not satisfied the assessement; That the said
Collectors shall have power to seize such Chests, money, or Goods, for
satisfaction of the sums assessed.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Mercurii 8. Februa. 1642.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the better Levying
and receiving of Moneys Assessed by virtue of the late Ordinance of 29. November.
1642.
WHEREAS Information is given, That diverse Collectors, nominated for the
Collecting, Levying, and receiving of the sums of money Assessed by virtue of
the late Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, of the 29. of November last,
for Assessements, by reason their other Employments in the Public Affairs of
the State, have been taken off, from the due execution of the same Ordinance,
whereby well affected Persons are still occasionally pressed to further
contributions, whilst those that have not contributed, or not in proportion to
their Estates, do not make a proportionable supply; Be it therefore Ordained,
and Declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Collectors nominated or to be nominated by virtue of the said Ordinance, shall
from and after the eleventh day of this instant month of February, only give
notice to the Persons assessed, or to be assessed of the several sums of
money at which they are or shall be assessed; And after the days limited by
the said Ordinance for payment, shall be elapsed, shall repair to the houses
of the persons assessed, or to be assessed, and demand the several sums of
money, at which they are or shall be assessed; and if the same be unpaid, then
to take notice whether sufficient distress may be had, to satisfy the sums
assessed or no, and accordingly to certify the same under their hands, to the
Committee of Lords and Commons for Advance of money and other necessaries for
the Army; And the said Collectors are hereby required and authorized to enquire
of any sum or sums of money due, or to be due unto the persons respectively
assessed, or to be assessed, from any person or persons for any Rents, Tithes,
Goods, or Debts, or for any other thing or cause whatsoever; And to compound
and receive the same, and give discharges therefore, according to the power to
them formerly given by the said Ordinance; And it is hereby further Ordained,
that where the said Collectors shall certify that a sufficient Distress may
be had for the sums of money assessed, or to be assessed; That Colonel
Randall Manwaring, Colonel Richard Brown, Captain Edmund Harvey, Captain
Robert Manwaring, Captain Heriot Washborne, and such Captains, Lieutenants,
Officers, and Soldiers under their several and respective Commands, as they
or any of them shall appoint; Upon notice thereof given, shall immediately
repair unto the several houses of the persons assessed, or to be assessed,
and certified as aforesaid; And levy the sums of money so assessed, by
distress, in as ample manner, as by the said Ordinance of 29. November, and an
Order of both Houses of Parliament, of the third of this instant month of
February, the Collectors nominated upon the said Ordinance are authorized and
appointed to do and perform: And the distress and distresses so had and
taken, to carry into Guild Hall London, or Crosseby-house in Bishops-gate
street London, or to such other place or places as the said Committee shall
appoint; To be sold and disposed of, for or toward satisfaction of the sums
assessed, at such times, and by such persons, and in such manner, as by the
said Committee shall be directed; And in case certificate be made by the said
Collectors, that no sufficient distress can be had, or found, and the sums of
money assessed, cannot be levied by any of the ways or means in the said
Ordinance mentioned. Then the said Colonel Randall Manwaring, Colonel Richard
Brown, Captain Edmund Harvey, Captain Robert Manwaring, Captain Heriot
Washborne, and such Captains, Lieutenants, Officers and Soldiers under their
Command, as they or any of them shall Command and appoint, shall repair unto
the dwelling houses of such person or persons, as are or shall be assessed, and
certified as aforesaid, and there or within any other place within this
Kingdom, where such person or persons shall be suspected to be, to make
diligent search, and him, her, or them, to apprehend and bring in safe custody
before the Committee of the house of Commons for Examinations, who have power
to imprison them in such places of this Kingdom, and for so long time, as the
same Committee shall appoint and Order; And the said Colonells and Captains,
and other the Captains, Lieutenants, Officers, and Soldiers, under the
command of them or any of them, shall have power to break open any of the
locks and doors of any room of other place in or belonging to the said
houses or places where search shall be made for the parties assessed, or to be
assessed, respectively; and the Goods, Debts, Money, and Estate of such persons
as already are imprisoned, or to be imprisoned, shall stillbe liable, and shall
and may be seized on, sold, received, and disposed of, for satisfaction of the
sums assessed, wheresoever, or in whose hands soever the same shall be found:
And the Families of such Persons Assessed, or to be Assessed, who have or shall
absent themselves from their dwelling houses, or places of abode, within the
Cities of London and Westminster, the Suburbs of the same, and the Borough of
Southwarke, shall be further proceeded against, as in the said Ordinance of 29.
November. is provided. And the said Collectors, and all Colonels, Captains,
Lieutenants, Officers, Soldiers, and other person or persons as shall be
appointed or employed, in, and for the better execution of the said Ordinance
as aforesaid, shall have the protection of both Houses of Parliament for their
indemnity in this service; And if any thing not mentioned in the said
Ordinance of 29. November. or this present Ordinance, may conduce to the more
effectual levying and receiving of moneys to be assessed upon the said
Ordinance of 29. November, the same is hereby referred to the wisdom and care
of the said Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of money and other
necessaries for the Army; And lastly it is Ordered that this Ordinance shall be
Printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Februa. 9. 1642.
At the Committee of Lords and Commons for Advance of Money and other
Necessaries for the ARMY.
IT is Ordered: That the Assessors nominated upon the Ordinance of Parliament
of 29. November. last, for Assessements, within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the Suburbs of the same, and the Borough of Southwarke, do
forthwith proceed to make a further and full Assessement, of all the
Inhabitants in the several and respective places aforesaid, which they hold
meet to be assessed: And that the said Assessors do, on or before Friday the
17. of this instant February, deliver to this Committee, under their hands, two
scrowles of the names of the persons assessed, and the sums of Money at which
they shall be assessed, one of which scrowles shall remain with the Clerk of
this Committee, and the other, to be delivered or sent by him, to the
Collectors in the several and respective places aforesaid. And it is ordered
that henceforth the Collectors of each Ward and place, do weekly every Tuesday
and every Friday in the afternoones, certify under their hands to this
Committee, the days that notice was given to the parties Assessed. And the
days for payment, limited by the said Ordinance being expired, the said
Collectors are to repair to the houses of the persons assessed, and demand the
several sums at which they were assessed, which they finding unpaid are to
take notice whether a sufficient Distress may be had to satisfy the sums
assessed or no, and accordingly from time to time to certify the same to this
Committee every Tuesday, and Friday weekly in the afternoones, whereof they
are not to fail. And it is ordered that this be Printed and published.

Martin Dallison, Clerk to the said Committee.


