An Additionall ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT:
Concerning days of Recreation, allowed unto Scholars, Apprentices and other
Servants.

Die Lunae 28 Junii. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Lunae 28 Junii 1647.
An additionall Ordinance concerning days of Recreation, allowed unto
Scholars, Appentices, and other Servants.
WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament, bearing date the eleventh day of this
instant June, 1647. It is provided and Ordained, That every second Tuesday in
every Month throughout the year, shall be allotted to Scholars, Apprentices,
and other Servants, for recreation, and relaxation from their constant and
ordinary labors, as formerly they have used to have on Festivals, commonly
called Holy Days, as by the said Ordinance more at large appears: And least
such days of Recreation might be abused, to the dishonor of God, scandal to
Religion, and detriment both of Masters and Servants, and for the more orderly
proceeding in the strict observation of the said day of Recreation, according
to the true intent and meaning of the said Ordinance; It is further Ordained by
the said Lords and Commons, That all windows of Shops, Warehouses, and other
places, where Wares or Commodities are usually sold, shall be kept shut on the
said day of Recreation, from eight of the clock in the morning until eight of
the clock at evening, on the said day; And that no Master shall wilfully
detain or withold his Apprentice or other Servant within doors, or from his
Recreation in his usual duty or service on the said day of Recreation, unless
Market days, Fair days, or other extraordinary occasion; yet so as such
Master shall allow unto such Apprentice or other Servant one other day instead
of such day employed in the Service of his Master, upon such occasion as
aforesaid. And be it likewise provided and Ordained, That if such Apprentice or
other Servant shall ryotously spend or abuse such day of Recreation, either to
his own hurt, or the damage of his Master, and being thereof lawfully
convicted and found guilty before any one Justice of the Peace; It shall and
may be lawful for such Master at his pleasure to detain and withold such
Apprentice or other Servant from their Recreation on such allowed days. And be
it also provided and Ordained, That if such Apprentice or other Servant shall
cause any ryotous or tumultuous assembly, to the disturbance of the Peace on
such day of Recreation, such Apprentice or other Servant being thereof lawfully
convicted and found guilty, upon the testimony of two Witnesses upon Oath,
before one Justice of the Peace in any County, City, or Town Corporate, where
such Offense shall be committed, or before the Chamberlain of the City of
London, for the time being, within the said City, who shall have power to
administer such Oath, such Justices of Peace, and the said Chamberlain of the
City of London respectively shall, and may at their discretion inflict on such
Apprentice, or other Servant so convicted as aforesaid any Corporal
punishment, by imprisonment or otherwise, so as the same imprisonment exceed
not the space of three days. And it is lastly Ordained, That all Mayors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other Officers and
Ministers are hereby Authorized to make, or cause to be made diligent Searches
for such Apprentices or other Servants in Tavernes, Alehouses, or
Gaming-houses, and such Apprentices or other Servants as shall be found in any
such place after eight of the Clock in the Evening, or being drunk, or
otherwise disorderly, or shall there remain after eight of the Clock in the
Evening on such day of Recreato^n, shall bring, or cause to be brought such
Apprentice or other Servant before any Justice of the Peace in any County,
City, or Town Corporate, or before the said Chamberlain of London within
their respective Limits as aforesaid, who shall cause the Statutes to be
executed upon them that are in such cases provided for the punishment of such
Offenders.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliam.

FINIS.

