The last SPEECH, Confession and Prayer OF Joyce Ebbs, To several Ministers in
the Presse-yard at Newgate, and at the place of Execution in Smithfield Rounds
on Thursday last in the fore-noon.

Immediately before She was bound to the Stake, to be burnt alive, to ashes,
for that horrid Act, and Bloody murdering of her own Husband at Dog and Bitch
Yard near Drury Lane.

As also, the several Passages that happened before her death; her heavy
groans and shrieks in the Fire, and the providing of a half sheet spread over
with Pitch, to shorten the time of her miserable Torment.

LONDON, Printed for G. Chambers, 1662.

The last Speech and Confession of Ioice Ebbs, to several Ministers in the
Press-yard, and at the place of Execution in Smithfield Rounds on Thursday last.
THE Subject of the ensuing Discourse, and the woeful Object beheld by many
hundreds, has occasioned a brief Abstract of the Life and Death of the person
condemned, whose name was Joice Ebbs, her place of livelihood was in a house of
wicked resort, in Dog and Bitch yard near Drury Lane, her Husband formerly was
a Soldier, and coming home, he found her by her self; and she asked him to eat
some part of a Pie with her which she had provided; but he having a mind to a
Pipe of Tobacco, desired her to help him to a Pipe, she told him he should have
none, but he was resolved to have a Pipe, upon which he went to the Cellar to
take a Pipe; she told him, if he did, she would stab him with the Knife; upon
which, she ris'd from the Table and followed him to the Cellar, and stabbed him
in three several places, so that it proved mortal, and he immediately gave up
the Ghost.

Upon which several Neighbors coming in they seized on her, carried her before
a Justice, and her Mittimus was made for Newgate, where she continued till the
Sessions following, and being brought to the Bar she was Arraigned, and
confessed the cruel and bloody murder she committed on her Husband, for which
she received Sentence according to the Law which was to be made fast to a
Stake, and burnt with Faggots at the usual place in Smithfield Rounds. But
pleading her Belley, she was repreived, and sent back again to Newgate where
she continued for the space of ten Months.

Upon Friday last being the 19th. of May, the Court being set at the
Sessions House in the Old Bailey; the said Joyce Ebbs was called down to the
Bar in Order to her former judgment; where being come down, the Clark of the
Peace after silence in the Court, said,

Joyce Ebbs, hold up thy hand; which she did as formerly.

Upon which he read over the Indictment, to this effect, viz. Joyce Ebbs thou
stand here Indicted and Convicted for Petty Treason, for the horrid and
bloody Murder committed by thy own hands on Thomas Ebbs thy husband, for which
you were formerly Sentenced according to the Law of this Nation, to be Burnt to
death; but pleadest thy Belly; whereupon the Honorable Bench ordered that a
Jury of Women should be called, which was accordingly done, and they bringing
thee in quick preserved thee from death for the space of ten months, can
thou say any thing for thy self, why thou should not suffer according to thy
former Sentence; she answered no, but withal desired the mercy of the
Honorable Bench.

The Right Honorable the Recorder told her, she had had a long time of mercy
by pleading her Belly, yet it appeared not so, though she had lain ten months
in custody; to which she answered, that she had a Mischance in the time of her
Imprisonment.

Whereupon it was again demanded of her, what she could say for her self, that
she should not suffer according to her former Judgment; she said, she could
not plead her Belly, for she had not deserved for it with any since the time of
her Commitment.

Upon which the Court Ordered, that she should return to the place from whence
she came there to continue till Thursday next, being the two and twentieth day
of May, from whence she should go to Smith-field Rounds, and there be Burnt
till she were dead, dead, according to her former Judgment.

Which accordingly was put in execution, betwixt ten and eleven of the clock in
the forenoon being guarded from Newgate to Smith-field, by many of the
Sheriffs Officers; she was arrayed and attired in White, having a branch of
Rosemary in one hand, and a Nose-gay in her Bosom; But not to omit that which
is very observable, even from the first time of her receiving Judgment, she
was admonished to read and meditate much on that Text, Esa. 57. 15. by which
means she gained very much, and by little and little abundance of spiritual
comfort flowed into her heart; in which condition, she continued many months,
even until her death; and at several times some Reverend Divines coming to
her, amongst whom was Mr. Cook, giving of her good Instructions, and exhorting
her to Repentance, to seek unto God for mercy, and to ground her Salvation upon
the precious blood and merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; upon which,
with tears trickling down her cheeks, she acknowledged that she had been a
wicked liver, and too too lewd in life and conversation, desiring others might
take warning by her; for that by her vicious ways and practices, she had
sundry times been assaulted with grievous temptations, and that her sins had
made her a prey to Satan, wishing that she had never been born, or that she had
been made any other Creature then a Woman, crying, Woe, woe, woe, a weak, a woeful,
a wretched, and most miserable woman! but at length, by Gods wonderful mercy,
through the unwearied pains of many good Ministers, at several times, and
especially on thursday morning last, that she received great comfort,
expressing her self with much penitency, and crying out, Wonderful, wonderful
are the riches of thy mercy, and saving grace, O thy love is unspeakable, in
dealing so graciously with me! O Lord my God, blessed be thy Holy Name for
evermore, which has showed me the path of life; I seek thy mercy, and am
assured of thy love; O blessed be the Lord, that has thus comforted me, And
for the joy which at this instant my soul feels, blessed be his Name for
evermore.

Having spent some time in prayer at Newgate, she immediately went to the
Stake, where she ended her life very penitently, and when the fire was going to
be kindled, she cried out, Lord Jesus strengthen me, blessed Father comfort me,
I commend my spirit into thy hands, (...) redeemed it; Oh what a happy (...)
shall I make from night to day, from darkness to light, and from death to life;
and now thou fiery Chariot, that came down to fetch up Elijah, carry my poor
soul to its happy hold, and all ye Blessed Angels that attended the Soul of
Lazarus, to bring it to Heaven, bear me, oh bear me into the bosom of my best
beloved; Amen, Amen; come, Lord Jesus, come quickly; And so she departed this
life, with three or four dolesom shrieks, when the flames of fire first seized
her body.

FINIS.

