EBEN-EZER. A Full and Exact RELATION OF THE Several Remarkable and Victorious
proceedings of the ever-renowned Colonel MASSY, Governor of Gloucester, from
May 7. to May 25. 1644.

In which time he took these several considerable Garrisons of the enemies in
Gloucestershire and Wiltshire, namely, Wesbury, little Deane, Newnam,
Beverston-castle, Malmsbury, and Chippenham.

With the Summons sent by Col. Massy to Col. Howard (son to the Earl of
Berkshire) Governor of Malmsbury; and his answer thereunto. And the names of
the Officers and Commanders taken there.

As also, the Votes of the House of Commons on Friday last, concerning the
supplies to be sent to Col. Massy, and a thousand pounds per annum to be given
to him and his heirs for ever, out of the estates of Papists and Delinquents;
as a reward for the many acceptable services performed by him.

June 4. 1644.
Imprimatur,

JOHN WHITE.

LONDON, Printed for T. W. and are to be sold in the Old Bailey. 1644.

A true Relation of several happy and wonderful Victories lately given unto
Col. Massy Governor of Gloucester, from May 7. 1644. until the 25 of the
same Month.
ON Tuesday the 7th of May the Governor marched out of Gloucester with about
nine hundred foot, and his own Regiment of Horse, and Col. Purefoys regiment
of Horse, two pieces of Ordnance, and other Carriage fit for the march, with
purpose to remove the enemies Garrisons at Wesbury, Little-Deane, and Newnam,
all strongly fortified, and well provided with Men, Arms, and Ammunition; all
which it pleased God miraculously to deliver into his hands. For he first
assaulting the Garrison at Wesbury (which was Mr. Colchesters house, and the
Church) he got to the Church, and with Grenades and Pistollshot, the which he
sent in at the Windows, he presently made the enemy to forsake the Church, and
to run to the house: which being discerned by the Governors Forces, the
Church was quickly possessed by them; which made the Enemy forsake all their
out-workes, and to cry for quarter. There were slain of the enemy about
twenty, and about threescore taken prisoners in that Garrison, with their Arms
and Ammunition. Whilst the Foot was at this Garrison at Wesbury, Colonel
Massy commanded some of the horse to march to Little-Deane, where the enemy
had also fortified a house to face them, who falling suddenly into the Town
took diverse of them in the Town, and there killed Lieutenant-colonell Congre
Governor of Newnham; and the Horse only with their Carbines, Swords, and
Pistols, suddenly surprised the Garrison it self (although fortified) where
were near forty prisoners taken: and that night Colonel Massy quartered at
Wesbury and Deane, and the next day drew up to Newnham, where presently he beat
the enemy out of the Town into their Works, which were double fortified and
very strong, having a very small compass to make good, and there being but one
place possible to fall on the enemy, who having there four small pieces of
Ordnance and good store of Provision and Ammunition. Yet it pleased God to give
the soldiers such courage and resolution that they fiercely stormed the
Works, and made the enemy to forsake them, and to run into the Church, where
the Governors forces rushed in upon them pell-mell, with much violence, which
enforced them to cry out for quarter; which one Tipper an old servant to Sir J.
Winter and an arch Papist perceiving, and being not willing to take quarter,
gave fire to a barrel of Powder intending to destroy himself and all the
rest, which occasioned the putting of more to the sword then otherwise had
been, the Governor being much enraged to see any of his men scorched with
Powder. In this Garrison was taken good store of provisions of all sorts, 4
Guns, one great Wall-piece of 8 foot long, good store of Grenades, and some
Fireworks, 8 barrels of Powder, 60 skeines of fine Match, with good store of
great shot for the Guns, about 150 prisoners, whereof 3 were Captains, and one
Capt. Butler was stain with the buttend of a Musket, and so was old Tipper
(that traitor to the rules of War) with about 20 others; there were taken about
twenty others; there were taken also about 40 horses. The prisoners were
instantly conveyed to Gloucester with safety, and the Governor quartered that
night at Newnam and little Deane. But the wonderful and extraordinary
providence of God was in this, that in the taking of three fortified garrisons
in two days, and all by storm, the Governor lost never a man, only some few
were scorched with the treachery of the Papists powder plot, and one had his
arm shot off with Cannon-bullet, but none of the wounds mortal.

After the taking of the said three several Garrisons, the Governor of
Gloucester marched with his said forces to Lidney, where Sir John Winters
fortifications and provisions being found too strong for such forces as the
Governor had with him, the Governor drew off his wearied men, and caused
three Iron-mills of Sir John Winters, with his provision of Coals to be
destroyed and burned, the same being very beneficial to the said Sir John
Winter, and most useful to him and the popish party for provisions of warlike
engines against the Parliaments Army and the Kingdom. While those Noble
actions of the Governor were performed in Gloucester stire, Col. Mynn with his
Regiments of Horse and Foot forsook Rosse in Herefordshire, and entered some
into Hereford, and some into Monmoth for their better security; whereupon the
worthy Governor with his said Forces of Foot and Horse marched into
Herefordshire, possessed himself of Rosle, took Wilton-bridge, being a
drawbridge on the River Wye, and took the house or castle near unto it, with
one and thirty prisoners and some horse; and then sent part of his horse, viz.
Col. Purefoys Regiment of horse toward Monmoth, to give an Alarm there; and
the other part, viz. his own Regiment of horse, toward Hereford, to perform
the like; which caused the great Jesuiticall Papist and arch Traitor, the L.
Herbert, to gather his forces of horse and foot into Monmoth to join with the
forces there of Col. Minus, and sent all their horse from Monmoth toward
Wilton-bridge; but they were encountered by the way by the horse sent by the
Governor toward Monmoth, who charged them bravely, slew 5 or 6 of them, and
the rest being near the Town of Monmoth sheltred themselves there. In the
mean time the Governor being now quietly possessed of all that part of
Herefordshire, summons the County to come in, and to take the Covenant, and to
pay contribution unto him; where he found willing obedience by the greatest
part of the Yeomanry of that County, and was resolved to have besieged
Hereford, which would have yielded unto him in very short time, as is since
informed, had not other important occasions called him from thence, to perform
a greater service in Gods cause. While the Governor was thus employed in
Herefordshire he received advertisment that 7 of his soldiers had taken Col.
Oglethorp the Governor of Beverston-castle, and six others of his Troopers,
and brought them to Gloucester; and that a Captain of his was going away into
other service of the Parliament: whereupon he coming to Gloucester May 21, in
the evening, dispatched the business he came about; and finding then by
examination of some of the said prisoners, that there were some distractions
happened upon taking the Governor of Beverston-castle, touching the government
thereof, and the rather because the King had granted the same unto Sir Baynham
Trockmorton whilst the said Oglethorpe was Governor; the said Noble Governor
of Gloucester resolved to take the opportunity to perform some worthy
exploits; and having then about 10 a clock at night the said 21 of May received
Letters from the Committee of the house of Commons nominated for the affairs
of the garrison of Gloucester, he wrote several Letters unto them from
Gloucester, which took up his time until two a clock in the morning, and
then posted back into Herefordshire 12 miles from Gloucester the same day
Wednesday May 22. and there drew his said forces of horse and foot into one
body at Rosse, and then presently caused his horse to march by Gloucester,
appointing them to be the next day at the Rendezvous within 3 miles of
Beverston-castle 15 miles from Gloucester Southward; and also the same day
caused his foot to march somewhat a nearer way toward Beverston-castle, over
the River Severne unto Frampton, being at least 16 miles, and were constrained
to march all Wednesday night to meet the horse at the Rendezvous appointed, as
aforesaid; and from thence marched to Beverston-castle on the Thursday, where
they first surprised about 60 horse depasturing under the Castle walls, and
guarded with about 6 Musketeers, who flying gave the Alarm to the Castle, which
the Noble Governor suddenly surrounded with his horse, and the same night drew
up his foot and Artilery, and then sending to summon the Castle, and writing
also to the Lieutenant-colonell and other Officers there some plausible
Letters, and offering fair quarter and true performance, the Castle was
surrendered unto him about 12 a clock the same night by accord, only to give
them quarter, liberty and their wearing apparel. In which Castle they had 50
Muskets, 4 barrels of Powder, and other provision; the command whereof was
presently delivered unto Captain Read a faithful man in the service of the
Parliament. The noble Governor having thus settled a garrison for the
Parliament in Beverston-castle, continued his march the next morning toward
Malmsbury in Wiltshire, and the same day sent this ensuing summons written with
his own hand unto the Governor of Malmsbury, viz.

To the Governor or Commander in chief of the Garrison of Malmsbury.
YOu are hereby summoned, that you within one half hour after the coming of
this to your hands, surrender the same, with all the Arms, Ammunition,
provision, and other things of service and use whatsoever unto Col. Massy
Governor of Gloucester, for the use, and on the behalf of the King and his
Parliament now sitting at Westminster. And he does hereby engage himself by
all the ties of honor, that you, your officers, and soldiers shall not only
enjoy your lives, and be received under the protection of good usage and
quarter, but also all such as shall desire employment with us, under my
command, shall find entertainment according to their qualities, or depart
whither they please. And if you shall refuse this proffer of mercy, then you
are to expect no other but what Fire and Sword shall bring upon you.

Edw. Massy.
Dated 24 of May, 1644.
The Governor of Malmesbury within the time limited in the said Summons sent
this ensuing Answer.

SIR,
I Have received your Summons, and (without any unsavory language) do return
you this Answer: That we will maintain this town for the King and Parliament
now sitting at Oxford, in defense of those Rites that pretended Parliament at
Westminster have abused and robbed our Nation. For the other particular, that
upon denial we must expect the extremity of Fire and Sword, we make this
Answer: That those extremities, I believe, are as likely to fall upon those
that assault this town, as those that defend it. For that point, of serving
you, the truth is, we are all too proud.

Your Servant, Henry Howard.

This Henry Howard, a Colonel of Foot, and one of the Earl of Berkshires
sons, being Governor there, prepared his Soldiers for defense, as well as
for defiance, and filled his Works with his numerous Soldiers, bragging much
of their valor and resolution; which caused that worthy Commander Colonel
Massy, to double his cart and diligence to storm it, with all vigor,
courage, and expedition; but it was late in the evening before he could draw up
his Horse, Foot, and Artillery before the said Town: and these two
difficulties happened unto him the same time: the one was his soldiers want of
sleep, having continued their constant watch, and continual duty, for several
days and nights together, without intermission: the other was, the great store
of rain that fell the same evening, and continued all the night ensuing,
whereby Colonel Purefoy's Regiment of Horse were constrained to forsake the
field, and seek out some shelter for themselves and their horses: But the
unwearied Governor, with his Foot, and some three or four Troops of Horse of
his own Regiment, gave the Alarm to the Enemy all that night, playing hard
with his Ordnance and Musketeers, during which time he himself took great
pains in making Bliues, and in taking such houses as might best preserve his
men, and resolved to storm it early the next morning, and accordingly about
Sunrising May 25. he drew out a strong party of Musketeers against the
Turne-Pike and chain, who very gallantly assaulted the Enomy, and beat them
from their Ordnance and Guards: some other of the Musketeers assaulting the
Enemy in their Works (at one and the same time) with scaling-ladders, beat the
Enemy from their Works, and with great courage and resolution entered the same,
wounded some, and the rest fled further into the Town: in all which it was
hard to judge, whether that worthy Commander, by his personal action, or
discieet direction, were of greater avail in taking the Town: but sure it is,
the same added much courage to the Captains both of Horse and Foot; insomuch
that Major Gray and Captain Ayleworth with joint courage, and brave horses
well manned, swiftly entered the town, by leaping their Horses over the chain,
and over the Turne-Pike, and encountered the first Enemy, by cutting off his
arm with a sword, and shot the next in the head with a Pistol; and Captain
Blunt, one of the Captains of Foot, upon the discharge of the Enemies Ordnance
forced his entrance into the Town through the Enemies Work where the Enemy
plied the Ordnance, which he overturned upon his entrance, and made way for his
Soldiers to follow: and Captain White entered the Town in another place over
the Works, first mastering the same with his Musketeers: but the first man that
by force entered the Enemies Works, was a Sergeant with 40. resolute Musketeers,
to whom the Governor had promised five pounds, with other rewards to the 40.
Musketeers, if they would give the first assault, and perform it with courage,
which they did accordingly, and the Governor paid them liberally. It was a
brave spectacle to see, how unanimous both Commanders and Soldiers undertook
the enterprise, and with what undaunted spirits and carriage all of them in one
minute of time performed the same, notwithstanding their hard marches, want of
sleep, and the unseasonable rain all that night. But let all glory and praise
be given to the Lord of Hosts, by whom the work was done in so little time,
and without so much as a man hurt of the Governors Soldiers in the storming
of it: nor did they lose a man during their time of being there, except the
Governors boy, and one common Soldier: our Forces lay but twelve or thirteen
hours before the same, ere they took it by assault: the Governor of
Malmesbury, and such other Prisoners as were taken, are contained in the
ensuing List.

A List of the Officers and Soldiers taken at Malmesbury, May 25. 1644. at 4.
of the Clock in the morning.
Henry Howard, Col. of Foot, William Howard, Liev Col. Sons to the Earl of
Berkshire. William Chester, Major. William Markham, Capt. Gilbert Wheathill,
Capt. John Brimsden, Capt. Lievt.
Lievtenants.
Richard Bleak. Edward Scott. William Roach.
Ensigns.
John Barrat. Robert Bates. Richard Cage. Browning.
Quartermasters.
James Bower, Moreley. Laurence Short.
Sergeants.
Henry Dixon. Richard Fletcher. Robert Baily. William Fenton.
Corporalls.
Henry Painter. Thomas Hadley. John Poole. John Peerce. John Chapel. Gilbert
Harris, Drummer. William Weeks, Chyrurgion John Clark, Capt. of Horse. Private
Soldiers, 149.
Gentlemen that bare Arms.
John Freame. William Norris. John Bridges.
The rest of the Officers and Soldiers by running through the River made their
escape.

2. Iron Faulcons. 2. Iron Hamberguns. 9. Barrells of Powder. 152. Skaines of
Match. 900. Weight of Shot. 150. Muskets, or thereabouts.
As soon as the right worthy Colonel Massey had possessed himself of
Malmesbury, and the Prisoners, he preserved all the town from plunder of the
Soldiers, and then sent a strong party to Chipham, who took in that Garrison
also, and about 80. Musketeers Prisoners, he took also seven Waines or Wagons
laden with Sack and other Wines, going from Bristoll to Oxford: but it is
affirmed by others, that much of that lading is Arms and Ammunition. He has
since taken other towns, and brought the greatest part of Wiltshire under the
obedience o^ the Parliament, and has taken many other Commanders and
Malignants adhering to the Cavaliers, and the Irish Rebels, viz. M. George Low,
of the Oxford-Parliament, and another, second son of Sir Edward Barmons, and
one M. Chivers, with others: And by taking of Malmesbury and Beverston Castle,
all trade and commerce out of the West to Oxford is much hindered, and from
Bristoll to Oxford quite taken away, and the trade of clothing opened from
those parts to London; and, as the report is, there are upon the way now coming
up out of Wiltshire toward London thirteen Wains laden with woollen cloth,
which will be welcome to the Merchants and Drapers here, and other wares and
commodities will be sent and returned from London into the Country: This is
the Lords doing, and to him be given all the praise and glory. This also may
stir up the hearts of such as are able to lend upon the Gloucester Ordinance,
for the raising of some horse to serve under the command of that valiant
Commander, who will be left destitute of horse, when the Regiment of Colonel
Purefoys Horse shall be called away from him, who is earnestly desired by the
Committee of Coventrey, that he may return again into Warwickshire, for the
defense of that County, being raised by them for that purpose. To all which I
will only add, and conclude with the Votes and Resolutions of the House of
Commons, made upon reading the said Governors Letters of the taking of
Malmesbury and Beverston, beforementioned.

Die Veneris, 31. Maii. 1644.
A Letter from Colonel Massey from Malmesbury of the 25. of May concerning the
taking of the Town of Malmesbury, and a copy of the Summons sent to the
Town, and the Answer of the Garrison, were all read: and likewise a Letter of
the 27. of May from Malmesbury, relating the same particulars more at large,
was likewise read; desiring that his Regiment might be recruted before any
other addition of force: and likewise desiring to know how that Town of
Malmesbury shall be disposed of.

Ordered, That the Town of Malmesbury, and the Castle of Beverston, as to the
Government of them, shall be left wholly to the disposal of Colonel Massey.

Ordered, That before there be any addition made of new Regiments for the
assistance of Colonel Massey, Colonel Masseys own Regiment of Foot be first
recruted, and that his Regiment of Horses may be completed for Men, Horse, and
Arms, by such supplies of Moneys as by the Ordinance may be procured for
Gloucester.

Ordered, That after Colonel Masseyes Regiments of Horse and Foot shall be
recruted and completed, That a Regiment of Horse shall be raised for Colonel
Stephens, High Sheriff of the County of Gloucester, to be under the command of
Colonel Massey: and that my Lord General be desired to grant no Commission to
any other for raising any other Regiments for the County of Gloucester, and the
other Counties mentioned in the Ordinance, but to such as shall be recommended
by Colonel Massey unto the Committee of Gloucester, and by them to this House.

Ordered, That Roger Burgoyne do by this day sevennight at farthest pay in the
400. l. owing upon Bond to Capt. Matthews deceased, and assigned by former
Order upon Colonel Massey.

Ordered, That it be referred to the Committee for Gloucester, to prepare an
Ordinance, and bring it in on Tuesday morning next, for settling upon Colonel
Massey an Estate of Jnheritance to the value of 1000. pound per Annum, at
least, out of some Papists and Delinquents Estates.

Char. Stavely Cler. Dom.
Pury. 1644. June 4.
FINIS.

