Die Lunae 7. Iunii 1647.
An Additionall Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament
of England for the more full Indemnity of the Officers and Soldiers who have
acted by Authority, and for the service of the Parliament.
FOrasmuch as in the times of this late War and public Distractions, there
have been many Injuries done to private persons, and other Offenses committed
by diverse persons bearing Arms in the service of the Parliament; the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled taking into their consideration, That it is
expedient that the Injuries and Offenses aforesaid be pardoned and put in
Oblivion, rather then by pretense of prosecution against some few persons, a
great number of such who have faithfully served the Parliament be brought into
a continual vexation for such Actions as the exigency of War has
necessitated them unto, do therefore Ordain, and be it Ordained by the said
Lords and Commons, That all persons who have committed any Offenses,
Trespasses, Injuries, or other Misdemeanors whatsoever, during such time as
they have been employed in Arms by, or for the service of the Parliament, be,
is, and are hereby discharged and pardoned of the same, and of and from all
Prosecution or Damages therefore, either at the Suit of the King or the party
grieved; and may, in case he or they be questioned therefore, plead the
general Issue, and give this Ordinance in evidence, which shall be allowed to
all intents and purposes, as if the same were pleaded in Bar: And in case any
shall prosecute any Action or Suit contrary to the tenor of this Ordinance,
against any person hereby discharged, after notice given that such person is
hereby discharged, the Defendant or Defendants so prosecuted, shall recover his
and their costs against such Prosecutor.

Provided also, that this Ordinance, nor any thing therein contained, shall
extend to discharge any such person or persons as aforesaid, from making their
true and just Accounts to any Committee or Committees of Parliament, appointed
or to be appointed for that purpose, of what they have taken, received, or had
for the service or benefit of the Parliament.

Die Lunae 7. Junii 1647.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.


