December. 3. 1642.
At the Committee of Lords and Commons, for advance of Money and other
Necessaries for the ARMY.
IT is this day Ordered that whereas an Account has been given unto us, by
the Sub-Committee of London, appointed to take the Subscriptions of diverse
well-affected persons, for Pay-money for Soldiers and Arms, by virtue of an
Ordinance of Parliament of the 14. of November last. And in the same Account we
find that several Parishes within the Liberties, of London, Suburbs, and
places adjoining, (viz. Fosters Parish, Faiths Parish, Christchurch Parish,
Katherine Coleman Parish, and Michael Woodstreet Parish, all within the Walls.
as also Bridewell Precinct, Giles Cripplegate, George Southwark, Olaves
Southwark, Saviors Southwark, Thomas Southwark, Trinity Minories, being
Parishes and places, part of them within the City Freedom, besides Bevis
Marks within the Walls, and the Nine out Parishes hereafter mentioned, viz.
Clement Danes, Giles in the Fields, James Clarkenwell, Katherine Tower, Leonard
Shorditch, Martins in the Fields, Mary White-Chappell, Magdalen Bermondsey, and
Savoy Parish) have not yet Subscribed for the purposes aforesaid, These are
therefore to require the Churchwardens and Constables of the said Parishes and
places, to join with such other Persons as are hereunder mentioned, to call a
General Meeting of the Inhabitants in the respective Parishes and places
aforesaid, and to deal effectually with them to Subscribe for the furnishing
of Arms and Money for payment of Soldiers for several months ensuing, or
during these times of danger, for the preservation and safety of the King,
Parliament, City, Suburbs, and places adjacent: And that you repair to the
several houses and places of abode of such of the said Inhabitants as shall
not appear at such Meeting, as well Freemen as others, and take their
Subscriptions for the purposes aforesaid. And that you keep a Book or Roll
for that purpose* And you are further Ordered to give account to the said
Sub-Committee at Weavers Hall in Basing hallstreet London of the said
Subscriptions before the foureteenth day of this instant December. And that you
return the names of the persons refusing. And that you choose a Treasurer
among your selves, who shall bring in from time to time, to Weavers Hall
aforesaid, your weekly or monthly Collections unto the said Sub-Committee,
where you shall have a discharge. And that you follow from time to time the
directions of the said Sub-Committee in all things touching the premises. And
for repayment of such sums of money as shall be advanced as aforesaid, with
interest for the forbearance thereof from the times disbursed, the Lords and
Commons in Parliament have engaged the Public Faith of the Kingdom. It is
likewise Ordered that this be Printed, and sent to the Parishes and places
aforesaid.


