A DECLARATION AND ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT;
Touching The Great SEAL OF ENGLAND.

And that the said SEAL is to be put into the hands and custody of such
Commissioners, as are herein named by both Houses of Parliament.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration Touching the Great
Seal, be forthwith printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Edward Husbands, November 11. 1643.

AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament; Touching the
Great Seal of England.
WHereas the Great Seal of England, which by the Laws of this Realm ought to
attend the Parliament, being the Supreme Court of Justice and Judicature within
this Realm, for the dispatch of the great and weighty affairs of the
Commonwealth, which is especially interessed and concerned therein, was above a
year last past, that is to say, the Two and twentieth day of May, Anno 1642. by
the then Lord Keeper thereof, Edward Lord Littleton, then a Member and Speaker
of the House of Peers in Parliament, contrary to the great trust in him
reposed, and duty of his place, secretly and perfidiously conveyed away from
the Parliament into the Kings Army, raised against the Parliament; the said
Lord Keeper departing therewith into the said Army, without the leave or
privity of the said House; By means whereof, great mischiefs and
inconveniences have ensued to this Kingdom, and the Kingdom of Ireland.

And whereas the said Great Seal ought constantly to remain in the hands and
custody of one or more Officer or Officers (sworn for that service) and to be
used and employed for the weal and safety of His Majesty's People; which
notwithstanding has been diverse times sithence the conveying away thereof as
aforesaid, put into the hands of other persons not sworn, and Popishly and
dangerously affected, who have had the disposing and managing thereof at their
own wills and pleasures, and has been traitorously and perniciously abused, to
the Ruin and Destruction of the Parliament and Kingdom, by granting and
issuing out diverse Illegal Commissions of Array, and other unlawful
Commissions for raising of Forces against the Parliament, by issuing out of
most foul and scandalous Papers, under the Name and Title of Proclamations,
against both Houses of Parliament, and diverse Members thereof, and others
adhering to them, and Proclayming them Traitors and Rebels; Commissions of Oyer
and Terminer, to proceed against diverse of them, as Traitors, and other
Commissions to seize and confiscate their Estates, for no other cause, but for
doing their duties and services to the Commonwealth; as likewise by granting
that horrid Commission, for executing of that most bloody and detestable
Design of Waller, Tomkins, and others, for the destruction of the Parliament,
and City of London, and of the Army raised for their just Defense; and (as if
Massacres and Assacinations, had been but light and venial crimes) another
Commission has been granted under the same Seal for a Cessation of Arms with
the barbarous and bloody Rebels in Ireland, after the effusion of so much
innocent blood, and slaughter of above one hundred thousand Protestants, Men,
Women, and Children, by their merciless, and bloody hands: whereupon a
Cessation of Arms is accordingly concluded; and those brutish Rebels thereby
imboldned to prepare themselves, not only for a total Exterpation of the
Protestants remaining there, but for a Conquest also of this Kingdom: And
further by granting of several Commissions, and Offices of Trust and Command,
to notorious Papists, who by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, are made
incapable thereof; and by conferring of Honors, and Dignities, and granting of
Lands and Estates to diverse exorbitant Delinquents, who stand legally impeached
of high Treason, and other high Crimes and misdemeanors in Parliament.

All which, and many other unlawful and enormous Acts have passed under the
said Great Seal, since the removal thereof from the Parliament, as aforesaid:
Which the Lords and Commons taking into their consideration, and finding all
ways, and means obstructed for the procuring of any redress from His
Majesty, in the Premises, notwithstanding their long hopes, and uncessant
Labors, for the obtaining thereof, are bound in duty, and of necessity to
provide some speedy Remedy for these insupportable mischiefs.

BE it therefore Declared and Ordained, by the said Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, that as well all and every the said Acts formerly mentioned,
which have passed under the said Great Seal, as also all Letters Patents and
Grants of any Lands, Goods or Estates, of any person, or persons whatsoever,
for adhering to the Parliament, all Compositions or Grants, of any Wardships,
or Leases of any Wards Lands, Liveries, Primer seizins and Ouster le maines,
since the said 22. of May 1642. which have not according to the due course of
Law, passed through the Court of Wards and Liveries, established by Law: All
grants since the said 22. of May 1642. of any Honors, Dignities, Manors,
Lands, Hereditaments, or other thing whatsoever, to any person or persons,
which have voluntarily contributed, or shall voluntarily contribure any Aid or
Assistance to the maintenance of that unnatural War, raised against the
Parliament; And all pardons granted to any such person or persons; And all
other Acts or things whatsoever, contrary to, or in derogation of the
Proceedings of both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, which have passed
under the said Great Seal, since the removal thereof from the Parliament,
shall be, and are hereby declared to be utterly Invalid, void, and of none
effect, to all intents and purposes.

And that all and every act or thing, which after the publication of this
Ordinance, shall pass by, or under the said Great Seal, or under any Great
Seal of England (other then what is hereby appointed and established) shall be
utterly void, frustrate, and of no effect; and every person, or persons, which
shall put the same in use, or shall claim any thing thereby, shall be held and
adjudged a public Enemy of this State.

And be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that a Great Seal of
England already by them made and provided, shall be forthwith put in use; and
shall be, and is hereby authorized and established to be of like force, power,
and validity, to all intents and purposes as any Great Seal of England has
been, or ought to be.

And that it shall be put into the hands and custody of the persons hereafter
named, who are hereby Ordained Commissioners for that purpose; that is to say,
John Earl of Rutland, and Oliver Earl of Bulling brook, Members of the House
of Peers, and Oliver St. John's Esquire, His Majesty's Solicitor General, John
Wild Sergeant at Law, Samuel Brown, and Edmund Prideaux Esquire Members of the
House of Commons; which said persons, or any three or more of them, whereof one
member or more of the Lords House, also one Member or more of the House of
Commons, shall be present, shall have, and are hereby Authorized to have the
Keeping, Ordering and disposing thereof, as also all such and the like Power
and Authority, as any Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, or Commissioner of the
Great Seal, for the time being has had, used, or ought to have.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

