THE DEFENSE Of sundry POSITIONS and SCRIPTURES FOR THE Congregational-way
JUSTIFIED: OR An Answer to an Epistle written by Mr. Richard Hollingworth, unto
S. E. and T. T. wherein he (in many particulars) charge them with injurious
dealing against God, and against himself, in that Book of theirs, called A
Defense of sundry Positions, etc.

CONTAINING A Vindication from such Charges and aspersions so laid upon them.

As also a brief Answer to his large (if not unreasonable) demands, to have
Scripturall, or rational Answ. given to his 112. Queries.

By SAM: EATON Teacher ^IM: TAILOR Pastor of the Church at Duckenfield in
Cheshire.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at
his shop in Popes-head-Alley. 1646.

To the Seeker of Truth in Sincerity, DIRECTIONS.
CHRISTIAN BROTHER, that look hereon, and art willing and desirous through
Christ to search after and to receive the love of the Truth, that thou may
be saved, and may further know and worship our God, and Father in Christ
acceptably, in spirit and in truth, to glorify his Name before men, wherein
thou have profaned and polluted it, as we have done, by conforming ( with the
times) to the precepts and ^raditions of men: Ponder with us for thy direction
these particulars. 1. That the Mystery of truth is not manifest to the World,
the generality, but to the Saints, who are dead to the World, John 14. 22. and
17. 6. Col. 1. 26. and 2: 20. and 3: 3: 2. Hence this is found amongst them
that are most full of love, Gal. 5* 6. John 13. 35. He that dwells ( or abides)
in that love; abides in God* and God in him, 1 John 4. 16. 3. Hence it is
amongst them that to others so do, as they would be done unto, Mat. 7. 12. And
that whatsoever they would not should be done to themselves, do not it to
others. (Act. 15: 20. 29. Old Transl. Margin. v. 20. Regim. v. 29. Complut.
Regius in Naturali and Graec. vetust. and optimis, aitinsig. Seldom D^ Anno
Civil, c. 21. and De Jure Gent. li 7. c. 12.) 4. It Is amongst the pitiful.
That ye seek to the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and keep
themselves unspotted from the world, John 1 27. 5. This Wis^dome is not from
below, but from above, and is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
well-perswaded, ( or rightly obedient) full of mercy Jam. 3. 17. 6. It Is
amongst such, as living godly in Christ Jesus; suffer persecution for his Names
fake, 2 Timothy 3. 12. John 15. 19 and 16: 33. Mat. 5. 10, 11.

Now if thou hardly kn^west such; Say to him whom thy soul loves, O tell me
where thou feedest, where thou make thy flocks lie down, Cant. 1. 7. and he
will give true wisdom to thee, to dis^^rne of persons, and things that d^ffer.

Yet expect not a Rose without a prick or spot. In many things we slip all. If
any slip not in word, he is perfect, Jam. 3. 2. Expect therefore to find this,
amongst them, that in their general aim and course, walk nearest according
to that Rule, Gal. 6. 16. And be a doer of the will of God, as far as thou
know, John 7. 17. and mainly be taken up with the knowledge, Grace, and love
of Jesus Christ, that thy heart may be established therewith, Heb. 13. 8, 9.

For our parts, shame may cover our faces, that we have walked after as men:
but henceforth our aim it so to walk as becomes the Gospel.

Cause it is of grief to our souls, that there should be Oppositions between
our Brethren and us, when the Canaanite (i. depressing Merchants) and the
breach-making Perizite, are in the Land, Genesis 13. 7, 8.

The truth is, after long seeking our God, and often discussing with our
Brethren, we peaceably set upon Reformation, Practicing what we were convinced
was most agreeable to the Word of God: Our Brother began against us: Printing
against this our practice: Yet we forbore long, till we saw, that by our
silence, not only we, but Truth suffered; then were we forced to print Our
just Defense of sundry Positions. And had he there stayed, we had, now, abode
silent, who by printing this, may each of us seem (...), unwise, imprudent, (
as Paul said often of himself, being forced so to write in his own, and the
Truths Defense, 2. Cor. 12. 11. and 11. And truly, had it been our persons
only that suffered, (though therein we share deeply) by this Late Printed
Epistle, with certain Queries (being for an Answer to our Defense;) we had in
this kind held our peace; (although our Brother could not easily repair our
Damage.) But seeing Truth now suffers a second time, by our so long forbearing,
we are again enforced to this seeming folly or imprudence. And by our viewing
and pondering our Brothers angry bitter expressions, if we in any passage seem
to any, to have learned some of his ways; ( which we confess we are subject
unto, Pro. 22. 25.) Let our weakness remain with us, and not be charged on
the Cause, or Truth that we maintain. We are learning not to render evil for
evil, or railing for railing, 1 Pet. 3. 9. and hope we shall more fully be
taught of God therein.

Christian Reader, If thou have read our Brothers Epistle, we entreat thee to
have one ear for this our Answer thereto: remembering what the wiseman said; He
that is first in his own cause, seems just: but his neighbor comes and
searches him, Prove. 18. 17. Consider what is said, and the Lord give thee and
us, understanding in all things. 2 Timothy ^. 7. Amen.

THE DEFENSE OF Sundry Positions and Scriptures, for the Congregational-way
JUSTIFIED:
Reverend and beloved Brother,
YOu have saluted us with a querulous and Apologeticall Epistle; a querulous in
reference to us, and Apologeticall in reference to your self; And with an 112
Queries, to all which you require us to give rational and scripturall Answers;
We will first take your Epistle into consideration, and afterward debate what
is meet to be said in reference to your Queries.

And first we will consider the justness of those charges that you lay upon
us. Secondly, Whether you have acquitted your self from those charges you say
are laid upon you.

The charges you make against us may be referred to seven Sect. 1*
heads.

1. That we unjustly charge you of provoking us to be your Antagonist in print.
page 3.

2. That there is a difference betwixt our Title page and the text. page 8, 9.

3. That our pretending to prove some positions, practices, by other scriptures
and arguments as to your intent expressed in the preface, is a by-matter. page
10.

4. That we do not answer directly, but obliquely and evadingly. page 10, 11.

5. That we discover too much willingness to quarrel at your expressions. page
11.

6. That contrary to rule and reason when we should make good the proof of the
Position from the Text alleged, we call to you to prove the contrary. page 12

7. That we curtall and clip your answers, fold them up in obscure etc. Omit
that which we know to be more pertinent, while we transcribe and largely answer
some thing less pertinent. page 13.

To begin with the first: How do you acquit your self R: H: M: A: of Maygd.
Col. Cambr. meant. Yet it was not your name (which we love as we do your
person) that could provoke us, but the matter in the Book; which as it tended
to the subversion of that Government which is in our apprehensions suitable to
the golden rule of the word of God, and the setting up of another government,
which in the things in controversy we can see no other ground for, save humane
policy and prudence, (so called,) measured by the line of natural reason: so
it reflected upon us in some particulars, which falling from us in conference
or writing you took up, and committed your answer unto them to be made
public. And for that cause when we saw no other of better abilities take up
the business, we thought we were bound to make our defense as public. But as
Joseph in another case said to his Brethren, Genesis 45. 5.
Be not grieved that ye sold me, etc: so whether you provoked, or whether we
without cause were provoked, yet if God (as we hope he will) make this a means
to bolt out some truth of his, so far forth we shall rejoice in it.

Your second charge is, that there is a difference betwixt our Title page and
the Text (page 7, 8.) for say you. The Title speaks indefinitely, that the
Positions and Scriptures alleged (not some or many of them) by me examined,
are sufficient, pertinent and full of power, and are manifested, yea clearly
manifested so to be. But in your text you disclaim the places applied to
Position 23, as it is by me controverted and are confident they are not found
in the works of any Congregationall man, etc.

Answ 1. The title page was not that we sent up, but was prefixed to our
defense by a Friend, to whose care we committed it, to see to the printing of
it, our selves living at such distance. And if less had been given out in the
Title, it would not have derogated from the validity of the work, and would
have liked us better. Notwithstanding we doubt not but to maintain the
concordance betwixt the Text and it, though not perhaps in every Punctilio. Yet
it must be understood, that so far as the Positions and scriptures are ours,
and truly and justly alleged by you as ours, so far we maintain the
sufficiency and pertinency of them. And also so far as Congregationall men
have intended to make use of them, in reference to their true and proper scope,
in alleging them, they are full of power, for they have produced and mentioned
several of them as probable, and there is strength of probability though not
of certainty, even in those texts in which the infallibility of them is not
asserted.

2. The title that we sent up prefixed to our Book, you may behold it in the
first page of our defense without variation, and we suppose you will judge it
modest enough.

3. And whatsoever may be said for the rest, yet sure we are, in the instance
you give there is no difference betwixt them. For the Title page ingageth to a
defense of sundry Positions, and scriptures alleged to justify the
Congregationall way; But Position 23 as it is by you controverted, is a
doctrine devised by your self, and the scriptures fixed by your self, to
render us odious to all other Churches and all other Saints. As for us, we hate
and detest the thought of confining the Priestly, Prophetical, and Kingly
Offices of Christ, to Churches merely Congregationall; Neither were these
scriptures ever alleged by us, or any of our judgment, (to our knowledge) to
any such purpose: therefore without clashing with our Title page, we might and
ought to explode them.

4. Forasmuch as your Title page runs thus, The examination of sundry
scriptures alleged by our Brethren in defense of some particulars of their
way: Either make it out that some Brethren of the Congregationall way, have
made use of these scriptures to this purpose, or else there will be found not
only an imaginary, but a real clashing betwixt your title page and your text,
and you also will be found guilty the second time, of a grievous reproach, not
only against the Brethren, but against the way it self.

For the second place, viz. Position the 15, wherein say After the allegation
of some Authorities instead of answering a Text (upon which the distinction of
Pastors and Teachers is grounded) You, (the one a Teacher and the other a
Pastor) conclude, if we do put a false gloss upon the scripture by
misinterpreting of Ephesians. 4. 11. yet more modest language (let any man find
immodesty in that examination if he can) had become you Brother, seeing such
reverend and learned men (whom your self honor) have gone before us in this
exposition.

Answ. If we had only urged their authorities, you might have charged us with
not making out in this place what we pretend in our title Page: but we urge and
improve the reasons, and so make them our own reasons, for the confutation of
your answer. First, after we have showed that whether you translate the
prepositive article (...), some, or these, you gain nothing by it; we
endeavor to prove that the Doctors are not Schoole-Doctors, but Church
Doctors, from Romans 12. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12. 8. and then proceed to prove that these
Church Doctors are distinct from Church Pastors, not only by the authority of
Zanchy, but by the reasons rendered by Pareus and Bucer, and specified by us,
viz. That God gives distinct gifts to Pastors from those that he gives to
Teachers: For to the one is given a special faculty of exhortation, to the
other a clearer understanding of doctrine, and consequently they are distinct
offices; And yet you would make all men believe, that in our Reply, we defend
not the Text at all.

Concerning our conclusion, in which immodest language is charged upon you, and
your defense of your self ( Let any man find immodesty in that examination if
he can) we say, we conceive not our selves injurious in it at all. For the
immodest language, though it be not in the examination of this Position, yet we
find it in the first words of the preface which is applicable in your proper
scope, to all the positions, and so consequently to this Position, viz. True
Positions and lawful practices must not (much less untrue and unlawful) be
fathered upon God by misinterpretation of his word, etc. In which words you do
insinuate the Positions which you examine, and practices built upon them to be
untrue and unlawful, and to be fathered on God by misinterpretation of Gods
word. And therein you do not asperse us only, but lay an immodest charge upon
Bucer, Zanchy, Pareus, who concur with us in our Position and interpretation
of Ephesians. 4.

Thirdly, say you, Do you clearly manifest that the text Mat. (whatsoever
other texts do) does prove that the Church must be Congregationall?

Answ. We clearly manifest, what in conference we have endeavored to prove
out of these words, and the Position as you have laid it down and do
controvert it, we shall believe to be your own Fiction, till you produce your
Author. We hold that the exercise of Church Power by the Congregationall Church
is founded upon this text, as the observation of the Christian Sabbath is upon
the fourth Commandme^t. We have clearly proved that Christ in this place sends
the offended Brother to the Church endowed with power at that time when the
offense should be committed, and therefore sends the Brethren of the Jewish
Church to the Jewish. Church, whilst that Church remained in power: and sends
the brethren of Christian Churches in the times of the Gospel to
Congregationall Churches as they stand in opposition to Classical,
Provincial, National and Oecumenicall Churches. And how slight soever you
make of this our Reply, except by scripturall reasons, you force us to quit
this ground, you lose your Presbyterian cause.

Fourthly, say you, Position the 20. Have you clearly manifested that the Keys
were given to Peter to be used by him, (For you could not but know that to be
the meaning) as a Disciple, Believer, not an Officer?

Answ. We have clearly proved the contrary; And yet you without the least
refutation of the proof made by us, stick to the conclusion, that we cannot
but know the meaning to be, that the Keys were given to Peter to be used by him
as a Disciple, or a Believer, not as an Officer. A doctrine which we profess
against (as in our Reply we manifest) as neither consonant to the mind of the
holy Ghost, (as we conceive) nor the Elders of New England, whom you allege,
as we proved it out of the sense of their own words. Do we but sing to a
deaf man in what we say to you? We leave it to the ingenuous Reader to judge
betwixt us.

Fifthly, say you, Have you clearly manifested that Col. 4. 17. proves the
Churches power to censure her Officers: when the strongest argument you bring,
to prove Archippus his faultiness, without which it was no censure, amounts
but to a strong presumption and that you know is but a weak proof.

Answ. A man would imagine that you (Brother) never built any conclusions as
mortally probable upon premises that might beget strong presumptions, but that
all your arguments were demonstrationes potissimae, and concluded with an (...)
because you find fault with our strong presumptions built upon two good
reasons, and ushered in by the authority of Zanchy, as one of those many
Classick Authors that assert the same thing with us in this particular. Yet
your self upon this place argue thus. Paul (say Examination in page 15, 1^
you) bids Timothy fulfill his ministry, 2 Timothy 4, 5. yet this does not
suppose Timothy to be faulty, etc. And then you add, And it may be Archippus
was not faulty, and then this Admonition was no censure. and thence you
infer, therefore its alleadg^d to no purpose; It had been more tolerable if
you had said therefore it may be, it is alleged to ^o purpose. Is it a fault
in us to build a strong presumption upon two reasons, yet uncontrowled? Is it
no fault in you (Sir) to build a peremptory conclusion upon that which amounts
to no more then an it may be, which is not so much as a remote probability,
much less a strong presumption?

Since our work and business was to defend the scriptures alleged against
your examinations, we have fulfilled what our Title page undertakes, if we
prove that a Church has a privilege to admonish her Officers by virtue of
this text, any thing in your examinations notwithstanding. Now the two reasons
by us alleged make it absolutely clear, that Archippus was faulty by virtue
of Col. 4. 17. and that tho Churches power in censuring her Officers, may be,
and is founded hereupon. i. e. For ought you allege to the contrary in that
place, and contain in them grounds of a strong presumption that the thing is
so indeed.

Sixthly, Have you (say you) clearly manifested from Adams Family, that 7 8 or
9, make a Church, etc.

Answ. Is not our work to defend the Position against your arguments? Is there
any thing that has the least appearance of an argument produced by you in this
section, which we have not fully answered? If there be, produce it.

We thought it superfluous and impertinent to prove that which your self
clearly grant, when you say the case of Adam and Noah was extraordinary, there
were no more in the world, and therefore could be no more in the Church: Do
you not grant a Church at that time consisting of 7, 8 or 9, Of this we make
use, and argue in effect thus; How few ever made a Church since the beginning
of the world, the same may make a Church at this day: But 7, 8 or 9 (say you)
made a Church in Adams time and Noah's time, Therefore 7 8 or 9, may make a
Church at this day. Yet we would not have the Church to consist of no more, but
judge a numerous addition of members a great mercy.

As for our concession ( that God has not precisely determined what number
does make a Church) which you make use of to darken the clearenesse of our
manifestation, we say, It is a confirmation of our argument which we bring,
viz. That look how few have made a Church, so few may make a Church still,
because God has not determined what number a Church must consist of. And it is
brought to clear the Position that 7 8 or 9, may now make a Church, because so
many have made a Church in Adams and Noah's days. And till you have overthrown
the strength of the Argument which is contained in these words ( because God
has not determined what number must make a Church) you deal not heartily, to
suggest that out own acknowledgement in those words, is against that clear
manifestation of that Position, which we in the Title page speak of.

Seventhly, Methinks you have not cleared (say you) that Revel. 8. 8, 9. is
sufficient and full of power against settled Endowments.

Answ. Sir, It falls out with the best writers, as it does with the best
builders, they have not only in the making of their walls certain pieces of
timber, which bear up the weight of the stories and roof which if they were
removed the whole building would fall; but also certain carved enterteises,
which serve for ornament, and yet possibly may yield some contributions of
strength also; yet so, that if they should be removed, the building would
remain firm. These amongst the learned are usually types, doubtful parables,
and dark prophesies, which they bring in when they have solidly proved a point
by sound argument before. Thus it falls out with the Elders of New England, who
being demanded whether they did allow or think fit to allow and settle any
certain stinted maintenance upon the Ministers, answer that there is nothing
done that way amongst them, and their practice they defend by two reasons,
which must needs infer the unfitness of the contrary course at least to
them which may be resolved into these two Arguments.

1. Arg^If the Condition of the Ministers and the Churches to which they belong
may vary, then it is unfit to settle a certain and stinted maintenance for the
Ministry: But etc. Ergo.

2. Argt If Christ our Lord has appointed no such thing as stinted
maintenance, then it is unfit for the Church to settle stinted maintenance: But
etc. Ergo.

Upon these two pillars is the fabrike of their practice borne up; yet to add
some probable luster to what was well proved before, they add the opinion of
some Divines concerning Revel. 8. 8, 9. and they speak doubtfully of the
place, as not thinking it fit confidently to lay this burden upon it; But say
they, if those writers be not deceived, which so expound that scripture, as for
our parts we know not but they expound it truly, etc. They say not confidently
that the exposition is true, but that they know not the contrary; and if it be
so, then it may be truly gathered, that the bringing in of settled endowments
and eminent preferments into the Church has been the corruptions and to some
t^^ destruction of such as lived by them, both Church Officers and members. And
we have endeavored to show the probability of this interpretation, but dare
not speak definitively of it. Yet the Position in the leter of it undertakes
no more than what you (Brother) grant, viz. that Revel. 8. 8, 9. is applied by
some good Authors to those times in which Constantine brought settled endowments
into the Church, and yet we are still beaten as though what the Elders intended
( viz. to cast a probable luster upon what was solidly proved before) we had
not clearly delivered this text of scripture, and by consequence must be
guilty of belying God, and counterfeiting the King of Kings hand, which is the
language of the preface, and so make us a laughing stock to some, and the
objects of hatred to other vulgar readers; For this cause we must of necessity
discover your dealing in this business.

2. It is said of Amaleck that he met Israel in the way, and Deuteronomy. 25. ^8.
smot the hindermost of them, even all that were feeble behind them: so you
(Brother) show a singular dexterity in passing by the two forementioned
reasons, and fall upon the probable argument drawn from this place, the
hindermost and most feeble of all the rest.

3. Again, what they speak hypothetically, and by way of supposition, you
make use of thetically, and by way of position, and so, that it may well leave
the ordinary reader under this apprehension, that we have no other argument to
build our dislike of stinted Church maintenance upon, but this place. For your
scope is apparently not only to vindicate the scriptures from abuse, but also
to confute these positions of the Congregationall way.

4. Once more, whereas the Elders show that this place is applied to those
times wherein Constantine brought settled endowments into the Church with ampla
praedia large possessions, you (Brother) leave out ampla praedia, and mention
only settled maintenance, whereas the place may be understood in the latter
sense, as well as in the former. For there were certain Revenues belonging to
the Churches before Eusebius. lib. 10. 1. 5.
Constanstine his time, as may appear out of the imperial constitution,
directed to Anilinus, wherein he says, We have already decreed the same, that
the possessions belonging to the Churches aforetime, should be restored; And
again provide, that if either gardens or houses, or other possessions
whatsoever have belonged to the title of their Churches, all the same be
speedily restored to them again.

Lastly, Give us leave to tell you, that we conceive you are not a little
injurious to the Elders of New England, and learned Master Forbes and others,
whilst you affirm that Constantines donation (as you seem to understand it)
is the foundation of this exposition; because you would imply, that they
believe such a donation of Constantine to be a truth, which is such an impudent
fiction, that all wise men no sooner hear it, but abhor it. For those which
say d. c. fund. de El^c. Sext. Chro. vol. 2.
least, affirm that Constantine gave the City of Rome to Silvester the Pope
and his successors, and others are not ashamed to avouch that he gave all the
Western Empire. And this donation is mentioned by Gratian in the Decretalls,
this also is censured by Nauclerus to be but Palea, because it is manifest that
Constantine gave Italy and other Kingdoms of the West to his sons by his
last will and testament. No^ not of this Donation but of other maintenance
which Constantine bestowed; not upon the Bishop of Rome alone, but upon other
godly Bishops and Ministers throughout his Empire, are the Elders of
New England Master Forbes and others to be understood.

Eighthly say you, And Position 7 do you manifestly clear that 2 Cor, 8, 5.
does pertinently and powerfully prove, that every member at his admission does
promise to give himself to the Church to be guided by them, when you say, the
practice of the Churches of Macedonia is by way of allusion made use of, and
the Argument is a Comparatis. For you know allusions and comparisons are not
argumentative.

Answ. Why do you the second time after admonition given by us in our former
book leave out that, without which neither can the Churches directing, nor the
members following direction be lawful. For the Elders of New England say not
that a Church member is to give himself up to the Church to be guided by her
according to will, but according to God; But these words ( according to God)
you leave out.

2. If to answer all your Reasons to the contrary be to defend this Position by
virtue of this text, we have done it; produce (if you can) any thing which has
the least appearance of an Argument in it, which we have not answered.

3. We have showed that the case of the Macedonian Churches, 2 Cor. 8. 5. is
parallel with the case of a member giving himself up to be guided by the
Church according to God: For as God gave Paul and Timothy to direct the
Churches of Macedonia according to God, so God has given particular Churches
to direct their several members according to God, that is to say, The Elders
by way of office authoritatively, and the brethren as God shall give them
opportunity to advise and admonish their fellow members. Therefore by the same
reason that the Churches of Macedonia, gave themselves up to Paul and Timothy,
by the same reason ought Church members to give up themselves to the Church to
be directed by her according to God.

But you would make men (at least if any possibly may look upon this
exception, as though Logique Reason and Religion what ever they be are wholly in
subserviency to your present design) believe (whether you have confuted us or
no) that we have consuted our selves, when we say it is Argumentum a
comparatis; for say you, You know that allusions and comparisons are not
argumentative.

For unless we must unknow all that we have known to gratify your cause
withal, we must needs profess that when we were but boys in the University,
we were taught that one head or common place from which Arguments were to be
drawn was a Comparatis from Comparrisons. And we have had no reason to
extirminate that doctrine from intermedling with the matters of God. Suppose a
man should say to Master Hollinworth (a Minister) You should season others with
the salt of knowledge, and of the love and sear of God, for you are the salt
of the earth, Math. 5. 13. You should feed your people with wholesome doctrine
and discipline, for you are a shepherd, would Master Hollinworth out with this
Logique, and say Comparrisons prove nothing and therefore the Arguments are
naught? Did Paul commit a sol^ris^e in Logique when he proves that Ministers
should receive maintenance because the mouth of the Ox must not be ^^zelled,
that* treads out the corn? Or is our Saviors argument weak and
insufficient, when he justifies his Disciples* for plucking the ears of
corn, by an argument ^ Comparatis taken from David's taking and eating the
shewbread? So that, till we have something more then your bare assertion to
convince us, we shall believe there is a truth in the old rule of Analogy,
Quod de uno, secundum proporti^nem affirmatur vel negatur, id etiam de altero:
That which is asserted or denied of one thing, according to proportion may be
asserted or denied of another thing. And if you can overthrow this old maxim,
we are confident that the Classique cause will suffer as well as the
Congregationall.

Ninthly, say you, In stead of clear manifestation of Ministers mantenance out
of the stock of the Church, you say, we think we see most warrant for it from
the New Testament, and as most probable once disputed it, but neither then
(...) are per^^ptory in it, etc.

Answ. What shall our modesty be now ^^de use of against us? Though it be so*
yet we shall desire to be mode^t Salust. B^l. Jug.
still. It was the Commendation of (...), that he did plurimum fac^re and
^inim^m de s^l^qui; We hope God will never leave us so (...) to ou^ selves as
to profess my doctrine, or f^ll upon a^^ practice confidently and per^^^torily
as of divine inspiration or institution, for which we have not a clear
evidence of scripture; That tithes and stinted Church maintenance are
unlawful, that Ministers are to be maintained out of the Church stock, the
reception and distribution whereof appertains to the Deacons office, we
conceive we have solidly proved out of the word of God: But that the Ministers
are to be maintained by such a stock as is raised by a weekly contribution,
because it is not absolutely clear in the Text (at least to us) we thought fit
to dispute it only as probable. If you could come as near unto a
demonstration of Classique government, as this chapter does to a demonstration
of a stock by weekly contribution of the Church, and we had no more to say
against it, then yet we have heard (for we cannot prophecy what you may
hereafter produce, against a Stock raised by weekly contributions, we should
be tender how we muttered a word against Classique government.

2. Except you can produce some one of the Congregationall way, that in writing
or disputation has asserted weekly contributions to be of divine institution,
and binding to all Churches, we shall esteem the Position and scripture
annexed (as to such a purpose) your own invention. As for us as we defended it
in disputation, so we have to the same purpose clearly manifested it to be
sufficient, pertinent, and full of power, viz. to make it probable, that the
Ministry should be maintained by a Stock raised by weekly contributions, and
see no cause to doubt, but that we have solidly answered all your arguments to
the contrary.

Lastly, Colophonis vice, as the close of this charge, you conclude when you
say, we think we conceive its probable, and do never so confidently assert
any of the several Positions, and do not prove the same by the several texts
respectively alleged, nor clear the said text from all Objections made
against your Exposition (one material Objection unanswered being enough to
invalidate the same) you afford so many Arguments to any wise Reader, that you
have not clearly manifested the Positions and Scriptures where such Speeches
are found to be sufficient, etc.

Answ. All that we have to say is this, First, That your triumph concerning our
not proving the Positions by the Text respectively alleged is before your
victory. Secondly, Though one material Objection unanswered (unanswerable you
should say, for our weakness may not (peradventure) be able to defend a
truth) does invalidate our Exposition: yet where we urge diverse Texts to any
Position, if any one of them be truly urged, and so unanswerable, though you
should invalidate all the rest as to such a purpose, you may advantage the
truth thereby, but advantage not your cause at all. So that one material
Objection (such as we have not yet met with in your writings) though it might
invalidate the Exposition, yet possibly might not prejudice the Position at all.

The third Charge which you lay upon us, that our pretending to prove some
Positions and practices by other Scriptures and Arguments (as to your intent
expressed in the preface) is but a By-matter, For Positions and practices may
be true and lawful, and yet not truly and lawfully grounded on the Text
alleged, etc.

Answ. When the King had burnt Jeremiahs Roll, and Jerem. 3^ 32.
and he caused Baruch to write the Roll a new, it is said, he added besides to
them many like words. If we had neglected to answer your Examination of the
scriptures alleged by us, and had fallen upon new scriptures, you might well
have complained: but we thought good measure pressed down shaken together and
running over, would not have offended you. And yet the truth is, we know not
how to please you, the one way or the other. In some sections (though to our
understanding) we have not left any thing in the similitude of an Argument
unanswered yet) we are complained of, that we have not clearly manifested the
Position, as we have already showed. And how should this be done otherwise than
by answering your Examination, unless it be by new Arguments: And what are
Arguments worth, if not backed with scriptures? and yet when besides our answer
to your examination, we add some short dissertation upon the Point, this is
counted as a By matter to your intent in the preface.

2. Your intent as it appears both in your Title Page, the Preface and the
Book it self, was not only to vindicate the scriptures, but to discover the
supposed weakness of the doctrine contained in the Positions. And why should
not we as well assert the doctrine, as vindicate the scriptures, which (some of
them culled out by you) are the weakest and most feeble parts of the proof
made by us as we have told you

3. You could wish you say, We might keep close to the Scriptures and
Positions alleged, till they be one way or other cleared, and then we may
more orderly proceed to other scriptures and arguments: and yet you that
cannot endure any addition of scripture or reason applied to the question
stated more fully to our own sense, than they are in the Positions drawn up by
you, require us in the mean time to give scripturall and rational answers to
no less then an hundred and twelve Queres, whereof some of them are Nihil ad
Rhombum independants (we are assured) in the business of controversy betwixt
us.

The fourth Charge that you make against us, is, That we do not answer
directly, but obliquely and evadingly in sundry places, as where (say you) I
allege that the Apostles never taught or practiced to gather or separate one
part of this true Church, and and another part of that, especially persons whom
themselves converted not, to make a purer Church. You answer of another thing
which was never denied, viz. The Apostles both taught and practiced the
separating of some Jews from other Jews and gathered them into a Christian
Church, while yet the Jewish Church was not dissolved, but was a Church of God.

Answ. We are so far from answering obliquely or evadingly in this place,
that we dare be bold to say, that no reply can more front and diametrically
oppose such a confused answer as yours i^, then this of ours does. We did
observe that the supposed strength of your answer, was couched in the four
sinews of it. 1. We thought you deserted it as a thing dissonant to the
doctrine and practice of the Apostles, to gather some Christians from others to
make a purer Church. 2. We conceived that the truth of the Churches from which
persons are gathered, was that which you imagined, made the gathering of them
in such sort to bear no conformity with the Apostles doctrine or practice; And
we conceived there was this implication in it, that it might be lawful and
suitable to the doctrine and practice of the Apostles, to gather believers out
of a false Church, but not out of a true. 3. We considered that this might have
some strength in your thoughts, that there is no such thing mentioned in the
doctrine and practice of the Apostles as the gathering of one Church out of
many. 4. That you imagined that there was some strength in it to prove our
gathering of Churches unlawful, because the persons gathered were such as we
converted not. Having thus anatomized in our thoughts your Answer, we addressed
our selves to discover the weakness and falliblenesse of all these Exceptions,
and we began with the second, because it was most general; and so descended to
the rest which were more particular. And First, we showed, that the truth of a
Church is not that that can make it sinful or unlawful to gather or take in
the members of it into the union of other Churches; For then it should have
been unlawful for the Primitive Churches to have gathered in the believing
Jews into their Churches whilst that Church remained true; But this say we
was the doctrine and practice of the Apostles. Now what can be more point
blanck opposite to this part of your answer then this? Hence also our
conclusion has the strength of this argument in it, If it be not unlawful to
withdraw from one Church that is true, then it is not unlawful to gather out
of twenty or an hundred, i. e. because they are true.

Object. But (say you) this was not a Christian Church.

Answ. We consider it not as Jewish, but under the notion of truth, as it was a
true Church.

Object. Nor are the Reformed Churches and Ministers to be compared with the
then Jewish Church and Priests thereof.

Answ. You shuffle in the Ministers of the one, and the Priests of the other
impertinently: We have only to do with the Churches, and we say the Christian
Churches might be compared with the then Jewish Church under the notion we
consider it in, viz. in point of truth; For the Jewish Church was a true Church
as well as the Christian Churches.

Object. It was but one (say you) and you should show gathering out of several
Churches.

Answ. Do we not show it thus? If it be lawful to gather out of one true
Church, then it is lawful (upon the same ground) to gather out of many.

Object. But (say you) the Apostles gathering was only of those Jews they
converted to Christianity from unconverted Jews, and you should show the
gathering of Christians converted by others, from other Christians.

Answ. This also we have showed at large, clearing also the former objection
together with it by several arguments and two places of scripture, viz. 1 Cor.
5, 6. 2 Cor. 13, 10. In our second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth particulars,
and these in opposition to the first and third particulars wherein we thought
you placed the strength of your answer.

Object. But you should show the gathering of Christians converted by others
from other Christians converted as well as they, and possibly from those
persons by whom they were converted.

Answ. And this we have fully cleared, page 10. from the practice of the
Apostles and Primitive Christians.

None but an Emperick would censure a Physician that he does not cure all
diseafes with one Dosse. Shall our reply be judged oblique, evading, and
insufficient, because it is not a bush to stop every gap with, though it be
most punctually opposite to that part of your answer, against which we levelled
it.

Object. But (say you) that Church was then by Gods Commandment to be
dissolved, and many Churches to be built upon its ruins, and therefore does no
more warrant the building of one Christian Church upon the ruin of other
Christian Churches, than the Parliaments Commission (if there were such a one)
to the Inhabitants of Derby hundred, to take down Lathamhouse to build them
houses of, does warrant any one of the Inhabitants to take as many good stones
as they can come by, out of this, and that, and the other neighbors house,
concerning which they gave no such Command.

Answ. You lately found fault with an argument of ours, because it was a
Comparatis, alleging that allusions and Comparisons are not argumentative, if
allusions and Comparisons were not capable of a better symmetrie and proportion
then this of yours, we should not only not yield them to be argumentative, but
we should disavow and discard them as not illustrative. For though it was not
our intent (as we said) to answer all the branches of your objections, with
this one instance, but only that that deceives its strength from the truth of
Churches (and therefore your triumph out-running your victory, might well have
been spared, when you say, your not bringing a more punctual and more
pertinent proof, argues either an implicit confession of the truth of my
answer, or inability to oppose it) and though we have brought other punctual
and pertinent proofs which are above the reach of your instance, yet though
all were as you would bear the world in hand, your Allegory wants that due
proportion that should render it illustrative, much more argumentative.

For First, it is not the practice of Congregationall members, or Churches, to
take any, much less as many good members as they can come by out of this, and
that, and the other neighboring Churches, concerning which, God has given no
Command that those persons should leave those Churches. For so your comparison
should be framed to make it run parallel with the case. Nay the
Congregationall members make it their scope to take in none but those, that
having righteously withdrawn themselves from other Churches, do voluntarily
tender themselves to communion with them, that so they may enjoy those
Ordinances purely with the corruption of which they were not only polluted,
but endangered before; And that they may enjoy other Ordinances purchased for
their special edification by the precious blood of Christ, which their souls
languished in the want of, whilst they were (some of them) as members in the
line of Parochiall-Communication. Once more, it is the scope and end of
Congregationall members, and Churches (if we understand them aright) sure we
are, it is our own desire and practice, to receive in no members, but from
such Churches, in which we have no ground of hope in sight, for a reformation
in any tolerable proportion of time, all of us having expressed the offense
given us by Parochial disorders to private brethren, because it would have
been interpreted a disturbance of the Churches peace, for private persons to
speak publicly against the received practice of the Church; And some of us
who by our calling were better enabled, having not only in vain witnessed
against the Leaven, with which we saw the Churches leavened, but also
fruitlesly waited a long time for redress of present greivances, when there
was no hope left, have withdrawn.

3. If God by means of this present happy Parliament, (wherein next under God
is our present hope) or by other should work such a reformation, that we might
comfortably join with Churches meeting nearer to our habitations then our
own, we should be willing for our parts (and we believe the same of all our
brethren) to lay down by mutual consent our Covenant, and fall into
fellowship in several other Churches, especially where we were sometimes
members respectively.

4. It supposes the Churches from which our members have withdrawn, have as
good right to hold their members as well as any man in Derby hundred has to
withold the stones of his house from those that without a just power
endeavor to take them away; which how you will make out, seeing that you hold
no other tie, but the boundaries and limits of the Parish or Chappelry, do so
fervently dispute against express agreements and Covenants we understand not.
Yet if the ways and walking of Parish Churches were such as tended to the
edification of the members, and no just cause appear of their removal or
withdrawing, we should not contest with you about it. But if either visible
wicked members be admitted to the Lords Supper without hope of redress, or the
dispensation of the Lords Supper, and execution of the power of the Keys, and
other Ordinances be wanting, without hope of redress, we conceive they have no
more power to withold such a member from joining to another Church for his
spiritual better accomdation, than a Master has to withold his Servant from
removing to another Family, that so he may not be enfeebled by being straightened
in his food, or endangered by the unwholsomenesse thereof.

5. Fifthly, But it may be there may be some more ground for your fifth charge,
which is, That we discover too much willingness to quarrel at your
expressions: a little after (say you) you discover too much willingness to
quarrel at my expresfions, wherein you say I would suggest, that you make
opposition to Magistracy: but does not Master Weld a Congregationall man, when
Master Rathband charge Independents to hold, that Christians may and ought to
set up new Churches and practice in them all Gods Ordinances without the
consent of a Christian State, yea against their peremptory Commands and
established laws, and in the midst and against the mind of such Churches, as
they freely acknowledge to be the true Churches of God, say of this Article, no
pen can express a greater latitude of opposition against Magistracy and Laws,
and Churches too, then he affirms to be in us? Do not I use his own words?
Print them in a different Character? Cite them in the Margent? etc.

Answ. True, you do so; notwithstanding it was not discerned by us, and the
fault was most in your self; For you print it in a different Character, and
cite Master Weld in the Margent, but were defective in a letter to guide to the
citation: and hence the mistake: For you cite Answer to 9 pos. page 76. as
appertaining to the letter ( U) speaking of something that was proper to
Apostolic men, and then immediately join T. W. to W. R. page 67. by close to
it, without any other letter, as if it had belonged to the same thing; and so
we received of it, as you may discern by our defense, when we make any mention
of that part of your answer, which speaks of the Apostles preaching against
the peremptory Command of Magistrates, we print your Citation pointed at by the
letter ( b) and we annexe T. W. to W. R. page 67. to it, as appertaining to the
same thing. The truth is, we were faulty also, because if we could have looked
into that place of Master Welds book, we might have rcctified our selves in
that mistake. But that Book was out of our way, when we should have done it,
and afterward we did not mind. And as for the different Character, we minded
it less, because for many causes the Character is changed, besides that when
other men's words are cited. Had we been aware that they were Master Welds
words, we would have have given a more pertinent answer, which hereafter if
there shall be occasion we shall annexe.

And whereas you say, this is but one example of many, as we know none at all,
so if there be any of moment, we persuade our selves we should have met with
them under his charge, for you spare not to give many instances of the same
kind, when you apprehend it makes for your advantage.

6. The sixth charge undertakes to prove that we have a saculty, and make much
use of it to turn the proof over to you. When I show you (say you) where the
proof of the Position, from the text alleged is defective, and require you to
supply that defect, you then turn it over to me to prove the contrary, as 1
Cor. 16. 1. When I say the Churches of Galatia might for ought you allege to
the contrary, be combined one to another, the substance of your answer is,
without proof we connot grant it; And that you may more plaufibly put the
business off your selves, you leave out the words (for ought you allege to
the contrary).

Answ. A little besore we were told that to prove some positions by other
scriptures and arguments than those annexed to the Positions (as to your intent
in the preface) was a by matter; And it was wished that we might keep close to
those scriptures and positions till they were cleared, but in this place though
we answer your arguments, and consequently make good the proofs annexed, and
when we have done, tell you that without proof we cannot grant such a
Classical Combination in Galatia, as is in Scot^^n^, and in Holland, yet we
are arraigned as departing from rule and reason, because we turn the probative
part over unto you. Is not our part defensive only of these Positions and
scriptures? And if we deliver the scriptures of the doctrine contained in the
Positions, any thing in your examinations contained notwithstanding, we do
Sportamquam nacti sumus ornare, Perform what we have undertaken. And though
when we do more, (if solidly and truly) your self and all the lovers of
truth are so much the more our debtors, yet if we do thus much only, you have
no cause to ensure us.

2. As for you, Forasmuch as you afford such hard quarter to the Positions as
to make them by interpretation a helping of God, counterfeiting of the King of
Kings hand, and an addition to his word, (since he that makes a charge must
prove it) we thought you were bound (these arguments in your examination
failing) either to make out your charge by other arguments, or at least
confess, that you have wronged the Authors of such Positions and the truth it
self, and therefore we put you upon proof.

3. As we put nothing off our selves that belonged to us, so we never left out
those words, ( for ought you allege to the contrary) for any such end as you
suggest. But for brevity sake, and because we thought there was nothing
material to the business in hand, either for your advantage, or our
disadvantage contained in them. For though if you understand it in a sense
nothing to the purpose, viz. The Churches of Galatia might be combined, for
ought we allege to the contrary; meaning God could have combined them, so he
could have made Rome, Paris, or Madrid, the place of an Oecumenicall
Congregation, for worship and government; It is true: yet if you mean the
Churches of Galatia might be combined, for ought we allege to the contrary,
meaning there is nothing in the proof made in the Position that inferres the
non* combination of the Churches of Galatia: we say, it is your oversight to
assert it. And we turn not over the proof to you, but having confuted the
supposed proof to the contrary, we send you to seek new arguments, or yield
us the cause.

7. The last charge, is of a great wrong to your self, and the truth of God,
(as you say) viz. That we curtall and clip your answers and arguments, not
only the supplement, but the substance and strength of them, folding them up
in obscure, etc. sometimes omitting them with a Censure; You ask us a little
after, Do^ you not omit that which you know to be pertinent, while you
transcribe and largely answer something less pertinent?

Answ. What may be done through oversight we know not, but we have omitted
nothing pertinent of purpofe or advisedly; D^lus late^ in generalibus, your ^en
general charges we cannot but take to be great injuries, and the issues of a
spirit of de^raction, since you would bear the world in hand, that they are so
many, that they would too much enlarge this Epistle, augmenting it in sundry
pages; If you had spared your Queries at this time, and left room for the
discovery of these supposed unc^ndide passages, you had done your self no
less right, and us much less wrong; And if you had but barely cited the pages
and lines where such passages are found, would this have swelled up your
Epistle to many pages more?

But let us consider the instance you give, and leave the Reader to guess at
the rest, for its more then probable, you would single out the grossest you
could find.

And first, concerning the omitting of the seven particulars, in position 24.
Which you plainly affirm we left out, least the Reader had we subscribed them
should have expected a^ answer. We rendered another reason (which we have the
clear testimony of our consciences for, was the true reason why we left them
out) and that which you obtend no reason at all) yet as though you did
communicate with God, in his incommunicable excellency of being (...) the
searcher of the heart, you affirm, that theresore we left them out, least the
Reader (had we transcribed them) should have expected an answer. We say again,
if we give you for granted those seven particulars, (or rather seven general
heads, including in them many particulars) improve you them ^o the best
advantage of your Presbyterian cause, in opposition to the doctrine included in
the 24 position. For those particulars how many soever they be, are no parts of
the discipline left by Christ to the Church, which (the position says) in the
essentials of it is unchangeable, and therefore the position may be defended,
though those particulars be granted. And for this cause we shall desire to be
excused with you, and nothing fear, incurring prejudice with the Reader,
though we did not transcribe your seven tedious impertinencies to the cause in
hand.

2. We say further, in that we transcribed them not, we rather spared you then
advantaged our selves; for there is something in all of them, that is either
doubtful or justly liable to exceptions.

For you (undertaking to show the differences between the Apostolic Churches
and ours) say:

1. The Jewish Ceremonies were then scarce dead, at least not buried, hence we
are not bound to circumcise.

We answer, This Legal right of Circumcision was never on foot among the
Apostolic gentile Churches, nor were they bound any more to it then we are
now, therefore there i^ no difference in that, betwixt us and the primitive
Apostolic gentile Churches.

2. The civil custom of those Countries differ much from ours, hence we are
not bound to make the covering of a man's head, a token of dishonor, 1 Cor. 11.
4, 5. 7. 10.

Answer. What ever it be that the Apostle means by covering of the head, (for
that is disputable) it seems to us* to be perpetual and binding to all
Churches as well as to that of Corinth, because of the Apostles reasons in 1
Cor. 11. 7. 14. He says ver. 7. The man ought not to cover the head, because
he is the Image and glory of God, but the woman must, because she is the glory
of the man. And ver. 14. he says, Nature it self teaches, that if a man have
long hair, it is a shame to him, because hair is not given to him for a
covering. (For so it is to be understood to make the Antithesis perfect) But if
a woman have long hair, it is an honor to her, because her h^ire is given her
for a covering. We think the reason is fetched from the excellency of the one
sex above the other, and that reason which is drawn from nature, are
perpetual, And if ever in force, remain still in force.

3. The Church was then but in gathering from amongst Heathens and Jews, bence
we want examples (to convince refractory. Anabaptists) of the baptizing of
Christian Infants, etc.

Answ. Such an argument as this, you use to defend your selves, in pleading for
an National Church, Scripture (say you) mentions not a National* Church;
for believers were not so many then, as to bear the name of a Kingdom or
Nation. As we conceived it weak against us, so may the Anabaptists judge it
unsatisfactory against them. For can any one rationally think, but that among
those many thousands converted of Jews and Heathens, and gathered into
Christian Churches, there were not many who had Infant Children, some of them
borne before they were converted, who upon such conversion of their parents
were to be accounted Christian Infants, and others borne after such conversion
in that period of time, which the history of the Acts of the Apostles fills up,
which Infants must also be styled Christian Infants? And if so, then the reason
of wanting examples of baptizing Christian Infants is not that which you
allege, viz. because the Church was then but in gathering from amongst the
Heathens and Jews* But because it seemed good to the Holy Ghost (for what
cause we dare not determine) to forbear the express mentioning of Infants
baptism.

4. The Church was then under heathenish persecuting Magistrates, hence they
had no houses built for or appropriated to holy worship.

Answ. In your Examinations page 6. you cite, 1. Cor. 11. 22. and say, To come
together (...) is, ( if rightly translated) to come together in one place, and
^o Ecclesia is opposed to the buildings or houses in which they did eat and
drink in: Here you say, That the primitive Churches had not houses, etc. Do
you not manifestly contradict your self? for if they were not houses, in which
they did eat and drink in, but did meet together in for holy worship, were
they not so far forth set a part for holy worship?

If by appropriation of houses to holy worship (which you say was not then in
the primitive times, but ought to be now) you mean such a setting a part as
must necessarily exclude all using of such houses to other purposes, it is
superstition so to conceive or speak. But if you grant that ^se may be made of
them otherwise then in Gods worship, How are they then appropriated to Gods
worship more now then in the times of primitive Churches? For they were then
known noted places, (at least among some Churches) and capacious of great
multitudes, in which the Churches did ordinarily meet, as from 1 Cor. 14. 23.
appears.

They meet in the night to pray, preach and celebrate the Supper.

Ans. And did they not meet in the day also? How else did 1 Cor. 14. 23
the unbeleevers meet with them and come among them?

Ministers had no settled maintenance.

Answ. It is a non sequitur, that because the Church was under Heathenish and
persecuting Magistrates, therefore Ministers had no settled maintenance. Is
there any rule for settled maintenance in the whole Gospel? which yet (being
that there are predictions many, of peaceable and prosperous times to the
Church) there might have been, if God had meant any such thing. Nay, there are
intimations, (if not clear declarations) against settled maintenance to arise
from the Churches.

There was then an extraordinary effussion of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles,
Evangelists, and sundry of the Elders and people; hence there was no need of
Universities, etc.

Answ. Yes: there was need, because you speak but of sundry, and the Apostle
desired that they all might speak with tongues, but rather that they might
prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. 5. therefore there might be use of schools in reference
to them that wanted extraordinary gifts.

Nor of studying for Sermons.

Answ. Yes: Else what means the Apostle when he bids Timothy stir up the
gift, etc. and give attendance to reading, etc.

No using set Prayers and Psalms.

Answ. Were there no set Psalms in those days? were those Psalms, Hymmes,
and spiritual songs, which the Church at Ephesus, and at Colosse, and all the
Churches did sing inspired by the spirit? And were no scripture Psalms sung in
those times? That will be a strengthening to them that doubt of the singing of
David's Psalms. As for prayers, is there a necessity now of a Form, because
extraordinary gifts are ceased? May not an ordinary gift be sufficiently
helpful, to put up prayers by? We would think it should now be unseasonable
to plead for set forms of prayer.

6. The Apostles had the care of all the Churches, and without difference
taught and baptized, and ordered matters in all Churches where they came, now
we may not expect such Officers, but must be content with ordinary Elders,
amongst whom so much of their power as God intended to be perpetual, ^s
divided.

Answ. But if there be an universal visible governing Church which you plead
for, the Elders of it must have care of all the Churches, and must Preach,
Baptize, and rule where ever they come. And the representative oecumenicall
Church or Counsel consists of such Elders that every of them must have care of
all the Churches. Where then is the difference according to your principles
betwixt the Apostles and such Elders in that matter? And whether the Brethren
do not share in some of their power you know is under controversy.

7. There were then some extraordinary occasional precepts, and practices
which bind not in ordinary, as selling all to give to the poor, Mat. 19. 21.
having all things common, Act. 2. 44, 45. and 4. 32. 3^, 35.

Answ. Selling all and giving to the poor, was never a precept nor practice in
the Christian Apostolic Churches; nor does Mat. 19. 21. prove it, whereas you
produce it to declare the difference betwixt the Apostolic Churches and ours.
The having of all things common, had not any precept for it in the Apostles
days that we know of, and the practice was voluntary and not binding, though
some did it, they freely did it, and others were not bound to follow, as from
Act. 5. 4. appears. Where then is the difference betwixt the Apostolic
Churches and ours? For were there now like cause, for having all worldly
substance common, and should God incline the hearts of Christians thereto, it
might be lawful now as well as then.

Now (Brother) we have given you an account what we are able to say to your
Seven Particulars, which we pretermitted before. And whether we did hurt you to
help our selves by our former silence of them, let the intelligent Reader
judge.

The second instance is, out of your Examination of your Position the Sixth,
where you say, a maine passage is omitted without giving any hint or intimation
of any thing omitted.

Answ. The Printer, or he that copied it out for the Press, possibly has
omitted an etc. will it be worth the rosting what you have taken in hunting?

2. We might challenge you if you can, so to avoid the whole, or any part of
those six lines omitted, to the relief or rescue either of the cause or your
Examination, as they relate unto the Position.

For those words wherein you allege, Genesis 9. 9, 10. we looked upon them as
free of the Company of those By-matters you besought us in the Preface not to
meddle with; which if we had examined, could neither advantage your cause nor
endanger ours.

For the rest of the words omitted, they are but different expressions of the
same thing imported in the words transcribed and both fully answered.

You say (but it is your mistake) That the Covenant (Genesis 17) is taken for Gods
part of the Covenant or Promise to Abraham, Gal. 3. 16, 17. Not for man's part
to God, whereof we no^ speak, and then add Gods Covenanting with Abraham did
not impose nor suppose an express vocal Covenant on Abraham's part. Now if
this be so, then was not Abraham bound to any thing on his part by virtue of
this Covenant; but the contrary is manifest from verse. 9. where God said to
Abraham, Thou shall keep my Covenant.

Ob. If it be sa^^, This Covenant was Circumcision.

Answ. Circumcision is called the Covenant Metonymically, as the Seal may be
called by the name of the thing sealed; and therefore is called the token of
the Covenant, verse. 11.

Ob. If it be said, this was not an express vocal Covenant.

Answ. The Position mentions an holy Covenant, but says nothing of an
express vocal Covenant; and you by your bringing in these words do alter the
Question; nor do we hold an express vocal Covenant necessary to the being of
a Church. And we would be rightly understood, when we say it is necessary to
the purity and strength of a Church. Our meaning is not, that it is a standing
Ordinance of God, that the Church should be united by a vocal expression of
their mutual consent (which we call the Covenant) so as that subscription,
signalls, or silence it self* as a sign, may not be a lawful testification
of their consent: but that for as much as with the heart man believes to
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation; for as
much as God has given us our tongues to express our conceptions withal, it
is fit and convenient, that it should be expressed in words, and so words are
necessary, as one (and usually the fittest) expression of our minds.

Lastly, having proved, that the stipulation 'twixt God and Abraham was
mutual, you are rather our debtor than we yours; for passing by your
expressions concerning Genesis 9. 9, 10. as expletive to fill up your sentence
upon a just period, rather then argumentative, for would i^ not be an
intolerable inconsequence thus to argue.

If Gods covenanting with a creature does not always suppose so much as an
implicit covenant on the creatures part, then Gods covenanting with Abraham,
Genesis 17. does not suppose an express vocal Covenant on Abraham's part; (take
it at the best as you have stated it for your advantage, quite besides the
question.)

But the first is true, Genesis 9. 9, 10. Ergo ^c. For what hinders though it does
always do it, why it may not do it, Genesis 17. Besides the Assumption may be
called in question in point of truth. If you speak of a Covenant, as properly
so called: For whereas you urge that the birds and beasts could not so much as
give an implicit assent, we say it is true: but say withal that it was not a
Covenant in propriety of speech with them, but improperly, even as the Covenant
mentioned, Job 5. 23. Hos. 2. 18. And we say with Master Rivet, In foeder is
objecto quaeri potest, an animalia sunt Rivet in Gen 9.
foederis capacia, quae neque stipulari possunt, neque promittere, ex
superioribus id repetendum quemadmodum indirecte, etc. In the object of the
Covenant it may be enquired how living creatures can be capable of the
Covenant, which can neither stipulate nor promise. Therefore we must repeat
what we have said before, that as the living creatures became sharers of the
punishment of sin, indirectly and for man's sake, so the benefit of the
Covenant concerning the not sending of another flood does indirectly and for
man's sake, belong unto them. So for children not borne, it was no actual
Covenant, but only vertuall and potentiall, to the reduction of which into an
actually mutual Covenant, (which is a Covenant properly so called) was
required the stipulation of the Children, when they should be actually called,
to take hold of Gods Covenant.

But this Covenant as it related to Noah, did suppose a Covenant on Noah's part.
For he was bound to faith, and walking with God on his part, as well as God to
preserve him and the world from a flood. For as Master Rivet says upon another
occasion, Fiunt autem foedera mutua stipulatione partuum, etc. Covenants are
made with a mutual and solemn stipulation, of engaging themselves to the
performance of such and such benefits and duties. Here we read of the promises
of a mercy on Gods part, but there is no mention of the duties that Noah for
his part was to perform, but yet this must be understood that Noah would walk
justly and uprightly as he had done in former times. So Paraeus upon this place
calls it, mutuum foedus, a mutual covenant. So that if it be understood of a
Covenant properly so called, and homogeneall with that in Genesis 17. (and if it
be not, the argument will be of no force) it may be said that Gods covenanting
with man, does suppose a restipulation or covenant on man's part.

The third instance is out of position 7. where also you would have the Reader
to understand; that the chief part of your answer, viz. It is not said they
gave themselves to the Church or Churches, but to us, viz. Paul a^^ Timothy, is
left without the least limit or intimation.

Answ. Are not these words to be found in our defense? page 44. The argument is
fetched a Comparatis, the members of the Churches of Macedonia did as much in a
like case: they gave themselves to the Lord, and to the Apostle and Timothy,
according to Gods will, to be guided by the Lord, and directed by them, a whole
Church or Churches to one or two persons gave themselves; And an argument is
fetched thence thus, then may one person that is to join to a Church, as fitly
give himself to the Lord to be guided by him, and to the whole Church and
Officers thereof to be directed by them according to the will of God. Do not
we grant, that it is not said, that they gave themselves to the Church or
Churches, but to us, viz. Paul and Timothy? Nor does the Position imply any
other thing. For it says, As the members of the Church of Macedonia did in a
parallel or like case. It speaks only of something done proportionably to
that which they press: where then is the injury done to you? Is it in this,
that without mentioning your allegation, as your allegation, we have yet
answered the whole strength of it? Forgive us this wrong, and retract your
charge, which though it have truth in it, in the letter of your words in which
it runs, yet it wants truth in your scope in which you make it; For you
complain of wrong to you and the truth of God, but causelessly and most
injuriously, as from what is presented is manifest.

The fourth instance is out of Position 22, where you say, Your whole answer to
Revel. 4. 4. is by an Index expurgatorius blotted out.

Answ. We have sought up our papers, and we perceive that in the copying out of
the Reply for the press, the answer to this text was omitted, Casu an
Consilio, we cannot say. The answer was to this effect, it has been usually
the practice of men of the most approved parts, and unquestioned integrity,
after they have solidly proved a place by plain texts of scipture, then to
add as probable those which in their judgment looked that way, though more
obscure, as typical and prophetical places; The same is that practice of the
Elders of New England, in urging this place. So that if you could make it out,
that the Elders have mist the genuine sense of the place, yet you have but
knocked off one of the Emblemata of the garnishings of the room, whereas the
Position it self remains unshaken by you.

2. We do profess our selves unwilling to defend the position by virtue of
the text (at least in that expression, viz. of authority and governing power)
yet it may be those reverend learned and religious Authors are able to
maintain it, though we by reason of our weakness dare not undertake it.

3. As for the exposition that you put upon it, though it be consonant to the
interpretation of some learned writers, and though it seemed probable to one of
us, yet upon further inexpectation, though we absolutely reject it, we have not
yet these exceptions against it.

1. We read not of any eyes that the 24 Elders had* but the four beasts were
full of eyes, Rev. 4. 8. Is this the meaning of it, that the Churches in the
four Quarters of the world had eyes, that is, wisdom, knowledge,
understanding to manage, order, guide, and dispose of the affairs of the
Churches: But the Officers wanted eyes, and so were excluded from directive
power? For this will follow upon your exposition, at least, if your argument
against the interpretation which the Elders of New England give of Crowns,
prove solid. You say by their exposition, The Elders which are signified by the
four beasts, are excluded from governing power, for they sit not on Thrones,
nor have Crowns on their heads. And we will say against you, the Elders which
you would have to be the Elders of the Churches are excluded from directive
power, for they have not eyes before and behind, as the four beasts have.

2. We read that the four beasts do lead the four and twenty Elders in the
worship and Service of God in the Church, Revel. 4. 9, 10. When those Beasts
gave honor and glory, etc. the four and twenty Elders fell down and
worshipped, etc. So also c. 5. 8. 11. 14. Now whether the Churches do lead
their Officers in all their worships they perform to God, (which will follow
from your exposition) or the Officers do lead the Churches, judge you.

3. We see no absurdity in Masters Cottons and New-Englands brethrens
exposition, who make the four beasts to be the Officers of the Churches, and
the four and twenty Elders to be the members. As for your allegation of Revel.
7. 9. 11. 13, 14. where you say, That the Elders are distinguished from
believers; We answer to it, We discern not that the Elders are any more
distinguished then the four beasts are, which yet you interpret to be the
Believers of the four parts of the world, let the place be viewed.

4. Though Master Cotton drive, that by Crowns, are Ensigns of authority any
more then white raiment was an Ensign of Priesthood, yet he asserts, that in
some particulars that belongs to Church members, which is the Privilege of
Kings that wear Crowns: As 1. That they transact nothing by themselves, but
by their Officers. 2. Their consent Cott. Case.
is requifite to the judgments that pass in the Church. And therefore it may
seem less strange, if they appear with Crowns.

Having thus answered that part of your Epistle, wherein you lay diverse charges
upon us, we shall now more briefly answer the former part of your Epistle,
wherein you endeavor to purge your self from those charges laid upon you. And
you say,

The deep and heavy charge (as you call it) in the first part of my preface
against misinterpretation of scriptures, as a belying of God, counterfeiting
the King of Kings hand, (though I now see how I have sped) I re(...)t not of.

Answ. Neither appears it that you do repent, that you Psalm. 35. 11.
have position 23 laid to our charge things that we knew not, yea things, that
when we heard of them, were of detestable consideration in our thoughts. If you
shall solidly confute our reply, we shall justify you in this impenitency, but
if otherwise, we shall desire to mourn in secret for you, and pray, that God
would give it an impression upon your spirit.

You have the more cause to repent, if that be true which you allege in the
portall of your Epistle, viz. that the Examination etc. was for the most part
an answer to some allegations, as they were privately made to you for
satisfaction. For do doubting brethren wanting light address themselves to
you for satisfaction concerning the meaning of such and such scriptures, and
do you publish their doubts, as their positions, and what was proposed to you
privately to obtain satisfaction, do you divulge it to the world: as a
belying of God, a counterfeiting of the King of Kings hand, an addition to his
Word? Surely this will make men tender how they seek satisfaction from you for
the future.

Nor see I cause (say you) why you should repine at it, or complain of it: if
you have clearly manifested (as in your title page you say you have) the
positions and scriptures alleged for your Church way, and by me examined, to
be sufficient, pertinent, and full of power.

Does not the meaning of this amount to thus much? (For undoubtedly these
censures relate to the positions, and consequently to the authors of them) that
if an interpretation may be clearly manifested to be sufficient, pertinent, and
full of power, then the persons that give it, may not complain, though they be
all bedawbed with imputations of belying God, counterfeiting the King of Kings
hand, adding to the Word? Must innocence of necessity be stupid and insensible
of injuries?

Dat veniam corvis, vexat censura columbas. And yet I find my self deeply
charged by you to deprave places, blotte and blurre sweet, humble, spirited,
holy, pertinent Expressions, to wrong the Elders of New England, wrest
allegations.

Answ. Let the Reader judge betwixt us, if it be not truth. But you go on and
say,

Yea though I said, I will not tell you who said all the Church is holy, etc:
yet you think it not unworthy my serious consideration, whether it might not
be said to me, as sometimes Christ said to one of the twelve, when he asked,
Master is it I? and he answered, thou have said: (a bitter personal invective)
etc.

We intended not these words as any invective at all, much less as a personal
invective as you affirm; It was never an Embrio in our thoughts to compare you
with Judas (as you insinuate) it is clear as the Sun, that you compare the
Congregationall members in the pursuit of their way, to Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram. Our meaning is plainly this, by this form of speaking, borrowed from
our Saviors words in another case, to signify that it might rather be said
against you, what you bring against us, viz. That Presbyteriall governors do
take too much upon them, because they take upon them, an authoritative power
over those Congregations over whom Christ has not set them. Your reasons to
prove that our way is the gainsaying of Corah are weak: For 1. this
schismatic company would utterly have taken away the power of Moses and the
Priesthood of Aaron, and so when they had Officers, would have destroyed their
Officers: we only in the extraordinary case of an utter want of an Eldership
to ordain, hold it fit to ordain by persons deputed, or by Elders elected; If
in the constitution of a Church, there do join as members, several persons
that have been approved Ministers, whilst their relations to their several
Churches were in being, then some of these are deputed to ordain the first
Elder; If there be but one Preacher joined as a member, and several persons of
eminent holiness and gifts fitted for ruling Elders, then there is an
Eldership chosen, and the rest of the Eldership ordained one of their Company
for their first Elder. In the Church of Duckenfield in Cheshire, four Preachers
joined in the foundation of the Church. At Sourby in Yorkshire but one; But in
both places the Ordination was performed either by Preachers as deputed, or by
elect Elders.

2. If the placing of Church power in the body of the Congregation, were the
gainesaying of Corah, then because election of Officers ( Act. 6.) is a branch
of Church Power, and was placed in, and acted by the body of the Church at
Jerusalem, that Church was guilty of the gaine-saying of Corah, which is your
second Argument.

3. It Is not true, that our cause enjoynes or allows complaining ( i. e. of
the regular exercise of the power) of the Elders that rule over them in the
Lord, for taking too much upon them, but we honor and obey the Elderships of
our several Churches; and also the Elders and Members deputed of several
Churches met in a Synod occasionally to rectify disorders, etc. which the
particular Churches are not able to accomplish. But as for stated
Classicall-Elderships, and your several graduall Judicatures, swallowing up
the Votes of the Elders of the particular Congregation in the Major part of the
Votes of the Synod, Ordaining, Depriving, Admonishing, Excommunicating,
Restoring; we say, these are not powers ordained of God. And consequently we
are not guilty of the gainesaying of Corah, though we should say of these,
They take too much upon them.

You proceed, The usual occasion of your Censures of depraving places, etc. is
a wide (I hope) not a willing mistake in you, and not any iniquity in my hands
or heart, you expect the Positions and Scriptures alleged, to agree fully and
exactly with the places cited in the Margent, which I neither professed nor
intended, etc.

Answ. We expect not an exact agreement in words and expressions, but yet we
could not but look for an agreement according to the expressions of your
Marginalls in sense and importment. Where you say Position. See almost the same
Argument verbatim. We expect with good cause an exact agreement in sense and
almost in words. When you say, See the like, we expect there an exact agreement
in sense, and a likeness in manner of expression, and so in the rest. For if
there be not the same thing asserted in both, the Margent is ridiculous. In
diverse Positions your Marginalls have no such modifications in them, must we
not expect an exact agreement in sense and words in those places?

Your Marginalls themselves are profession enough of such an agreement,
especial to any man that reads your Preface, where you say, The way of
Independencie produces sundry texts in Preaching, Writing, Conference, which
for the most part also, she produces in Print upon the same or the like
occasion.

Does not this import an agreement in sense and importment, betwixt the Printed
Books alleged and the Positions gathered from Preaching, Writing, Conference?

When you say, You allege Printed Books probably to intimate whence the
Proposition was taken: Do you not imply that the substance of the Proposition
is to be found in the place from whence it is taken, and if it be not found
there, are you not justly to be blamed?

Whereas you say The Printed Books alleged in the Margent are the Bystanders
spoken of in the Preface, either we do much mistake you, or you do, (which
were strange) not a little mistake your self. What then is the meaning of
these words in the Preface? I publish not all their Depositions, nor all that
is material, but so much (as I conceive) at present sufficient. If any of the
Brethren (amongst whom Mr. Cotton is deservedly the chief) seem in my
apprehension to come nearer the truth then others, I willingly take notice of
it, etc.

Is not Mr. Cotton one among the rest of those Authors in Print, whose
Depositions you publish, how then is Mr. Cotton and the rest made Bystanders
which must not be meddled with? And (by the way) if you had any action at all to
enter against the cause, why did you so uningenuously as not to publish all
that is material? Is it your meaning that you would have liberty to allege
our Printed Books at your pleasure, and we might not take notice whether you
did them right or wrong? This seems to be too gross. For our parts we took
Bystanders and By-matters to be meant of some expressions rather of an
ornative and expletive then of an argumentative nature.

The next thing you endeavor to purge yourselfe from, is from affecting
Prelacy, which you say, we do secretly intimate, and that to this end, to cast
an odium upon you and the cause you plead.

Answ. We know you are more wise then to express affection to declining
Prelacie. If you should, this could not with rational men, bring an Odium upon
your Cause: and when you say, peradventure the word (simply) was put in for a
retrect, in cause you should be hotly pursued for pleading the Cause of
Prelacie under the notion of Presbytery; we intended to show the weakness of
your reasoning, not to cast an Odium upon you, for the thing it self avoid the
force of it if you can. If (you say) Diotrephes was not blamed for having
pre-eminence. Do you not plead the Prelaticall Cause? And if you say, he was
not simply blamed, Do you not clear the Allegation of the Elders? If there be
any other place mention it, and we hope to give you satisfaction.

But you say, That you in the worst times were not more Prelaticall then the
greatest and godliest Independents in the Kingdom, if not at least one of us
have been.

Answ. For our selves, when we first entered into the Ministry, we were both of
us conformable in judgment, and sometimes (though very rarely) in practice.
But we have bewailed, and publicly testified our repentance, both before and
since the times of this present Parliament. The one of us renounced it, and was
therefore suspended by the Bishop of Chester fourteen years ago, and was
afterward about thirteen years since expulsed from his habitation, and after
that about eleven years since was forced to leave the Kingdom, and to seek
for shelter in Holland, and there joined with others in a Congregationall way,
and after that when the unsutablenesse of that air occasioned much sickness,
he was constrained to return, and finding no rest was the second time
necessitated to transplant himself into New England, where if the High
Commission at York could have let him alone, he might probably have ended his
days; But for none appearance at their Courts, when yet he was out of the
Land, and knew nothing of their summons, he was fined in several sums of
money, which together amounted to fifteen hundred and fifty pound. And his
estate in Wirrall in Cheshire was extended upon for payment, and the Tenant to
whom the Land was leased besore his departure to New England, forced to pay
great sums of money for the redemption of his cattle, which were driven off
the ground: where he was supported in those troublous times by the beneficence
of two religious Gentlemen, viz. Master William Stevinton of Dothit, and his
son in law Creswal Tailor of Longdon aforesaid his noble friends. And the
tidings of these cruel proceedings, and the grievous complaints of the Tenant,
coming over to him in several letters, he was advised to try if by his
returning back, he could use means to free his estate, but besore he arrived
this renowned reforming Parliament was assembled, and what he has suffered
since for his opposition to Prelacy is known not to a few.

As for the other of us, some years before the Bishops fell, and whilst their
power seemed to be bound as with a Band of iron and brass, being enforced by
the then Chancellor of Hereford, to turn his afternoon Sermon into a
Catecisme Lecture. Upon that occasion studying more elabourately and
industriously the second Commandment, through the rich grace and mercy of God
not only saw the evil of Episcopacy, and ceremonies imposed, but also
repented of the use of them, and publicly in the Parish of Almele in
Herefordshire preached against them, and for all the substantials of that way
of Congregationall government, which ever since, and at this day, he has and
does judge to bear most conformity with the word of truth. Afterward being
troubled in the Bishops Court for Nonconformity, and having no hope of liberty,
did by consent leave Almele, and lived about three years in a small peculiar
exempt from Episcopal Jurisdiction, viz. Longdon upon Terene in Shropshire.
And yet we suppose there may be other Independents (so called) more
anti-prelaticall then our selves. Concerning you, though you have forced us by
your causeless comparison, (which also was a manifest charge) to appear in
our own justification, yet (that being done) we are not willing to vent our
selves in the words of detraction against you, but we leave you to your own
conscience to be judged; and to the judgment of some thousands of persons, who
have many years been acquainted with your whole course of preaching and
living, whether the comparison was equal.

You say, You plead for the government of the Reformed Churches maintained by
Master Burn of Manchester, Master Gosnall of Boulton, Master Fleetwood of
Wigan, etc.

Answ. What these Reverend men did hold or maintain, we have no particular
knowledge, saving that we think good to let you understand, that Reverend
Master Burn was in his latter days, in a great part against that Classical
way which you contend for. And we have notes of his own hand writing, which we
can if need require (and hereafter it may be shall) produce, to the open view
of men. In which he closes very much with the Brethren of N. England in their
answer to the nine Positions, and dislikes Mr. Bals Reply.

Thus Brother, we have endeavored to take off the strength of your complaints,
which you make against us in your Epistle. Our hearts do witness for us that
we intended not to use guile or cunning craftiness in our defense of the
Positions and Scriptures against your examinations, nor yet to asperse you with
reproaches, but with integrity of spirit, what we have believed with the heart,
we attempted the maintenance of without any design of wronging you, much less
the truth of God. We hope your ingenuity will be such that you will retract so
hard a censure, and repent of such a causlesse outcry, with which you close
your Epistle. If not, let the godly intelligent Reader judge betwixt us,
whether we or the Complainant has most offended; as for us it shall be our
desire that peace and truth may abound more and more with you, and with

Your loving Brethren* Sam. Eaton.
Tim. Tailor.

COncerning your questions, whereto you require rational and scripturall
answers, you have been so insatiable in the multiplication of them, as that
you have made your demand irrational to rational men. If seven or eight
questions may well exercise an Assembly of men some weeks, perhaps months, to
give scripturall and rational answers to them, how long may one or two be
exercised in answering one hundred and twelve questions?

Yet we shall say somewhat to them, and give our sense of them, the better to
be excused with the Reader, though we give not at present a direct scripturall
answer to any of them.

1. Your questions are reduceable to these heads. Some of them are either in
whole or in part answered already, in our defense, as Q. 11. 24. 30, 31. 35,
36. 38. 41, 42, 43. 48, 49. 52. 56. 73. 77, 78. 84, 85. 102, 103.

2. Some of them are bottomed upon mistakes, of things asserted to be held by
us, which yet we hold not, as 19, 20, 21, 22. 39. 44. 50, 51. 56, 57, 58. 61.
80.

3. Some of them do arise and proceed ex non concessis, from things taken for
granted, which yet we cannot grant, as 23. 29. 32. 84.

4. Some of them are de non negatis, of things which we grant and yield as well
as you, wherein you and we do agree, or else they are de negatis, of things
which both you and we do alike deny, as 55. 86, 87. 91. 96, 97, 98, 99, 100.
102, 103.

5. Some of them are in the nature of them deep censures, and full of calumny
and slander, both of our way and persons, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 10. 15. 37. 41.
45. 49.. 57* 78. 83. 88. 104. 10^.

6. Some of them savor of a bitter distempered spirit, and tend to incense the
Magistrate against us, as 57. 96. 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111, 112.

7. Some of them seem to be dubious questions proceeding from a troubled
spirit, that either we have Auditors to hear us preach or any maintenance from
any beside them of our own way, as 77. 79. 84.

8. Some of them are entrapping questions, and in them there is aliquid latens
some thing that appears not and you watch for advantage, as 76. 81. 82.

9. One of them (in a superfluous Parenthesis) gibes at the language of many
godly known Christians, who yet are able to justify their expressions, viz.
46.

10. One of them is a question concluding with a vaineglorious challenge. viz.
100.

11. Some of them are such as that many of the Brethren of the Presbyterian
judgment do agree with us in them, and we may refer you to them to answer
them, as 46. 71.

12. One of them is rather a point controverted among your selves then betwixt
you and us, viz. 90.

13. Some of them are impertinent and come not up to the controversy betwixt
us, as 16. 17. 18. 44. 54. and same others.

14. Some of them are unnecessary questions, because the answering of some one,
would cut off and make void the necessity of propounding* and answering of
the rest of that nature, as the answering of the 7. would prevent the
propounding of the 8. 10. 13, 14. the answreing of the 11. would make the 9.
and 12. useless. So the answering of 63. makes vain the propounding of 58.
59. 60. 61. 62. 64. 65. 66. 68. and so of others.

15. The most of them are argumentative, and do dispute against the thing, and
sometimes conclude peremptory, rather then propound and inquire after the thing
of which yet in form of words there is a question made.

By all which it arpeares how many of this great multitude of Questions might
have been spared, and how little reason we have to answer them.

Had you not done more commendably if you had propounded some one Question of a
kind; as namely, one about constitution of Churches; one about gathering out of
many Churches, one about the qualification of Members; one about an universal
visible governing Church; one about diversity of Congregations in those City
Churches mentioned in Scripture; one about the entity and power of an
incompleate Church that has no Officers; one about the Covenant, and of what
Covenant Baptism is the seal; one about the power of the Keys; one about
Ordination; one about Communion of Officers; one about maintenance of Officers,
one about a private man's exercising his gifts; one about withdrawing from
communion of ones own Church, Ministry and Ordinances; one about the externalls
of discipline, whether they be contained determinately in the New Testament;
one about the lawfulness of tolerating another way then what is by Law
established; and yet it would have been unseasonable to have propounded some
of these till the answers we have given to them already in our Defense, have
been rendered invalid; and all these would not have amounted to above 15.
Questions, what then would have become of your many scores. But your design
was under the form of sundry Questions, to assault us with sundry Arguments,
for very many of your Questions, yea the most of them are arguments which if we
confute and overthrow (though your greatest strength be put forth in them, yet)
you come off with honor, you asserted nothing positively but propounded only
Questions; and if we confute them not nor answer them clearly, we receive (as
you imagine) a blot thereby; such cunning there is in the way of your
proceeding. But we rather choose to put you upon it to state the Question
with us, and then to form your Argument, and we shall willingly engage our
selves then in answering of you; this is to set our selves upon equal ground
with you; and you cannot, and we hope the Reader will not expect fairer
proceedings from us. Notwithstanding if you like not this, wait but a while,
till this present controversy be issued betwixt us, and if others in the
intrim do not, we shall probably be at leisure to undertake the particular
answer of them in the form they are presented to us.

FINIS.

