ALL ORDINANCES AND ORDERS, For the better observation of the LORD'S DAY, and
the FAST.

9. December. 1646.
ORdered etc. That the Ordinances for the better Observation of the public
days of Fast and Humiliation and for the better Observation of the Lord's Day
be Printed together, And that it be referred to the Care of the Knights and
Burgesses of the several Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, to send down a
sufficient number of Copies, of them so Printed, to the several and Respective
Committees to be distributed and dispersed to the several Parishes, and the
several and respective Ministers are hereby enjoined and required, the Lords
day immediately before every day of public Humiliation, to give notice of the
said day to the Congregation assembled, and to read unto them these Ordinances
for the better observation of the Lord's Day, and the days appointed for
public Humiliation And that the Justices of Peace in their several Limits do
take a strict Monthly Account of the due Execution and Observation of these
Ordinances.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


LONDON.

Printed for Edw. Husband printer to the Honorable House of Commons. Feb. the
18. 1646.

Die Sabbathi 6. April, 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the better
Observation of the LORD'S DAY.
FOrasmuch as the Lords day, notwithstanding several good Laws heretofore
made, has been not only greatly profaned, but diverse ungodly Books have been
published by the Prelaticall faction, against the Morality of that Day, and to
countenance the profanation of the same, to the manifest indangering of
Souls, prejudice of the true Religion, great dishonor of Almighty God, and
provocation of his just wrath and indignation against this Land; The Lords and
Commons for remedy thereof, do Order and Ordain, and be it Ordered and
Ordained, that all the Laws enacted, and in force, concerning the Observation
of the Lords day, be carefully put in execution; and that all and singular
person and persons whatsoever, shall on every Lords day, apply themselves to
the sanctification of the same, by exercising themselves thereon, in the duties
of Piety and true Religion, publicly and privately: And that no person or
persons whatsoever, shall publicly cry, show forth, or expose to sale any
Wares, Merchandises, Fruit, Herbs, Goods, or Chattels whatsoever, upon the
Lord's Day, or any part thereof* upon pain, that every person so offending shall
forfeit the same Goods so cried, showed forth, or put to sale: And that no
person or persons whatsoever, shall, without reasonable cause for the same,
Travel* carry Burdens, or do any worldly labors or work whatsoever, upon
that day, or any part thereof; upon paing, that every one traveling contrary
to the meaning of this* Ordinance, shall forfeit for every offense, ten
shillings of lawful money; and that every person carrying any burden, or
doing any worldly labor or work, contrary to the meaning hereof, shall forfeit
five shillings of like money for every such offense* And be it further
Ordained, That no person or persons shall hereafter upon the Lords day, use,
exercise, keep, maintain, or be present at any Wrestlings, Shootings, Bowling,
Ringing of Bells for pleasure or pastime, Masque, Wake, otherwise called
Feasts, Church-Ale, Dancing, Games, Sport or pastime whatsoever, upon pain,
that every person so offending, being above the age of fourteen years, shall
lose and forfeit five shillings for every such offense. And be it further
Ordained, that all and singular person and persons, that have the care,
government, tuitition or education of any child or children, under, or within
the age of fourteen years, shall for feit and lose twelve pence for every of
the said offenses that shall be committed by any such child and children. And
because the profanation of the Lords day has been heretofore greatly
occasioned by May-poles (a Heathenish vanity, generally abused to superstition
and wickedness) The Lords and Commons do further Order and Ordain, that all
and singular May-poles, that are, or shall be erected, shall be taken down,
and removed by the Constables, Borsholders, Tythingmen, petty Constables, and
Churchwardens of the Parishes and places where the same be; and that no
May Pole shall be hereafter set up, erected, or suffered to be within this
kingdom of England, or Dominion of wales.

And it is further Ordained, that if any of the said Officers shall neglect to
do their Office in the premises, within one week after notice of this
Ordinance, every of them for such neglect shall forfeit five shillings of
lawful moneys; and so from week to week, weekly five shillings more
afterward, till the said May Pole shall be taken down and removed. And that
if any Justice of the Peace of the County, or the chief Officer or Officers,
or any Justice of the Peace, of, or within any City, Borough, or
Towne-Corporate, where the said offenses shall be committed upon his or their
view, or confession of the party, or proof of any one or more witnesses by
oath (which the said Justice, chief Officer or Officers, is by this Ordinance
authorized to minister (shall find any person offending in the premises, the
said Justice, or chief Officer or Officers, shall give warrant under his or
their hand and seal, to the Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish or
Parishes where such offense shall be committed, to seize the said Goods,
Cried, showed forth, or put to sale as aforesaid; and to leavy the said other
Forfeitures or penalties by way of Distress, and sale of the Goods of every
such offender, rendering to the said offenders the overplus of the Moneys raised
thereby; And in default of such Distress, or in case of insufficiency, or
inabilitie of the offender to pay the said Forfeitures or penalties, that the
party offending be set publicly in the Stocks by the space of three hours.
And all and singular, the forfeitures or penalties aforesaid, shall be
employed and converted to the use of the poor of the Parish where the said
offenses shall be committed, saving only, that it shall and may be lawful,
to and for any such Justice, Mayor, or head Officer or Officers, out of the
said forfeitures or penalties, to reward any person or persons that shall
inform of any offense against this Ordinance, according to their discretions;
so as such reward exceed not the third part of the forfeiture or penalties.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the Kings
Declaration concerning observing of Wakes, and use of exercise and recreation
upon the Lords day, The Book entitled, The Kings Majesty's Declaration to His
Subjects, concerning lawful Sports to be used; and all other Books and
Pamphlets that have been, or shall be written, printed or published against the
Morality of the fourth Commandment, or of the Lord's Day, or to countenance the
profanation thereof, be called in* seized and suppressed, and publicly
burnt, by the Justices of Peace, or some, or one of them, or by the chief
Officer or Officers aforesaid, in their several Limits, or by their VVarrant
or Command.

Provided, and be it Declared, That nothing in this Ordinance shall extend to
the prohibiting of dressing of Meat in private Families, or the dressing and
sale of Victuals in a moderate way in Innes or Victualling-Houses, for the use
of such as otherwise cannot be provided for; or to the crying or selling Milk
before Nine of the Clock, in the Morning, or after Four of the Clock in the
Afternoon, from the Tenth of September, till the Tenth of March: or before
Eight of the Clock in the Morning, or after five of the Clock in the
Afternoon, from the Tenth of March, till the Tenth of September.

And whereas there is great breach of the Sabbath by Rogues, Vagabonds and
Beggars; It is further Ordained, That the Lord Mayor of the City of London, and
all Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens and other Officers and
Ministers whatsoever, shall from time to time cause all Laws against Rogues,
Vagabonds and Beggars, to be put in due execution; and take order that all
Rogues, Vagabonds and Beggars, do on every Sabbath Day repair to some Church
or Chapel, and remain there soberly and orderly during the time of Divine
Worship. And that all and singular person and persons, that shall do any thing
in the execution of this Ordinance, shall be protected and saved harmless by
the Power and Authority of Parliament.

And be it further Ordained* That this Ordinance be printed and published, and
read in all Parish Churches and Chappells, before the Sermon* in the Morning on
some Lord's Day before the first of May next, on the South Side of Trent, and
before the first of June next, on the North-side of Trent.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

Die Mercurii 22. August 1642.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the better
Observing and Keeping a Monthly Fast, within the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of WALES.
WHereas the Kings most excellent Majesty upon the request of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by and with their advice and
consent, considering the lamentable and distressed condition of his good
Subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland; (that there might be a general
Humiliation of all the Estates of this Kingdom before Almighty God in Fasting
and Prayer) was graciously pleased to command the keeping of a Monthly Fast;
and to the end that all persons might the better take notice thereof (and to
leave such without excuse, as should not duly keep and observe the same) did
afterward by his Proclamation of the eighth of January 1641. appoint that the
same should be generally* publicly, and solemnly holden, and kept, as well by
abstinence from food, as by public prayers, preaching and hearing of the Word
of God, and other Religious and holy duties, in all Cathedralls, Collegiate,
and Parish Churches, and Chappells, within the Kingdom of England and Dominion
of Wales, (without any exception) on the last Wednesday of every Month, to
continue during the troubles in the said Kingdom of Ireland: All which his
Majesty did straightly charge and command, should be reverently and devoutly
performed by all his Subjects, as they desire the blessing of Almighty God, and
would avoid his heavy indignation against this Land and people; and upon pain
of such punishments as may justly be inflicted upon all such as shall contemn
or neglect so Religious a work and duty.

And whereas the Lords and Commons in both Houses of Parliament, have received
diverse informations from several parts of this Kingdom and Dominion of Wales,
of the great neglect of the due observation and keeping of the said Fast upon
the days appointed, and of the prophanations of the same, by many irreligious,
ill-affected, loose, and scandalous persons, as well of the Clergy as others,
who are so far from aflicting their souls, and loosing the bands of
wickedness, as that they provoke the wrath of Almighty God, and make so pious
a means to procure his blessings, the occasion of greater Judgments.

For the prevention whereof for the time to come, the Lords and Commons do
order, declare, ordain, that in all and every the Cathedrals, Collegiate, and
Parish Churches, and Chapels within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, (without any exception) upon every Lords day, next and immediately
before any the days appointed for the said public Fast, the Parson, Vicar,
Curate, or Minister, that upon that day shall officiate, or exercise in any of
the said Cathedralls, Collegiate, Parish Churches or Chappells, shall give
public notice in every of the said Cathedralls, Collegiate, Parish Churches or
Chappells respectively, of the Fast day next ensuing, immediately after Sermon,
or prayer ended in the forenoon, before the Congregation be dismissed,
earnestly exhorting and persuading all the people to the solemn due keeping
and religious observation of the whole day appointed for the said Fast, and
that they would repair to some Church or Chapel, there diligently and
reverently to attend all such holy duties as shall be used in the observance of
the same; that they forbear to use all manner of sports and pastimes
whatsoever, and their ordinary Trades and Callings upon the said day, as well
Carriers, Waggoners, Carters, Waynmen, Drovers, Butchers, Hucksters,
Shopkeepers, Laborers, or any others using any Art, Trade, Mystery or manual
Occupation whatsoever, and that all Vintners, Taverners, Alehouse-keepers, and
Keepers of Victualing-houses* do forbear to keep open their doors, Bulks, or
Shops, or to sell or utter (except in cases of extreme necessity) any Wine,
Beer, Ale or victual, till the public exercises and religious duties of that
day in the respective Cathedralls, Collegiate, Parish Churches and Chappells be
past and over.

And lastly all and every the Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers inhabiting or residing within
the limits or precincts of any such Cathedral, Collegiate, Parish Church or
Chapel, are hereby required to take special notice as well of such Parson,
Vicar, Curate, or other Minister that ought to Officiate in any of the said
Cathedralls, Collegiate, and Parish Churches or Chappells, upon any such day
appointed for the said Fast, that shall either refuse or neglect to do the
same, or not do or cause the same to be done in that religious and solemn
manner as it ought to be, or that shall refuse to give notice of the Fast day
at the time and in manner as aforesaid, and forthwith to return their names,
and the names of all such (from time to time) as shall wilfully offend herein,
in contempt of the Laws, his Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament, unto some
one or more of the Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses that serve for the county
where such offense is or shall be committed, that some speedy course may be
taken for the severe punishing of such as shall offend herein, according to the
Laws.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl, Dom. Com.

24. April. 1643.
WHereas the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, have made an Ordinance
for the more strict and solemn keeping of the days of public Fast, which are
not by all persons duly observed, even in these times of public calamity, to
the great dishonor of God, and the contempt of the Authority of both Houses of
parliament. Now that more particular notice may be given unto all such as shall
offend herein, before any exemplary punishment be inflicted upon them; It is
Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, That all Constables (or
their Deputies) shall the day before every public Fast, repair to every House
within their several and respective liberties, and charge all persons, That
they strictly observe the Fast, according to the directions in the said
Ordinance.

And they shall upon the said days of the public Fast, walk through their
said Liberties, diligently searching for and taking notice of all persons, who
either by following their work of their calling, or sitting in Taverns,
Victualling or Alehouses, or any other ways shall not duly observe the same;
And they are hereby required to return the Names of all such persons as they
shall find so offending, as also such Informations as they shall receive
against any other persons within their liberties, guilty of the like offense
unto the Committee for Examinations, that so they may be proceeded against for
the contempt of the said Ordinance; And all Constables are to observe these
directions from time to time, so long as the said public Fast shall be kept,
without expecting any further Order.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl* Dom. Com.

2. Decembris. 1646.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for the better
Observation of the Monthly Fast.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, Taking notice of the great
neglect and profanation of the Monthly Fast in diverse places of this
Kingdom, do for prevention thereof in time to come. Order and Ordain, and be
it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that all Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Bayliffes, Constables, and other Officers and Ministers whatsoever in
their respective places shall put in Execution all Orders, and Ordinances of
Parliament heretofore made for the due observation of the said monthly Fast,
and are hereby authorized and required to use and exercise the same power, and
to inflict penalties upon the offenders therein, in such manner and form as is
limited and appointed by any Statute, Law, Order, or Ordinance whatsoever now
in force for the Sanctification of the Lords day, or against the profanation
thereof: And for the better encouragement of all such persons as have or shall
testify their good affections to the State by their readiness in observing
and putting in Execution of this and other the Ordinances of this Parliament,
and for prevention of causeless and contentious suits against them; It is
further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons that if any Action, Bill, Plaint
or Suite upon the Case, Trespass, Battery, or false Imprisonment now be or
hereafter shall be brought, for or concerning any matter, cause, or thing done,
or to be done hereafter by any Person or Persons whatsoever, by Virtue of any
Ordinance of Parliament or by any Person or Persons in their aid and
assistance or by their Commandment, according to any such Ordinance of
Parliament, the said Action, Bill, Plaint or Suite shall be laid within the
County where the Trespass or Fact was or shall be done, and committed and not
elsewhere; and that it shall be lawful to and for all and every Person, and
Persons aforesaid to plead thereunto the General issue that he or they are not
Guilty, And for their Justification to give in Evidence to the Jury which shall
try the same, any Ordinance, or Ordinances of Parliament which they or any of
them shall produce, by virtue whereof the Fact Complained of was done or
Committed. And that if upon the Trial of any such Action, Bil, Plaint, or Suit
the Plantiff or Plaintiffs therein shall not prove to the Jury which shall try
the same, that the Trespass, Battery, Imprisonment, or other Fact or Cause of
his, her, or their said Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suit was or were, had, made,
committed, or done* within the County wherein such Action, Bill, Plaint, or
Suit, is or shall be laid, That then in every such case the Jury which shall
Try the same, shall find the Defendant or Defendants in every such Action,
Bill, Plaint or Suit not Guilty without having regard or respect to any
evidence given by the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs therein touching the Trespass,
Battery, Imprisonment, or other Cause for which the same Action, Bill, Plaint,
or Suit, is or shall be Brought: And if the Verdit shall Pass with the
Defendant or Defendants in any such Action, Bill, plaint, or Suit, or the
plaintiff or plaintiffs therein become Non-suits or suffer any discontinuance
thereof, that in every such Case the Justices, or Justice, or such other Judge,
before whom the said Matter shall be tried, shall by force, and virtue of this
Ordinance allow unto the Defendant, or Defendants, his, or their double Costs,
which he or they shall have sustained by reason of their wrongful vexation in
Defense of the said Action, or Suit, for which the said Defendant or Defendants
shall have remedy as in other Cases, where Costs, by the Laws of the Realm are
given to the Defendants.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

FINIS.

