A DECLARATION AND NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings of the Parliament of ENGLAND,
touching the Message and Letters of Credence, sent from the Estates General of
the United Provinces; and presented to the Parliament by the Lord Ambassador
Cats; With his Lordships Speech delivered at the same time; And a translate of
the States Message into English; presented to Mr. Speaker by the Lord
Ambassador Schaep; and read in the House: With the Parliaments Answer,
Declaration, Votes, and Order, concerning the same.

Published by Authority.

Anglo-Irish blazon or coat of arms

Imprinted at London, for G. Horton, 1651.

A DECLARATION AND NARRATIVE Of the Proceedings of the Parliament of ENGLAND,
touching the Letters of Credence, sent from the Estates General of the United
Provinces; And delivered to the Parliament by the Lord Ambassador CATS.
THe Parliament of England having received advertisements from Mr. Speaker,
touching his receipt of a Letter from the Lords Ambassadors Extraordinary of the
States General of the United Provinces of the Low Countries, with a Copy of
their Letters of Credence therein enclosed, which were both on the 18 of this
Month read in the House; and after some debate thereupon, it was ordered, that
they should have audience the next day: And that Sir Oliver Fleming Knight,
Master of the Ceremonies, should attend them with the Vote of the Parliament
touching the time of giving their Lordships audience; And that the Sergeant at
Arms attending the Parliament, shall take care for providing necessaries for
fitting the House for giving audience to them.

The next day, being the 19 instant, the House being informed by the Sergeant
at Arms, That the Lords Ambassadors from the high and mighty Lords, the Lords,
the Estates General of the United Provinces, were ready, and did attend to
present themselves to the Parliament; It was further ordered, That the
Sergeant, with the Mace, should attend them to the House; who coming forth, and
presenting himself before them, with a salute, said;

MY LORDS,
I Have acquainted the Parliament with your present and immediate residence;
and by them have received Order and command, to attend you personally to the
House.

And according he attended them with the Golden Mace on his shoulder, who no
sooner were entered the House, but they uncovered themselves; and when they were
come as far as the Bar, Mr. Speaker, and the Members uncovered their heads, and
stood up; the Master of the Ceremonies, and the Sergeant attended the Lords
Ambassadors, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left, until they
came to the Chaires appointed for them, which were placed in the North side of
the House upon a Turkey Carpet.

The Ambassadors names were,
James Catz Knight, Lord of Walpen, Keeper of the Great Seal, and Lieutenant
of the Fees of the Lords, the States of Holland, and West-Friezland. Gerard
Schaep Esquire, Councellor and late Alderman of the City of Amsterdam, and from
the aforesaid Lords, the States of Holland and West-Frieziand, etc. And Paulus
Vand Peire, counselor of the city of Middelburgh.
The Lord Ambassadors being sat (the L. Cats in the middle chair, the Lord
Schaep on his right hand, and the Lord Paulus on the left) and having by the
hands of the Master of the ceremonies, presented unto Mr. Speaker their Letters
of credence: the Lord Cats did in an eloquent Oration (in the Latin tongue)
declare, That it was the ardent affection and desire of the high and mighty
Lords, the Estates General of the United Provinces, to continue a right
understanding, and firm league of Amity and Union with the commonwealth of
England; and likewise to assist each other, both in an offensive and defensive
War, against any common Enemy whatsoever; to the end, That peace and prosperity
may crown the future Endeavors of both Estates, and a blessing attend them in
their present Designs and consultations. The Lord Cats having ended his
Speech, the Lord Emb. Schaep presented unto Mr. Speaker a paper, containing (in
writing) what was spoken by the Lord Ambassador Cats; to which Mr. Speaker
returned this Answer,

MY LORDS,
I Shall according to the course of the Parliament of England, make reports
unto Them of what your Lordships have now delivered.

And thereupon the Ambassadors, after several enterchanges of ceremonies,
withdrew; Sir Oliver Fleming (Master of the ceremonies) and the Sergeant of
Arms, attended them to the court of Wards; And being withdrawn, the letters of
credence were read in the House; wherein many passages, tending to Peace,
Unity, and preservation of free traffic and commerce, were debated; but the
further result thereof was referred till Wednesday the 24 instant: At which
time, Mr. Speaker (according to Order) made a report of the whole Embassy to
the House; who insisted upon certain branches, tending to peace and unity, and
mutual correspondency, etc. And after some time spent in debate thereof,
declared a great willingness for a firm league and union, so far as it may
extend to the honor and happiness of the commonwealth of England; but
withal, an account and satisfaction is to be given for sundry great and
unparalled wrongs done to the English; I shall only instance one; to wit,
that of Amboyna, where diverse English Merchants, and others; were most
barbarously murdered by the Dutchmen (by the subtle Engine of a pretended
plot) who protested their innocence to the last hour and minute.

The Swedish Ambassador has likewise had audience, and his letters read, which
tend to a general and lasting peace: This was well rescented, and the House
declared a free condescension thereunto.

FINIS.

