A Declaration and Protestation of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to this
Kingdom, and to the whole World.

Wherein (amongst diverse of His Majesty's late illegal proceedings) is
discovered, how several Commissions under the Kings Authority have been
granted to many professed Papists (herein nominated) for places of command in
this War, with power to raise men and arms, which in sundry places they have
performed.

Also how Sir John Hinderson, and Colonel Cockram, were sent to Hamburg and
Denmark* to raise Forces and in other foreign parts, to bring into this
KINGDOM.

With the names of some who have been proclaimed Rebels in Ireland, now in
great favor with his MAJESTY.

For which and other reasons they are resolved to the uttermost of their power,
with the hazard of their lives and fortunes to defend the Truth, against the
Popish Army, and all that shall join with them in the prosecution of this
wicked design.

Also, an Order of both Houses of Parliament, for the placing of Courts of
Guard, Posts, Bars and Chains, in all by-Lanes of several Parishes adjoining
to this City.

Die Sabbathi, October 22. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament that this Declarrtion
shall be forthwith Printed and published; and read in all Churches and Chapels
within the Kingdom of England, and dominion of Wales, by the Parsons, Vicar,
or Cu^^^^ of the same.

John Brown Cler. Parl.



London Printed for F. Coals, and Tho. Bates. 1642.

IT is this day ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That houses for
Courts of Guard, and Posts, Bars, and chains, be forthwith erected and set up
in such places and by-Lanes of the Parishes of S. Margarets Westminster, S
Martins in the fields (in the confines of Westminster, S. Clements Danes, S.
Mary Savoy, S. Andrews Holborne, S. Giles in the fields, Coven-Garden, S
Iohn-street, S. James at Cl^arken-well, S. Giles Crippl^gate, Shorditch,
White-Chappell, Islington, Mile-end, Southwarke, Lambeth, or any other place or
places, as shall be thought necessary and convanient for the defense and safe
guarding of the said Parishes, places* and by-Lanes, the charge thereof to be
borne by the inhabitanrs of the several Parishes aforesaid respectively, who
shall be rated and assessed by such persons respectively, as the Lord
Lieutenant of that County or any two of his Deputies shall nominate for that
purpose. And if any shall refuse to contribute their proportion, then the said
persons so to be named to rate and assesse, shall certify the names of such
refusers to the Lord Lieutenant, or any two of his Deputies, who are to
acquaint one or both Houses of Parliament therewith, that such further order
may be taken therein as to them shall be thought most convenient; And that a
competent number of the Trained-bands and Companies of Volunteers in and
belonging to the said Parishes, shall day and night attend with their Arms in
or near the said Court of Guard; who shall have power and authourity hereby to
apprehend, seize and arrest all suspicious persons, Ammunition and Arms,
passing through the said Parishes, places, or by-Lanes, or any part of them,
until either of the said Houses of Parliament be made acquainted therewith,
and their pleasure be further known concerning the same; And the Captains and
Officers of the Trained-Bands and Volunteers. And the persons here under named
are required to take care that the premises be carefully performed accordingly*
which persons are to be named by the Lord Lieutenant, or any two or more of his
Deputy-Lievtenants.

Io. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

A Declaration and Protestation of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
WE the Lords and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, do in the
presence of Almighty God, for the satisfaction of our Consciences, and
discharge of that great trust which lies upon us, make this protestation and
Declaration to this Kingdom and Nation, and to the whole world, that no
private passion or respect, no evil intention to his Majesty's person, no
design to the prejudice of his just honor and authority, engaged us to raise
Forces and take up arms against the authors of this War, wherewith the
Kingdom is now inflamed.

And we have always desired from our hearts and souls, manifested in our
actions and proceedings, and in several humble Petitions and Remonstrances to
his Majesty, professed our loyalty and obedience to his Crown, readiness and
resolution to defend his person and support his estate with our lives and
fortunes to the uttermost of our power.

That we have been willing to pass by, not only those Injuries, Ignominies,
Slanders, and false Accusations, wherewith we have been privately oppressed and
grieved, but likewise many public encroachments, and high usurpations, to the
prejudice of Religion and Liberty, diverse bloody, traiterous and cruel
practices and designs, for the utter ruin and destruction of the Church and
State, so as we might for the time to come have been secured from that wicked
and malignant party, those pernicious and Traiterous Counsels, who have been
the Authors and fomentors of the former mischiefs and present calamities
which have and still do distemper this Church and State.

That for the same purpose, and for the avoiding of blood we directed the Earl
of Essex Lord General by himself, or others in some safe and honorable way
to cause to be delivered an humble Petition, wherein we do desire nothing from
His Majesty but that he would return in peace to his Parliament, and by their
faithful counsel and advice compose the distemper, and confusions abounding
in his Kingdoms, as he is bound to do, we therein professes in the sight of
Almighty God, which is the strongest obligation that any Christian, and the
most solemn public faith which any such State as a Parliament can give, that
we would receive him with all honor, yield him all true obedience and
subjection, and faithfully endeavor to defend his person and estate from all
danger, and to the uttermost of our power to establish to him and to his
people, all the blessings of a glorious and happy Reign, as it is more largely
expressed in that Petition.

For the delivery of which Petition, his Excellency has twice sent unto the
King, humbly desiring a safe conduct for those who should be employed therein,
but his Majesty refused to give any such safe conduct, or to receive this
humble and dutiful Petition, by any address from the Earl of Essex, saying
that if Justice had been done, the Gentleman which brought the second Message
could not expect his liberty.

By all which and many other evidences and Inducements, we are fully convinced
in our judgments and belief, that the Kings counsels and resolvtions are so
engaged to the Popish party, for the suppression and extirpation of the true
Religion, that all hopes of peace and protection are excluded, and that it is
fully intended to give satisfaction, and to the Papists by alteration of
Religion, and to the Cavaliers and other Soldiers, by exposing the wealth of
the good subjects, especially of this City of London, to be sacked, plundered,
and spoiled by them.

That for the better effecting hereof, great numbers of Papists have in show
conformed themselves to the Protestant Religion by coming to the Church,
receiving the Sacrament, and taking the oaths of Alegiance and Supremacy,
which some of their own Priests have encouraged them to do, by maintaining
that they might do all those things and yet continue good Catholics: Under
which cover his Majesty did at first begin to strengthen himself, those of
that Religion being weak, and unable to endure the envy and discontent which
the arming of the Papists would procure in the Kingdom, and therefore
endeavuored to keep off all Jealousies and suspicions by many fearful oaths
and imprecations, concerning his purpose of maintaining the Protestant Religion
and the Laws of the Kingdom; causing some professed Papists to be discharged
out of his Army, and none to be received that would not endure the Test of
commidg to Church, receiving the Sacrament, and taking the oaths of Allegiance.

That his Majesty being now grown stronger, and able as he conceives to make
good his own ends by Arms, his confidence in the Priests does more clearly
appear persons imprisoned for Priests and Jesuits have been released out of
the Iale of Lancaster, professed Papists have been invited to rise and take up
Arms, Commissions under his Majesty's Authority, have been granted to many of
them for places of command in this war, with power to raise men and great
numbers have been raised by them, and they daily increase, as namely to Sir
Nicolas Thornton Sir Tho. Howard Bar. Sir Edwiard Widdington, Sir William
Kiddell, Master Smith, of Ash, Master George Wray, Master Edward Gray, of
Morpeth Castle, Master Lancelot Errington, of Denico, Master Lancelot Holtby,
all of Northumberland, Bishopric of Durham and New Castle, to Master Clifton,
Master William Walter, Sir William Gerrard, Baronet, Sir Cicill Trafford,
Master Anderson of Lostocke in the County of Lancaster, and diverse Forces are
raised and paid by the Earl of Worcester, and his son the Lord Herbert, and
as we are informed by an express messenger sent from those parts, the said
Lord Herbert, a notorious Papist, is made General of all South Wales; and we
are further informed out of Yorke-shire, by diverse persons of great worth and
quality, that those that raise Forces in these parts for His Majesty* do arm
and employ Papists, and use their advice in their consultations, all which is
contrary to the solemn oaths, Protestations and execrations, whereby His
Majesty bound himself to maintain the Protestant Religion, and the Laws of
the Land, by which he endeavored to get a confidence in the people of his good
intentions, which how well it is answered, we leave to the world to judge.

That Sir John Hinderson, and Colonel Cockrom, men of ill report both for
Religion and honesty, sent to Hamburg and Denmark, as we are credibly
informed, to raise Forces there, and to bring them to New Castle, and to join
with the Earl of New Castle, and the army of Papists, which they intend to
raise there, and that diverse endeavors have bin used in other foreign parts to
bring in strange Forces into the Kingdom, that the K. has received about him
diverse Papists of Ireland, some of which are indicted of high Treason for their
Rebellion there, notoriously known to have been in actual rebellion, as namely
the L. Yaffe, Sir John Oungane proclaimed a Rebel, Colo. Fitz Williams, Doctor
Meara indicted for the rebellion in Ireland, and fled for the same, and yet
appointed Physician to Prince Rupert, and that His Majesty has sent for the
Petition of the Irish Rebels, which the Justices had stopped, with evident
expression of favor to them, whereby that Kingdom is like to become an unfit
habitation of any Protestants, and a seminary of war and treason against this
Kingdom.

That diverse English Traitors, actors in the former designs against the
Kingdom and Parliament, are the chief Counselors and actors in this
unnatural war against his Subjects, as the Lord Digby, O neale, Wilmot,
Pollard, Ashburnham and others.

That we have been likewise credibly informed, that diverse Jesuits and
Priests in foreign parts, make great collections of money, for relief of the
Papists in Ireland, and the furthering of His Majesty's designs here against
the Parliament, and that by them and some others, fled out of this Kingdom for
Treason; great means are made to take up the differences betwixt some Princes
of the Roman Religion, that so they might unite their strength, for the
extirpation of he protestant Religion, wherein principally this Kingdom, and
the Kingdom of Scotland are concerned, as making the greatest Body of the
Reformed Religion in Christendom, and best able to defend themselves, and
succor other Churches.

For all which reasons we are resolved to enter into a solemn Oath and
Covenant with God, to give up our selves, our Lives and Fortunes into his
hands, and that we will to the uttermost of our power and judgment maintain
his truth, and conform our selves to his will. That we will defend this cause
with the hazard of our lives, against the Kings Army, and against all that
shall join with them in the prosecution of this wicked design, according to
the form to be agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament, to be subscribed by
our hands, and that we will for the same ends associate our selves, and unite
with all the well affected in the City of London, and other parts of His
Majesty's Dominions.

That we expect our Brethren of Scotland, according to the act of pacification,
whereby the two Kingdoms are mutually bound to suppress all debates and
differences, to the disturbance of the public peace, that they will help and
assist us in defense of the Cause, which if the Popish party prevail, must
needs either involve them in that alteration of Religion which will be made
here, or engage them in a War against this kingdom, to defend their own
Religion and liberty: And we doubt not but the God of truth, and the great
protector of his people, will assist and enable us in this our just defense, to
restrain the malice and fury of those that seek our ruin, and to secure the
persons, estates, and liberties of all that join with us: And to procure and
establish the safety of Religion, and fruition of our Laws and Liberties, in
this and all other His Majesty's Dominions, which we do here again profess
before the everliving God, to be the chief end of all our Counsels and
Resolutions, without any intention or desire to hurt or injure His Majesty,
either in His Person or just Power.

Die Lunae, 24. October 1642.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords and Commons* That all People within the
Cities of London and Westminster, and (...) Priveledged Places, Liberties and
Suburbs thereof, and in the Borrough of Southwarke be required to shut up their
Shops, and for^ their Trades and other ordinary Employments, that so they may
w^ the greater diligence and freedom for the present attend the defense of the
said places, and put in Execution, and perform such Commands for the Defense
and safety thereof, as they shall from time to time receive from both Houses of
Parliament; the Committee for the defense of the Kingdom, the Lord General,
or the Lord Mayor and Committee for the Militia.

I^ Br^wne Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

