THE ANSWER OF The LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament, to the Petition
of the Knights, Gentry, Clergy, and Commonalty of the County of SUSSEX.
Die veneris 9. Junii, 1648.
THe Lords have commanded me to return thanks to the County of Sussex for the
good affections which they have expressed to the Parliament and Kingdom, and
they take notice, and are well satisfied, with the compliance of that County to
the directions of Parliament, in the way of the delivery of this their
Petition. They have already made some proceedings* which they hope may bring
his Majesty to a safe Treaty with the two Houses of Parliament, for the settling
of a secure and well-grounded Peace, the which they will prosecute with all
care and diligence. And they desire you to be assured, that they will use their
utmost endeavors, that our sad differences and divisions may be speedily and
happily composed; that so the Laws and Fundamental Constitutions of this
Kingdom may have their free course and full vigor: Neither will they be
wanting to contribute their utmost help for the freeing that County and the
whole Kingdom from all those Taxes and Impositions, that the necessity of the
late Wars have occasioned, as soon as the safety of the Kingdom shall permit.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die veneris 9. Junii, 1648.
THe House being informed that diverse. Gentlemen of the County of Sussex were
at the door, they were called in, and Sir William Culpepper Barronet, presented
a Petition in the name of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy, and Commonalty of the
said County; and after they were withdrawn, the Petition entitled The humble
Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Clergy, and Commonalty of the County of
Sussex, was read. The Petitioners were again called in, and Mr. Speaker by the
command of the House, gave them this Answer.

Gentlemen, This House takes notice, and approves of the Petitioners conformity
to their Declaration, in the peaceable manner of their address, and have under
consideration such means as are most conduceable to the speedy settlement of
the peace of the Kingdom, and easing the Burdens of the People, and had (by
Gods assistance) made a further progress therein, had not some late Tumults
and Commotions unhappily interrupted their proceedings.

Hen. Elsyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.


