Die Lunae quinto Maii 1645.
At the Committee of Lords and Commons appointed by Ordinance the 28 of March
last, for securing Eighty thousand pounds, And for a further provision for the
raising and maintaining of the Forces under the Command of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.
WHEREAS of the ten months Assessments charged upon several Counties of this
Kingdom, by the Ordinance of the Fifteenth of February last past, for raising
and maintaining of the said Forces, Three whole Months Assessements are become
due, and ought to have been collected and paid to the Treasurers at Wars at
Guildhall London, according to the said Ordinances; But through the negligence
of the several Assessors, Head-collectors, Sub-collectors, and others that are
trusted and employed therein by the Parliament, most of the Counties have not
paid in any Money at all; And such Counties as have paid in any, the sums are
so inconsiderable, as that the Army can thereby in no sort be supplied; And
unless some speedy and effectual course be taken for the Collecting of those
Moneys, and such other Assessements as shall incur, manifold mischiefs will
inevitably and suddenly ensue, to the exceeding great prejudice of the
Commonwealth: It is therefore Ordered, that the Agents appointed by the
Parliament to solicit the bringing in of those Moneys, shall forthwith repair
into the several Counties to them assigned, Who are hereby authorized to call
before them, or any of them the Assessors, Head-collectors, and Sub-collectors,
appointed for the Assessing and collecting of the said Assessements, and to
take an account of them what they have collected and paid, and to whom, and
what remains in their hands, and what is, and shall be from time to time in
Arrears in the several Divisions of the Counties, and to cause such sums of
Money as are now due, to be forthwith collected and paid to the Treasurers at
Wars at Guild Hall London; And whatsoever person or persons the said Agents,
or any of them, shall find in the said Counties to have neglected their duties
in assessing, collecting, paying, distrayning, or otherwise for the three
Months past, or shall neglect their duty for the time to come, to take them
into safe custody, and forthwith to bring, or to send them to the Committee or
Committees in the several Divisions of the Counties, or before this Committee,
to be forthwith proceeded against, as the said Ordinances of Parliament direct,
And the said Committee or Committees in the several Counties aforesaid are
hereby desired, and required forthwith upon the complaints of the said Agents,
or any of them, to proceed accordingly. And it is further Ordered, that all
Justices of Peace, High Constables, Constables, Captains, and other Officers
and Soldiers, or any of the Trained Bands of the several Counties, and all
other his Majesty's Subjects shall be ayding, and assisting to the said Agents,
or any of them, for the apprehending and conducting of the said offenders to
the aforesaid respective Committees. And it is lastly ordered, That this
service which so much concerns the Public, may effectually be carried on,
That in each of the Counties of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, Kent, Sussex London,
Middlesex and Surrey, there shall be an Agent employed to attend this service,
and one Agent for the Counties of Hartford and Bedford, and another for the
County of Cambridge, with the Isle of Ely, and the County of Huntington, Which
several Agents are constantly to remain in the Counties, and are every six
days to return an account of their proceedings herein unto this Committee,
and likewise of the proceedings of the Committee or Committees in the several
Counties in this Business; And this shall be a sufficient Warrant, not only to
the said Agents, but likewise to the said Justices of Peace, High Constables,
Constables, Captains, other Officers and Soldiers, and other his Majesty's
Subjects that shall be employed in the service aforesaid.

Pembrooke and Mountgom. Salisbury. Vis. Say and Seal. Wharton. Arthur
Heslerige. William Masham. John Potts. John Evelyn. Tho. Hodges. John Venn.
Robert Scawen. Valentine Wauton.


12. Die Maii 1645. At the Committee above mentioned.
ORdered that M. Thomas Walker. M. Jeremiah Whitworth. M. Edward West. and M.
John Walker. or any one of them, shall have power to execute the Directions
above mentioned As Agents employed by Order of the House of Commons.

Rob. Scawen.

London Printed for ED. HUSBAND. 1645.


