All the ORDINANCES OF THE LORS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: For the
true Payment of TITHES, And other such Duties according to the Laws and
Customs of this Realm.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That these Ordinances for the
due Payment of all Tithes and such other Duties, be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley.

Die Veneris, 8. November. 1644. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled
in Parliament, for the true payment of Tithes and other such Duties, according
to the Laws and Customs of this Realm.
WHereas diverse persons within the Realm of England and Dominion of Wales,
taking advantage of the present distractions, and aiming at their own profit,
have refused, and still do refuse to set out, yield, and pay Tyths, Offerings,
Oblations, Obventions, and other such duties, according to the Law of the said
Realm, to which they are the more encouraged both beause there is not now any
such compulsary means for recovery of them by any Ecclesiastical proceedings,
as heretofore has been; and also for that by reason of the present troubles,
there cannot be had speedy remedy for them in the temporal Courts, although
they remain still due, and of right payable, as in former times. Be it
therefore Declared and Ordained, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, that every person and persons whatsoever within the said Realm and
Dominion shall fully, truly and effectually set out, yield, and pay
respectively all and singular Tithes, Offerings, Oblations, Obventions, Rates
for Tithes, and all other Duties commonly known by the name of Tithes, and all
arreares of them respectively to all and every the respective owners,
Proprietors, Improprietors, and possessors, as well Lay as Ecclesiastical
respectively, their Executors and Administrators of Parsonages, Vicarages, or
Rectories, either impropriate or presentative, or donative, and of Vicarages,
and of portions of Tithes respectively within the said Realm and Dominion,
according to the Law, custom, prescription, composition or contract
respectively, by which they or any of them ought to have been set up, yielded
and paid at the beginning of this present Parliament, or two years before. And
in all and every care where any person or persons has at any time since the
beginning of this present Parliament or two years before, subtracted,
withdrawn, or failed in due payment of or hereafter at any time shall
substract, withdraw, or fail in due payment of any such Tithes, Offerings,
Oblations, Obventions, Rates for Tithes, or any duty known by the name of
Tithes, or Arreares of them or any of them, as aforesaid, the person or persons
to whom the same is, has been, or shall be respectively due, his Executors or
Administrators, shall and may make his and their complaints thereof to any two
Justices of Peace within the same County, City, Town, Place, Riding, or
Division, not being Patron nor Patrons of the Church where such substraction,
witwdrawing, or failer of payment has been or shall be; not being interessed
any way in the things in question: Which Justices of Peace are Authorized
hereby, and shall have full power to summon by reasonable warning before hand,
all and every such person or persons against whom any such complaints shall be
made to them, and after his or their appearance before them, or upon default
made after the second summons, the said summons being made as aforesaid, and
proved before the said Justices by Oath, which said Justices hereby shall have
power to administer the same, to hear and determine the said complaint, by
sending for, and examining witnesses upon Oath, which said Oath the said
Justices are hereby also authorized to Minister, and admitting other proofs
brought on either side, and thereupon shall in writing under their Hands and
Seals adiudge the case, and give reasonable costs and damage to either party,
as in their judgments they shall think fit.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons shall refuse to pay any such Tithes or sums of money as upon such
complaint, and proceeding shall be by any such Justices of Peace adjudged as
aforesaid: and shall not within thirty days next after notice of such
judgment in writing under the hand and seal of such Justices of Peace given to
him or them, make full satisfaction thereof, according to the said judgment,
in every such case the person and persons respectively to whom any such Tithes
or sums of money shall be upon such judgment due, shall and may by warrant
from the said Justices, or either of them, distrain all and every, or any the
goods and Chattels of the party or parties so refusing, and of the same to make
sale, and to retain to himself, or themselves so much of the moneys raised by
sale thereof, as may satisfy the said judgment, returning the overplus
thereof to the party or parties so refusing. And in case no sufficient
distress can be found, that then the said Justices of Peace, or any other
Justices of Peace of the same County, as aforesaid, shall and may commit all
and every such person and persons so refusing to the next common Goal of the
said County, there to remain in safe custody without bail or mainprize,
until he or they respectively shall make full satisfaction, according to the
said judgment.

Provided always, and it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that
if any person or persons shall think him or themselves uniustly dealt with by
or in any such judgment, as aforesaid, then he or they respectively shall and
may thereof complain to the high Court of Chancery, where the cause between
the parties shall be again heard and determined; wthich Court shall hereby
have full power and authority to summon the parties, and to hear and
determine the same, and to suspend execution as the same Court shall see cause,
and to give final judgment therein with reasonable costs to the party or
parties grieved by any such complant brought before them.

Provided always that this Ordinance or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to any Tithes, Offerings, yearly payment, or other Ecclesiastical
duties, due or to be due for any houses, buidings, or other hereditaments
within the City of London or the Liberties thereof, which be otherwise provided
for by Act of Parliament.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Lunae 9. August, 1647. An Additional Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, for the true payment of Tyths and other Duties.
WHereas some doubts have been raised, whether Ministers put into Livings and
Sequestrations by Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, or Committees
thereunto authorized by them, be comprised within the Ordinance of the eight of
November, 1644. Entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament for the true payment of Tithes, and other such Duties according to
the Law, and Custom of the Realm, so as to recover their Tithes and other
Duties by virtue thereof, and in what manner Justices of Peace ought to proceed
upon the same. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for the prevention
of all such doubts and scruples, do Declare, that every Minister put, or which
shall be put into any Parsonage, Rectory, Vicarage, or Ecclesiastical Living,
by way of Sequestration, or otherwise, by both or either the Houses of
Parliament, or by any Committee, or other person or persons by Authority of any
Ordinance or Order of Parliament, shall, and may sue for the recovery of his
Tithes, Rates for Tithes, Rents or other Duties by virtue of the said
Ordinance, in as full and ample manner to all intents and purposes, as any other
Minister, or other person whatsoever. And that the Justices of Peace mentioned
in the said Ordinance, shall upon complaint to them made by any such Minister
as aforesaid, or other person within the said Ordinance, immediately without
delay issue out their Warrants to the Constables, petty-Constables, or other,
or other Officers to summon such person or persons who already have, or
hereafter shall refuse to set out, or pay, or shall substract their Tithes,
Rates for Tithes, Rents, or other Duties, to appear before them at their next
monthly meeting, or sooner; and use all possible expedition in the hearing and
determining of such complaints; and shall likewise have power to award treble
damages to the parties complaining, and shall award the same accordingly in all
such Cases where the statute allows and gives the same to any Minister or
other person whatsoever.

And in case the sum or sums of money so adjudged and awarded, shall not be
paid within the time in the said Ordinance mentioned, then the said Justices
shall upon complaint to them made, send forth their Warrants to the Constables,
Petty-Constables, or such other fit persons, as shall be by the parties named,
to whom any such sum or sums upon such Judgment shall be due, and destrain
all and every, or any the Goods and Chattels of any person or persons so
refusing; and to sell and dispose of the said Goods and Chattels according to
the said Ordinance; and to impose such Fines and Penalties, not exceeding the
sum of Forty shillings upon the Constables, Petty-Constables, and other
Officers, who shall wilfully refuse or be negligent in executing their
warrants, as they in their discretions shall think meet.

And because many appeals are brought into the Chancery upon former Ordinance
for Tithes, rather for vexation and delay, then otherwise; Be it therefore
Ordained, that no Appeal shall be received or admitted thereupon, until the
party appealing shall lay down in money, either with the said Justices of
Peace, or in the Court of Chancery, the full value of the Tithes adjudged
before the said Justices, by way of security, to persecute his appeal with
effect, and to render double costs and damages to the party injured or delayed
by the appeal, in case no relief be given upon the appeal to the persecutor.

Provided that this Ordinance shall continue and be in full force from the
four and twentieth day of July, 1647. until the first day of November, which
shall be in the year, 1648.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Lunae 23. August, 1647, An Ordinance for keeping in Godly Ministers placed
in Livings by Authority of PARLIAMENT.
Whereas diverse Ministers in the several Counties of this Kingdom for
notorious Scandals and Delinquency, have been put out of their Livings by
authority of Parliament, and Godly, Learned, and Orthodox Ministers placed in
their rooms; And whereas the said Scandalous and Delinquent Ministers by force,
or otherways, have entered upon Churches, and gained the possession of the
parsonage-Houses, Tithes, and Profits thereunto belonging, and have obstructed
the payment of Tithes, and other profits due by the parishoners unto the
Ministers placed in the said Churches by Authority aforesaid.

The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament do therefore Order and Ordain,
and be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That Sheriffs, Mayor,
Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, all Deputy-Lievtenants, and Committees of
Parliament in the several Counties, Cities, and place within this Kingdom, do
forthwith apprehend, or cause to be apprehended all such Ministers as by
Authority of Parliament have been put out of any Church or Chapel within
this Kingdom, or any other person or persons who have entered upon any such
Church or Chapel, or gained the possession of such Parsonage houses, Tithes
and Profits thereunto belonging, or have obstructed the payment of the Tithes,
and other profits due by the Parishioners, to the said Ministers there placed
by Authority of Parliament, or Sequestrators appointed, where no Ministers are
settled to receive the same, and all such persons as have been Aiders,
Abetters, or Assistors in the premises, and commit them to prison, there to
remain until satisfaction be made to the several Ministers placed by the
said Authority of Parliament for his or their damages sustained, as to the
said Sheriffs, Mayors, Bayliffes, Justices of the peace, Deputy Lieutenants,
or Committees of Parliament, or any two of them shall appear to be just, upon
hearing and proof made upon the Oath of two sufficient Witnesses (which they
or any two of them are hereby authorized to administer) who are likewise
required to restore, settle and quiet the possession in such Ministers as have
been placed by the said Authority of Parliament, and they or any two of them
have hereby power to raise Trained Bands, or any other forces within the said
several Counties, Cities and places to put this Ordinance in execution, and
the said Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenants,
and Committees of Parliament respectively, are hereby required to take
effectual course according to the several Orders and Ordinances of Parliament
in that behalf made, that all men do pay their Tithes or profits due unto the
said respective Ministers. And it is hereby further Ordered and Ordained. That
the Committee appointed for the plundered Ministers have power to see this
Ordinance put in execution. And it is further Ordained, That the Committee of
complaints do give the like remedy to all such Ministers put in by the said
Authority of Parliament, and Sequestrators of the profits against whom any
action shall be brought by any such Delinquent, or scandalous Ministers, or any
other claiming by or under them for their Livings, Tithes, and profits, as they
are authorized unto by any Order or Ordinance in other cases.

It is lastly Ordered and Ordained, That if any such scandalous or Delinquent
Minister, put out as aforesaid, their aidors, or abettors, shall at any time
hereafter, disturb, molest, or hinder such Minister as is put into such Church
or Chapel as aforesaid, in the Exercising of the office of his Ministry, upon
proof thereof made upon the oath of two Witnesses, before the said Sheriffs,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Justices of Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, or Committees of
Parliament, or any two of them, It shall and may be lawful to and for the said
Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffes, Justices of the Peace, Deputy Lieutenants, or
Committees of Parliament, or any two of them, to commit such Offender or
Offenders to prison for one Month, so often as he or they shall so offend.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Martis 4 April, 1648. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT, For the better payment of Tithes and Duties to the Ministers of the
City of LONDON.
WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament of the eight of Novem. Anno Dom. 1644.
entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Paliament, for
the true payment of Tithes, and other such Duties, according to the Laws and
Customs of the Realm, there is a Proviso, That the said Ordinance, or any
thing therein contained, shall not extend to any Tithes, Offerings, Yearly
payments, or other Ecclesiastical Duties, due or to be due for any houses,
buidings or other hereditaments within the City of London, or the Liberties
thereof which be otherwise provided for by Act of Parliament: And whereas some
doubt and scruple has been made, whether the Lord Mayor of the City of London
be sufficently authorized to relieve such Ministers with^n the said Cities or
the Liberties thereof, as have been put into any Benefice or Ecclesiastical
Living by way of Sequestration by both or either houses of Parliament, or by
the Committee of Plundered Ministers, or any other Committee of Parliament; Be
it therefore Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, That the said Proviso in the before mentioned Ordinance
of the eight of November. 1644. be hereby repealed and wholly made null and void,
and that the said Ordinance of the eight of November, 1644 and the Ordinance of
the ninth of August 1647. entitled, An Additionall Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the true payment of Tithes and other
Duties, and the Ordinance of the 23. of August, 1647. en^^^uled An Ordinance
for the keeping of Godly Ministers placed in Livings by authority of
Parliament, and all other Ordinances of Parliament, concerning the payment of
Tithes, Rates for Tithes, Rents or other Duties, do extend to the said City of
London, and the Liberties thereof, and be put in execution by the Lord Mayor of
the said City for the time being, or by any two Justices of Peace within the
said City or Liberties thereof, who are hereby authorized and required
respectively, to require and command the aid of all Constables and other
Officers that shall be by the said Mayor or Justices of Peace as aforesaid
appointed for their assistance in the due execution of this Ordinance as well
within their several Parishes or precincts as without, as well in cases of
Sequestrations as otherwise, to all intents and purposes, and in the like
manner as in and by the said Ordinances is Ordained, limited and appointed to
be executed and done, in any other place or places within the Kingdom of
England by the respective Justices of Peace, and other Officers in the said
Ordinances mentioned.

Provided, That this Ordinance, or any thing therein contained shall not be
construed to extend to the payment of any other kind of Tithes, payments,
rents or Duties, then such as have been paid at any time since the beginning of
this Parliament, or two years before

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, 27. October. 1648. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, For the true payment of Tithes and other Duties, and for
continuance of an Ordinance of the ninth of August, 1647.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Do Order, Ordain, and
Declare, That the Ordinance of Parliament of the ninth of August. Anno Dom.
1647. Entitled, An additionall Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, For the true payment of Tithes and other Duties, shall continue,
remain and be, and hereby is continued to remain and be in full force and
strength, from the last day of October, Anno Dom. 1648. until the first day of
November, Anno Dom. 1650. any promiso of limitation, or restraint for ceasing,
or determination thereof therein contained, or to be contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. Provided always that upon all appeals to be brought into the
Chancery, the party appealing shall lay down in moneys either with the
Justices of Peace, by whom any Order shall be made according to the purport of
the said Ordinance, or in the Court of Chancery, the full value of the Tithes
adjudged before the said Justices, together with the treble Damages and Costs,
the which Costs so to be deposited shall not exceed ten pounds, or in default
thereof no appeals shall be received or admitted; and it is likewise Ordained,
That the penalty of forty shillings upon Constables, petty Constables, and
other Officers limited and appointed in and by the said Ordinance for
neglecting to do their Duties, shall be levied by way of distress and sale of
the Goods of such persons so neglecting or refusing, by Warrant from the said
Justices of Peace, and by such persons as shall by them be thereunto
Authorized, the same to be employed to the use of the Poor of that Parish where
such Constable, petty Constable or other Officer does inhabit.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

29 April, 1652. Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament.
That it be referred to the Committee appointed to receive proposals for the
better propogation of the Gospel, to take into speedy consideration how a
competent and convenient maintenance for a godly and able Ministry may be
settled in liew of Tithes, and present their opinion therein to the House, and
that Tithes shall be paid as formerly, until such maintenance be settled.

Hen. Scohel Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

