ARTICLES of Impeachment exhibited in PARLIAMENT, AGAINST SPENCER Earl of
Northamp WILLIAM Eatle of Devonsh. HENRY Earl of Dover HENRY Earl of
Manmouth, ROBERT Lord Rich, CHARLES Lord Howard Charlton, CHARLES L. Gray of
Ruthen THOMAS Lord Coventry, ARTHVR Lord Chapel, etc.


For several high Crimes and Misdemeanors

Ordered to be Printed.

Hen. Elsing Cler. D. C



Whereunto is annexed, The Grounds of the Proceedings of the Parliament from
the beginning to this present, with the hindrances of their Proceedings and
causes of these distractions

TOGETHER With the several means which they have used to prevent intestine
War, and to hinder the malignant Designs of the enemies of the Peace of the
Kingdom

Likewise ordered to be Printed

Jo. Brown Cler. Parl.



July, 1. LONDON, Printed by T. F. for J. Y. 1642

Articles of Impeachment against the Nine Lords.
THe Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, finding the distractions of the
Kingdom to be great, have thought sit to explain, and remonstrate to the
world the grounds of their proceedings, and the causes of these distractions,
in these ensuing particulars.

1. The Root of these mischievous designs 2. The maturity to which they had
attained fore the beginning of this Parliament 3. The effectual means which
has been used for the extirpation of those desperate evils and the
progression which therein has been made by the wisdom of the Parliament. 4.
The ways of opposition, by which that progress is interrupted. 5. The courses
to be taken for the removing of these obstacles, and for the accomplishing of
our faithful endeavors of restoring the ancient Honor, greatness, and
security of this Crown and Nation, the root of all this mischief we find to
be a malignant design of subverting the fundamental Laws, upon which the
Religion and Justice of this Kingdom are firmly established.
The Actors hereof have been, 1. The Papists, which hate the Laws, as the
obstacles of that subversion of Religion, which they so much long for. 2. Such
Counselors, and Courtiers, as for private ends, have engaged themselves to
further the interests of Foreign Princes, or States, to the prejudice of his
Majesty, and the State at home.


The common Principles by which they govern their Actions, are these. 1. To
maintain continual Differences betwixt the King and the People, upon
questions of Prerogative, and Liberty, that so they may gain to themselves,
and their parties, the greatest places of trust and power in the Kingdom. 2.
To suppress the purity of Religion, and such persons as were best affected to
it. 3. To disaffect the King to Parliaments, by slanders, and false
imputations, and by putting him upon other ways of supply, which in show were
fuller of advantage, then the ordinary course of Subsidies, which indeed have
been the greatest cause of these troubles and distractions under which we
suffer.


Here are the Authors, and causes of these distempers made manifest, now it is
necessary to declare how far these mischiefs have extended.

Former relations, and precedent Declarations have made some apparent, but yet
so great is the power of ambition, that the infliction and execution of the Law
upon Strafford, the durance and imprisonment of diverse others of that faction,
can no way deter them from using all means to perfect their designs, and
finding no way so apt for their purposes, as to foment lealoufies betwixt the
King and Parliament, they have cast many odionse scandals upon the proceedings
of Parliament, nay so far has their treachery extonded, that they have
seduced diverse Members of the Parliament, (namely) Spencer Earl of
Northanmpton, William Earl of Devonshire, Henry Earl of Monmouth, Charles
Lord Howard of Charlton, Robert Lord Rich, Charles Lord Gray of Ruthen, Thomas
Lord Coventry, and Arthur Lord Chapel, who are Impeacht for these high crimes
and heinous misdemeanors, following.

1. That contrary to their duty, they being Peers of the Realm, and summoned
by writ to attend the Parliament, and contrary to an Order of the House of
Peers, of the ninth of April last, and several other Orders, requiring the
attendance of the said House. 2. That after a Vote passed in both Houses the
20. of May last, that the King seduced by wicked Council intends to make War
against his Parliament, etc.
It was Voted that the departure of these nine Lords without leave at such a
time, when the House had declared that the King intended to make War against
his Parliament, and their still continuing at York, notwithstanding their
summons, and command, is a high affront, and contempt of both Houses, and that
the said Lords did as much as in them lav, that the business of Parliament
might be deserted, and are justly suspected to promote a War against the
Parliament.

For that they have by another Order of the 30, of May, been duly summoned, by
the House of Peers, to make their appearance before that House, upon the 8.
day of June last past, they refused to appear, and returned a scornful
Answer, by a Letter under their Hand, directed to the Speaker of the Lords
House, and remaining there upon Record.

For which Crimes, and misdemeanor (they tending to the dissolution of the
Parliament) and disturbance of the Kingdom. It is demanded by the Commons that
the said Lords may be brought to their Answer, and receive speedy andexemplary
punishment, according to their demerits.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this both
printed and published.

Hen. Elsing, Cler. C. D.



FINIS.

