The Copies of all LETTERS, PAPERS And other TRANSACTIONS Between the
Commissioners of the Parliament of England, And the Parliament and Committee of
Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, From February 10. 1647. until July 8. 1648.
Whereby it may appear, What the Endeavors of the Kingdom of England have been
to keep a good Understanding, and to preserve The Union between the Nations:
AND How the SEIZING of Barwick and Carlisle by Papists and other notorious
Delinquents (against whom both Kingdoms lately joined in War as Enemies to the
Happiness and Peace of both) was countenanced (if not procured) by the Scottish
Nation, contrary to several Treaties and Agreements between the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
August 14. 1648.

The Copy of a Letter from the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, to
the Right Honorable, The Earl of Londoun, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland.
SIR,
WE are sent from both Houses of the Parliament of England Commissioners unto
the Committee of Estates, Convention of Estates, and Parliament of the Kingdom
of Scotland: And hearing that the Committee of Estates do meet this day, we do
entreat your Lordship to move them on our behalf, That they would be pleased to
appoint in what way we may impart to them what we have in command from both
Houses, with as much speed as may stand with their convenience; wherein you
will do a special favor unto, My Lord,

Edinburgh, 10 Febr. 1647. Your Lordships most humble Servants, William
Ashhurst. John Birch.


The Lord Chancellors Answer to the Commissioners Letter.
Right Honorable,
I Did communicate your Letter yesterday to the Committee of Estates, who have
commanded me to make known to you, That they will take your Desire into
consideration, and return an Answer speedily: And I shall be ready upon all
occasions to testify that I am

Holyrood house, 11 Feb. 1648. Your most humble Servant, Loudoun Canc.

The copy of a Letter from the Commissioners to the Lord Chancellor.
SIR,
WE do acknowledge your Lordships favor, in presenting the Desires in our
former Letter unto the Right Honorable, The Committee of Estates; And now
(after we have resided here so many days) we judge it our duty, both to let
their Lordships know in general, wherefore we are sent to them; and to enable
our selves to give some account to Both Houses of the Parliament of England,
what we do in pursuance of their Commands: Therefore we do further humbly
entreat your Lordship, To communicate this enclosed Paper to the Right
Honorable Committee of Estates, whose Resolutions we shall attend concerning
the way of our further Proceedings, and ever remain,

Edinburgh, 15 Feb. 1647. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servants, William
Ashhurst. John Birch.

A copy of the first Paper sent by the Commissioners of England to the
Committee of Estates of Scotland, concerning the Union betwixt the Kingdoms.
WE the Commissioners of both Houses of the Parliament of England, have in
charge from them to Declare unto the Committee of Estates, Convention of
Estates, and Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, That it is their unfeigned
Desire, and shall be their constant Endeavors, to maintain and preserve a good
Correspondence, a right Understanding, and a perpetual Brotherly Agreement
between the Parliament and Kingdom of England, and the Parliament and Kingdom
of Scotland: And that they do sincerely intend to do all things which (with
Honor and Justice) lies in their Power, to give Satisfaction unto their
Brethren of Scotland. To which end they have sent us, that all contrary
Impressions or Apprehensions (that possibly might arise) may be removed, and
their unfeigned Desire manifested, to continue the happy Conjunction betwixt
these two Kingdoms in the Common Cause, and against the Common Enemy, wherein
they have been so long (through the Blessing of God) United; it being that
whereunto we are deeply obliged by so many mutual Engagements; and wherein the
glory of God, the Interest of all that profess the true Reformed Religion, and
the Tranquillity and Peace of both these Kingdoms are so much concerned: Upon
which considerations we cannot doubt but that the like Affection and Desire
will be manifested by the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, your
Lordships, and all others in Power and Trust under them.

Edinburgh, 15 Febr. 1647. By Command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of
England, JOHN SQUIB.

A copy of the Lord Chancellors Letter to the Right Honorable the Earl of
Notingham, and the other Commissioners.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
I Received your Letter of the 15. with the enclosed Paper, which I
communicated to the Committee of Estates, who have appointed me to desire that
you would be pleased to make known the Commission or Powers you have from the
two Houses of the Parliament of England; after which they will take your
Desires speedily into consideration. This being all I have in command at this
time, I rest,

21 February, 1648. My Lord and Gentlemen, Your most humble Servant, LOUDOUN
Canc'

A Letter of Credence from the Parliament of England to the Parliament of
Scotland, for the Commissioners hereafter named.
Right Honorable,
WE are commanded by both Houses of Parliament, to signify unto you, That
they have nominated and appointed Charles Earl of Notingham, Henry Earl of
Stanford, and Bryan Stapilton, Robert Goodwyn, William Ashhurst and Colonel
John Birch, Esquires, Committees and Commissioners of Both Houses of the
Parliament of England, to the Parliament of Scotland; and therefore in the name
of the two Houses of Parliament, we are to desire the Parliament of Scotland to
give unto them or any two of them, full credit in those things which shall be
propounded by them, from and on the behalf of Both Houses of Parliament.

Westminster, 31. Jan. 1647. Your Lordships very affectionate Friends and
Servants, E. Manchester, Speaker of the House of Peers pro tempore. William
Lenthal, Speaker of the House of Commons.


A Letter from the Commissioners, to the Lord Chancellor of Scotland.
My Lord,
THe Last night we received in a Letter from your Lordship, that which (upon
Saturday the 19. of this month) your Lordship was pleased to deliver to us by
word of mouth from the Committee of Estates; in Answer whereunto, we did then
show unto your Lordship our Letters of Credence unto the Parliament of Scotland
(whereof because we have a Duplicate, we have for better satisfaction sent you
enclosed one of the Originals) which we doubt not will give satisfaction unto
the Right Honorable Committee of Estates, to whom both Houses of the Parliament
of England are so desirous to show all respect, that (we are confident) they
would have sent to them also a particular Letter of Credence, if it could have
been judged necessary or usual: Besides, we did then show unto your Lordship,
that both Houses of the Parliament of England did (upon the 29. of January
last) pass Instructions (which having the force of an Ordinance of Parliament,
are both a Commission and Instructions) unto Charles Earl of Notingham, Henry
Earl of Stanford, Bryan Stapilton, Robert Goodwyn, William Ashhurst and Colonel
John Birch, Esquires, Commissioners to the Kingdom of Scotland: And we did then
let your Lordship see so much of our Instructions, as did make it appear, that
the said Commissioners or any two of them, were commanded in the name of both
Houses of the Parliament of England, to make Addresses not only unto the
Parliament of this Kingdom, but also unto the Convention and Committee of
Estates; and that we had sufficient Warrant in those Instructions for the Paper
of the 15. of February last (now mentioned in your Lordships Letter) wherein we
did declare the unfeined desires of the Parliament of England, to preserve and
continue a good Understanding, and a Brotherly Agreement betwixt these two
Kingdoms, who are (by the blessing of God) in so happy a Conjunction: And now
having this opportunity, we do entreat your Lordship to present from us this
further desire unto the Right Honorable the Committee of Estates, That they
would entertain no misapprehensions of the proceedings of the Parliament of
England, but if any such should be, that we may be heard, it being the
resolutions of the Parliament of England, to give satisfaction to the Kingdom
of Scotland in all just and honorable things; which is all wherewith we shall
at present trouble your Lordship, but shall wait upon the further resolutions
of the Committee, and remain, my Lord,

Edinburgh, 22. Febr. 1647. Your Lordships humble Servants, C. Notingham. Rob:
Goodwyn. William Ashhurst. John Birch.


A Copy of the Order of the Committee of Estates of Scotland.
Edinburgh, 23 February, 1647.
THe Committee of Estates gives Commission to the Lord Chancellor, the Earl of
Lauderdail, the Earl of Lanerick, the Lord Lee, Sir Charles Aresken, Archibald
Sydserf, and Hue Kenuedy, or any four of them, there being one of each Estate,
to hear the Commissioners of both Houses of the Parliament of England, and to
receive any Papers from them, and to report the same to the Committee.

Extractum. ARCH: PRIMROSE.

A Copy of a second Paper delivered by the Commissioners of England, concerning
the preservation of the Union.
Edinburgh, 21 February, 1647.
Whereas your Lordships are now appointed by the Right Honorable Committee of
Estates, to receive our Addresses to them; We the Commissioners of the
Parliament of England, according to our Paper of the 15. and our Letter to the
Lord Chancellor of the 22. of this present February, do again Express and
Declare unto your Lordships (in the name of both Houses of the Parliament of
England) their unfeigned desire to preserve and maintain a good Correspondence,
and perpetual Brotherly Agreement betwixt the Parliament and Kingdom of
England, and the Parliament and Kingdom of Scotland. And now again we desire,
that the Right Honorable the Committee of Estates, would not entertain any
misapprehensions of the proceedings of the Parliament of England, or if there
be any such, that they would be pleased to make them known to us, who are
commanded to declare unto the Parliament, Convention and Committee of Estates
of this Kingdom, the sincerity of the intentions of both Houses of the
Parliament of England, to remove whatever of that kind may have arisen in, or
been made upon their Brethren of Scotland; and they are resolved to do whatever
is Just and Honorable, for the satisfaction of this Kingdom.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIE.

A copy of the Paper concerning the payment of the One hundred thousand pounds.
Edinburgh, 28 February, 1647.
WE the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, are commanded by them, to
make known unto the Right Honorable the Committee of Estates, Convention of
Estates, or Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, That they have taken into
serious consideration the payment of the One hundred thousand pounds, which was
due unto our Brethren of Scotland about the third of this present February; and
however they could not get the money ready at that day, yet they have taken
such course as will be effectual, to bring in speedily what moneys is not
already brought in (Copies of which resolutions we do for better satisfaction
herewith deliver to your Lordships) and for such part of the said sum, as was
not paid at the aforesaid time, both Houses will allow after the rate of Eight
pounds per centum per annum, for forbearance for so much as shall be behind,
until the whole be paid, which we are confident will be very speedily.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIB.

An Order of both Houses, concerning the bringing in of the Arrears of the Two
hundred thousand pounds Loans for payment of the Scots Army.
Die Sabbathi, 27 Januarii, 1647.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Committee
at Goldsmiths-Hall be herewith required and enjoined to take the most effectual
course they can for bringing in from the several Counties the Arrears of the
Two hundred thousand pounds Loans for payment of the Scots Army, and also the
Arrears of the Two months Assessments for the said Army: And that they do
prepare Letters to be sent to the respective Committees in the several
Counties, where any of those Arrears are due, to be Signed by the Speakers of
both Houses, to satisfy them with the necessity of bringing in the said
moneys, and to quicken them in the bringing in of the same.

Joh: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


An Order of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the payment of One hundred
thousand pounds to the Scots, assigned to be paid 3 February, 1647.
Die Sabbathi, 29 Januarii, 1647.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, do Declare, That their
intention is fully and really to perform with our Brethren of Scotland to the
uttermost of their powers, in the due payment of the One hundred thousand
pounds, assigned to be paid to them on the third day of February next; and in
Order thereunto, do require the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall to employ their
best endeavors, that the Fifty thousand pounds, part thereof charged on these
Receipts, may be complied with, and paid to the persons named in the
Ordinance, appointing the payment of the said Fifty thousand pounds in course,
as it is directed by the said Ordinance; And in case the said several sums
cannot in time be paid to the said several persons, that Interest after the
rate of Eight per centum, be allowed and paid to the said several persons
during the time the said sums or any of them shall be unpaid: The said
Committee is further required from time to time to represent any such
obstructions as they shall meet with, to the end they may be removed, and due
payment of the said Moneys may be made according to the Intentions and Orders
of the Houses. It is further Ordered, That the Interest of the aforesaid whole
Hundred thousand pounds be charged upon the Receipts of Goldsmiths-Hall, and
paid by the Committee there from time to time, for so long time as the same, or
any part thereof shall be unpaid: It is likewise Ordered, That power be, and it
is hereby given to the Committee, to Treat with such persons, Citizens or
others, as they shall think fit, for the present borrowing of the Fifty
thousand pounds, charged upon the Credit and Receipts of Goldsmiths Hall.

Joh: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


An Order of the House of Commons, concerning the bringing in of the Arrears of
the Loans, and the Arrears of the Assessments for the Scots Army.
Die Sabbathi, 29 Januarii, 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the several Members of
this House, that are employed in the several Counties for bringing in the Six
months Assessments of Sixty thousand pounds per mensem, be likewise required
to employ their best endeavors for the speedy Leavying and bringing in the
Arrears of the Loans of the Scots Army, and the Arrears for the Assessments of
the Scots Army, according to the Letters to be written by the Speakers to that
purpose.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

A copy of the Paper concerning the Scottish Army in Ireland.
Edinburgh, 28. February, 1647.
WE the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, have it in charge to make
known unto the Right Honorable, The Parliament, Convention, or Committee of
Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, That however the great troubles wherewith
it has pleased God to exercise the Kingdom of England, and their great
necessities and occasions for money incident thereunto, have hitherto
disinabled them to make those Provisions for the Scottish Army in Ireland that
they intended and desired, yet they are fully resolved to give them all the
satisfaction that lies in their power: And therefore we are commanded in the
name of both Houses, to offer unto the Parliament, Convention, or Committee of
Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, That both Houses of the Parliament of
England will, if it be desired, send Commissioners into Vlster in the Kingdom
of Ireland, to state the Accounts of the said Army; or if your Lordships shall
rather desire to agree by way of general estimate for the whole, they will
consent to that way; and when the sum shall be mutually agreed on, both Houses
of the Parliament of England will endeavor to the utmost of their power and
ability, to give that Army all just satisfaction.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England. JOHN SQUIB.

For the Right Honorable the Earl of Loudoun, Lord High Chancellor of Scotland,
and President of the Parliament.
My Lord,
WE have already made known unto the Right Honorable the Committee of Estates
of this Kingdom, That we were sent by both Houses of the Parliament of England,
unto the Parliament, Convention, and Committee of Estates of this Kingdom of
Scotland, to continue and preserve a good correspondence and Brotherly
Agreement betwixt both Kingdoms; in order whereunto, we have-already given to
the Committee of Estates our Letters of Credence, and several other Letters and
Papers, which if they be regularly (according to your form of proceedings)
before the Right Honorable the Parliament of Scotland (now sitting) we shall
wait for their resolutions thereupon; but if they be not, we do desire your
Lordship to move the Parliament, that they would be pleased to direct the way
of our Addresses to them, wherein you will do a favor unto,

Edinburgh, 4 Martii, 1647. My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servants, C.
Notingham. Robert Goodwyn. William Ashhurst. John Birch.


A copy of a Letter to the Lord Chancellor of the 10. of March, 1647.
My Lord,
WE desire your Lordship to move the Honorable, The Parliament of Scotland, to
take our Letter of the 4. of this instant March into consideration; and that
your Lordship would procure their Answer therein to be returned unto,

My Lord, Your Lordships humble Servants, C. Notingham. Stanford. Bryan
Stapilton. William Ashhurst. Rob: Goodwyn. Jo: Birch.


A copy of the Lord Chancellors Letter of the 11. of March, 1647.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
YEsterday I received your Letter, which I did immediately communicate to the
Parliament; and in obedience to their commands, I do return unto your Lordships
their Answer here enclosed, and so rest, My Lords and Gentlemen,

Your most humble Servant, Loudoun Canc. President of the Parliament.

A copy of an Order of the Parliament of Scotland, of the 10. of March, 1647.
THe Estates of Parliament having received and considered certain Papers and
missive Letters from the Commissioners of the Honorable Houses of the
Parliament of England, They did nominate and appoint some of every Estate to be
a Committee for taking the same Papers and Missives into their consideration,
to whom the said Commissioners may make their Addresses, concerning any thing
they have to offer to the Parliament; and desire the Lord High Chancellor,
President of the Parliament, to return this Answer.

Extr. out of the Records of Parliament,

by me Sir Alex. Gibson of Dury Knight, Clerk of His Highness Registers Council
and Rolls.



A copy of the Letter of the 14 of March to the Lord Chancellor, concerning
Barwick.
My Lord,
THis last night we did receive a Letter from the Town of Barwick, (whereof the
enclosed is a Copy) with a further assurance from the Messenger, That they had
good Information from several parts, of a real Design in the Malignants to
surprise the Town at this intended Horse-Race: And that the Major, and other
the Magistrates of the Town (besides the forbidding of the Horse-Race) only
appointed a Watch of Townsmen for the preventing of such a mischief; We thought
it our part, speedily to acquaint your Lordship with the truth of this
business, to prevent all Misreports and Mistakes that might happen upon it; and
entreat your Lordship to communicate the same to the Honorable, The Parliament
of Scotland; with this further, That however the Delinquents are very
industrious to interrupt the happy Union betwixt the Kingdoms, as that which
stands most with their Interest; yet we doubt not but it will have this effect,
to make them both more careful and diligent to continue and preserve it: And as
Both Houses of the Parliament of England are resolved to keep the Treaties
concerning this Town, and all other Treaties betwixt both Kingdoms inviolable,
so we have given such Directions to the Town of Barwick upon this occasion, as
may manifest the like Resolutions in, My Lord,

Edinburgh, 14 Martii, 1647. Your Lordships humble Servants, C. Notingham.
Bryan Stapilton. William Ashhurst. Stanford. Robert Goodwyn. John Birch.


A copy of the Letter to the Lord Chancellor, 15 Martii, 1647.
My Lord,
WE have in charge from Both Houses of the Parliament of England, to
communicate unto the Honorable, The Parliament of Scotland, their Answer
(herewith sent you) unto some former Papers of the Commissioners of this
Kingdom, touching the Disposing of the Person of the King: Upon consideration
whereof, We doubt not but their Proceedings and Intentions will be cleared from
some Mistakes which we perceive are apprehended by many in this Kingdom. Thus
desiring that your Lordship will take the first opportunity to present it, We
shall only add, that we are, My Lord,

Your Lordships humble Servants, C. Notingham. Robert Goodwyn. Stanford.
William Ashhurst. Bryan Stapilton. John Birch.


A copy of the Paper given in to the Parliament of Scotland, concerning the
Demand of Captain Wogan.
Edinburgh, 21 Martii, 1647.
WE the Commissioners of Both Houses of the Parliament of England, are
commanded to make known unto the Parliament of Scotland, That they have notice
from Sir Thomas Fairfax their General, That one Captain Wogan (an English man)
and his Troop, who being of the Supernumerary Forces, was by the Resolutions of
Both Houses of Parliament, and the Order of the General to be disbanded; but he
refusing so to do, marched by a counterfeit Pass from the county of Worcester
in the Kingdom of England, into the North; and that from thence they are come
in a Military posture, with Arms and Colors into the Kingdom of Scotland,
which was altogether without the allowance, order or privity of the Parliament
of England. And they are likewise informed, That others who are principal
English Delinquents, and have been in Arms against the Parliament, do harbor in
this Kingdom; All which is against the large Treaty betwixt the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, the Act of Pacification and Oblivion, passed Anno 17
Caroli Regis. The said Captain Wogan being seen in Edinburgh by several of our
Servants yesterday and diverse days before; we do in the name of both Houses of
the Parliament of England, demand of the Parliament of Scotland, that the said
Captain Wogan, with his Officers and Soldiers (that are English men) together
with their Horses and Arms, be seized, secured and delivered to us, to be
disposed of as both Houses of the Parliament of England have or shall appoint:
And we cannot doubt but upon discovery of any other English Forces, or any
English men who have been Officers or Reformades, and served the King against
the Parliament, that shall be received or harbored in this Kingdom, you will do
the like justice to the Kingdom of England upon our demanding of them.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIB.

A copy of the Letter to the Lord Chancellor, of the 23. of March, 1647.
My Lord,
WE are commanded by both Houses of the Parliament of England, to give in the
Declaration herewith, sent to the Parliament of Scotland; we do therefore
entreat your Lordship to communicate it to them: We are, my Lord,

Your Lordships humble Servants, C. Notingham. Stanford. Bryan Stapilton. Rob:
Goodwyn. William Ashhurst. Jo: Birch.

The Declaration herein mentioned, was from both Houses, of the 4. of March,
1647. concerning the Papers of the Scots Commissioners, entitled, The Answer
of the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scotland to both Houses of Parliament,
upon the New Propositions of Peace, and the Four Bills to be sent to His
Majesty: And concerning the proceedings of the said Commissioners in the Isle
of Wight.



A copy of the Paper delivered in to the Parliament of Scotland, pressing for
an Answer to former Papers.
Edinburgh, 27 Martii, 1648.
WE have by the command, and in the Name of both Houses of the Parliament of
England, several times made known unto the Parliament and Committee of Estates
of the Kingdom of Scotland, that we were sent hither to keep a good
Correspondence betwixt both Kingdoms; And that it is the Resolution of both
Houses of the Parliament of England on their part, to continue and preserve the
Union and Brotherly Agreement betwixt them, and to remove all misapprehensions
to the contrary (if any such should be) and in order thereunto, have delivered
in to your Lordships several Papers: But although we have been at Edinburgh
since the Eighth of February last, yet we have not received a particular Answer
to any of them, whereof we are (and Both Houses of the Parliament of England
have reason to be) very sensible. At this time we being required to return an
Account to Both Houses of the Parliament of England, concerning the Business of
Captain Wogan and his Troop, must earnestly press your Lordships to give us
your Answer to our Paper concerning him of the 21. of this instant March;
wherein we do not doubt but your Lordships will comply with the Desires of Both
Houses, it being conform to, and in prosecution of the Large Treaty betwixt
Both Kingdoms, and the Act of Pacification and Oblivion passed by the
Parliaments of Both Kingdoms.

By Command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIB.

A Paper delivered in to the Parliament of Scotland, dated Edinburgh, 31
Martii, 1648. Concerning the former Demand of Captain Wogan, and a further
Demand of Sir Philip Musgrave and Sir Tho: Glemham.
Whereas Both Kingdoms of England and Scotland have passed their Public
Faith in the Act of Pacification and Oblivion of 17 Caroli Regis, to concur in
the repressing of those that shall rise in Arms, or make War in any of the
Kingdoms of England, Scotland or Ireland, without the consent of the Parliament
of that Kingdom to which they do belong; and that such shall be held, reputed
and demanded as Traitors to the Estates whereof they are Subjects: And that no
person sentenced by the Parliament of either Nation, as Incendiaries betwixt
the Nations, shall have shelter or protection in any other of His Majesty's
Dominions. And whereas by the said Act, if any English man who has committed
offenses against that Kingdom shall remove into Scotland, he shall (at the
desire of the Parliament of England) be remanded to abide his trial in that
Kingdom where he committed the offense. We having in charge to demand all
English men that we shall discover to be in this Kingdom of Scotland, who have
been in Arms against the Parliament and Kingdom of England: And being certainly
informed, That there is now many such persons in this City of Edinburgh
(Incendiaries betwixt the Nations) and particularly Sir Philip Musgrave, and
Sir Thomas Glemham, We do therefore in the name of Both Houses of the
Parliament of England, demand, That the said Sir Philip Musgrave, and Sir
Thomas Glemham be delivered to us, to be disposed of as Both Houses of the
Parliament of England have or shall appoint (wherein as also in the business of
Captain Wogan and his Troop, represented to your Lordships in our Papers of the
21. and 27. of this instant March, who were in Arms in Westmerland and
Cumberland, and in some other parts of the Kingdom of England, and afterward
in this Kingdom, without the consent of the Parliament of England) the public
Faith of this Kingdom being so deeply engaged, We cannot doubt of a speedy and
satisfactory answer.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIB.

A copy of the Lord Chancellors Letter to the Commissioners.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Did communicate your Letter and Paper of the last of March to the
Parliament, who have remitted the same to a Committee; who were appointed to
consider of your former Papers; And the Parliament is resolved to give their
Answer to your Lordships some time this week: which by their Warrant and
Command is signified to your Lordships, from

Edinburgh, 3 April, 1648. Your Lordships most humble Servant, Loudoun Canc'
President of the Parliament.

A copy of the Lord Chancellors Letter to the Commissioners.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe Committee to whom your Lordships Desires and Papers were referred, having
this day made their Report to the Parliament, they have commanded me to show
your Lordships, That they have taken the same into consideration, and have
resolved to give your Lordships their Answer in the beginning of the next week,
as will appear by their Order, which is herewith sent to you, from

8 April, 1648. Your Lordships most humble Servant, Loudoun Canc' President of
Parliament.

A copy of the Order of the Parliament of Scotland.
AT Edinburgh the Eighth day of April, the year of God, 1648. The Estates of
Parliament recommends to the Lord Chancellor, President of Parliament, to make
known to the Commissioners from the Parliament of England, That the opinion of
the Committee of an Answer to be returned to the Letters and Papers given in by
them, was this day, being the last day of the week, presented and read in
Parliament; But according to the order kept in this Parliament, the Answer is
taken to the consideration of the several Estates till the beginning of the
next week; at which time Answer will be given to them.

Extr. forth of the Records of Parliament

by me Sir Alex: Gibson of Dury Knight, Clerk of His Majesty's Registers
Council and Rolls, under my Sign and Subscript Manual, Alex: Gibson Cleric.
Registr.



A copy of the Paper delivered in to the Parliament of Scotland, concerning the
former demands of Captain Wogan, Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir Tho: Glemham, and a
further demand of Col: George Wray.
Edinburgh, 14 April, 1648.
WE had notice from the Honorable, the Parliament of Scotland, that we should
have an Answer the last week to the several Papers communicated to them from
us; and since that time, that we should have an Answer in the beginning of this
week; but we not receiving any hitherto, think it our duty in businesses
wherein we have so strict a charge, and which do so much concern the Peace of
both Kingdoms, to press your Lordships again for a speedy Answer, especially to
our demands of Captain Wogan and his Troop, and Sir Philip Musgrave, and Sir
Tho: Glemham; the rather because we do still observe a great concourse of
English Delinquents to this Kingdom, who are received and harbored here; and
amongst them some Papists that have been in Arms, who were all (by former
Propositions to the King agreed to by both Kingdoms) excepted from pardon; and
particularly we know, that one Colonel George Wray, who is a Papist, and was a
Colonel in the War against the Parliament, has been for some time of late (and
we believe now is) in this City of Edinburgh: We do therefore upon the grounds
laid down in our former Papers (which we hope do appear very clear to your
Lordships) demand of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name of both Houses of
the Parliament of England, That the said Colonel George Wray be likewise
delivered to us, to be disposed of as both Houses of the Parliament of England
shall direct, and that they may no longer have shelter and protection in this
Kingdom.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIE.

A copy of a Paper from the Lord Chancellor, and others, of the 15. of April,
1648. Delivered by them to the English Commissioners.
WE do according to the Warrant and Command of the Parliament, deliver to your
Lordships their Answer to the Desires and Papers presented from you to them,
and shall report what further your Lordships shall be pleased to move to the
Parliament.

Loudoun. Fochgert. Lotherdail. Rob: Jenies. Lanerick. Arch: Sydserf.


A Paper of the Parliament of Scotland, in Answer to several Papers delivered
by the English Commissioners, dated at Edinburgh, 12 April, 1648.
THe Estate of Parliament having perused and considered the several Papers
given in to them, and to the Committee of Estates by the Commissioners of Both
Houses of the Parliament of England, since their last coming to this Kingdom,
do find at the arrival of the said Commissioners, and upon their first Address
to the Committee of Estates; Although they show no Commission, nor had any
Credential Letters directed to the Committee, yet the Committee of Estates did
appoint some of their number to meet with them, who did accordingly receive
from them what they then thought fit to offer: And when they made their Address
to the Parliament, The very days wherein their Letters were given to the Lord
Chancellor (to whom they sent the same) they were instantly read in Parliament,
and a Committee appointed to take in consideration what was offered by them,
that upon report thereof an answer might be returned by the Parliament.

Whereas your Lordships are pleased in the name of the Honorable Houses of the
Parliament of England, to express their desires to preserve a good
understanding and Brotherly Agreement betwixt the two Kingdoms; The Estates of
Parliament do return this Answer, That as the actions of this Kingdom have been
real proofs of their desires and willingness to entertain a good Correspondence
and Amity betwixt the two Nations, so they are still resolved to keep
inviolably on their part the happy Union to which both kingdoms are Solemnly
engaged by the Covenant and Treaties; Yet they have thought fit to let them
know, That this kingdom has reason to be very sensible that the necessary and
just desires given in by their Commissioners by Warrant of the Parliament and
their Committees, to the Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England,
concerning Religion, the Kings Majesty, and Interest of this kingdom, have had
no satisfactory Answer as yet.

And for the particular desires concerning Captain Wogan and his Troop,
alleged to be in this kingdom, and demanded in the Paper of the 21. of March,
upon the Act of Pacification and Oblivion in the large Treaty in Anno 1641. as
Delinquents, and who have been in Arms against the Parliament of England; And
the Paper of the 31. of March, demanding the aforesaid Captain Wogan, Sir
Philip Musgrave, and Sir Thomas Glemham, to be delivered upon the same Act of
Pacification, as those who have risen in Arms and made War against the
Parliament of England: If your Lordships will be pleased to peruse that Treaty,
and Act of Pacification to which the Papers given in do relate, It will clearly
appear, That none can be remanded or delivered by this kingdom, but such only
of the English Nation who have incensed the King of Scotland against the
kingdom of England, all other criminals being referred to the Laws.

And the Estates of this kingdom are confident that your Lordships will not
misunderstand the not returning of an Answer sooner to your Papers and Desires,
since the many other pressing and weighty Affairs of this kingdom, which have
still been before the Parliament since your coming, has been the only Reason
of this delay.

The Estates of Parliament give warrant and command to the Committee of Twenty
four, to deliver to the English Commissioners the Answer this day past in
Parliament, and to appoint some of their number to meet with the English
Commissioners, and to assert the Parliaments answer, and to report what further
the Commissioners of the Honorable Houses shall offer to the consideration of
the Parliament.

Extracted out of the Records of Parliament

by me Sir Alex: Gibson of Dury Knight, Clerk of His Majesty's Registers
Councels and Rolls, under my Sign and Subscription Manual, Alex: Gibson Cleric.
Regist.



The Reply of the English Commissioners of April 19. to the Parliament of
Scotland, in Answer to theirs of the 12th
Edinburgh, April 19. 1648.
WE have received your Lordships Answer of the 12. of this instant April,
wherein we do not find any thing of those Papers we delivered, in order to the
giving satisfaction unto this Kingdom, concerning such moneys as are due to
them, and to the Scottish Army in Ireland, from the Kingdom of England, wherein
both Houses of the Parliament of England are most willing to do any thing in
their power, for the real performance of their Engagements: For that which your
Lordships mention concerning our Commission and Credential Letters, we must
affirm, That although our Letters of Credence were only directed to the
Honorable Parliament of Scotland, yet we did show unto the Right Honorable the
Lord Chancellor, who was sent to us from the Honorable the Committee of
Estates, that by our Instructions we had Commission and Command to make
Addresses unto that Committee; however, we do gladly take notice of your
Lordships readiness to continue the good correspendence betwixt both Kingdoms,
and the Declaration of your Resolutions to keep inviolably on your part the
happy Union, to which both Kingdoms are solemnly engaged by the Covenant and
Treaties; and as we have several times already, so now again we do in the name
of both Houses of the Parliament of England declare, That it is their
Resolutions to keep the Union inviolably on their part, and we shall hope that
both Kingdoms (having to their former Engagements added these mutual
Declarations of their real intentions therein) will be careful not to do any
thing which may increase jealousies, or provoke one another to break the Union,
which is so much hoped, desired and endeavored by those that are Enemies to
both Kingdoms.

For those desires your Lordships mention, given in by your Commissioners to
the Parliament of England, we are consident they will do therein what shall be
fit, to manifest their desire of a Brotherly Union with the Kingdom of Scotland.

For the Answer your Lordships were pleased to give to our demands of Captain
Wogan and his Troop, Sir Philip Musgrave, and Sir Thomas Glemham, if it were
only according to your Lordships Papers, that by the Act of Pacification and
Oblivion they were such as were to be referred to their Trial by Law; yet that
(as we conceive) does imply a ground and justification of our demands; for they
being in this kingdom, we cannot bring them to Trial, seeing we cannot pursue
them hither by force, until the Parliament or Estates in this kingdom do
deliver them into our hands, which was the sum of our Demands; but it is most
clear without dispute (in one of the last clauses in the said Act, That no
persons who shall be censured by the Parliament of England as these are) should
have shelter or protection in the kingdom of Scotland; and if your Lordships
had but proceeded at present to such a Resolution, it might possibly have
prevented affronts and threatenings to us from some Englishmen here, who have
been in Arms against the Parliaments of both kingdoms: However, we do not now
intend to trouble your Lordships with any thing of our own particular
concernments, we do further desire your Lordships to peruse that clause in the
said Act, wherein it is provided, That in case any of the Subjects of any of
the kingdoms shall rise in Arms or make War against any other of the kingdoms
and Subjects thereof, without consent of the Parliament of that kingdom whereof
they are Subjects, or upon which they do depend, that they shall be held,
reputed and demained as Traitors to the Estates whereof they are Subjects; and
that both the kingdoms in that case be bound to concur in the repressing of
those that shall happen to arise in Arms, or make War, without consent of their
own Parliament; from whence we do observe, That if any of the Subjects of the
kingdom of England be in Arms without the consent of the Parliament of England,
as Captain Wogan and his Troop were in Cumberland and other parts of England,
and Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir Thomas Glembam, and Colonel George Wray are,
having been Commanders in the War against the Parliament of England, and not
pardoned by them, although they should not make War against any other of the
kingdoms or Subjects thereof, yet both kingdoms are bound to repress them; upon
which, and all the abovesaid grounds, we do insist upon our former Papers, That
the aforesaid persons being now in this kingdom, may (by your Lordships power
and authority) be delivered to us.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIB.

A Paper delivered in to the Parliament of Scotland, April 29. Concerning their
former demands, and the further demand of Sir Marmaduke Langdale and Sir Lewis
Dives.
Edinburgh, April 29. 1648.
WE have by several Papers (upon grounds of the Treaties betwixt the Kingdoms
of England and Scotland) demanded Captain Wogan and his Troop, Sir Philip
Musgrave, Sir Thomas Glemham, and Colonel George Wray, to be delivered to us,
that they might be disposed of as should be directed by the Parliament of
England; and although unto that Paper concerning Colonel George Wray (a Papist
in Arms) we have not heard any thing, yet we have received your Lordships
Answer as to the other two, wherein finding no satisfaction, we did by our
Paper of the 19. instant, insist upon our former Demands; yet the said persons
not being hitherto delivered to us, but rather on the contrary, still enjoying
freedom and shelter in this Kingdom, and (as we are credibly informed) some of
them have lately had frequent meetings in this City with Sir Marmaduke
Langdale, Sir Lewis Dives, and other great English Delinquents, which might be
much to the prejudice of the Peace and Good of both kingdoms; and the said Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Lewis Dives, being persons excepted in the
Propositions agreed upon by both kingdoms, and jointly sent to the King for the
settling of a safe and well grounded Peace; We do therefore Demand, That the
said Captain Wogan and his Troop, Sir Philip Musgrave, Sir Thomas Glemham, and
Colonel George Wray, the said Sir Marmaduke Langdale, and Sir Lewis Dives, may
(by your Lordships power and authority) be Apprehended and Delivered to us;
which if your Lordships shall not think fit to do, but that they shall have
freedom and shelter in this kingdom, The kingdom of England and our selves are
free from all the evils and ill consequences (that upon their contrivances and
practices) may arise or happen to either or both kingdoms.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIB.

A Paper delivered in to the Parliament of Scotland, May 2. concerning the
seizing of Barwick.
Edinburgh, May 2. 1648.
ALthough we had Information long since, That some Delinquents had a Design to
seize the Town of Barwick upon Tweed; wherefore we gave your Lordships notice
by our Letter of the 14 of March last (at which time we had the like
Information concerning the City of Carlisle) yet the kingdom of England and our
selves were careful in all things to preserve the Treaties betwixt both
kingdoms, and to avoid every thing that might have the least color of a
Breach, or administer occasions of Jealousies betwixt them: yet observing the
great flocking together of English Delinquents in this City, We could not but
apprehend, That they had some desperate Design against the Parliament and
kingdom of England: And now after we have long expected your Lordships
Resolutions upon our several Demands of some principal men amongst those
Delinquents, We are informed, That some of them, with diverse other English
Delinquents, that went from this City of Edinburgh, and forded the River Tweed,
did upon Friday last the 28 of April, the same day return back over the Bridge,
and in an Hostile way seized upon the said Town of Barwick, and keeps it by
force, contrary to several Treaties betwixt both kingdoms; which being so, We
do by virtue of the large Treaty Declare to your Lordships, That all those who
have seized and taken the said Town of Barwick, or do now hold and keep the
same in a Hostile way as a Garrison, To be Enemies and Traitors to the
Parliament and kingdom of England, and in Arms against them; And likewise all
English men who shall any ways be ayding, assisting or abetting to them, or
shall furnish them with any Moneys, Horses, Arms, Ammunition, Corn, or other
Victual or provisions whatsoever, and to be punished accordingly: And do in the
Name of Both Houses of the Parliament of England demand, That your Lordships,
in order to the repressing of them, do Declare them Enemies to this kingdom;
And likewise all those of the Scottish Nation who shall aid them with Money,
Horse, Arms, Ammunition, Corn, or any other Victuals or provisions whatsoever.
And to the end that they may not be stored with provisions out of this kingdom,
We desire, That publication of such Declaration as your Lordships shall make in
this case, may be made forthwith not only in Edinburgh, but in all parts of
this kingdom near the said Town of Barwick upon Tweed. And because we hear that
Carlisle is seized in like manner, We desire your Lordships Orders and
Declarations may extend to both: All which, considering the many ways whereby
these kingdoms are engaged to one another, and your Lordships late Declarations
of your Resolutions to preserve the happy Union betwixt them, we cannot doubt
but that your Lordships will do effectually and with speed.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, JOHN SQUIB.

A Letter from the Parliament of Scotland to the Parliament of England.
Right Honorable,
THe Parliament of Scotland now assembled, being resolved by all fair and just
means to endeavor the preserving and entertaining the Brotherly Union and good
correspondency betwixt the kingdoms; to which by so many bonds and ties they
are mutually obliged: Yet being very sensible that the many just and necessary
Desires given in by their Commissioners by order from this kingdom, for the
good of Religion, of His Majesty, and for the Interests of Scotland, have not
received a satisfactory Answer; and considering the many great and imminent
dangers threatening Religion, His Majesty's Person and Authority, yea,
Monarchical Government it self, and the Peace and Union of these two kingdoms
of Scotland and England, by the power and prevalency of Sectaries and their
Adherents, Have thought fit to make these just and necessary Demands to the
Honorable Houses of the Parliament of England, to which the Parliament desires
a clear and satisfactory Answer, not having the least thought or intention to
encroach upon the National Rights of the kingdom of England, nor to entrench
upon the Privileges of Parliament; But their Zeal to the Glory of God, their
Loyalty to their King, and their desire of Unity betwixt the kingdoms, has
moved them to make these enclosed Demands, whereby Religion may be settled
according to the Covenant, His Majesty may enjoy His Freedom and Just Rights;
And so by settling a Religious and safe Peace, the present Confusions and
Distempers may be removed, and all occasions of Mistakes and Differences
betwixt the two kingdoms prevented. This is all I have in command from the
Parliament; In whose Name this is subscribed by

Edinburgh, 26 April, 1648. Your Lordships affectionate Friend and humble
Servant, Loudoun Canc' President of the Parliament.

Desires of the Parliament of Scotland, to the Honorable Houses of the
Parliament of England.
FIrst, It is desired, That an effectual course be taken by the Houses for
enjoining the Covenant to be taken by all the Subjects of the Crown of England,
conform to the first Article of the Treaty, and conform to the Declaration of
both kingdoms in Anno 1643. By which all who would not take the Covenant, were
declared to be public Enemies to Religion and the Country; and that they are
to be censured and punished as professed adversaries and Malignants; and that
Reformation and Uniformity in Religion be settled according to the Covenant;
That as the Houses of Parliament have agreed to the Directory of Worship, so
they would take a real course for practicing thereof by all the Subjects of
England and Ireland; That the Confession of Faith transmited by the Assembly of
Divines to the Houses, be approved; And that Presbyterian Government, with a
subordination of the lower Assemblies to the higher, be settled and fully
established in England and Ireland; And that effectual course be taken for
suppressing and extirpating all Heresies and Schisms, particularly,
Socinianism, Arminianism, Arrianism, Anabaptism, Antinomianism, Erastianism,
Familism, Brownism and Independency; And for perfecting of what is yet further
to be done for extirpating of Popery and Prelacy, and suppressing the practice
of the Service Book, commonly called, The Book of English Common Prayer.

Secondly, That conform to the former desires of this Kingdom, the Kings
Majesty may come with Honor, Freedom and Safety to some of His Houses in or
near London, That the Parliaments of both kingdoms may make their Applications
to Him, for obtaining His Royal Assent to such Desires as shall be by them
presented to Him, for establishing of Religion as is above expressed, and settling
a well grounded Peace.

Thirdly, That all the Members of both Houses, who have been faithful in this
cause, may freely and safely return and attend their charges; The City of
London may enjoy its Liberty and Privileges which it had before the late
encroachment of the Army; The Parliament may sit and voice with Freedom and
Safety; Both kingdoms without interruption or disturbance, may make their
Applications to His Majesty; And the settling of Religion and Peace, may not
longer be hindered and obstructed. It is desired, That the present Army of
Sectaries, under the command of Thomas Lord Fairfax of Camerone, be disbanded,
and none employed but such as have or shall take the Covenant, and are
well-affected to Religion and Government, excepting from the said disbanding,
the Garrisons necessary to be kept up by the Parliament of England for security
of that kingdom, which are desired to be commanded by such as have or shall
take the Covenant, and are well-affected to Religion and Government as
aforesaid. Endenburgh the 26 day of April, in Anno 1648.

Loudoun, Canc' President of the Parliament.

A Letter from the Lord Chancellor the 10 of May, 1648.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe enclosed contains the Parliaments Answer to your former Papers; and as to
that Paper which you sent me yesterday, the Answer will be returned either this
night or to morrow: This is all I have in command, and so I rest,

Your affectionate Friend and humble Servant, Loudoun, Canc' President of the
Parliament.

A copy of the Answer of the Parliament of Scotland 2 May, to the Commissioners
Papers of the 19 and 29 of April, 1648. concerning the persons demanded by the
Commissioners.
Edinburgh, 2 of May, 1648.
THe Estates of Parliament have considered the two Papers bearing date the 19.
and 29. of April, presented to them from the Commissioners of both Houses of
the Parliament of England, to which they return this Answer, That the persons
remanded, not being as they are informed in this Kingdom, they think it not
necessary to insist upon giving the Reasons of their former Answer; but if the
Commissioners of both Houses shall think it fitting, they will appoint a
Committee to confer with them anent those Articles of the Large Treaty
mentioned in your papers, and how far either kingdom stands engaged thereby,
wherein they are confident to give all just satisfaction.

Extract. out of the Books of Parliament

by me Sir Alexander Gibson of Dury Knight, and Clerk of His Majesty's
Registers Council and Rolls, and under my Sign and Subscription Manual. Alex.
Gibson Cler. Regist.


Memor. received this the 10. of May, 1648. in a Letter from the Lord
Chancellor of the said 10. of May.



A Paper delivered by the Commissioners in to the Parliament of Scotland the 9.
of May, 1648. pressing them to declare against those that had seized Barwick
and Carlisle, and to prevent their supplies of Arms, Ammunition and Provisions
out of Scotland.
Edinburgh, May 9. 1648.
BY our Paper of the second of this Month we did Declare, That those who had
seized the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, and kept it as a Garrison, were Enemies
and Traitors to the Parliament and kingdom of England, and all others of the
English Nation, who were any ways ayding or assisting to them; and the like for
the City of Carlisle: And forasmuch as what they have done herein, was against
the Large Treaty and Act of Pacification, passed by the King and Parliaments of
both kingdoms; and considering the great mischief that might follow upon it, if
they should be furnished with Arms, Ammunition and Provisions out of this
kingdom, we did for prevention thereof Demand, That your Lordships would
likewise speedily Declare against them, and all of this Nation who should aid
or assist them; but we are very sorry, in a business of so great concernment to
the peace and good of both kingdoms, we should have cause to complain (after a
weeks expectation) that we have not received any Answer from your Lordships,
especially now being informed, that several loads of Arms, Ammunition and
provisions, have since the second of this Month been conveyed out of this
kingdom into the said Town of Barwick, which we hope was only done by some
particular Malignants and disaffected persons of this kingdom, and not by any
allowance or connivance from your Lordships, it being so directly against not
only the Treaties betwixt both kingdoms, but against the Solemn League and
Covenant, wherein we have sworn, not to suffer our selves directly nor
indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided or
withdrawn from the blessed Union and Conjunction (of these kingdoms) either by
making defection to the contrary party, or by giving our selves to a detestable
indifferency or neutrality in this cause; and therefore all those who have
taken the Covenant, must needs engage God against them, if they any ways
engaged with, or assist those men in Barwick and Carlisle, who (as we are
informed) have many Papists come daily to join with them, and themselves are of
the Popish and Prelatical party, who have been in Arms against both kingdoms,
and against that cause wherein we have been happily United, and to which God
has given a blessing of Victory and Success; and as we are most confident,
that not only the Parliament of England, but also all the Religious persons,
and those who have been faithful in this cause in England, will still be United
against those in Barwick and Carlisle, and all other our common Enemies, so we
cannot doubt but that your Lordships actions and determinations will be such as
shall speak you to have the same affections and resolutions to the preservation
of the Union betwixt these kingdoms, and to the maintenance of this cause
against the common Enemies of it that ever you had; from which if either
kingdom do recede, it can only be an advantage to the Rebels of Ireland, and
the Popish and Prelatical party of England and Scotland, but must be a
reproach, loss and infinite hazard to all the rest, which we are well assured
the kingdom of England will no ways be guilty of, and we hope the same of your
Lordships, that your proceedings will be such as we shall never hereafter have
cause to remember, How many of our English Delinquents did lately resort
hither; How long they had shelter and freedom here; How often we did by
Directions, and in the Name of the Parliament of England, Demand some of the
chief of them to be delivered to us, and had them not; How many meetings and
consultations they had in this City; How they went from hence when they did
take Barwick and Carlisle, some of those Soldiers (as we are informed) having
for diverse weeks before had Free Quarter in this kingdom, and diverse of them
pay (as themselves affirmed) That those who are now chief Commanders in them
were here, and demanded by us; And that since (in the time of the delay of your
Lordships Answer to our last Paper) they have (as we are credibly informed)
been furnished with Arms, Ammunition and Provisions out of this kingdom; We do
therefore earnestly press your Lordships to take our Paper of the second of
this Month into consideration, that so all such mischiefs for the future may
be prevented (until it please God by his blessing upon the Forces of the
Kingdom of England, to give those persons in Barwick and Carlisle into their
hands) and by your Lordships actions and resolutions tending to Peace and Union
of the kingdoms, there may be a further declared and manifest confidence and
good understanding betwixt both kingdoms, which for our parts we shall not only
heartily desire, but earnestly and faithfully endeavor.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, THO: READ.

The Answer of the Parliament of Scotland the 10 of May, to the Commissioners
Papers of the 2 and 9 of May, concerning Barwick and Carlisle, 1648.
Edinburgh, 10 Maii, 1648.
Whereas your Lordships mentioned by your Paper of the 2 of May instant, That
you formerly had given us notice of a Design some English Delinquents had to
seize upon the Town of Barwick upon Tweed; by the same Address you informed us,
that Guards were kept there for preventing any such Design; and as to your
Demands concerning the Delivery of Captain Wogan and his Troop, and Sir Thomas
Glemham, Sir Marmaduk Langdale, Sir Philip Musgrave, Colonel Wray, and Sir
Lewis Dives, We gave you such Answers thereunto as we conceived agreeable to
the Treaties, which by our Paper of the 2 of May instant, we offered to assert
by conferrence; And whereas you give us notice that the Towns of Barwick and
Carlisle are seized upon, contrary to the several Treaties betwixt both
kingdoms; and by virtue of the large Treaty, your Lordships in Name of Both
Houses of the Parliament of England, do Declare all those who have seized and
taken the said Towns, or do now hold and keep the same in an Hostile way as a
Garrison, to be Enemies and Traitors to the Parliament and Kingdom of England,
and in Arms against them; And likewise all English men, who shall any ways be
aiding, assisting or abetting to them; And do in their name also Demand, that
in order to the repressing of them, we should declare them Enemies to this
kingdom, and likewise any of this kingdom, who shall aid or assist them: To
this and your Paper of the 9 relating thereto, we return this Answer, That as
we have been always most careful to preserve unviolated on our parts all the
Articles of the Treaties betwixt the kingdoms, so when we shall be certainly
informed by what persons, and by what power and authority the places are seized
upon and Garisoned, your Lordships may be confident that this kingdom will do
thereupon what is just and fit, and agreeable to their Solemn Covenant and
Treaties; and upon this or any thing else you have in command from the two
Houses, we are ready to appoint some to confer with you.

Extracted out of the Books of Parliament

by me Sir Alex: Gibson of Dury Knight, Clerk of His Majesty's Registers
Councels and Rolls, under my Sign and Subscription Manual. Alex: Gibson,
Cleric. Regist.



A Paper delivered in to the Committee of Estates by the English Commissioners,
with the Votes of Both Houses of May 6. 1648.
Edinburgh, 15 Maii, 1648.
WE have often declared to your Lordships the unfeigned desires of Both Houses
of the Parliament of England, to continue and preserve the Union and Brotherly
Agreement betwixt them and the Parliament and kingdom of Scotland; And now it
may appear to your Lordships and all the World, how really they have endeavored
it by their resolutions here enclosed, which we doubt not will give your
Lordships satisfaction: we are to give an account to Both Houses of Parliament
of your Lordships acceptance of what they herein do offer, which we hope your
Lordships will return to us with all convenient speed.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, THO: READ.

A Vote 6 Maii, concerning the keeping of the Covenant and Treaties, and their
offer to join with the Propositions presented to the King at Hampton Court.
6 Maii, 1648.
THe Lords and Commons do Declare, That they are fully resolved to mantain and
preserve inviolably the Solemn League and Covenant, and the Treaties betwixt
the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and that they shall be ready to join with
the kingdom of Scotland; in the Propositions agreed on by both kingdoms,
presented to the King at Hampton Court, for the making such further proceedings
thereupon, as shall be thought fit for the speedy settlement of the Peace of
both kingdoms, and preservation of the Union according to the Covenant and
Treaties.

The Answer of the Commissioners of both Houses of the Parliament of England,
unto the several Papers of the 2. and 10. of May instant, sent to them from the
Honorable Parliament of Scotland.
Edinburgh, 18 of May, 1648.
BY your Lordships Papers of the 2. of May instant, in Answer to ours of the
19. and 29. of April (which yet we did not receive till the 10.) you are
pleased to inform us, That the persons remanded are not within this kingdom,
and therefore you think it not necessary to insist upon giving the Reasons of
your Lordships former Answer, but offer us a conference about it; to which we
must Reply, That by the same Reason, it is not necessary to have any conference
upon it; and however, we shall not wave a conference concerning the aforesaid
Papers, if your Lordships shall desire it, yet we wish it had been offered to
us before those Gentlemen took their journey from hence, so much to the
prejudice of the kingdom of England, when (as we should not have doubted to
clear the justice of our Demands, so) we might have had hope to reap the fruit
of it in having those persons delivered to us, which might have prevented much
mischief that has and may happen to both kingdoms.

For your Lordships Paper of the 10. of May instant, in Answer to ours of the
2. and 9. of May, as to that part wherein your Lordships are pleased to say,
That we had in a former Address to you, informed your Lordships, that Guards
were kept in Barwick upon Tweed; we affirm, if your Lordships shall please to
peruse that Letter, it will appear, that we did not inform your Lordships that
any Guards were there, but only a Watch of Townsmen (which by the Laws of the
kingdom of England every Town may keep) the scope of our Letter being only to
assure your Lordships, that there were no Guards or show of Hostility or
Garrison there; it being the resolution of the Parliament of England, and of us
entrusted by them, not only to keep the Treaties betwixt the kingdoms
inviolable, but to avoid every thing that might have the least appearance of a
breach; and therefore although at that time the Major and Officers of Barwick
did give charge to the Watch, That during the time of the then intended
Horse-race, no man that had been in Arms against the Parliament, should come
into the Town, yet because we heard that some Members of the Parliament here
were unsatisfied with it, to avoid offense, the said Watch was laid down; this
being the truth, whatever we may suffer at present by the surprising and
holding of Barwick and Carlisle, yet our honest and sincere intentions herein,
we are assured is acceptable to God and all good men; and we are confident will
(by Gods blessing in the issue) be of more advantage, then if we had underhand
privately carried on unworthy and unrighteous designs against our Agreement
with this kingdom, to get them taken and held without your Lordships consent,
although it had been to no other end, but to preserve them from those who have
been in Arms against us, and who as they have hitherto been, so will again be
found to be, the real Enemies of both kingdoms.

As to that part of the Answer your Lordships are pleased to give us, That when
you shall be certainly informed, by what persons, and by what power and
authority these places are seized upon and Garisoned, we may be confident, that
this kingdom will do thereupon what is just and fit, and agreeable to the
Solemn Covenant and Treaties; and upon this or any other thing else we have in
command from the two Houses, your Lordships are ready to appoint some to confer
with us.

We must confess this Answer seemed very strange to us, when our Papers to
which your Lordships did relate, assured your Lordships, that they were such
persons as were Enemies to the Parliament and kingdom of England; and these
being English Towns, if we had said no more, considering the ties that are
betwixt these kingdoms (although there had been no Treaties betwixt us
concerning these Towns) yet we conceive had been sufficient grounds in our said
Papers of the 2. and 9. of May for our Demands; but we did more particularly
tell your Lordships, that they were such as went from this City (of Edinburgh)
to take and seize them, and some of those whom we had in the Name of the
Parliament of England demanded of your Lordships whilst they were here: and
although we cannot imagine but the particular names of those persons are much
better known to many in this City then to us, seeing those in Carlisle and
Barwick have frequent and free recourse hither, even the Commanders in these
Towns; yet we shall more particularly acquaint your Lordships (as we are
credibly informd) that of those we have demanded, Sir Marmaduke Langdale did
seize Barwick, and commands the Forces there and thereabouts in chief, and that
with him there is Colonel George Wray, and many such like, that have been
Papists in Arms; and that Sir Philip Musgrave has taken and holds Carlisle,
and that with him is Captain Wogan and his Troop, which as to the persons, we
hope, will give your Lordships satisfaction; however we conceive it was
altogether unnecessary, further then to Answer your Lordships Quere in our
Papers; for if these Towns be taken, seized and held (as they are) contrary to
the Treaties, it is a breach in any whomsoever.

For your Lordships desire to know by what power and authority these places are
seized upon and Garisoned; although we cannot Answer it in the Affirmitive, yet
we may satisfy your Lordships in the Negative, That no power on earth without
the consent of the Parliament of England, can give a lawful Warrant to take or
hold those Towns of Barwick and Carlisle, they being to remain disgarisoned by
Act of Parliament, whereof we need not to give further assurance to your
Lordships, the same Act being likewise passed in this kingdom: For the
conference upon this business offered by your Lordships, although we conceive
nothing can be objected against these clear matters of fact, yet we should
willingly accept of it, but that it must make a delay, which we have no reason
to occasion on our part, when to the stores of Arms and Ammunitions which are
already brought to Barwick and Carlisle, mentioned in our former Papers
(although not taken notice of by your Lordships in your Answer) we are credibly
informed, that several pieces of Ordnance are now going out of this kingdom to
Barwick; which if your Lordships do not allow (as we are confident you will
not) we hope you will not only use means to prevent, but now without further
delay, make such Declaration against those that now hold the said Towns of
Barwick and Carlisle, and their adherents, as will make it appear to the world,
that your Lordships are resolved to keep inviolable the Solemn Covenant and
Treaties betwixt the kingdoms of England and Scotland.

By command of the Commissioners of of the Parliament of England, THO: READ.

A Paper delivered by the Commissioners to the Committee of Estates the Twenty
fifth of May, 1648. In pursuance of theirs of the 15. sent with the Votes of
Both Houses.
Edinburgh, 25 Maii, 1648.
BY our Paper dated the fifteenth of this instant May, We did communicate to
your Lordships a Vote of the Parliament of England, declaring their readiness
to join with the kingdom of Scotland in the Propositions agreed on by both
kingdoms, presented to the King at Hampton Court, and the making such further
proceedings thereupon as should be thought fit for the speedy settlement of the
Peace of both kingdoms, and preservation of the Union according to the Covenant
and Treaties; whereunto presuming of your Lordships Resolutions to pursue the
same ends, we expected a speedy Answer; but having not as yet received any, we
must press your Lordships for a return to that Paper, and the Vote therewith
sent to your Lordships, which so much conduces to the happiness of both
kingdoms.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, THO: READ.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Loudoun, Lord Chancellor of Scotland, and
President of the Parliament of Scotland.
My Lord,
WE are commanded by Both Houses of Parliament to acquaint your Lordship, That
they received a Letter of the 26. of April last, signed by your Lordship in the
Name of the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, together with a Paper of
Desires enclosed, and that such Resolutions as shall be taken thereupon, shall
be signified to the Parliament of Scotland, by the Commissioners of this
Kingdom resident there: Thus much we desire your Lordship to communicate to the
Parliament of Scotland, which being all we have in command, we remain,

Westminster, 15 Maii, 1648. Your Lordships humble Servants, Signed by the
Speakers of Both Houses.
After that the Letter of Both Houses of the Parliament of England to the Lord
Chancellor of Scotland, concerning their Desires of the 26. of April, was
received by the Committee of Estates then sitting; The Lord Crawford and
Lindsey, Lord Treasurer of Scotland, in the name of that Committee did write a
Letter to the English Commissioners, a Copy thereof is wanting; but it was to
this purpose, That the Committee of Estates desired to know whether the
Parliament of England had sent unto them an Answer of their Desires of the 26.
of April, whereunto the English Commissioners returned the ensuing Answer.



A Letter to the Lord Treasurer of Scotland, 23 Maii, 1648.
My Lord,
YOur Lordships Letter of May 23. we received this day; in Answer whereunto we
desire your Lordship to acquaint the Right Honorable the Committee of Estates,
that we have not yet heard from the Parliament of England this week, but we are
in daily expectation to hear from them, concerning the contents of your
Lordships Letter, which shall be without delay signified to your Lordship, as
soon as it comes to our hands, by, My Lord,

Your Lordships humble Servants, C. Notingham. Bryan Stapilton. William
Ashhurst. Rob: Goodwyn. John Birch.


A copy of a Letter to the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, 1 Junii, 1648.
My Lord,
IF the Committee of Estates had sitten since Saturday last, We had given them
the enclosed Papers, which we now entreat your Lordship to communicate to the
Parliament of Scotland, from, My Lord,

Your Lordships humble Servants, C: Notingham. Bryan Stapilton. Will: Ashhurst.
Rob: Goodwyn. John Birch.


A copy of the Commissioners Paper, concerning the Desires of the Parliament of
Scotland, of the 26 of April, 1648.
Edinburgh, June 1. 1648.
WE are commanded by Both Houses of the Parliament of England, in pursuance of
their Letter to the Lord Chancellor of Scotland, dated the 15 of May last, to
acquaint your Lordships, that before they received your Lordships Paper of
Desires of the 26 of April last, Both Houses were in Debate and Consideration
of the best ways and means for the settling of a well grounded Peace, and
preservation of a good correspondency and brotherly Agreement and Union betwixt
the kingdoms; And as the most effectual way thereunto, Both Houses did pass the
enclosed Vote, which we sent to the Honorable Committee of Estates, with a
Paper of the 15 of May, desiring their Lordships Resolutions thereupon, and
seconded that Paper by another to them of the 25 of the same month, to which
we have received no answer. We are commanded to assure your Lordships, that the
Parliament of England do make a real offer to join with your Lordships, in the
Propositions agreed upon by both kingdoms, presented to the King at
Hampton Court, for the making such further proceedings thereupon as shall be
thought fit, for the speedy settlement of a Peace of both kingdoms, and
preservation of the Union according to the Covenant and Treaties. And we are
further commanded to assure your Lordships, that when the Parliament of England
shall receive the answer of the Parliament of Scotland, concerning their
Conjunction in the said Propositions, The Parliament of England will be then
ready to give your Lordships satisfaction in those things which shall be judged
necessary for the Peace of both kingdoms, and which shall not entrench upon the
particular interest of the kingdom, and privileges of the Parliament of
England.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, EDWARD FOX.

A copy of the Paper concerning the Forces marching into the North, of the 1 of
June, 1648.
Edinburgh, June 1. 1648.
WE have in command from the Parliament of England to give notice to your
Lordships, That the Lord Fairfax has command from the Houses to march with
Forces into the Northern counties of the kingdom of England, for the
suppressing of those who are now in Arms against that kingdom, and for the
removing of them (according to the Treaties) who have possessed Barwick and
Carlisle contrary thereunto: And we are further commanded to assure your
Lordships (and as we have power and authority from Both Houses of the
Parliament of England, we do hereby engage the Faith of the Kingdom of England)
That the employing or sending of these or any other Forces to the more remote
Northern parts of the kingdom of England, is not with the least intention of
any offense or prejudice to the kingdom of Scotland, or in the least manner to
disturb the peace or quiet of that kingdom, but for the suppression of the said
Traitors and Rebels now in Arms against the Houses, and the keeping of the
Northern counties in obedience to the Parliament of England, and protection of
such as have been faithful to the Cause which Both kingdoms have been and are
engaged in.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, EDWARD FOX.

A copy of a Paper delivered by the Commissioners of the 6 of June, 1648.
pressing the Parliament of Scotland to declare against them in Barwick and
Carlisle, and against their Supplies out of Scotland.
Edinburgh, 6 June, 1648.
BY our several Papers of the 2. the 9. and the 18 of May last, We have in the
Name of the Parliament of England (upon grounds of Treaties and Acts of
Parliament passed Both kingdoms) demanded, That your Lordships would declare
against those who had (contrary thereunto) seized and do hold the Town of
Barwick upon Tweed, and city of Carlisle, and against all such of this Nation
as should aid or assist them; but we are (and the Parliament of England have
just cause to be) very sensible, That notwithstanding we did according to our
duties timely and frequently represent to your Lordships what mischiefs have
and were like to happen, if they were not speedily declared against by your
Lordships; yet those in the aforesaid Towns, who have been and are professed
Enemies to both Kingdoms, and for some years past have still been fighting
against the cause of God, Religion and the Covenant (which your Lordships
profess to maintain) have gotten so much encouragement, and so many advantages
by your Lordships delaying hitherto to declare against them: And now being
further credibly informed, That many loads of Provision, Arms and Ammunition
have lately gone from this City of Edinburgh to the said Town of Barwick, and
that the people of this Kingdom have free recourse to Barwick and Carlisle, and
many have there taken up Arms with them, notwithstanding it be well known, that
there be very many Papists amongst them, and that some chief men (who impose
great sums of money upon the well-affected, both in those Towns and Countries
thereabouts) and some chief Officers both in those Garrisons and their other
Forces, are notorious Papists, who ought to be so far from being connived at,
that (by the Agreement of both Kingdoms in their Propositions presented to the
King) they were to be excepted from pardon.

We do therefore once more earnestly press your Lordships, that you would take
this business into your serious consideration, when we shall not doubt but that
your Lordships Resolutions therein, will Answer our Desires and Expectations.

We do further acquaint your Lordships, that we are credibly informed, That
some Troops lately raised by your Lordships Authority, went Armed in an Hostile
way into the Kingdom of England, and did Quarter there, to the great
encouragement of those who are Enemies to the Peace of both Kingdoms, which as
we hope it was done without your Lordships knowledge, so we doubt not but that
your Lordships will declare against it, and will take effectual course that
such things may not happen, to make breaches and interrupt the Peace of both
Kingdoms: We do likewise further Desire, That (with all convenient speed) we
may receive your Lordships Resolutions concerning the offer made to your
Lordships by Both Houses of the Parliament of England, represented to the
honorable the Committee of Estates in our Papers of the 15. and 25. of May
last, and to your Lordships in our Paper of the first of this present June,
that so we may give an account thereof to the Parliament of England, who do
daily expect it from us.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England. EDWARD FOX.

The Answers of the Parliament of Scotland to the Papers after mentioned,
presented to them from the English Commissioners.
Edinburgh, Septimo Junii, 1648.
THe Estates of Parliament have received your Lordships Papers of the first of
this instant June, with the Votes of the Honorable Houses of the 6. of May
last, to which they can return no Answer, until just satisfact on be given to
their necessary Desires of the 26. of April.

By your other Paper of the same date, your Lordships gave notice of the Lord
Fairfax his march unto the Northern counties, by command from the Honorable
Houses of the Parliament of England, with this assurance, That it is not with
the least intention of any offense or prejudice to the Kingdom of Scotland: And
as you therein express the respect of the two Houses to this Kingdom, so the
Parliament do assure your Lordships, That their Resolutions of raising new
Forces within this Kingdom for their own securities, and for observing their
pious and loyal Desires, are without the least intention to interrupt the Union
betwixt the Kingdoms of Scotland and England, or violate in the least manner any
of the Articles of the Solemn League and Covenant, by which they are so
strictly united under his Majesty's government.

Extract. forth of the Records of Parliament

by me Sir Alex. Gibson of Dury Knight, Clerk of His Majesty's Registers
Councels and Rolls, under my Sign and Subsription Manual. Alex. Gibson, Cleric.
Regist.



The Reply of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, to the Answer of
the Parliament of Scotland, 7 Junii, 1648.
Edinburgh, 9 Junii, 1648.
WE the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, have this day received
your Lordships Answer of the 7 of June, to our Papers of June the first; And as
to that sent with the Votes of Both Houses of the Parliament of the 6 of May
last, your Lordships were pleased to tell us, That you can return no Answer
until just satisfaction be given to your necessary Desires of the 26 of April;
whereunto we must Reply, That when it is considered how we did in the Month of
March last, in the Name of Both Houses of the Parliament of England, demand of
your Lordships some English Delinquents and Incendiaries that were then (and
for a long time after) in this City of Edinburgh, to be delivered to the
disposal of the Parliament of England, according to the Treaties and Acts of
Parliament passed both Kingdoms, and how often we pressed and renewed those
Demands, and yet your Lordships did not think fit to deliver them, but suffer
them to return to England in Arms, where they are Wasting and Destroying those
in the Northern Counties of that Kingdom, who have been faithful in the
Covenant and Cause wherein both Kingdoms are engaged. And when it is likewise
considered, that the Town of Barwick was taken before your Lordships Desires of
the 26 of April went out of this City; And that we did upon the 2 of May last,
(which was before your Lordships said Desires came to the Parliament of
England) Demand that your Lordships would Declare against those (Delinquents
and Papists) that had taken and held the said Town contrary to the Treaties
betwixt the Kingdoms, and have since very often by several Papers pressed that
Demand (and the like for Carlisle) and yet got no satisfactory Answer; These
Demands and Desires of the Parliament of England to your Lordships, being first
in time, and upon most just and clear grounds of Treaties and Acts of
Parliament in both Kingdoms, and the delaying of them being so prejudicial to
the Kingdom of England: when these things (we say) are well and indifferently
weighed and considered, we doubt not but it will appear to your Lordships, that
the Parliament of England had more cause then your Lordships, to have made such
a return that they could give no Answer to your Lordships said Desires of the
26 of April, until just satisfaction had been given to their aforesaid Demands
and Desires made by us to your Lordships; especially considering, That neither
in the paper of your Lordships said Desires, nor in the Letter sent with them
from the Lord Chancellor, nor any other way since, do your Lordships oblige
your selves to any thing, or make any offer to the Parliament of England
(though they had granted all your Lordships Desires) which might be a ground of
further mutual confidence betwixt the kingdoms; but on the contrary (whatsoever
answer they should give) your Lordships have ever since you sent your Desires
and before) been pursuing your resolutions to raise a new Army, which (as it is
generally reported and believed) is to invade the kingdom of England (to which
the expressions in your Lordships Answer gives too great grounds of jealousy,
which we shall afterward mention in its proper place) yet the Parliament of
England, who are exceeding desirous to continue and preserve the brotherly
Agreement and happy Union betwixt these Kingdoms, and to use all good means to
that end, have notwithstanding made the first offer to your Lordships (which
is) to join with your Lordships in the Propositions, presented to the King at
Hampton Court, and for the making such further Proceedings thereupon, as shall
be thought fit for the speedy settlement of the Peace of both Kingdoms, and
preservation of the Union according to the Covenant and Treaties. And further,
that upon their Receipt of your Lordships resolutions, therein they will be
ready to give your Lordships satisfaction in those things which shall not
entrench upon the particular Interest of the Kingdom, and privileges of the
Parliament of England: Wherein the Parliament of England assert the Cause both
Kingdoms have been engaged in by Covenant and by Arms, and the Terms wherein
they have both agreed, and only desire that your Lordships would do the like,
which is a thing so Pious, Just and Honorable, that we could do no less then
offer it again to your Lordships serious consideration, and shall not doubt of
your Lordships Concurrence with the Parliament of ENGLAND, seeing those
PROPOSITIONS wherein they offer to join with your Lordships do contain full
security for Religion, For the Kings Majesty, For the Covenant, For the
Treaties, And all other things which in the Judgments of Both Parliaments was
necessary for the settling of a safe and well-grounded Peace in both Kingdoms,
and preservation of the Union; Therefore we hope your Lordships will judge that
it really answers your Lordships Desires: However, We shall with all possible
speed send your Lordships Answer to the Parliament of England. As to the other
part of your Lordships Answer to our Paper, wherein we by the command of Both
Houses have engaged the Faith of the kingdom of England, that their Forces
shall do no prejudice nor disturb the Peace or quiet of the kingdom of
Scotland, we might justly have expected an answerable Engagement from your
Lordships for the Armies and Forces of this kingdom, that they should do no
prejudice, or disturb the Peace and quiet of the kingdom of England; but it
appears far otherwise (to our present apprehension) for although your Lordships
do express that you will not interrupt the Union betwixt the kingdoms, nor
violate any of the Articles of the Solemn League and Covenant (wherein we most
willingly and heartily join with your Lordships) yet your Lordships having said
in the beginning of your Lordships Paper, That you could return no Answer to
ours of the first of June, until just satisfaction were given to your necessary
Desires of the 26 of April, (which your Lordships sent to the Parliament of
England) and there being no mention by your Lordships of Desires to any other
kingdom or person whatsoever, and your Lordships affirming that you raise new
Forces for your own securities, and for obtaining your Pious and Loyal Desires:
which, should they relate to your Lordships Desires before expressed, sent to
the Parliament of England, then the words might seem to imply, that you raised
your Forces against them; wherein because your Lordships expression is
something doubtful, and may raise Jealousies betwixt the Kingdoms: however, we
know your Lordships cannot intend any such thing, being in so strict a Union
with them, and it being agreed by the large Treaty (confirmed by Act of
Parliament in both kingdoms) that neither shall denounce War, but three months
warning is first to be given; yet for the avoiding of all mistakes and
misapprehensions that may arise, we likewise Desire, that your Lordships would
make a more full and clear Declaration in that point, which may give the
Parliament and Kingdom of England assurance, that the Forces and Kingdom of
Scotland shall do nothing to the prejudice, or to the disturbance of the Peace
and quiet of the kingdom of England, and that your Lordships would give us an
Answer to our Paper of the sixth of this present June, concerning your
Lordships Declaring against those in Barwick and Carlisle, and their adherents
in this kingdom, whereunto your Lordships are not pleased to say any thing in
the Answer we have now received.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, EDWARD FOX.

A copy of the Paper sent to the Committee of Estates, 17 Junii, 1648.
concerning their declaring against those in Barwick and Carlisle, and that the
Scottish Forces shall not be employed to the prejudice of England.
Edinburgh, 17 Junii, 1648.
WE the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, have long waited for a
satisfactory Answer to our many Papers given to your Lordships, and the
Honorable the Parliament of Scotland, concerning our Demand, That your
Lordships would declare against those Delinquents, Papists, and Enemies to the
kingdom and Parliament of England, who contrary to the Treaties betwixt both
kingdoms, have seized and do hold the Towns of Barwick and Carlisle, and those
of this kingdom who assist them or adhere to them: We have from time to time
made known to your Lordships, what credible informations we have received of
several stores of Arms, Ammunition and Provisions that have gone to them out of
this kingdom, which we might justly expect your Lordships would not have
suffered (considering the strict Union that is betwixt England and Scotland)
although there had been no particular agreements concerning the aforesaid
Towns: But seeing the Commanders in those Towns have still free recourse to
this City, and they are not only supplied, but much encouraged by the delay of
your Lordships Resolutions, which being so much to the prejudice of the Kingdom
of England, and the business of so great importance to the Peace of both
kingdoms, We should much fail in the discharge of our Duties, if we cease not
earnestly to press your Lordships (which hereby we do) for your Answer to our
several Papers concerning Barwick and Carlisle.

We do likewise further Desire, That as we (by the command of Both Houses of
the Parliament of of England) have engaged the Faith of that kingdom, That
their Armies and Forces shall not do any thing to the prejudice of the kingdom
of Scotland, or disturb the peace and quiet thereof; so your Lordships would
make the like Engagement, That the Armies and Forces of this kingdom, shall not
do any thing to the prejudice or disturbance of the peace and quiet of the
kingdom of England; which if your Lordships shall deny or delay, considering how
ambiguous your Lordships expressions were upon this business, in the Paper of
the Parliament of Scotland of the 7 of June instant, it must needs increase the
fears and jealousies of all honest men in both kingdoms, who wish and hold
themselves obliged to endeavor the continuing and preserving the happy Union
betwixt them.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, EDWARD FOX.

A copy of the Paper sent to the Committee of Estates, 22 Junii, 1648. With the
Three Propositions to be sent to the King.
BOth Houses of the Paliament of England have commanded us to communicate to
your Lordships their Resolutions enclosed, concerning the Propositions to be
sent to His Majesty; and we have further in charge to desire your Lordships to
prepare such Propositions as you shall judge fit and necessary for the Kingdom
of Scotland, that they may be sent to His Majesty with all convenient speed: We
hope your Lordships will take this and our former Papers (to which we have yet
received no Answer) into your speedy consideration, we being confident your
Lordships will find the offers and proceedings of the Parliament of England so
reasonable and so just, according to former Agreements betwixt both kingdoms,
and the Grounds whereupon both Kingdoms were engaged in this Cause; that we
shall speedily be enabled by your Lordships Answer, to give such an account to
Both Houses, as may be a ground of further mutual confidence betwixt both
kingdoms; and may disappoint the hopes and expectations of the Papists and
Malignants, who endeavor to break that Conjunction, wherein both kingdoms (by
the blessing of God) are so hapily United, and all of us have entered into a
Solemn Covenant to God, and one to another to maintain.

By command of the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, EDWARD FOX.

III. PROPOSITIONS.
30 Maii, 1648.
1. Whereas both Houses of the Parliament of England have been necessitated to
undertake a War in their just and lawful defense, and afterward both kingdoms
of England and Scotland joined in Solemn League and Covenant, were engaged to
prosecute the same.

That by Act of Parliament in each kingdom respectively, all Oaths,
Declarations and Proclamations, heretofore had, or hereafter to be had, against
both or either of the Houses of the Parliament of England, the Parliament of
the Kingdom of Scotland, and the late Covention of Estates in Scotland, or
Committees flowing from the Parliament or Convention in Scotland, or their
Ordinances and proceedings; or against any for adhering unto them, or for doing
or executing any Office, place or charge by any Authority derived from them:
And all Judgments, Indictments, Outlawries, Attainders and Inquisitions in any
the said Causes; and all Grants thereupon made or had, or to be made or had, be
declared Null, suppressed and forbidden; and that this be publicly declared
in all parish Churches within His Majesty's Dominions, and all other places
needful.

2. Whereas both Kingdoms are mutually obliged by the same Covenant, to bring
the Churches of God in the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and
Uniformity in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government, according to the
Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches.

That the Presbyterial Government be confirmed by Act of Parliament, in such
manner as both Houses of Parliament have agreed in several Ordinances of
Parliament, That is to say, etc. for the term of Three years from the (...) of
June, 1648.

That it be established by Act of Parliament, That the Lords and Commons in the
Parliament of England assembled, shall during the space of Ten years from the
(...) of June, 1648. Arm, Train and Discipline, or cause to be Armed, Trained
and Disciplined all the Forces of the kingdoms of England and Ireland, and
Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick
upon Tweed, already raised both for Sea and Land-Service; and that from time to
time during the said space of ten years, shall Raise, Leavy, Arm, Train and
Discipline, or cause to be Raised, Leavied, Armed, Trained and Disciplined, any
other Forces for Land and Sea-Service in the Kingdoms, Dominions and places
aforesaid, as in their judgments they shall from time to time, during the said
space of ten years think fit and appoint: And that neither the King, His Heirs
or Successors, nor any other, but such as shall act by the Authority or
Approbation of the said Lords and Commons, shall during the said space of Ten
years, exercise any of the powers aforesaid.

And the like for the kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of the Parliament
there shall think fit.

That Moneys be Raised and Leavied for the maintenance and use of the said
Forces for Land-Service, and of the Navy and Forces for Sea-Service, in such
sort, and by such ways and means, as the said Lords and Commons shall from time
to time, during the said space of ten years, think fit and appoint, and not
otherwise; and that all the said Forces both for Land and Sea-Service so Raised
or Leavied, or to be Raised or Leavied, and also the Admiralty and Navy, shall
from time to time during the said space of ten years, be Employed, Managed,
Ordered and Disposed by the said Lords and Commons, in such sort and by such
ways and means as they shall think fit and appoint and not otherwise. And the
said Lords and Commons during the space of ten years shall have power,

1. To suppress all Forces raised or to be raised, without Authority and
Consent of the said Lords and Commons, to the disturbance of the public peace
of the kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of
Guernsey and Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, or any of them.

2. To suppress any Foreign Forces who shall invade, or endeavor to invade the
kingdoms of England and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Guernsey and
Jersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, or any of them.

3. To conjoyn such Forces of the kingdom of England, with the Forces of the
kingdom of Scotland, as the said Lords and Commons shall from time to time
during the said space of ten years, judge fit and necessary, to resist all
foreign Invasions, and to suppress any Forces Raised or to be Raised against
or within either of the said kingdoms, to the disturbance of the public Peace
of the said kingdoms, or any of them, by any Authority of the Great-Seal, or
other Warrant whatsoever, without consent of the said Lords and Commons of the
Parliament of England, and the Parliament or the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively; and that no Forces of either kingdom shall go into, or
continue in the other kingdom, without the advice and desire of the said Lords
and Commons of the Parliament of England, and the Parliament of the kingdom of
Scotland, or such as shall be by them appointed for that purpose.

Provided, That during the said space of ten years, nothing herein before
contained, shall extend to the taking away of the ordinary legal power of
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Majors, Bailiffs, Coroners, Constables,
Headboroughs, and other Officers of Justice, not being Military Officers
concerning the Administration of Justice; so as neither the said Sheriffs,
Justices of the Peace, Majors, Bailiffs, Coroners, Constables, Headboroughs,
and other Officers, nor any of them, do Leavy, Conduct, Employ or Command any
Forces whatsoever, by color or pretense of any Commission of Array, or
extraordinary command from His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, without the
consent of the said Lords and Commons.

And if any persons during the said space of Ten years shall be gathered and
assembled together in warlike manner, or otherwise, to the number of Thirty
persons, and shall not forthwith disband or disperse themselves, being required
thereto by the said Lords and Commons, or command from them, or any by them,
especially authorized for that purpose; Then such person or persons not so
disbanding or dispersing themselves shall be guilty, and incur the pains of
High Treason, being first declared guilty of such offense by the said Lords and
Commons, Any Commission under the Great Seal, or other warrant to the contrary
notwithstanding. And he or they that shall offend herein, to be incapable of
any pardon from His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, and their Estates shall
be disposed as the said Lords and Commons shall think fit, and not otherwise.

Provided, That the City of London shall have and enjoy all their Rights,
Liberties and Franchises, Customs and Usages in the Raising and Employing the
Forces of that City for the defense thereof, in as full and ample manner, to all
intents and purposes, as they have or might have used or enjoyed the same at
any time before the making of the said Act or Proposition.

And after Your Majesty's assent given to the three Propositions now tendered to
Your Majesty, and to such Acts of Parliament as shall be offered by Both Houses
for confirmation thereof, Then Both Houses of Parliament will Treat with Your
Majesty, concerning the future settlement of the Government of the Church, the
settlement of the Militia, and upon the rest of the Propositions formerly
tendered to Your Majesty at Hampton Court.

That the Houses of the Parliament of England do desire, That such Propositions
as shall be fit and necessary for the kingdom of Scotland, may be prepared to
be sent to His Majesty with all convenient speed.

A Paper from the Committee of Estates of Scotland, of the 8. of July, to the
Commissioners of England, in answer to some of their former Papers.
At Endenburgh, the 8. of July, 1648.
WE the Committee of Estates of the Parliament of the kingdom of Scotland, do
return this answer to your Lordships Papers of the 17. and 22. of June:

That although our Commissioners at London did often, for some Months together
(after the return of our Army out of England) attend without any answer to
their Papers, and the just Desires of this kingdom, and at several times for
many days could obtain no hearing; Yet the Parliament, notwithstanding of their
important business, and that this last Session was very short, did always,
immediately after the receipt of your Lordships Letters and Papers read them,
and returned such answers as they conceived ought to satisfy, and particularly
to your Desires concerning Barwick and Carlisle; as likewise to that Engagement
which you were pleased to offer upon the advance of the Army under the command
of the Lord Fairfax into the North of England toward our border, which
therefore we shall not here repeat.

The Parliament also, upon consideration of the great dangers threatening
Religion. His Majesty's Person and Authority, yea Monarchy it self, and the
peace and happiness of these kingdoms, strictly united by Covenant, Treaties,
and so many near relations, Did upon the 26 of April last, send such Demands to
the Houses of the Parliament of England, as they conceived to be just and
necessary: To which they did upon the 15. day of May return a very general
answer, relating to a more particular satisfaction, to be expected from your
Lordships. And the Committee of Estates did on the 23. day of May last desire
to know, if your Lordships had received any further Instructions for satisfying
the Desires of this kingdom: To which your Lordships answered, That as yet you
had not received any; neither have we since that time heard any thing
concerning the said Desires from your Lordships: Which we cannot but look upon,
as a great contempt and neglect of this kingdom, and an evidence of no great
forwardness nor inclination toward a peace or settlement, or Resolution to
entertain that Amity and good correspondense betwixt the Nations, which we by
Treaties, Messages and all imaginable means have still studied to preserve: And
had a satisfactory answer been returned to these our necessary Desires, all the
Inconveniences which hereafter may ensue, would probably have been prevented,
which we have still since that time patiently expected, and acted nothing as to
an Engagement, in hopes thereof: But finding the dangers to all that is dearest
to us still increasing, No satisfaction, nor so much as an answer offered to
these our just and necessary Desires; No security to Religion, but rather a
greater danger thereunto from the Propositions now communicated unto us; No
hope of Safety or Freedom thereby to His Majesty's Person, and as little of
Freedom to the Honorable Houses of the Parliament, Ease to the oppressed
Subjects of England, or Security to either Nation. We have therefore resolved
to pursue our duties in order to all these, as Christians, as Subjects, and as
Brethren joined together in Covenant, upon the grounds contained in the
enclosed Declaration; which we desire your Lordships would be pleased to
communicate to the Honorable Houses.

By command of the Committee of the Estates of Parliament, ARCH: PRIMEROSE,
Cler.
Unto this Paper the English Commissioners returned no Answer, in regard the
Scottish Army had then invaded England.



The Commissioners of both Houses of the Parliament of England, sent to the
Committee of Estates of the Kingdom of Scotland, for a safe Pass to return into
England, which they granted, and therewith sent a Letter to the Commissioners;
a Copy whereof is as follows:
Right Honorable,
I Am commanded by the Committee of Estates, in Answer to your Lordships
Desires of the 19. of this instant July, to return to your Lordships from them
the enclosed Pass: And when your Lordships shall be pleased to acquaint them
with the time of your parting from hence, they will be ready, if you insist
thereupon, to appoint a competent Convoy to attend your Lordships for so much
of the way as you shall think necessary; your Lordships engaging the Public
Faith of the Kingdom of England for their safe return: I am likewise commanded
by the Committee to show your Lordships, That by their Orders the Towns of
Barwick and Carlisle, are for the Peace of both Kingdoms secured from the
Sectaries; and that just satisfaction being given to the necessary Desires of
this Kingdom, not only these Towns shall be put in the condition they were in
formerly, and their Fortifications slighted, but likewise all the Forces of the
kingdom of Scotland now in England, shall immediately be recalled and return;
And that they will still inviolably observe on their parts the Union and
brotherly Correspondence betwixt the kingdoms.

The Committee having employed one Mr. Thomas Hamilton Gentleman, about a
month ago to London as a public Servant of theirs, they have commanded me to
show your Lordships their Desire, that no let nor hindrance be offered to him
in his return, which would be contrary to the Law of Nations, and their
expectations: I shall add nothing from my self, but that I am,

Eden. last July, 1648. My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servant, Crayford
and Lindsey.

The Answer of the Commissioners to the Letter from the Lord Treasurer of the
last of July, 1648.
Right Honorable,
WE have received yours of the last of July, and to that part thereof which
concerns public business, we cannot give your Lordship any Answer, but have
thought good to let your Lordship understand, That an Order is come to our
hands, Dated the 22. of July, 1648. by which we are recalled, and thereby our
powers of any further Transaction of business with your Lordship, otherwise
then in order to our return, we conceive are Determined; as to that part
wherein your Lordship has been pleased to manifest your care for our safe Pass
and Convoy, we return your Lordship thanks. We are,

Edinburgh, 1 Augusti, 1648. My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servants, C:
Notingham. Bryan Stapleton. Robert Goodwyn. John Birch.


FINIS.

