Tudor rose royal blazon or coat of arms fleur-de-lys
THE DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, Directed to
the high Sheriff of the County of Essex, and all other Sheriffs in general
within England and Wales, Concerning his MAJESTY'S Proclamation about the
Militia.
WHereas Robert Smith Esquire, now high Sheriff of the County of Essex, has
lately received a Writ, bearing date the 27 day of May, in the eighteenth year
of His now Majesty's reign, thereby commanding him to publish a Proclamation
whereby all His Majesty's Subjects belonging to the Trained-bands or Militia of
this Kingdom are forbidden to rise, march, muster, or exercise, by virtue of
any Order or Ordinance of one or both Houses of Parliament, without consent or
warrant from His Majesty, upon pain of punishment according to the laws. And
whereas the said high Sheriff has now addressed himself to both Houses of
Parliament for advise and directions therein; conceiving the said Proclamation
to be contrariant and repugnant to the Ordinance and judgment of both Houses of
Parliament concerning the Militia: It is therefore declared by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament (they intending nothing by the said Ordinance but the
protection and security of His Majesty's Person, the defense of the Kingdom
against foreign invasion, and the preservation of the public peace, against
intestine rebellions and insurrections here at home, the maintenance of the
privileges and authority of Parliament according to the Protestation) That the
said writ is illegal, for that by the constitution and policy of this
Kingdom, the King by his Proclamation cannot declare the Law contrary to the
Constitution os any of the inferior Courts of justice, much less against the
high Court of Parliament; And likewise for that this Writ forbids that to be
done which they are obliged unto by their duty to God, their allegiance to His
Majesty, and the trust reposed in them by the Commonwealth (the law having
entrusted them to provide for the good and safety thereof.) And that the said
high Sheriff has done nothing, in forbearing to publish the said
Proclamation, but according to his duty, and in obedience to the Order of both
Houses. And he is hereby required not to publish the said Proclamation, or any
other Proclamations or Declarations of the like nature that concern the
Parliament, without first acquainting the said Houses. And it is further
declared, that the said high Sheriff, and other Sheriffs of other Counties
within this Kingdom of England, and the Dominion of Wales, for their obedience
to the Orders and Ordinance of Parliament, or that have or hereafter shall do
any thing in the execution thereof, shall be protected by the power and
authority of both the said Houses.

Sabbathi 18 Iunii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, That this Declaration shall be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Io. Brown. Cleric. Parliament.

London Printed for Joseph Hunscot and John Wright, 1642.


