THE DECLARATION OF The LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament assembled, Concerning
the Earl of Stamford and others his Assistants; whom the KING Proclaimed
Traitors for executing the Ordinance of the Militia.
WHereas Henry Earl of Stamford was by Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament
appointed Lord Lieutenant of the County of Leicester, and by the Order of both
the said Houses the Magazin of the said County was delivered into his hands to
be removed or disposed of as he should think fit for the safety and defense of
His Majesty and the County; In obedience whereunto the said Earl did take the
said Magazine and did place a great part thereof at his house at Bradgate under
safe guard, and the residue thereof at a place in the Newarkeneere the Town of
Leicester; For the doing whereof the said Earl, and also William Sherman,
William Stanley, John Norris, and William Reynor, upon pretense of being
Afsistants to the said Earl, and all other his Adherents, were without all
color of Law, and against the rights and liberties of the Subject proclaimed
traitors, which as concerning the said Earl being a Member of the House of
Peers, is a high breach of the privilege of Parliament: Be it therefore
declared by the said Lords and Commons, That the said Earl, William Sherman,
William Stanley, John Norris, William Reynor, nor any other of the parties
which were assisting of the said Earl in the Premises, have done any thing
herein but according to their duties, and in obedience to the commands of both
Houses of Parliament; and that therefore the said Earl and all other the said
persons his assistants and every of them shall and ought to be protected by the
power and Authority of both Houses of Parliament. And the said Lords and
Commons do hereby forbid all Sheriffs, Majors, Bayliffes, Constables, and
other His Majesty's Officers and Subjects whatsoever, any way to arrest,
impeach, molest, or trouble the said Earl, William Sherman, William Stanley,
John Norris, William Reynor, or any other of the said persons (so assisting to
the said Earl) either in their persons, goods, or estates, for, or by reason
of the premises without the Authority or consent of both Houses of Parliament.

Sabbathi 23 Julii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith printed
and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London Printed by E. G. for C. Latham and T. Creake. 1942.


