portrait of King Charles I

Charles by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland KING,
Defender of the Faith, etc,

A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons IN PARLIAMENT assembled, concerning a
personal Treaty with the Kings Majesty, and the establishment of a true and
wel-grounded p^ace in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

ALSO, Certain propositions from the Revolted Ships to the Duke of York,
touching their coming with him into England, and his Highnesses Answer
thereunto.

LIKEWISE, The last Intelligence from COLCHESTER, concerning the proceedings of
the Lord Fair fax, and the storming the Town.

TOGETHER, With the storming of Wamour Castle in Kent, and exceeding go^d news
from Ireland, of the proceedings of the Lord Inchique^ne.

July. 3d LONDON. Printed for J. J. 1648.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons, concerning a personal Treaty with the
Kings Majesty.
THe House of Commons take notice of the affectionate acknowledgments which the
City expresses of the Houses Concessions upon their former Petitions, and of
their Christian and present desires of a safe and wel-grounded peace according
to the Covenant, and of that means which they propose in order thereunto of a
personal Treaty. In which as in the other particulars of your Petition, the
House especially observes the confidence and trust which the City reposes in
them, in leaving the consideration of their peace, and security of their wisdom
and care. To all which, the House has commanded me to give you this Answer,
That they have the same fellow feeling with the City and Kingdom of their
sufferings by War, and the same desires with them to attain to a safe and
welgrounded peace. They have for that end spent a great part of this last month
in Considera^ions of Peace, and have made some progress therein: And for the
more speedy dispatc^ of what further remains to be done, the Houses have
appointed a Committee to consider what the King has offered, and what is
further to be offered to the King, for His satisfaction for se^ling of a-speedy
and wel-grounded Peac^; and to consider of time, place, and ^ther circumstances
for convenience of Address to be made to His Maj. and they doubt not but what
they have done, and speedily shall do herein, will be fully satisfactory to the
City of London, and to all others that desire to see the troubles of this
Kingdom ended in a safe and just Peace. And for your good affections to the
Parl. and Kingdom, manifested by your Actions in the late War, and in your
present Petition for a safe and welgrounded Peace, the House has commanded me
to give you thanks.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
A List of the names of the Committee of Lords and Commons chosen by both
Houses of Parliament, about the perfecting the business of Treaty with the
King, and setting the peace of the Kingdom.
Piers, Earl Northumb^rland. E. Kent. E Rutland. E Lincoln E. Suffolk. E.
Stamford. Lord Ba^tlet. L North. L. Hunsdoun. L. Harbert. Comm^n^rs, Sir Walter
Earl. Sir Harbottle Grimston. Sir John Potts. Sir William Lewis. Sir Richard
Onslow. Sir Gilbert Gerhard. Sir James Harrington. Sir John Burgin. Sir I.
Eulin of Wilts. Sir Martin Lumbley. Sir Robert Harlow. Mr. Prideux. Mr.
Swy^fen. Mr. Maynord. Mr. Wheeler. Mr. Hungerford. Mr. Perepoint. Mr. Lisle.
And 2. more of the House of Commons.



SIR.
AS was certefyed this morning, a party of the Enemies sallyed forth at the
South gate, and approached near our horse Guard, but were quickly beaten back,
and pursued by our party to the turn pike, where they kep^ a Court of Guard,
who upon her approach gave fire and fled away. So we entered this Guard, took
such arms as were left there. This Guard of theirs was kept near the
Alme^-houses, at the entrance of the Subburbs of the town in this action three
of the enemy were killed, and many wounded. We also took 12. prisoners, and 15
or 16 horse with arms, two horses of ours were killed, and one man cut in the
head, but the wound not mortal, not any one of the rest of our men received
any hurt at all. Provisions begin to grow scarce in the town, especially bread,
and how they are provided with corn I know not, but I am certain they are ill
provided of mills to grind it if they have any. For this day we have fi^ed and
burnt down their Windmils to the Ground, diverse soldiers steals away from
the enemy daily, and come into us, especially since the Lord General sent in a
Letter, proff^ring conditions to such as should come to him, and unto all, if
they would embrace and yield upon the Town, which conditions were. 1. That
within 24. hours after the receipt thereof, the officers laying down their
arms should have p^sses to travel beyond Sea. etc. 2. That the common
soldiers, and all men of that rank, shall have liberty to depart to their own
homes, submitting to the authority of Parliament. 3. That the Inhabitants of
the town shall be free from plunder and violence.

These conditions proffered not being accepted of, the Lord General is
resolved not to offer so good again to those which are the chief in action
amongst the enemy, our army is in a very good condition, and full of
resolution, and although the Genesis is very unwilling to storm the town (for
that as much as in him is, he would avoid the shedding of blood.

About four of the clock this morning another party of the Enemies forces
sallyed out of the town upon the Suffolk forces an the North East side, but
Col. Whaley joining with them, charged them, killed two and put the rest to a
disorderly retreat, took ten prisoners, and some very good horses. This Evening
another party of the enemy attempted to go out on Harwich road, to fech in
provisions, and were fallen upon by a party of ours which routed them and took
diverse prisoners, one of which that was wounded says, that they begin to be
exceedingly straightned in the town for provisions, espetially for the house
meat: three of their Wind-mills are burnt down, they have two Watermils which
we are cuting off, and have scaling Ladders ready to storm, but the mortar
piece is not yet come up.

Yesterday morning 3 troopers came out of the town with horse and arms, and
proffered their service to the General, they report there are in the town about
600. horse, and 3500, foot and about three of the clock in the afternoon, Sir
Charles Lucas drew out 8. companies of foot, and 4 troops of horse, close under
their works, whereupon a party of ours were commanded out to charge them, and
after some exchang of shot, our forces beat them in, set their guard house on
fire, killed two, and took some prisoners.

From the Leaguer before Colchester, June 28. 1648.
Certain Propositions of the Revolted Ships to his Highness the Duke of York.
SIR,
For the present all the news I can send you is this, that his Highness the
Duke of York is here in these parts, and that the revolted Ships are coming
into Go^ith, and have sent 2. propositions to his Highness concerning their
proceedings for His Majesty (as they pretend) which are as is certified thus.
1. To come aboard there to give them countenance in their Design which they are
now engaged in. 2. To send them in provision necessary for the furnishing of
their Ships, and for the better maintenance of that design. But his Highness
denied to countenance the business in the least.

From the Hague June 11. 1648. Letters from Colchester say thus, that his
Excellency goes on very gallantly, and intends very speedily to storm the
Town, and not to make many days more, yet the enemy have made c^rtain sallies
forth; but with much loss on the enemies side, 8. of them were taken prisoners
of the Country men, and 2. Prentices by the Army, and it is not to be doubted
but to short time the City will be reduced.

Some talk of the storming of Wamor Castle, but as yet no letters come
concerning the s^m^.

There is very great discord about the proceedings of the Rebels in IRELAND,
and some blood spilt, Neale, Mache^ma c^^^^^^ent of Owen Roes party, is sore
wounded if not dead, The Popes Nuntio excommunicated all the supreme Coun^ells
at Kilkenny, that had a hand in the Cessation with Inchiqueene.



SIR,
THere are some forces here in Scotland, which are already in a posture to
march, and are intended to join with Sir Marmaduke Langdale; but we fear not
but they will v^ry speedily be prevented, by reason of the Earl of Argile, who
is in a great forwardness to give them battle, and has had many Skirmishes
with them, also diverse prisoners are taken by him from these forces under Duke
Hamilton, which hereafter J shall give you a more full Relation. So for the
present J remain

From Edinburgh June the 18. 1648. Your humble Servant T. B.

FINIS.

