A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, concerning
diverse well affected persons and Citizens of the City of London, who are
willing and ready to undertake and advance a considerable number of Soldiers,
and them to Arm, maintain, and pay for several months ensuing, or during
these times of danger, upon the public Faith.
Die Lunae. 14. November. 1642.
WHereas diverse well-affected Persons, Citizens of the City of London, and
others, have advanced several great sums of money, and other supplies for
the safety of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, and also have set forth many
Soldiers under the several Commands of their Excellencies the Earls of Essex
and Warwick: Notwithstanding all which said former Advances, and for the
better supply of the said Forces, as also for the more sure preservation and
safety of the King, Parliament, and City, which so much concerns the Public.
And no way to hinder or backward the said former undertakings or intentions;
diverse of the said well-affected Persons, are and do declare themselves yet
willing and ready, further to undertake and advance a considerable number of
Soldiers, and them to Arm, maintain and pay for several months ensuing, or
during these times of dangers and Distractions, for the purposes aforesaid.
Provided they may have the Public Faith of the Kingdom for repayment of all
such sums of money, which they shall so advance by way of Loan. All which is
Declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to be an acceptable Service to
the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, and necessarily tending to the preservation
of them. And do therefore Order that all such as shall furnish Men, Money,
Horse or Arms for this Service, shall have the same fully Repayed again, with
interest for the forbearance thereof from the times disbursed: And for the true
payment thereof, do hereby engage to all and every such person and persons the
Public Faith of the Kingdom. And do further Order, that the Lord Major, and
Sheriffs of London for the time being, shall by themselves, and such
Sub-Committee as they shall appoint to take the said Subscriptions, who are to
order the performance of this Service for the advancement thereof.

John Brown, Cler. Parliament.
ACcording to an ordinance of Parliament bearing date the fourteenth day of
this present Month of November 1642 concerning the advancing of a considerable
number of Soldiers, by contribution of Money; and Arms, to be raised within
this City, and liberties by the subscriptions of persons to be called upon in
the several Wards and Parishes, for the perfecting of this necessary work,
and the furtherance of the same, being directed by the said ordinance unto us
the Major and Sheriffs of this City, and to such subcommittee, as by us shall
be thought fit, for the execution of the contents of the said ordinance, we do
therefore hereby ordain and appoint the several persons here under mentioned
that is to say (Robert Sweet for La^gborne Ward. John Bellamie for Cornehill
Ward. Hugh Smithson for Cheap Ward. Richard Willet for Cordwinders Ward.
Wylliam Walwin for Vintrey Ward. Haugan Hovell for Broadstreete Ward.
Christopher Nicholson for Castle-Bennets Ward. Miguel Styles for Candleweak
Ward. John Hilliard for Dowgate Ward. Rich. Cotes for Aldersgate without. and
John Leigh for Aldersgate within. Walter Boothby for Cripplegate Ward. Nicholas
Gerrard for Breadstreete Ward. Will. and Matthew Fox for Farington without.
Tho. Lentall for Billingsgate Ward. Tho. Hutchins for B^shopsgate Ward. Richard
Finch for Queene-hithe Ward. Robert Meade for Walbrooke Ward. Will. Farrington
for Port-Sokin Ward without. Mark Hilsley for Colemanstreete Ward. John
Dethick, for Limestr. Ward. John Kenricke for Tower Ward. Tho. Foot, for
Bridge Ward. Francis Greeneway for Basinghall Ward. Edward Vaughan for
Farrington within. Solomon Vandebrooke for the Dukes place,) and to any other
Committes, that have not yet brought in their names unto you to be a general
Committee for the mannaging of this business, and for the same to assemble
themselves together from time to time, keeping their Court at Weavers Hall, or
where-else your selves shall find most convenient, to consider and conclude of
those things which may promote the expedition of this service, to which purpose
we give you by these presents full power and authority together with the other
treasurers of several parishes to collect and receive all such subscriptions
as shall be advanced for money and arms as aforesaid, and that by monthly
payments to begin from the first day of this present Month, and to deal with
the Deputies, Common Council men, Churchwardens and all others of the
several Wards and Parishes within and about this City of London, and
particularly with those who have not yet promoted the subscriptions in their
Wards or Parishes, nor have hitherto chosen any Treasurers nor Committes for
the furtherance of this work; to call before you all such persons, and to
press them thereunto, by virtue of the ordinance of Parliament, and of this
our authority given unto you in this behalf, for the execution whereof, it
will be convenient that the greatest number of you should be present at your
Courts, however when there shall be a defect of the greater number, then
whatsoever six persons of you at the least shall debate and resolve upon, shall
pass for good, and be entered for an order, and for your ease and more free
attendance upon the Committee Court. We give you power in your several
Parishes to choose and appoint such person or persons as you think meet together
in the subscriptions, and to bring in the same to you that are Treasurers, as
well as Committees.

Isacke Pennington, Major.
Shreiffes.
John Langham, Thomas Andrews,





