A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, Concerning the
Kings Majesty, and the State of this Kingdom; Sent to the General Assembly of
the Church of Scotland.

Together with a Letter from the Ministers of the Church of England, to the
General Assembly of the Church of Scotland; concerning the KING, and the
Discipline of this NATION.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for R. W. 1648.

A DECLARATION OF Both Houses of Parliament, sent to the General Assembly of
the Church of Scotland.
THE Lords and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, finding to their
great grief, that the distractions of this Kinddom do daily increase, and that
the wicked council and practice of a malignant party amongst us, if God
prevent them not, are like to cast this Nation in blood and confusion,
testifying to all the World how earnestly the desire to avoid a civil War,
they have addressud themselves in a humble supplication to his Majesty, for the
prevention thereof, a Copy whereof they have ^hought fit to send to the
National Assembly of the Church of Scotland, to the intent, that the Church
and kingdom, whereunto they are united by so many, and so near bands, as well
spiritual as civil, may see that the like mind ^s now in them that formerly
appeared to be in that Nation.

And that they are as tender of the effusion of Christian blood on the one
side, as they are zealous on the other of due Reformation both in Church and
State: in which work, while they were laboring, they have been interrupted by
the plots and practices of a malignant party of Papists and other ill-affected
persons, especially of the corrupt and dissolute Clergy, by the incitement and
instigation of others, whose avarice and ambition being not able to bear the
Reformntion endeavored hy the Parliament, they have labored (as we can expect
little better fruit from trees) to kindle a flame, and raise a combustion
within the bowels of this Kingdom, which if by our supplication to his Majesty,
it may be preeented, and that according to our earnest desire therein, all
force and warlike preparations being laid aside, we may return to a peaceable
and Parliamentary proceeding.

We do not doubt but by the blessing of God upon our endeavors, we shall
settle matters both in Church and State, to the increase of his Majesty's
honor and state, the peace and prosperity of this Kingdom, and especially to
the glory of God by the advancement of the true Religion, and such a
Reformation of the Church, as shall be most agreeable to Gods Word: out of all
which there will most undoubtedly result a just, stable, and firm union betwixt
the two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, which according to our Protestation,
we shall by all good ways (...) upon all occasions labor to maintain and
preserve.

A Letter sent by the Ministers of the Church of England, to the General
Assembly of the Church of Scotland.
Right Reverend in our Lord and Savior,
WE received with much joy and satisfaction, the answer of your General
Assembly, vouchsafed us to our last Letters: some of us in the name of our
Brethren, thought it requisite to return our desired thanks.

And we now further think it equal upon this occasion, to make a more public
acknowledgement of such a public favor. You were then pleased to give us fair
grounds, to expect that brotherly advice and endeavors, which the common cause
of Christ, and the mutual interest of the united Nations commands us now
again to ask, if not to challenge. We doubt not, but your experience,
together with your intelligence, abundantly informs you of our condition, what
various administrations of providence we have passed through (...) betwixt hope
and fear, a fit temper for working, the God of all grace enable us to improve
it. As our hopes are not such, as may make us secure, so neither do our fears
prevail, to the casting away of our confidence.

Your own late condition, together with this Declaration of our present, may
acquaint you with the certain, though subtle authors and tormenters of these
our confused conflicts, which we conceive to be the Hierarchial faction, who
have no way to peace and safety, but through the trouble of others. Our prayers
and endeavors according to our measure have been, and shall be, for the
suppressing and rooting up whatsoever we find so prejudicial to the
establishment of the Kingdom of Christ, and the peace of our Sovereign, And
that this Declaration of our selves, may not leave you unsatisfied, we think
it requisite further to express, that the desire of the most godly and
considerable part amongst us, is, that the Presbyterian Government, which has
just and evident foundation, both in the Word of God, and religious reason may
be established amongst Us, and that we may agree in one Confession of faith,
one directory for Worship, and form of Government, which things, if they were
accomplished, we should much rejoice in our happy subjection to Christ our
Head, and desired association with you our beloved Brethren. For the better
effecting whereof we thought it necessary, not only to acquaint you, with what
our desires are in themselves, but also, to you; that is, that which shall seem
most fit to the wisdom of that grave and religious Assembly, may be taken for
the furtherance of our endeavors in this kind. This design and desire of ours
has evennesse on the left hand, and dissenting brethren on the right, but we
doubt not that as your hearts justify us that our intentions are right, and
such as we conceive tend most directly to the glory of God, and peace of the
Churches of the Saints: So (by your brotherly concurrence in the most speedy
and effectual way you can find out) the work will in gods due time receive a
prayed for, and hoped for issue. We shall, not need by any arguments from
mutual, National interest (though we know ye will not overlooke these) to
enforce this request, the same bond wherewith we are all united in one Lord
Jesus Christ, we are assured, will alone engage you a faithful endeavors in
this buisinesse.

To him we commit you with these great and important affairs you have in hand.

Be pleased to accept of these, as the expression of the minds of our many
godly and faithful brethren, whose hearts we doubt not of, neither need you,
though their hands in regard of the suddenness of this opportunity, could not
he subscribed together with ours, who are.

Your most affectionate Friends and Brethren is the work of the Lord. Sic
subscribitur.

Imprimatur,

G. M.


