A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, For the
appeasing and quieting of all unlawful Tumults and Insurrections in the
several Counties of England and Dominion of Wales.

Die Veneris 2 September. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
Declaration shall be forthwith printed, and afterward published in all
Market-Townes, Parish-Churches, and Chapels, within the Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales, and especially in the County of Essex.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for J. Wright. September. 3. 1642.

Die Veneris 2 Septem. 1642.
A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons having lately sent Sir Thomas Barrington, and M.
Grymston into the County of Essex, for the appeasing and quieting of diverse
Assemblies of people gathered together in great bodies, who had much damnified
the houses, and taken the goods of diverse persons without Law or other
authority; And having received a report from Sir Thomas Barrington being
returned, that the people upon the first knowledge given them that the
Parliament required they should forbear the searching of any houses for Arms
and Ammunition, or the taking goods out of any House otherwise then is or shall
be directed by the Parliament, or without the assistance of some of those
persons who are by both Houses of Parliament declared that they ought to be
present; The people did thereupon presently yield obedience and withdraw
themselves in a peaceable manner, and as they were required, did make
restitution of Plate, Money, and many other goods by them taken from such as
were pretended Popish-Recusants, and other malignant persons, and that they had
expressed great zeal and forwardness to comply with the directions of
Parliament for the future. The Lords and Commons do declare, that they rescent
the aforesaid expressions of the people, and their ready obedience, as a
testimony of that dutiful affection which they bear to the Parliament, and to
the present service of the Kingdom, and do hereby order and declare, that all
persons whosoever, that have taken either Money, Plate, or any other Goods out
of the House or Houses, or from the persons of any whosoever, without the
special command or Order of both, or either House of Parliament, shall
forthwith restore the same to the parties from whom they were taken, or
otherwise be proceeded against, as the Lords and Commons shall further direct
upon complaint made, And as both Houses of Parliament have been, and will be
very careful to preserve the peace of the Kingdom, by disarming of all
Recusants, and such others as shall be known or justly suspected to be enemies
thereunto, and to the pious and good endeavors of this Parliament; And to that
purpose have by a Declaration passed by assent of both Houses the three and
twentieth of August last, expressed what persons shall be entrusted for the
mannaging of that service; They do thereby further Order and Command, that no
person do presume either alone, or accompanied with others, to break or
violently enter the House of any whosoever, under color of pretense of
disarming Reculants or other persons pretended to be Enemies to the Peace of
the Kingdom, without the particular command of such as are entrusted or
deputed by the Parlialiament; And it is further declared, That special and
speedy care be taken therein, for the security of the Kingdom; and
particularly for the County of Essex, from whom they have received so many
expressions of their duty to the service of the public, though the Parliament
cannot but let them know, that several violent actions by some of them
unwarrantably committed, are extremely disallowed; But as the Lords and
Commons declare, that they shall be ever ready to give assistance, and
protection to all such as shall obey the commands of both, or either Houses of
Parliaments, So they do resolve, that they will inflict exemplary punishment on
all such according to their several demerits, as shall be refractory and
disobedient to these their commands made known to them; And by all good ways,
and means will further endeavor to bring them to a legal trial for such
their Offenses; But for the encouragement of those who have been forward, and
active in the service of the Commonwealth, It is thought fit to give them
notice, that those eight Horses taken from Sir John Lucas and brought up to the
Parliament by Sir Thomas Barrington and intended by Sr. John Lucas for the
strengthening of a malignant party, and are delivered by command to the Lord
General to be by him employed for the preservation of the kingdom, And the
Parliament has caused the same Sr. John Lucas and M. Newcomen to be committed
to several prisons; And it is Resolved that they shall be brought to their
several trials and receive such punishment as shall appear to be just
according to their demerits. And like proceedings shall be had against all such
as shall be found disturbers of the Peace of that County.

FINIS.

