A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.

For the speedy putting this City into a posture of defense, and to fortify
all the passages into the same, Diverse Rebels, Traitors, and other ill-affected
people, in pursuit of a wicked design to alter Religion, being now marching
against the Parliament for destruction of the same, and of the City of London.

Also an Ordinance of both Houses, declaring their Resolutions of making
provision for those that shall be maimed in this present war, who are in the
service of the Parliament; and for the wives and children of those that shall
be slain.

Die Martis 25. October. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration and Ordinance be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parl.



LONDON, Printed for Robert Wood. October. 27. 1642.

Die Martis 25, October. 1642.
WHereas diverse Rebels, Traitors, and other ill-affected people, in pursuit of
a wicked design, to alter Religion, and subvert the Laws and Liberty of the
Kingdom, are marching against the Parliament, and for destruction of the same,
and of the City of London, having plundered, spoiled and destroyed diverse of
His Majesty's good Subjects in their passage, to the great terror of the
people, and danger of the Parliament, City, and of the whole Kingdom; for the
prevention whereof, It is ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that
the Committee for the Militia of the City of London, be authorized and required
to take a speedy course to put the City in a posture of defense, to resist and
oppose all such Force, to fortify all the passages into the same, Suburbs and
places adjoining whether the same be within or without the said City, and
Liberty; likewise all the streets of the same, and that they have power, and be
authorized to leavy the Trainedbands and other Forces of the City as well Horse
as Foot, and to place the same under fit Captains, and other Officers for
defense of the Parliament, City, Suburbs, and other his Majesty's Subjects, And
to lead and conduct the said Forces as well in the places without the said
City, and Liberty, as within, and to give battle and fight with the said
Rebels and Traitors, their adherents, and all other that shall approach with
any force toward or against the City, or raise any insurrection within the
same, and them to invade, resist, repress, subdue, pursue, kill and slay, and
put to execution of death, and by all means to destroy as enemies of the
Kingdom; And to perform all things else needful for the preservation of the
Parl. and City, either by water or Land, observing from time to time such other
directions or commands as they shall receive from both Houses of Parl. the
Committee for the safety of the Kingdom, or the E. of Warwick Lo: General; And
for their so doing this shall shall be a sufficient warrant.

The said Lords and Com. do further ordam and declare, That the said Committee
for the Militta, and every of them, and all the Commanders and Officers
employed in this service, And all other his Majesty's officers and Subjects
whatsoever in the execution of the premises shall be saved harmless, and
defended by the power and authority of both Houses of Parl.

AN ORDINANCE OF The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WHereas diverse persons now are or hereafter may be in the service of the
Parliament, in the present War undertaken for the preservation of the Kings
Majesty's Person, the defense of the Religion and Laws of the Realm, and of
the just liberties of the Subjects, who have little or nothing to maintain
themselves, their wives, and children, but by their own labors, The Lords and
Commons for their better encouragement in the service, do order and declare,
that they the Lords and Commons will provide competent maintenance and
allowance for such of them, as shall be maimed, and therehy disabled by their
labor to provide for themselves, their wives or children, as formerly they
did. And in the distribution of such allowances and rewards they will always
have regard to the deserts and service of each person. And in case any such
person shall be slain. that they will make provision for the livelihood of
their wives or children.

And in case any persons of estate shall be slain, or die in this service, the
said Lords and Commons do declare, that they will take the estates, wives and
children of such persons into their protection; And in case their estates shall
not at the time of the death of such persons be settled, they will be always
assistant to the friends of the party deceased, in the settling and disposing of
their estates in such manner as may be for the most advantage of their wives
and children and posterity know the respect they bear to the memory of those
who have spent their lives in the service of the Church and Commonwealth.

FINIS.
News from the Army; As it was brought by the Lord Wharton, and Mr. Strode,
to both Houses of Parliament.
Upon Wednesday in the afternoon, October 26. 1642. the Lord Wharton
accompanied with Mr. Strode, a Member of the House of Commons, came to both
Houses of Parliament with a Message from His Excellency the Earl of Essex,
Being a Relation of the Battle fought between His M^jesties Forces and them, on
Sunday the 24. of October to this effect.

God has given us the Victory, the particulars are these.

Lord Lindsey General of the Field for His Majesty, is hurt and taken.

Also Sir Thomas Lunsford, Sir Edward Stradling, and Colonel Vavasor, are
Prisoners now in Warwick Castle.

And it is said that the Lord VVillough by, the Lord of Linseys Son is taken.

Our loss is about 300. whereof of note Sir James Ramsey, and Colonel Essex,
and Captain Danes Arm is broken.

All our Noble Lords are in good health.

And more, have taken 6. Colors, and His Majesty's Standard. We have also
taken five Wagons laden with Ammunition and Plate, by Captain Bridges, and a
Coach and eight Pieces of Ordnance, the King and Prince being all the while at
Sir Edward Copes House at Harwell, and now intends to march toward Northampton
with three hundred men.

The Kings loss three thousand.

The rest of His Army is routed, and the Earl of Essex remains Master of the
Field.

FINIS.

