A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, CONCERNING The
Trial of the KING; And the Bill of Attainder and Charge against Him, in the
Name of Charles Stuart, impeaching Him of High Treason, for breach of Covenant
with His People.

AND A List of the Names of the Judges, Lords, Commons, Colonels, Officers of
the Army, and Aldermen of the city of London, who are appointed as
commissioners to try his Majesty, and to give sentence against Him at
Westminster; With the time of His coming to Trial, and a Message to the
Kingdom, touching the same.

ALSO, The further and final Resolution of the Army, touching the person of
the King, their Resolution touching the Government of this Kingdom, their
Summons to the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York; and a Declaration
concerning the Duke of Gloucester.

Printed for I. White, and are to be sold in the Old-Bayley:

THE RESOLVTION OF THE ARMY Concerning The trial of the KING, and their
Summons to the Prince of Wales and the Duke of York, and a Declaration
concerning the Duke of Gloucester.
THE General Council of the Army have fully resolved upon their Debates,
touching the trial of the King, and are resolved to bring him to a present
trial, the manner of it (is said to be) by ten Lords, twenty Commons, and ten
Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, and Majors, who are to receive Instructions (as
Commissioners) for managing and prosecuting of the Bills of Attainder and
Impeachment against the person of the King; and are resolved to establish and
confirm a true and lasting Government within this Kingdom, and that the best
they can imagine for a Commonwealth, which contains these particulars, viz.

1 The Magistrate to have power in things civil and natural. 2 The Subject to
be free, submitting to the Civil Laws. 3 No toleration for Popery nor
Prelacy. 4 None to be forced to fight in War against their will, etc.

And the General Council have further resolved and declared, That the
Parliament shall not proceed against any persons to give Judgment, but
according to what is Law, Reason, and Equity.

And for the better facilitating and establishing of a true and lasting peace
within this Nation, the General Council of the Army have passed the remaining
part of the Articles for an Agreement of the People, and are determined
speedily to consider of a form of conclusion and subscription to this
Agreement as to the Officers of the Army.

Summons are also sent to the Prince of Wales, and the Duke of York, to require
their present appearance, and to desist from their Engagement, in acting
against this Kingdom, and involving their place of Nativity in another bloody
and intestine War, and a day is prefixed, for their return, that in case they
refuse to yield obedience to the said Summons, then to be declared against as
Enemies to the peace of this Kingdom, and to be degraded of all Titles and
Honors, belonging to either of them.

Yet notwithstanding, we have one precious Flower and Blossom to fix our eyes
upon, viz. the Duke of Gloucester, (the Kings youngest Son) who in all
probability, will speedily be advanced to great Honors and Dignities, to the
great admiration of the whole Kingdom.

Yesterday the Committee reported the Ordinance of Attainder against Charles
Stuart, and the names of such Commissioners as should try him, which are, the
Earl of Denbigh, Earl of Pembroke, E. of Kent, E of Mulgrave, E. of Nottingham,
and Lord Gray of Wark.

Of the House of Commons, the Lord Munson, L. Lisle, L. Gray of Groby, Lieu.
Genesis Crumwell, M. G. Skippon, Com. Gen: Ireton, Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir John
Danvers, Col. Walton, Col: Moor, Col: Boswell, Col: Rossiter, Col: Ven, Col:
Thorney, Col: Lassels, and about 30 Members more.

Of the Army that are not members of the House of Commons, the L. Genesis Fairfax,
Col: Whalley, Col: Rich, Col: Walter, Col: Tomlinson, col: Scroop, Col:
Sanders, Col: Pride, col: Twisleton, Col: Huson, Col: Barkstead, Col: Horton,
Col: Desborough, Col: Dean, and Col: Okey.

Of the City of London, Alderman Pennington, Alderman VVoollaston, Ald: Fooks,
Ald: Gibbs, and Alderman Andrews.

The Judges are, the Lord chief Justice Rolls, chief Justice of England,
Justice St. John, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Lord chief Baron
VVild. And two out of all the 40 Counties throughout the Kingdom, all which
commissioners, who are to sit as a Jury, are to consist of 150, and any 20 of
them are to be a Committee for trial of the King, and to give sentence against
him. By this Ordinance the Commissioners are limited to a months time, to make
a final determination of the business, the place of trial is said to be at
Westminster.

New Quaeries from the King:
HIs Majesty has had some discourse about the Remonstrance of the Army, in
reference to the bringing of his person to a trial, proposing several
Queries, how that could be, what way they could do it, or which way they could
bring in any Charge against him: It was answered by a Member of the Army, That
what if a Charge should be brought against him for his life, according to the
manner of trial of the Subjects by the Laws of the Kingdom, what would he
then do, in reference to an answer, for preservation of his Life, Crown, and
Privilege, the King replied, That if any such Charge of Impeachment should be
exhibited against him, either by Parliament or Army, he would not give any
answer thereto, but declare against it, to be both Arbytrary and uniawfull; and
that if they sought to depose and degrade him of his Titles and Honors, or to
spill his Royal blood, by separating his Soul and Body, he was resolved to
sacrifice his life with patience, and to cast himself in the Arms and Bosom
of his sweet Lord and Savior, and only Redeemer; to the end, He may dye like a
Martyr, in prosecution and defense of Religion and Country. So confident is the
King in his ways. But it is feared, that his great averseness to the peace of
this kingdom, will cause cause much trouble and distractions to befall his
people.

His Majesty is in a very secure place in the Castle, and strong bolts and
guards are for the night about the Chamber, but he will not admit any to lie,
or remain in the chamber with him.

He says, that he knows there is a time for his redemption and that many of
his enemies will moulter away, and fall before him; for, in his discourse, he
often declares, that he is confident that both Scotland and Ireland will help
him, and that the Army will divide among themselves, and be destroyed.

Col. Tomlinson has the command of this Castle, and his Majesty is not
suffered to stir out, only walks sometimes upon the Territs, he is debarred
from the speech of many, and no suspicious persons are admitted to him: he
presses much for D. Hamond to be refident with him, and that He may have
leave to communicate a Declaratory Message to Holland and France.

Yesterday his Majesty desired a conference with Colonel Tompson, which was
assented to, and after some disputation touching the present matter of State,
his Maj. declared and proposed several questions touching Maj. Genesis Brown, and
the rest of the impeached members, saying, That the said M. G. was a man worthy
of honor and trust, and that he pittyed his case, as much as his own, not
doubting, but that sew days would produce their liberty, notwithstanding their
present sufferings for Religion and a good conscience: his Maj. is oftentimes
exceeding high in his expressions, and very bitter against diverse of the Army;
but casts a favorable constsuction upon the Lord General,

Windsor 1 Jan. 1648.
The Declaration of Col. Harrison to the King.
1 That his trust was to be in God. 2 That his desire is, that God may have the
glory of all. 3 That he hated all base and obscure undertakings. 4 That what
would be done concerning his Majesty would be open, and to the eyes of the
world. And protested that he himself would oppose any that should privately
offer violence to his person. This gave his Majesty great satisfaction, who
replied, that if the Army acted beyond his thoughts and expectation, he would
proclaim their fame throughout all Europe.

Tuesday Jan: 2. The Commons communicated the Ordinance (for trial of the
King) to the house of Peers for their concurrence, which was assented to. And
for the better confirmation of the present trial, and foundation thereof, and
prevention of the like for the future, the House declared, viz. Resolved, That
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, and adjudge, That by
the fundamental Laws of this Realm, it is treason in the Kings of England for
the time to come, to levy War against the Parliament and Kingdom of England.

A message is said to be sent from the Parliament, to the several Counties of
the Kingdom of England, concerning the trial of the King, for satisfaction of
the people.

The Bill of Attainder runs high, against his person, charging him with high
treason: His trial will be at Westminster, and his Majesty is expected to be
thee on Monday next.

FINIS.

