A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons IN PARLIAMENT, CONCERNING His Majesty's
Proclamation, given at His Court at York, the 27. of May, 1642. With the
Statute of the 7. Edw. 1.

Die Lunae, Iunii 6. 1642.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Ioh. Brown, Cleric. Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for William Gaye, June 8. 1642.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, conccerning his
Majesty's Proclamation the 27. of May 1642.
THe Lords and Commons having perused His Majesty's Proclamation, forbidding
all His Majesty's Subjects, belonging to the Trained-Bands, or Militia of this
Kingdom, to rise, march, muster, or exercise, by virtue of any Order or
Ordinance of any one or both Houses of Parliament, without consent or Warrant
from His Majesty, upon pain of punishment according to the Laws,

Do thereupon declare, That neither the Statute of the seventh of Edward the
first therein vouched, nor any other Law of this Kingdom does restrain, or
make void the Ordinance agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament, for the
ordering and disposing the Militia of the Kingdom, in this time of extreme and
imminent danger, nor expose His Majesty's Subjects to any punishment for
obeying the same, Notwithstanding that His Majesty has refused to give his
Consent to that Ordinance; But ought to be obeyed by the fundamental Laws of
this Kingdom.

The Declaration of 7. Ed. 1. Quoted in His Majesty's Proclamation, runs
thus.
THe King to the Justices of His Bench sends greeting: Whereas of late before
certain Persons deputed to treat upon sundry debates, had between Us, and
certain great men of Our Realm, Amongst other things it was accorded, That in
Our next Parliament, after provision shall be made by Us, and the common Assent
of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, That in all Parliaments, Treaties, and
other Assemblies which should be made in the Realm of England for ever, That
every man shall come without all force and Armor, well and peaceably to the
Honor of Us, and the peace of Us and Our Realm. And now in our next Parliament
at Westminster, after the said Treaties, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the
Commonalty of Our Realm there Assembled, to take Advice of this business have
said, That to Us it belongs, and Our part is through Our Royal Seigniory
straightly to defend force of Armor, and all other force against Our Peace at
all times when it shall please Us, and to punish them which shall do contrary
according to Our Laws and Vsages of Our Realm.

And hereunto they are bound to aid us, as their Sovereign Lord at all
seasons, when need shall be. We command you, that you cause these things to be
read before you in the said Bench, and there to be Enrolled.

Given at Westminster the thirtieth day of October.
THe occasion of this Declaration was for the restraint of Armed men from
coming to the Parliament, to disturb the Peace of it, and is very improperly
alleged for the maintenance of such Leavies, as are now raised against the
Parliament. The title of the Statute being thus, To all Parliaments, and
Treaties, every man shall come without Force and Arms. So that the Question is
not, whether it belong to the King or no to restrain such force; But if the
King shall refuse to discharge that Duty and Trust, Whether there is not a
power in the two Houses, to provide for the safety of the Parliament, and Peace
of the Kingdom, which is the end, for which the Ordinance concerning the
Militia was made, and being agreeable to the scope and purpose of the Law,
cannot in Reason be adjudged to be contrary to it; For although the Law do
affirm it to be in the King, yet it does not exclude those, in whom the Law
has placed a power for that purpose; As in the Courts of Justice, the
Sheriffs, and other Officers and Ministers of those Courts. And as their power
is derived from the King by His Patents, yet cannot it be restrained by His
Majesty's command, by His great Seal, or otherwise, much less can the Power
of Parliament be concluded by His Majesty's command, because the Authority
thereof is of a higher, and more eminent nature, than any of those Courts.

It is acknowledged, That the King is the Fountain of Justice, and Protection;
But the Acts of Justice, and Protection, are not exercised in His own Person,
nor depend upon His pleasure, but by His Courts, and by His Ministers, who must
do their Duty therein, though the King in his own Person should forbid them;
And therefore, if Judgments should be given by them against the Kings Will and
Personal command, yet are they the Kings Judgments.

The High Court of Parliament, is not only a Court of Judicature, enabled by
the Laws, to adjudge, and determine the Rights, and Liberties of the Kingdom,
against such Patents, and Grants of His Majesty, as are prejudicial thereunto;
although strengthened both by His Personal Command, and by His Proclamation,
under the great Seal: But it is likewise a Council to provide for the
necessities, prevent the imminent dangers, and preserve the public Peace and
safety of the Kingdom, and to declare the Kings pleasure in those things as
are requisite thereunto; and what they do herein, has the Stamp of Royal
Authority, although His Majesty seduced by evil Counsel, do in His own
Person, oppose, or interrupt the same. For the Kings Supreme Power, and Royal
Pleasure, is exercised and declared in this High Court of Law, and Council,
after a more eminent and obligatory manner, then it can be by any personal Act
or Resolution of His Own.

Seeing therefore the Lords and Commons, which are His Majesty's great and
Highest Council, have ordained, That for the present and necessary Defense of
the Realm, the Trained Bands, and Militia of this Kingdom should be ordered
according to that Ordinance, And that the Town of Hull should be committed to
the Custody of Sir John Hotham, to be preserved from the attempts of Papists
and other malignant persons, who thereby might put the Kingdom into a
combustion, which is so far from being a Force against the Kings peace, that
it is necessary for the keeping and securing thereof, and for that end alone is
in ended: and all his Majesty's loving Subjects, as well by that Law as by
other Laws, are bound to be obedient thereunto, and what they do therein is
according to that Law to be interpreted to be done in aid of the King, in
discharge of that Trust which he is tied to perform: and it is so far from
being liable to punishment, that if they should refuse to do it, or be
persuaded by any Commission or Command of his Majesty to do the contrary, they
might justly be punished for the same, according to the Laws and Usages of the
Realm: for the King by his Sovereignty, is not enabled to destroy his people,
but to protect and defend them; and the high Court of Parliament, and all other
his Majesty's Officers, and Ministers, ought to be subservient to that Power
and Authority, which the Law has placed in his Majesty to that purpose, though
he himself in his own person should neglect the same.

Wherefore the Lords and Commons do declare the said Proclamation to be void
in Law, and of none effect, For that by the Constitution and Policy of this
Kingdom, the King by his Proclamation cannot declare the Law contrary to the
Judgment and Resolution of any of the inferior Courts of Justice, much less
against the High Court of Parliament; for if it were admitted, that the King by
his Proclamation may declare a Law, thereby his Proclamations will in effect
become Laws, which would turn to the subverting of the Law of the Land, and
the Rights, and Liberties of the Subjects.

And the Lords and Commons do require and command, all Constables,
Petty-Constables, and all other his Majesty's Officers, and Subjects
whatsoever, to Muster, Levy, raise, March and Exercise, or to Summon or Warn
any upon Warrant from the Lievtenants, Deputy-Lievtenants, Captains, or other
Officers of the Trained Bands, and all others according to the said Ordinance
of both Houses; and shall not presume to Muster, Levy, Raise, March, or
Exercise, by virtue of any Commission, or other Authority whatsoever, as they
will answer the contrary at their perils; and in their so doing, they do
further declare, That they shall be protected by the Power and Authority of
both Houses of Parliament; And that whosoever shall oppose, question, or hinder
them in the execution of the said Ordinance, shall be proceeded against as
violaters of the Laws, and disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom.

FINIS.

