A DECLARATION OF The Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

In Answer to His Majesty's Declaration, Entitled His Majesty's Declaration to
all His loving subjects, after His late Victory against the Rebels, on Sunday
the 23 of October, 1642.

Together, With a Catalogue of the names of diverse of the Colonels,
Lievtenant-Colonells, Sergeant Majors, Captains, and Lievtenants, that are
Papists and Commanders in the Army, under the Command of the Earl of
NEVV-CASTLE.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this
Declaration be forthwith Printed and Published.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and John Frank, 1642.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
WE the Lords and Commons in Parliament, having seen a Printed Declaration
entitled His Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects, after his late
victory against the Rebels, on Sunday the 23 of October: And finding the same
to be full of scandalls and invectives against the Parliament, without any
ground or color of truth to support them. Thought it our duty as well for the
discovery of the falsehood thereof, as of the malice and subtilties of the
Contrivers of those scandalls, who to our unspeakable sorrows, have gained so
much power with His Majesty, as to vent the same under the title of his own
Royal name, to make this ensuing Declaration in answer thereunto.

In the beginning of that Declaration, the contrivers thereof speak in His
Majesty's name, of a great preservation of His Majesty and his Children in the
late Battle.

If His Majesty and his Children escaped any danger in that Battle, as we are
ready with the Contrivers to rejoice thereat, so do we apprehend a just cause
of sorrow, That His Majesty seduced by the desperate advice of lewd and wicked
Counsel, who tender their own preservation before His, would intermix himself
with Traitors and Rebels, and expose his own Royal Person and his Children to
that danger.

And whereas the Parliament under the name of a Malignant party is charged with
an endeavor to poison the hearts, and corrupt the Allegiance of the Kings
Subjects, by urging and pressing a false groundless imputation (as it is there
styled) of favoring Popery, and employing many of that Religion in his
Majesty's Army.

Though we have just cause to believe that our late Declaration of the 15 of
October is sufficient to prove, That the aspersion of favovring Papists, and
employing them in the Kings Army, the same being there not only barely
alleged, but the evidence proving the same, and the persons so employed
particularly set down: Yet since the Contrivers of that Declaration have the
confidence to deny it, We thought it necessary for the confirmation thereof, to
publish some evidences and advertisements that we received since the issuing
out of our said late Declaration, touching that particular.

First, that it does appear by the examination of Master Dormer, who professes
himself a Papist, taken before a Committee of the House of Commons, That a
Commission under the Kings own hand was delivered unto him, by Serieant Mayor
Courtney* a notorious Papist, Authorizing the said Dormer to be a Captain of a
Foot Company, in the Regiment of Sir John Beaumont, another professed Papist,
and with that Commission, threescore and fifteen men raised in the County of
Lancaster, consisting (as is probable) of Papists, though Mr. Dormer in his
examination alleges he knows not whether they were Protestants or Papists.
And it does further appear by a Commission now remaining in the House of
Commons, signed with the Kings own hand, that the said Courtney is made
Serieant Mayor of that Regiment. And by the same examination, another professed
Papist is Lieutenant Colonel; and by a letter intercepted sent from one Dan.
Chambers a Papist (as is informed) directed to one Captain Thomas Rookewood,
That he expresses his joy for the good success of the general Cause, and the
advancement of their design. And by another letter intercepted likewise, and
sent from the same Dan. Chambers to Serieant Mayor Courtney, That he was going
to the North where (as we are now advertised) the Papists are raising a
considerable Army, That he liked well the way of two years composition, and
would propound it, That his endeavors should never be wanting to further any
good action, and the more wherein he the said Courtney was interessed; And
though the Hothamites would hinder his traveling, yet he would venture hard,
and daily pray for the general Cause. And in a letter sent from one Savage, a
servant of the Earl of Newcastle, his Majesty's General in the North,
directed to one John Atkins of Lambeth, are contained these words, Tell them
that the Pope rules in peace here in Northumberland. etc. no prosecution
neither of Priest or Papist: And in another sent from one George Tempest a
Papist, to his brother John Tempest in the Kings Army, are these words: Our
Priests at Lancaster are all at liberty, Catholic Commanders admitted, and
all well enough that way, God Almighty (as I hope) will the b^tter prosper the
design: And in the Printed Declaration it self, it is confessed, That Popish
Commanders are employed in the Kings Army, and that which is as notorious as
any of the rest, They of the Popish Religion are arrived to that height of
favor, that upon their Petition presented to his Majesty, they have obtained
an express command and direction, That they and their servants and Tenants
(though Convict Recusants, and consequently by the Laws and Statutes of this
Realm to be disarmed) should Arm themselves, and use them for the defense of
his Majesty's Person, and in opposition to the Forces raised by the Parliament;
which Petition and Answer we have caused to be printed herewith, We need not
again recite the Earl of Worcester and his Son the Lord Harbert, two of the
most eminent and powerful Papists in the Kingdom, their levying of great
Forces in Mounmouthshire and Wales, having mentioned it in our former
Declaration. And we purposely omit many other demonstrations of favor extended
unto them, as the not putting the Laws in execution against them, their free
reception into the Kings Court and Presence, the tender care of them and their
persons and estates from the danger of the Kings forces, when the most pious
and zealous Protestant Ministers and others, are most b^rbarously murdered,
plundered, and robbed of their estates and fortunes. And upon what is already
said, submit it to the World to judge, whether the favoring of Popery, and
employing them of that Religion in the Kings Army, be a false and groundless
imputation; and we do the more wonder at the confidence of the Contrivers, in
urging that to be a groundless imputation and scandal, when we see a
Declaration published by the Earl of Newcastle, his Majesty's General in the
Northern parts, which does not only confess that he has taken diverse Popish
R^cusants in those parts, under his command and conduct, but spends some Leaves
(weakly enough) in endeavoring by the examples and presidents of former times,
to justify the same; and therefore we need not any further to labor the
proof of the matter of fact.

For the Allegation, That great number of Popish Commanders and others serve in
the Army under the c^nduct of the Earl of Essex, and of the private promises
and undertakings made to them, That if they would assist against his Majesty,
all the Laws made in their prejudice, should be repealed; A charge contrary
not only to the profession and several protestations of both Houses of
Parliament, but even to reason and policy it self, That they who have raised
an Army for the just defense of their Privileges, Laws, and Liberties, and of
the true Protestant Religion, should make use of Papists, the only enemies of
them all, to be the Instrument and means to protect them.

If the Contrivers of that Declaration had been pleased to name some of that
great number of Papists they suppose to be in the Earl of Essex his Army, they
had not only afforded us the means to have cleared our selves from that
Imputation, by joining issue with them of the truth thereof, but given us
opportunity in case any of that Religion, under the name and profession of a
Protestant (for otherwise we are assured they could not) had crowded themselves
into the Army, to remove them: But in regard they omitted the mention of any
pa^ticular, we are confident, That either they could not name any, or in case
any of the Popish Religion be in that Army, they are subtly, by the cunning
and malicious practice of our enemies conveyed thither, under the mask and
profession of Protestants, to corrupt (if they can) the good affection of
others, and so made Instruments to destroy us, as David Alexander should have
been, had not Gods goodness and providence, by a timely discovery, prevented
it.

But to show how much the Parliament did always abhor and detest the aid and
assistance of Papists, of what nature soever, we hold it fit upon this
occasion, to let the World know, That about the beginning of this Parliament,
diverse eminent Papists of this Kingdom did prefer a Petition to the House of
Commons, for the repealing of some Laws now in force against them, with an
humble submission to all reasonable Conformity; the substance of the same being
opened, it was app^ehended with such Indignation, that it was never so much as
vouchsafed to be read but quite rejected.

And upon Information given, That the Lord Dillon, and Colonel Taffe were
employed by the Rebels of Ireland, to bring some Propositions to his Majesty;
and that (amongst others) one was, That there should be a Toleration of the
Popish Religion in Ireland; It was thereupon resolved on the eighth of December.
1641, upon solemn debate, by the Lords and Commons, That they would never give
consent to any Toleration of the Popish Religion in Ireland, or in any other of
his Majesty's Dominions. And when the Lord Herbert, son of the Earl of
Worcester, this Parliament, made an offer to the House of Commons, to give
freely 500l a year, or 5000l to be disposed at the pleasure of the Parliament,
yet the House, though in a time of great necessity to use money, because the
same came tendered by the hand of a Papist, did refuse to accept. All which had
been passages of great weakness, had we intended any correspondency with them.
And we are confident, That this Charge is so full of malice, and so far from
truth, that we dare challenge all the world, not to be able to make it good
against any one particular Member.

For the matter of his Majesty's raising an Army against the Parliament, and
taking away the Privileges thereof, which the contrivers of that Declaration
termed to be a senseless scandal, we shall refer it to the judgment even of
ordinary Capacities, Whether is most void of sense, to say, That this War is
raised against the Parliament, or, That both Houses, whereof the one consists
of all the Peers, the other, of eminent and principal Gentry of the Kingdom,
who for their Abilities, and known Integrities, are by the Universal Consent
of the Kingdom, chosen to represent them, are governed by the number of not
above 12 or 20 persons, and that those few should have a power to force and
compel the rest to submit to their Faction, and to have their Liberty and
Freedom of Consultation taken from them.

But the truth is, That it is not a few persons, but the Parliament it self is
the thorn that lies in these men's sides; which heretofore, when it was wont to
prick them, was with much ease, by a sudden dissolution, pulled out: But now
that it is more deeply fastened by the Act of Continuance, they would force it
out by the power of an Army.

And whosoever will pursue the several Speeches and Declarations made upon the
breaking up of former Parliaments since the beginning of his Majesty's Reign,
will find the pretenses of those unjust and illegal Dissolutions, to be
grounded upon the exceptions against some particular Members, under the name of
a few factious and seditious persons: So that the aspersing and wounding of the
Parliament through the sides of a few Members, is no new Invention.

And for the satisfaction of all indifferent men, that this War is raised
against the Parliament, we shall refer them to former Declarations issued out
in his Majesty's Name, being so many Invectives, and groundless Accusations,
not against particular Members only, but against the Votes and Proceedings of
both Houses, and in plain terms, declaring and publishing both Houses guilty
of high Treason; (a Charge not to be presidented by any former times, or in
truth that Council canbe capable of.) And that the Earl of Essex, General of
the Forces raised for the defense of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, is a
Traitor; and that all those that aid and assist him, thereby comprehending both
Houses of Parliament, by whose Command and Authority he bears that place, are
Rebels, and guilty of high Treason: Notwithstanding all which, the Contrivers
of that Declaration can have the face to term it, A groundless Accusation to
affirm, That the Army raised by his Majesty, is raised against the Parliament,
or to take away the privileges thereof.

But if the truth were, as that Declaration seems to imply, That this Army is
raised to force some particular Members of this Parliament to be delivered up,
yet upon that Ground would it follow, That the same is levied against the
Parliament: For it cannot be denied by any ingenious man, but that the
Parliament, by their inherent Rights and Privileges, has the power to judge
and punish their own Members: And we have often declared to his Majesty and the
world, That we were always ready to receive any evidence or accusation against
any of them, and to judge and punish them according to their demerits; yet
hitherto no Evidence produced, no Accuser appearing: And yet notwithstanding to
raise an Army to compel the Parliament to expose these Members to the fury of
those wicked Counselors, that thirst after nothing more, then the ruin of
them and the Commonwealth: What can be more evident, then that the same is
levied against the Parliament; for did they prevail in this, then by the same
reason might they demand twenty more; and consequently, never rest satisfied,
until their malice and tyranny did devour all those Members they found cross
and opposite to their lewd and wicked Designs.

Touching the privileges of Parliament, which the Contrivers of that
Declaration (in his Majesty's Name) seem to be so tender of, and to profess
all Conformity unto, and to deny this Army to be raised in any degree to
violate, we shall appeal to the Judgment of any indifferent man that will take
a short view of their proceedings, how little truth is contained in this their
Assertion.

The Parliament is to be considered in three several respects: first, As it is
a Council, to advise: secondly, As it is a Court, to judge: thirdly, As it is
the Body Representative of the whole Kingdom, to make, repeal, or alter Laws.
And whether the Parliament has enjoyed its privileges in any of these
respects, let any that has his eyes open judge.

For the first, we dare appeal even to the consciences of the Contrivers
themselves, Whether the Parliament, for the most part of the time they have
sat, has been consulted with in any matter concerning the Church or State, of
what nature or consequence soever; nay, Whether matters of highest Importance
have not been agitated and determined, not only without, but contrary to their
Advice; and, Whether private and unknown Counsels, destructive both to Church
and State, have not been hearkened unto, approved, and followed, when the
faithful and wholesome Advice of that greatest Council has been scorned and
neglected; and yet none can deny, but it is one of the principal ends why a
Parliament is called to consult of the great Affairs of the Church and State:
And what miserable effects, and sad events this neglect of that great Council,
and preferring of unknown and private counsels before it, has produced, let
the present Distractions of this Kingdom bear witness.

Concerning the second, that is, The Judicature of the Parliament, not to
insist upon the private practices, even from the first sitting thereof, to
interrupt our legal proceedings against Delinquents, in the secret conveying
them b^yond the Seas, by immediate Warrants procured from his Majesty, as in
the Cases of Secretary Windebank, the Lord Finch, the Lord Digby, M. Percy, M.
Germyn, and others accused in Parliament of high Treason; we shall mention
only what has been done therein by public Actions, and of them, recite some
few particulars notoriously known to the Kingdom; As first the rescuing of
Beckwith, a professed Papist, by the Cavaliers, from our messenger at York,
being sent for to answer a notable Delinquency against the Parliament; and by
his Majesty's own personal command, discharged, though the messenger informed
his Majesty of his Warrant from the Parliament to apprehend him, and the
violence done him by the Cavaliers, The abusing, beating, and scoffing of
diverse other our messengers at York, being sent thither by the Parliament for
Delinquents, and forced by the Cavaliers to return back well beaten, without
their prisoners: His Majesty's express Commands sent to several Sheriffs of
this Kingdom, and to diverse others, not to obey any M^ssenger or Command of
both or either Houses of Parliament, and to resist them; His Majesty's
enioyning the Members of both Houses to reside with him, whereas by the legal
and respective Summons of both Houses whereof they were Members, they were
commanded to repair to the Parliament, and which they were bound, by the Duty
of their places and calling, and the known Laws of the Land, to obey: The
taking away of the Great Seal, whereby the execution of Justice, which is the
soul and life of all Laws, is much interrupted; an act not to be paralleled by
the example of any former times, and such (were it done to the meanest Court of
the Kingdom) could not be justified, there being no Count without a Seal
belonging to it.

The making the Kings Court by the force and power of the Kings Army, the
sanctuary and refuge of all sorts of Delinquents against the Parliament and
Kingdom, and protecting and defending them from the justice thereof: His
Majesty's receiving into His grace and favor, and by force and violence
protecting them from the Justice of the Parliament, such as stand impeached of
high Treason, and so far convinced of their own guilt, that they durst not
stand to their Trial, but fled out of the Realm to avoid the same; and are now
returned, and in most eminent credit and esteem with His Majesty, and bear
places of great trust in the Army, and stand in defiance of the Parliament, and
the Authority thereof; as namely, The Lord Digby, M. Henry Percy, Master Dani^l
Oneal, and Captain Leg, all impeached of high Treason, Master Wilmot, and
Master Ashburnham, impeached of Misprision of Treason; and all those
Impeachments before any Army raised by the Parliament.

Touching the third particular of making and altering Laws, we shall need to
say little of that, it being well known to the Kingdom, that diverse Bills
highly importing the peace and prosperity of the Church and Commonwealth have
past both Houses, and been presented to his Majesty for his Royal assent, and
all denied; and Declarations have been made and published in his Majesty's
name, that he would not pass any Bill of what Importance or consequence soever
(the business of Ireland excepted) before certain Demands of His Majesty in
those Declarations mentioned, which the Parliament could not in Honor or
Justice assent unto, were granted. A Declaration, (we are confident) that
cannot find a president to warrant it in any Kings time.

By all which it is apparent how our Privileges have been torn from us by
peece-meales from time to time. And we might mention many passages, whereby
they were endeavored to be pulled up by the root, and totally subverted. As
the attempt to bring up the late Army from the North to force Conditions upon
the Parliament; The Petition and Protestation of the Bishops, to Invalide all
the Acts and Proceedings thereof. His Majesty's Letters and Commands to the
Members of both Houses (which found obedience in a great many) to attend Him at
York; and so by depriving the Parliament of their Members, destroy the whole
Body. But we shall rest satisfied with what is already said, which is enough to
prove the vanity of the Contrivers, to feed themselves with hope of belief,
That the Privileges of Parliament are not violated, but intended to be
preserved with all due observance.

Concerning the Allegations that the Army raised by the Parliament is to
murder and depose the King; We hoped the Contrivers of that Declaration, or
any that professed but the name of a Christian, could not have so little
charity as to raise such a scandal, especially when they must needs know the
Protestation taken by every Member of both Houses, whereby they promise in the
presence of Almighty God, to defend His Majesty's Person. The Promise and
Protestation made by the Members of both Houses upon the nomination of the
Earl of Essex to be General, and to live and die with him, wherein is
expressed, That this Army was raised for the defense of the Kings Person.

Our often, earnest, and most humble addresses to His Majesty to leave that
desperate and dangerous Army where with He is now encompassed, raised and
upheld to the hazard of his own and the Kingdoms ruin; And to come in Person
to His Parliament, where he should be sure to remain in Honor and Safety. And
our humble Petition directed to be presented to Him by the hands of the Earl
of Essex, before any blow given, to remove His Royal Person from that Army, a
request inconsistent with any purpose to offer the least violence to His
Person, which has and ever shall be dear unto us.

It was well known we raised not any Forces until a considerable body of an
Army was raised against the Parliament to destroy us, our Liberties and
Religion, which being secured unto us, and the Army raised against us
disbanded, we shall be ready and willing to disband, and do most earnestly
desire it.

And concerning the imputation laid to our charge of our raising this Army to
alter the Frame of Government, and established Laws of the Land, we shall need
to give it no other Answer then this, That if to raise an Army in our own just
defense, when another is marching toward us to destroy us and our Laws, be to
alter the Frame of Government, then is that Army raised for that purpose,
otherwise it is for our own and our Laws necessary preservation.

And whereas the contrivers of that Declaration urge it as a necessary
consequence, That because the Kings Person was in danger in the late Battle of
the 23. of October, therefore the Army raised by the Parliament, and that gave
Battle to the other Army, was not raised for the defense of the Kings Person,
but of purpose to destroy him: We confess we understand not the Logique
thereof, no more then if the Kings Person should be chased, apprehended and
possessed by Thieves and Robbers, and the Kings good Subjects should raise an
Army to pursue those Robbers, and by Battle dispossess them of him, and
rescue him from their Power and Tyranny; That therefore this was an Army raised
to murder and destroy the King.

And we cannot but wonder that we are still charged with that scandal (so
often answered) That the greatest part of our Members are driven away by
violence, when instance cannot be made of any one in particular, and that it is
well known, that many of them, if not most of them that absent themselves have
been by express Letters from His Majesty commanded to repair to Him to York:
And contrary to the express Summons of either House required to continue
there, and many of them have since been Principals and Inciters of this War
against the Parliament and Kingdom.

Concerning the Book of Common Prayer, suggested by that Declaration to be
rejected, we have by several Declarations cleared our selves of that Charge,
that we never rejected it, that we intend to take nothing out of it, but what
shall be evil and justly offensive, or at least but unnecessary and
burdensome, and for that purpose to require the Advice of a Religious, Learned
and Orthodoxe Assembly of Ministers.

Touching the Aspersion of our giving no countenance to any, but to Brownists
and Anabaptists, we would have been very glad to know who, and what kind of
persons the Contrivers of that Declaration intend by Brownists and Anabaptists,
for now all such as will not submit to those unwarranted Ceremonies, and Popish
Innovations lately introduced in the Church by the Prelaticall party, such as
in truth and sincerity of heart make conscience of their ways, such as will
not by blasphemous oaths profane Gods Name, and contemn the Lords Day, and
such as look after, and heartily wish a perfect and thorough Reformation in the
Church, are by that Malignant and Popish party comprehended under the name of
Brownists and Anabaptists: And if by Brownists and Anabaptists they intend such
Persons, we acknowledge the countenancing of them: But if by that name and
style they mean such, who are truly so, according to the real and proper
signification of the expression, we do affirm it to be a false groundless
imputation; And had not His Majesty (seduced thereunto by that Popish and
Prelaticall Faction) denied His consent to the Bill for the Assembly so often
by both Houses presented unto Him, we had long since manifested to the world by
a well settled Reformation, our utter dislike of Brownisme and Anabaptisme. But
we very well know it is one of the Stratagems of that Prelaticall party, to
interrupt us of the means to settle Church Government, that by the delay
thereof they may stir up Factions and Divisions amongst the people, (who
having not the rule before them, are apt to run several ways, and so impute
the Errors and indiscreet carriage of few persons unto the Parliament: But God
in his good time will unmask their plots and confound their devices.

The Contrivers of that Declaration suggest an endeavor by us to raise an
implacable malice and hatred between the Gentry and Commonalty of the Kingdom.
A charge of a very strange nature* That we should endeavor to raise up a
spirit of hatred and malice in the Comminalty against our selves; For so it
must necessarily follow, unless these Contrivers will deny us to have any part
or interest in that style or Title of Gentry. And though we know very well
there are too many of the Gentry of this Kingdom, who to satisfy the lusts of
their own ambition, are content like Esau to ^ell their Birthright and render
themselves and their posterity to perpetual slavery, and care not to submit
themselves to any Arbitrary and unlimited Government; so they may for their own
time partake of that Power to trample and insult over others: yet we are
assured that there are of the Gentry many worthy and true-hearted Patriots, who
are ready to lay down their Lives and Fortunes, (and of late have given ample
testimony thereof) for maintenance of their Laws, Liberties, and Religion, and
with them and others of their resolution, we shall be ready to live and die.

And though we must own it as our duty, to use our best endeavors, That the
meanest of the Comminalty may enjoy their own Birthrights, Freedom, and
Liberty of the Laws of the Land, being equally entitled thereunto with the
greatest Subject, yet we hope this is far from any purpose to raise hatred or
malice between them and the Gentry, but rather to knit and unite them more fast
together.

And that the Commission of Array does take away the Estates of the Kings
people, is a Charge so far from a scandal, or being senseless or impossible,
that we are ready to make it good, That it is not only so in Intention, but
Actually put in Execution; For the matter of Intention we shall need to go no
further then the words of the Commission it self, that gives an Arbitrary
power to the Commissioners, over the persons and estates of the Kings Subjects,
which we have made apparent in our Declaration of the illegality thereof; and
therefore as to that particular shall refer our selves to that Declaration,
adding there unto His Majesty's own Letter sent with diverse of the said
Commissions, to require the Commissioners to bring the Trained Bands of
several Counties to attend His Majesty's Royal Standard at Shrewsbury, and
that the several Counties should furnish them with sufficient Ammunition for
the journey, and money to bear their charge: And that the said Commission has
been put in practice to take away the estates of the Kings Subjects, we shall
make it good, that by color thereof, diverse great sums of money have been
imposed upon the Inhabitants of several Counties, and they forced to pay the
same both by distress and imprisonment of their persons. And the Commissioners
of Array in the County of Carnarvon, assessed that County by color of that
Commission to the proportion of above two and twenty Subsidies. And for the
levying thereof issued out Warrants forthwith to distrain, and commit the
persons of such as resisted, and accordingly diverse were distrained and
imprisoned.

And by this time we are confident all the world will rest satisfied, That the
Kings Army was raised against the Parliament, and to destroy the Rights and
Privileges thereof.

That persons of the Popish Religion are principally employed in that Army,
That the same, and the Forces of the North under the Conduct of the Earl of
Newcastle, and in Monmouth Shire and Wales, under the comm^nd of the Lord
Harbert, do most consist of Papists, and are maintained and continued by them;
That by the power of these Forces, the Intention is not only to subvert
Parliaments, and the Laws, but to follow the Examples of their Brethren in
Iniquity, the Rebels in Ireland, to pull up the Protestant Religion by the
roots, and in the place thereof to plant their own Idolatry and Superstition.
That the Army raised by the Parliament is to no other end, but for the
preservation of His Majesty's Person, to defend themselves, the Laws of the
Land, and the true Protestant Religion. All which the Lords and Commons thought
good to publish, to the intent the danger the Protestant Religion lies under
may be clearly discerned, and that all persons that love the same, may now as
one man extend their utmost endeavors, and join with the Parliament to
suppress this Popish Army and Forces, that otherwise in a short time will
bring our Religion and Kingdom into ruin.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty, The humble Petition of Us the
Inhabitants of Lancashire, whose names are hereunder written, in the behalf of
our Selves and diverse others, being Recusants:
Humbly shows,
THat whereas we and the rest of the said County, Your Majesty's most loyal
Subjects, are disarmed, and not sufficiently provided for the defense of Your
Royal Person and our own families; Our most humble Supplication to Your
Majesty is, That we may be received into Your most gracious protection from
violence, have our Arms taken from us, re-delivered in this time of actual
War, and by Your Majesty's special directions be enabled further to furnish
our selves with competency of weapons for the security of Your Royal Person
(if we be thereunto required) our Countries and Families, who now are not only
in danger of the common disturbance; but also menaced by unruly people to be
robbed: And when by the Almighties assistance Your Majesty's Kingdom shall be
settled, in case we be again dis-armed, that a full value in money in liew
thereof to us may be restored:

And we shall daily pray, etc. W. G. C. Tr. C. T. Chr. An. Io. C.


To Our Trusty and Welbeloved Sir William Ger^rd Baronet, Sir Cecill Trafford
Knight, Thomas Clifton, Charles Townley, Christoph^r Ander^^n, and Jo^^
Clansfield, and other of Our Sub^ects, Recu^^nts Esqui^^s, in the Co^nty o^
Lancaster.
CHARLES R.

Trusty and Welbeloved,
We greet you well, whereas by reason of the Laws and Statues of our Realm,
by which all Recusants convicted are to be without Arms, your Arms have been
taken from you; so that now in this time of immiment danger, wherein there are
Armies raised against Our Commands, and contrary to Our Proclamations, and are
marching against Us, and diverse of Our good Subjects, for obeying Our lawful
Commands, and opposing the rebellious proceedings of others ill-affected, are
by strong hand seized upon and imprisoned, their houses plundered, and their
goods taken away; and the like is threatened to our selves, who as all others
Our Subjects ought to have Our protection against all un^^wfull violence and
force: And the Laws made for dis-arming Recusants were made only for a
provision to prevent danger in time of peace, and were not intended to bar you
from a necessary use of Arms in time of actual war, for your own safety, or
for the defense of Our Person against all Rebels and Enemies, which by your
duty and allegiance you are bound unto* which is not, nor ever was meant to
(...) discharged or taken away by any (...) And wh^^^ as the Arms* which were
taken from you* ought by Law to have been (...)to have been made use of by you
in such time of open war, or of such others (...) you should provide: yet under
the specious pretense of dis-arming Recusants, and persons (...) your Arms have
been disposed and dispersed into the hands of fever all persons (...) and for
the most part Fomenters and Exciters of these Commotions (...) Kingdom; Our
Will and Command therefore is, and We charge and require you upon your
Allegiance* and (...) you tender the safety of Our Person, and the peace and
welfare of Our Kingdom, That you with all possible speed provide sufficient
Arms for your selves, your servants, and your tenants, which We authorize and
require during the time of open war raised against Us, to keep and use for the
defense of Us, and of your selves, and of your Country, against all Forces and
Arms raised, or to be raised against Us, or against Our consent, or contrary to
Our Proclamations, by color of any Order, or Ordinance, or Authority
whatsoever. And We shall (according as We are bound to all Our Subjects) use
Our utmost powers for the protection of you and yours, against all (...)
violence. And whenever these Arms which you shall so provide (after it shall
please God to put an end to these dangers and distractions) shall be taken away
from your custody, by reason of Our Law (...) the same, so much as you shall
have dispended in provision thereof.

Given under Our Signet at Our Court at Chester, the 27 of September, in the
eighteenth year of Our Reign Sir William Riddell. Sir Edw. Widdrington. Sir
Fra. Howard. Sir Nic. Thornton. Col. Tho. Howard. M. Lance Errington. M.
Errington of Befron. M. Geo. Wray. M. Ralph Mellet. M. Chr. Wray. M. Lambton.
M. Hodgeson. M. Smith. M. David Errington. M. Pudsey. M. Antho. Bulmer. M. Jo.
Bulmer. M. Askwith. M. Geo. Collingwood. M. Forcer. M. Evers. M. Holtby. M.
Evers. M. William Fenwicke. M. Ratcliffe. M. Haggerston. M. Forcer. M. Edw.
Gray.

These are the Names of diverse of the Colonels, Lieutenants Colonels,
Sergeant Majors, Captains, and Lieutenants that are Papists, and Commanders in
the Army, under the command of the Earl of Newcastle.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



FINIS.

