A DECLARATION Of both Houses of PARLIAMENT Sent to the well-affected Brethren
of the Kingdom of Scotland.

Wherein is discovered the manifold dangers, threatening the ruin of this
kingdom and the Kingdom of Scotland, by the Insurrection of many Papists and
others taking up of Arms in the North.

With their unfeigned Counsel and Desires unto the Brethren of Scotland, to
take up Arms, and to come into England, for the suppressing of these present
dangers, and the subduing of these Papists Forces;

Which without prevention are like to bring destruction upon both Kingdoms.

Printed for Tho. Nelson. November. 17. 1642.

A Declaration of both Houses of Parliament.
Public dangers cannot be with too much care overlookt, and when the whole
estate of a Kingdom lies at stake by the malice of some ill affected members
belonging to the said body. Conspiracies of this grand and desperate nature are
not easily prevented: For this end Parliaments, who are the eye of the
Kingdom, have been elected and cherished, and continually by their cares and
consultations have People and Kingdom bin preserved from imminent destruction.
And yet in this miserable Kingdom things are so disjoynted, the public peace
so disturbed, and all things which may promote ruin and accelerate
destruction; so out of frame, that it seems very difficult unto that supreme
Court, the grand counsel of this Kingdom, to reduce the destructions of this
State to their pristine peace and integrity. They have sought all plausible
ways for remedy, and now at the last, when nothing else will do, Immedicabile
vulnus. Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahetur The Sword, although very
unwillingly has been drawn, yea dipped and dyed in Scarlet, as if it blushed at
the unnatural practice it was constrained unto, and yet since they have most
humbly beseecht His Gracious Majesty to give an ear unto the Desires of His
faithful Counsel the Parliament now assembled, whereby the effusion of much
innocent blood may be prevented, which of necessity must ensue with the
hazard of the whole Kingdom, without some mature course to stay and remedy
the now growing dangers on foot: Yet this also has taken small effect by
reason of his wicked counsel, whose crooked and backward dispositions to
peace, do still incense His Majesty's good disposition to the prosecution of
this most unnatural War against his Parliament, the representative Body of
the whole Kingdom. Whereupon considering how the Malignant party does daily
increase, and grow stronger and stronger; And how not only this, but the
Kingdom of Scotland may also cousequently be endangered by this unnatural
War; they passed a Declaration, and sent it into Scotland with all speed that
might be, the substance whereof is here according to the best and truest
information set down.

THat notwithstanding their continual care to suppress this growing Hydra in
its proceedings, yet still the dangerous distempers continue here, and are so
far from being composed, that therr remains but very small hopes to accomplish
so happy, and desired an end as their endeavors and intentions have aimed at
in all their consultatious; For the Papists whose Resolutions have leveled at
the subversion of this Church and State, and not only some of meaner quality
and ability, but even the most powerful, and those of greater eminence, in the
Northern parts of this Kingdom, and also in diverse other Counties thereof,
do still persist and proceed in raising of forces against the Parliament,
whereby they eadeavour to stay and for to prohibit all manner of Reformation
either in Church or in the Commonwealth.

And that not only in the bowels of this Nation but in that by their
procurement great endeavors are used in Foreign parts great endeavors are
used, to introduce and bring in, all power and force from other Countries,
which are intended to Land at New Castle, or some other place within this
Kingdom. And also that those forces are determined to join with the Paq^sts
forces in the North, whereby that Kingdom of Scotland alwell as this will run
into destruction. For it is to be conceived, when our neighbors house is on
fire ours is not secure, wherefore both houses of Parliament conceiving the
danger now approaching, have thought fit to send this their Declaration to
their well affected brethren of Scotland, that both ours and their misery may
be prevented, before it take fast hold on them and us, and then prove incurable.

That they would therefore make all speed to prepare such forces as may quiet
these storms, and that they would raise such forces as they think fiting to
remedy these present evils, and to come into England to assist this languishing
Kingdom from the hands of bloody Papists, and by this means the whole
Kingdom may take just notice, and be truly informed notwithstanding all
scandalous reports. That the Parliament still have a most Pious care, as well
for the future estate, as the present of this Kingdom, in case that the
Cavaleers, and the rest of his Majesty's ill Council should prevail with him,
and that by them he should be seduced, so that he should not hearken to the
faithful and just desires of his most Loyal Subjects now assembled in
Parliament.

FINIS.

