Tudor rose royal blazon or coat of arms fleur-de-lys harp
A DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in Parliament, For the
defense and preservation of Hertfordshire, and other places and Counties
adjoining from the barbarous cruelties of Papists and other il-affected persons
who being in actual War against the whole Kingdom, have now drawn their
Forces to Brill in the County of Buckingham, and threaten to overrun all
places thereabouts.
WHereas great forces of Papists, and other ill affected persons are now in
actual War against the King, the Parliament, and the whole Kingdom; and part
of those Forces being now drawn to Brill in the County of Buckingham, and other
places adjoining, have according to their usuage, plundered, robbed, pillaged
and murdered diverse good Protestants thereabouts; and threaten to march into
the County of Hertford, and other Counties that way, there to commit the like
outrages, and barbarous cruelties, as they have done in places where they have
formerly been.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament, being most desirous to prevent these
miseries, and to suppress the Authors of them; For the better effecting
thereof, do hereby desire all well affected persons of the County of Hertford,
and other Counties and places adjoining, forthwith to raise all such Forces of
Horse, and Foot, as they can make; and to march with them to Alesbury in the
County of Buckingham, or to such other place as they shall be directed by order
from hoth Houses of Parliament, or from the Earl of Essex Lord general, and
to join with, and assist the Forces raised by authority of Parliament, for the
defense of themselves, their families, and estates, and the true Protestant
Religion, and for the suppressing and punishing those Forces at Brill, and all
other their adherents, notorious enemies to the King, and Kingdom; And such
well affected persons as the County of Hertford, or any other Counties, or
places whatsoever, that shall join with, and assist the Forces raised by
Authority of Parliament, for the purposes above mentioned, shall therein do a
very acceptable service to the Commonwealth, and shall be assisted and protected
by the power and authority of Parliament.

Die Lunae, 2 Januar. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

I. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for J. Wright in the Old Bailey. 1642.


