A DECLARATION OF The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Fully
pardoning diverse Officers and Soldiers of Horse who have lately been and still
are in mutiny, if they shall return to their duty before the fifteenth day of
this month. But if they shall continue in their mutiny, they shall be proceeded
against as Traitors, and enemies to the Commonwealth, and are to expect severe
punishment: Die Mercurii, 5 Martii. 1644.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled taking notice that diverse
inferior Officers and Soldiers of Horse raised by their Authority have lately
been and still are in disorder and mutiny, refusing to obey commands, which in
the example to others may be of great danger to the public, and by the
discipline and rules of war published is to be punished with death:
Nevertheless the Lords and Commons having had experience of the dutifulness
and good service heretofore performed by those Officers and Soldiers, of the
fruit and reward whereof they are most unwilling those Officers and Soldiers
should make themselves incapable, do therefore hereby declare, That if those
Officers and Soldiers, or any of them, do before the fifteenth day of this
instant March return to their duty, and shall obey the commands of their
Officers according to the discipline of war, and observe such orders and
directions as they shall receive from the two Houses of Parliament, or the
Committee of both Kingdoms, and from the time of their having notice of this
Declaration shall forbear any plundering or violence upon the Country under
the protection of the Parliament, That then they shall be and they are hereby
fully pardoned and acquitted of this mutiny and disorder. And the Lords and
Commons do further declare their pleasure to be, That they shall forthwith be
taken into the like care for pay and all fitting accommodations with the other
Officers and Soldiers in their service. But if after the day herein appointed
for their return to their duty they shall still continue in mutiny and
disorder, and not submit to the mercy hereby offered, they shall then be
proceeded against as Traitors, and enemies to the Commonwealth, and are to
expect the seveare punishment due to their demerits.

ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, that this Declaration be
forthwith printed and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for J. Wright in the Old* baily, March 6. 1644.


