A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Concerning an
insolent Letter sent to Mr. CLARKE at Craughton near Brackley in
Northamptonshire; From Sir JOHN BIRON Knight, since the Inhabitants of that
County apprehended diverse Rebels under his command; as he with them and many
Troops of Horse, in a warlike and traiterous manner marched toward Oxford, to
the great terror and aff^ightment of His Majesty's good Subjects in those parts.

Whereunto is annexed a Copy of the said LETTER.

13. September. 1642.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
Declaration and Letter shall be forthwith printed and published. J. Brown Cler.
Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for J. Wright. 14. September. 1642.

A DECLARATION Of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
WHereas Sir John Biron Knight, upon the 28 of August last with diverse Troops
of Horse in a Traitorous and warlike manner, did march into the County of
Northampton, with an intention to kill, rob, and spoil his Majesty's Subjects
in that and other Counties, to the great terror and afrightment of the
Inhabitants of those parts; whereupon diverse of His Majesty's loyal and well
affected Subjects of the said County, according to their duty did assemble
themselves together, and pursue the said Traitors, and Rebels, and apprehended
diverse of them, and routed the rest, whereby their Traiterous designs were for
that time prevented; Since which time the remainder of those Troops that
escaped, joined again in a body, and in manner as before, forcibly entered the
City of Oxford, and plundered, robbed, and spoiled, his Majesty's faithful
Subjects there, and forced diverse to leave their own habitations, and to fly
elsewhere for protection from their fury. And whereas the Lords and Commons,
have been since informed, That the said Sir John Biron, the head and
ringleader of those Traitors, in a presumptuous and insolent way, wrote a
Letter to one Master Clarke of Craughton a Gentleman of quality in the said
County of Northampton, a Copy whereof is hereunto annexed, whereby most
falsely and impudently he presumes to style the faithful, and dutyfull service
of His Majesty's good Subjects in apprehending and chasing the said Rebels by
the name of treachery and rebellion, endeavoring to transfer that odious crime
and title due unto himself to them, and using diverse menacing speeches against
Master Clarke, and others, thereby as much as in him lies to dete(...)
Majesty's good Subjects from resisting him and his associate^ in their
Traitorous attempts.

The Lords and Commons taking the same into their consideration, do declare
that the Assembling together of the said Inhabitants of the County of
Northampton, and their pursuing, apprehending, and chasing the said Rebels,
was according to the Laws of the Land and the duty they and all good Subjects
owe to the King and Commonwealth, and their service very acceptable to both
Houses of Parliament, who will take them and all others that shall follow their
good examples into their care and protection.

To M. Clarke at Craughton near Brackley in Northamptonshire.
SIR,
IN my way to Oxford, I made some stay at Brackley to refresh my self, and my
Horses, after a long march, where I was unexpectedly assaulted by sundry Troops
of rebels that came (as I am since informed) from Northampton, and the
adjoining places, and withal most treacherously set upon by the town of
Brackley, so that I was forced to make a speedy retreat to the Heath to resist
them, had they had the courage to come forth of the town. In this confusion
one of my Grooms who had charge of my baggage was surprised in the town,
another who had a Box, wherein was money, apparel, and other things of value,
left it in a land of standing Corn, which since has been found, and as I
hear brought to you; I have therefore sent this Messenger to require the
restitution of it; which if you do, I shall represent it to His Majesty, as an
acceptable service, if not, assure your self I will find a time to repay my
self with advantage out of your estate; And consider, that as rebellion is a
weed of a hasty growth, so it will decay as suddenly; and that there will be a
time for the Kings loyal Subjects to repair their losses sustained by rebels
and traitors; So I rest in expectation of a speedy answer by this bearer,

Oxford, 2. Sep. 1642. Your friend and servant, John Biron.

FINIS.

