Jovis 6. October. 1642.
A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT:
In Commendation of the Inhabitants of the Town of Manchester, for their
valiant resisting the late Lord Strange, and now Earl of Darbie; And to
encourage them in their valor which they have showed for their own defense,
and to endeavor to suppress or apprehend the said Earl, or any his
Accomplices, assuring them of allowance and payment for all Disbursements or
Losses in that Service.
John Brown Clerk Parliament.

WHereas upon credible Information made unto this House, That James late Lord
Strange, and now Earl of Darby, heretofore impeached in the name of the House
of Commons, and of all the Commons of England, by the name of James Lord
Strange, for high Treason, Has in pursuance of his Traiterous Actions,
procured diverse Papists, and other ill-affected Persons, in a hostile, and
Rebellious manner, with Gunnes and other warlick weapons, to make war upon
his Majesty's Subjects in the Town of Manchester, in the County Palatine of
Lancaster, and have killed and murdered diverse in that Town, and has robbed
and spoiled diverse others of his Majesty's good Subjects inhabiting near the
same; The Inhabitants whereof with the Christian aid and help of diverse well
affected Gentlemen, and others of that County, have valiantly resisted the said
Earl, and his Accomplices, and has thereunto bravely defended themselves and the
Town; It is thereupon ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
That such Gentlemen, and others, of his Majesty's good Subjects who has
already hazarded their lives, and spent of their estates, and all such others
as shall hereafter, either with their persons, or purses, give aid unto the
Inhabitants of the said Town of Manchester, for their defense, and shall
endeavor to suppress or apprehend the said Earl, or any of his Accomplices,
shall have allowance, and payment made of all such Moneys or other Charge,
which they shall expend or disburse in that Service, upon Account made unto the
House of Commons: And such their Actions, and endeavors, are declared to be a
Service both agreeable unto the Law of the Land, acceptable to both Houses of
Parliament; and beneficial to the Commonwealth.

John Brown Cler. Parliament.

London: Printed for Tho. Underhill, at the Bible in Wood-street. 1642.


