A DECLARATION Of The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.

Concerning his Majesty's advancing of his Army toward London, with directions
that all the Trained Bands and Volunteers be put into a readiness, that so
the Kings Army may find opposition in every place as they Martch.

Also how Sir John Hinderson urged one David Alexander, a Scotchman, to kill
Sir John Hotham, and blow up the Parliaments Magazine, to whom his Majesty gave
Money, and he received it.

And that no man shall presume to wear any colors or Marks of Division in
the City of London.

Whereunto is added several Votes of the Lords and Commons, for the searching
of diverse men's houses in the City, and for the staying of the Kings Revenue,
and all the Bishops, D^anes and Chapters Rents and profits whatsoever.

Sabbathi, 15* October. 1642.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this Declaration and
Votes be forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliam.

October. 17. London Printed for John Wright. 1642.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament, considering with much tenderness and
compassion, the miserable condition of this Kingdom, distracted, and
distempered with many present evils, and imminent dangers, and brought now to
such an height of extremity of misery, that two English Armies are near
together, even ready to join in a dreadful and bloody encounter, through the
violent and wicked counsel of those, who have captivated both the Person and
the power of the King, to their own impious and Traiterous designs, do
thereupon think good to publish and declare the same to the Kingdom, together
with some directions and provisions which may prevent that utter desolation and
ruin, both of Religion and liberty, already overwhelmed and suppressed in the
intention and hope of those Rebels and Traitors about the King, to which
purpose it is desired by both Houses, that all well-affected Subjects may take
notice of these particulars.

That the King by the help and assistance of the Papists, the Prelaticall and
corrupt part of the Clergy, the Delinquent Nobility and Gentry, and by the
confluence of some notable Traitors from beyond the Seas, the Lord Digby,
Oneale, and others, and of many desperate mercenary and ill-affected persons
from all parts of the Kingdom, has raised an Army, armed, clothed, and fed,
for the most part with the spoils of his Subjects, giving them liberty to
plunder and rob all sorts of people; to exact money and plate from
Corporations, by threatening fire, and sword, if they should refuse it.

That this wicked counsel does not only hinder his Majesty from exercising
the justice and protection of a King toward his people, but even that honor
which is observed betwixt Enemies; for by a confident instrument of his
Majesty, Sir John Hinderson a Papist (as we are credibly informed) one David
Alexander was urged to kill Sir John Hotham, telling him it would be a good
service both to God and the King, which he refused to do, saying it was the
work of a Butcher, and not of a Soldier; This Alexander being a Scotchman, of
a very poor fortune, and of a mind fit for desperate attempts. The King sent
for him 2, while he was at Beverley, and when he came to his presence, he spoke
to him publicly in the field, and appointed a sum of money to be given him,
which he received.

After which another proposition was made to him by the same Sir John
Hinderson, that he would put fire to the Magazine of the Army raised by the
Parliament, and to gain the better opportunity to effect it, that he should
labor to get some employment in the train of Artilery, which he accordingly
undertook, and endeavored to obtain; But before he could effect his
mischievous intention, he was discovered, apprehended, and examined, and
thereupon confessed the practice, and undertaking, the particulars whereof are
referred to the examinations thereupon taken. That the King does send out
Letters to borrow great sums, professing that those who will not lend him money,
do give him just cause to suspect their duty to his Person, and the peace of
the Kingdom. And this will be a sufficient reason to make them liable to be
plundered and spoiled of all they have; but such is the violence of the Kings
Army, that their friends are in little better case then they who oppose them,
and those who escape best must yet feed and billet the Soldiers for nothing.

In those places where the trained bands are willing to go forth to serve in
his Maj. Army, yet for the most part their Arms are taken from them and put
upon those who are more mercenary, and less interessed in the Common Wealth,
and so likely to be fitter instruments of Rapine and Spoil.

By these great violences and oppressions they have so exhausted those parts
that his Majesty cannot stay long about Shrewsbury, and it is the earnest
desire of the Cavaliers that he would march forward toward London, those rich
and fruitful Countries in the way being like to yield them a supply of their
necessities, and the wealth of London a full satisfaction of their hope, where
they likewise think to find a party which upon his Majesty's approach may make
some disturbance, and facilitate their designs upon the City.

That if the Kings Army prevail, the good Subjects can expect nothing but that
their lives and fortunes will be exposed to the malice and rapine of those
ravenous Soldiers, who often talk of cutting the Throats of honest and
Religious men, and have long expected their goods and estates* as the rewards
of their service; the Kingdom will again fall under the government of those
mischievous counsels, who before this Parliament, had even brought both
religion and liberty to ruin; and we shall have no hope left of any more
Parliaments, but such as shall beconcurrent and subservient to these ends.

The means of curing and preventing these evils and dangers, we conceive to
be these.
That good provision be made by loan and contribution for the Army raised by
the Parliament, under the Lord General the Earl of Essex, which is no whit
inferior in Horse and Foot to the Kings Army, better armed, full paid,
restrained from disorder and Rapine, as much as may be; well provided of all
outward necessaries; but above all, well encouraged and instructed in the
goodness of the cause, by the labor of many godly and painful Divines.

That this Army be always ready to attend the removes of the Kings Army,
either in one body or divided as there shall be occasion, according to the
wise conduct and direction of the Lord General, that so no opportunity of
fighting upon advantage be lost, nor the greedy Soldiers of the Kings Army
suffered to range, and spoil the Country at their pleasure.

That the Countries through which the Kings Army is to pass do associate
themselves, and draw all their Forces together, for the mutual defense of
their persons and goods from Oppression and Spoil.

That those Counties be required to send in all their Horses fit for carriage
and for Dragoones as well for the Assistance of the Lord General, for which in
convenient time they shall receive satisfaction, As likewise that by such
means these Horses may be kept from being employed by the Kings Army.

That command and direction be given to all Lieutenants of Counties and deputy
Lieutenants, that all the Trained-Bands and all Volunteers be put into a
readiness to be brought to such Randezvous, and to be obedient to such
Commanders in chief as shall be appointed by the Committee for the safety of
the Kingdom, or by the Lord General, that so the Kings Army may find
opposition in every place as they pass, and the Inhabitants may have at hand a
sufficient protection and defense, and the Lord General may strengthen his own
Army with these Forces, as he shall see cause.

That Powder, Munition, and Ordnance, with all other necessaries be prepared
for these forces, that so without any trouble or confusion, they may be brought
together, and fitted for service upon all sudden Occurrents.

That all those who in the City of London, or any other place, shall wear any
Colors, or other marks of division, whereby they may be distinguished from
others and known to be of the malignant Party, shall be examined, searched, and
disarmed, as likewise all others, who being able, shall not lend or contribute
toward the public safety of the Kingdom, in this time of so great and
imminent danger.

That it be commended to the serious consideration of those in the Kings Army,
and of all other that intend to assist and succor his Majesty in this impious
and unnatural war, among whom it may be hoped there are some honest men, and
Protestants, what it is that moves them in this Quarrel.

Is it for fear of some Innovations and alteration? of Religion or Church
Government? let such as are possessed with this vain and causeless
apprehension, know, that nothing is intended or desired, but to take away the
government by Bishops, which has bin so constantly, evidently, mischievous,
and dangerous to the Church and state; and such other things as shall be found
to be justly offensive, and nothing to be settled and Introduced, but by
authority of Parliament after consultation first had with an assembly of
learned and reverend Divines.

Is it to uphold the authority, prerogative, and Honor of the King and to
preserve the safety of his Royal Person? surely the Parliament is and ever
has been ready to do any thing that belongs to them to secure all these,
which they have often testified by many humble petitions to his Majesty.

If there be no cause for any of these respects, to seek the destruction of
the Parliament and the blood and ruin of their kindred, friends and
acquaintance, what remains then to be the matter of the quarrel, and the
motives of such great combustions, and the effects and consequences of their
victory if they should prevail? That Priests, Jesuits, and the Popes Nuncioes
may domineere and govern in the Kings Counsel as heretofore, that the Arch
Bishops of Canterbury and York and their Suffragans may suppress diligent and
powerful preaching, and bannish and oppress all the most pious and best
affected Subjects of the Kingdom, and introduce the Popish Religion under a
protestant profession, till they have strength and boldness to cast off the
disguise, and openly appear that which indeed they are, and would not seem to
be.

That the Earl of Bristoll, and his Son the Lord Digby, Mr. ^ermin, and other
such Traitors may possess the great places, and government of this Kingdom;
and be the arbiters of the affairs of State, and distributers of preferments,
and disgraces, to such as shall further or oppose their designs.

That the delinquents, oppressors, and destroyers of the Kingdom, may not
only escape the justice of the Parliament, but triumph in the spoils of all
honest men, good Patriots; and that through out troubles, and divisions, the
Rebels in Ireland may prevail; that we may cease to be a free Nation, and
become the object of cruelty and oppression at home, and of scorn and infamy
abroad.

And if there can be no other fruit of their hazard and endeavors on that side,
let them then consider, whether by adhering to the Parliament, they may not
expect effects more suitable to the desires of honest men, The glory of God, in
the preservation of his Truth, The peace of the Church, by securing it against
the pride, avarice, and ambition of the Clergy, The honor greatness and
security of the King, by freeing him from false and Traitorous Counsels, and
establishing him in the hearts and affections of his people, the prosperity of
the whole Kingdom by the blessing of good Laws and a righteous government.

Die Sabbathi 15. October. 1642.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
THat such persons as shall not Contribute to the charge of the Common wealth
in this time of imminent necessity, shall be held fit to be secured.

Resolved upon the Question etc.
That such persons as shall not contribute to the charge of the Commonwealth
in this time of iminent necessity, shall be held fit to be Disarmed.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Lord Major
and Sheriffs of the City of London shall forthwith search the houses and seize
the Arms belonging unto M. Nathaniell Iefferson, M. Austin, M. John Bedle, M.
John Batty, M. Ralph Long, and M. Robert Lewis, all of Broadstreet Ward, M.
John Blunt, of Limestreet Ward, M. Ald. Wright of Colemanstreet Ward, M. Roger
Drake, M. John Walther, of Faringdon within, for that as it appears by the
report from the Committee they have not Contributed as they ought to the charge
of the Commonwealth, in this time of imminent necessity.

Resolved upon the Question etc.
That the fines, Rents, and profits of Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Deanes
and Chapters, and of such notorious Delinquents who have taken up Arms against
the Parliament, or have bin active in the Commission of Array, shall be
sequestered for the use and service of the Common wealth.

Resolved upon the Question etc.
That the Kings Revenue arising out of Rents, Fines in Courts of Justice,
Compositions for Wards, and the like, and al other his Majesty's Revenue, shall
be brought into the several Courts and other places where they ought to be
paid in, and not Issued forth or paid out, until further order shall be taken
by both Houses of Parliament.

The manner of sequestration is referred to a Committee.

FINIS
The Examination of David Alexander, taken October. 6. 1642.
He says, wheu the King went toward the North, at Newmarket he came to the
Court, and followed the King to York and stayed at York, when the King first
went to Kingstone upon Hull, and came back to York, and after the Kings
return Sir John Hinderson told him it was a good service to God and the King
to kill Sir John Hotham, and he refused to do it; and that he said he would
rather venture upon an Army, and then the King went to Beverly, and the
Postmasters boy brought him word from Sir James Hamilton he should come to
Beverly, and should be made Corporal of the field, which he slighted, and
said he was an old man, and could no ride, and then Sir James Hamilton sent to
him to meet him at the Post House, which he did, and Sir James told him if he
came not the next day, he would lose his place, he told him he had no money,
and he gave him ten shillings, and with that he hired horse and went thither,
and that he came to the Lord Lindsey, General, which said he was welcome* and
bid him go to the King* and told him the King had sent twice for him, and the
next day, which was the day wherein the Earl of Holland, etc. had his
audience, the King being in the field spoke to him, and bid him go to my L.
General who gave order to Sir John Culpepper, to give him ten pounds, which
he received* and my Lord General told him Master Slingsby and an other Knight
were about a Mine which failed, and the siege raised, and afterward he went to
Nottingham, and there Sir John Hinderson said to him, he should do good
service if he would set the Magazine on fire, and that he undertook to do,
and he told him it would be well, if he could get a service in the train of
Artillery, and often spoke to him about that action, and said he should he
highly recompensed: and thereupon he came to London on Tuesday was five or six
we^kes; and he was with Sir William Balfore, and made means to go into
Ireland: and that he confessed to Sir Balthazar Gerbier upon Monday last, all the
passages betwixt him and Sir John Hinderson, and to nobody else but he spoke to
Sir John Mildram to get him a place in the Irish Wars, and Sir John promised to
speak with the Irish Committee for him: he said Sir John Hinderson told him the
King was acquainted with this proposition of firing the Magazine diverse times:
and this examinant told him that he had spoken to Sir Balthazar Gerbier to
tell the King that he could not perform it, and he denied that ever he had
labored for any place in this Army.

David Alexander.

The Examination of Sir Balthazar Gerbier, taken the 8. of October 1642.
He says, he knows one David Alexander a Scotch-man, and has known him
long, and has had discourse lately with him.

He says, the said David Alexander said he had a proposition made to him to
kill some body, but none named to this examinant, he answered, that to kill a
man was fit for a hangman, but any generous act befitting a soldier he would
do.

The said Alexander, said that Colonel Hinderson made this proposition at the
Court, he says that act was proposed; That another proposition was made by the
same person that he should get a place in the Train of Artillery, and getting
knowledge where the Magazine was, to do his best to fire it, and this he
entertained, and was received, and had money given him, and besides Colonel
Hinderson, and Master Endymion Porter spoke also concerning the same business
to him.

This Examinant says, he knows not whether Alexander, Hinderson, and M.
Endymion Porter spoke of the same at the same time, nor did he tell him what
sum of Money he received, nor did he speak of any other Promises: upon the
third of this Instant, at nine of the clock this discourse was, which he noted
in his Table-booke. Then desiring to look in his Table-Booke, the Examinant
further related; That he having occasion to use some man's service to the
Court, with the Venetian Ambassador, according to his place, he sent to this
David Alexander, to know if he would go along with him, the said David told
him he could not go; the Examinant wondered at it, knowing his poverty, and
asked the reason, the reupon he said he had some service to do, and the
Examinant being his old friend, he would deal plainly with him, and tell him,
and said it was of that nature, that it was as much worth as his life to
discover, the Examinant wondered at it, and made some difficulty to know it; but
he answered that in the Lord Buckinghams time he had been his friend, and
therefore to him he would tell it, and put his life into his hands: The
Examinant said, why will thou put thy life into such danger? then he said he
was dispatched and had received money for it to apply himself to the Army, and
to endeavor to get a place about the Artillery, to the end to take a time to
fire the Magazine; which he said you know I can do by an instrument made like
a watch, which having gone for so many hours then strikes fire, he said he had
applied himself to Sir William Balfore to be recommended by him, but was put
off, only had offered to him 14 s. per diem for a Sergeant Majors place of
Dragooners, or some service for Ireland; but he refused it, as not fit for him,
saying, that he was more proper for fire works and Artillery, etc. He said
further, that meeting Dulbier, he told him, how now David, thou do not come
hither for the service against those from whence you come, he said no; and then
resolved to apply himself to Sir John Meldram, by whom he was to be presented
to the house the third of this instant: he desired this Examinant to take this
relation from him and to acquaint the King with it, to whom it would be
acceptable to know what was become of him, and he could not write it himself,
and therefore wished this Examinant to write it in his Table. book: This
Examinant said he would put it into his Table-booke, and said how should I
venture to tell this to the King, or know it to be true; and he said the King
would soon know that, and it will be an honor to you to be so trusted, so he
concluded his discouse with presenting a Scotchman to this Examinant in his
journey, the Scotchman was his companion, and a Solicitor here for one Gordan
the Kings Agent at Hamburgh; but this Examinant took only his name, and liking
not his aspect, promised to send him some other time.

Balthazar Gerbier.

THe same Examinant, upon the 7 day of October, does confirm all the particulars
aforementioned: and further says, that the reason why he told Sir Balthazar
Gerbier of this business, was to desire him to tell the King that he could not
as yet perform it; and he thinks that the King and Sir John Hinderson, do
believe that he is in my Lord of Essex Army; and that he does intend to
perform his promise.

Taken the ^0 of October. David Alexander.

THis Examinant told Sir Balthazar Gerbier the 3 of October. last, I cannot go
with you, because I have undertaken to fire the Ammunition in the Army of
Parliament, and tell the King or Sir John Hinderson I have not effected it; but
I am going to Sir John Mildram at 9 of the clock this morning, to bring me to
the Parliament, to get employment in the Artillery belonging to the Parliament;
and that I might have had 14 shillings a day to be a Major in a Regiment of
Dragooners with the Parliament, and refused it; which he desired the King might
know.

David Alexander.

October 10. 1642.
THe said David Alexander further acknowledges, that he offered to tell Sir
Balthazar Gerbier, what the great business was which did hinder him from going
with him, and what he had said was as much as his life was worth to discover:
that Sir Balthazar Gerbier did refuse to hear it; but this Examinant did very
earnestly press to hear what it was.

David Alexander.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament that this
Declaration, Depositions, and Votes thus amended be forthwith Printed and
published

John Brown Cler.
Parliam^
FINIS.
October. 20. London Printed for John Wright.


