THE DECLARATION OF BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT Concerning His Majesty's Letter
to the Privy Council of the Kingdom of Scotland. And the Petition of the
Noblemen, Gentlemen, Ministers, etc. of Scotland, to the Lords of the Privy
Council.
THE Lords and Commons in Parliament, have perused a printed Paper under the
title, A Letter sent from the Kings Majesty to the Lords of the privy Counsel
of the Kingdom of Scotland; bearing in the front the appearance of his
Majesty's usual Signature, and in the bottom this Date. Given at ou^ Court of
York the 20* of May. 1642. As likewise another paper in the form of a
Petition with this inscription, To the Right Honorable the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Counsel. The humble Petition of many Noblemen, Gentlemen,
Burgesses, and Ministers occasionably meeting at Edenbrough, and having bin
credibly informed, that they are true Copies of a Letter and a Petition sent
and delivered as the several Titles import. Upon mature consideration of the
matter therein contained, do declare, and protest; That those sufferings
expressed in the Papers betwixt his Majesty, and Parliament, cannot justly be
imputed to any actions, or intentions of ours, who have endeavored with all
fidelity, to procure the happiness of his Majesty, and of this Kingdom; And
that we are not guilty of laying upon the King, any such calumnies, and
aspertions, as are mentioned in that Paper, and seem to reflect upon us; But
on the contrary have labored to take the blame from his Majesty, and to lay it
upon his evil Council.

And as touching the Petition aforementioned, we do with much contentment,
and thankfulness, observe the faithfulness, and good affection of our
Brethren of Scotland, in seeking to prevent all Iealousies, and to preserve the
peace betwixt the two Nations, so truly expressed to the Lords of the Council;
whereby the hopes of those, who practiced to have drawn from their Lordships
some Declaration to the prejudice of this Kingdom, were frustrated. And we
shall never cease to answer this great care of theirs, with the like earnest
and dilligent endeavors, to promote the honor, wealth, and prosperity of that
Nation, and preserve that Union so strongly fortefyed, by public and mutual
interest, and affection on both sides; And we desire that the Commissioners
may give notice to the Scottish Commissioners how heartily, and joyfully we
do embrace the kindness of that Kingdom, manifested in that Petition, and
Order this Declaration to be forthwith printed; That so it may be published to
the whole Kingdom of Scotland, hoping that this constant, and Inviolable amity
betwixt us, will not only conduce to the safety, and honor of both Kingdoms,
but prove very useful for the advantage, and security of the Protestant
Religion in other parts.

Mercurii 15 Iunii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled. That this
Declaration shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

Io. Brown. Cleric. Parliament.

London Printed for Joseph Hunscot and John Wright, 16 June, 1642.


