A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: Concerning the
reducing of the late Revolted Ships To the obedience of PARLIAMENT.

Die Veneris 14 Julii. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that this
Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Imprinted at London for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bailey. 1648.

Die Veneris, 14 Julii, 1648.
IT cannot be unknown to all men that the Commerce and Navigation of this
Kingdom has been by the blessing of God an especial means of the honor and
greatness of the English Nation, and that the courage, industry, and fidelity
of the English Seamen and Mariners has been a principal means of the
increase of the Trade and Commerce of this Kingdom in all the parts of the
world; the consideration whereof have caused both Houses of Parliament to have
an especial care unto the Royal Navy, by building many Ships and Frigates,
and setting forth and maintaining Fleets, expending in that service the whole
revenue of the Customs, (the greatest part whereof in former times was
diverted unto other uses) besides other vast sums of Money laid out in that
action.

And for the better encouragement of such Mariners as were employed in the
servier of the State, they have much advanced their pay above that which it was
formerly, and at the coming in of the Fleets have so carefully provided for
them, that they were never discharged from on Board out of Victuals and wages,
until their Moneys were duly paid them, hoping that by these and many other
encouragements upon all occasions they would have approved themselves faithful
to the Kingdom in the discharge of the trust reposed in them; but contrary
hereunto, the Mariners of several of the Royal ships set forth in this last
Summers Fleet, being by the cunning insinuation of men ill affected to the
Peace of this Kingdom seduced, have rreacherously revolted from their duty,
and do still persist in their disobedience, by which horrid and detestable act
in breach of their trust, they have much blemished the honor and credit of the
Navigation, and Mariners of this Kingdom, and as much as in them lies,
betrayed the public interest and liberties thereof, and retarded those ends
of a happy Peace, which the Parliament have ever pursued, and now are more
especially employed in; and although both Houses of Parliament have (after an
Act of Indemnity already offered) good reason for to proceed in the reducing
of them by force, yet to the end it may appear that the Parliament do as much
as in them lies, seek to prevent the effusion of blood, The said Lords and
Commons do hereby Offer and Declare; That if the Seamen, Officers and
Commanders on Board the said Ships shall within twenty days after publication
hereof, or forthwith upon notice given them by the Lord Admiral, or such other
Person or Persons as he shall appoint, render themselves, and the Ships,
wherein they are to the Parliaments obedience, and bring them into some Port
under the command of the Parliament, the persons so submitting shall be
indempnified in their persons and estates, any former act of theirs
notwithstanding; but if they shall after the said time prefixed expired persist
still in their disobedience, then the Houses will proceed to the reducing of
them by force, and doubting not of a good success by the blessing of Almighty
God, hoping that every true-hearted English man will contribute his uttermost
assistance to this work, especially the Merchants and Owner of Ships, they
being principally Interessed in the consequences thereof, it being to be
expected that the Revolters will endeavor to maintain their defection by
rapine and violence, and for the Encouragement of Seamen, to engage themselves
herein, The Lords and Commons do promise and declare, that such Seamen as
shall so engage and use their best endeavors in this so honorable a work
shall have two months wages extraordinary duly paid them, as soon as the said
Ships shall be by them reduced and brought into Port*

And it is lastly Declared, that not only the persons on board the said Ships,
who shall notwithstanding this offer of Indemnity stand out, but also all
other the Subjects of this Kingdom, and others whatsoever, who shall hereafter
join with, assist, supply, or any way adhere to them, shall be dealt with and
proceeded against as Traitors and Enemies to the Kingdom, and their Estates
confiscate; and for the miseries that shall ensue, they will stand charged with
the same as guilty of them, and authors of that ruin which will attend them
and their posterity.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

