A DECLARATION FROM BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT With the Additionall Reasons last
presented to his MAJESTY.

Sabbathi 12. Martii 1641.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that the Declaration
with the additionall Reasons last presented to his Majesty, shall be forthwith
Printed and published.

Jo. Brown Clerick. Parl.
H. Elsine. Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Whereunto is annexed, His Majesty's SPEECH to the Commit, the 9 of March,
1641. when they presented the DECLARATION of both Houses of Parliament at
New-maket.

London, Printed by R. Oulton and G. Dexter. 1641.

A DECLARATION TO HIS MAJESTY.
May it please your most excellent Majesty,
ALthough the expressions of your Majesty's Message, the second of this instant
Month, do give just cause of sorrow to Us your Majesty's faithful Subjects,
the Lords and Commons in Parliament; yet it is not without some mixture of
Confidence and Hope, considering they proceed from the Misapprehensions of our
Actions and Intentions, which having no ground of truth or reallity, may, by
your Majesty's Justice and VVisdome be removed, when your Majesty shall be
fully informed, that these fears and jealousies of Ours, which your Majesty
thinks to be Causeless, and without just grounds, do necessarily and clearly
arise from these dangers and distempers, into which the mischievous and evil
Counselors about you have brought this Kingdom: and that those other fears
and jealousies by which your favor, your Boyall presence and Confidence have
bin withdrawn from your Parliament, have no foundation or subsistence in any
Action, Intention, or Miscarriage of Ours, but are merely grounded upon the
falsehood and malice of those, who for the supporting and fomenting their own
wicked designs against the Religion and Peace of this Kingdom, do seek to
deprive your Majesty of the strength and affection of your People, them of your
Grace and protection; and there by to subject both your Royal person and the
whole Kingdom to ruin and destruction.

To satisfy your Majesty's. Judgment and Conscience in both these points, We
desire to make a clear and free Declaration, of the Causes of our fears and
jealousies, which We offer to your Majesty in these particulars.

1. That the design of Altering Religion, in this, and in your other
Kingdoms, has bin potently carried on by those in greatest Authority about
you, for diverse years together; and that the Queens Agent at Rome, and the
Popes Agent at Nuncio here, are not only evidences of this design, but have
bin great Actors in it.

2. That the Wars with Scotland was procured to make way for this Intention,
and chiefly incited and fomented by the Papists, and others Popishly affected,
whereof we have many evidences, especially their free and general Contribution
to it.

3. That the Rebellion in Ireland was framed and contrived here in England; and
that the English Papists should have risen about the same time, We have diverse
testimonies and Advertisements from Ireland; and that it is a common speech
among the Rebels, wherewith concur other Evidences and observations of the
suspicious Meetings and Consultations; the tumultuary and seditious carriage of
those of that Religion, in diverse parts of the Kingdom; about the breaking out
of the Irish Rebellion; the Deposition of O Conneli; the Information of Mr Cole
Minister, the Better of Prestram Whitcomb; the Deposition of Thomas Crant; and
many others, which we may produce do all agree in this.

4. The public Declaration of the Lords, Gentlemen, and others of the Pale
that they would join with the Robells, whom they call the Irish Army, or any
other, to recover unto his Majesty his Royal Prerogative wrested from him by
the Puritan Fuction in the Houses of Parliament in England; and to maintain
the same against all others; as also to maintain Episcopal jurisdiction, and
thereof, these two being the Quarrels upon which his Majesty's late Army in
the North should have bin incensed against us.

5. The great Cause we have to doubt, that the late design, styled The Queens
pious Intention, was for the Alteration of Religion in this Kingdom: for
success whereof the Hopes Nuntio, and Count Rosetti enjoined Fasting and
Praying to be observed every week, by the English Papists, which appeared to Us
by one of the Original Letters directed by him to a Priest in Lancashire.

6. The boldness of the Rebels in affirming They do nothing but by Authority
from the King; that they call themselves the Queens Army; that the Prey or
Booty which they take from the English, they mark with the Queens Mark. That
their purpose was to come into England, after they had done in Ireland and
sundry other things of this kind proved by O Connelt, and diverse others;
especially the aforementioned. Letter from Trestram Whitecombe the Major of
Kinsaile to his Brother Benjamin Whitecomb, wherein there is this passage, that
Many other speeches they utter about Religion and our Court of England, which
he dares not commit to paper.

The man old Attempts to provoke your Majesty's late Army, another Army of the
Scots, and to raise a Faction in the City of London and other parts of the
Kingdom; that those who have bin Actors in this business, have had their
Dependence, Countenance and Inconragement from the Court, witness the Treason
whereof Mr Germin and otherstand accused, who were transported beyond Sea by
Warrant under your Majesty's hand, after your Majesty had given. Assurance to
your Parliament that your Majesty had laid a strict command upon all your
Servants, that none of them should depart from Court; and that dangerous
Petition delivered to Captain Leg by your Majesty's own hand, accompanied
with a Direction signed with C. R.

The false and scandalous Accusation against the Lord Kymbellon, and the Five
Members of the House of Commons, tendered to the Parliament, by your Majesty's
own Command, endeavoring to be justified in the City by your own presence and
persuasion; and to be put in execution upon their Persons, by your Majesty's
demand of them in the House of Commons, in so terrible and violent a manner, as
far exceeded all former breaches of Privileges of Parliament, acted by your
Majesty, or any of your Predecessors: And whatsoever your own Intentions were,
diverse bloody and desperate persons, which attended your Majesty, discovered
their affections and resolutions to have massacred and destroyed the Members of
that House; if the absence of those Persons accused, had not by Gods providence
stopped the giving of that Word which they expected, for the setting them upon
that barbarous and bloody design.

The Listing of so many Officers, Soldiers and others, putting them into pay,
and under Command of Colonells, keeping them at White Hall, Feasting and
carousing them in an unusual manner, thereby maintaining them in the violent
Assaults, and other injuries, which they offered to diverse of your Subjects,
coming that way in a Lawful and peaceable manner; the carrying them out of
the Town, and keeping them in so long a Pay, after which they were told by the
Lord Digby that the King removed on purpose they might not be trampled in the
dirt; and endeavoring to engage the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court in the
same course; the plotting and designing of a perpetual Guard about your
Majesty; the laboring to infuse into your Majesty's Subjects an evil opinion
of the Parliament throughout the whole Kingdom, and other symptoms of a
disposition of raising Arms, and dividing your People by a Civil War, in
which Combustion Ireland must needs be lost, and this Realm miserably wasted
and consumed, if not wholly ruined and destroyed.

That the Lord Digby should presame to Council your Majesty to declare your
self, and to retire to a place of strength in this Kingdom, and to persuade
you that you could not be safe among your People, and yet should have such
Credit with you as to be sent may by your Warrant to Sir John Pennington, to
land him beyond the Sea, where he took that transcendent boldness to vent his
own Traiterous conceptions in the Letter to the Queen, offering to entertain
a correspondencie with her Majesty by Ciphers, intimating some service which he
might do in those parts; for which he desired your Majesty's Inteations,
whereby in all probability he intended the procureing of some Foreign Forces
to strengthen your Majesty in that condition to which he would have brought:
which false and malicious Council and advice, we have great cause to doubt,
made too deep an impression in your Majesty, considering the course you are now
pleased to take, of absenting your self from your Parliament, ang carrying the
Prince with you, which seems to express a purpose in your Majesty to keep your
self in a Readiness for the acting of it.

The manifold Advertisements, we have had from Rome, Venice, Paris, and other
parts, that they still expect that you have some great design in hand, for the
Altering of Religion; the breaking neck of your Parliament; that you will yet
find means to compose that designer that the Popes Nuncio has solicited the
Kings of France and Spain to lend your Majesty 4000. men a piece to help to
maintain your Royalty against the Parliament; and this of foreigne force
seems to be the most pernicious and malignant design of all the rest,
because no man can believe you will give up your people and your Kingdom to be
spoiled by Strangers, if you did not likewise intend both to change your own
profession in Religion, and the public profession of the Kingdom, that so
you might still be more assured of those foreign states of the Popish
Religion for your future supoort and defense; but we hope God will direct your
Majesty to better Counsels.

These are some of the grounds of our fears and jealousies, which made us so
earnestly to implore your royal Authority and Protection for our defense and
security, in all the ways of humility and submission, which being denied by
your Majesty, seduced by evil Counsels, We do with sorrow, for the great
and inavoydable misrule, which is like to fall upon your own person, and your
Kingdoms, apply our selves to the use of that Power, for the security and
defense of both, which by the fundamental Laws and Constitutions of this
Kingdom; reside in Us: Yet still resolving to keep our selves within the
bounds of Faithfulness and Allegiance to your sacred person; and your
Crowns: so as to the Second sort of jealousies and fears, of Us expressed by
your Majesty, We shall give a shorter, but as true and as faithful an Answer.

Whereas your Majesty is pleased to say that for your residing near your
Parliament, you wish it might be so safe and honorable that you had noe cause
to absent your self from White Hall, this we take as the greatest breach of
the privileges of Parliament that can be offered, the heaviest miseri^e to
your self and jniurie to us, and Impuuation upon us, that can be imagined, the
most mischeivous effect of evil Counsels, it roots up the foundation of that
safety and honor which the Crown affords, it seems as much as may be to cast
upon the Parliament such a charge as is inconsistent with the nature of your
great Counsel being body whereof your Majesty it the head, it striks at the
very being both of King and Parliament depriving our Majesty in your own
apprehension of their fidelity and them of your protection, which are the
mutual bonds of Government and subjection.

We have according to your Majesty's desire laid our hands upon our hearts, we
have asked our selves in the strictest examination of our Consbiencys, we have
searched our affections, our thoughts, considered our aandions, and we find none
that dan give your Majesty just occasion to absent your self from White Hall
and the Parliament but that you may with more honor and safety continue there
then in any other place, your Majesty lays a general Tax uprn us, if you
will be graciously pleased to let us konw the particulars we shall give a
clear and satisfactory answer but what hope can we have of ever giving your
Majesty satisfaction when theie particulars which you been made believe were
true yet being produced and made known to us appeared to be false, and your
Majesty notwithstanding will neither punish nor produce the authors, but go on
to contract Jealousies and fears upon general and uncertain grounds
affording us no means or possibility of particular Answer to the clearing of
ourselves: For proof whereof we beseech your Majesty to consider these
Instances.

The speeches alleged to be spoken in a meeting by diverse Members of both
Houses at Kensington, concerning a purpose of restraining the Queen and Prince
which after it was denied and disavowed, yet your Majesty refused to Name the
Authors though humbly desired of both Houses

The report of Articles framed against the Queen given out by some of near
relation unto the Court, but when it was publicly and constantly disclaimed,
the Credit seemed to bt withdrawn from it but the Authors being kept safe will
always be in readiness for exploits of the same kind wherewith your Majesty
and the Queen will be troubled if this course betaken to cherish and secure
them in such wicked and mallcious slanders.

The heavy Charge and accusation of the Lord Kimbolton and the five Members of
the House of Commons, who refuse no Trial and examination which may stand with
the Privilcdge of Parliament yet no Author, noe witnesses produced, against
whom they may have reparation for that great jnjury and infamy cast upon them
notwithstanding three several Petitions of both Houses, the Authority of two
Acts of Parliament vouched in the last of these Petitions.

We beseech your Majesty to consider in what estate you are, how easy and
fair a way you have to happiness, honourabe greatness, plenty and security
if you will join with the Parliamentand your faithful Subjects in defense of
the Religion and the public good of the Kingdom: This is all we expect from
you and for this we shall return to you our lives and fortunes and utmost
endeavors to support your Majesty, your Sovereignty and power over us, but it
is not words that can secure us in these our humble desires, we cannot but two
well and sorrowful remember what gracious Messages we had from you this Summer,
when with your privity the bringing uthpe Army was in agitation, we cannot but
with the like affection recall to our minds, how not two days before hou gave
direIion for the above mentioned accusation and your own coming unto the
Commons House, that house received a Message that you would always have care of
their Privileges as of your own Prerogative, of the safety of their Persons
as of your own Children, that which we expect which will give us assurance
that you have noe thoughts but of peace and Justice to your people must be some
real effect of your goodness to them in granting those which the present
necessity of the Kingdom do enforce us to desire, and in the first place that
your Majesty will be graciously pleased to put from you those wicked and
mischeivous Counselors which have caused all these dangers and distractions
and continue your own residence and the Princes near London and the parliament
Which we hope will be a happy beginning of contentment and confidence betwixt
your Majesty and your People, and be followed with many succeeding blessings of
honor and greatness to your Msjesty, and of security and prosperity to them.

The Additionall Reasons.
THe Lords and Commons have commanded us to present unto your Majesty this
further Addition to their former Declaration.

That your Majesty's return, and continuance near the Parliament is a matter in
their apprehension of to great necessity and importance toward the
preservation of your Royal Person and your Kingdoms, that they cannot think
they have discharged their duties in the single expresof their desire, unless
the add some further Reasons to back it with.

I. Your Majesty's absence will cause men to believe, that it is out of design
to discourage the undertakers; and hinder the other Provisions for raising
money for defense of Ireland.

II. It will very much hearteo the Behells there, and disastected persons in
this Kingdom, as being an evidence, and efiect of the jealousy and division
betwixt your Majesty, and your people.

III. That it will much weaken and withdraw the affection of the Subject from
your Majesty, without which a Prince is deprived of his chiefest strength and
luster, and left naked in the greatest dangers and miseries, that can be
imagined.

IIII. That it will invite and encourage the Enemies of our Religion and the
State in Foreign Parts, to the attempting, and acting of their evil dessgnes
and intentions toward us.

V. That it causes a great interuption in the proceedings of Parliament.

These considerations threaten so great danger to your Majesty's person and to
all your Dominions, that as your Majesty's great Council, they hold it
necessary to represent to You, this their faithful Advise that so whatsoever
follows, they may be excused before God and Man.

His Majesty's Speech to the Committee, the 9. of March, 1641. when they
presented the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament at New Market.
I Am confident that you expect not I should give you a speedy Answer to this
strange and unexpected Declaration. And I am sorrv (in the distraction of, this
Kingdom you should think this way of address to be more convenient, than that
purposed by my Message of the 20 of January last to both Houses.

As concerning the grounds of your fears and Iealousies, I will take time to
answer particularly, and doubt not but I shall do it, to the satiffaction of
the whole world. God in his good time will I hope, discover the secrets of all
Plots and Treasons; and then I shall stand right in the eyes of all my people.
In the mean time, I must tell you, That I rather expected a Vindication for the
imputation laid on me in Mr PYMS Speech, than that any more general Rumors and
Discourses should get redit with you.

For my fears and doubts, I did not think they should have been thought so
groundless or trivial, while so many seditious Pamphlets and Sermons are
looked upon, and so great Tumults are remembered, unpunished, uninquired into: I
still confess my fears, and call God to witness, That they are greater for
the true Protestant Prefession, My People and Laws, than for my own Right or
safety, though I must tell you, I conceive that none of these are free form
danger.

What would you have? Have I violated your Laws? Have I denveed to pass any
one Bill for the ease and security of my Subjects? I do not ask you what you
have done for me.

Have any of my People been transport with Fears and Apprehensions? I have
offered as free and general a Pardon, as your selves can devise. All this
considered, There is a Judgment from Heaven upon this Nation, if these
distractions continue.

God so deal with Me and Mine, as all my Thoughts and Intentions are upright
for the maintenance of the true Protestant Profession, and for the Observation
and Preversation of the Laws of this Land: And I hope, God will bless and
assist those Laws for My preservation.

As for the Additionall Declation, you are to expect an Answer to it, when you
shall receive the Answer to the Declaration it self.

FINIS.

