AN ORDINANCE OF PARLIAMENT, Concerning THE SVBSIDIE OF TONNAGE AND POUNDAGE.

LONDON, Printed for Lawrence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at Temple Bar in
Fleet Street, 1642.

AN ORDINANCE OF PARLIAMENT, Concerning the Subsidy of Tonnage and Poundage.
THe Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament, taking into consideration
the great perils and dangers that may ensue, not only to this Kingdom, but
likewise unto that of Ireland, especially in these times of apparent danger,
far exceeding all former times, either of his Majesty, or of his Royal
Father King James; and taking into further consideration the great debt now due
unto the Navy, as well before the beginning of this Parliament as since,
amounted to the sum of two hundred thousand pounds or thereabouts: and that
two and fifty Ships of War are now in the actual service of this Kingdom,
as well for the defense thereof as of Ireland, and not knowing what other
supply of Ships and of store will be further requisite in these times of
danger; and well knowing that they cannot be maintained without great sums
of Money, nor the said great Arrears satisfied by any moneys already collected
or owing by Merchants for the time past.

And foreseeing the danger and the necessity of the supply, did long before
this time prepare a new book of Rates which passed both Houses, now ordered to
be published, wherein they had as well an equal respect to the ease of
Merchants, as to the raising of such sums of money as might be proportionable
to those supplies: and did likewise prepare and pass a Bill of Tonnage and
Poundage, whereby the Book of Rates is confirmed; which Bill they have likewise
ordered to be printed and published, which after they were past both Houses,
were upon the 29th day of June last past, sent to his Majesty to York for the
Royal Assent; which his Majesty not having passed, the Lords and Commons did
upon the fourteenth day of this instant July command the Earl of Holland, Sir
John Holland, and Sir Philip Stapleton (by whom they did-send the late Petition
to his Majesty) in the name of both Houses, to move his Majesty to give a
speedy passage to that Bill, whereunto his Majesty has given no Answer at all.
And whereas the former Bill of Tonnage and Poundage did determine the first day
of this instant July, since which time no moneys intended to be raised by this
last Bill have been collected. Now the said Lords and Commons having taken the
premises into due and serious consideration for preventing the inevitable
dangers that must necessarily ensue, without timely prevention in that behalf,
have thought good to make this their Declaration to all his Majesty's loving
Subjects.

First, whereas by an Act made this present Parliament, entitled, an Act for
the relief of the Captives taken by the Turkish Mooreish, and other Pirates,
and to prevent the taking of others in time to come, All Merchants as well
Denizens as Aliens, for any goods exported or imported from the tenth day of
December one thousand six hundred forty and one, during the term of three
years then next ensuing, are to make due entries of such their goods in the
Port of London, and all other his Majesty's Ports within the Realm of England
and Dominion of Wales upon the penalty of the forfeiture of the said goods.

Now the said Lords and Commons do enjoyne all Merchants as well Denizens as
Aliens to make due entry of all such goods and Merchandise, as they shall,
during the continuance of the said Act, export or import. And to the intent
that the Entries may be accordingly made, they do expect that the Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers, and other the Officers of the said City of London, and
other the Ports respectively do carefully attend their several charges, and
make due seizure, as forfeited, of all such goods and Merchandise as shall not
be entered according to the intent of the said Statute.

2. That although the said last Bill of Tonnage and Poundage has not yet had
the Royal Assent, and therefore the Subject by the Law is not compellable to
pay the duty therein limited to be paid; yet the premises and pressing
necessities considered, the Lords and Commons do declare, that it shall be
taken as an acceptable service to the Commonwealth by a manifestation of their
good affections to the public of all those, that shall upon entry of their
goods advance, and pay by way of Loan unto the Collectors, or Commissioners,
which now are, or hereafter shall be named, or to their Deputy or Deputies all
such sum or sums of money as are payable by the last Book of Rates, and
should have been due in case the said Bill had past for a Law.

3 That every Merchant so advancing money as abovesaid, shall have allowance by
way of defalcation of fifteen pounds per cent. out of every hundred pou^ds he
or they shall so advance and pay, over and above all other allowances made in
the said Bill or Book of Rates, or either of them, and so out of every greater
and lesser sum, after that rate.

4 Whereas the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage now remaining with his Majesty,
cannot have the force of a Law without the further concurrence of the Lords and
Commons, in respect the Speaker of the House of Commons by and with the consent
of the said Commons is to carry the said Bill up into the Lords House for the
Royal assent; as also in respect that in his Majesty's absence from
Parliament, his Majesty has no power to pass his Royal assent unto a Bill,
but by his Letters Patents under the great Seal, and signed with his hand,
declared and notified to the Lords and Commons assembled together in the higher
House, as by a Statute made in the 23 year of the reign of King Henry the
eighth, c. 21. appears. Now the Lords and Commons, for the further assurance
of Merchants advancing moneys as aforesaid, do promise and declare, that
before they consent to the perfecting of the said Bill of of Tonnage, and
Poundage now remaining with his Majesty, or any other Bill of Tonnage and
Poundage whatsoever, provision shall be made that the said allowance of
fifteen per Cent. shall be confirmed unto the said Merchants accordingly. And
that they, their heirs executors administrators and assigns shall be forever
acquitted and discharged of, and from the payment thereof.

5 To the intent that no Merchant does forbear to advance the said moneys by
way of Loan, according as hereby is desired, in hope that the duties in the
said Bill shall not hereafter become payable from the first day of July, 1642
The Lords and Commons do declare that no Bill of Tonnage and Poundage shall
hereafter pass in Parliament, but such as shall relate and be in force to
compel all merchants to pay for all goods and merchandise exposed or imposed
from the said first day of July, 1642 on which day the former Bill of Tonnage
and Poundage expired. In which Bill there shall be that clause of forfeiture of
the value of all such goods as shall not be duly entered in the Custom house
from, and after that day in such manner as in the said Bill is expressed.

6 That all Merchants who shall not advance money by way of Loan as aforesaid in
regard of the present and pressing dangers, and necessities, The Lords and
Commons do declare, that at what time soever they shall consent to the passing
of any Bill of Tonnage and poundage, All such persons who shall not advance
moneys as aforesaid shall be charged to pay the duties of Tonnage and
Poundage, from the said first day ot July one thousand six hundred forty two,
during the Term of the said Bill in such manner as by the said Bill shall be
provided.

7 That to the intent that no officer belonging to any Customehouse within this
Kingdom, or the Dominion of wales, or other persons appointed to be
Commissioners for receiving of such moneys as shall be abvanced by Merchants as
aforesaid, be discouraged by reason of any Penalties mentioned in any former
Act of Tonnage and Poundage past this Parliament, for receiving of any duties
upon Merchandise not being granted by Parliament, Although the Lords and
Commons do conceive and hereby declare; That the receiving of the said Sums of
Money before mentioned is not within the true intention of the said Penalties,
the same being advanced voluntarily by way of Loan: as also in respect those
Acts, and the true intent of them, were principally to restrain the Crown
from imposing upon the people without their consent. Yet for the further
encouragement of such person or persons who shall receive any such Sums, They
do declare and promise: That whereas the said Bill of Tonnage and Poundage now
remaining with his Majesty or any other do pass for a Law, there shall be
provision made in such Bill for the indemnity and security of all such person
and persons in that behalf.

8. That whereas by a former Order of the Commons House of Parliament: the
officers appointed for that purpose have Order to take Bonds of all Merchants
for the payment of one per Cent. to be raised by virtue of the aforesaid Bill
for the releife of the Captives taken by Turkish or other pirates, or so much
thereof as shall be agreed on by the Lords and Commons in Parliament. It is now
ordered, That all such Merchants as shall not advance money by way of Loan as
aforesaid, shall at all times hereafter upon entry of their goods, make payment
of ready money for their said goods according to the Tenor of the said bill,
and likewise all such other sums of Money as by virtue of the said Bill are
due from the said Merchants, upon Bill or otherwise for goods by them formerly
entered, since the tenth day of December one thousand six hundred, forty and
one, by the true intent of which Act the one per Cent. to be paid and received,
is to be taken and received according to such Rates as were due and payable by
the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage which did last determine.

9. The Lords and Commons do ordain that the same Collectors or Commissioners
who have formerly received the several Duties upon Merchandise, upon the
several Bills of Tonnage and Poundage past this Parliament, shall be, and are
deputed to be Commissioners, who are enabled by this Ordinance to receive all
such sum or sums of Money, which shall at any time hereafter be voluntarily
advanced by way of Loan in such manner as they have formerly received, the
former duties of Tonnage and Poundage, which said Commissioners, their Deputy
or Deputies, or any one of them, shall have full power and authority to give
allowance by way of defalcation after the rate of fifteen per Cent. out of all
such moneys as shall be advanced, according to the true intent of this
Ordinance. All which moneys the said Commissioners their Deputy or Deputies
shall receive upon Account, and shall from time to time issue out the same, as
they the said Commissioners shall be authorized by Order of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, or of such other person or persons as they shall
nominate and appoint, to be employed for the uses herein before expressed.

10 For the more due Execution of the Premises, and that account be justly kept
and the Commissioners duly charged, the Customers and Comptrollers as well of
the City of London as the Out-ports are required once in every 28. days to
make a true account, of all such entries as have been made in the several
Ports respectively, and of the moneys payable by the said Entries, and are to
certify the said accounts monthly unto William Toames Esquire Surveyer
General in the Custom House of London, who is likewise required to make up a
perfect Account upon all the several Certificates, and to return in the same
unto the Commons House of Parliament, or to such Committee as shall be
thereunto authorized by them.

11. That for the better directions as well of the Merchants, what is to be
performed on their parts, as of several Officers of the Custom House in the
several Ports respectively. It is Ordained by the Lords and Commons now
assembled in Parliament, That a true Copy of the said Bill of Tonnage and
Poundage which has past both Houses, and now remaining with his Majesty, shall
be printed, and both it and the said Book of Rates published and sent as well
to the Officers of the Custom House in the City of London, as unto the
Officers of the Out-ports respectively.

Lastly, for the encouragement of Merchants Strangers trading in the Port of
Dover to continue their intercourse of Trade, and the importation of Bullion
and foreign Coin; It is ordered by the said Lords and Commons, that the
several Officers in that Port respectively shall and may from time to time
give unto all Merchants Strangers the like respect and allowance in their
Customs, as they have formerly done.

FINIS.

