A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
Die Mercurii 10. May, 1643.
WHereas by the Ordinance of Parliament for the speedy raising and levying of
Money, for the maintenance of the Army, raised by the Parliament, and other
great Affairs of the Commonwealth, by a weekly assessement. It is ordained
among other things, that the weekly sum of three hundred pounds, shall be
charged, rated, taxed and levied upon the Borough of Southwark, the Parishes of
Redrith, Newington-Butts, and Lambeth, as by the said Ordinance may appear;
which sum of three hundred pounds, since reduced to two hundred pounds. And
because in common account the liberty of the Clink, and the Bankside lying in
the Parish of S. Saviors, and the Parish of S. Mary Magdalens Bermondsey, in
the County of Surry, are reputed to be within the said Borrough and lie within
the limits of the places in the said former Ordinances specified, the same were
not in the said former Ordinance particularly named, and expressly set down,
whereby some doubt has bin made, whether the said liberties of the Clink, the
Bankeside, and the said Parish of S. Mary Magdalens are within the intent of
the said former Ordinance, which occasions the retarding of the assessing and
collecting of the said weekly assessements, to the prejudice of the public
affairs of the Commonwealth; The Lords and Commons do ordain and declare,
and be it ordained and declared by the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, That the said liberty of the Clink, and the Bankeside
aforesaid, and the said Parish of S. Mary Magdalens Bermondsey and every of
them, at the several times of the making of the said recited Ordinances were,
now are, and shall be reckoned and held to be within the intent and true
meaning of the said Ordinance; And that the said two hundred pounds weekly
assessement, shall be charged, rated, taxed and levied upon the said Borough of
Southwark, the Parishes of Redrith, Newington-Butts and Lambeth, and upon the
said liberties of the Clink and the Bankeside, and Parish of S. Mary Magdalens
Bermondsey, And that none of the said places or Parishes shall be exempt from
the same charge, but shall every of them be contributary thereunto as amply and
fully to all intents, constructions, and purposes, as if the same and every of
them had bin expressed and set down by name, in the said former Ordinance; Any
matter, thing, or cause whatsoever to the contrary thereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Die Martis 16. May; 1643.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, 1643.


