A DECLARATION OF the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Die Veneris, 13. October. 1648.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking into consideration the
manifold hazards and services great numbers of Officers employed in the
several Armies, have for their safety and defense of the Parliament and
Kingdom in these late Wars undergone and performed: And being very sensible
of their said services, and of the great Arreare of Pay due to them for the
same, have taken into their most serious debate many ways and means for
furture provision for them, according to what their other weighty affairs will
give leave; And being informed that many of the said Officers (invited thereto
by Persons ill affected to the Parliament and the Public affairs thereof)
upon hopes of an immediate receiving some considerable part (at least) of their
Arreares are repayring to the Parliament, and Cities of London and Westminster;
The said Lords and Commons do therefore Order and Declare, and it is hereby
Ordered and Declared, That all and every such Officers who have heretofore
served the Parliament as aforesaid, and expect payment of their said Arreares,
shall and do upon publication hereof, peaceably continue in the several
Counties and Places of their aboade, and that they and every of them do upon
no pretense whatsoever under penalty of losing their said Arreares, repair
unto the Parliament or Cities aforesaid, to the disturbance of both or either
of the Houses during the weighty considerations they are upon, as well for a
certain and speedy provision for the said Officers, as for the settling of the
public Peace of the Kingdom: The said Lords and Commons intending by the
blessing of God with all convenient speed to establish such a provision and
satisfaction for all the aforesaid Officers, as will witness to the world
their affections to and services for the Parliament in this great Cause are not
only well accepted of, but shall also in due time be recompensed with suitable
satisfaction to their very many and great deservings respectively.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this
Declaration be forthwith Printed, and sent to the Sheriffs to be published in
the several Counties.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London Printed for John Wright, at the King's Head in the Old-Bayley, 1648.


