A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, Concerning the
present lamentable, and miserable Condition of Ireland, the poor Protestants
in some places being forced to kill their Horses to satisfy their Hunger, and
very many others having perished by Famine.

With some sad and serious Motives propounded by both Houses, to all pious and
well affected Englishmen for their speedy Relief, a thing earnestly to be
intended considering what courses are now set on foot at Oxford, for bringing
those barbarous Rebels into this Kingdom.

Whereunto are added, The several Propositions made by the Committees of the
House of Commons, and the Committee of Adventurers chosen in London out of the
body of the Adventurers, and ratified by the House, for the more perfect
encouragement of all that wish well to the general cause of Religion, the
relieving of the Protestant brethren in Ireland, and the safety of this State
and Kingdom.

Die Lunae. 19 June. 1643.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration, with the Propositions and Votes shall be forthwith printed and
published.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON, Printed by George Miller, June 24. 1643.

Die Veneris 16. June 1643.
WE the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, being by several Letters
fully informed both from the Lords Justices, and Council of Dublin, and also
from other parts of the Kingdom of Ireland, of the extremely necessitous
condition of the whole Army and the test of the distres^ed Protestants of that
Kingdom, out of a compassionate sense of the miseries of their Brethren there,
and their tender care to prevent the extirpation of the Protestant Religion so
generally aimed at: have though fit to publish to the view of all piously
affected persons, the lamentable estate of that distres^ed Kingdom, which is
now by the unhappy influence of our distractions here, reduced to that
extremity that in most parts of the Army, our Soldiers want Bread for their
bellies, Clothes for their backs, and Shoes for their feet, to give them a
necessary subsistence; and in some parts they have been forced to kill their
Horses to satisfy their hunger, very many of the poor English in several
places having perished by famine.

Nevertheless it has pleased Almighty God, to imprint such special marks of
his unlimitted favors, upon the endeavors of our several Armies there, that
we have more then probable cause to hope, that if we shall cheerfully address
our selves to send them seasonable supplies, he will not yet permit the ruin
of our Religion and Countrymen in that kingdom. Which we are the more induc^d
to believe, since we are credibly informed, that the wants of our Adversaries
do in most parts equalize, in many far exceed ours, where they have been
forced to eat, not the flesh only but the very hides of their Horses to keep
them from starving, which have brought very many of them to such a condition of
weakness, that they appear rather like walking Anatomies then fighting me^,
so that we have no reason to suspect, but that our Armies there (if not
suffered first to starve) may by Gods blessing yet soon reduce that Kingdom.

Nor can it be unknown to any understanding and judicious observer, that
whatever be pretended by the Rebels, yet the true causes heightning them to
such a degree of barbarousnesse, are, the inveterate hatred they bear to the
true Religion, and their ambitious desires as is most evident by the several
Commissions from the Rebels, stiling themselves the supreme Counsel of the
confederate Catholics of Ireland, issued to men of War whom they maintained
at Sea to spoil the trade of this Kingdom, making themselves absolute and
independent on this Kingdom, and which is not a little fomented by all the
Popish party throughout Christendom, as appears by the large contributions
sent from all parts thither of Money, Arms, Ammunition and experienced
Commanders: And can it be that Gods enemies should be more violent, and
indefatigable for restoring Idolatry in a Kingdom foreign to theirs, then we
zealous in propugning Gods truth in our own against both barbarous Traitors
and monstrous Idolaters? shall the common incendiaries of both Kingdoms strip
themselves of all they have to accomplish our destruction, by devouring that
rich and fruitful Island; And shall the good people of this Nation, of the
same blood and Religion with them, think any thing too dear for redeeming
them, whom we ought to our powers to preserve; seeing hereby, we also secure
our own both Religion and Liberties, preventing the access of the Rebels from
thence by inabling our Army to continue there, which will consequently contain
them within that Kingdom, A thing earnestly to be intended, considering what
cour^es are set on foot at Oxford, for bringing them into this Kingdom:

Not to insist how much it imports all the Adventurers, Lenders and
Contributers, all Merchants and indeed the whole Nation to advance a
considerable sum to what they have applied unto that work for the now
completing thereof, Nor to be more particular in laying before the World, how
the King (seduced by evil Councels) does deny his concurrence to the Bill
lately sent him as a most necessary expedient for that work.

We have therefore thought fit to appoint a special Committee for that
purpose, and have resolved in the midst of our distractions here, (as a thing
wherein the welfare of our Religion, the honor our English Nation, and the
safety of this Kingdom is so nearly concerned) to contribute by all possible
means to the preservation of that Kingdom.

And although the great burdens which lie upon the subjects for maintenance of
the Armies, raised for the necessary defense of this kingdom, will not suffer
us to lay any present charge upon them, yet our tender care of Ireland is such,
that in pursuance of a vote of the House of Commons, an Ordinance is now ready
to pass, whereby a charge shall he set of two hundred thousand pounds upon
this Kingdom, to be assessed upon the several Counties, according to the
Proportion of the Bill of four hundred thousand pounds, and to be paid in two
years, by which time we hope the distractions of this Kingdom by Gods mercy
may be so settled, that the Subjects shall with ease and cheerfulness bear
this necessary burden, and by this means we conceive this future charge will
give present credit for the relief of the starving condition of Ireland, which
is intended to be laid upon this Kingdom, as an adventure for land in Ireland,
for the benefit of the several Counties proportionable to the sums that
shall be raised in the particular Counties to be employed to the ease of
their publi^^e charge. And do likewise earnestly recommend the care of that
work to all such as are really affected to our Religion, and the Cause we have
in hand, to advance Moneys for that use, either by way of adventure, loan, or
weekly Contribution in such manner as shall be agreed on by the Committee, and
approved by the Parliament, wherein both Houses of Parliament intend to show
that good example which they hope all others will follow.

For what may be advanced by way of adventure, it is already provided in a
late Ordinance of Parliament, that all new Adv^nturers shall receive the same
Advantages granted to the form^r in the Act of Parliament for the Adven^urers
of Ireland, and in the same Ordinance provision is made for the security of all
such as shall voluntarily lend to so pious a Work; All which Moneys now
proposed to be advanced, shall only have their aspect forwards (without
consideration of former ar^ea^s) and be disposed of with all possible c^re to
the best advantage of this present Summers service: And for what has been
formerly raised to that purpose, it shall most evidently ap^ea^e to all the
World, that it has been with a great overplus disposed of for the use of
Ireland, And that all aspersions of that nature cast upon the Parliament have
been but the malicious pretenses of disaffected persons, to excuse their own
backwardness, and dishearten such as desire to prevent the ruin of our
Religion, which we hope by our cordial and seasonable endeavors may speedily
be prevented, and this War soon brought to a happy conclusion, And herein
the concurrence of most of the Officers of that Kingdom administers great
encouragement, who are desirous (so well they affect that work) to underwrite
the one half of their Arreares due by way of Adventure for Land, and also take
the one half of what shall grow due and is to come, likewise on the Condition
of the Subscribers at the reducing of that Kingdom, desiring only to subsist
until the work be finished.

We have so just reason upon these many and convincing grounds to be sensible
of the extraordinary Care and pious Intentions of the well affected Party in
this Kingdom, as we must not or cannot doubt of their ready Zeal in the
setting forward of so Pious, so Charitable a work, wherein the Religion we
profess, lies at the stake: and the lives of so many thousand of our poor
Protestant brethren are in apparent danger, unless by present relief their
approaching ruin be timely prevented, nor can we well expect that God will
long bless us, if we be wanting to our brethren, whose preservation is so
immediately linked to our own safety, that we have much cause to suspect this
Kingdom is much endangered, when we have once absolutely lost that of Ireland.

For such is the malice of the Rebels to our Nation, that if they once root us
out of that Kingdom, they will not despair by themselves and their
Confederates wholly to extirpate both us and our Religion out of the Christian
World.

For remedy whereof in so much as the general ways observed on the last Act
of Contribution has not procured such means of relief as are necessaty,
(though diverse both Persons and Parishes have been very bountiful) several of
that Kingdom with others are therefore directed to solicit the business by
such particular applications as may be hoped (in a wor^e so earnestly crying
for relief) will beget competent supplies for giving that Kingdom a being,
and in all likelihood preserving this from final undoing, which as it must be
acknowledged to the already Contributers, so is and shall be esteemed by those
who hereafter put hand to the work as a most acceptable service to this and
that Kingdom.

These things considered, we desire that all well affected people would
heartily apply themselves to prevent such mischief by cheerful contributing
to so Pious a work, which will be an Act in the esteem of all the world very
commendable and extremely acceptable to God and all good men.

Die Lunae, 19o. Junij, 1643.
THe Committee appointed by the House, the 29th of May, 1643. for the better
expediting the Affairs of Ireland, together with the Committee of the
Adventurers in London newly elected, or any eight of them, shall have power to
call to their Assistance such other persons as they shall think fit, And the
said Committee of Adventurers, shall have equal power to Vote with the
Committee of the House of Commons in all matters concerning the managing of the
Moneys now to be raised for Ireland by way of Adventure or otherwise; And this
Committee shall have likewise power to appoint Treasurers to peruse the
Accounts of such as have been formerly employed, to be ready for the view of
the House, to reward such as they must necessarily employ in this service, and
to issue out any of these Moneys now to be raised for the affairs of Ireland
by Order from this Committee, and to manage all matters for the good of the
future service according as they shall find most expedient, being still to give
an account to the House of their Proceedings as often as shall be required.

Die Lunae, 19o. Iunij, 1643.
Resolved upon the Question, THat this House does declare, that they will in a
short time send over a Commander in Chief into Ireland, such as this Kingdom
shall have good cause to confide in.

Resolved upon the Question, THat this House does think it fit to send over
Committees into the several Provinces of Ireland, whereof one in each to be of
the House of Commons, and one chosen by the Adventurers, from whom they may
expect such continual Intelligence of the conditions of each Province, that
they may make their Provisions accordingly.

Die Lunae, 19o. Iunij, 1643.
Propounded from the Committee* THat an Ordinance may be brought in for the
Adventurers, who shall now deposite a fourth part of what formerly is
subscribed and paid, that they shall have so many Acres of Land added to what
is allotted by the former Act of Parliament, as shall make their former
proportian of Acres double to what is granted by the Act, as also for what
they shall now pay upon the Ordinance, with all Privileges as formerly. And
whosoever shall subscribe De novo, shall have the like double proportion of
Land for his new subscription.

THe Adventures to be set in such Province as they shall clouse.

THat such as desire to Plant together, may be permitted so to do, they
declaring the same at their new subscriptions, or within ^Moneth.

THat the House declares an Act or Acts of Parliament shall be prepared in due
time, to pass both in England and Ireland for confirming whatsoever now
passes by Ordinance.

Resolved, etc. THat this House does agree, that an Ordinance be prepared and
drawn in pursuance of these Propositions.

H. Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Lunae 19o. Iunij, 1643.
FOr as much as many both Adventurers for Land in Ireland and others, are
willing to apply themselves by all good means for bringing that great good
work to some perfection, well knowing, what consequence the loss of that
Kingdom will be to this, both in relation to the security and firm peace of
the State, and also in respect of the Cause of Religion, which must be deeply
wounded in case that Kingdom should become wholly Popish. And for as much as
the Subscriptions upon the several Acts of Parliament do not engage a third
part of the Land designed to be applied to that work by those Acts, and that
the time limited for underwriting by those Acts is elapsed; We being desirous
to make up what was wanting in the former Subscriptious, in some proportion to
our Abilities, do humbly offer, That both Houses of Parliament will give such
encouragement as may induce those who are Merchants, and live on Trades, to
adventure Considerable Sums, by passing an Ordinance in these following or
the like particulars.

That so much of the City and Suburbs of Limbricke as is Escheated with the
Island of Enishcattery, and the fishings of the River, with other immunities
belonging to the City, and Twenty four Thousand Acres of Confiscated
Profitable Land next contiguous to that City may be secured to the Adventurers
who shall now underwrite, the said City and Land being made over to them and
their heirs, etc. in free and common soccage as of his Majesty's Castle of
Dublin, with such Immunities as are granted to the City of Bristoll, and such
other Privileges as be contained in the Acts of Parliament for Subscriptions
on Lands in Ireland; Provided the several Sums to be underwritten do amount
in the Total unto Sitty Thousand Pounds, there being reserved to his Majesty
for the same, the Yearly rent of one Thousand two Hundred and Fifty Pounds per
Annum.

That the Town of Galloway in Connaught* with Twenty Thousand Acres of Land
and Immunities as abovesaid shall be secured unto such as adventure for that
City and Land, provided, That the total of the subscriptions amount unto Fifty
Thousand Pounds, his Majesty's Rent one Thousand and Forty pounds.

That the City of Waterford in Munster, with thirty Thousand* Acres of Land and
Immunities as aforesaid, shall be secured to such as adventure for that City
and Land, Provided the total of their Subscriptions amounts unto Sixty
Thousand Pounds, the Rent to his Majesty per Annum, one Thousand two Hundred
and Fifty Pounds.

That the Town of Wexford with twelve Thousand Acres of Land and Immunities as
aforesaid, shall be secured to such as adventure for that Town and Land*
Provided the total of their Subscriptions, amount unto Fifteen Thousand
Pounds, the Rent to his Majesty per Annum, three Hundred and twelve Pounds
eight Shillings eight Pence.

And seeing the course of passing Bills is so much obstructed, that the
Kingdom of Ireland will be lost if some effectual and speedy course be not
taken, The Adventurers desire to be secured, that such Conditions as shall be
now past by Ordinance, shall be turned into an Act or Acts of Parliament for
their more fit and unquestionable security* which they humbly conceive will
much further the work.

That those who have or shall underwrite any considerable Sum upon the said
Propositions for Cities, and have formerly adventured, or shall underwrite for
Lands in the Kingdom at large, shall be accomodated to have his Lands set out
as near unto those Cities (for which he shall subscribe) as may be.

And in case the respective Sums whereat the said Cities Towns and said
Lands adjacent are valued be not wholly underwritten* yet the underwriters shall
have so much in proportion out of those Cities, Towns and Lands adjacent as
their adventure shall amount unto, to be set forth by indifferent Commissioners
to be Named by both Houses.

THe House does allow of these Propositions, And it is Ordered that the House
will apply their Authority for making good of the same.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

THe Propositions aforementioned being now agreed unto, These are further to
signify, that the following Title is prefixed to several Books for the
several Companies, whereunto all that are so disposed, are desired this day to
repair, and such as are at present in this Assembly this 24th. of June, 1643.
are desired to resort to their several Companies, where the same Books are now
remaining* Such others as be not of any Companies of London, and whose hearts
God inclines to Contribute in this Pious work, are entreated to resort unto
Grocers-Hall, where Books are also remaining, and Treasurers appointed, as in
the foregoing Declaration appears.

June 14. 164^.
Whereas the Honorable House of Commons have fully condiscended to the
Propositions made by the joint Committee of Adventurers, as by an Order of the
19th. of June 1643. does appear, That so good a work may not suffer through
the want of necessary supply, which is now hoped may be soon brought to a very
good condition; We whose Names are under written, do hereby oblige our selves
to the payment of the sums to our Names affixed at Grocers-Hall unto M. James
Bunce, M. Thomas Foot, M. John Kenderick Alder-men, and M. Sam: Avery Esquire
Treasurers, appointed for that service, whose acquittance, or any two of them
shall be sufficient to entitle the said Subscribers to such Adventure unto
which they shall subscribe, and be a discharge for such other paiments as shall
be brought in upon the other Propositions; the several paiments to be made as
follows. viz. One third within Ten Days, another third within one Month
after, and the last third within two Months after that; So as all our
Adventure is to be fully paid in within three Months after our said
Subscription; And we whose Names are underwritten, will make our Election to
which of the Propositions we will apply our Adventure, at the time of our said
first payment.

FINIS.

