A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the speedy
setting forth of a Fleet of Ships to Sea, for the Defense of the Kingdom.
Die Lunae, 13. Martii, 1642.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, foreseeing the great
inconveniences, Distractions, and Troubles, that must of necessity befall these
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, by the Approaching of Foraigne Forces now in
preparation, against the well affected Subjects of both the said Kingdoms, and
that the woeful effects thereof do begin to appear by the Narrow Seas being
already infested, not only by Sea Rovers, by Commissions from the Rebels in
Ireland, but also by Pirates of our own Nation, lately come forth of Falmouth in
English bottomes, to destroy their own Countrymen, and in all probability to
Join with our Foraine Enemies, and so hinder all the good endeavors of the
Parliament for relief of distressed Ireland, and interrupt all Trade and
Commerce in these Seas.

Wherefore the said Lords and Commons for the prevention of these great
mischiefs, do once more Declare and Ordeine, That the Fleet now in
Preparation to go forth, and al things thereunto conducing, may hasten to Sea
with all possible Expedition; And that for the better encouragement of the
Officers, and Seamen, who shall be employed in the said Fleet, there shall be
allowed unto those in the Kings Ships besides their pay, one full third part of
all Prizes that they shall take in this their employment, the other two thirds
to be reserved to the State; and to those in the Merchants Ships, one full
third part for the Officers and Seamen, and another third part to the Owners,
in respect of their hazarding their Ships, and the other third part reserved to
the State as aforesaid, which divisions are to be according to the Custom of
Men of War.

Die Lunae, 13. Martii, 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration shall be forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

March 14. Printed at London for John Wright in the Old-bailey. 1642.


