Die Iovis, 2 September, 1647,
A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking into their serious
consideration the great inconvenience and danger which daily does, or may
accrue by the resort of diverse Persons to the doors of both Houses, under
pretense of Arreares to them due, the greatest part of them being persons evil
affected to the Parliament and Kingdom; and their coming thither being for
the most part (though under other pretense) to disturb them in their
proceedings; and likewise remembering the effectual course by them taken by
their late instructions, bearing date the 28. of May last, for the determining
of all Accounts, so that there can be no color of any such resort as
aforesaid, except it be of such who are unwilling the truth of their Accounts
should appear, Do hereby Order and Declare, That henceforth no person or
persons shall presume to resort thither under any such pretense, both Houses
having formerly Ordered, That the Committee for the Accounts of the whole
Kingdom, or other Committees authorized for that purpose, shall present Rolls
of such Accounts so determined to both Houses, and not otherways, where those
persons concerned therein shall receive such further assurance and satisfaction
as both Houses shall find to be just. And in case after the publication hereof
any person shall presume contrary to this Declaration, the Guards attending on
either or both Houses, are hereby required to seize upon them, and keep them
in safe Custody; and if upon examination by the Committee of Complaints it be
found that there is any Arreare due to any such person, every such sum of
money shall be, and is forfeit for his or their contempt, and such further
punishment upon others as both Houses shall appoint.

ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Declaration be
forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily. 1647.


