A DECLARATION CONCERNING The present Treaty of Peace, between his Majesty and
both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

Containing the several Reasons, why the well-affected Subjects of this
Kingdom ought to embrace either Peace, or War, His Majesty assenting, or
dissenting the present Propositions, propounded by the High Court OF PARLJAMENT.

LONDON Printed for J. H. and Hen. Hutton, 1643.

A Declaration concerning the presene Treaty of Peace, between His Majesty,
and both Houses of Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, (having taken into serious
consideration, the manifold distempers of this Kingdom, occasioned by a
malignant party, too prevalent with his Majesty, by which means this Kingdom
is at this time engaged in a civil, and destructive war, through many
difficulties have endeavored all possible means to give a period to these
calamities which lie, and daily increase upon this Nation, especially to close
the divisions that have happened between his Majesty and both Houses of
Parliament, for which end they have concluded of a Treaty, and sent such
Propositions to his Majesty, as are both full of honor and security to his
Majesty, and his Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Yet notwithstanding all the endeavors of that high (...) honorable Council,
so mallicious and envious are many men in this Kingdom, both about his
Majesty, and in this City, that they labor rather to increase these
divisions, then to cure those desperate wounds which their former malignancy
has made in this distracted and distepered Kingdom, they cease not, but add
more fuel to that fire which flames to high already, for by their scandalous
reports they daily stigmatize and brand that honorable Assembly with false and
libellous reproaches, terming them factious, seditious, peace-breakers, with
many other contumelious base slanders, when it is apparent, that the said
reports are raised by persons of mean condition, and evil affected to the
Religion and peace of the Kingdom, for all wise men know and all honest men
must of necssity confess, that the high Court of Parliament has, and does
lahour earnestly to settle a religious Peace in these his Majesty's Realms,
and Dominions.

By these delusive practizes they make the world believe that they are the
only desirers of peace,, when indeed they rather desire a continuance of the
Wars, they having no other means to defend and maintain that cause, which
they favor, (namely) Popery, and Prerogative.

Therefore that their practizes may be made apparent, and that the world may
discern whether they desire a true and religious peace, or whether for some
sinister end to themselves, they counterfit, and under that notion, gain power
to perfect their destructive designs, here is set down the several reasons
why we ought to desire peace, or embrace War, contained in this following
discourse.

The Reasons to induce us to desire Peace.
1. In respect of God. 2. In respect of our selves, 3. in respect of Ireland,
1. In respect of God, that the Lord of Hosts may be Slorified thereby for it
must be a religious peace that must propagate the Gospel, and cause Religion
to flourish and increase in this Kingdom, and not a civil and destructive
War.

That this is apparent, we may behold a pleading and bleeding president in
Ireland, a Kingdom that not many years ago was inhabited by creatures that
scarce knew that there was a God, having no other instructers, then natural
instinct, yet that place being settled in Peace, it was become a fruitful
plantation, being inhabited by protestant proffessors, to the Glory of God, and
admiration of Foreign Nations, but on the contrary, look upon it now,
involved in blood, overrun with that rebellious Rout of blood-thirsty Papists,
who have the same Designs on foot here in this Kingdom to further our
destruction, and root out and utterly extirpate the Protestant profession out
of these his Majesty's Dominions, there you may behold how some few Months War
has ruined and destroyed the fruits of above twenty years Peace, so that now
it is become an habitation for Wolves and Tigers, and the Temples of God,
defiled with Idolatrous Images.

Therefore this may serve as one especial reason why this Kingdom ought to
seek peace, it being for the glory of God, and propagation of the Gospel;
therefore I wish all men would take up the saying of Christ, Mat. 5.9. Blessed
are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Sons of God.

2 In respect of our selves. That every man whose personal subsistence depends
on his artificial practice, has cause to embrace peace, I need not declare:
for the remembrance of what they enjoyed by peace formerly, and the sense of
what they suffer by this present war is an effectual motive to induce them to
desire the same.

3 In respect of Ireland, because without a speedy peace that Kingdom is
irrecoverably lost, and made a prey to those bloody and insulting tyrants, and
being lost, then we lie open to the bloody practices of the same power which
has so great a party in that Kingdom, then we have small hope to resist,
being already divided amongst our selves.

These considerations (doubtless) have been the motives of this present
Treaty, there being no desire, I presume, in any Member of that honorable
Assembly inclining to war, if upon honorable terms our Religion, lives, laws
and liberties may be secured.

But on the contrary part, if the Propositions propounded by the Parliament
should not take effect, then the Commons ought rather to embrace war, and
that for these reasons.

1 In respect of religion, that being Gods cause. 2 In respect of the Laws,
that being the Kings cause. 3 In respect of the Parliament, that being the
subjects cause. 4 In respect of the unjustnesse of our enemies cause, being an
unbounded Prerogative, and an Antichristian religion (the only aim of the
Papists the chief incendiaries in these unnatural wars) grounded upon flattery
and ceremony, contrary to Gods Word, and the laws of the Kingdom.
1 In respect of religion. That we had many innovations crept into the Church,
I think the greatest Hierarchist will not deny, and that the beginning to purge
the Church of those innovations, was the first step to this division, cannot be
denied. Now that a Nation ought to take up arms to oppose those that shall not
only bring in such innovations and idolatrous worship into the Church, but
also raise forces to abet and maintain the same, is apparent: for that land or
people that shall suffer idolatry to remain in it, is threatened to be
destroyed, Jer. 44.21. and how should a nation have power to purge their land
of idolaters and idolatry, but by rising with one heart and one mind, like the
Tribes of Israel against the Benjamites, to punish those that have committed
iniquity in our Israel.

2 In respect of the Laws, that being the Kings cause: That the Laws are the
authority of the King (I presume none will question) and if so, then
consequently those men that shall labor to destroy the power and authority of
the Law, do as much as in them lies to destroy the authority of the King, since
the Kings Authority is derived from the Law, and not the Law from the King
alone. Now that they endeavor to destroy the Law of this Land is apparent, in
their practices to dissolve this Parliament, contrary to all Law, when the King
himself has confirmed this Parlitment by a known law: in doing whereof they
endeavor to destroy his Majesty's power, and make his word of no effect.
Therefore for this cause all those that are true subjects to their King, are
bound in this point to take up arms for the defense of the Laws, in which
consists His Majesty's honor and Regal Authority.

3 In respect of the Parliament, that being the subjects cause. That in the
continuance of Parliaments consists the benefit of the subject, is apparent by
the many pressures that were thrown upon them in the intervals of Parliaments,
when the Laws were abused, and the subjects oppressed by those persons which
should have preserved them from oppression, is manifested by these late years
experience, and that by the wisdom of this Palliament those things have been
redressed for the present, and those oppressors for ever disabled of the like
practices, except they can compass their ends by this war, therefore we are
bound in respect of our own security to ioyn with the Parliament in the defense
of this cause, which tends only to the future security and liberty of the
subject.

Lastly, in respect of our enemies cause, an unbounded Prerogative, and an
idolatrous Religion, grounded upon flattery and ceremony. That Prerogative is
prejudicial to the subject, let France be your example, and that Ceremony
contrary to Law and Religion, is a rag of Rome, look into Luthers Works, where
he shows the reasons of his falling off from the Sea of Rome, and then no
doubt the greatest Royallist will cry down Prerogative, and the moderatest
Conformist will shun their Ceremonies, and prove a Reformist, and join with
the high Court of Parliament in the maintenance of a cause so acceptable to
God, so serviceable to the King, and so beneficiiall to the Commonwealth.

FINIS.

