A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
Die Lunae 8. September. 1645.
WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, are informed that by
the subtle and malicious practices of a Popish and malignant party, opposite
to Gods Cause and the prosperity of this Kingdom, it has been insinuated and
infused into sundry of the Inhabitants of His Majesty's Dominions of Wales, to
dis-affect and poison them against the proceedings of the Parliament, That it
was their intention to gratify our Brethren of Scotland for their assistance
in these our extremities drawn upon us by the said Popish and malignant party
with the Estates and Lands of the said Inhabitants, which is so absolutely
false that it never entered into their thoughts, and consequently needed no
refutation: Yet that the Subjects of this Kingdom, inhabiting within the said
Dominion of Wales, may receive full and befiting satisfaction, and We and our
Brethren of Scotland Vindication against so foul and so barbarous an
Aspersion, the said Lords and Commons do testify and declare to all persons
whatsoever to whom these shall come, That they do much abhor and detest an Act
of such Injustice and Inhumanity, and that they are so far from doing any
such thing, that if any of the said Inhabitants upon due sense and sorrow for
any of their Crimes and Misdemeanors committed against the present Parliament,
shall submit and apply themselves by humble Petition to the Parliament, and
desire the favor of; and reconciliation to the same, the said Lords and
Commons will be thereupon ready to receive any and all such upon such
reasonable terms as the wisdom of the Parliament shall think in some measure
proportionable to the qualities and degrees of their several Offenses, and
thereupon yield them all such aid and assistance as they shall reasonably
desire, and the Parliament be able to afford. Provided always that this shall
not extend to any that are excepted from Pardon within the Propositions lately
presented to His Majesty for a safe and well grounded Peace.

Ioh Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the old Bayley. 9.
September. 1645.


