The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
AND COMMONS In Parliament Assembled, Presented to HIS MAJESTY On the Twenty
fourth of February, 1695.

AND His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS ANSWER THEREUNTO.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.

Die Martis 25. Feb. 1695.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Address of both Houses, Presented to His Majestly Yesterday, and His
Majesty's most Gracious Answer thereunto, shall be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
Die Lunae 24. Feb. 1695.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, Having taken into
our Serious Consideration what Your Majesty has been Pleased to Communicate to
us this Day, think it our Duty, in the First Place, to give Your Majesty most
humble Thanks, for having Acquainted Your Parliament with the great Danger Your
Sacred Person has been so nearly Exposed to, and the Design of an Invasion
from our Enemies Abroad; We heartily Congratulate Your Majesty's Happy
Preservation, and Thankfully Acknowledge the Signal Providence of God in it;
and at the same time Declare our Detestation and Abhorrence of so Vilanous and
Barbarous a Design. And since the Safety and Welfare of Your Majesty's
Dominions do so Entirely Depend upon Your Life, we most humbly Beseech Your
Majesty to take more than ordinary Care of Your Royal Person, And we take this
Occasion to Assure Your Majesty of our utmost Assistance to Defend Your Person
and Support Your Government, against the late King James, and all other Your
Enemies both at Home and Abroad; hereby Declaring to all the World, That in
Case Your Majesty shall come to any Violent Death (which God forbid) we will
Revenge the same upon all Your Enemies and their Adherents; And as an Instance
of our Zeal for Your Majesty's Service, we will give all possible Dispatch to
the Public Business; And we make it our Desire to Your Majesty, to Sieze and
Secure all Persons, Horses and Arms, that Your Majesty may think fit to
Apprehend upon this Occasion.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Address of both Houses to this
Effect:
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Thank you heartily for this kind Address; on My Part you may be Assured that
I will do all that is within My Power for the Preservation of this Kingdom, to
which I have so many Obligations; I will readily Venture my Life for Preserving
it, and Recommend My Self to the Continuance of your Loyalty and Good
Affections.

FINIS.

