THE DECLARATION OF THE LORDS AND Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England, to the Subjects of Scotland.

WITH HIS MAJESTY'S Message to the Lords of His Privy Counsel of SCOTLAND,
upon that occasion.

Charles R.

Our express pleasure is, That this Our Declaration be Published in all
Churches and Chapels within Our Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, by
the Parsons, Vicars or Curates of the same.



Printed, by His MAJESTY'S Command, AT OXFORD, By LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to
the University. 1642.

The Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of
England to the Subjects of Scotland, etc.
WE the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, considering
with what Wisdom and public Affection, our Brethren of the Kingdom of
Scotland did coneurre with the endeavors of this Parliament, and the desires
of the whole Kingdom, in procuring and establishing a firm peace and amity
between the two Nations; and how lovingly they have since invited us to a
nearer and higher degree of union, in matters concerning Religion and Church
government, which we have most willingly and affectionatly embraced and intend
to pursue; Cannot doubt but they will with as much forwardness and affection
concur with us in settling peace in this Kingdom, and preserving it in their
own; that so we may mutually reap the benefit of that amity and alliance, so
happily made and strongly confirmed betwixt the two Nations. Wherefore as we
did about a year since, in the first appearance of trouble then beginning
amongst them actually declare, That in our sense and apprehension of the
National alliance betwixt us, we were thereby bound to apply the authority of
Parliament, and power of this Kingdom to the preservation and maintenance of
their peace. And seeing now that the troubles of this Kingdom are grown to a
greater height, and the subtle practice of the Common Enemy of the Religion
and Liberty of both Nations, do appear with more Evidence, strength, and
danger then they did at that time, we hold it necessary to declare that in our
judgment the same obligation lies upon our Brethren by the aforementioned
Act, with the power and force of that Kingdom to assist us in repressing those
amongst us, who are now in arms, and make war not only without consent of
Parliament, but even against the Parliament, and for the destruction thereof.

Wherefore we have thought good to make known to our Brethren, that His Majesty
has given Commission, to diverse eminent and known Papists, to raise forces,
and to compose an Army in the North, and other parts of this Kingdom, which is
to join with diverse foreign forces intended to be transported from beyond
the Seas, for the destruction of this Parliament, and of the Religion and
liberty of the Kingdom: And that the Prelaticall part of the Clergy and their
adherents have likewise incited His Majesty to raise another Army, which in His
own Person he does conduct against the Parliament, and the City of London,
Plundring and Robbing sundry well-affected Towns within their power. And that
in prosecution of their malice, they are so presumptious and predominant of His
Majesty's resolutions, that they forbear not those outrages in places, to which
His Majesty has given his Royal word and Protection. A great cause and
incentive of which malice, proceeds from the design they have to hinder the
Reformation of Ecclesiastical government in this Kingdom, so much longed for
by all the true lovers of the Protestant Religion. And hereupon we further
desire our Brethren of the Nation of Scotland, to raise such forces as they
shall Judge sufficient for the securing the peace of their own borders, against
the ill-affected persons there, as likewise to assist us in suppressing the
Army of Papists and Forreiners, which, as we expect, will shortly be on foot
here, and if they be not timely prevented may prove as mischievous and
distructive to that Kingdom, as to our selves.

And though we seek nothing from His Majesty that may diminish His just
Authority or Honor, and have by many humble Petitions endeavored to put an
end to this unnatural War and Combustion in the Kingdom; and to procure His
Majesty's Protection and Security for our Religion, Liberty and Persons,
(according to that great trust which His Majesty is bound to by the Laws of
the Land;) and shall still continue to renew our Petitions in that kind. Yet to
our great grief we see the Papisticall, and malignant Counsel, so prevalent
with His Majesty, and His Person so engaged to their power, that we have
little hope of better success of our Petitions then we formerly had, and are
thereby necessitated to stand upon our just defense; and to seek the speedy
and powerful assistance of our Brethren of Scotland, according to that Act
agreed upon in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, the common duty of
Christianity, and the particular interests of their own Kingdom.

To which we hope God will give such a blessing, that it may produce the
preservation of Religion, the Honor, Safety and peace of His Majesty and all
His Subjects; and a more strict conjunction of the Counsels, designs and
endeavors of both Nations, for the comfort and releife of the Reformed
Churches beyond Sea.

7. November. 1642. Hen. Elsing, Cl: Parl: D. Com. John Brown, Cler: Parliam.


His Majesty's Message to the Lords of His Privy Counsel of Scotland, upon the
aforesaid Occasion.
RIght Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cosens and Counselors, and Right Trusty
and Welbeloved Counselors, We greet you well. We have lately seen a Paper
presented to Us by the Earl of Lynsey, as a Declaration of the Lords and
Commons assembled in the Parliament of England, of the 7. of November, to Our
Subjects of Our Kingdom of Scotland; which, after many high taxes of Us and Our
Government, very earnestly invites, and in a manner challenges Assistance, from
that Our native Kingdom, of Men and Arms for making a War against Us,
making a claim to that Assistance, by virtue of the late Act of Pacification,
to the which (out of Our desire to make a perpetual union between Our two
Kingdoms, for the happiness of both, and by it the more firmly to establish
Our own greatness and just power,) We cheerfully consented.

As We are at Our soul afflicted, that it has been in the Power of any
factious, ambitious, and malicious Persons, so far to possess the hearts of
many of Our Subjects of England, as to raise this miserable Distemper and
Distraction in this Kingdom, against all Our real Actions and Endeavors to
the contrary; so We are glad, that this rage and fury has so far transported
them, that they apply themselves in so gross a manner to Our Subjects of
Scotland, whose experience of Our Religion, Justice, and Love of Our People
will not suffer them to believe those horrid Scandalls laid upon Us; and their
Affection, Loyalty, and Jealousy of Our Honor, will disdain to be made
Instruments to oppress their Native Sovereign, by assisting an odious
Rebellion.

We have from time to time acquainted Our Subjects of that Kingdom with the
Accidents and Circumstances which have disquieted this: how (after all the acts
of Justice, Grace, and Favor performed on Our part, which were, or could be
desired to make a people completely happy,) We were driven by the force and
violence of rude, and tumultuous Assemblies, from Our City of London, and Our
two Houses of Parliament. How attempts have been made to impose Laws upon Our
Subjects without Our Consent, contrary to the Foundation, and Constitution of
this Kingdom. How Our Forts, Goods, and Navy were seized and taken from Us by
force, and employed against Us: Our Revenue and ordinary subsistence wrested
from Us. How We have been pursued with scandalous, and reproachful language;
bold, false, and seditious Pasquills, and Libells publicly allowed against
Us; and been told that We might, without want of modesty and Duty, be Deposed.
Now after all this (before any force raised by Us) an Army was raised, and a
General appointed to lead that Army against Us, with a Commission to Kill,
Slay, and destroy all such who should be faithful to Us. That when We had been
by these means compelled with the assistance of Our good Subjects, to raise an
Army for Our necessary defense, We sent diverse gracious Messages, earnestly
desiring that the Calamities and Miseries of a Civil War might be prevented
by a Treaty, and so We might know the grounds of this misunderstanding. How We
were absolutely refused to be treated with: and how at last the Army (raised,
as was pretended, for the defense of Our Person) was brought into the Field
against Us, gave Us Battle, and (though it pleased God to give Us the
Victory) destroyed many of Our good Subjects, with as imminent danger to Our
own Person and Our Children, as the skill and malice of desperate Rebels could
contrive: of all which and the other Indignities which have been offered Us, We
doubt not the Duty and Affection of Our Scottish Subjects will have so just a
resentment, that they will express to the world the sense they have of Our
sufferings. And Our good Subjects of Scotland are not, We hope, so great
Strangers to the Affairs of this Kingdom, to believe that this Misfortune and
Distraction is begot and brought upon Us by Our two Houses of Parliament:
(though in truth no unwarrantable Action against the Law can be justified even
by that Authority.) They well know how the Members of both Houses have been
driven thence, insomuch that of above five hundred Members of the House of
Commons, there are not now there above eighty, and of above one hundred of the
House of Peers, not above fifteen or sixteen. All which are so awed by the
multitude of Anabaptists, Brownists, and other Persons, desperate and decayed
in their Fortunes, in and about the City of London, that in truth their
Consultations have not the freedom and Privilege which belong to Parliaments.

Concerning any Commissions granted by Us to Papists to raise Forces, We must
refer Our good Subjects to a Declaration lately set forth by Us upon the
occasion of that Scandal, which We send together with this: and for Our own
true and zealous Affection to the Protestant Religion, (the Advancement whereof
Our Soul desires) We can give no other Instances, then Our constant practice,
on which malice it self can lay no blemish; and those many Protestations We
have made in the sight of Almighty God, to whom We know We shall be deerly
accomptable, if We fail in the observation.

For that scandalous Imputation of Our Intention of bringing in Foreign
Forces, as the same is raised without the least color or shadow of reason, and
solemnly disavowed by Us in many of Our Declarations; so there cannot be a
cleerer Argument to Our Subjects of Scotland that We have no such thought, then
that We have hitherto foreborne to require the Assistance of that Our native
Kingdom, from whose Obedience, Duty, and Affection We should confidently
expect it, if We thought Our own Strength here too weak to preserve Us, and of
whose Courage, and Loyalty We shall look to make use, before We shall think of
any Foreign Aid to succor Us. And We know no reasonable or understanding
man can suppose Our good Subjects of Scotland are obliged, or enabled by the
late Act of Parliament in both Kingdoms, to obey the Invitation which is made
to them by this pretended Declaration; when it is so evidently provided for by
that Act, That as the Kingdom of England shall not make War against the
Kingdom of Scotland, without consent of the Parliament of England, so the
Kingdom of Scotland shall not make War against the Kingdom of England,
without the Consent of the Parliament of Scotland: and when they have always
declared themselves so careful of Our Honor, Safety, and just Rights, which
now undergo so great violation.

This We have thought fit to say upon occasion of this late Declaration, and
do commend it to you the Lords of Our Privy Counsel of Our Kingdom of
Scotland, to be communicated and published to all Our loving Subjects there;
and if the grave Counsel and Advice, which you derived hither by your Act of
the 22th of April last, had been followed here, in a tender Care of Our Royal
Person, and of Our Princely Greatness and Authority, then would not this face
of Confusion have appeared, which now threatens this Kingdom: And therefore We
require you to use your utmost Endeavors to inform Our Subjects of that Our
Kingdom, of the truth of Our Condition, and that you luffer not the Scandalls
and Imputations laid on Us, by the malice and Treason of some men, to make any
Impression in the minds of Our People, to the lessening or corrupting their
Affection and Loyalty to Us; but that you assure them the hardness We now
undergo, and the Arms We have been compelled to take up, are for the defense
of Our Person, and Safety of Our Life, for the maintenance of the true
Protestant Religion, for the preservation of the Laws, Liberties, and
Constitution of this Kingdom, and for the just Privileges of Parliament: and
We look no longer for the blessing of Heaven, then We endeavor the defense
and Advancement of all these: and We doubt not a dutiful Concurrence in Our
Subjects of Scotland, in the care of Our Honor and just Rights, will draw
down a blessing upon that Nation too.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, the sixth day of December. 1642.

