DIRECTIONS OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. After advice had
with the Assembly of Divines, for the electing and choosing of RULING-ELDERS in
all the Congregations, and in the Classical Assemblies for the Cities of
London and Westminster, and the several Counties of the Kingdom: For the
speedy settling of the Presbyteriall-Government.

Die Martis 19 August. 1645.
ORdered by the LORDS Assembled in Parliament, That these Directions for
electing of Elders in particular Congregations, and Classical Assemblies, be
forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1645.

Die Martis, 19 Augusti. 1645. DIRECTIONS FOR TNE Election of Elders.
1 THat the Ruling Elders of a Parochial and congregationall Eldership shall
be chosen by the several Ministers, and members of their Congregation
respectively, being such as have taken the National Covenant, and are not
persons under age, nor servants that have no families.

2. That notice of such election, and of the day when it shall be given by the
Minister in the public assembly the next Lords day but one before, and on
that said Lords day a Sermon be preached preparatory to that weighty business.

3. That no man be chosen for a Ruling-Elder but only for one Congregation,
and that in the place where his most settled dwelling and employment does lie.

4. That it shall be lawful for the Congregation respectively, or any other
persons to exhibit exceptions against any person elected as aforesaid,
touching the right of his election, or touching matter of ignorance, or
scandal, hereafter mentioned, within fourteen days next after the said
election to such persons, Ministers, and others, as shall be appointed by
Authority of Parliament, to receive the said exceptions, which said persons
shall have power to receive, hear, and determine all complaints against any
Elder of ignorance and scandal, within the description of ignorance and
scandal hereafter mentioned.

And shall have power to approve the person so elected, in case no just
exception, as aforesaid, shall be proved against him. But if he shall upon just
proof be found ignorant or scandalous, as aforesaid, then to remove him. And
if any of the said Elders shall be adjudged to be removed, as aforesaid, then
another shall be chosen in his place, as aforesaid.

5. That such shall be chosen for Ruling Elders as are men of good
understanding in matters of Religion, sound in the faith, prudent, discreet,
grave, and of unblameable conversation. And willing to undergo the said Office.

6. That all parishes and places whatsoever, (as well privileged places, and
exempt jurisdictions, as others) be brought under the government of
Congregationall, Classical, Provincial, and National Assemblies. Provided*
that the Chapels or places in the houses of the Peers of this Realm shall
continue free for the exercise of Divine duties, to be performed according to
the Directory.

7. That the Chapel of the Rolls, the two Sergeants Innes, and the four
Innes of Court, shall be each of them a Congregationall Presbytery within
themselves, and make a Classical Presbytery in the whole.

8. That the Province of London shall be divided into twelve Classical
Elderships according to the distributions hereafter following: The first
Classis to contain:
ALhallowes Breadstreet, Andrews Wardrope, Anne Black Friars, Austins Parish,
Bennet Paul's wharfe, Faiths, Gregory's, John Evangelist, Margaret Moses, Martin
Ludgate, Mary Aldermary, Mary le Bow, Matthew Fridaystreet, Mildreds
Breadstreet, Paul's, Peter's Paul's wharfe.
The second Classis to contain:
Anthomes vulgo Anthelms, Bennet Sherehogge. James Garlickhithe, John Baptists,
Martin in the Vintry, Mary Magdalen old fishstreet, Mary Somerset, Mary
Mounthaunt vulgo Mounthaw. Michael Queen Hithe, Michael Royal, Nicholas old
Abbey, Nicholas Olaves, Pancret Soperlane, Thomas Apostle, Trinity Parish.
The third Classis to contain:
Alhallowes the greater, Alhallowes the less, Alhallowes Lumberstreet, Edmunds
Lumberstreet, Laurence Pountney, Mary Abchurch, Mary Bothaw, Mary Woolchurch,
Mary Woolnoth, Nicholas Aron, Stephens in Walbrook, Swithens,
The fourth Classis to contain:
Andrew Hubbert, Bennet Grace-church, Buttolph Billingsgate, Clements in
Eastcheape, Dionis Backchurch, George Buttolph-lane, Leonard in Eastcheape,
Magnus, Margaret New-fishstreet, Martin Orgars, Maryhill, Michael Crookedlane.
Michael Cornhill, Peter's Cornhill.
The fifth Classis to contain:
Anne Aldersgate, Buttolph Aldersgate, Brides, Bridewell, Christchurch, John
Zachary, Leonard Fosterlane, Mary Staynings, Michael in the Corn, vulgo in the
Querne, Olaves Silverstreet, Peter's Cheap, Pedast, alias Fosters.
The sixth Classis to contain:
Albanes Woodstreet, Alhallowes Honi-lane, Alphage, Giles Creeplegate, James
Chapel, Laurence in the Jury, Martin in Jremengerlane, Mary Aldermanbury,
Marymaudlins Milkstreet Mary Colechurch, Michael in Woodstreet, Mildred in the
Poultry, Olives in the Jewry.
The seventh Classis to contain:
Alhallowes by the Wall, Bartholmew Exchange, Bennet Fynck, Buttolph
Bishopsgate, Christophers, Margaret Lothbury, Michael Bashinshaw, Peter Poor,
Stevens Colemanstreet.
The eight Classis to contain;
Andrew Undershaft, Buttolph Algate, Ethelburge, Hackney, Hellens, James
Dukes-place, Katherine Cree-Church, Leonard Shoreditch, Martins Oteswich, vulgo
Outwich. Mary Newington, alias Soke Newington.
The ninth Classis to contain:
Alhallowes Barkin, Alhallowes Stanings, Dunstans in the East, Gabriel
Fenchurch, Katherine Coleman, Katherine Tower, Margaret Pattons, Olaves
Hartstreet, Peter's in the Tower, Stepney, Trinity Minories, Wapping,
Whitechappell.
The tenth Classis to contain:
George Southwarke, Lambeth, Mary Magdalen Bermondsey, Mary Overs, Newington
Buts, Olives Southwarke, Rotherhithe vulgo Redriff Thomas Hospital, Thomas
Southwarke,
The eleventh Classis to contain:
Clemnets Danes, Giles in the Fields, Knightsbridge, Margaret Westminster,
Martins in the Fields. Newchurch, Peter's Westminster, Paul's chapel in covent
Garden.
The twelfth Classis to contain:
Andrew Holborne, Bartholmew the greater, Bartholmew the less, Charterhouse,
Dunstones in the West, James Clarkenwell, Mary Islington, Sepulchers.


9. That all the several Parishes and Places within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the parts adjacent, according as they are distinguished into
twelve several Classis, shall be the extent and bounds of the Province of
London.

Concerning the members of the Classical and Congregationall Assemblies in the
several Counties.
THat in the several Counties certain persons, Ministers, and others, shall be
appointed by authority of Parliament, who shall consider how their several
Counties respectively may be most conveniently divided into distinct classical
Presbyteries, and what Ministers and others are fit to be of each Classis. And
they shall accordingly make such division, and nomination of persons for each
classical Presbytery, which Divisions, and persons so named for every Division
shall be certified up to the Parliament. That the Chancellors,
Vice-chancellors, and heads of the Uniuersities shall consider how the
Colleges may be most conveniently put into classical Presbyteries, and do
certify the same up unto the Parliament.

And the said several Classis respectively being approved by Parliament within
their several Precincts shall have power to constitute Congregationall
Elderships where a competent number of persons so qualified for Elders, as
aforesaid, shall be found. And where no persons shall be found fit to be
Elders, as aforesaid, then that Congregation shall be immediately under the
Classical Presbytery, until that congregation shall be enabled with members
fit to be Elders, as aforesaid.

The congregationall Assembly shall meet once every week, and oftener if
occasion shall serve.

The classical Assembly shall meet once every month.

Concerning members of the Provincial Assembly.
THe Provincial Assembly shall be constituted of members sent from every
Classis within the Province.

The number of the members sent from each Classis shall be so proportioned, as
that the Provincial Assembly may be more in number then any Classical
Presbytery within that Province. And to that end there shall be at least two
Ministers, and four Ruling-Elders out of every Classis. And that where there
shall be need, the number may be increased, as to the persons appointed for the
bounding of the Provincial Assembly shall seem meet. Provided, that the number
do not exceed nine of each, Ministers and Ruling-Elders, from any one Classis.
And that there always be two Ruling-Elders to one Minister. That the
Provincial Assembly being constituted, shall meet twice every year, the first
meeting shall be determined by the persons appointed for the bounding of the
Provincial and Classical Assemblies.

Concerning the National Assembly.
THat the National assembly shall be constituted of members sent from the
several Provinces aforesaid, the number of the members from each Province to
the National Assembly shall be two Ministers, and four Ruling-Elders. The
National Assembly is to meet when they shall be summoned by Parliament, and to
sit and continue as the Parliament shall order, and not otherwise.

FINIS.

