(...) The Seventh Classis to contain:
Alhallowes by the Wall, Bartholmew Exchange, Bennet Fynck, Buttolph
Bishopsgate, Christophers, Margaret Lothbury, Michael Bashinshaw, Peter Poor,
Stevens Colemanstreet.
The Eight Classis to contain:
Andrew Undershaft, Buttolph Algate, Ethelburge, Hackney, Hellens, James
Dukes-place, Katherine Creechurch, Leonard Shoreditch, Martins Oteswich vulgo
Outwich. Mary Newingtonalias soke Newington,
The Ninth Classis to contain:
Alhallowes Barkin, Alhallowes Stanings, Dunstons in the East, Gabriel
Fenchurch, Catherine Coleman, Katherine Tower, Margaret Pattons, Olaves
Hartstreet, Peter's in the Tower. Stepney, Trinity Minories, Wapping, White
Chapel.
The Tenth Classis to contain.
George Southwarke, Lambeth, Mary Magdalen Bermondsey, Mary Overs, Newington
Butts, Olives Southwarke, Rotherhithe vulgo Redriff Thomas Hospital, Thomas
Southwark.
The Eleventh Classis to contain:
Clements Danes, Giles in the Fields, Knights bridge, Margrets Westminster,
Martias in the Fields, Newchurch, Peter's Westminster, Paul's chapel in covent
Garden.
The Twelfth Classis to contain:
Andrew Holburne, Bartholmew the greater, Bartholmew the less, Charterhouse,
Dunstones in the West, James Clarkenwell, Mary Islington, Sepulchers.
9. That all the Several Parishes and Places within the Cities of London and
Westminster, and the parts adjacent, according as they are distinguished into
twelve several Classis, shall be the exrent and bounds of the Province of
London.

Concerning the members of the Classical and Congregationall Assemblies in the
several counties.
THat in the several Counties certain persons, Ministers and others, shall be
appointed by Authority of Parliament, who shall consider how their several
Counties respectively may be most conveniently divided into distinct classical
Presbyteries, and what Ministers and others are fit to be of each Classis. And
they shall accordingly make such division and nomination of persons for each
classical Presbytery, which Divisions, and persons so named for every Division
shall be certified up to the Parliament. That the Chancellors,
Vice-chancellors, and heads of the Universities shall consider how the
Colleges may be most conveniently put into classical Presbyteries, and do
certify the same up unto the Parliament.

And the said several Classes respectively being approved by Parliament within
their several Precincts shall have power to constitute Congregationall
Elderships where a competent number of persons so qualified for Elders, as
aforesaid, shall be found. And where no persons shall be found fit to be
Elders, as aforesaid, then that Congregation shall be immediately under the
Classical Presbytery, until that congregation shall be enabled with members
fit to be Elders, as aforesaid.

The congregationall Assembly shall meet once every week, and oftener if
occasion shall serve.

The classical Assembly shall meet once every month.

Concerning Members of the Provincial Assembly.
THe Provincial Assembly shall be constituted of members sent from every
Classis within the Province,

The number of the members sent from each Classes shall be so proportioned, as
that the Provincial Assembly may be more in number then any Classical
Presbytery within that Province. And to that end there shall be at least two
Ministers, and four Ruling-Elders out of every Classis. And that where there
shall be need, the number may be increased, as to the persons appointed for the
bounding of the Provincial Assembly shall seem meet. Provided, that the number
do not exceed nine of each, Ministers and Ruling-Elders, from any one Classis.
And that there be always two Ruling-Elders to one Minister. That the
Provincial Assembly being constituted, shall meet twice every year, the first
meeting shall be determined by the persons appointed for the bounding of the
Provincial and Classical Assemblies.

Concerning the National Assembly.
THat the National Assembly shall be constituted of members sent from the
several Provinces aforesaid, the number of the members from each Province to
the National Assembly shall be two Ministers, and four Ruling-Elders. The
National Assembly is to meet when they shall be summoned by Parliament, and to
sit and continue as the Parliament shall order, and not otherwise.

FINIS.

