A DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons IN PARLIAMENT: With the Additionall
Reasons, last presented to His MAJESTY.

Sabbathi 12 Martij. 1641.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the
Declaration, with the Additionall Reasons last presented to His Majesty, shall
be forthwith Printed and published.

Io. Brown, Cleric. Parl. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.




Whereunto is annexed, His Majesty's Speech to the Commit, the 9 of March,
1641. when they presented the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament at
New Market.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott, 1641.

The Declaration.
May it please your Majesty;
ALthough the Expressions in your Majesty's Message of the second of this
instant March, do give just cause of sorrow to us your faithful Subjects, the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, yet it is not without some mixture of
confidence and hope, considering they proceeded from the mis-apprehension of
our Actions and Intentions, which having no ground of Truth or Reality, may by
your Majesty's Justice and Wisdom be removed when your Majesty shall be fully
informed, that those fears and jealousies of ours, which your Majesty thinks
to be causlesse, and without any just ground, do necessarily and clearly arise
from those dangers and distempers, into which the mischievous and evil
Counsels about you have brought this Kingdom; And that those other fears and
jealousies, by which your favor, your Royal Presence, and confidence have
been withdrawn from your Parliament, have no foundation or subsistence in any
action, intention, or miscarriage of ours, but are merely grounded upon the
falsehood and malice of those, who, for the supporting and fomenting their own
wicked designs, against the Religion and Peace of the Kingdom, do seek to
deprive your Majesty of the Strength and Affection of your People, them of
your Grace and Protection, and thereby to subject both your Royal Person, and
the whole Kingdom to ruin and destruction.

To satisfy your Majesty's judgment and Conscience in both these points, we
desire to make a clear and free Declaration of the causes of our fears and
jealousies, which we offer to your Majesty. in these particulars:

1. That the design of altering Religion in this, and in your other Kingdoms,
has been potently carried on by those in greatest Authority about you for
diverse years together, the Queens Agent at Rome, and the Popes Agent or Nuncio
here, are not only evidences of this design, but have been great Actors in it.

2. That the War with Scotland was procured to make way for this intent, and
chiefly invited and fomented by the Papists, and others popishly affected,
whereof we have many evidences, especially their free and general contribution
to it.

3. That the Rebellion in Ireland was framed and contrived here in England, and
that the English Papists should have risen about the same time, we have
several testimonies, and advertisements from Ireland; and that it is a common
speech amongst the Rebels, wherewith concur other Evidences and observations of
the suspicions, meetings, and consultations, the tumultuary and seditious
carriage of those of that Religion in diverse parts of this Kingdom, about the
time of the breaking out of the Irish Rebellion; The deposition of O Connelly,
the Information of Mr. Cole Minister, the Letter of Trestram Whitcombe, the
deposition of Thomas Crant, and many others which we may produce, do all agree
in this. The public Declaration of the Lords, Gentlemen, and others of the
Pale, that they would join with the Rebels, whom they call the Irish Army, or
any other, to recover unto His Majesty His Royal Prerogative, wrested from
him by the Puritan faction in the Houses of Parliament in England, and to
maintain the same against all others, as also to maintain Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and the lawfulness thereof; these two being the Quarrels, upon
which His Majesty's late Army in the North should have been incenst against us.

The great cause we have to doubt that that late design styled, The Queens
pious intention, was for the alteration of Religion in this Kingdom; for
success whereof, the Popes Nuncio, the Count Rosetti enjoined Fasting and
Praying to be observed every Week by the English Papists; which appeared to us
by one of the Original Letters, directed by him to a Priest in Lancashire.

The boldness of the Irish Rebels, in affirming they do nothing, but by
Authority from the King; That they call themselves the Queens Army: That the
prey or booty which they take from the English, they mark with the Queens Mark:
That their purpose was to come to England, after they had done in Ireland, and
sundry other things of this kind, proved by O Connelli, and diverse others,
especially in the forementioned Letter from Trestram Whitecombe, the Major of
Kinsale, to his Brother Benjamin Whitecombe, wherein there is this passage,
That many other strange speeches they utter, about Religion, and our Court of
England, which he dares not commit to paper.

The manifold attempts to provoke Your Majesty's late Army, and the Army of the
Scots, and to raise a faction in the City of London, and other parts of the
Kingdom: That those who have been Actors in those businesses, have had their
dependence, their countenance, and encouragement from the Court; Witness the
Treason whereof Master Iermyn and others stand accused, who was transported
beyond Sea by Warrant, under Your Majesty's Hand, after Your Majesty had given
Assurance to Your Parliament, that Your Majesty had laid a strict command upon
all your Servants, that none of them should depart from Court: And that
dangerous Petition, deliverd to Captain Leg by your Majesty's own Hand,
accompanied with a Direction, Signed with C. R.

The false and scandalous accusation against the Lord Kymbolton, and the five
Members of the House of Commons, tendered to the Parliament by your Majesty's
own Command, endeavored to be justified in the City, by your own presence and
persuasion, and to be put in execution upon their persons, by your Majesty's
demand of them in the House of Commons, in so terrible and violent a manner, as
far exceeded all former breaches of Privileges of Parliament, acted by your
Majesty, or any of your Predecessors: And whatsoever your own intentions were,
diverse bloody and desperate persons which attended your Majesty, discovered
their affections and resolutions to have Massacred and destroyed the Members of
that House, if the absence of those persons accused had not, by Gods
providence, stopped the giving of that word which they expected, for the setting
them upon that barbarous and bloody act: The Listing of so many Officers,
Soldiers, and others, putting them into pay, and under command of Colonells,
feasting and carressing them in an unusual manner, at White Hall, thereby
maintaining them in the violent assaults, and other injuries which they offered
to diverse of your Subjects, coming that way in a lawful and peaceable manner:
the carrying them out of Town; after which they were told by the Lord Digby,
That the King removed on purpose, that they might not be trampled in the dirt:
And keeping them so long in pay, endeavoring to engage the Gentlemen of the
Innes of Court, in the same course: The plotting and designing of a perpetual
Guard about your Majesty: The laboring to infuse into your Majesty's Subjects
an evil opinion of the Parliament, through the whole Kingdom, and other
Symptoms of a disposition of raising Arms, and dividing your people by a
Civil War; in which combustion, Ireland must needs be lost, and this Kingdom
miserably wasted and consumed, if not wholly ruined and destroyed.

That after a Vote had passed in the House of Commons, declaring, That the Lord
Digby had appeared in a warlike manner at Kingston upon Thames, to the terror
and fright of your Majesty's good Subjects, and disturbance of the public
peace of the Kingdom; and that therefore the Lords should be moved to require
his attendance, he should, nevertheless, be of that credit with your Majesty,
as to be sent away by your own Warrant to Sir John Fennington, to Land him
beyond the Sea; from whence he vented his own Traiterous conceptions, That your
Majesty should declare your self, and retire to a place of strength in this
Kingdom, as if your Majesty could not be fafe among your people: And withal
took that transcendent boldness to write to the Queen, offering to entertain
correspondency with her Majesty by Ciphers, intimating some service which he
might do in those Parts; for which, he desired your Majesty's instructions,
whereby in probability, he intended the procuring of some foreign force to
strengthen your Majesty, in that condition into which he would have brought
you: Which false and malicious counsel and advice, we have great cause to
doubt, made too deep an Impression in your Majesty, considering the course you
are pleased to take, of absenting your self from your Parliament, and carrying
the Prince with you, which seems to express a purpose in your Majesty, to keep
your self in a readiness for the acting of it.

The manifold Aduertisements which we have had from Rome, Venice, Paris, and
other parts, that they still expect that your Majesty has some great design
in hand, for the altering of Religion, the breaking the neck of your
Parliament: That you will yet find means to compass that design, that the
Popes Nuncio has solicited the Kings of France and Spain to lend your
Majesty four thousand men apiece to help to maintain your Royalty against
the Parliament: And this foreign force as it is the most pernicious and
malignant design of all the rest, so we hope it is and shall always be
farthest from your Majesty's thoughts, because no man can believe you will give
up your people and Kingdom to be spoiled by strangers, if you did not
likewise intend to change both your own profession in Religion, and the
public profession of the Kingdom, that so you might still be more assured of
those foreign States of the Popish Religion, for your future suport and
defense:

These are some of the grounds of our fears and Iealousies which made us so
ernestly to implore your royal Authority and protection for our defense and
security, in all the ways of Humility and submision, which being denied by
your Majesty sedused by evil Counsel, we do with sorrow for the great and
inavoydable misery and danger, which thereby is like to fall upon your own
person, and your Kingdoms apply our selves to the use of that power for the
security and defense of both, which by the fundamental Laws and
Constitutions of this Kingdom resides in us, yet still resolving to keep our
selves within the bounds of faithfulness and allegiance to your sacred Person
and your Crown, so as to the second sort of jealousies and fears of us, expressed
by your Majesty, we shall give a shorter, but as true, and as faithful an
Answer.

Whereas Your Majesty is pleased to say that for your residence near the
Parliament, you wish it might be so safe, and honorable, that you had no cause
to absent your self from Whitehall; This we take as the greatest breach of
Privilege of Parliament that can be offered; As the heaviest misery to your
self, and imputation upon us that can be imagined, And the most mischievous
effect of evil Counsels; it roots up the strongest foundation of the safety
and honor which your Crown affords; It seems as much as may be, to cast upon
the Parliament, such a charge, as is inconsistent with the nature of that great
Council, being the body whereof your Majesty is the head; it strikes at the
very being, both of King, and Parliament; depriving your Majesty in your own
apprehension of their fidelity, and them of your protection, which are the
mutual bands and supports of Government, and Subjection.

We have according to your Majesty's desire, laid our hands upon our hearts, we
have asked our selves in the strictest examination of our Consciences; we have
searched our affections, our thoughts, considered our Actions, and we find none
that can give your Majesty any just occasion to absent your self from
Whitehall, and the Parliament; but that you may with more honor and safety,
continue there then in any other place.

Your Majesty lays a general tax upon us; If you will be graciously pleased
to let us know the particulars, we shall give a clear and satisfactory Answer:
But what hope can we have of ever giving your Majesty satisfaction, when those
particulars which you have been made believe were true, yet being produced and
made known to us, appeared to be false; and your Majesty notwithstanding, will
neither punish, nor produce the Authors, but go on to contract new jealousies
and fears, upon general and uncertain grounds, affording us no means or
possibility of particular Answer, to the clearing of our selves; For proof
whereof, we beseech your Majesty to consider these Instances.

The Speeches alleged to be spoken in a meeting of diverse Members of both
Houses at Kensington, concerning a purpose of restraining the Queen and Prince,
which after it was denied, and disavowed, yet your Majesty refused to name the
Authors, though humbly desired by both Houses.

The report of Articles framed against the Queens Majesty, given out by some of
near relation to the Court; but when it was publicly, and constantly
disclaimed, the credit seemed to be withdrawn from it; but the Authors being
kept safe, will always be ready for exploits of the same kind, wherewith your
Majesty, and the Queen, will be often troubled, if this course be taken to
cherish and secure them in such wicked and malicious slanders.

The heavy charge and accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Members of
the House of Commons, who refused no trial or examination, which might stand
with the Privilege of Parliament; yet no Authors, no witnesses produced,
against whom they may have reparation for the great injury and infamy cast upon
them; notwithstanding three several Petitions of both Houses, and the
authority of two Acts of Parliament, vouched in the last of those Petitions.

We beseech your Majesty to consider in what State you are, how easy, and fair
a way you have to happiness, honor greatness, plenty, and security; if you
will join with the Parliament, and your faithful Subjects in defense of the
Religion, and public good of the Kingdom: This is all we expect from you, and
for this we shall return to you, our lives, fortunes, and uttermost endeavors
to support your Majesty, your just Sovereignty and power over us, but it is not
words that can secure us in these our humble desires; we cannot but too well,
and sorrowfully remember what gracious Messages we had from you this Summer,
when with your privitie, the bringing up the Army was in agitation; we cannot
but with the like affections recall to our minds, how not two days before,
you gave directions for the above mentioned accusation, and your own coming to
the Commons House, that House received from your Majesty a gracious Message,
that you would always have care of their Privileges, as of your own
Prerogative of the safety of their persons; as of your own children: That which
we expect, which will give us assurance, that you have no thought, but of peace
and justice to your People, must be some real effect of your goodness to them
in granting those things, which the present necessity of the Kingdom, do
enforce us to desire: And in the first place, that your Majesty will be
graciously pleased to put from you, those wicked and mischievous Counselors,
which have caused all these dangers and distractions, and to continue your own
Residence, and the Princes near London, and the Parliament, which we hope will
be a happy beginning of contentment, and confidence betwixt your Majesty, and
your People, and be followed with many succeeding blessings of Honor and
Greatness to your Majesty, and of security and prosperity to them.

The Additionall Reasons.
THe Lords and Commons have commanded us to present unto your Majesty this
further Addition to their former Declaration.

That your Majesty's return, and continuance near the Parliament, is a matter
in their apprehension of so great necessity and importance toward the
preservation of your Royal Person and your Kingdoms, that they cannot think
they have discharged their duties in the single expression of their desire,
unless they add some further Reasons to back it with.

I. Your Majesty's absence will cause men to believe, that it is out of design
to discourage the undertakers, and hinder the other Provisions for raising
money for defense of Ireland. II. It will very much hearten the Rebels there,
and disaffected persons in this Kingdom, as being an evidence, and effect of
the jealousy and division betwixt your Majesty, and your people. III. That it
will much weaken and withdraw the affection of the Subject from your Majesty,
without which a Prince is deprived of his chiefest strength and luster, and
left naked to the greatest dangers and miseries, that can be imagined. IIII.
That it will invite and encourage the Enemies of our Religion, and the State,
in foreign Parts, to the attempting, and acting of their evil designs and
intentions toward us. V. That it causes a great interruption in the
proceedings of Parliament.
These considerations threaten so great danger to your Majesty's Person, and to
all your Dominions, that as your Majesty's great Counsel, they hold it
necessary to represent to You, this their faithful Advise, that so whatsoever
follows, they may be excused before God and Man.

His Majesty's Speech to the Committee, the 9 of March, 1641. when they
presented the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament at New Market.
I Am confident that you expect not I should give you a speedy Answer to this
strange and unexpected Declaration. And I am sorry (in the distraction of this
Kingdom) you should think this way of address to be more convenient, that that
proposed by My Message of the 20 of January last to both Houses.

As concerning the grounds of your Fears and Jealousies, I will take time to
answer particularly, and doubt not but I shall do it to the satisfaction of all
the World. God, in his good time, will, I hope, discover the secrets and
bottoms of all Plots and Treasons; and then I shall stand right in the eyes of
all My people. In the mean time, I must tell you, That I rather expected a
Vindication for the imputation laid on me in Master Pyms Speech, than that any
more general Rumors and Discourses should get credit with you.

For My fears and doubts, I did not think they should have been thought so
groundless or trivial, while so many seditious Pamphlets and Sermons are
looked upon, and so great Tumults are remembered, unpunished, uninquired into: I
still confess my fears, and call God to witness, That they are greater for
the true Protestant Profession, My People and Laws, than for My own Rights or
Safety; though I must tell you, I conceive that none of these are free from
danger.

What would you have? Have I violated your Laws? Have I denied to pass any one
Bill for the ease and security of My Subjects? I do not ask you what you have
done for Me.

Have any of my People been transport with Fears and Apprehensions? I have
offered as free and general a Pardon, as your selves can de^ All this
considered, There is a Judgment f^m Heaven upon this Nation, if these
distract^s continue.

God so deal with Me and Mine, as all My Tgoughts and Intentions are upright
for the maintenance of the true Protestant Profession, and for the Observation
and Preservation of the Laws of this Land: And, I hope, God will bless and
assist those Laws for My preservation.

As for the Additionall Declaration, you are to expect an Answer to it, when
you shall receive the Answer to the Declaration it self.

FINIS.

