A DECLARATION Of the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT; Straightly
charging and forbidding all In-Keepers, Victuallers, Alehouse-keepers, or other
persons whatsoever, to harbor or entertain any Mariners, Seamen, Watermen,
etc. Pressed into any of His Majesty's or Merchants Ships employed in this
service after the beat of the Drum, and Proclamation made to give them notice,
to repair on Board the several Ships to which they belong.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration be
forthwith printed and published.

Hen: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Also a Letter from Sir JOHN HOTHAM.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
middle Temple. April 7. 1643.

April 4th 1643.
WHereas there are several Fleets now setting forth to the Seas, under the
command of the Earl of Warwick for the defense of this Kingdom, and the rest
of His Majesty's Dominions in this time of eminent danger, which will be much
retarded, if all effectual means be not used for the providing them with able
Mariners and Seamen, Watermen, etc. The Lords and Commons in Parliament do
hereby straightly charge and forbid all Inkeepers, Victuallers,
Alehousekeepers, or other persons whatsoever, to harbor, or entertain any
Mariners, Seamen, Watermen, etc. Pressed into any of His Majesty's, or
Merchants Ships employed in this service after the beat of the Drum, and
Proclamation made, to give them notice to repair on Board the several Ships to
which they belong; And in case any Inkeep^^, Victualler, Alehousekeeper, or
other person, shall be found faulty herein; The said Lords and Commons do
declare, That they will not only proceed severally against all such for their
contempt, but cause their Licenses for Inn, or Alehousekeepers to be made
void, and themselves dis-enabled hereafter from such employment; And do further
require the principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy, to suffer no
payments to be made of such debts as shall be contracted by Mariners, Sailors,
or Watermen in any Victualling house, Alehouse, Inn, or the like as
aforesaid, out of the wages due to any such Mariners, Sailors, or Watermen.

Except it be to such housekeepers as do receive any of the said Mariners or
Seamen into their houses being sick or set on shore for the recovery of their
health, and such Inkeepers, Alehousekeepers, Victuallers, or others, as shall
so receive or entertain any of the said Seamen, are to have a testimony in
writing, under the hand of the Lord General the Earl of Warwick, or the
Captain of the ship, or under the hand of two of the chief Officers of the said
ship, from whence the sick man comes.

And the Lords and Commons do further declare, That if any Mariner, Sayler,
Watermen, etc. after his receiving of pressed and conduct money, neglect to make
his appearance according to the time limited in his Ticket, or shall presume to
run away, or desert the said service, in this time of eminent and public
danger, that all such persons so apprehended, shall be proceeded against by
the E: of Warwick, according to the custom and rules of War, in that behalf.

Die Luna, 3^ April, 1643.
A Letter from Sir John Hotham from Hull, of the first of this April instant,
expressing Sir Hugh Cholmleys deserting the Parliament, and the regaining of
Searborough by his directions, by the courage and industry of Captain Bushel;
and his desires that Captain Bushel might have the command of that place, by
his nomination, and receive his Commands and Orders from him, was this day Read.

Resolved upon the question* Hugh Cholmley be forthwith disabled for
continuing any longer a Member of this House.

Resolved upon the question. Hugh Cholmley shall be for ever disabled for
sitting as a Member of Parliament in this House, for falsely and perfidiously
betraying the trust reposed in him by the Parliament, falsifying his
Protestation, and revolting to the Popish Army raised against the Parliament.

Resolved upon the question.

That Sir Hugh Cholmley shall be impeached of High Treason.

Master Marten, Sir Peter Wentworth, Sir Henry Hayman, Master Samuel Brown,
Mr. Sergeant Wild, Master Solicitor, Master Rous, and Master Strode,
Are appointed to prepare an Impeachment of High Treason against Sir Hugh
Cholmley.

H: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D.C.

FINIS.

