FOUR ORDERS Of great Consequence Of the LORDS and Commons Assembled in
PARLIAMENT.

1. Concerning the speedy le^vying and collecting of the Moneys upon the
Weekly Assessements, or otherwise. 2. Concerning the demolishing of all
Altars, or Tables of Stone, within every Church or Chapel, and also for the
Removal and taking away of all Tapers, Candlesticks, and Basins from the
Communion Table, and to remove the said Table from the East End of the Church.
3. For the more strict Observance of the Monthly Fast, according to a late
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons for that purpose Likewise an Order for a
strict enquiry throughout every Parish, of all Papists or Delinquents, who have
any goods, debts, chattels, personal estates, lands, tenements, or otherwise,
within their respective Parishes, and have not contributed according to the
propositions.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that these ORDERS
shall be forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamento.



May 17. London Printed for R. B. 1643.

An Order of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the speedy
levying of the Moneys upon the weekly Assessements and otherwise.
Die Mercurii, 10. Maii. 1643.
IT is now ordered by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, that the several persons appointed by the Ordinance of the third of
this instant May, and instructed for the bringing out of diverse counties
therein mentioned perfect, and speedy accounts of the weekly Assessement
toward the maintenance, of the Army, do also use their best endeavors for
the discovery and finding out all other moneys, levied, or to be levied and
collected by any Act of Parliament, or Ordinance either by way of Subsidy, or
of Loan, or contribution for England or Ireland, which have not been brought
into the Treasurers hands appointed by such Acts or Ordinances to receive the
same; And particularly such Moneys as are yet uncollected, or not brought in
upon the Act for speedy contribution toward the relief of Ireland: And an
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons of the Thirtieth of January last, for a new
Loan and contribution for the same purpose: And that they receive certain
Information of such Money, either from the Commissioners, Sheriffs, collectors,
or other persons employed therein, do take course that the same be duly and
speedily leavyed and paid to the respective Treasurers or Receivers aforesaid,
and have power to send for the collectors and Sub-collectors within their
several counties for the speedy effecting thereof.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

At the Committee for the Demolishing of Monuments of Superstition or Idolatry.
BY virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, and agreeable to a Bill passed
by both Houses of Parliament, for suppressing of diverse Innovations in Churches
and Chapels; This Committee does require you and every of you to take away,
and demolish every Altar or Table of stone within your Church or Chapel, and
to remove the Communion Table from the East end of the said Church or Chapel,
and to place the same in some other convenient place of the body of the said
Church or Chapel; And to remove and take away al Tapers, Candlesticks, and
Basins from the Communion Table in the said Church or Chapel; And to take away
and demolish all Crucifixes, Crosses and all Images and Pictures, of any one,
or more persons of the Trinity, or of the Virgin Mary in your said Church or
Chapel.

And this Committee does further require you to take down and demolish all
Crucifixes, Crosses, Images, or Pictures of any one, or more persons of the
Trinity, or of the Virgin Mary, upon the outside of your said Church or
Chapel, or in any open place within your Parish, whereof you are to give an
account to this Committee before the Twentieth day of this present Month.

To the Churchwardens of the Parish Church or Chapel of (...) and to every of
them.
WHereas the Lords and Commens in Parliament, have made an Ordinance for the
more strict and solemn keeping of the days of public Fast, which are not by
all persons duly observed, even in these times of public Calamity to the great
dishonor of God, and the contempt of the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament.

Now that more particular notice may be given unto all such that shall offend
herein, before any exemplary punishment be inflicted upon them, It is Ordered
by the Commons now Assembled in Parliament, that all Constables (or their
Deputies) shall the day before every public Fast, repair to every House
within their several and respective Liberties, and charge all persons, that
they strictly observe the Fast, according to the directions in the said
Ordinance.

And they shall upon the said days of the public Fast, walk through their
said Liberties, diligently searching for, and taking notice of all persons, who
either by following the work of their calling, or sitting in Tabernes,
Victualling, or Alehouses, or any other ways shall not duly observe the same,
and they are hereby required, to return the names of all such persons as they
shall find so offending, as also such Informations as they shall receive
against any other persons within their Liberties guilty of the least offense
unto the Committee for Examinations, that so they may be proceeded against for
the contempt of the said Ordinance; And all Constables are to observe these
directions from time to time, so long as the said Public Fast shall be kept,
without expecting any further Order.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parlia. D. Com.

BY Virtue of an Ordinance made by both Houses of Parliament, for the seizing
and sequestring of the Estates of Delinquents and Papists, in the said
Ordinance mentioned, these are to will and command you and every of you,
personally to be and appear before us at (...) by (...) to declare and give
notice to us of all such Delinquents or Papists as are within your Parish, or
that have any Goods, Debts, Chattells, personal Estates, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Revenues, or profits therein, or issuing from thence, and hereof fail
you not, as you will Answer the Contrary at your perils.

FINIS.

