

THE DIURNALL OCCVRRENCES of every days proceeding in PARLIAMENT since the
beginning thereof, being Tuesday the twentieth of January, which ended the
tenth of March. Anno Dom. 1628.

With the Arguments of the Members of the House then assembled.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. and are to be sold by William Cook, at Furnivals
Inn Gate in Holborn. Anno Dom. 1641.

A TRVE RELATION of every days proceeding in PARLIAMENT, since the beginning
thereof, being Tuesday the 20. of January: An. Dom. 1628.
Upon the said twentieth day of January being the first day of the Parliament
nothing was done, but only the settling of the Committees.

Upon Wednesday the 21. of January, It was ordered that M. Seldom and others
should see if the Petition of Right, and his Majesty's Answer thereto were
enrolled in the Parliament Rolls, and the Courts of Westminster, as his
Majesty sent them word the last Session they should be, and also in what
manner they were entered, which was done accordingly.

M. Seldom reported to the House that his Majesty's Speech made the last day of
the Parliament, in the upper House, is also entered by his Majesty's command.

M. Pymme moved that the debate thereof should be deferred until Tuesday next,
by reason of the fewness of the House, and the liberty of the Kingdom.

Sir John Elliot, It is true it deserves to be deferred until there be a
fuller House; But it is good to prepare things; I find it is a great point; I
desire a select Committee may consider thereof, and also how other liberties of
the Kingdom be invaded: I find in the Country the Petition printed indeed,
but with an Answer that never gave satisfaction; I desire a Committee may
consider thereof, and present it to the House by what warrant it was printed;
which was ordered.

M. Seldom, In this Petition of Right it is known, how lately it has been
violated, since our last meeting, the liberties for Lease-person and Freehold,
how have they been invaded? have not some been Committees? and contrary to
that: Now we knowing this Invasion, must take notice of it; We know of an order
made in the Exchequer, That a Sheriff was commanded not to execute a Replevin;
and men's goods are taken away and must not be restored; And also no man ought
to loose life or limb, but by the Law: And has not one lately lost his Ears
(meaning Savage) that was censured in the Star Chamber, by an Arbitrable
Judgment and sentence? Next they will take away our Arms, and so our Lives;
Let all see we are sensible of these customs which creep on us; Let us make a
just presentation hereof to his Majesty.

Norton at Bar, Norton the Kings Printer was called to the Bar, and asked
by what warrant the Additions to the Petition were printed; He said, there was
a Warrant (as he thought) from the King himself; And being asked whether
there were not some Coppies printed without Additions, He said there were some,
but they were suppressed by some Warrants.


Sir John Elliott desired a clearer satisfaction might be made; and that he
might answer directly by what Warrant: whereupon he was called in again, and
said he did not remember the particular, but sure there was a Warrant.

Thursday the 22. of January.
One M. Rolls a Merchant and a member of the House informed the House, that
his goods were seized by the Customers, for refusing to pay the custom by them
demanded, although he told them what was adjudged to be done by Law, he would
pay: Whereupon Sir Robert Phillippes spoke as follows,

Sir Robert Phillippes: By this information you see the unfortunatenesse of
these times; and how full time it was for this Assembly to meet, to secure his
Majesty, and to preserve our selves: And I am confident we came hither with
fullness of both, and all shall conduce to a happy conclusion, and to the
Kings honor, and to our own; Great and weighty things wound deep: Cast your
eyes which way you please, you shall see violations on all sides. Look on the
liberty of the Subject: Look on the privilege of this House: Let any say, if
he ever saw or read the like violations by inferior Ministers that over-doe
their commands. They know the party was a Parliament man; Nay, they said, if
all the Parliament was in you, this we would do and justify. If we suffer the
liberty of this House to wither, out of fear or complaint; we give a wound to
the happiness of this Kingdom: Here the course of Justice was intercepted. An
Order in the Exchequer was made for a stay of the goods, since there is seizure
upon the approach of Parliament of goods amounting to 5000 l. for a pretended
duty of 200 l. In the first of King James, by reason of the sickness that
then was, the Parliament was prorogued, and then was some boldness to take
this Tonnage and Poundage; and then we questioned the men that demanded
Tonnage and Poundage, for there was no right to demand it: Let us proceed with
affection of duty to make up breaches; Let a Committee proceed of these
proceeding: Here M. Littleton made a Speech to second him.

M. Littleton, We have had good admonitions, and we have followed them; We have
Moderation preached unto us in Parliament, and we have followed it; I would
others did the like out of Parliament: Let the parties be sent for, that
violated the Liberties of Parliament to have their Doom. This Speech was
occasioned by Secretary Cook, who in his Speech desired that Moderation
should be used.

Sir John Elliott, I see by this Relation what cause we have to be tender of
the Liberty of the Subject, and this House; and yet withal to retein the
Moderation, as to give satisfaction to the world, that our heart is fixed to
serve his Majesty, and to free us from offer of jealousy; Three things are
involved in this complaint: 1. The Right of a particular Gentleman. 2. The
Right of the Subject. 3. The Right and Privilege of this House.
Let the Committee consider of the two former; but for the violation of this
House, let us not be lesser then our forefathers: Was ever the information of a
member committed to a Committee? Let us send for the parties: Is there here a
bare denial of the Restitution of the goods? Was it not also said, that if all
the Parliament were comeined in him, they would do as they did? Let them be
sent for.

It was ordered that the Officers of the Custom House should be sent for.

M. Seldom reported from the Committee concerning the printing of the Petition
of Right, That there were 5000 Coppies printed without any Additions at all,
which were published in the time of the last Parliament; but since the
Parliament other Coppies have been printed with the Additions, and these
suppressed and made waste papers, which the Printer did as he said by command
from M. Attorney, which he received from his Majesty: And the Printer further
said, that M. Attorney was with the Lord Privy Seal at Whitehall, and there
delivered to the Printer diverse papers with diverse hands to them; and on the
back side was endorsed these words, We will and command you, that these Coppies
be printed.

Friday the 23. of January.
His Majesty sent the House a message to this effect, That he willed them to
cease from further debate of Tonnage and Poundage till the next day in the
afternoon, and that he would speak with them in the Banqueting House at
White Hall.

Saturday the 24. of January.
The Kings Speech.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
The care I have to remove all obstacles that may hinder the correspondencie
betwixt me and this Parliament, is the cause that I have called you hither at
this time; the particular occasion being a complaint made in the Lower House.
And as for you my Lords, I am glad to take this and all other occasions,
whereby you may clearly understand both my words and actions; For as you are
nearer in degree, so you are the fittest witnesses for Kings. The complaint I
speak of is for staying men's goods, that denied Tonnage and Poundage, this may
have an easy and short conclusion, (if my words and actions be rightly
understood); for by passing of the Bill as my Ancestors have had it, my past
Actions will be included, and my future authorized; which certainty would not
have been struck at, if men had not imagined that I have taken these duties as
appertaining to my Hereditary Prerogative, in which they are much deceived; For
it ever was, and still is my meaning by the gift of my people to enjoy it: And
my intention of my Speech at the ending of the Session concerning this point,
was not to challenge Tonnage and Poundage as of right, but De been esse,
showing you the necessity, not the right, by which I was to take it, until
you had granted it unto me; assuring my self according to your general
professions, that you wanted time, not will to give it me: Wherefore now having
opportunity, I expect that without loss of time, ye make good your
professions; and by passing of the Bill, to give an end to all the Questions
arising from this subject, especially since I have cleared the only scruple
that can trouble you in the business.

To conclude, let us not be jealous of one another actions; for if I had been
easily moved at every occasion, the Order made on Wednesday last might have
made me startle, there being some show to suspect that you had given your
selves the liberty to be inquirers after Complaints, (the words of your Order
being some what largely penned;) but looking into your actions, I find you are
only complainers, not seeking complaints, for I am certain you neither
pretend nor desire the liberty to be Inquisitors of men's Actions, before
particular complaints be made.

This I have spoken, to show you how slow I am to believe harshly of your
proceedings; likewise I assure you, that the Houses resolutions, not particular
men's Speeches shall make me judge well or ill, not doubting but according to my
example you will be deaf to ill reports concerning me, till my words and
actions speak for themselves: That this Session beginning with confidence one
toward another, may end with a perfect good understanding between us, which
God grant.

Monday the 26. of January.
M. Walter did inform the House that there were diverse Ships laden with
Corn for Spain; Hereupon a Committee was appointed to enquire about the
Trading into Spain, and other enemies; and transporting Corn, and other
Munition thither.

It is also ordered, that some of the Privy Council should presently move the
King about the stay of the Ships.

Then after M. Secretary Cook moved that the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage
might be read, and after some debate it was diverted, and they fell upon point
of Religion.

M. Rowse concerning Religion. Master Speaker,

We have of late entered into the consideration of the Petition of Right, and
the violation of it; and upon good reasons, for it concerns Goods, Liberties
and Laws, but there is Right of a higher nature, that preserves for us far
greater things; eternal life, our selves, yea our God himself: Right of
Religion, derived to us from King of Kings, conferred upon us by the King of
this Kingdom, enacted by Laws in this place, streaming down upon us in the
blood of Martyrs, that witnesses from Heaven by miracles, even miraculous
Deliverances: And this Right in the name of this Nation, I this day claim and
desire, that there may be a deep and serious consideration of the violations
of it; I desire first, that it may be considered, what new paintings are laid
upon the old face of the Whore of Babylon, to make her more lovely, and to draw
so many Suitors unto her; I desire that it may be considered how the Sea of
Rome does eat into our Religion, and fret into the Walls and Banks of the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, especially since those Laws have been made
in a manner by themselves, and by their own treasons and bloody designs. And
since their Popery is a confused mass of errors, casting down Kings before
Popes; the precepts of God, before the traditions of men; living and reasonable
men before dead and senseless stocks and stones: I desire that we consider
the increase of Arminianisme, an error that makes the grace of God lacquey it
after the will of man, that makes the sheep to keep the Shepherd, and makes a
Mortal seed an Immortal God; I desire we may look into the very belly and
bowels of this Trojane Horse, to see if there be not men in it, ready to open
the gate of Romish Tyranny and Spanish Monarchy; for an Arminian is the spawne
of a Papist: and if there come the warmth of favor upon him, you shall see him
turn to one of those Frogs that rise out of the bottomless pit. And if you
mark it well, you shall see an Arminian reaching out his hand to a Papist; a
Papist to a Jesuit; a Jesuit gives one hand to the Pope, and another to the
King of Spain; and these men having kindled a flame in our neighbor Country,
have brought over some of it hither, to set on flame this Kingdom also: Yea,
let us further search and consider whether these be not the men that break
upon the Goods and Liberties of this Commonwealth; for by this means they
make way for the taking away of our Religion. It was an old trick of the
Devil, when he meant to take away Jobs Religion; he began at his goods. Lay
thine hand on all, and he will curse thee to thy face; either they think
thereby to set a distaste between Prince and people, or to find some other way
of supply to avoid or break Parliaments, that so they may break in upon our
Religion, and bring in their own errors: But let us do as Job did, he held
fast his Religion, and then his goods came again with advantage; and if we
hold fast God and his Religion, these things shall be added unto us: Let us
consider the times past, how they flourished in honor and abundance, when
Religion flourished amongst us; but as Religion decayed, so the honor and
strength of this Kingdom decayed. When the soul of a Commonwealth is dead,
the body cannot long over-live it. If a man meet a Dog alone, the Dog is
fearful, though never so fierce by nature; but if the Dog have his Master
by him, he will set upon that man from whom he fled before: This shows the
lower natures being backed by higher increase in courage and strength; and
certainly man being backed with omnipotence, is a kind of omnipotent thing. All
things are possible to him that believes, and where all things are possible,
there is a kind of omnipotence; wherefore let us now with an unanimous consent
of us all, resolve to make a vow and covenant henceforth to hold fast our God
and our Religion, and we shall from henceforth certainly expect prosperity unto
this Kingdom and Nation, and to this covenant let every one say, Amen.


Sir Francis Seymor. If Religion be not a rule to all our actions, what policy
can we have? if God fights not our battles, the help of man is in vain; In
our defects the cause thereof is our defect in Religion, and the sin thereof
is Idolatry and Popery: Papists increase more now then ever, neither do they
want their Priests and Masses. Nay, his Majesty's name is used to stop
proceedings against Papists, and that since the Parliament, contrary to his
Majesty's goodness and public profession; and contrary to his many
Proclamations and many Instructions to the Judges; and whatsoever is done in
the Country, is undone above.


M. Kirton. Master Speaker,

This business that we have in hand concerning our Religion, is of dangerous
consequence, if it be not thoroughly looked into; I think that no man that
sits here but is sensible in what danger now it stands, if this Honorable
House do not find some speedy remedy for it.

It was apparent to every man, that new opinions are brought in by some of our
Churchmen to disturb our peace, and the meaning of these Churchmen can be no
other, then to bring in the Romish Religion amongst us; for it has ever been
Jesuiticall policy, first to work a disturbance, then afterward a change; we
must seek the cause: I shall briefly speak my opinion, that is, that this
proceeds from the ambition of the Clergy, that are near his Majesty; for
it is well known, that at first the Church of Rome, and that we profess were
all one; and that the ambition of the Clergy begot and brought in all these
differences that are now betwixt us: The highest dignity they can here attain
unto, is but an Archbishopricke; but a Cardinals Cap is not here to be had: I
believe some of them affect that too well, and in some we see the effects, how
they change their opinions for advancement; and then they will turn white into
black, and black into white.

This being so, our endeavor must be to take away the root, and then the
branches will decay themselves; It is not the calling of the Appeal to Caesar
will do it; for if they can get Bishoprics for writing such books, we shall
have many men that will write books in that kind: It behooves us all, every
man according to his ability, to employ himself for the search of these
things; and that we may find out the matter and the men, that we may present
them and the danger that this Kingdom stands in by them to his Majesty: And
for mine own part, as God shall enable me, I will do my best herein.


M. Sherland. We have a Religion that is worth the loving with all our hearts;
it was settled by the blood of Martyrs, and kept by Miracles. To have our noses
wiped of this, would grieve my heart, to see more, to behold our Religion go
away, and designs daily made on it; and Arminianisme still to increase as it
does, I admire: I persuade my self the greater part of the Clergy, Nobility,
and Gentry are firm; but it is the desires of some few that labor to bring in
a new faction of their own, and so they drop into the ears of his Majesty,
That those that oppose them oppose his Majesty, and so they put him upon
designs, that stand not with public liberty: That he commands what he lists,
with Lives, Goods, and Religion; and does as he pleases: And so they involve
all true hearted Englishmen and Christians, under the name of Religious
Puritans, and so involve his Majesty's quarrels to be theirs, which is Treason
of the highest quality.


Tuesday the 27. of January.
A Petition was exhibited against one Lewis, that said that about the 25. of
December, The Devil take the Parliament, which was avowed by two witnesses;
and though it was spoken our of Parliament, yet it was resolved to be an
offense to the Parliament, and it was ordered that he should be sent for.

Sir Nathaniel Rich tendered a Petition concerning the Fast, which was agreed to
be preferred to the King as follows. It was ordered that conference should be
dosired with the Lords about this Petition, who desired to join with the
Commons.

The King sent a message by Secretary Cook to this effect; viz. His Majesty
understanding that the Remonstrance was called, for to take away all quesition,
commanded me to deliver it to you; but hoping you proceed with the Bill of
Tonnage and Poundage, and give precedencie to that business, and to give an
end to further dispute between some of his Subjects, or else he shall think
his Speech, which was with good applause accepted, had not that good effect
that he expected: But before the message, a report was made by M. Pymme from
the Committee of Religion, where a motion was made about the Remonstrance last
Session, concerning that part which concerns Religion; and the Clerk
answered, that by command from the King he delivered it to the Lord Privy
Seal, and so the Committee proceeded no farther.

Sir Walter Earl replied to the message: the last part of the message calls me
up for point of Precedencie; Religion challenges Precedencie and Right of our
best endeavors; Vbi dolor, ibi digitus. I know Justice and Liberty is Gods
cause, but what good will Justice and Liberty do, if Popery and Arminianisme
join hand in hand together, to bring in Spanish Tyranny, under which those
Laws and Liberties must cease? what has been done for Religion since the
last Session, we know; what Declarations have been made, what Persons
advanced, what Truths confirmed, by all authority of Church, Councels, and
Kings: for my part, I will foregoe my life, estate and liberty, rather then my
Religion; and I dare boldly affirm, That never was more corruption then is at
this time. Humana Consilia castigantur, ubi caelestibus se praeferunt; Let us
hold our selves to this method, and that God that carried us out of so many
difficulties the last Session, will not be wanting to us now.

M. Coriton. Let us not do Gods work negligently: We receive his Majesty's
messages with all duty; for our proceedings, let us so proceed, as it may soon
conduct us to his Majesty's desire: Religion concerns the King as well as us:
The unity of this House is sweet, especially in Gods cause. Let us cry, and
cry again for this; Let us be resolved into a Committee, and presently to
debate hereof.


M. Pymme. There are two diseases; the one old, the other new; the old, Popery;
the new, Arminianisme. There are three things to be enquired after concerning
Popery:

First,

Secondly,

Thirdly,

For Arminians, be advised;

First,

Secondly, Edward the sixths days; and by the writing of Peter Martyr, and
Martin Bucer, Wickliffe, and others; and by the constant profession, sealed
with the blood of so many Martyrs, Cranmer, Ridley, and others; and by the 36.
Article, set forth in Queen Elizabeth's time; and by the Articles set forth at
Lambeeth, as the Doctrine of the Church of England, which King James sent to
Dorte, and to Ireland, as the truth professed here: and by his Majesty's
Declaration and Proclamation, to maintain unity in the settled Religion, as
appeared by his Proclamation; and other courses tending that way, which were
perversted and abused to the ruin and subversion of Religion, which bred a
fear of Innovation; as also by the preferment which such have received since
the last Parliament, who have heretofore taught contrary to the truth.

Then to consider again for what act these men have been countenanced and
advanced, what pardons they have had for false Doctrines; what Preachings has
been lately before his Majesty; what prohibiting of books, as have been
written against their doctrine; and permitting such books as have been for
them.

It belongs to the duty of the Parliament to establish true Religion, and to
punish false: And howsoever it is alleged, that the Parliament are not Judges
in matters of Faith; yet ought they to know the established and fundamental
Truths, and the contraries unto them: For Parliaments have confirmed general
Councels, which have not been received until they have been so authorized,
and Parliaments have enacted Laws for trial of Heretics by Jury.

The Parliament punished the Earl of Essex for countenancing of Heretics;
and there is no Court can meet with this mischief but Courts of Parliament.

The Convocation cannot, because it is but a Provincial Synod, only of the
Jurisdiction of Canterbury; and the power thereof is not adequate to the whole
Kingdom: and the Convocation at York may perhaps not agree with that of
Cunterbury. The High Commission cannot, for it has its authority from
Parliaments, and the decivati^e cannot prejudice the original: The judgment
of Parliament, being the judgment of the King, and of the three Estates of the
whole Kingdom.


Wednesday the 28, of January.
Master Secretary Cook delivered another Message (...) his Majesty: viz. His
Majesty upon an occasion of dispute in this House about Tonnage and Poundage,
was pleased to make a gracious Declaration, wherein he commended to the speedy
finishing thereof, and to give a precedencie thereunto. And since his Majesty
understands the preferring the cause of Religion; His Majesty expects rather
thanks then a Remonstrance, yet he does not interrupt you, so that you do not
trench of that, that belongs not to you. But his Majesty still commands me to
tell you, that he expects precedencie in Tonnage and Poundage; assuring
himself he has given no occasion to put it back, and so you will not put it
off.

M. Long. I cannot but with much sorrow see that we are still pressed to this
pount; I hoped that those near the Chair would have informed his Majesty of
our good intentions: But we see how unhappy we are still, some about his
Majesty makes him diffident of us.


Sir Thomas Edmonds. I am sorry this House has given occasion of so many
Messages about Tonnage and Poundage; after his Majesty has given us so much
satisfaction. You may perceive his Majesty is sensible of the neglect of his
business: We that know this, should not discharge our duties to you, if we
should not persuade you to that course which should procure his Majesty's good
opinion of you. Your selves are witnesses how industrious his Majesty was to
procure your gracious Laws in his Fathers time; and since that, what
enlargement has he made of our Liberties, and still we give him cause to
repent him of the good he has done: consider how dangerous it is to alien his
Majesty's heart from Parliaments.


M. Coriton. When men speak here of neglect of duty to his Majesty; let them
know, we know no such thing, nor what they mean; and I see not how we do
neglect the same: I see it is all our hearts to expedite the Bill of Tonnage
and Poundage in due time; our business is still put back by their Messages,
and the business in hand is of God and his Majesty.

Things are certainly amiss, and every one sees it; and woe be to us, if we
present them not unto his Majesty.


Sir John Elliott. I have always observed in the proceedings of this House,
our best advantage is in Order; And I was very glad when this noble Gentleman
(my Countryman) gave occasion to stay our proceedings; for I fear it would
have carried us into a sea of confusion and disorder: And having now occasion
to present my thoughts unto you, in this great and weighty business of
Religion; I shall be bold to give a short expression of my own affection; and
in that order, that I hope will conduce best to the effecting of your work,
and direct our labors to an end. To enter into a particular disquisition of
the writings of Divines, I fear it will involve us in a Labyrinth, that we
shall hardly get out, and perchance hinder that way, and darken that path in
which we must tread; before we know what other men declared: It is necessary
we presently lay down what is the truth; and (as I presume) we come not hither
now to dispute of Religion: far be it from the thought of the Church, that
has thus long confessed it, now to dispute it: Shall posterity think that we
have enjoyed our Religion fourscore years almost, and are now doubtful of
the sense? (God forbid.) It may be Sir, and out of some thing lately delivered,
I have not unnecessarily collected, that there is a jealousy conceived; as if
we meant to deal in matter of Faith, it is our profession; this is not to be
disputed, neither will that truth be receded from this long time held, nor is
that Truth decayed; it is confirmed by Parliament because it was Truth: And as
this Sir, before I shall come to deliver my self more particularly, give me
leave, that have not yet spoken in this great cause, to give some apprehension
to have a fear; For it is in the Parliament to make a new Religion, (I hope)
shall it be in any to alter the body of the Truth, waich we now profess: I
must confess Sir, amongst all these fears we have contracted, there arises
to me not one of the least dangers in the Declaration, which is made and
published in his Majesty's name. And yet Sir, this conclusion exclusively (let
me say that I may not be mistaken) what ever in that or other things shall
appear to carry mention of his Majesty; we have not the least suspicion or
jealousy of him: We have that comfort in his Piety and Goodness, as if there
be any misprision or error, I hope it is by those Ministers about him; which
not only he, but all Princes are subject unto.

And to clear that, that Princes are subject to misinformation, and many
actions may be entitled to their names, when there is no suspicion of it to
be done by themselves; we leave to look back to Presidents and other times,
and what I find in our Stories, may be useful in this.

Antiochus King of Asia sent his Letters and Missives to his Provinces, etc.
That if they received any dispatches in his name, not agreeable to Justice,
Ignoto s^ litera^ esse scriptas, ideoque eis, parent: I find by Plutarch. of
great King Antiochus of Asia, who faith, that Princes are obnoxious to abuses
of Ministers, and yet could not at all times be prevented; and therefore he
sent Messengers and Letters to all his Provinces, that if there were any
Letters or Dispatches sent under his name that came to them, that were not
warrantable by Law, and agreeable to Justice, it could not be conceived to be
done by him; and therefore they should not give way to it.

Sir, I find in another Book, (and beseech you let it be apprehended) Gratian
did not only note and confess the same, but added the reason also; which the
Masters of the Civil Law can testify from their Books, wherein is thus
expressed, Quod verecunda poenitentium inchoatione Principes saepe
restringantur, ut non concedenda concedant; Because that oftentimes with
importunity of Ministers and those about them, Princes are drawn to grant
things by them not fit to be granted: as it was in that, so it may be in this:
I speak it to this end, to draw this conclusion, That if there be any thing
that bars the Title of his Majesty, it may be his Ministers: (far be it from
me to have any suspicion of him.)

And now to that particular in the Declaration, wherein I confess, with me an
apprehension of more fear then we have in all the rest; for in all the
particulars we heard what is said of Popery and Arminianisme, it is that our
Faith and Religion is in great danger, but it is by degrees: Here Sir, like an
Inundation it does break in at once, that we are in danger to be ruined and
overwhelmed: For I beseech you mark the ground of our Religion, it is
contained in the body of these Articles. If there be any difference in opinion
concerning the sense and interpretation, the Bishop and the Clergy in the
Convocation have power admitted to them to do any thing that shall concern
the continuance and maintenance of the truth, being contained in these
Articles, being different in the sense; so as if there be any dispute about it,
it is in them to order which way they please: And for ought I know, Popery and
Arminianisme may be a sense introduced by them, and then it must be received.
Is it a slight thing that the power of Religion should be left to the power of
these men? I honor their Professions, and honor their calling in Reverend
Bishops, but I honor not these men: give leave unto me to say the truth; that
we profess is not men's, but Gods; and God forbid man should be made to judge
of the Truth: Look upon the conclusion they have made, and from thence draw
their arguments; I remember a character I have seen, in a Diary of Edward the
sixth, that young Prince of famous memory, wherein he does express the
conditions of the Bishops and Clergy of his time under his own handwriting:
That some for sloth, some for age, some for ignorance, some for luxury, and
some for Popery; they were unfit for discipline and government.

I hope it is not so with us: Nay, give me leave to vindicate the honor of
those men that openly show their heart to the truth. There are amongst our
Bishops such as are fit to be made examples for all ages, who shine in virtue,
like those two faithful witnesses in Heaven, of whom we may say that Elegy
which Seneca did of Caius, that to their memories and merits No hoc quidem
obstet, quod nostris temporibus nati sunt, To whose memory and merit I may use
the saying, that others faults are not prejudicial to their virtues, are so
industrious in their works, that I hope posterity shall know that they are
men that are firm for the Truth.

But Sir, that all are not such, so free, sound, and orthodoxe in Religion as
they should; witness the men complained of, and you know what power they have:
Witness the man nominated lately in Master Montagues: I reverence the Order, I
honor not the man; others may be named as bad: I apprehend such fear that
should be in their power, we may be in danger to have our whole Religion
overthrown.

But I give this for testimony, and thus far express my Religion against
all the power and opposition of these men; or whenever any opposition of
these men shall come, we shall maintain the Religion we profess, for that we
have been borne and bred: nay Sir, if cause be, in that I hope to die.

Some of these Sir you know are Masters of Ceremonies, and they labor to
introduce new Ceremonies into the Church; some Ceremonies are useful: give me
leave to join with you in one that I hold necessary and commendable, That at
the repetition of the Creed we should stand up, to testify the resolutions of
our hearts, that we should defend the Religion we profess: And as in some
Churches it is added, they did not only stand upright with their swords
drawn, but said, if cause were, (they did hope) to defend their Prince,
Country, and Religion, and would draw their swords against all that opposed.

This I speak out of that care I have to preserve the honor of our King, who
I fear by these Innovations of Religion may have sought to undermine it: But
to come to the manner and method of our proceedings, having made the
expression; wherein, if I have transgressed the rule propounded, I receive your
pardon: I desire to avoid confusion and distraction, that we may go presently
to the ground of our Religion, and lay that down a rule on which all others
rest: Then when that is done, it will be time to take into consideration the
breakers and oftendors against this rule in the next place; But before we have
laid down that, our work will be in vain: therefore first to lay down the
proposition wherein we differ from the Arminians, and in that I shall be ready
to deliver my opinion; and this is my humble motion.

It was ordered that a Committee should be appointed to pen an answer to his
Majesty's messages, and to show him that it is their resolutions to give him
all expedition in his service, and that they hold it not only fit to give him
thanks, but rather to show what perils we are in; and that Tonnage and
Poundage is their own gift, and it is to arise from themselves; and that they
entend not to enter into any thing that belongs not to them.


Thursday the 29. of January.
The former part of the day was spent in debating of the transportation of
Corn and Victuals into Spain; and it was ordered, that a message should be
sent to his Majesty: That it is now evident, that diverse Ships are bound for
Spain, and to desire a stay of them, after the House sat at a Committee about
Religion; After long debate, it was resolved by the Commons House of Parliament
concerning Religion, as follows.

That We the Commons now in Parliament assembled, claim, profess, and avow
for the Truth, the sense of the Articles of Religion, which were established in
Parliament, in the 13. year of our late Queen Elizabeth, which by the public
Acts of the Church of England, and by the general and current Exposition of
the Writers of our Church, have been delivered to us, as we erect the sense of
the Articles of Religion, which were established in Parliament in the
thirteenth year of our late Queen Elizabeth, which by the public Acts of
the Church of England, and by the general and current Exposition of the
Writers of our Church have been delivered to us, and we reject the sense of
the Jesuits and Arminians, and all other wherein they differ from us. The
House received an answer from his Majesty touching the Ships; which was, that
he would consider of it, and send them word in due time.

Friday the 30. of January.
A Committee of the Lower House went to the King in the Privy Chamber with the
Petition of the ^ast, and the Archbishop of York after he had made a short
Speech, presented it to his Majesty in the name of both Houses.

The Petition of both Houses for the Fast.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
It is the hearty and very earnest desire of us your most dutiful and loyal
Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled; that this our meeting be abundantly blessed with all
happy success in the great and urgent affairs of Church and State, upon which
we are to consult; and that by a clear understanding both of your Majesty's
goodness to us, and of our ever faithful and loyal hearts to your Person and
service (all fear and distractions, which are apparent signs of Gods
displeasure, and of ensuing mischief being removed, there may be this Session,
and for ever be a perfect and most happy union and agreement between your
Majesty and all the estates of your Realm; but humbly acknowledging that this
nor any other blessing can be expected without the favor of Almighty God, upon
the observation of the continued and increasing miseries of the reformed
Churches abroad) whose cases with bleeding hearts we compassionate; as likewise
of those punishments already inflicted, and which are likely in great measure
to fall upon our selves: We have just cause to conceive that the Divine Majesty
is for our sins exceedingly offended with us.

We do in these and all other pious respects, Most Dear Sovereign, humbly
beseech your Majesty, that by your Royal commandment not only our selves,
but all the people of your Kingdoms, may be speedily enjoined upon some
certain day by your Majesty prefixed, by public Fasting and Prayer, to
seek reconciliation at the hands of Almignty God; so that the Prayers of your
whole Kingdom joined with your Majesty's most Princely care, and the faithful
and hearty endeavors of this great Council now assembled, may procure glory
to Almighty God in the preservation of his true Religion, much honor to your
Majesty, prosperity to your people, and comfort to all your Majesty's friends
and Allies.

The Kings Answer to the Petition for the East.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
The chiefest motive of your Fast being the deplorable estate of the reformed
Churches abroad is too true; and our duties are, so much as in us lies, to
give them all possible help; but certainly fighting will do them much more
good then fasting: though I do not wholly disallow of the latter; yet I must
tell you, that the customs of Fasts every Session is but lately begun: And I
confess I am not fully satisfied with the necessity of it at this time, yet
to show you how smoothly I desire your business to go on, eschewing (as much
as I can) Questions, or

I do willingly grant your requests herein, but with this note, that I expect
that shall not hereafter be brought into president for frequent Fasts, except
upon great occasions: As for the form and time I will advise with my Lords the
Bishops, and then send you a particular answer to both Houses.

The Declaration of the Commons.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
We have within these three days received from your Majesty a message,
putting us in mind of our present entering upon the present consideration of a
grant of Tonnage and Poundage; but the manner of the possessing the House
therewith being disagreeable to our orders and privileges, (so that we could
not proceed therein; and finding our selves in your Majesty's name pressed in
that business, and that we should give precedencie thereunto) we cannot but
express some sense of sorrow, fearing least the most hearty and forward
affections, wherewith we desire to serve your Majesty, are not clearly
represented unto you; besides, such is the sollicitous care we have of
preserving our selves in your Majesty's most gracious and good opinion, that it
cannot breed but much trouble in us; when ever we find our selves (as now we
are enforced, to spend that time in making our humble Apologies, from whence
do usually arise long debates, which we conceive might be very profitably
applied in the great services of your Majesty, and the Commonwealth, which we
did with all humble diligence apply our selves unto; and finding the extreme
dangers wherewith our Religion is threatened, (clearly presenting themselves to
our thoughts and considerations) we think we cannot (without impiety to God,
disloyalty to your Majesty, and unthankfullnesse to those from whom we are put
in trust) retarde our proceedings until something be done to secure us in this
maine point, we prefer our lives and all earthly things whatsoever: And here
we do with all humble thankfulness acknowledge your most pious care and
Princely intentions to suppress both Popery and Arminianisme; The professor
of the one being open enemies and maintainers of the others subtle and most
dangerous undermyners of the Religion of Almighty God, established in your
Realm and Dominions: The truth of which our holy Religion, or any part
thereof, as being sufficiently known, and generally received here of all the
members of our Church, except of some Schismatic persons, which have of late
years taken the boldness to broach their contrary corrupt opinions, we desire
should not be called into doubt or question; but howsoever it has pleased your
Majesty to our exceeding great comfort by many Testimonies to declare your
own constant resolution to maintain the said Religion; yet how your gracious
purposes are therein crossed, and into what a miserable condition your whole
Kingdom is likely by that means to be reduced, we shall earnestly endeavor,
as that which does nearely concern the safety and prosperity of your Majesty
and people in such sort disordered, that the ruin thereby threatened to both,
may by Gods blessings be prevented; being most heartily sorry that these
occasions are offered, which did thus hinder our occasions in proceeding; and
therefore as well for the dignity and necessity of the matter, as for that we
receive it to be a most-speedy and effectual way, by uniting our hearts and
endeavors to dispatch all other businesses of importance; particularly those
which may seem more immediately to respect your Majesty's profit: We pray that
our resolutions of preferring this business before all other, may be
acceptable to your Majesty: To whom both in the matter and the manner of our
proceedings, we desire to give all possible satisfaction.

The Kings Answer to the Declaration of the House of Commons the third of
February: Ann. 1628.
Gentlemen,
This Answer being somewhat long, may by reason require some time to reply unto
it, since as most of you cannot but judge, that this gives no satisfaction,
therefore I shall give you some short notes upon it; I cannot think that
whereas you allege the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage was brought in against
the privilege of your House, that you will offer to take so much privilege
from every one of your members, as not to allow them the liberty to bring in
any Bill whatsoever, although it be in your power (when it is brought in) to do
with it what you think good. And I cannot imagine your coming together only
by my power, and to treat of things that I propound unto you, can deny me that
prerogative to commend or offer my Bill unto you; Though in this particular I
must confess that this Bill was not to have bin offered unto you in my name,
as that member in your House can bear me witness. As for the cause of delay
in my business, being Religion, here is none of you shall have a greater care
for the true preservation of it then my self; which since it is confessed by
your Answer, you must either think I want power (which cannot be) or that I am
very ill counseled, if it be in so much danger as you affirm.

Though I may say much of this point, I will say no more; but for all this I
shall not stop my ears to you upon this subject, so that in form and matter
you transgress not your limits: As for Tonnage and Poundage I do not so much
desire it out of greediness of the thing, being persuaded you will make no
great stop in it, when once you take it in hand, as out of desire to put an end
to these questions that arise between Me and some of my Subjects, thinking it
a strange thing if you should give ear to these complaints; and not to take
the sure and speediest way to decide them. Besides, I must think it strange,
that this business of Religion should be only a hinderer of my affairs;
whereas I am certainly informed, all other things go according to their
ordinary course; therefore I must still be instant with you, that you proceed
with Tonnage and Poundage with all diligence, not looking to be derned in so
just a desire: And you must not think it strange if I find you flacke, I give
you such farther quickening as I shall find cause.

Tuesday the 3. of February. Anno 1628.
Secretary Cook reported that himself and the rest of (...) Committee
attended his Majesty upon Monday: And he said, for my part I have used all
diligence to (...) all the commands of my Master, and of this House: And I
find that some exceptions have been taken at some words by me used, when I
delivered the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage; indeed I used many Arguments in
speaking of his Majesty, I said it much concerned him, and that his Majesty
much desired it; but this was mistaken, as if his Majesty had commanded it, and
I required it in his name, which I did not intend; but to avoid dispute, I said
not this was an ordinary Revenue, but that this Tonnage and Poundage was a
means to enable his Majesty to set his Fleet to Sea.

After this Apology, he read his Majesty's Answer to the Petition of the Lower
House.

Sir John Elliott. Master Speaker,

I confess this has given great satisfaction for our present desires, and
future hopes; and however I find the mis-interpretation of some, and the
danger of our Religion, yet I find his Majesty's ears open; and that if those
things be thus as we see, that then he is not rightly counseled; I am
confident we shall render his Majesty an account of what he expects: But Sir, I
apprehend a difference between his Majesty's expression, and the expression of
his Ministers; For Sir, that Bill was tendered here in his Majesty's name, and
now we find that his Majesty disavowes it, that he did it not; what wrong is
this done to his Majesty, and to this House, to press things in his Majesty's
name, to the prejudice and distraction of us all, I think him not worthy to
sit in this House.


Master Speaker. This Honorable Person did explain himself, that he did not
press it in his Majesty's name, but only commended it to your consideration.


Secretary Cook. I said, that in regard of the difference between his
Majesty and his Subjects, my desire was to accommodate it.


Sir Humphrey May. If you be too quick to except against the Ministers of his
Majesty that serves his household, it will discourage and stop our mouths,
whose Service you daily commend.


Wednesday the 4. of February. Anno 1628.
M. Kirton. The two Bishops named are the maine and great Roots; Let us enquire
what men they have preferred.


M. Coriton. The Declaration now read came from his Majesty, but it is by
advise of his Ministers; and sure they have not advised the right way: That no
dispute of Preaching must be one way or other, this is to suppress the truth;
and yet the contrary professors of it are preferred in the Church, to the
grief of all good men.


Sir Walter Earl. Mountague is a principal disturber of the Church: He was a
Batchelour of Divinity, I would know how he came to be a Bishop; two men are
named in the last Remonstrance that are Privy Counselors, and it is very
probable, that these Ecclesiastical Officers did give that advice to his
Majesty.


Sir Humphrey May. I will let you know what I am privy unto; It is true, those
two were named in the Remonstrance. This point was pressed before the King and
his Council; The King does utterly dislike those Novellours, then were these
Bishops with tears in their eyes present, and protested, they hated those
opinions and the Questions; and they renounced them upon their knees.


Sir James Parrat. It is said that these two Bishops were before the Council,
and with tears did disclaim the opinions; but we see their facts: The Bishop
of London, Doctor Land, did entertain for his Chaplain in his house, one that
did dispute the Arminian points; who said, what Arminians hold and write, this
I will maintain and justify upon my oath.


It was ordered that the complaint against Master Mountague should be taken
into consideration, and that a Committee should make search after the pardon.

A Petition was preferred against Cozens.

Master Sherland made report from the Committee about the search for the
Pardons; that they found Pardons sealed, one to Bishop Mountague; one to
Cozens, one to Doctor Mannering, and one to Doctor Sibthorpes.

Sir Robert Phillippes. If ever there came here business of like consequence,
I have lost my memory; if ever King of England was abused in his mercy, it is
our King; what persons are pardoned, the greatest enemies to the Church and
State, that ever was standing under the judgment of Parliament, they are
pardoned between Parliaments: If every man be not warned to search this into
the bottom, I would we might never regard any thing: Ye see an offender
complained of, and in stead of punishment, Grace; the goodness of our King is
thus abused: Let a select Committee consider of it, and let Master Attorney
certify what is done, and by whom; and I hope we shall find those original
Instruments who have misled his Majesty.


It was ordered, that a sub-Committee should have power to send for the
Records, and the Privy Seal, and other Instruments belonging to the Pardons,
and to send for the parties; and also to send to Master Attorney about his
knowledge, by whose signification the Pardons were obtained: which was done
accordingly.

Sir Robert Phillippes made report, that we went to Master Attorney, and found
him in the Star Chamber, and acquainted him with the Message; He answered,
that he received a command from his Majesty in the last long Vacation,
presently after the end of the last Session, to draw a Pardon; and delaying it
till Michaelmas Term, he said, that he met with the Bishop of Chichester, who
intimated unto him his Majesty's favor, and requested him to draw his Pardon.
Master Attorney said, he desired him to advise whither it would be any
advantage to him or no: after he met with a great Lord, and a Privy
Counselor, (the Earl of Dorset) who asked him if the Pardon for the Bishop
of Chichester were drawn, and desired him to dispatch it. After this he said,
the Lord Carlton sent to him a warrant under the Kings hand, to command him to
draw the Pardon, which he did, and sent it to the Bishop of Winchester, who
interlined it: And whereas the Pardon was but for one, he put in four;
Montague, Cozens, Sibthorpe, Mannering.

Thursday the 5. of February. Anno 1628.
Secretary Cook brought the Kings Answer to the House, concerning the Fast;
viz. That it was his Majesty's pleasure that the Fast should be kept by both
Houses of Parliament on the eighteenth day of this instant February, and for
the whole Kingdom the 20. of March.

Friday the 6. of February. Anno 1628.
One Witherington was petitioned against (who had formerly been examined
before the Lords of the Council) for depraving our Religion, oftentimes
calling the Protestants Heretics, wishing that an hundred of their throats
were cut: And to one that was a Papist, and lately turned to our Religion, he
said he would be hanged, and otherwise disgraced him. It was ordered that he
should be sent for.

The House being informed about two days ago, that a little before Cozens
obtained his Pardon, he was accused to Master Attorney by two witnesses, for
speaking words against the King, and sent to Master Attorney about it: Sir
Robert Phillippes and others were appointed to examine this business:
whereupon report was made to the House by Sir Robert Phillippes, as follows.

Sir Robert Phillippes. My part is to give account about the affidavits against
Cozens, and the diversion of the cause against him in the Star Chamber:
Master Attorney said, that one Master Heath of Graies Inn came to him about
Michaelmas Term, and affirmed that Cozens in a public meeting said, that the
King had nothing to do to be Head of the Church, and that he had no more power
to excommunicate, then his servant that rubbed his horses heels: the Attorney
acquainted his Majesty with it, but his Majesty was not willing to believe
that any man would dare say so much, but that the compliant did arise from
malice; but he charged the Attorney to make a careful disquilition of it; and
if it were strongly proved, that then he should repair to his Majesty:
Master Attorney did again enquire after this business, and said to Master
Heath, the matter is found and very improbable, there is some mistake in it;
hereupon there were two Affidavits taken, and they did swear it point blancke:
Yet Master Attorney sent his Letters to Master Deane, and others that were
present when the words were spoken, to require them to certify whether the
words were spoken or no; upon that Certificate there was some variance about
the words, and thereby the business was lessened; and being demanded if he had
directions from any to desist, he said no: But casually he met with the Bishop
of Winchester, and he told him of the complaint; The Bishop said, it will be
nothing. For King (one of them that made the Affidavit) is but a baggage fellow.


Sir John Elliott. It was our honor and duty not to pass these things over
too slightly; I find the Kings Honor and his Right is in question, which we
are all sworn to: If I mistake not, it is high Treason, and that proved upon
oath, and presented to the Attorney. His Majesty was acquainted with it, who
gave command to examine it, and the Attorney was to certify his Majesty. In
ordinary Felonies the Law does not allow oaths contrary to the proceedings for
the King; here against two Affidavits, a Letter and a Certificate must dath
them all. The Attorney informed the Bishop of Winchester with it, who said,
that he heard of such a complaint against Jack Cozens, but it was upon
malice: Let the persons that made these affidavits be sent for, and let Master
Attorney be sent for, to answer why he passed over the matter so slightly:
Consider the person of the man in question, not only suspected, but charged as
Arminians, and one that is obnoxious.


It is ordered that the witnesses should be sent for.

It was moved that Master Attorney should be sent for, but they made a question
whether they could send for him or no, if he attended by Writ in the Lords
House; Thereupon it was ordered that intimation should be given him to be there
on Monday next, to give in satisfaction to the House for his not proceeding
against Cozens, having two Affidavits.

Saturday the 7. of February. Anno 1628.
Sir Dudley North informed the House that one Doctor Moore attending the Bishop
of Winchester, upon an occasion the Bishop told him, that he had often heard
him preach before King James, and that he used to preach against Popery,
(which he said was well liked of then) but now you must not do so; whereupon
the Doctor said, that if occasion did serve, he would not spare to do the like
now; to whom the Bishop further replied, then the times were not the same, and
therefore you must not.

Sir Robert Phillippes said, by this you may guess; that this Bishop had a
hand in setting up those Ceremonies in Durham, and that he bears good will
toward them, laboring to make Durham and Winchester Synonymaes. This reflects
upon his Majesty, as if his Majesty should not be pleased that men in their
Preaching should refell and repel Popery.

Sir John Elliott. In this Lord is hatched and contracted all the danger, (we
fear) for he has procured those Pardons, which may be the author of those new
opinions: And I doubt not, but that his Majesty being informed thereof, will
leave him to the Justice of this House; and I hope those exhalations will not
raise jealousies betwixt his Majesty and us: let the Doctor be sent for to
justify it; which was ordered accordingly.


Monday the 9. of February. Anno 1628.
A Petition in complaint of the Postmasters Patent of London, which is referred
to a Committee.

Master Speaker delivered from Master Attorney a Narration in writing, of his
proceedings in Cozens business.

Sir John Elliott reported from the Committee, for examination of the Merchants
business; that the Committee finding Sheriff Acton in prevarications and
contradictions in his exammation, which being conceived to be a contempt to
this House desires, he may be sent for to answer his contempt.

Master Goodwin says, that the Sheriff acknowledges his error; and humbly
desires so much favor, that he may once again be called before the
Committees, and if he give not full contentment by his answer, he will refer
himself to the Wisdom and Justice of this House.

Sir Walter Earl secondeth this motion, so did Alderman Moulson, Secretary
Cook, Chancellor of the Dutony, and some others; but this abuse being
declared to be so great and gross, and that he had so many times given him to
recollect himself; and being so great an officer of so great a City, he had
all the favor that might be, and yet rejected the same, and carried himself
in a very scornful manner: wherefore it is ordered he shall be sent for to
the House as a Delinquent to morrow morning.

Jones the Printer and his Counsel are called to argue the business of Master
Montagues Episcopal confirmation.

First, Quaere. Whether the Exceptions be legal.

Secondly, Whether the confirmation be good.

Thirdly, and the last, is the point now in hand: To which the House enjoined
the Council to speak. The Council propounded a third Question; what will be
the fruit or effect, if in Law, the Confirmation prove void: In this the
Council said, it will not extend to make no Bishop upon the point of
Confirmation only, which makes him punishable, if he execute any thing
concerning the Bishoprics.

Sir Henry Martin says, the Exception making void the Confirmation, does in
Law work also upon the Election, and will make that void also.

Doctor Steward says, the point of setting to the Advocates hand, is but a
matter of form in the Court, no matter of Law.

Sir Henry Martyn says, he will endeavor to give the House full satisfaction,
and will speak without relation to the Kings Right and Laws of the Realm;
the Proclamation by the Common Law, should not be at Bow Church, but at the
Cathedral Church of the Diocese, where the Bishop is to be elected, and the
Deane and Chapter of that Diocese are to accept, and not every one that will.
The Arguments are endless; and to alter a course so long settled; I conceive it
is plain, the King and the Law have power to deprive him of his Bishopric,
if he deserve the same; I think therefore it were good to decline this
dispute for the present, and to proceed to remove him, which is allowed of.

Tuesday the 10. of February. Anno 1628.
A Bill for ordering the government and Plantation of the Summer Islands.

A Bill to restrain some abuses in Ministers and Magistrates.

Master Rolls complains, that since his last complaint of the breach of the
Liberties of this House, his Warehouse has been locked up by one Massey a
Pursevant; and that yesterday he was called forth from the Committee in the
Exchequer Chamber, but that since he received a Letter from Master Attorney,
that it was a mistake, the Subpaena was read, but the Letter not suffered to be
read.

Sir Robert Phillippes. You see we are made the subjects of scorn and
contempt; I conceive this to be a Bone thrown by them, that have drawn a
cloud on our Religion, to divert or interrupt us in the prosecution of them; I
desire the Messenger may be sent for, and be examined by what procurement this
Subpaena was taken forth; for if we find not forth those that throw these
scorns upon us, it is in vain to sit here.


Master Chancellor of the Duchy. This proceeds from some great error; for
I will assure you, this never proceeded from King nor Council; I therefore
desire it may be searched to the bottom, for be confident neither King nor
State have cast in this as Bone.


M. Seldon. This is not to be reckoned an error; for questionless this is
purposely to affront us, and our own Lenities is the cause of this.


It is ordered that Shenington the messenger that served the Subpoena, be
presently sent for; and to examine the same, and by whom the same was put in;
and they have power to send for persons, or Records that may inform them: And
also they shall have power to enjoyne any, whom they shall think fit to attend
the House at such time as they shall think meet.

The privilege of the Merchants that are Plaintifes here, may be taken into
consideration by this Committee, concerning the information in the
Star Chamber.

Sheriff Acton called to the Bar as a delinquent, upon his knees says, if
he has offended or erred, it is through want of memory and ignorance, for he
intended not the least dislike or distaste to any member of this House.

Master Long moved that he might be sent to the Tower.

Sir Francis Seymor. That he may be referred back to the Committee, to be
examined; if then he deal not clearly, this House may proceed to further
punishment.


M. Seldom. I cannot remember when we did commit a Sheriff of London, but I
remember when this House did commit both the Sheriffs of London to the Tower,
for an abuse of less nature, only for countenancing a Sergeant in an Arrest
on a member of Parliament, though they did acknowledge their faults at the
Bar, (which this man has not yet done) the Sergeant sent to little ease, the
party at whose suit he was arrested was committed to the Fleet, and both the
Sheriffs to the Tower.


M. Kirton. I came into this House with as good a will to this man, as any man;
for I was spoken to, to stand for him, as I came in, and I promised to do what
favor I could: But if he were my Brother, he should to the Tower.


M. Littleton. You see the affronts by Books, by Preaching, by Rumors, by
being daily served with Process that are put upon us, that we are become but a
mere scarre-crow; the neglect of our duty is the cause of this: It is high
time to remedy this; or it is in vain to sit here.


The Sheriff is again called to the Bar on his knees, and is sentenced to
the Tower.

Sir Benjamin Rudiardes. There are diverse Recantations, and Submissions, and
Sentences, remaining on Record in both Universities, against Arminianisme, that
concerning any thing that may conduce to our end, the Speakers letter may be
sent to the Vice Chancellor, for those Records, which is ordered.

It is ordered that Worstenholme Dawes, and Carmarthen, are to be at the Bar
upon Friday.


Wednesday the 11. of February. Anno 1628.
M. Seldom reported concerning the Process of the Merchants, that Master
Attorney gave order for the Process, and that Master Attorneys man took for
the same.

For the Bill, it is a course by way of crime for those things which depend in
Parliament, complained here by the Merchants: The Coppie of the Bill brought in
and read, That the Merchants did plot, practice, and combine against the peace
of the Kingdom; This being conceived to be a business incident to Tonnage and
Poundage, is ordered to be referred until to morrow morning.

M. Seldom. That a report should be made to morrow of the complaints of the
Merchants, and the Information in the Exchequer may also be brought; which was
ordered.

It is ordered, that in respect the Term ends to morrow, and the Assizes to
follow, and diverse members and Lawyers may be gone; it is ordered none shall
go forth of Town, without leave of the House.

It is ordered the Speakers letter to be sent for Sir Edward Cook.


At the Committee for Religion. M. Walter delivered a Petition of the
Booke-sellers and Printers in complaint of the restraint of Books, written
against Popery and Arminianisme, and the contrary allowed of by the only
means of the Bishop of London; and that diverse of them have been Pursevanted
for Printing of orthodoxe Books; and that the licensing of Books is now only
restrained by the Bishop of London, and his Chaplains.

One of the Printers said he tendered diverse Books, one called The Golden Spur
to the celestial Race; That Turner, one of the Bishop of Londons Chaplains,
said, that if he would put out the point, That a man may be certain of his
Salvation, he would license the same; notwithstanding he put out the same
point, yet he could not get it licenced.


M. Seldom. The refusing the licensing of Books is no crime, but the licensing
of bad Books is a crime: There is no Law to prevent the printing of any Book
in England, only a Decree in Star Chamber; therefore that a man should be
fined, imprisoned, and his goods taken from him, is a great Invasion on the
liberty of the Subject, he moves that a Law may be made upon this.


This is referred to a select Committee to be examined.

Master Shervile reported concerning the pardons that they have examined Doctor
Sibthorpes, and Cozens pardon: Sibthorpes solicited his own pardon, and said
he would get the Bishop of Winchester to get the Kings hand to it; It is
evident that the Bishop of Winchester got the Kings hand to Sibthorpes and
Cozens pardons, and also Montagues pardon was promised by him. That Doctor
Mannering solicited his own pardon, and the Bishop of Winchester got the
Kings hand to his pardon. It is likewise said, the Pardons were all drawn by
Master Attorney, before there was any Warrant.

Master Cromwell says, he had by relation from one Doctor Beard, that Beard
said, that Doctor Alablaster had preached flat Popery at Paul's Cross. The
Bishop of Winchester commanded him, as he was his Diocessan, that he should
preach nothing to the contrary.

Sir Robert Phillippes says, one Doctor Marshall will relate as much, said to
him by the Bishop of Winchester, as the Bishop said to Doctor Moore.

M. Kirton. That Doctor Marshall and Doctor Beard may be sent for: That this
Bishop, though he has leapt through many Bishoprics, yet he has left Popery
behind him.

That Cozens frequenting the Printing House, has caused the Book of Common
Prayer to be new printed; and has changed the word Minister into Priest, and
has put out in another place the word Elect: Thus Cozeus and his Lord go hand
in hand.

Sir Miles Fleetwood says, we are to give Mountague his charge, and by his
Books charge him with 1. Schism in error of Doctrine. 2. Faction in point
of State. 3. Matter of Aggravation.


Sir Walter Earl (Qui color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo;) says,
Doctor White has sold his Orthodoxe books, and bought Jesuiticall books:
And Moore, that Bishop White may go arm in arm with Mountague.

Ordered a select Committee to be named to digest these things that have been
already agitated, concerning the Innovation of our Religion, the cause of the
Innovation, and the remedy.


Thursday the 12. of February. Anno 1628.
The Sheriff of London upon his submission, is released of his imprisonment in
the Tower.

Sir John Elliott made the report from the Committee, in the Examination of the
complaints of the Merchants, and delivered in the Orders and Injunctions in the
Exchequer.

At a great Committee for Tonnage and Poundage, Master Shervile in the Chair.

Master Walter delivered a Petition from Chambers. Fawkes, and Gilborne, in
complaint of an Information against them in the Star Chamber, about Tonnage
and Poundage; and that by restraint of their goods, they are like to be undone.

Sir John Elliott. The Merchants are not only kept from their goods by the
Customers, but by a pretended Justice, in a Court of Justice (the Exchequer I
conceive:) if the Judges of that Court had their understanding enlightened,
they would reform the same, and the Merchants thereby suddenly come to their
goods.

Master Wansford conceives this a difficult way for us to go.


M. Coriton. Let it be done which way the House shall think fit: But I
conceive it is fit the Merchants should have their goods. And before we can
think of the Bill, Kings ought not by the Law of God thus to oppress their
subjects: I know we have a good King, and this is the advice of his wicked
Ministers; but there is nothing that can be more dishonorable unto him.


M. Strowde. That it may be voted that the Merchants may have their goods
before we enter on the Bill.


Chancellor of the Duchy. I shall speak my opinion, because I know not
whether I shall have liberty to speak, or you to hear any more: All the
proceedings of the King and his Ministers was to keep the Question safe,
until this House should meet; and you shall find the proceedings were legal:
And thus much, not knowing whether I shall attain liberty to speak here
again.


Master Treasurer. There is none here but would think it a hard thing, that a
possession should be taken from us without any order for sequestration, that
therefore it was not to be suffered that those few men should so unjustly
disturb the government of the State, desires that there may be no
interruption; but may proceed to settle the Tonnage, etc.


M. Corinton. I hope we shall speak here as we may speak in Heaven, and do
our duties; and let no fear divert us.


M. Walter. It is not so few as five hundred Merchants are threatened in this.


Sir Robert Phillippes moves we may go to the King, and satisfy him of these
interruptions.

M. Noye. We cannot safely give, unless we be in possession, and the
proceedings in the Exchequer nullified; and information in the Star Chamber,
and the annexion to the Petition of Right, and other Records; I will not give
any voice to this, unless these things be made void: For it will not be a
gift, but a confirmation; neither will I give, unless these interruptions, and
a Deciaration in the Bill, that the King has no right, but by our free gift:
If it will not be accepted as it is fit, we cannot help it; if it the Kings
already, as by these Records, we need not give it.


Master Seldom secondeth the motion of fending a message to the Exchequer;
declares a president of a message sent into the Chancery for stay of
proceedings in a cause, and it was obtained; and what Answer soever the Judges
return, it cannot prejudice us: The Law speaks by Record, and if those
Records remain, it will to posterity explain the Law.

M. Littletor. For the Right, there is no Lawyer so ignorant to conceive it,
nor any Judge of the Land to affirm; it is against giving to the King, or
going on with the Bill: In this case a man cannot be put to a Petition of
Right, but shall recover without Petition.


Ordered a message shall be sent to the Court of the Exchequer: That whereas
certain goods of the Merchants have been stayed by injunctions from that
Court by false Affidavit; and that upon examination, the Customers that made
the Affidavits, have confessed that the goods were stayed only for duties
contained in the book of Rates; That therefore that Court would make void the
Orders and Affidavits in this business.

Friday the 13. of February. Anno 1628.
A Petition against one Burges a Priest, who was here complained of the last
Sessions, some new Articles against him, that he could not get a copy of his
Articles out of the House, until he was feign to get one to counterfeit
himself a Puritan to get the same, and other new misdemeanors.

He is ordered to be sent for.

Sir John Elliott moves for Privilege of the Merchants.

Order is, if any man have a complaint depending here, shall be privileged in
his person, not freed from suits.

A Committee is to consider what privilege is to be allowed any man that has
any cause depending here, in the mean time intimation shall be given to my
Lord Keeper, that no Attachment shall go forth against the Merchants.

The Chancellor of the Duchy reported the message to the Exchequer Court,
That the Treasurer and the Barons will forthwith take the same into
consideration, and return an answer.

Ordered, that Master Secretary Cook shall take care, that intimation shall be
given to the City about the Fast.

Doctor Moore called in, says, he was referred to the Bishop of Winchester to
be censured for a Sermon preached by him; the Bishop, he had heard him preach,
and deliver many pretty passages against the Papists, which pleased King
James, but he must not do so now. That you have a Brother that preaches
against bowing at the holy name of Jesus, and of bowing to the high Altar; and
that the Communion Tables stood as in Alehouses, but he would have them set as
high Altars: Doctor Moore is to deliver these things in writing to morrow
morning.

At the Committee for Religion. If we now speak not, we may for ever hold
our peace; when besides the Queens Mass there are two Masses daily in the
Queens Court, so that it is grown ordinary with the out-facing Jesuits, and
common in discourse; will you go to Mass, or, have you been at Mass at
Somerset house: There coming five hundred at a time from Mass.

We desire it may be known by what authority the Jesuits lately in Newgate
were released.

M. Coriton doubts not but his Majesty's intention was good, in the Declaration
lately published; but I conceive it will be made use of, only to our
disadvantage: That therefore the Declaration may be taken into consideration.

Sir Richard Gravenor repents the proceedings of this House against Popery the
last Session, and what (...) has been therein.


Sir Richard Gravenor. Master Pymme, In this great business concerning
Religion, and the staying of Execution of the Laws against Recusants, it will
much conduce to our purpose and forward our Resolutions, to cast back our eyes
to see what was done the last Session: You may remember that amongst many other
businesses of weight, we took to heart the decay of Religion; we sought after
the preservation thereof, and how to maintain it in its own purity: We
found, that of late years it had been much wounded, by heartning of Papists,
by conferring offices upon Recusants. We summoned our judgments, and employed
our best cares and pains, for stopping the current of Popery, which by such
means like a Deluge, came flowing upon us: And well did it befit the profit of
this House to be so zealous for the prosperity of that which ought to be so
dear to every good man's soul, and so precious in their eyes; and this we
attempted by these and the like stoppes. First, by that religious Petition;
wherein it pleased the Lords so readily to join with us. Secondly, by framing
a Bill against Recusants, which passed both Houses, whereby his Majesty had
been much enriched, better enabled to compass his due from them; and to avoid
their deceits, defrauding him thereof. Thirdly, by enforming him of the numbers
and particulars; and by petitioning him to remove all Papists and Popishly
affected from the Court, from places of Trust, from places of Power. Fourthly,
by examining the dangers and inconveniences of those late Commissions, and
instructions granted forth for the compounding with Recusants for their estates
and forfeitures. Fifthly, by framing a charge to usher up Master Montague to the
Lords, not to his seat amongst the Reverend society of Bishops, but to the
Bar, as an offender against that House, this and the whole Church of God.

But what good has this our zeal brought to Religion? what profit to the
Church, we all know; and with thankfulness acknowledge, That his Majesty gave
a most gracious and pious answer to our Petition of Religion; and to some
particulars, as fully as we could desire; which raised our hopes to the
expectation of much good, and some has followed; for it is true (Master
Speaker) that the promised Proclamation to command Judges, and other Ministers
of Justice, to put the Laws in execution against Recusants, their Priests and
Jesuits, is now extant; which yet seems to me to have been so long kept by
some back-friends to Religion: and I am induced to think thus for these
Reasons.

My first Reason I draw from common fame, it being generally reported, that in
stead of life and motion to the Laws in force against Recusants, the Judges
had in charge before the last Circuit, to deal sparingly with them.

My second Reason I draw from the time, when this Proclamation came forth,
which was five weeks after the ending of the Sessions, when some of the
Circuites were ended, or so near conclusion, that the Judges could take little
or no notice thereof.

And Thirdly, from consideration of a former Proclamation dated the 7. of July,
which though that passed not the Seal, yet it did the Press; and in my poor
opinion, would never have gone so far, (knowing the resolution of Counsels
to be more certain) had not some men hoped to have prevented the latter, by
procuring the former as satisfaction, which falls far short of his Majesty's
pious intentions, expressed in that his religious Answer: And if with reverence
I may speak my humble thoughts, they do both of them in conclusion too much
encourage the worst of subjects to hope for his Majesty's best favor too
fairly invite them to compound for their forfeitures; which course this House
was bold to style little less then a Tolleration. Again, is the course of
Recusants as yet restrained from the Court? Nay, do they not since our Recesse
frequent it with more confidence and greater alacrity, do not their hopes
daily increase, and themselves grow more insolent; their fears ended with the
Sessions. Is the promised wrath as yet appointed to keep them from
Ambassadors Houses. Had the Judges in charge to inform themselves in their
last Circuites, and (after their return) his Majesty of all such Papists and
Popishly affected, as they shall find to be in authority; I have not yet
heard it, and to me those are all the known effects of that Religious
Petition. Next take notice of the abortion of that necessary Bill against
Recusants, which when we hoped would have received life and perfection by the
Royal assent, perished in Embrion; suddenly vanished as being too cruel, too
merciful: Consider what fruit we have reaped from that Petition and
Information, whereby we let his Majesty know the particulars of such Papists
and Popishly affected, as were in such Countey, in Commission of the peace of
Lieutenancie, etc. Are any of them since remooved: Nay, it is well if their
numbers be not increased. Oh Master Pymme, this breaks the heart; if God be
God, let us follow him: And if Baal be God, let us follow him, and no longer
hault between two opinions; for whilst we are thus careless in standing for
God, that we dare scarce own our own Religion: Is it any marvel that God
estrangeth himself, and will not own us? and by too woeful experience we
have cause to suspect, since we find he goes not out with our Armies, since
so ill success attends all our actions; We have not yet made our peace with
God. And Master Pymme, to these griefs and discouragements, I find an
addition of that nature, that threatens very ruin and desolation, if not
dissolution of Religion in this Land, (unless God himself take his own cause
into his own hand.) And that is the countenancing and preferring of a plotting,
undermining, and dangerous sect of upstart Divines, when Arminians shall be
graced and preferred before honester men, when such desperate Divines as have
fired a part of Christendom, almost ruined our neighbors, kindled their
firebrarnds, and cast their dangerous sparks abroad in our Church, shall be
encouraged to go on in planting their damnable doctrines and positions which
already have taken too deep footing, too fact rooting in our Universities, and
many other parts of this Land: You remember Sir, what care and pains this
House took (as a matter of great consequence) to frame a charge against Master
Mouniague, which was ready with the first oppertunity to have transmitted him
to the Lords; but those many interruptions we had, gave breaking to that as to
many other businesses of weight; yet was this man shortly after the ending of
the Sessions, dignified with the sacred title of Bishop; and Bishop of the Sea,
wherein his Predecessor (a Grave Divine, and Orthodoxe Prelate,) had labored
by his pen and directions, to strangle those errors, and to confute Master
Mountague, whose ready way to obtain a Bishopric, is to undermine Religion,
and set the Church in a combustion. Another also of his own profession, little
better then himself, I mean time-pleasing Mannering, has also tasted
extraordinary favor; This man attempted to make his holy function a means to
seduce the Kings conscience, to misguide his judgment, to dis joint his
affections from his people; to avert his mind from calling a Parliament. The
particulars of his damnable doctrine are yet fresh in your memories: What could
a man have done worse; for hereby he did as much as in him lay, violently to
break in pieces that coard, to wrest in sunder that chain, which linkes, and
ties, and unites the hearts and affections of the Prince and people together:
verily he that shall go about thus to seduce or corrupt a Prince, deserves to
be hated of all men; as much as those that attempt to poison a public spring
or fountain, whereof all drink; for which offense of his he received a just,
but moderate censures: one particular whereof was, that he should be disabled
from holding any Ecclesiastical dignity in the Church. And although it be
confessed that the Doctor justly brought upon himself the censure of
Parliament, yet was this man after our rising released from his imprisonment,
reported to have the honor to kiss the Kings hand, obtained his Pardon in
Folio, preferred to a rich Living; and if fame say true, cherished with assured
hopes of future dignity in the Church: If these be steps to Church
preferment, God be merciful to those Churches which shall fall under the
government and feeding of such a Clergy. Thus, Master Pymme, you see the issue
of our good endeavor vanished into smoke; what should be the reasons, I know
not; But I may well gnesse, it comes by the like practices as were used in King
James his time; for then had we the like gracious Answers to Petitions of
Religion, the like Proclamations, the like Declarations, and like Commands to
put Laws in execution against Recusants, and yet little done; being prevented
by secret directions and commands of some eminent Ministers of State, which I
am able to justify, by a letter under their hands, which I have now about me:
And I wish that all such as have notice of any such private letters as have
been sent for the stay of execution of those Laws, would give this House
knowledge thereof.


Sir Robert Phillippes. If ever were a necessity of dealing plainly and freely,
this is the time; there is an admission of Priests and Jesuits, as if it were
in Spain or France: This increase of Papists, is by connivance of persons in
Authority; Nine hundred and forty persons in houses of Religion, being English,
Irish, and Scots, in the Netherlands, maintained by the Papists of England; And
of this I shall deliver the particulars, that we may frame a Remonstrance to
the King: That unless there be some better performance of his Majesty's so
many Answers to so many Petitions, our Religion will be past recovery.


M. Coriton. That those Papists by Laws, or Acts of State, may be removed from
their offices; which we have just cause to suspect.


Master Seldom moves things may be debated in order; and first for the
releasing the Jesuits that were arraigned at Newgate, whereof one was
condemned; they were ten in number which were Priests, who had a College here
in London about Clarkenwell, and these men could not attempt these Acts of
boldness, but that they have great countenancers.

Secretary Cook. That a Minister of State, which is said to be himself,
having notice of these ten; and this College intended to be kept at
Clarkenwell.

That it is plain there was a place appointed for this College, and Orders
and Relics prepared: This Minister made the King acquainted with it, and I
should not do my duty; if I should not declare how much his Majesty disliked
it: His Majesty referres it to the especial care of the Lords of the
Council, who examined the same; sent these ten persons to Newgate, and gave
order to Master Attorney to prosecute the Law against them.

That this College was first at Edmonton, removed from thence to Camberwell,
and thence to Clarkenwell.

Ordered, that all the Knights and Burgesses of the House, shall to morrow
morning declare their knowledge what Letters or other hindrances have been for
the staying of proceedings against Recusants.


M. Long. A Justice of Peace, who is said to understand much in the business
of the College of Jesuits at Clarkenwell, is sent for and examined, says
he, by the appointment of Master Secretary Cook, apprehended those persons,
and took their Examinations; and says further, that he heard they were
delivered out of Newgate, by order from Master Attorney. That Master Middlemore
a general Sollicitour for the Priests, hired this house for the Lord of
Shrewsbury, a Papist; and that there are diverse Books of Accounts, of
Receipts, and Disbursements, to the value of three hundred pounds per annum,
with diverse Recusants names, who allowed toward the maintenance of this
College: and these books and papers are in the hands of Master Secretary
Cook.


Secretary Cook says, he cannot so amply declare the truth of the
proceedings herein, until that he have leave from his Majesty.

One Cross a Pursevant is to be examined in this, who likewise says, he can
discover diverse stoppings of the execution of Laws against Recusants.

Saturday the 14. of February. Anno 1628.
A complaint against the Lord Lambert, a Baronet of Ireland, and a member of
this House, who (being a Colonel of Soldiers in Middleborow) has imposed 4d.
upon every Soldier toward his Officers charges, and the Petitioner for
refusing to pay, was set in the stocks, and after by the Lord Lamberi
commanded to a Prison.

It is ordered that the Lord Lambert be sent for to answer this.

Sir John Ipsley desires leave to answer a complaint that is against him in
the Lords House.

M. Seldom. That the use was, and cites a president, that no Commoner could
be called to the Lords House; but it will trench much to the disadvantage of
the privilege of this House; and until 18. Iacobi, there was never president
to the contrary: that therefore this may be considered of by a select Committee.


Ordered, that Sir John Ipsley shall not have leave.

Master Chancellor of the Duchy stiffely secondeth the motion of Master
Seldom.

Master Secretary Cook. I am as careful to maintain a good correspondencie
with the Lords, as any man; but connivances in this kind may overthrow the
fundamental Rights and Liberties of this House: Let it be therefore seriously
considered of, for this not only concerns the Right of this House, but the
Liberty of the whole Kingdom or Commonwealth.


Ordered a special select Committee shall be appointed to confider of this.

Master Chancellor of the Duchy delivers an answer from the Barons of the
Exchequer, as follows.

Whereas the Honorable House of Commons, by order this twelfth of this instant
February, have appointed that notice should be given to the Lord Treasurer,
Chancellor, and Barons of the Exchequer, for a Declaration made by Sir John
Wolstenholme, Abraham Dawes, and Richard Carmarden, then in the said House of
Commons, of the goods that the Merchants brought into the Kings Storehouse,
and laid up there for his Majesty's use, were detained only as they conceive
for the duty of Tonnage and Poundage; and other sums comprised in the books
of Rates, which notice was given, to the end the said Court of Exchequer might
further proceed therein, as to Justice should appertain. Now the Lord
Treasurer, Chancellor, and Barons, out of their due respect to that Honorable
House; and for their satisfaction do signify, that by the orders and
injunctions of the said Court of Exchequer, they did not determine, nor any
ways trench upon the right of Tonnage and Poundage; and so they did declare
openly in Court at the making of these orders: Neither did they by the said
Orders or Injunctions, bar the owners of those goods, to sue for the same in
a lawful course. But whereas the said owners endeavored to take those goods
out of the Kings actual possession, by Writs or Plaints of Replevin, which was
no lawful Action; or course in the Kings case, nor agreeable to his Regal
prerogative: Therefore the said Court of Exchequer, being the Court for
ordering the Kings Revenue, did by those Orders and Injunctions stay those
suites; and did fully declare by the said Orders, that the owners if they
conceived themselves wronged, might take such remedy as the Law allows.

Richard Weston. John Waller. Thomas Trevers. Lo: Newburgh. John Denham. George
Vernon.


M. Kirton. We looked for satisfaction, but now you see a justification of
their Actions; I therefore desire we may now proceed to consider of their
proceedings, and whether ever the Court of Exchequer held this course before
the staying of Replevies; and whether this has been done by the Regal
prerogative of the King in his Court of Exchequer.


Ordered, that a select Committee of Lawyers and Chequer-men shall take this
into hand.

M. Selder. We have delayed the proceedings with the Customers expecting some
good success from the Exchequer; but finding it otherwise, I desire the
Customers may be called to the Bar on Monday next, which is ordered at the
Committee of Religion.


Sir Thomas Hobby reported from the Committee (for the Examination of the
Keeper and Clerk of Newgate concerning the Priests, there being a Warrant
under Master Attorneys hand for the delivery of these persons.

A Warrant under the Lord Chief Justices hand, according to a Letter which he
received from the Lord of Dorset, signifying it was his Majesty's pleasure,
that the Priests condemned should be reprieved. Another Warrant under Master
Attorneys hand, in the Kings name, to release the nine other persons.

The Petition of the Lords to his Majesty: Presented at White Hall the 24. of
February. 1628.
In all humility shows unto your most Excellent Majesty, your ever loyal
Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, now in Parliament assembled; That
whereas the Peers and Nobilities of this your Realm of England, have
heretofore used in courtesy to afford precedencie, according to their several
degrees, unto such of the Nobility of Scotland and Ireland; and being in title
of Honor above them, have upon occasion resorted hither; and remaining here in
your Majesty's service, which we are most willing should be still observed, as
a Civilitie tending to the great honor of our Nation.

Now diverse of your natural borne Subjects of this Kingdom, where both
themselves and their families do reside, and have their chiefest estates and
possessions amongst us; having of late been created some Barons, some
Viscounts, and some Earls, within these your Kingdoms of Scotland and
Ireland, do by reason claim as of right to take place, and have precedencie
of the Peers and Nobility of England, and their children within this Realm,
which we do conceive does not belong unto them by any grant from your
Majesty; and tends both to the disservice and prejudice of your Majesty and
your Realm, and to the great disparagement of your English Nobility, as by
the Reasons hereunto annexed does appear.

We therefore beseech your most Excellent Majesty, of whose tender care to
preserve the ancient honor and dignity of your Nobility we are thoroughly
persuaded, that your Majesty's wisdom and goodness will be pleased according
to the examples of the best Princes and times upon the considerations of the
manifold inconveniences, which practice and observation has brought to light,
being represented to your Majesty by the nearest body of honor unto you, and
neareliest concerned in this, and offered with as much faith and humility as
they can devise, for the avoiding of all debate and contention; which upon this
occasion may arise, either for the present or future; that some such course and
order may be timely settled therein by your Princely wisdom, and that thereby
the inconveniences of your Majesty's service might be prevented; and that the
prejudice and disparagement of your Peers and Nobility of this Kingdom may
be redressed.

Reasons delivered to the King upon the Petition the 17. of February. Anno 1628.
We held it to be new and not warranted by any ancient presidents, that
subjects of this Kingdom, whose habitations, estates, and possessions, are
principally within this your Majesty's Realm, should have titles of honor in
other Kingdoms, where they have small or no estates of aboade: That it may be
the cause of great discontentments to your Majesty's subjects in Ireland, that
such a number of those, who have no estate to oblige them to the defense of
that Kingdom, should have voices in Parliament there to make Laws: As also
that may be of great danger to the Country, if times of hazard should come;
which weighty consideration has wrought so far with your Royal
Predecessors, and the whole State, as an Act of Parliament was passed, which
took away great estates of land in reland, from some of the no blessed Families
of this Kingdom, only in contemplation of their want of Residencie: whereupon
their lands might endanger the loss of that Kingdom.

That it is of great disservice to your Majesty and this Country, that those
which live amongst us should by foreign titles seek to exempt themselves
from those services of trust and charge, which others, as of good birth and
estate here undergo daily; whereby it happens that either persons of good
quality are more frequently burdened, or the charge falls upon them of meaner
condition and less ability, not without prejudice of the service and
coffeehouse of the subject that undergo it; as also of loss to your
Majesty, and grief to your subjects, in those places where the honor is
given; that although they draw from your Majesty's coffers, creations and
money, yet they do not help or assist them to any necessary charge or
contribution.

That it is conceived to be contrary to the fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom, that any should be invested with an hereditary honor, where he has
not an estate, both to oblige him and his, to the defense of that Kingdom; and
make himself by that responsible to the Justice of that place, where his
person is privileged, and of great grief to your faithful Nobility of this
Realm; who have yielded to no Nation in Civility, but in courtesy to strangers.

That they should be disturbed in those ranks and degrees which the grace of
Princes grounded upon merits, long time have settled them in, by others of
their own Nation of meaner quality, in whom little cause appears, but
ambition to precede others without ground of merit, or estate to warrant it, in
those places where they have sought Titles, it being a great diminution to your
Nobility and their children, and the ancient Gentry of this Kingdom.

That Honor, both in the nature it self and practice of former times, being
achieved principally by virtue and desert, and it being one of the chiefest
marks by which the best of Princes make impressions thereof, and descend
hereditarily in the most deserving Families, which was by generous spirits
esteemed above all other rewards; We leave unto your Majesty's prudent
consideration, of how great inconveniencie it is, to alter or lessen the value
of the reward, which was of so much honor and no charge to your Majesty, and
of so great contentment and ease to your Majesty's people, which may be
demonstrated in many particulars, too long now to rehearse.

Further, we hold it no small degree derogatorie, to the very foundation of
Nobility it self, which is the step and circle that compasses your Royal
Throne; that those who bear a Title and claim a precedencie before many of
us, should fall so low in the peoples eyes and esteem, as to be daily subject
to Arrests of their persons and all other circumstances of disrespects, which
your meanest subjects undergo, being in the eye of the Law but Commoners.

To conclude, this our cause of grief, being (in our opinion) the practice of
it new, and unusual in the consequence of it, not without danger and
coffeehouse to your Realm and subjects of all degrees, in the nature of it,
contrary to the foundation of the grounds of Honor laid in this Kingdom, and
in the whole course of it breeding ill effects to the service of your Majesty,
and the public, and dis-value and contempt to Nobility it self, which is the
degree interposed immediately betwixt your Majesty and your people: We can no
where so justly appeal as to your Majesty (the fountain of Honor) for a
timely remedy, against this great and growing inconvenience, both for the
present and future. And as your Majesty's Honor is equally discerned in this,
with the interest of your Kingdoms and Subjects; so we doubt not but it shall
appear to the world, that your Majesty's gracious care to reduce and maintain
your Nobility in their ancient luster, shall equally tend to your Majesty's
service and happiness, and to our contentment.

Sir Nathaniel Rich. I am confident the grace of the King has been abused in
this, that therefore the Privy Counselors of the House may know whether it
was his Majesty's direction.


It is moved that Secretary Cook must first declare his knowledge in this.

One Cross gave intimation, first of the persons to the Secretary, Super totam
materiam; It is evident that the College at Clarkenwell is a College of
Jesuits, holden under a foreign supreme head.

Sir Francis Seymor taxes Master Attorneys affection and judgment in this,
and also declares continual Letters from Master Attorney, in stay of
proceedings against Recusants: You see in this House how slightly Master
Attorney has put over a business of this weight.

M. Long. Cross the Pursevant says, there were eleven men in the Prison, and
the Keeper of that Prison says, they were delivered by Warrant from the
Council board.


Sir John Elliott. No man could find a way on which to vent mischief against
the Church and State, so much as by protecting these men; that this may be
fixed on that great Lord, the Lord of Dorset, that has I fear soyled his
fingers too far in this business: And on Master Attorney, at whom I am sorry
to nominate so often in this case of Religion, in stopping of proceedings
against Recusants.


Master Recorder is ordered to be sent unto, to be examined in this, rather
then to be sent for; having formerly had the honor to sit in the Chair.

Secretary Cook says, we shall desire the King (being merciful in case of
blood) to give direction for the reprieving the condemned Priests.

Sir John Elliott. I doubt not but when we shall declare the depth of this to
his Majesty, but he will render them judgment that gave him advice herein.


Sir Nathaniel Rich. These Jesuits are bound by sureties to answer further at
Council Board, I wish those bonds may produce those men, that by the
examination of them, we might out with the whole pack of Benefactors and
Countenancers.


Master Long says, that he offering at the Sessions the evidence by order
from Master Attorney, the Lord chief Justice Richardson interrupted him, and
told him he must speak to the point in issue, whether Priests or no Priests;
and hereupon the Judges consulted amongst themselves.

Master Seldom says, he was present at the Sessions, and plain Treason
proved, and nothing done in it: The further examination of this is referred to
a select Committee.

Monday the 16. of February. Anno 1628.
A Petition of complaint against Sir Henry Martin, for the taking the goods of
one Brown, who dyed intestate, to his own private use.

Sir Henry Martin. If I prove not my self as clear in this as Saint John
Baptist, let me be accounted a Jew.


Referred to the Committee for course of Justice.

At the Committee for Religion. Master Strowde. That the Lord Chief Justice
may be called to give account of his stay of Justice in the execution of the
condemned Jesuit, which he ought to have done, though his Majesty signified
his pleasure to the contrary.


Chancellor of the Duchy. That this was a thing so ordinary for a Chief
Justice to do in Queen Elizabeth and King James their time, as also a
Declaration in Star Chamber, that all condemned Priests should be sent to the
Castle at Wisbitch, and from thence, though the King had given no order for the
Replevy, he might have taken this Warrant for his proceedings.


Master Seldom reported from the Committee the further examination of Master
Long, concerning the proceedings of Newgate against the Jesuits; whereby it
plainly appears, that the evidence tendered in Court at Newgate did plainly
testify these men to be Priests; yet the Lord Richardson did reject the same,
against the sentence of the rest of the Judges and Justices present; whereby it
is plain, that he dealt under hand to the same Jesuits.

Ordered, that two members shall be sent to each Judge that were present at
the Sessions at Newgate, who were said to be the Lord Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench, the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Justice Whittlocke,
Justice Jones, and Justice Crook.

Thursday the 17. of February. Anno 1628.
Master Chambers preferred another Petition in complaint of a Warrant, newly
proceeding from the Council Board, for the stay of the Merchants goods,
unless they pay the duties that were due in King James his time.

Sir John Elliott. You see as by the last answer from the Exchequer, the
Merchants were bound within that Court from all means of coming by their own
goods.


It is ordered the Customers shall attend the House on Thursday; in the mean
time it is referred to the former Committee.

Ordered a Committee of six to take all the names of the Fast, and to meet at
Church by eight of the clock in the morning.

Ordered, that a Committee shall consider of the speediest way to put the
Merchants into possession of their goods, without which it is conceived we sit
here in vain.

Sir Thomas Hobby reported from the Lord Chief Justice Hide, That he does not
remember any papers tendered, by Master Long were rejected, or that he affirmed
they were dangerous persons, and a College of Jesuits: But howsoever Master
Long tendered nothing to prove them so, but that he held diverse papers in his
hands.

Master Wansford reported from the Lord Chief Justice Richardson, who said
Master Long did discourse of the place and House, but did not press the
rending of the papers; neither does he know what were in the papers; neither
knew of any thing to prove the persons Jesuits.

Sir Thomas Barrington delivers the answer of Justice Jones, who says, there
were some papers offered by Master Long, but he knew not the contents thereof,
nor the reason why they were refused; but he came late for want of health, and
the second day was not there at all.

Sir Miles Fleetwood delivers the Answer of Justice Whitlocke, who said, he
came late, and therefore understood not the business, and the second day was
not there at all.

The like was reported by Sir William Constable from Justice Crook.

Sir Thomas Barrington says, although Justice Jones did not write the name of
the Lord Chief Justice, yet in discourse named him to be the man, that said,
the point in proof is not whether they be Priests or no Priests.

Sir Nathaniel Rich. Here is a charge of high nature on the Judges by Master
Long; that now Master Long may make his charge, or suffer for it; for there
were witnesses enough in the Court.


Ordered Master Long to be here on Thursday morning.

Ordered, that the Justices about the Town shall be required to deliver in all
the names of the Recusants remaining about the Town, and their conditions; and
of what County they be.

It is ordered that the Gentlemen of the Innes of Court and Chancery, shall
give in their knowledge what Recusants are there.

Sir John Stanhope. That the Court may give in the names of the Recusants
there, and likewise by what Warrant they be about the Town, and what public
charge of office any of these persons have. Also what Priests and Jesuits are
in any Prison in London for they are at liberty to go sometimes five miles to
a Mass.


Wednesday the 18. of February. Anno 1628.
A public fast was kept by this House at Westminster, where were three
Sermons.

Thursday the 19. of February. Anno 1628.
Master Dawes. One of the Customers called in to answer the point of
Privilege, in taking Master Rolls goods, being a member of this House; says,
he took Master Rolls goods by virtue of a Commission under the great Seal;
and other Warrants remaining in the hands of Sir John Elliott, that he knew
Master Rolls demanded his Privilege, but he did understand his Privilege
did only extend to his person, not to his goods: Master Dawes further says,
he took those goods for such duties as were due in the time of King James, and
that the King sent for him on Sunday last, and commanded him to make no other
answer.


M. Carmarthen. Another Customer called, says, he knew Master Rolls to be a
Parliament man; and that he did not find any Parliament man exempted in their
Commission; and if all the body of the House were in him, he would not deliver
the goods; If he said he would not, it was because he could not.


Master Wansford moves that the delinquency of these men may be declined for
the present, and that we may go to the King by way of Remonstrance;
considering the matter from whence this does arise: if it were a single
Privilege, it were easily determined.

M. Seldom. If there be any near the King that do mis-present our Actions,
let the curse light upon them, not upon us; and believe, it is high time to
right our selves; and until we vindicate our selves in this, it will be in
vain to sit here.


Sir Nathaniel Rich moves not to proceed in this, until it be by a select
Committee considered; in respect the King himself gave order to stay those
goods, though the goods of a Parliament man.

Sir John Elliott. The heart blood of the liberty of the Commonwealth
receives life from the Privilege of this House.


Resolved by Question, that this shall be presently raken into consideration;
and being conceived to be a business of great consequence;

It is ordered, that the House shall be dissolved into a Committee for more
freedom of debate.

Master Herbert in the Chair of this Committee.

Friday the 20. of February. Anno 1628.
A Petition of complaint of Conspiracy of a man's life by the Lord Deputy of
Ireland and others, to get the estate of the Petitioner to their own use:
Which is referred to the Committee for course of Justice.

Sir John Wolstenholme Another of the Customers called in, says, he was
commanded from the King, that the goods were taken for duties, and no more,
that he sought not to farm the Customs, and told the King, being sent for to
him, that he was not willing to deal therein, until the Parliament had
granted the same.


Master Seldom conceives the case of these Customers, do differ in the
degrees of their offenses: First, for Master Wolstenholme; what ever he says
here, he has often confessed, the goods were taken for Tonnage and Poundage;
so that he brake the Privilege in taking the goods: so likewise in swearing
one thing, and the contrary plainly appearing upon proof, and his own
confession.

Master Dawes his case differs only in that Sir John Wolstenholme is a
Patternee, and Dawes only a Share.

Master Carmarthens case differs in saying, If all the Parliament were in
him, he would not deliver his goods.

Ordered, that Wolstenholmes case shall be first decided; and the point is,
Whether by the Leaf Sir John Wolstenholme, having seized the goods, has
interest or no? or whether he be only an accomptant to the King or not.

Master Glanvile. Here is a sum of money advanced, a Leaf granted for
certain years, a certain Rent received; and though there be a Covenant to
these men, that if there be loss, it shall be abated, yet that cannot take
away their interest: the substance of the Affidavit made by the Customers in
the Exchequer, is, That the goods of the Merchants seized by them, and
remaining in the Kings Storehouse; were seized only for duties to the King,
mentioned in a Commission made under the Kings Signet; and that themselves (the
Customers) had no interest, nor pretense of interest.


Saturday the 21. of February. Anno 1628.
A Petition by Master Thomas Symons, in further complaint of the Customers; and
the two shillings six pence upon Currents granted to the Lord of Arundell,
which is referred to the Committee for Merchants.

Sir Robert Pie says, the Lord of Arundell has delivered in his Patent to the
King two months since.

At the Committee for Merchants. Master Littleton argues, whether a Member of
the House has his goods privileged upon a Prorogation, being seized for the
King.

All Privilege is allowed for the benefit of the Commonwealth, and the
Parliament privilege is above any other; and the Parliament only can decide
privilege of Parliament: not any other Judge or Court. That a man may not
distraine for Rent in Parliament time, but for all Arrerages after the
Parliament he may distraine: He is not to be impleaded in any action
Personal, nor his goods seized in the Exchequer.

A Record and Act of Parliament by Petition, that because a servant of a Member
of Parliament is in the Kings Royal protection, that it might be high Treason
to kill a Parliament man, and the King answered which made it a Law. And for
the Judges to determine Privilege of Parliament, were to super-head and make
void the Law; for the Prorogation, the Privilege stands good until the day of
Prorogation; notwithstanding a Proclamation of new Prorogation: That the King
is never so high in point of State as in the Parliament; cites the case of Sir
Robert Howard in the High Commission.

All Privileges, unless in Felony, Treason, or breach of the Peace.


Sir Robert Phillippes. That you see how fast the Prerogative of the King does
trench upon the liberty of the Subject, and how hardly recovered: Cites many
Presidents, wherein the goods of a Member of Parliament were privileged from
seizure in the Exchequer the 19. Eliz. It was resolved in Parliament, that
twenty days before, and twenty days after, was the time of Privilege.


Chancellor of the Duchy. That in this debate we may tie our selves to point
of Law and Authority, not to points of Reason; and conceives that no
Privilege lies against the King in point of his duties.


Sir Francis Seymor. I desire it may be debated, whether this care does
concern the King or no; for I conceive these Customers have not made good that
there was any Right, only Art used to entitle the King: I conceive it an high
offense for any man to lay the scandal of every project upon the King.


Master Glanvile. Here is a cunning Affidavit in the Exchequer to entitle the
King: A mere cunning project, and an offense of an high nature, to shelter
their projects under the command of the Crown.


Secretary Cook. The point in question is not the Right of the Subject, but
the Right of the Parliament Privilege; and that in the case of Master Rolls:
and this is only now in question.


Sir John Strangwage. I know no reason why we should draw a question upon our
selves, which we need not; especially between the King and us: I conceive it
plain, those Customers took those goods in their own Right, not in the
Kings; in this the Privilege is plainly broken, wherein it is easily
determined.


Master Banks. In this case there is no interposing of the Kings Right, and
the King this Parliament has declared as much; that the Courts of Westminster
do grant twelve days privilege to any man to inform his Council, much more
the Courts of Parliament are to have their privilege: The Kings command cannot
extend to authorize any man to break the Privilege; no more then it will
warrant an entry upon any man's Land, without process of Law.


Master Sollicitour. If the King have no Right, how can he make a Leaf; then
this pretended interest of the Customers must be void: and therefore their
goods must be taken not in their own Right, but in the Right of the King.


M. Seldom. If there were any Right, the pretended Right is in the Subject. 1.
Whether Privilege in goods. 2. Whether the Right were in the Customer only.
3. Whether Privilege against the King.


If the Lords have no Privilege of Parliament for their goods, they have then
no Privilege at all; for they are privileged in their persons out of
Parliament.

For the point of Interest it is plain, for no kind of Covenant can alter
Interest; and questionless had the case in the Exchequer appeared to the
Barons, as it does to us; they would never have proceeded as they did: if our
goods may be seized into the Exchequer, be it right or wrong; we had then as
good have nothing.


Sir Nathaniel Rich. It was recorded the last Session in the Lords House, and
cites other Presidents in this House, that a servant of a member of
Parliament, ought to have privilege in his goods; decided by Question, that a
Parliament man ought to have privilege of his goods.


Master Noye says, that these Customers had neither Commission nor command to
seize; therefore without doubt we may proceed safely to other Questions, that
the Privilege is broken by the Customers, without any relation to any
Commission or command of the King.

Secretary Cook says, it is in the Commission to seize; but the Commission
being read, it is not found to be there.

Chancellor of the Duchy says, Master Dawes mentioned, that he seized
those by virtue of a Commission; and other Warrants remaining in the hands of
Sir John Elliott: that therefore these Warrants may be seen, whether there be
not command to seize the goods.

Sir Nathaniel Rich. This days debate much rejoices me, especially the motion
made by Master Noye; whereby it is plain, we have a way open to go to the
Question, (without relation to the Kings Commission or command,) and desires
it, in respect there appears nothing before us that does incumber the Question.


Chancellor of the Duchy again desires these Warrants may be looked into,
before we proceed to the Question.

M. Kirtor. Because this Honorable Gentleman presses this so far, let it
appear with what judgment this House has proceeded.


M. Glanvile. I consent these Warrants be sent for and read; but withal, if
any thing arise that may produce any thing of ill consequence, let it be
considered from whence it comes: The Privy Counselors are contented with this
motion.

The Warrants being sent for and read, it is plain, there is no Warrant to
seize.


M. Kirton. If now there be any thing of doubt, I desire those Honorable
persons to make their objections.


Chancellor of the Duchy. I rejoice when I can go to the Court, able to
justify your proceedings; I confess I see nothing now, but that we may easily
proceed to the Question.


Master Secretary Cook says as much: Master Hawkewell argues against
Privilege in time of Prorogation.

Master Noye says, he had no doubt, but Privilege was in force in time of
Prorogation, until he heard this Argument of Master Hawkwell, and says he
has heard nothing from him yet that does alter his opinion; and cites a
President: wherein the Lords House has this very Prorogation adjudged the
Privilege.

Master Hackwell says, he is glad to hear it so; and he is now of the same
opinion.

Decided by Question, that Master Rolls ought to have Privilege of Parliament
for his goods seized, 30. of October, 35. Iacobi, and all since.

This Committee is adjourned until Monday, and the Customers are to attend.

Monday the 23. of February. Anno 1628.
Sir Humphrey May. I will never cease to give you the best advice I can: We all
agree, A word is given, We have wine and oil before us: If you go to punish
Delinquents, there is vinegar in the wound; think of some course to have
restitution.


Sir John Elliott. The Question is, whether we shall go to the restitution, or
to the point of delinquency of breach of Parliament, and other fears: I meet
with this both here and elsewhere, take heed you fall not upon a rock; I am
confident that this will be some what difficult, were it not for the justice
and goodness of the King: when we do that which is just, let there be no
fear or memory of breaches, and let us now go to the delinquency of these
men, and that is the way to procure satisfaction.


Secretary Cook. We labored the last day to bring us to our end; and now we
fall to this issue, to proceed to the delinquency of these men: our ground is,
because they have no command from his Majesty; I must speak plain English,
his Majesty took notice of our labor last Saturday, to sever the Act of the
Customers from his Majesty's command. His Majesty commanded me to tell you,
that it concerns him in a high degree of Justice and Honor, that truth be not
concealed; which is, what they did was his own direct order, and command of
the Council Board, himself being present: and therefore he will not have it
divided from his Act.


Report was made from the Grand Committee, that they took into their
consideration the violation of the liberty of the House by the Customers, and
at last they resolved that a Member of the House ought to have privilege of
person and goods; and the command of his Majesty is so great, that they leave
it to the House.

Secretary Cook reported a message and command from his Majesty, and said,
that howsoever the House labored to sever the Kings interest, His Majesty
thinks that this distinction will not clear his Honor, and he will not be
drawn to do that that may touch him; though others may make distinctions.

Sir Robert Phillippes. I had rather pray to God to direct us, then give any
direction: Now the Kings Honor, Justice; and Government are presented to us,
and also the essential liberty of this House; and are we now fit for a
debate? In the greatest retirement our best thoughts are summoned to resolve
what to do.


Hereupon the House was adjourned till Wednesday next.

On Wednesday the 25. of February, 1628. both Houses by his Majesty's command,
were adjourned till Monday morning next.

Monday the second day of March, Sir John Elliott made a Speech as follows.
God knows that I now speak with all duty to the King: It is true, the
misfortunes we suffer are many. We know what discoveries have been made; how
Arminianisme creepes and undermines, and how Popery comes upon us: they mask
not in strange disguises, but expose themselves to the view of the world. In
search of these we have fixed our eyes, not simply on the Actors, the Jesuits
and Priests, but on their Masters; those that are in authority: thence it is we
suffer, the fear of them makes these interruptions.

You have some Prelates that are their Abettors: That great Bishop of
Winchester, we know what he has done to favor them: The fear extends to some
others that contract a fear of being discovered; and they draw from thence
this jealousy: That is, the Lord Treasurer, a man in whose person all evil is
contracted; I find him Acting and Building on those grounds, laid by his
Master the great Duke; and his spirit is moving for this interruption: and for
this they break Parliaments, least Parliaments should break them. I find him
the head of all that great party; the Priests and all the Jesuits derive from
him their shelter and protection: He dismayes our Merchants, and he it is that
invites Strangers to come in to drive Trade, to serve their own ends.


Thus was put to Question, but Master Speaker refused to do it; and said he
was otherwise commanded by the King.

Whereupon Master Seldom speak as follows.

You Master Speaker say, you dare not put the Question which we commanded you;
if you will not put it, we must sit still; and so we shall never be able to
do any thing: they that come after you may say, they have the Kings command
not to do it. We sit here by the command of the King, under the great Seal;
and for you, you are by his Majesty sitting in his Royal Chair, before both
Houses appointed our Speaker, and you now refuse to be our Speaker.


The Protestation of the Commons in Parliament.
1. Elliot. Hollis.
Whosoever shall bring in an Innovation in Religion, or by favor or
countenance seek to extend or introduce Popery, or Arminianisme, or other
opinions disagreeing from the true and orthodoxe Church, shall be reputed a
capital enemy to this Kingdom and Commonwealth.

2. Whosoever shall counsel or advise the taking and levying of the Subsidies
of Tonnage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament; or shall be an Actor
or Instrument therein, shall likewise be reputed an Innovator in the
government, and a capital enemy to this Kingdom and Commonwealth.

3. If any Merchant or person whatsoever, shall voluntarily yield or pay the
said Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament; he
shall likewise be reputed a betrayer of the liberties of England, and an enemy
to the same.

Thereupon the House was dissolved by Proclamation.

The Kings Speech upon Thesday the tenth-day of March. 1628.
My Lords,
I never came here upon so unpleasing an occasion, being for the dissolving of
a Parliament; therefore many may wonder why I did not choose to do this by
Commission: It being the general Maxim of Kings, to lay harsh commands by
their Ministers, themselves only executing pleasing things: but considering
that Justice is as well in commending and rewarding of virtue, as in punishing
of vice; I thought it necessary to come here to day, to declare to you my
Lords, and all the world, that it was only the disobedient carriage of the
Lower House that has caused this dissolution at this time; and that you may
Lords are so far from being causers thereof, that I have as much comfort in
your obedience, and by all your carriage toward me, as I have cause to
distaste their proceedings: Yet that I may be clearly understood, I must
needs say that they do mistake me wonderously, that think that I lay this
fault equally upon all the Lower House; for I know there are many there, as
dutiful loyal subjects, as any are in the world; for I know it was only some
Vipers amongst them that did cast this miste of disobedience before their eyes;
although there were some there that could not be infected with this contagion,
insomuch that some by their speaking (which indeed was the general fault) on
the last day of the Parliament, did show their obedience.

To conclude, my Lords, all those ill affected persons must look to have their
reward: so you that are here of the Higher House, may justly claim from me
that protection and favor, that a good King bears to his faithful and loyal
Nobility.

Now my Lord execute that I command you.

The Lord Keeper. My Lords and Gentlemen of the House of Commons, His Majesty
does dissolve this Parliament.


FINIS.

