A DECLARATION OF THE PARLIAMENT Assembled at WESTMINSTER.
WHereas the Parliament of this Commonwealth having, through the eminent favor
and mercy of God, sat many years in the performance of the Trust reposed in
them by the people, whose Representatives they are; and being in the
prosecution of that duty assembled in Parliament at Westminster upon the 20th
day of April 1653. were then interrupted and forced out of the House from that
time until this present day.

And whereas the Officers of the Army raised by this Parliament, calling to
mind that the same Parliament, consisting of the Members which continued to
sit until the 20th of April 1653. were Assertors of the good Old Cause, and had
a special presence of God with them, and were signally blessed in that Work,
did adjudge it their duty (the desires of many good people concurring with them
therein) to invite the aforesaid Members to return to the exercise and
discharge of their Trust, as before the said 20th of April 1653.

And for the effecting thereof, the Lord Lambert, with diverse other Officers of
the Army, in the name of the Lord Fleetwood and Council of Officers of the
Army, did upon the 6th day of May 1659. resort unto the Speaker of the said
Parliament, and in the presence of many of the said Members of Parliament
presented a Declaration, containing their earnest desire, that the Parliament,
consisting of those Members who continued to sit since the year 1648. until the
20th of April 1653. would return to the exercise and discharge of their Trust,
promising their readiness in their places, as became them, to yield their
utmost assistance to them to sit in safety, for improving the present
opportunity for settling and securing the Peace and Freedom of this
Commonwealth, Praying for the presence and blessing of God upon their
endeavors.

Whereupon the Speaker, with the aforesaid Members of Parliament, resolved to
meet at Westminster the next morning, giving notice to others of their
Fellow Members of such their intention: And accordingly the Speaker, with the
said Members, being assembled at Westminster the 7th of May 1659. found it a
duty incumbent on them, not to neglect this opportunity, which the wonderful
and (as they hope) the gracious Providence of God has held forth unto them,
for the prosecution of what yet remains of their great Trust. All which the
Parliament taking into their consideration, do Declare, That they are resolved
(through the gracious assistance of Almighty God) to apply themselves to the
faithful discharge of the Trust reposed in them, and to endeavor the
Settlement of this Commonwealth upon such a Foundation, as may Assert,
Establish and Secure the Property and Liberties of the People in reference unto
all, both as Men and as Christians, and that without a single Person, Kingship
or House of Peers: And shall vigorously endeavor the carrying on of
Reformation so much desired, and so often declared for, to the end there may be
a Godly and faithful Magistracy and Ministry upheld and maintained in these
Nations, to the glory and praise of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the reviving
and making glad the hearts of the upright in the Land.

Saturday the 7th of May 1659.
Ordered by the Parliament, That this Declaration be forthwith Printed and
Published.

JO. PHELPES Clerk of the Parliament pro tempore.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN FIELD, and are to be sold at the seven Stars in
Fleetstreet over against Dunstans Church, 1659.


