FOUR ORDINANCES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS, Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Viz. The
1. for raising and maintaining of Horse and Foot for the Garrison of Gloucester.
The 2. for a weekly Assessement on the County and City of Gloucester. The 3. for
continuance of a weekly Assessement on the City and County of Gloucester. The 4.
concerning Currants.


13. Martii 1644.
ORdered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that the several Ordinances
for raising Moneys for the City and County of Gloucester, be forthwith Printed
and published.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands, March. 18. 1645.

10. Maii. 1644. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
for raising and maintaining of Horse and Foot for the Garrison of Gloucester,
and for the County of Gloucester, etc.
WHereas the County and City of Gloucester, and the County of the said City are
now in a sad condition, by reason of the enemies lying upon them, and keeping
many Garrisons in the County of Gloucester, and the Counties of Hereford,
Monmouth, Glamorgan, Brecknock, and Radnor, being almost all in their power,
whereby the Irish Rebels and other enemies have the freer passage for
prosecuting their bloody designs against this Kingdom to spoil and ruin the
same; for prevention whereof and to reduce the residue of the said Counties to
their due obedience of the King and Parliament, there is great necessity that
three or four hundred horse, and other Forces be presently raised, and money
provided for the same, and also for the better maintaining of the Forces
already raised, and to be raised in the said Counties and City. The Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, considering the premises, and well weighing
the extraordinary and faithful service performed at, before and since the late
siege of Gloucester, by the Garrison there, by Colonel Massey, and the Forces
under his command, Do declare, order, and ordains, and be it hereby ordered,
declared, and ordained, That Sir Robert Harley, Knight of the Bath; John Wild,
Serieant at Law; Nathaniel Stephens, Edward Stephens, Tho. Hodges, and Tho.
P^ry, Esquires; Members of the House of Commons, the Mayor and Recorder of the
City of Gloucester for the time being; Sir Giles Overbury, Knight; Edward
Massy, Colonel and Governor of Gloucester; James Kirle, John Stephens, Thomas
Stephens, Edward Harley, Isaac Bromwich, Sylvanus Wood, Willam Shepherd,
Stephen Flower, Edward Broughton, and Henry Jones, Esquires; shall be, and are
hereby nominated a Committee of, and for the said several Counties and City;
and that they, or any three or more of them shall hereby have full power and
Authority, to take the subscriptions of all such persons as will voluntarily
lend or contribute any sum or sums of Money, Plate, Horse or Arms toward
the supplies and provisions aforesaid, and for other necessaries for the
advancement of the said service, which sum and sums of Money, Plate, Horse,
or Arms to be subscribed, lent, and contributed as aforesaid, the said
Committee, or any three or more of them shall and may receive and employ for
the services aforesaid, and give Notes, or Acquittances for the several sums
of Money, Plate, Horse, or Arms so received, which said Notes or Acquittances
shall be a sufficient specialty for the several persons that shall lend, or
contribute any Money, Plate, Horse, or Arms as aforesaid, to demand re-payment
thereof, or the value thereof with such increase as shall be agreed upon so as
the same shall not exceed 8. l. per cent. And for the better enabling the said
Committee to make re-payment of such Moneys, and the value of such Plate,
Horse, and Arms as shall be lent for the purposes aforesaid and for the
raising, maintenance, and supplies of the said Forces from time to time as need
shall require, Be it further ordained by the Lords and Commons, that the said
Committee, or any three or more of them, shall have Power and Authority to put
in execution within the said Counties the several Ordinances of this present
Parliament hereafter mentioned; That is to say, The Ordinance for Sequestration
of Malignants, Delinquents, and Papists Estates; the Ordinance for raising of
Money, by taxing such as have not at all contributed, or not according to their
Estates; The Ordinance for the weekly Assessements, and all other Ordinances
made this present Parliament, for advance of Money through the whole Kingdom
of England, and dominion of Wales, for the service of the King and Parliament,
so far forth as they, or any of them have not been already fully executed
within the places aforesaid, except the Ordinances for leavying of Money by way
of Excise, or new Impost, the proceed of all which raised, and to be raised
within the said Counties, shall be paid unto the said Committee, or any three
or more of them to be issued out for the uses and purposes aforesaid, which
shall be a sufficient discharge to the Commissioners of Excise in that behalf.
And the Commissioners of Excise are Authorized, and hereby required from time
to time, to issue their Warrants to their inferior Officers within the said
Counties for payment of the said Moneys accordingly, and that the said
Committee, or any three or more of them take care of the full and due execution
of the said Ordinances, according to the tenure and true meaning of the same
respectively; and for the more speedy raising of Moneys for the repayment of
such sums, and the value of such Plate, Horse, or Arms, as shall be brought
in by subscriptions as aforesaid; Be it ordained by the Lords and Commons, that
the said Committees, or any three or more of them, shall have hereby full power
and authority to set, and let the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments of all
Malignants, Delinquents, and Papists, which shall be seized and sequestered
according to the Ordinance of Parliament for Sequestrations, within the said
Counties and City, from year to year, or by Lease or Leases for the intents
or purposes aforesaid, so long as the said Sequestration shall continue; and in
case the said Subscribers and Lenders shall not receive full satisfaction of
their principal Money, and interest to be lent and subscribed as aforesaid out
of the Estates of Malignants, Delinquents, and Papists, and other provision as
aforesaid, that then the said Subscribers, and Lenders, and every of them are
by virtue of this Ordinance to have the public faith of the Kingdom for the
repayment of such sum and sums of Money as shall be due unto them,

And be it further Ordained, that the said Committees or any three or more of
them shall have full power and Authority to name and appoint such Treasurers.
Collectors, and other Officers within the said Counties and City, as they shall
think fit and convenient for the better putting in Execution of all and every
the aforesaid Ordinances of Parliament, and of this present Ordinance, as well
for the receiving of all or any the said Moneys, as also for the issuing out of
the same, for the purposes aforesaid, by warrant under the hands of the said
Committee, in such manner as the said Committee, or any three or more of them
shall appoint, and to call to account from time to time upon Oath, all such
Treasurers, Collectors, and other persons who shall receive any Moneys, Plate,
Horse, or Arms, by virtue of this present Ordinance of Parliament, for the
Services aforesaid, and to give such fitting and reasonable allowances unto
such persons as shall be employed in the Execution of the Ordinance aforesaid,
and of this present Ordinance, or any of them for their charges and pains
therein, as the said Committees or any three or more of them shall think fit:
provided that such allowance shall not exceed the respective rates allowed by
the said several Ordinances in other Counties of the Kingdom for putting the
said Ordinances in Execution; And if any such Treasurers, Collectors or other
person or persons shall refuse to Account or pay in the Moneys wherewith they
are charged, then the said Committees, or any three or more of them, shall
return their names to one or both Houses of Parliament, and the said
Committees, or any three or more of them are hereby enabled and Authorized to
call to account upon oath all such person and persons of the said several
Counties, as have received any Moneys by Authority of Parliament, which they
have not made even payment of. And the said Committees or any three or more of
them are hereby Authorized, to Administer the several oaths specified in the
foresaid Ordinances, to such Commissioners or persons as have not already taken
the same: And be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the
personal Estates of such Malignants, Delinquents and Papists within the Cities
of London and Westminster, and within 20. miles of the same not yet sequestered
nor discovered, and which shall be discovered by the said Committees, or any
three, or more of them, or by such person or persons as they shall Authorize
under their hands and seals for that purpose, within three Months next after
the passing of this Ordinance shall be allowed unto the said Co^mittees for the
further advancement of the said service: Provided that the said concealed
Estates exceed not the sum 5000 pounds; And that the said Committees, or any
person or persons authorized by them as aforesaid, nor any of them shall
possess themselves of the said Delinquents or Papists Estates before he or
they acquaint the Committee of Lords and Commons for Sequestrations therewith,
or any three or more of them, whereof the Chayrman to be one, to the end, they
may judge of their Delinquency before his or their Estates he sequestered and
taken away: And be it further Ordained by the Lords and Commons, that the said
Committees, or any three or more of them, shall have power and authority, and
are hereby required to administer the late National Covenant appointed to be
taken by the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to all persons
within the said Counties and City, who ought to take the same by the late
Ordinance and Instructions for that purpose, and have not already taken it. And
be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the said Committees
or any three or more of them, shall have power to call before them all
Ministers and Schoolmasters within the said Counties and City that are
scandalous in their lives, or ill-affected to the Parliament, or fomenters of
this unnatural War, or shall wilfully refuse obedience to the Ordinances of
Parliament, or shall have deserted their ordinary place of Residence, not being
employed in the service of the King and Parliament, and they shall have power
to send for any witnesses, and examine any complaint, or receive any testimony
against them upon Oath of any person that shall be produced to give evidence
against them, and upon such proofs of the aforesaid crimes, the said
Committees, or any three or more of them; have hereby power to remove and eiect
all such scandalous Ministers and Schoolmasters, and in their places to
nominate and appoint such learned, able, and godly persons as they shall think
fit, and shall cause all such Ministers and Schoolmasters so nominated,
appointed, and placed, to be put in possession of the said several Churches
and Schools, who shall and may respectively take, receive, and perceive, to
their own use, the profits and revenues belonging to the said several
Churches and places in as large and ample manner as the several Ministers and
persons in the said several places have formerly used to do: And all Majors,
Sheriffs, Constables, and other. His Majesty's Officers and Ministers, are
hereby required to be ayding and affisting to the said Committee, as aforesaid
in the execution of this service; and it is lastly ordered, declared and
orpained, that the good endeavors of the said Committee in the execution of
the premises, are, and shall be taken as real and public testimonies to the
public weal, and themselves, and such others as shall act, and be ayding and
assisting to them according to the true meaning of this present Ordinance,
shall be for so doing, saved harmless and indempnified by power of Parliament.

FINIS.
Die Mercurii 2 Octobris 1644. An Ordinance for a weekly assessment on the
County of Gloucester, and on the City and County of the City of Gloucester.
WHereas the Committee nominated in a former Ordinance of Parliament, for
raising and maintaining of Horse and Foot, for the Garrison of Gloucester, and
for the County of Gloucester, Hereford, Monmouth, Glamorgan, Brecknock, and
Radnor, are not able by the Ordinances of Sequesiration of Delinquents and
Papists Estates, And the Ordinance of raising Moneys by taxing such as have not
Contributed, or not according to their Estates to raise such present sums of
Money as are expedient for the maintenance of the present Forces within the
said Garrison, and County of Gloucester.

It is therefore Ordained, And be it hereby Ordained by the Lords and Commons
in Parliament Assembled, That the said Committee nominated in the said
Ordinance, or any four or more of them, shall have, and hereby has power and
Authority to Rate and Tax upon the said County of Gloucester, the sum of one
thousand pounds a week, and on the said City and County of the said City of
Gloucester, the sum of one hundred pounds a week, to begin from the
Sixteenth day of August last past: And so to be weekly paid for the space of
five Months, Unless the said Houses of Parliament shall make any other Order
concerning the same, to be Rated, Taxed, Leavied, and Collected in such sort,
manner, and form, as is prescribed in the former Ordinances of the weekly
Assessments; And in lieu of the said weekly Assessments, and to be employed
for, and toward the maintenance of the said Forces in the said Garrison and
County of Gloucester, and City and County of the City of Gloucester, aforesaid:
And for preventing disorders in raising Horse, Leavying Moneys, and taking and
Seizing Goods without Authority,

It is hereby Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, That from henceforth no Horse shall be there raised, or Money
Levied, or Goods taken of any person or persons, without Consent and Order of
the said Committee, or the Major part of them then present, expressed by
warrant under their hands.

And that no free Quarter shall be Assigned, or taken of the Inhabitants under
Contribution: by the Commanders and Officers of Horse, and their Troopers, but
by like Order and Consent of the said Committee by warrant as aforesaid And so
long time as any of the said Troopers have free Quarter, they are to have but
half Pay: And the Officers to allow in Proportion out of their Pay.

And that all Officers, and Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, shall be Paid
according to the late establishment of my Lord Generals Army: And no Commander
or Officer there, shall receive Pay, but such as duly attend their Charge,
unless otherwise specially Employed in service of the Parliament.

And that no other Commander or Officer shall be Paid, but such as are received
now into service, and such as shall be here after received, and approved of by
the said Committee, or the Major part of them

And that no Officer or Commander shall receive Pay there as an Officer and
Commander, both Horse and Foot, by virtue of any Commission granted to any one
person, for Horse and Foot, except Collonell Massey Governouer of Gloucester.

And that all such Horse, Beasts and Cattle, as shall be taken and driven by
any of the Forces in the said several Counties, out of the Enemies Quarters,
shall be delivered to the said Committee, or such persons as they shall
appoint; To the end, they may be employed toward the Public Charge,
according to the said Ordinance, some reasonable reward to be allowed to the
said Soldiers, who shall do the said Service, as the said Committee shall
think fit.

And it is hereby Ordained that all Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers in the
said Garrison of Gloucester, and several Counties aforesaid, shall be, and are
hereby required from timeto time, Ayding and Asisting to the said Committee in
the execution of the said former Ordinance, and of this present Ordinance.

And that the said Committee, and their Agents, and Assistants, in execution of
the Premises, shall be Saved harmeles, and Protected by Authority of Parliament.

And lastly it is hereby Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the said
Commitee, or any five or more of them, may Imprison all such as shall make any
atempt, or do any Act tending to the disturbance of the proceedings of the
said Committee, Or the Peace of the said County, And them to fine, not
exceeding the Sum of Ten Pounds, upon every such offender; every such
offender to remain in Prison until he have satisfied and paid the said Fine,
which shall be Employed to the uses expressed in the said former Ordinance.

Hen: Elsynge Cler. Par. Dom. Com.

13. Martii 1644. An Ordinance for the continuance of a weekly assessment on
the County of Gloucester and on the City and County of the City of Gloucester.
WHereas the Committee nominated in a former Ordinance of Parliament, for
raising and maintaining of Horse and Foot for the Garrison of Gloucester, and
for the County of Gloucester, Hereford, Monmouth, Glamorgan, Brecknock, and
Radnor, are not able by the Ordinances of sequestration of Deliaquents and
Papists estates, And the Ordinance of raising moneys, by taxing such as have
not Contributed, or not according to their Estates, to raise such present sums
of money as are expedient for the maintenance of the present Forces within the
said Garrison and County of Gloucester.

It is therefore ordained, And be it hereby Ordined by the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, That the said Committee nominated in the said
Ordinance, or any four or more of them shall have and hereby has power and
Authority to Rate and Tax upon the said County of Gloucester, the Sum of one
thousand pound per week, and on the said City and County of the said City of
Gloucester, the Sum of one hundred pounds a week, to begin from the Sixteenth
day of January last past: and so to be weekly Paid for the space of nine
Months from henceforth next ensuing unless the said Houses of Parliament
shall make any other Order concerning the same, to be Rated, Taxed, Levied, and
Collected in such sort, manner and form, as is prescribed in the former
Ordinances of the weekly Assessments: and in lieu of the said weekly
Assessments: and to be employed for and toward the maintenance of the said
Forces in the said Garrison, and County of Gloucester, and City and County of
the City of Gloucester aforesaid.

15. Martii 1644
Whereas by Ordinance of Parliament, beareing date die veneris 21. Feb. 1644.
It is Ordained (int. alia) that one third part of the profit that shall arise
out of the Customs payable upon Currants shall be appropriated to the Garrison
of Gloucester. It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, that the Commissioners of the Customs, shall from time to time,
during the continuance of the said Ordinance, pay over all the said third part
of the profit that shall arise out of the Customs payable upon Currants, unto
Nathaniell Stephens, Thomas Hodges, and Thomas Pury, esquires, Members of the
House of Commons for the use of the Garrison of Gloucester upon account (if the
said Garrison be continued a Garrison) taking their receipt for the same,
which shall be to the said Commissioners and every of them a suficient
discharge in that behalf.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler Parl. Dom. Com.

FINIS.

