A DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament To the whole
Kingdom, Concerning the EXCISE: With additionall Instructions for the better
Regulating of the same.

Die Lunae 22 Feb. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, that this Declaration and
Jnstructions be forthwith printed and published.

Io. Brown. Cler. Parliam.

LONDON. Printed for John Wright, at the Kings head in the Old Bailey. 1646.

Die Lunae 22. Febr. 1646. A DECLARATION of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
PARLIAMENT, concerning the EXCISE.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking notice of the many
Tumults and great Riots, which have of late happened, and been privily
fomented in several parts of the Kingdom against the Recepts and Collections,
of the Excise, by the secret and subtle designs and practices of Malignants,
and such, who by their false and fained pretenses do endeavor to breed a
misunderstanding, and impatience in the People; have for the better manifesting
of the Justice of their proceeding, and realty of their intentions thought fit
to make this Declaration to the whole Kingdom.

That as nothing did or could have drawn them to resolve upon this imposition,
but the preservation of this Kingdom, the Religion, Laws and Liberties from
utter ruin, and destruction, all which at that time was threatened by the
restless, and cruel designs, practices, and treacheries of Papists and
Malignant persons, so they could then find no other means* after the
well-affected had so willingly borne so many great Levies, which the Malignants
had endeavored by all cunning ways to evade, how any longer to maintain the
Parliament forces, and other great affairs of the Common Wealth, and to draw
in the Malignants, and Neutrals to bear their proportional parts of the
charge, then by some such constant, and indifferent way; And what great
difficulties expenses, and charges, the said Lords and Commons have by the
Receipt* and credit of the Excize with some other helps as occasion did
require, been enabled ever since, through Gods blessing to overcome and
maintain by continually keeping on foot so many several Armies as they were
by the Kings party in Arms against the Parliament, enforced to raise in diverse
parts of the Kingdom by maintaining so many Garrisons by relieving of Ireland
from time to time when other supplies could not be timely raised, by satisfying
our Brethren of Scotland in part; is by this time so evident to the whole
Kingdom, that they hope no well affected person can, or will look back upon
what he has contributed in this way for his part, with any regret, or
repining, as if the same had, or can be fruitless to him, or his posterity;
And for the present continuance of this Leavy, when it shall be considered for
what great sums, and to how many well affected persons they have already
engaged the Excise for Moneys borrowed and justly due unto them, what expenses
they must yet be at before they can settle this Kingdom, what charges are
requisite to reduce the Kingdom of Ireland, and what great engagements do
otherwise lie upon the Parliament for many supplies and services, for
satisfying whereof the public Faith, and Honor of the Parliament, and
Kingdom is engaged, they are confident that no well-affected, or understanding
person can, or will desire, or expect that this Leavy, which they still find
the most equal and indifferent course to go through so many great affairs
should cease, while the Parliament is thus deeply engaged, and have so many
pressing occasions for Moneys for the necessary support, and preservation of
the Kingdom; And therefore the said Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
do hereby declare to the whole Kingdom that they shall, and do expect that all
persons whatsoever shall duly pay all sums of Money imposed by any Ordinance
of Parliament by way of Excise upon all, and every the Commodities,
Marchandizes, and things therein mentioned, and comprised, and that the same
Ordinances shall be duly observed according to the Rules therein prescribed
until further Order of both Houses of Parliament; Whereunto the said Lords and
Commons do hereby require all persons to yield all ready obedience, conformity
and assistance accordingly as they tender the honor of the Parliament, the
welfare of the Kingdom, and as they would approve themselves well affected to
both.

And we the said Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, to manifest our
constant and sincere intentions, in the continuance of this receipt of the
Excise, do hereby declare, that as hitherto the Revenue thereof has been
wholly employed for the Public uses and occasions of the Kingdom, and
diverted to no private use whatsoever, so they are still resolved to dispose
thereof in the same public and necessary services of the Commonwealth only,
and shall no longer continue this charge upon the Subject, then they shall
find the public affairs wherewith they are entrusted necessarily to require
the same; And when it shall please God by the continuance of his mercy, to
enable them to settle the Peace of the Kingdom, and to overcome the
engagements thereof in some good measure, they shall then make it ap^eare to
the whole World, how much more ready they are to ease the People of this
charge, then they were willing at first to impose the same. In the mean time,
and to the end that they may give all possible ease to the People, where the
nature of such a Leavie, and the just and most indifferent Rules, which must
necessarily be used and observed in the raising of the same, will admit thereof.

They have for the better regulation of this Receipt and for restreyning of
Arbitrary and Exorbitant power, resolved for the present on the Instructions
and Rules ensuing; And do hereby require the Commissioners of Excise, their
Sub-Commissioners and all other their Collectors and under Officers duly to
observe the same, and according as they the said Lords and Commons shall
further discover any further inconveniency or preasures upon the People in the
leavying of the Excise. It shall be their continual care to find out such
fitting remedies for the ease of them, and removing of all just grievances as
shall be a sufficient testinony to the whole Kingdom, how ready they are to
answer the great trust reposed in them, and to let the People enjoy the long
expected fruits of their great expenses and contributions.

And the said Lords and Commons do hereby further declare, and Ordain, that
for the better and dire punishment of all such Tumults, Riot^, and unlawful
Assemblies; All Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffes, and all
other his Majesty's Officers within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, as well within Liberties as without, within their several Counties,
Liberties, and Jurisdictions respectively, do from time to time make diligent
inquiry of all Tumults, Riots, and other unlawful Assemblies as have been, or
for time to come shall be made, done, or committed against the said
Commissioners of Excise, their Sub-Commissioners or any of their Officers, or
others in their aid and assistance in the execution of the several Ordinances
of Excise, and all such persons as have or shall make or cause such Tumults, or
Riots, to apprehend, and to commit to prison and to punish according to Law.

And in case any Tumult, or Riot be hereafter attempted, or acted against the
said Commissioners of Excise, their Sub-Commissioners, Collectors or Officers,
or others in their aid, and assistance. It is hereby further Ordained and
declared, that for the better aiding and assisting, the said Commissioners of
Excise, their several Sub-Commissioners, Officers, and others in their aid
and assistance, in pursuance of the said Ordinances of Parliament for the
levying of Excise; All Sheriffs, Deputie-Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other his Majesty's
Officers in their several Counties, Liberties, and Jurisdictions. All
Colonells, Captains, Officers and Soldiers, and all other his Majesty's
Subjects, be aiding and assisting from time to time upon notice to them given
for the suppressing of all such Tumults, Riots; and unlawful Assemblies, and
in apprehending and bringing to condign punishment, all such Rioters and
Offenders according to Law. And in ayding and assisting the said Commissioners
their Sub Commissioners and Officers, and others in their aid and assistance
in execution of the said Ordinances for Excise. And all such as shall be so
aiding and assisting, shall be defended and saved harmless and indempnified,
by Authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Die Lunae 22 Febr. 1646. Additionall Instructions concerning the Excize.
I.
THat no Excize, or Arreares of any Excize, due for any goods Excizeable,
consumed or spent, be henceforth Demanded, Leavied, or Collected by any Officer
or Collector of Excize, due by any person before such time as the Ordinances of
Excize have or shall begin to be put in Execution in the several Counties or
Cities, or any part of the said Counties.

II.
That no Excise, or any Arreares of Excise, be from henceforth Demanded,
Leavied, or Collected, by any Officer or Collector of Excize, for any Excize
that did grow due by any person, for any Goods within any County, City, Town,
or Place, during the time such County, City, Town, or Place, were under the
power of the Enemy.

III.
That the Excize of Ale and Beer be raised and leavied upon the Subjects of
this Kingdom, as is prescribed and directed by the several Ordinances of
Parliament, for the Assessing, Raising, and Collecting thereof, and not by way
of Poll, or otherwise, unless it be where any person or persons have, or shall
at their own desire, and free consent, and for such time only, as they shall
so desire and consent unto, in writing, compound by the Poll or otherwise, for
Beer and Ale brewed in their own houses, and consumed by themselves and
family within their own houses.

IV.
That upon complaint made upon Oath to any the Justices of Peace of any County
of this Kingdom, or to any Mayor, Bayliffe, or chief Officer, in any City or
Town Corporate, of the Kingdom of England or Dominion of Wales, That the
Sub-Commissioners of Excize, their Officers or Servants, or any of them, under
color or pretext of the trust in them reposed, and power given by the several
Ordinances of Parliament, have or shall oppress and abuse the People, by
exacting or compelling them to pay more or greater sums of Money, then is
appointed by the several Ordinances of Excize; or Fine and Imprison, contrary
to the said Ordinances, or to have converted or employed the Money by them
collected, to their own uses, or to any other use then is appointed by the
said Ordinances, or otherwise abuse the said Trusts and Power given them; That
the said Justices, Mayors, Bailiffs, and Chief Officers, have Authority, and
are hereby required, to send for the Parties and Witnesses, and to examine the
Witnesses upon Oath, giving notice to the Parties, of the time of examining the
said Witnesses; and the Examinations so taken upon Oath, to send up in writing,
sealed up, and subscribed by the hand of the Justice of Peace, or other chief
Officer, before whom the said Examinations shall be taken from time to time,
within twenty days after the complaint made to both or either House of
Parliament, or to the Committee of Lords and Commons for regulating the Excize,
sitting at the Star Chamber Westminster, who shall and will proceed to the
consideration of the said Offenses, and to the severe and due punishment of the
said Offenders, as to Justice shall appertain.

V.
That in case any Justice of Peace, Deputy Lieutenant, or any of the Committees
within the several Counties of this Kingdom shall refuse, or wilfully neglect
to pay the Excise by them due and payable, and to conform to the orders and
directions in the several Ordinances of Excise, or that shall affront, or
publicly abuse the said Sub-commissioners of Excise, or their Officers within
the said respective Counties, in the execution of their several duties and
places according to the Ordinances of Excise: That the Deputy Lievtenants,
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bayliffes, or other chief Officers within the
said Counties, Cities, and places, or any of them, upon notice and request to
them made by the said Sub-commissioners, or any of them, do examine the same
upon Oath, and thereof within twenty days certify in writing the said Houses
of Parliament, or either of them, or the Committee of Lords and Commons for
regulating the Excize, who will proceed thereupon against such persons as to
justice shall appertain according to their demerits.

VI.
That no person taking Alms or Collection, shall be compelled to pay Excize
for any Ale or Beer, that is, or shall be brewed in their own houses, and
consumed by themselves and family within their own houses.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

