The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
AND COMMONS In Parliament Assembled, Presented to HIS MAJESTY On the
Seventeenth of December, 1695

Printed at LONDON, and Reprinted at EDINBURGH, 1696.

Die Mercurij 18. Dec' 1695.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, do give Order, That the
Address made Yesterday, to His Majesty by both Houses of Parliament, be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric. Parliamentor.

The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
Die Veneris 13 Decembris, 1695.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
having taken into our Consideration the State of the Trade of this Kingdom, Do
find, That besides many other Disadvantages and Difficulties it now lies under,
An Act of Parliament, that has lately Received Your Majesty's Royal Assent in
Your Kingdom of Scotland, for Erecting a Company Trading to Africa and the
Indies, is likely to bring many great Prejudices and Mischiefs to all Your
Majesty's Subjects, that are concerned in the Wealth or Trade of this Nation;
and therefore in all Duty to Your Majesty, and the Care we ought to have of
this Kingdom, We do humbly Represent to Your Majesty, that the said Act does
provide, That all Ships, Vessels, Merchandise, Goods, and other Effects
whatsoever belonging to that Company, shall be free from all manner of
Restraints, or Prohibitions, and of all Customs, Taxes, Sesses, Supplies, or
other Duties Imposed or to be Imposed by Act of Parliament, or otherwise, for
the Space of One and Twenty Years: And father, that the said Company, whole
Members, Officers, Servants or others belonging thereto, shall be free both in
their Persons, Estates and Goods Employed in the said Stock and Trade, from all
manner of Taxes, Sesses, Supplies, Excises, Quartering of Soldiers Transient or
Local, or Levying of Soldiers, or other Impositions, during the space of One
and Twenty Years.

By reason of which great Advantages Granted to the Scots East India Company,
and the Duties and Difficulties that lie upon that Trade in England, a great
part of the Stock and Shipping of this Nation will be carried thither; and by
this Means Scotland be made a Free Port for all East India Commodities; and
consequently these several places in Europe, which were Supplied from England,
will be Furnished from thence, much Cheaper than can be done by the English:
And therefore this Nation will lose the Benefit of Supplying Foreign parts with
those Commodities, which has always been a great Article in the Balance of
our Foreign Trade: Moreover, the said Commodities will unavoidably be brought
by the Scots into England, by Stealth, both by Sea and Land, to the vast
prejudice of the English Trade and Navigation, and to the great Detriment of
Your Majesty in Your Customs. And when once that Nation shall have settled
themselves in Plantations in America, our Commerce in Tobacco, Sugar,
Cotton-Wool, Skins, Masts, etc. will be utterly lost, because the Privileges
of that Nation, Granted to them by this Act, are such, That that Kingdom must
be the Magazine for all those Commodities, and the English Plantations and the
Traffic thereof lost to us, and Exportation of our own Manufactures yearly
Decreased.

Besides these, and many other Obstructions that this Act will unavoidably
bring to the general Trade of this Nation Another Clause in the said Act,
whereby Your Majesty Promises to Interpose Your Authority, to have Restitution,
Reparation, and Satisfaction made for any Damage that may be done to any of the
Ships, Goods, Merchandise, Persons or other Effects whatsoever belonging to the
said Company, and that upon the Public Charge; Does seem to Engage Your
Majesty to Employ the Shipping and Strength at Sea of this Nation, to Support
this New Company, to the great Detriment even of this Kingdom.

All which great Prejudices, Inconveniences and Mischiefs arising by the said
Act, we in all Duty and Faithfulness lay before Your Majesty.

Matthew: Johnson. Cleric' Parliamentor.


