A DECLARATION Of The LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, With their
Resolution.

That if Captain Catesby, Captain Lilborne, Captain Vivers, or any others,
which are or shall be taken Prisoners, by his Majesty's Army, shall be put to
death, or any other hurt or Violence offered to their Persons, for their
faithful endeavors in the Parliaments service, the like punishment shall be
inflicted by death, or otherwise, upon such Prisoners, as have bin or shall be
taken by the forces raised by authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Also that if Judge Heath, or any other Minister of lustice shall do contrary
to this Ordinance, they for so doing shall be proceeded against, and dealt
with, as enemies to the King and Kingdom.

Die Sabbathi, December. 17. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliaments, that this
Declaration be forthwith Pr^^^ed and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.



December. 19. Printed for John Wright in the Old-Bailey. 1642.

A DECLARATION Of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Die Sabbathi, 17. December. 1642.
WHereas Information has bin given to the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, That Clifton Catesby, John Lilborne, and Robert Vivers, Captains
in the Army, raised by Authority of both Houses of Parliament, for the
necessary defense of the true Protestant Religion, the King, parliamen, and
Kingdom, under the Command of Robert Earl of Essex, Captain Gene rall
thereof, were taken prisoners by the Forces raised against the parliament, in
executing their several duties and services, according to the Ordinances of
both the said Houses, and after carried prisoners to Oxford Coal, and having
been most Barbarously used, are now questioned and proceeded against by way of
Indictment, before Sir Robert Heath Knight, one of His Majesty's Justices of
the Kings Bench, and others (by color of some Commission or other Authority
from His Majesty) for high Treason and other supposed Misdemeanors, whereas
many have been taken prisoners by the Parliament Forces, in the Act of War
against the parliament, which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm is
Rebellion and high Treason against the King and Kingdom, and the Actors
therein Traitors, and yet none of them has hitherto been put to death, or
otherwise severely dealt with by the parliament.

It is therefore Ordered and Declared by the said Lords and Commons, that all
such Indictments and other proceedings against the said Captain Catesby,
Captain Lilborne, and Captain Vivers, or against Captain Wingate, who have
done faithful and good service to the Common. Wealth, or against any other
person or persons who have done or shall do service in the said Army, or for
the Raising of any Money, plate, Horse, or Arms, for the maintenance thereof,
or otherwise in Execution of, or pursuance of any Order or Ordinance of both or
either of the said Houses of parliament, for the defense of the public
safety, are injust and illegal; and the said Sir Robert Heath, and all other
Commissioners, Justices, Sheriffs, Jurors, and other Officers and Ministers of
Justice, and other persons whatsoever, are hereby required and enjoined, to
surcease any further proceeding against the said persons before named, or any
other for any the causes aforesaid, upon the said Indictments or otherwise; And
the said Lords and Commons do further declare, that if the said persons before
named, or any of them, or any other, shall be put to death, or other hurt or
violence offered to their or any of their persons, for, or by reason of any
such service done, or to be done, by, or according to any Order or Ordinance of
both or either of the said Houses, the like punishment shall be inflicted by
death or otherwise upon such prisoners as have been or shall be taken by the
Forces raised by Authority of both Houses of Parliament; And if the said Sir
Robert Heath, or any other Commissioner, Justice, Sheriff, Juror, or other
Officer, or Minister of justice, or other person shall do contrary to this
Ordinance in any the premises, they and every of them for so doing, shall be
proceeded against, and dealtwith, as Enemies to the King and Kingdom.

FINIS.

