Die Martis, 26. Iulii. 1642.
A DECLARATION OF The Lords and Commons Assembled IN PARLIAMENT, With Additions
to a former DECLARATION, Dated. July 12. 1642.
For the Protecting of those who are employed by the Authority of both or
either House of Parliament, in the execution of the Ordinance for the MILITIA:
Or in Advancing the Propositions far raising of Horse, Monyes, or Plate
according to the Instructions of both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament do declare, that it is against the Laws
and Liberties of the Kingdom, that any of the Subjects thereof should be
commanded by the King to attend Him at His pleasure, but such as are bound
thereto by special service; And if any Messengers or Officers shall by color
of any Command from His Majesty, or VVarrant under His Majesty's hand, arrest,
take, or carry away any of His Majesty's Subjects to any place whatsoever,
contrary to their wills, That it is both against the Laws of the Land, the
Liberty of the Subjects, and is to the disturbance of the public Peace of the
Kingdom: And any of His Majesty's Subjects so arrested, may lawfully refuse to
obey such Arrests and Commands.

And it is further declared, that whosoever is employed by both or either House
of Parliament, concerning the Ordinance for the Militia, or in advancing the
Propositions, for raising of Horse, Money or Plate, according to the
Instructions of both Houses, or in furthering the subscriptions for Ireland, or
in any other Service of both or either House of Parliament, shall not depart
that Service, or attend his Majesty upon any summons or commands, signified by
Letter, Proclamation, or otherwise except such Persons shall be compelled to
such departure or attendance by authority of Law. And in so doing, both houses
of Parliament will extend the utmost of their Power for their indemnity.

Ordered that this be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

London. Printed by A. N. for E. Husbands and I. Franck* and are to be sold at
his shop at the Kings head in Fleetstreet.


