THE MESSAGE OF BOTH HOUSES To the King MARCH 22. 1641.

With His Majesty's ANSWER reported to the House of Peers, APRIL 1. 1642.

Published by Order of the Lords in PARLIAMENT.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. MDCXLII.

Die Veneris, 1. April. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament; That the Message of both Houses of
Parliament to His Majesty, dated the 22th of March, and His Majesty's Answer
thereunto, shall be forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parl.

To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY The humble Petition of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament.
May it please Your Majesty,
YOur Majesty's most loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament
cannot conceive that the Declaration which Your Majesty received from us at
New Market, was such as did deserve that censure Your Majesty was pleased to
lay upon us in that Speech which Your Majesty made to our Committees there,
and sent in writing to both Houses; Our address therein being accompanied with
Plainness, Humility, and Faithfulness, we thought more ^roper for the
removing the distraction of the Kingdom, then if we had then proceeded
according to Your Majesty's Message of the 20th of January, by which Your
Majest^e was pleas^d to desire, That we would declare what we intended to do
for Your Majesty, and what we expected to be done for our selves; in both
which we have been very much hindered by Your Majesty's denial to secure us and
the whole Kingdom, by disposing the Militia, as we had diverse times most humbly
Petiti^ned: And yet we have not bin altogether negligent of either, having
lately made good proceedings in preparing a cook of rates to be passed in a
Bill of Tonnage and Poundage; and likewise the most material Heads of those
humble desires which we intended to make to Your Majesty for the good and
contentment of Your Majesty and Your people; but none of these could be
perfected before the Kingdom be put into safety, by settling the Militia: And
until Your Majesty shall be pleased to concur with your Parliament in these
necessary things, we hold it impossible for you to give the world, or Your
people such satisfaction concerning the Fears and Jealousies which we have
expressed, as we hope your Majesty has already received touching that
exception which You were pleased to take to Master Pyms Speech.

As for Your Majesty's Fears and doubts, the ground whereof is from Seditious
Pamphlets and Sermons, we shall be as careful to endeavor the removal as soon
as we shall understand what Pamphlets and Sermons are by Your Majesty
intended, as we have been to prevent all dangerous Tumults: And ^f any
extraordinary concourse of people out of the City to Westminster had the face
and show of Tumult and danger in Your Majesty's apprehension, it will appear to
be caused by Your Majesty's denial of such a guard to Your Parliament as they
might have cause to confide in; And by taking into White Hall such a guard for
Your self as gave just cause of Jealousy to the Parliament, and of terror and
offense to Your People. We seek nothing but Your Majesty's Honor, and the
peace and prosperity of Your Kingdoms; And we are heartily sorry we have such
plentiful matter of an answer to that question, Whether you had violated our
Laws.

We beseech your Majesty to remember, that the Government of this Kingdom, as
it was in a great part managed by Your Ministers before the beginning of this
Parliament, consisted of many continued and multiplied acts of violation of
Laws, the wounds whereof were scarcely healed, when the extremity of all these
violations was far exceeded by the late strange and unheard of breach of our
Laws in the accusation of the Lord Kymbolton, and the five Members of the
Commons-house, and in the proceedings thereupon, for which we have yet received
no ful^ satisfaction.

To Your Majesty's next Question, Whether You had denied any Bill for the ease
and security of Your Subjects, We wish we could stop in the midst of our
answer, that with much thankfulness we acknowledge that Your Majesty has
past many good Bills full of contentment, and advantage to Your People; But
truth and necessity inforceth us to add this, That even in or about the time
of passing those Bills, some design or other has been on foot, which if it had
taken effect, would not only have deprived us of the fruit of those Bills, but
have reduced us to a worse condition of confusion then that wherein the
Parliament found us.

And if Your Majesty had asked us the third question intimated in that Speech,
What we had done for Your Self, our Answer would have been much more easy,
That we have paid two Armies, wherewith the Kingdom was burdened last year;
And have undergone the charge of the War in Ireland at this time, when through
many other excessive charges and Pressures, whereby Your Subjects have been
exhausted, and the stock of the Kingdom very much diminished: Which great
mischiefs, and the charges thereupon ensuing, have been occasioned by the evil
counsels so powerful with Your Majesty, which have, and will cost this
Kingdom more then two Millions: All which in Justice ought to have been born by
Your Majesty.

As for that free and general Pardon Your Majesty has been pleased to offer,
it can be no security to our Fears and Jealousies, for which Your Majesty
seems to propound it, because they arise not from any guilt of our own Actions,
but from the evil Designs and Attempts of others.

To this our humble Answer to that Speech, we desire to add an Information
which we lately received from the Deputy Governor of the Merchant Adventurers
at Rotterdam in Holland, That an unknown person p^^r^aining to the Lord Digby,
did lately solicit one James Henley a Mariner to go to Elsenore, and to take
charge of a Ship in the Fleet of the King of Denmark there prepared, which he
should conduct to Hull: In which Fleet likewise, he said a great Army was to be
transported. And although we are not apt to give credit to Informations of this
nature, yet we cannot altogether think it fit to be neglected, but that it may
justly add somewhat to the weight of our Fears and Jealousies, co sidering
with what circumstances it is accompanied, Of the Lord Digbies preceding
Expressions in his letter to Her Majesty, and Sir Lewis Dives, And Your
Majesty's succeeding course of withdrawing Your Self Northward from Your
Parliament, in a manner very suitable, and correspondent to that evil Counsel.

Which we doubt will make much deeper impression in the generality of Your
People; And therefore we most humbly advise and beseech Your Maj^stie for the
procuring and settling the confidence of Your Parliament, and all Your Subjects,
and for the other important reasons, concerning the recovery of Ireland, and
securing this Kingdom, which have been formerly presented to Your Majesty, You
will be graci^usly pleased (with all convenient speed) to return to these
parts, and to close with the Counsel and desire of Your Parliament, where You
shall find their dutiful affections, and endeavors ready to attend Your
Majesty with such entertainment, as shall not only give Your Majesty just
cause of security in their faithfulness, but other man fold evidences of their
earnest intentions and endeavors to advance Your Majesty's Service, Honor and
contentment, and to e^^ablish it upon the sure foundation of the Peace and
Prosperity of all Your Kingdoms.

His Majesty's Answer To the Petition of both Houses of PARLIAMENT, Presented
to Him at YORK on Saturday the 26th of March, 1642. by the Lord Willoughby,
Lord Dungarvan, and Sir Anthony Irby.
IF you would have had the patience to have expected Our Answer to your last
Declaration (which, considering the nature of it, has not been long in coming)
We believe you would have saved your selves the labor of saying much of this
Message. And We could wish that Our Privileges on all parts were so Stated,
that this way of Correspondencie might be preserved with that Freedom which
has been used of old: For We must tell you, that if you may ask any thing of
Us by Message or petition, and in what language (how unusual scever) you think
fit, and We must neither deny the thing you ask, nor give a reason why we
cannot grant it, without being taxed of breaking your Privileges, or being
counseled by those who are enemies to the Peace of the Kingdom, and favorers
of the Irish Rebellion (for we have seen your Printed Votes upon Our Message
from Huntington) you will reduce all Our Answers hereafter into a very little
room. In plain english, It is to take away the Freedom of Our Vote, which,
were we but a Subject, were High injustice; but being your King, we leave all
the world to judge what it is.

Is this the way to compose all misunderstandings? We thought we showed you one
by Our Message of the 20th of January, if you have a better or ^^adier, we
shall willingly hearken to it, for hitherto you have showed us none. But why
the refusal to consent to your order, (which you call a denial of the
Militia) should be any interruption to it, we cannot understand. For the
Militia (which we always thought necessary to be settled) we never denied the
thing (as we told you in Our Answer of the 28th of January, to the petition of
the House of Commons, for We accepted the persons, (except for Corporations) We
only denied the way. You ask it by way of Ordinance, and with such a preface
as We can neither with Justice to Our Honor, or innocence consent to: You
exclude Us for any Power in the disposition or execution of it, together with
you, and for a time utterly unlimited. We tell you we would have the thing
done; Allow the persons (with that exception;) Desire a Bill (the only good
old way of imposing on Our Subjects.) We are extremely unsatified what an
Ordinance is, but well satisfied, that without Our Consent it is nothing, not
binding: And it is evident by the long time spent in this argument, the
necessity and danger was not so imminent, but a Bill might have well been
prepared, which if it shall yet be done with that due regard to Us, and care of
Our People, in the limitation of the power and other circumstances, we shall
recede from nothing we formerly expressed in that Answer to your Order,
otherwise we must declare to all the world, That we are nothing satisfied with,
or shall ever allow Our Subjects to be bound by your printed Votes of the
fifteenth or sixteenth of this month, or that under pretense of declaring what
the Law of the Land is, you shall (without Us) make a new Law, which is plainly
the case of the Militia: And what is this but to introduce an Arbitrary way of
Government?

Concerning Pyms Speech, you will have found by what the Lord Compton, and Mr
Baynton brought from Us, in answer to that Message they brought to Us, that as
yet we rest nothing satisfied in that particular.

As for the seditious Pamphlets and Sirmons, we are both sorry and ashamed in
so great a variety, and in which Our Rights, Honor and Authority are so
insolently slighted and vilified, and in which the Dignity and Freedom of
Parliament is so much invaded and violated, it should be asked of Us to name
any; the mentioning of the Protestation protested, the Apprentices
Protestation, To your Tents, O Israel, or any other, would be too great an
excuse for the rest. If you think them not worth the inquiry, We have done. But
We think it most strange, to be told, That Our denial of a Guard (which We yet
never denied, but granted in another manner, and under a Command at that time,
most accustomed in the Kingdom) or the denial of any thing else (which is in
Our power legally to deny) which in Our understanding (of which God has surely
given Us some use) is not fit to be granted, should be any excuse for so
dangerous concourse of people, which not only in Our apprehension, but (we
believe) in the interpretation of Law it self, has been always held most
tumultuous and seditious. And we must wonder, what, and whence comes the
Instructions and Informations that those people have, who can so easily think
themselves obliged by the Protestation to assemble in such a manner, for the
defense of Privileges, which cannot be so clearly known to any of them, and so
negligently pass over the consideration, and defense of Our Rights (so
beneficial and necessary for themselves, and scarce unknown to any of them)
which by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy (and even by the same
Protestation) they are at least equally obliged to defend. And what
interruptions such kind of Assemblies may be to the freedom of future
parliaments (if not seasonably discountenanced and suppressed) we must advise
you to consider, as likewise whether both Our powers may not by such means by
usurped, by hands not trusted by the Constitution of this Kingdom. For Our
Guard, we refer you to Our Answer to your Declaration.

By that Question of Violating your Laws; by which we endeavored to express
Our care and resolution to observe them; we did not expect you would have been
invited to have looked back so many years, for which you have had so ample
Reparation; Neither looked we to be reproached with the Actions of our
Ministers (then against the Laws) whilst we express so great a zeal for the
present defense of them, it being Our Resolution, upon observation of the
mischief which then grew by Arbitrary power (though made plausible to Us by the
suggestions of necessity and imminent danger, and take you heed ye fall not
into the same error upon the same suggestions) hereafter to keep the Rule Our
self, and to Our power require the same from all others. But above all, we must
be most sensible of what you cast upon Us for requital of those good Bills you
cannot deny. We have denied any such Design, and as God Almighty must judge
in that point between Us, who knows Our upright intentions at the passing
those Laws: So in the mean time we defy the Devil to prove that there was any
Design (with Our knowledge or Privity) in or about the time of passing those
Bills, that had it taken effect could have deprived Our Subjects of the fruit of
them: And therefore we demand full Reparation in this point, that we may be
cleared in the sight of all the world, and chiefly in the eyes of Our loving
Subjects, from so notorious and false an imputation as this is.

We are far from denying what you have done. For we acknowledge the charge Our
People have sustained in keeping the two Armies, and in relieving Ireland, of
which we are so sensible, that in regard of those great Burdens Our People
have undergone, we have and do patiently suffer those extreme personal wants,
as Our Predecessors have been seldom put to, rather then we would press upon
them: which we hope (in time) will be considered on your parts.

In Our offer of a General Pardon, Our intent was to compose and secure the
general condition of Our Subjects, conceiving that in these times of great
Distractions the good Laws of the Land have not been enough observed; But it
is a strange world when Princes proffered Favors are counted Reproaches: yet,
if you like not this Our offer, we have done.

Concerning any discourses of Foreign Forces (though we have given you a full
Answer in Ours to your last Declaration, yet) we must tell you, we have neither
so ill an opinion of Our own merit, or the Affections of Our good Subjects, as
to think Our self in need of any Foreign Force to preserve Us from Oppression
(and we shall not need for any other purpose) but are confident (through Gods
providence) not to want the good wishes and assistance of the whole Kingdom,
being resolved to build upon that sure Foundation, the Law of the Land. And we
take it very ill that any general Discourses between an unknown Person and a
Mariner, or inferences upon Letters should be able to prevail in matters so
improbable in themselves, and scandalous to Us, for which We cannot but
likewise ask Reparation, not only for the vindicating of Our Own Honor, but
also thereby to settle the minds of Our Subjects, whose Fears and Iealousies
would soon vanish, were they not fed and maintained by such false and malicious
Rumors as these.

For Our return to Our Parliament, We have given you a full Answer in Ours to
your Declaration, and you ought to look on Us as not gone but driven (We say
not by you, yet) from you. And if it be not so easy for you to make Our
residence in London so safe as We could desire, We are, and will be contented
that Our Parliament be adjourned to such a place, where We may be fitly and
safely with you. For (though we are not pleased to be at this distance, yet) ye
are not to expect Our Presence, Until ye shall both secure Us concerning Our
just apprehensions of Tumultuary Insolences, and likewise give Us satisfaction
for those Insupportable and Insolent Scandals that are raised upon Us.

To conclude, As We have or shall not Refuse any way agreeable to Justice or
Honor, which shall be offered to Us for the begetting a right understanding
between Us: So we are Resolved, that no straits or necessities (to which we may
be driven) shall ever compel Us to do that, which the Reason and understanding
that God has given Us, and Our Own Honor and Interest, with which God has
trusted Us for the good of Our Posterity and Kingdoms, shall render unpleasant
and grievous unto Us.

And we assure you that (how meanly soever you are pleased to value the
discharge of Our public duty) we are so Conscious to Our self of having done
Our part, since this Parliament, that (in whatsoever condition we now stand) we
are confident of the continued Protection from Almighty God, and the constant
gratitude, obedience, and affection from Our people: And we shall trust God
with all.

FINIS.

