A LETTER Sent by order of both Houses of Parliament, to the high Sheriff of
every Shire, concerning matters of great consequence.

ALSO An Order of both Houses of Parliament; concerning such persons as are
appointed for the gathering of such sums of money in London, as is intended for
the reducing of the Rebels in Ireland.

Ordered by both Houses to be printed.

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his shop next door to
the Kings head in Fleetstreet, 1642.

Mr. SHERIFF,
THe Lords and Oo^mons being deeply sensible of the unspeakable calamities,
which his Majesty's good Subjects of the Kingdom of Ireland do now suffer by
the barbarous Cruelties, and Massacres of the Rebels there, and conceiving
these printed Propositions herewith sent (being ratified by his Majesty's
Royal Assent, and the unanimous approbation of both Houses of Parliament) do
undoubtedly tend, to the speedy and effectual reducing of those bloody Rebels,
the propagating of the Protestant Religion, the augmenting of the greatness,
and Revenew of the Crown of England, and the establishing of an happy and
firm peace for the future in his Majesty's three Kingdoms, And all this to be
effected (by Gods gracious assistance) without the general charge of the
Subject, and to the great advantage of those that shall under-write, have
thought fit to require you to publish these printed Propositions and
Instructions at this Lent Assizes, to the intent, that all his Majesty's good
people within your County, may take notice of the benefit they may receive by
under-writing in due time, and that so many of them then present, and willing
to subscribe, may give up a note of their names, sums, and Dates of their
Subscriptions to you, to be entered in the paper book, mentioned in the printed
Instructions, which is forthwith to be sent unto you; And you are further
directed hereby at this Lent Assizes (if they be not past) by the advice and
assistance of the Justices of peace for your County then present, to appoint
certain days and places, most convenient for this service, when, and where
your self, and the Justices of peace within each division will be present to
receive the names, sums, and times of subscription of such of his Majesty's
well-affected Subjects within your County, as shall not have subscribed at this
Lent Assizes, their names, sums, and times of subscription to be likewise
entered in the Paper book. And if this become to your hands after the Assizes;
then to appoint such times and places, as may best speed this service.

And further, your self and the Justices of Peace, the Ministers of Gods word,
and persons of quality within your County, are hereby earnestly desired to show
themselves active, and exemplary in advancing this great and pious work, as a
service tending so much to the glory of God, the honor and profit of his
Majesty, and the peace and tranquillity of his three Kingdoms for the future.

And you are likewise to inform those that shall under-write, that the act of
Parliament (which his Majesty has promised to pass for the settling of those
two Millions and a half of Acres) is already in hand, and that the lands are
to be divided so indifferently by lot amongst them that under-write, that no
one man whatsoever shall have more respect or advantage then another in the
division:

And lastly, you are to give a speedy account to the Parliament of your
proceedings and of those that do really advance this service; Thus not
doubting of your utmost care and diligence herein, we bid you heartily
farewell.

Your lov. Friends.

March 5. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that John
Warner, John Towes, Thomas Andrews, Aldermen, and Lawrence Halsted Esquire, or
any two of them shall receive all such subscriptions and sums of money as
shall be subscribed, and paid in according to the printed Propositions made for
the speedy reducing of the Rebels of Ireland, and assented unto by his
Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, and are daily to attend that service at
the Chamber of London, from eight of the clock till eleven in the forenoon, and
from two of the clock till six in the afternoon, and it is further ordered, that
this order shall be forthwith printed and published.

FINIS.

