THE HVMBLE PETITION AND DECLARATION of both Houses of Parliament, to the KINGS
Most Excellent Majesty,

Sent to York by one Lord, and two Members of the House of Commons, on
Wednesday the 23. of March. 1641.

In Answer to every particular of his Majesty's Speech at Newmarket: which he
made to the Committee of both Houses when they presented the last Declaration.

With their Additionall Information received from the Governor of Rotterdam,
concerning the great Fleet prepared in Denmark, which by means of the Lord
Digby should have been transported over to Hull.

Whereunto is added, A Copy of the Petition, delivered to the King at Newark,
by the Inhabitants of Lincoln.

London, Printed by the copy that was printed for John Wright. Ann. Dom. 1641.

March 23. 1641. TO THE KINGS Most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition and Declaration of the Lords and Commons, assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Majesty,
YOur Majesty's most loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
cannot conceive that the Declaration which your Majesty received from us at
Newmarket, was such as did deserve that censure your Majesty was pleased to
say upon us, in that Speech which your Majesty made to our Committees there,
and sent in writing to both Houses; our address therein being accompanied with
plainness, humility, and faithfulness, we thought more proper for removing
the distraction of the Kingdom, then if we had then proceeded according to
your Majesty's Message of the 20. of January. By which your Majesty was
pleased to desire, that we would declare what we intended to do for your
Majesty, and what we expected to be done for our selves. In both which we have
been very much hindered by your Majesty's denial to secure us and the whole
Kingdom, by disposing the Militia, as we had diverse times most humbly
petitioned, and yet we have not been altogether negligent of either; having
lately made good proceedings in preparing a book of Rates, to be passed in a
Bill of Tunnage and Poundage: and likewise the most material heads of those
humble desires which we intended to make for the good and contentment of your
Majesty and your people: but none of these could be perfected before the
Kingdom be put into safety, by settling the Militia; And until your Majesty
shall be pleased to concur with your Parliament in these necessary things, we
hold it impossible for you to give the World or your People such satisfaction
concerning the fears and jealousies which we have expressed, as we hope your
Majesty has already received, touching that exception which you were pleased
to take to Master Pyms Speech.

As for your Majesty's fears and doubts, the ground whereof is from seditious
Pamphlets and Sermons, we shall be as careful to endeavor the removal, as
soon as we shall understand what Pamphlets and Sermons are by your Majesty
intended; as we have been to prevent all dangerous Tumults. And if any
extraordinary concourse of people out of the City to Westminster, had the face
and show of tumult and danger in your Majesty's apprehension, it will appear
to be caused by your Majesty's denial of such a guard to your Parliament as
they might have cause to confide in, and by taking into White hall such a Guard
for your self, as gave just cause of jealousy to the Parliament; and of
terror and offense to your People. We seek nothing but your Majesty's Honor,
and the peace and prosperity of your Kingdoms. And we are heartily sorry we
have such plentiful matter of an answer to that question, Whether you had
violated our Laws? We beseech You to remember that the Government of this
Kingdom as it was in a great part managed by your Ministers before the
beginning of this Parliament, consisted of many continued and multiplied Acts
of violation of Laws, the wounds whereof were scarcely healed, when the
extremity of all these violations, was far exceeded by the late strange and
unheard of breach of our laws in the Accusation of the Lord Kimbolton, and the
five Members of the Commons House, and in the proceedings thereupon: for which
we have yet received no full satisfaction.

To your Majesty's next question, Whether you had denied any Bill for the ease
and security of your Subjects, we wish we could stop in the midst of our
answer; that with much thankfulness we acknowledge that your Majesty has past
many good Bills full of contentment, and advantage to your People: But Truth and
Necessity enforces us to add this, That even in or about the time of passing
those Bills, some design or other had been afoot, which if it had taken effect,
would not only have deprived us of the fruit of those Bills, but have reduced
us to a worse condition of confusion than that wherein the Parliament found us.

And if your Majesty had asked us the third question intimated in that Speech,
what we had done for your self, our answer would have been much more easy,
That we have paid two Armies wherewith the Kingdom was burdened last year; and
have undergone the charge of the war in IRELAND at this time; when through many
other excessive charges and pressures, whereby your Subjects have been
exhausted, and the stock of the Kingdom very much diminished; which great
mischiefs, and the charges thereupon ensuing, have been occasioned by the
evil counsels so powerful with your Majesty, which have and will cost this
Kingdom more than two millions: all which in justice ought to have been borne
by your Majesty.

As for that free and general pardon your Majesty has been pleased to offer,
it can be no security to our fears and jealousies, for which your Majesty
seems to propound it; because they arise not from any guilt of our own
actions, but from the evil designs and attempts of others.

To this our humble Answer to that Speech, we desire to add an information
which we lately received from the Deputy Governor of the Merchant Adventurers
at Roterdam in Holland, That an unknown person appertaining to the Lord Digby
did lately solicit one James Henly a Mariner to go to Elsenore, and to take
charge of a Ship in the Fleet of the King of Denmark there prepared, which he
should conduct to Hull: in which Fleet likewise he said a great Army was to be
transported. And although we are not apt to give credit to Informations of this
nature, yet we cannot altogether think it fit to be neglected, but that it may
justly add somewhat to the weight of our fears and jealousies, considering
with what circumstances it is accompanied of the Lord Dighies preceding
expressions in his Letter to her Majesty, and Sir Lewis Dives; and your
Majesty's succeeding course of withdrawing your self Northward from your
Parliament, in a manner very suitable and correspondent to that evil counsel.

Which we doubt will make much deeper impression in the generality of your
People. And therefore we most humbly advise and beseech your Majesty for the
procuring and settling the Confidence of your Parliament and all your Subjects,
and for the other important reasons concerning the recovery of Ireland and
securing this Kingdom, which have been formerly presented to your Majesty, you
will be graciously pleased with all convenient speed to return to these parts,
and to close with the Counsel and desire of your Parliament: where you shall
find their dutiful affections and endeavors, ready to attend your Majesty
with such entertainment, as shall not only give your Majesty just cause of
security in their faithfulness; but other manifold evidences of their earnest
intentions and endeavors to advance your Majesty's service, honor and
contentment; and to establish it upon the sure foundation of the peace and
prosperity of all your Kingdoms.

FINIS.
A copy of the Petition delivered to the KING at Newark, in his Majesty's
passage to York, by diverse of the Inhabitants of the County of Lincoln.
To the KINGS Most Excellent Majesty. The humble Petition of your Majesty's
loving Subjects, in the County of Lincoln.
IN all humility representing, as our thankfullest acknowledgements to God, and
to your Majesty, of the gracious blessings which we have for these many years
enjoyed under your Majesty's Government, and particularly the blessed fruits of
this present Parliament, by your Majesty's wisdom and goodness assembled,
whereby many wholesome laws have been enacted for the great honor of your
Majesty, the relief of your People, the prosperous Government of this Kingdom,
and happy settling of the late troubles in both Kingdoms. So also our saddest
regreat for any the least misunderstanding and differences which have happened
between your sacred Majesty and the said Parliament, or any of the Members of
the same, with our many distractions thereupon, and fears of the utter ruin
of your Majesty, your royal Posterity and Kingdoms, by the malicious and
insolent designs of the Popish party, and the advantage that foreign enemies
may take thereby.

Humbly prostrating our selves at your Majesty's feet, do most affectionately
pray, That your Majesty and Parliament may by all good means be firmly
reunited, and for that purpose, That you would graciously please to reside
near, and listen unto the faithful Counsels of your said Parliament; Whereby
Romish Idolatry and Superstition may be extirpated. The Church and
Commonwealth duly reformed, the true Religion, and all things settled in a
blessed peace under your Majesty's government, And we shall still have further
cause to continue our cheerful Aides, both of persons and estates, for your
Majesty and your Kingdoms prosperity and honor,

And ever pray for your Majesty's long and happy Reign over us, etc.


