THE HUMBLE Desires and Propositions OF The LORDS and COMMONS in PARLIAMENT,
tendered to His MAJESTY, February 1. AND His MAJESTY'S Gracious Answer and
Propositions The third of February 1642.

C R
HONI QVI MALl Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1642.

The humble Desires and Propositions of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, tendered unto His Majesty February 1. 1642.
WE Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, having in our thoughts the Glory of God, Your Majesty's
Honor, and the Prosperity of Your People, and being most grievously afflicted
with the pressing Miseries and Calamities which have overwhelmed Your two
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, since Your Majesty has, by the persuasion of
evil Counselors, withdrawn Your Self from the Parliament, raised an Army
against it, and by force thereof protected Delinquents from the Justice of it;
constraining us to take Arms for The Defense of our Religion, Laws, Liberties,
Privileges of Parliament, and for the sitting of the Parliament in safety;
which Fears and Dangers are continued and increased by the Raising, Drawing
together, and Arming of great numbers of Papists under the command of the Earl
of Newcastle: likewise by making the Lord Herbert of Ragland, and other known
Papists, Commanders of great Forces, whereby many grievous Oppressions,
Rapines, and Cruelties have been, and are daily exercised upon the Persons and
Estates of Your People, Much innocent blood has been spilt, and the Papists
have attained means of attempting, with hopes of effecting their mischievous
Design of rooting out the Reformed Religion, and destroying the Professors
thereof. In the tender sense and compassion of these Evils, under which Your
People and Kingdom lie (according to the Duty which we owe to God, Your
Majesty, and the Kingdom for which we are trusted) do most earnestly desire,
That an end may be put to these great Distempers and Distractions, for the
preventing of that Desolation which does threaten all Your Majesty's Dominions;
And as we have rendered, and still are ready to render to Your Majesty that
Subjection, Obedience, and Service which we owe unto You, so we most humbly
beseech Your Majesty to remove the causes of this War, and to vouchsafe us
that Peace and Protection which we and our Ancestors have formerly enjoyed
under Your Majesty and Your Royal Predecessors, and graciously to accept and
grant these our most humble Desires and Propositions.

I. THat Your Majesty will be pleased to disband Your Armies, as we likewise
shall be ready to disband all those Forces which we have raised, and that You
will be pleased to return to Your Parliament.

II. That You will leave Delinquents to a legal trial, and Judgment of
Parliament.

III. That the Papists may not only be disbanded, but disarmed according to
Law.

IIII. That Your Majesty will be pleased to give Your Royal assent unto the
Bill for taking away superstitious Innovations: To the Bill for the utter
abolishing and taking away of all Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and
Commissaries, Deans, Subdeans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons, and
Prebendaries, and all Chaunters, Chancellours, Treasurers, Subtreasurers,
Succentors, and Sacrists, and all Vicars Chorall, and Choristers, old Vicars
and new Vicars of any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all other their
under Officers out of the Church of England: To the Bill against scandalous
Ministers: To the Bill against Pluralities: And to the Bill for confultation to
be had with Godly, Religious, and Learned Divines: That Your Majesty will be
pleased to promise to pass such other good Bills for settling of
Church Government, as upon consultation with the Assembly of the said Divines
shall be resolved on by both Houses of Parliament, and by them be presented to
Your Majesty.

V. That Your Majesty having expressed in Your Answer to the nineteen
Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, an hearty Affection and Intention
for the rooting out of Popery out of this Kingdom, and that if both the Houses
of Parliament can yet find a more effectual course to disable Jesuits,
Priests, and Popish Recusants, from disturbing the State, or deluding the Laws,
that You would willingly give Your consent unto it. That You would be
graciously pleased for the better discovery and speedier conviction of
Recusants, that an Oath may be established by Act of Parliament, to be
administered in such manner as by both Houses shall be agreed on, wherein they
shall abjure and renounce the Popes Supremacy, the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, worshipping of the consecrated Host, Crucifixes
and Images; and the refusing the said Oath, being tendered in such manner as
shall be appointed by Act of Parliament, shall be a sufficient conviction in
Law of Recusancie. And that Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to give
Your Roya'l assent unto a Bill for the Education of the children of Papists by
Protestants in the Protestant Religion. That for the more effectual execution
of the Laws against Popish Recusants, Your Majesty would be pleased to consent
to a Bill for the true leavying of the Penalties against them, and that the
same Penalties may be leavied and disposed of in such manner as both Houses of
Parliament shall agree on, so as Your Majesty be at no loss: And likewise to
a Bill, whereby the practice of Papists against the State may be prevented, and
the Law against them duly executed.

VI. That the Earl of Bristoll may be removed from Your Majesty's Councels; and
that both he and the Lord Herbert, eldest son to the Earl of Worcester, may
likewise be restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court; And that they
may not bear any Office, or have any Imploiments conceming State or
Commonwealth.

VII. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased by Act of Parliament to
settle the Militia both by Sea and Land, and for the Forts and Ports of the
Kingdom in such a manner as shall be agreed on by both Houses.

VIII. That Your Majesty will be pleased by Your Letters Patents, to make Sir
John Brampston chief Justice of Your Court of Kings Bench; William Lenthall
Esquire, the now Speaker of the Commons House, Master of the Rolls, and to
continue the Lord chief Justice Banks chief Justice of the Court of
Common Pleas, and likewise to make Master Sergeant Will chief Paron of Your
Court of Exchequer, and that Master Justice Bacon may be cominued, and Master
Sergeant Rolls, and Master Sergeant Atkins made Justices of the Kings Bench;
That Master Justice Reeves, and Master Justice Foster may be continued, and
Master Sergeant Pheosant made one of the Justices of Your Court of Common
Pleas; That Master Sergeant Creswell, Master Samuel Brown, and Master John
Pubeston may be Barons of the Exchequer; And that all these, and all the Judges
of the same Courts for the time to come, may hold their places by Letters
Patents under the Great Seal Quam diu se been gesserint; And that the sevenall
persons not before named, that do hold any of these places before mentioned,
may be removed.

IX. That all such persons as have been put out of the Commissions of Peace, or
Oyer and Terminer, or from being Custodes Rotulorum, since the first day of
April 1642. (other then such as were put out by desire of both, or either of
the Houses of Parliament) may again be put into those Commissions and Offices,
and that such persons may be put out of those Commissions and Offices as shall
be excepted against by both Houses of Parliament.

X. That Your Majesty will be pleased to pass the Bill now presented to Your
Majesty, to vindicate and secure the Privileges of Parliament from the ill
consequence of the late President, in the charge and proceeding against the
Lord Kimbolton, now Earl of Manchester, and the five Members of the House of
Commons.

XI. That Your Majesty's Royal assent may be given unto such Acts as shall be
advised by both Houses of Parliament for the satisfying and paying the Debts
and Damages, wherein the two Houses of Parliament have engaged the Public
Faith of the Kingdom.

XII. That Your Majesty will be pleased, according to a gracious Answer
heretofore received from You, to enter into a more strict Alliance with the
States of the united Provinces, and other Neighbor Princes and States of the
Protestant Religion, for the defense and maintenance thereof against all
Designs and Attempts of the Popish and Jesuiticall Faction to subvert and
suppress it, whereby Your Subjects may hope to be free stom the mischiefs
which this Kingdom has endured through the power which some of that Party have
had in your Councels, and will be much encouraged in a Parliamentary way for
Your aid and assistance, in restoring Your Royal Sister, and the Prince
Elector to those Dignities and Dominions which belong unto them, and the
relieving the other Protestant Princes who have suffered in the same cause.

XIII. That in the general Pardon which Your Majesty has been pleased to
offer to Your Subjects, all offenses and misdemeanors committed before the
tenth of January 1641. which have bin or shall be questioned or proceeded against
in Parliament upon complaint in the House of Commons before the tenth of
January 1643. shall be excepted (which offenses and misdemeanors shall
nevertheless be taken and adjudged to be fully discharged against all other
inferior Courts) That likewise there shall be an Exception of all offenses
committed by any person or persons, which has or have had any hand or practice
in the Rebellion of Ireland, which has or have given any counsel, assistanee
or encouragement to the Rebels there, for the maintenance of that Rebellion,
as likewise Exception of William Earl of Newcastle, and George Lord Digby.

XIIII. That Your Majesty will be pleased to restore such Members of either
House of Parliament to their several places of services and employment, out of
which they have been put since the beginning of this Parliament; That they may
receive satisfaction and reparation for those places, and for the Profits which
they have lost by such removalls, upon the Petition of both Houses of
Parliament; And that all others may be restored to their Offices and
employments who have been put out of the same upon any displeasure conceived
against them for any assistance given to both Houses of Parliament, or obeying
their Commands, or forbearing to leave their Attendance upon the Parliament
without license, or for any other occasion arising from these unhappy
differences betwixt Your Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, upon the like
Petition of both Houses.

THese things being granted and performed, as it has always been our hearty
prayer, so shall we be enabled to make it our hopeful endeavor, that Your
Majesty and Your People may enjoy the blessings of Peace, Truth and Justice;
The Royalty and Greatness of Your Throne may be supported by the Loyal and
Bountiful affections of Your People, Their Liberties and Privileges
maintained by Your Majesty's Protection and Justice, and this Public Honor
and Happiness of Your Majesty and all Your Dominions communicated to other
Churches, and States of Your Alliance, and derived to Your Royal Posterity,
and the future generations in this Kingdom for ever.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms
His Majesty's Answer To the DESIRES and PROPOSITIONS of both Houses, February
3. 1642.
IF His Majesty had not given up all the Faculties of His soul to an earnest
endeavor of a Peace and Reconciliation with His People, or if he would suffer
Himself by any provocation to be drawn to a sharpness of Language, at a time
when there seems somewhat like an overture of Accommodation, He could not but
resent the heavy Charges upon Him in the Preamble of these Propositions, and
would not suffer Himself to be reproached with protecting of Delinquents by
force from Justice, (His Majesty's desire having always been, that all men
should be tried by the known Law, and having been refused it) With raising an
Army against Pis Parliament; And to be told that Arms have been taken up
against Him, for the defense of Religion, Laws, Liberties, Privileges of
Parliament, and for the sitting of the Parliament in safety, With many other
particulars in that Preamble, so often, and so fully Answered by His Majesty,
without remembering the World of the time and circumstances of raising those
Arms against Him: When His Majesty was so far from being in a Condition to
invade other men's Rights, that He was not able to maintain and defend His own
from Violence; And without telling His good Subjects that their Religion (the
true Protestant Religion, in which His Majesty was born, has faithfully
lived, and to which he will die a willing sacrifice) their Laws, Liberties,
Privileges and safety of Parliament were so amply settled and established, or
offered to be so by His Majesty before any Army was raised against Him, and
long before any raised by Him for His defense, that if nothing had been desired
but that Peace and Protection which His Subjects and their Ancestors had in the
best times enjoyed under His Majesty, or His Royal Predecessors, this
Misunderstanding and Distance between His Majesty and His people, and this
general misery and distraction upon the face of the whole Kingdom, had not
been now the Discourse of Christendom: But His Majesty will forbear any
expressions of bitterness, or of a sense of His own sufferings, that if it be
possible the memory thereof may be lost to the World; And therefore, though
many of the Propositions presented to His Majesty by both Houses appear to him
very derogatory from, and destructive to His just Power and Prerogative, and no
way beneficial to His Subjects, few of them being already due to them by the
Laws established; (And how unparliamentary it is by Arms to require new Laws,
all the World may judge) yet (because these may be waved or mollified, and many
things that are now dark and doubtful in them cleared and explained upon
debate) His Majesty is pleased (such is His sense of the miseries this Kingdom
suffers by this unnatural War, and His earnest desire to remove them by an
happy Peace) that a speedy time and place be agreed upon for the meeting of
such Persons as His Majesty and both Houses shall appoint, to discuss these
Propositions, and such others here following, as His Majesty does propose to
them.

I. THat His Majesty's own Revenue, Magazine, Towns, Forts and Ships, which
have been taken or kept from Him by force, be forthwith restored unto Him.

II. That whatsoever has been done or published contrary to the known Laws of
the Land, or derogatory to His Majesty's Legal and known Power and Rights, be
renounced and recalled, that no seed may remain for the like to spring out of
for the future.

III. That whatsoever illegal Power has been claimed and exercised, by, or
over His Subjects, as Imprisoning their Persons without Law, Stopping their
Habeas Corpusses, and Imposing upon their estates without Act of Parliament,
etc. Either by both or either House, or any Committee of both or either, or by
any Persons appointed by any of them be disclaimed, and all such Persons so
committed forthwith discharged.

IV. That as His Majesty will readily consent (having done so heretofore) to
the execution of all Laws already made, and to any good Acts to be made for the
suppressing of Popery, and for the firm settling of the Protestant Religion now
established by Law; So He desires that a good Bill may be framed for the better
preserving the Book of Common Prayer from the Scorn and Violence of Brownists,
Anabaptists and other Sectaries, with such Clauses for the ease of tender
Consciences as His Majesty has formerly offered.

V. That all such persons as upon the Treaty shall be excepted out of the
General Pardon shall be tried Per Pares, according to the usual course and
known Laws of the Land, and that it be left to that, either to acquit or
condemn them.

VI. And to the Intent this Treaty may not suffer interruption by any
intervening accidents, that a cessation of arms and free trade for all His
Majesty's Subjects may be first agreed upon.

THis offer and desire of His Majesty He hopes will be so cheerfully
entertained, that a speedy and blessed Peace may be accomplished. If it shall
be rejected, or by insisting upon unreasonable Circumstances be made impossible
(which he hopes God in His mercy to this Nation will not suffer) the guilt of
the Blood which will be shed, and the desolation which must follow, will lie
upon the heads of the Refusers. However His Majesty is resolved, through what
Accidents soever He shall be compelled to recover his Rights, and with what
prosperous success soever it shall please God to bless Him, that by His
earnest constant Endeavors to propagate and promote the true Protestant
Religion, and by His governing according to the known Laws of the Land, and
upholding the just Privileges of Parliament, according to His frequent
Protestations made before Almighty God, which He will always inviolably
observe, the world shall see that he has undergone all these difficulties and
hazards for the Defense and maintenance of th^se; The zealous Preservation of
which His Majesty well knows is the only foundation and means for the true
Happiness of Him and His people.

FINIS.

