THE LATE LETTERS from both Houses of PARLIAMENT CONCERNING THEIR purpose of
delivery of a Petition to His MAJESTY. HIS MAJESTY'S Answer to those Letters.

Printed by His MAJESTY'S Command AT OXFORD, BY LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to
the University. 1642.

For the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount FALKLAND Principal Secretary unto
His MAJESTY, or in his absence for Mr Secretary NICHOLAS, or any of the Lords
the Peers attending His MAJESTY.
Gray of Warke.

My Lord,
I Am commanded by the Lords the Peers and Commons assembled in Parliament, to
address by you their humble desires to His Majesty, that He will be pleased to
grant His safe Conduct to a Committee of Lords and Commons to pass and to
repasse unto His Majesty, that are directed to attend Him with an humble
Petition from His Parliament. This being all that I have in Commission, I rest

Your assured friend and servant GRAY of WARKE Speaker of the House of Peers
pro tempore.
Westminster this 3. of November 1642.
To the Right Honorable the Lord GRAY of WARKE Speaker of the House of Peers
pro tempore.
My Lord,
HIS Majesty has commanded me in answer of your Lordship's of the third
present, to signify to you, That He always has been and is still ready to
receive the humble Petitions of either or both Houses of Parliament, and shall
take order, that a Committee of Lords and Commons may pass and repasse to Him
with the Petition of both Houses as is desired, so as the said Committee
consist of Persons that have not been by His Majesty either by name declared
Traitors or otherwise in some of His Declarations or Proclamations excepted
against by name, with His intention declared to proceed against them as
Traitors; And so as the said Committee come not with more then Thirty Persons
in their company, and give notice before hand of their coming. And for the
said Commitees better security, His Majesty upon the receipt of their names
will give a safe Conduct for them under His Hand and Signet. This being all I
have in Command to deliver to your Lordship, I humbly rest

Your Lordship's most humble servant EDWARD NICHOLAS.
Reading 4. November.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount FALKLAND Principal Secretary to
His MAJESTY, or in his absence to any of the Lords the Peers attending His
MAJESTY.
Gray of Warke.

My Lord,
I Have received a Command from the Lords and Commons in Parliament to send you
the names of two Lords, that is to say, Algernon Earl of Northumberland,
Phillip Earl of Pembrooke and Montgomery, and of four Members of the House of
Commons Mr Perpoint, the Lord Wenman, Sir John Evelin of Wilts, and Sr John
Hippisly, being the Committees of both Houses appointed to attend His Majesty
with an humble Petition directed from them to His Majesty, desiring your
Lordship will be pleased to move His Majesty to send a safe Conduct to pass
and repasse under His Royal Hand and Signet for the several persons before
mentioned. This being all that I have in Commission, I rest

Your Lordships friend and servant GRAY of WARKE Speaker of the House of Peers
pro tempore.
Westminster this 5. of November 1642.
To the Right Honorable the Lord GRAY of WARKE speaker of the House of Peers
pro tempore.
My Lord,
YOur Lordship's Letter, of the 5th of November, I showed to His MAJESTY, who
has expressly commanded me to return your Lordship this Answer in these words,
That His MAJESTY has sent (which I have enclosed) a safe Conduct under His
Royal hand and Signet for the Earl of Northumberland and the Earl of
Pembrooke and Montgomery, Mr Perpoint, the Lord Wenman, and Sr John Hippisly,
but has not admitted Sr John Evelin of Wilts to attend Him, as being included
in the Exception made by His MAJESTY in the Letter sent by Mr Secretary
Nicholas to your Lordship of the 4th, as by the enclosed Proclamation
proclaimed at His Majesty's Court at Oxford, and sent with a Writ sealed into
the County of Wilts, will appear. His Majesty has likewise commanded me to
signify to your Lordship* that in case the Houses shall think fit to send any
other person in the place of Sir John Evelin, that is not included in the
exception made in Mr Secretaries letter before mentioned, His Majesty has
commanded all His Officers, Soldiers and other Subjects to suffer him as
freely to pass and repasse as if his name had been particularly comprised in
this safe Conduct. This being all that I have in Commission, I rest

Your Lordship's humble servant FALKLAND.
Reading this 6. of November. 1642.
His Majesty's safe Conduct.
OUR Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby strictly charge and Command all
the Officers and Soldiers of Our present Army, and all Our Ministers and
Subjects whatsoever, to suffer Our Right trusty and right well-beloved Couzins
and Counselors Algernon Earl of Northumberland, and Philip Earl of Pembrooke
and Montgomery, and Our right trusty and right well-beloved Couzin Thomas Ld
Viscount Wenman, and Our trusty and well-beloved William Perpoint Esquire, and
Sir John Hippisly Knight (together with their attendants not exceeding the
number of Thirty) to pass and repasse to and from Us, they being now sent to
attend Us with a Petition from both Our Houses of Parliament. This Our safe
Conduct under Our Royal Hand and Signet, We charge and Command them and every
of them punctually to observe and obey, as they will answer the contrary at
their utter most perils.

Given at Our Court at Reading this sixth of November. 1642.
BY THE KING. A Proclamation of His Majesty's Grace, Favor, and Pardon, to the
Inhabitants of His County of Willts.
WHEREAS We have taken notice that by the malice, Industry and Importunity of
several ill-affected and seditious persons in Our County of Willts, very many
of Our vveake and seduced Subjects of that Our County have not only been drawn
to exercise the Militia, under color of a pretended Ordinance, without and
against Our consent (a Crime of a very high nature, if We would strictly
enquire thereinto) but have made Contributions of Plate, Money and Horses
toward the maintenance of the Army now in Rebellion against Us; We do here
by publish and declare, That We are graciously pleased to attribute the Crimes
and Offenses of Our said Subjects of that County to the power and Faction of
their seducers, Who, We believe, by Threats, Menaces, and false Informations
compelled and led them into these actions of undutifullnesse and disloyalty
toward Us; And We do therefore hereby offer Our free and gracious Pardon to
all the Inhabitants of Our said County of Willts, for all Offenses concerning
the premises committed against Us before the publishing of this Our
Proclamation (except Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir Henry Ludlow, Sir John Evelin,
and Walter Long Esquire,) against all which We shall proceed according to the
Rules of the Law, as against Traitors and Stirrers of sedition against Us, And
whom We do hereby require all Our Officers and Ministers of Justice, and all
Our loving Subjects whatsoever, to apprehend and cause to be kept in safe
Custody till Our Pleasure be further known. Provided that this Our Grace shall
not extend to any Person, who after the publishing this Our Proclamation shall
presume by Loan or Contribution to assist the said Army of Rebels, to
assemble and Muster themselves in Arms without Authority derived from Us
under Our Hand, to enter into any Oath of Association for opposing Us and Our
Army, or to succor or entertain any of the Persons excepted in this Our
Proclamation, or in Our Declaration of the 12 of August. But We must and do
declare, That whosoever shall hence forvvard be guilty of the premises, or of
either of them, shall be esteemed by Us as an Enemy to the public Peace, a
Person disaffected to Us, and to the Religion and Law of the Kingdom, and
shall accordingly receive condign punishment, of which We give them timely
notice, that they may proceed accordingly at their perils.

Given at Our Court at Oxford, this second day of November, in the Eighteenth
year of Our Reign.

