A MESSAGE Of the LORDS and COMMONS of the Parliament of England, Assembled at
Westminster, To his Majesty, now at his Court, at Holmby-House; For a firm and
well grounded Peace in England, and prosecution of the affairs in Ireland.

Die Jovis 1647.
It is this day Ordered, that this Message for a firm and well grounded Peace
for England, and for the prosecution of the affairs in Ireland, be forthwith
Printed and Published according to Order of Parliament.



LONDON, Printed for George Duglasse. March 4. 1647.

A Message of the Lords and Commons, of the Parliament of England, Assembled at
Westminster, Sent to his Majesty, for a safe and well grounded Peace.
May it please your Majesty;
WE the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name
and on the behalf of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the
Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and on the behalf of
the Kingdom of Scotland, Do humbly present unto your Majesty the humble
desires and Propositions for a safe and well grounded Peace, agreed upon by the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively: Unto which we do pray your
Majesty's Assent: And that they and all such Bills as shall be tendered to your
Majesty in pursuance of them, or any of them, may be Estaeblished and Enacted
for Statutes and Acts of Parliament, by your Majesty's Royal Assent in the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively.

THat Reformation of Religion, according to the Covenant, be settled by Act of
Parliament, in such manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon,
after consultation had with the Assembly of Divines.

That the King do give his Royal Assent to an Act for the due observation of
the Lords day.

And to the Bill for the suppression of Innovations in Churches, and Chapels,
in and about the Worship of God etc.

And for the better advancement of the preaching of Gods holy Word in all parts
of this Kingdom.

And to such Act or Acts for raising of moneys for the payment and satisfying
of the Public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom, and other public uses, as
shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament; And if the King do
not give his Assent thereunto, then it being done by both houses of Parliament,
the same shall be as valid to all intents and purposes, as if the Royal Assent
had been given thereunto.

That his Majesty, according to the laudable example of His Royal Father, of
happy memory, may be pleased to swear and sign the late solemn League and
Covenant; And that an Act of Parliament be passed in both Kingdoms
respectively, for enjoining the taking thereof by all the Subjects of the three
Kingdoms; and the Ordinances concerning the manner of taking the same in both
Kingdoms, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament respectively, with such
penalties, as by mutual advice of both Kingdoms shall be agreed upon.

That His Majesty give assurance of His consenting in the Parliament of
Scotland, to an Act, acknowledging and ratifying the Acts of the Convention of
Estates of Scotland, called by the Counsel and Conservers of the Peace, and
the Commissioners for the common burdens, and assembled the 22 day of June
1643. and several times continued since; and of the Parliament of that
Kingdom since convened.

That the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England assembled, shall
during the space of twenty years from the first of July 1646. Arm, Train,
and Discipline, or cause to be Armed, Trained, and Disciplined, all the forces
of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of
Guernsey, and Iersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, already raised both
for Sea and Land service, and shall from time to time during the said space of
twenty years, Ralse, Levy, Arm, Train, and Discipline, or cause to be Raised,
Levied, Armed, Trained, Disciplined, or any other Forces for Land or Sea
service in the Kingdoms, Dominions, and places aforesaid, as in their
judgments they shall from time to time during the said space of twenty years
think fit, and appoint; and neither the King, his Heirs, or Successors, nor
any other but such as shall Act by the Authority or approbation of the said
Lords and Commons, shall during the said space of twenty years, exercise any
of the powers aforesaid.

And if any Person shall be gathered or Assembled together in warlike manner,
or otherwise to the number of 30 persons, and shall not forthwith disband
themselves being required thereto by the said Lords and Commons, or any Command
from them, or any of them, especially. Authorized for that purpose: then such
person and persons not so disbanding themselves, shall be guilty and incur
the pains of High Treason, being first declared guilty of such offense, by the
said Lords and Commons; any Commission under the Great Seal or other warrant to
the contrary notwithstanding.

That Algernon Earl of Northumberland, John Earl Rutland, Philip Earl of
Pembroke and Mountgomery, Thenphilus Earl of Lincoln, James Earl of Suffolk,
Robert Earl of Warwick, Edward Earl of Manchester, Henry Earl of Stanford,
Francis Lord Dacres, Philip Lord Wharton, Francis Lord Willoughby, Dualy Lord
North, John Lord Hunsdon, William Lord Gray, Edward Lord Howard of Estrisk,
Thomas Lord Bruce, Ferdinando Lord Fairefax, Mr. Nathaniel Fients, Sir Philip
Stapilton, Sir Henry Vane senior, Master William Pierpoint, Sir Edward
Aiscough, Sir William Strickland, Sir Arthur Hesilrig, Sir John Fennick, Sir
William Brereton, Sir Thomas Widdrinton, Master John Toll, Master Gilbert
Millington, Sir William Constable, Sir John Wray, Sir Henry Vane junior, Master
Henry Darley, Oliver Saint John Esquire, His Majesty's Solicitor General,
Master Alexander Rigby, Master Cornelus Holland, Master Samuel Vassel, Master
Peregrin Pelham, John Glyn Esquire, Recorder of London, Master Henry Marten,
Master Alderman Hoyle, Master John Blakiston, Master Sergeant Wild, Master
Richard Barwis, Sir Anthony Irby, Master Ashurst, Master Bellingham, and Master
Tolson; Members of both Houses of the Parliament of England, shall be the
Commissiooners for the Kingdom of England for conservation of the Peace
between the two Kingdoms to act according to the Powers in that behalf expressed
in the Articles of the large Treaty, and not otherwise.

That by Act of Parliament, all Peers made since the day, that Edward Lord
Littleton, then Lord Keeper of the great Seal, was serruptitionsly conveyed
away from the Parliament; being the 21. day of May, 1642: And who shall be
hereafter made, shall not fit or vote in the Parliament of England, without
consent of both Houses of Parliament: since the 20 of May 1642. being the day
that both Houses declared: That the King seduced by evil counsel, intended to
raise War against the Parliament, be declared Null and Void.

That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves late Members of either
House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the Parliament, but have also
sat in the unlawful Assembly at Oxford, called or prerended by some to be a
Parliament, and Voted both Kingdoms Traitors, and have not voluntarily
rendered themselves before the last of October, 1644. be remooved from His
Majesty's Counsels, and be restrained from coming within the Verge of the
Court. And that they may not without advice and consent of both Kingdoms,
bear any Office, or have any employment concerning the State or Commonwealth:
And in case any of them shall offend therein, to be guilty of high Treason,
and incapable of any Pardon by his Majesty, and their estates to be disposed as
both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively, shall think fit.

That two full parts in three, to be divided of all the Estates of the Members
of either House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the Parliament, but
have also Voted both Kingdoms Traitors, and have not rendered themselves before
the first of December 1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the
public debts and damages of the Kingdom.

These Persons of all others, to befree of all personal censure,
notwithstanding any Act, or thing done in, or concerning this War, they taking
the Covenant.

That the Persons, and Estates of all common Soldiers, and others of the
Kingdom of England, who in Lands or Goods be not worth two hundred pounds
sterling: And the Persons and Estates of all common Soldiers and others, of
the Kingdom of Scotland, who in Lands or Goods be nor worth one hundred
pounds sterling, be at liberty and discharged.

That an Act of Parliament be passed, to declare and make void the cessation of
Ireland, and all treaties and conclusions of Peace, or any Articles thereupon
with the Rebels, without consent of both Houses of Parliament. And to settle
the prosecution of the War of Ireland in both Houses of the Parliament of
England, to be managed by them; and the King to assist, and to do no act to
discountenance or molest them therein.

That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant, be serled in the
Kingdom of Ireland, by Act of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses of the
Parliament of England have agreed or shall agree upon, after consultation had
with the Assembly of Divines here.

That no Citizen of the City of London, nor any of the Forces of the said City,
shall be drawn forth or compelled to go out of the said City or Liberties
thereof, for military service, without their own free consent.

That an Act be passed for the granting and confirming of the Charters,
Customs, Liberties, and Franchises of the City of London, notwithstanding any
Nonuser, Misuser, or Abuser.

That all grants of Offices, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments made, or passed
under the great Seal of Ireland, unto any person or persons, Bodies politic
or Corporate, since the cessation made in Ireland, the 15 day of September
1643, shall be Null, and void, And that all Honors and Titles conferred upon
any Person or Persons in the said Kingdom of Ireland, since the said
Cessation, shall be null and void.

That by Act of Parliament in each Kingdom respectively, all Oaths,
Declarations, and Proclamations heretosore had, or hereafter to be had against
both or either of the Houses of Parliament of England, the Parliament of the
Kingdom of Scotland, and the late Convention of Estates in Scotland, or
Committees flowing from the Parliament or Convention in Scotland, or their
Ordinances and proceedings; or against any for adhering unto them; or for doing
or executing any Office, Place, or Charge, by any Authority derived from them.
And all Judgments, Indictments, Outlawries, Attainers, and Inquisitions, in any
of the said Causes; and all Graunts thereupon made or had, or to be made or
had, be declared Null, suppressed, and forbidden. And that this be publicly
intimated in all Parish Churches within His Majesty's Dominions, and all other
Places needful.

FINIS.

