TO HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging: The Humble
Additional and Explanatory PETITION and Advice, of the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses now assembled in the PARLIAMENT of this COMMONWEALTH.

Anglo-Irish Protectorate blazon or coat of arms

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1657.

TO HIS HIGHNESS THE LORD PROTECTOR OF THE Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging.
The Humble Additional and Explanatory Petition and Advice, of the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses now Assembled in the Parliament of this Commonwealth.
WHereas upon the humble Petition and Advice of the said Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses, now Assembled in the Parliament of this Commonwealth, lately
Presented and Consented unto by your Highness, Certain Doubts and Questions
have risen, concerning some particulars therein comprised, for explanation
whereof. May it please your Highness to declare and consent unto the Additions
and Explanations hereafter mentioned, and may it be Declared with your Highness
Consent.

In the fourth Article.
That such person and persons as invaded England, under Duke Hamilton, in the
year 1648. Or Advised, Consented, Assisted, or voluntarily contributed unto
that war; And were for that cause debarred from public Trust by the Parliament
of Scotland, be incapable to Elect, or be Elected, to sit and serve as Members
of Parliament, or in any other place of Public trust, relating unto the fourth
and thirteenth Articles, in the Petition and Advice, excepting such as since
have born Arms for your Highness, or the Parliament, or have been admitted to
sit and serve in the Parliament of this Commonwealth, and are of good life and
Conversation, or such as shall hereafter be declared by your Highness, with the
Advice of your Council, to have given some signal testimony of their good
affection and continuance in the same.

That the Proviso in the said fourth Article, be explained thus, viz. That such
English and Scottish Protestants, who (since the defection of the Earl of
Ormond, and the Lord Inchiquin, and before the first day of March, 1649.) have
born Arms for, and ever since continued faithful to the Parliament, or your
Highness, or have otherwise (before ye said first day of March 1649.) given
signal testimony of their good affection to this Commonwealth, and have ever
since continued faithful to the same, shall not be debarred or deemed
incapable of Electing, or being Elected to serve in Parliament.

And whereas in the said fourth Article Public Ministers, or Public
Preachers of the Gospel, are disabled to be Elected to serve in Parliament; It
is hereby explained and declared to extend to such Ministers and Preachers
only, as have Maintenance for Preaching, or are Pastors or Teachers of
Congregations.

In the said fourth Article.
That in stead of Commissioners to be appointed by Act of Parliament, to
examine and try whether the Members to be Elected for the House of Commons in
future Parliaments, be capable to sit according to the Qualifications mentioned
in the said Petition and Advice, there shall be the Penalty, and Fine of One
thousand pounds laid and inflicted upon every such unqualified Member (being so
adjudged) by the said House of Commons, and imprisonment of his Person until
payment thereof.

And that the ensuing Clauses in the said Article, viz. We desire that it may
by your Highness Consent be Ordained, That forty and one Commissioners, be
appointed by Act of Parliament, who, or five, or more of them, shall be
Authorized to examine and try whether the Members to be Elected for the House
of Commons in future Parliaments, be Capable to sit according to the
qualifications mentioned in this Petition and Advice, and in case they find
them not qualified accordingly, then to suspend them from sitting, until the
House of Commons, shall, upon hearing their particular Cases, admit them to
sit; which Commissioners are to stand so Authorized for that end, until the
House of Commons in any future Parliament, shall nominate the like number of
other Commissioners in their places: And those other Commissioners, so to be
nominated in any future Parliaments, to have the same Power and Authority. That
the said Commissioners shall Certify in writing to the House of Commons, on
the first day of their meeting, the cause and grounds of their suspensions of
any person so to be Elected as aforesaid; That the Accusation shall be upon
Oath of the Informant, or of some other person. That a Copy of the accusation
shall be left, by the party accusing, in writing under his hand, with the party
accused, or in his absence, at his house in the Country, City, or Town, for
which he shall be Chosen, if he have any such House, or if not, with the
Sheriff of the County, if he be chosen for a County, or with the chief
Magistrate of the City, or Borough, for which he is chosen; shall not be put
in Execution, or made use of, but shall be void, frustrate, Null and of none
effect, and shall be so construed and taken to all intents and purposes
whatsoever, any thing contained in the said Petition and Advice to the contrary
notwithstanding.

In the fifth Article.
That the Nomination of the persons to supply the place of such Members of the
other House, as shall die, or be removed, shall be by your Highness and your
Successors.

In the seventh Article.
That the moneys directed to be for the supply of the Sea, and Land Forces, be
issued by Advice of the Council, And that the Treasurers or Commissioners of
the Treasury, shall give an Account of all the said money to every Parliament.

That the Officers of State, and Judges, in the Ninth Article of the said
Petition and Advice mentioned shall be chosen, in the Intervals of Parliament,
by the Consent of the Council, to be afterward approved by Parliament.

That your Highness will be pleased, according to the usage of former Chief
Magistrates in these Nations, and for the better satisfaction of the People
thereof, to take an Oath in the form ensuing,

I do in the presence, and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and swear, That
to the uttermost of my power I will uphold, and maintain the true Reformed
Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to the uttermost of my power and
understanding, and encourage the profession, and professors of the same; and
that to the utmost of my power, I will Endeavor, as chief Magistrate of these
three Nations, the Maintenance and Preservation of the Peace and safety, and of
the just Rights and Privileges of the people thereof; And shall in all things,
according to my best knowledge and power, govern the people of these Nations
according to Law.

That your Highness Successors, do, before they take upon them the Government
of these Nations, take an Oath in the form aforesaid.

That all such persons who now are, or shall hereafter be of the Privy Council
of your Highness or Successors, before they, or either of them, do act as
Counselors, shall respectively take an Oath, before persons to be authorized
by your Highness and Successors for that purpose, in the form following.

I. A. B. Do in the presence, and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and
swear, That to the uttermost of my power, in my place, I will uphold, and
maintain the true Reformed Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity
thereof, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, and encourage the profession and professors of the same; And that I
will be true and faithful to His Highness the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto
belonging, as Chief Magistrate thereof, And shall not contrive, design, or
attempt any thing, against the person or lawful authority of his said
Highness, and shall keep secret all matters that shall be treated of in
Council, and put under secrecy, and not reveal them but by Command or consent
of His Highness, the Parliament, or the Council, and shall in all things
faithfully perform the trust Committed to me as a Councellor, according to the
best of my understanding, in order to the good Government, peace and welfare of
these Nations.

That the same Oath be taken by the members of your Highness Council of
Scotland, and Ireland.

That every person who now is, or hereafter shall be a Member of either house
of Parliament, before he sit in Parliament, shall, from and after the first day
of July, 1657. take an Oath before persons, to be Authorized and appointed by
your Highness and Successors for that purpose, in the form following.

I. A. B. do in the presence, and by the name of God Almighty, promise and
swear, that to the uttermost of my power in my place, I will uphold and
maintain the true Reformed Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity
thereof, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament, and encourage the profession and professors of the same, and that I
will be true and faithful to the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging, as Chief Magistrate thereof; And shall not Contrive, Design, or
Attempt any thing against the Person or lawful Authority of the Lord
Protector, and shall endeavor as much as in me lies, as a Member of
Parliament, the preservation of the Rights and Liberties of the People.

That your Highness would be pleased in convenient time, before the next
meeting of this Parliament, to cause several summons in due form of Law, to be
issued forth to such persons as your Highness shall think fit (being qualified
according to the Humble Petition and Advise of the Parliament, whereto your
Highness has consented) to sit and serve as Members in the other house of
Parliament; by which summons the said persons shall be respectively commanded
to be, and personally to appear at a certain place and time, to be appointed by
your Highness, to give their Advice and Assistance, and to do such things
concerning the Great and Weighty Affairs of this Commonwealth, as to the other
House of Parliament does appertain, by the said Humble Petition and Advice.

That the Persons so summoned and Assembled together, shall be, and are hereby
declared to be the other house of Parliament; and shall, and may without
further Approbation of this House,, from such time of their Meeting, proceed,
to do and perform all such matters and things, as the other House of Parliament
ought to do and perform, and shall and may, have and exercise, all such
Privileges, Powers and Authorities, as the other House of Parliament ought, by
the aforesaid Humble Petition and Advise to have and Exercise; the said Humble
Petition and Advise, or any thing therein contained, to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

Which Petition being presented the 26. day of June, 1^57. His Highness answer
thereunto was read by the Clerk of the Parliament in these words.

The Lord Protector does consent.
