A MESSAGE FROM Both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT UNTO His MAJESTY, Concerning the
PRINCE His SON. With the ANSWER of his Majesty thereunto.

Together with His Majesty's Answer to the desire of both Houses concerning the
MILITIA.

LONDON: Printed for JOHN TOMPSON. 1641.

A Message from both Houses of Parliament unto his Majesty, concerning the
Prince, His SON.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament humbly desire His Majesty, That the
Prince may not be removed from Hampton Court; And that for these ensuing
Reasons.

I. They conceive his Majesty had Resolved that the Prince should stay at
Hampton Court until his Majesty's Return.

II. That the Lord Marquess Hertford, appointed by his Majesty to be
Governor of the Prince, and approved of, and commanded by the Parliament to
give his personal attendance on the Prince, Is now so indisposed in his
health, that he is not able to attend the Prince to any other place.

III. That the Prince his Removal at this time from Hampton Court, may be a
cause to promote Iealousies and Fears in the hearts of his Majesty's good
Subjects, which they conceive very necessary to avoid.

Die Jovis 24. Febr. 1641.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Lord Howard of Char
shall attend upon the King, and present these Reasons unto his Majesty.

Io. Brown Cler. Parliament.

His Majesty's Answer to the Reasons He Received by way of Message from both
Houses concerning the PRINCE his SON.
THat His Majesty intended at his remove from Hampton Court with His Royal
Consort the Queen, toward Dover, That the Prince His Son should stay at
Hampton Court, till His Majesty returned to some of His Houses: and thereupon
as soon as His Majesty resolved upon a certain day to be at Greenwich, He
commanded that his Son should attend him there, which was no way contrary to
his former Intention.

2. That His Majesty was very sorry to hear of the Indisposition of the
Marquess Hertford, being the Person upon whom He principally relies for the
Care of his dearest Son; But if that indisposition should have lasted, His
Majesty could no ways think fit, that his want of health should have hindered
the Prince from waiting upon His Majesty, according to His Command, and
therefore would have bin much offended if the Prince had failed of meeting His
Majesty, according to his appointment.

3. To the Fears and Jealousies, His Majesty knows not what Answer to give,
not being able to imagine from what grounds they proceed. But if any
Information have bin given to that purpose, His Majesty much desires that the
same may be examined to the bottom, and then He hopes that these Fears and
Iealousies will be hereafter continued only with Reverence to His Majesty's
Rights and Honor.

His Majesty's Answer to both Houses, conning the Militia.
HIS Majesty having with his best care and understanding perused and considered
that which was sent him from both Houses for the Ordering of the Militia,
presented unto him to be made an Ordinance of Parliament, by the giving of his
Royal assent; as he can by no means do it, for the Reasons hereafter
mentioned, so he does not conceive himself obliged by any promise made in His
Answer of the second of this month, to the Petition to both Houses to yield to
the same.

His Majesty finds great cause to except against the Preface or Introduction to
that Order, which confesses a most dangerous and desperate Design upon the
House of Commons, of late, supposed to be an effect of the bloody Counsels of
Papists, and other ill-affected persons; by which many may understand (looking
upon other printed papers to that purpose) his coming in Person to the House
of Commons, on the fourth day of January, which begot so unhappy a
misunderstanding between Him and His People: And for that, though He believes
it, upon the Information since given Him, to be an apparent breach of their
Privilege, and has offered, and is ready to repair the same for the future,
by any Act shall be desired of His Majesty; Yet He must declare and require to
be believed, That He had no other Design upon that House or any Member of it,
then to require (as He did) the persons of those five Gentlemen His Majesty had
the day before accused of High Treason.

And to declare, that he meant to proceed against them legally, and speedily;
upon which He believed that House would have delivered them up: And his Majesty
calls the Almighty God to witness, that He was so far from any intention or
thought of force or violence, although that House had not delivered them
according to his Demand, or in any Case what soever, That he gave those his
Servants and others (who then waited on his Majesty) express Charge and
Command, that they should give no offense to any Man; Nay if they received any
provocation or injury, that they should bear it without Return. And his Majesty
neither saw or knew that any person of his Train had any other weapons, but his
Pensioners and Guard, those with which they usually attend His Person to
Parliament, and the other Gentlemen Swords, And therefore his Majesty doubts
not, but his Parliament will be so regardfull of his honor herein, that he
shall not undergo any imputation by the rash or indiscreet expressions of any
young men then in his Train, or by any desperate words uttered by others, who
might mingle with them without his confent or approbation.

For the persons nominated to be Lieutenants of the several Counties of
England and Wales, his Majesty is contented to allow that Recommendation, only
concerning the City of London, and such other Corporations, as by ancient
Charters have granted unto them the power of the Militia, his Majesty does not
conceive that it can stand with Justice or Policy to alter their Government in
that particular: And His Majesty is willing forthwith to grant every of them
(that of London and those other Corporations excepted) such Commissions as He
has done this Parliament to some Lord Lieutenants by your advice. But if that
power be not thought enough, but that more shall be thought fit to be granted
to these persons named, then by the Law is in the Crown it self, his Majesty
holds it reasonable, that the same be by some law first vested in him, with
power to transfer it to these persons which he will willingly do; And what
ever that power shall be, to avoid all future doubts and questions, his Majesty
desires it may be digesled into an Act of Parliament rather then an Ordinance,
so that all his loving Subjects may thereby particularly know, both what they
are to do and what they are to suffer for their neglect, that there be the
least Latitude for his good Subjects to suffer under any arbitrary power
whatsoever.

As to the time desired for the continuance of the powers to be granted, His
Majesty gives this Answer, That he cannot consent to divest himself of the
just power which God and the laws of this Kingdom have placed in him for the
defense of his people, and to put it into the hands of others for any
indefinite time. And since the ground of this request from his Parliament was
to secure their p^esent fears and jealousies, that they might with safety apply
themselves to the matter of his Message of the 20 of Ian. His Majesty hops
that his grace to them since that time in yielding to so many of their desires,
and in agreeing to the persons recommended to him by his Parliament, and the
power before expressed to be placed in them, will wholly dispell those Fears
and Iealousies, and assures them that as his Majesty has now applied this
unlawful remedy to their doubts, so (if there shall be cause) He will
continue the same to such time as shall be agreeable to the same care He now
expresses toward them.

And in this Answer, his Majesty is so far from receding from any thing He
promised, or intended to grant in His Answer to the former Petition, that His
Majesty has hereby consented to all was then asked of Him by that Petition
concerning the Militia of the Kingdom (except that of London, and those other
Corporations) which was to put the same into the hands of such persons as
should be recommended unto Him by both Houses of Parliament: And his Majesty
doubts not, but the Parliament, upon well weighing the particulars of this His
Answer, will find the same more satisfactorie to their ends, and the peace and
welfare of all His good Subjects, then the way proposed by this intended
Ordinance, to which, for these Reasons, His Majesty cannot consent.

And whereas his Majesty observes by the Petition of both Houses, presented
unto him by the Earl of Portland, Sir Thomas Heal, and Sir William Savile, That
in some places, some persons begin already to intermeddle of themselves with
the Militia, His Majesty expects that His Parliament should examine the
particulars thereof, it being a matter of high Concernment, and very great
Consequence.

And his Majesty requires, that if it shall appear to His Parliament, that
any persons whatsoever have presumed to command the Militia without lawful
Authority, they may be proceeded against according to Law.

FINIS.

