The humble Desires and PROPOSITIONS OF THE Lords and Commons in Parliament,
tendered to His Majesty, Febr. 1.

AND HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS ANSWER And PROPOSITIONS, Febr. 3. 1642.

Die Lunae, 6. Febr. 1642.

IT is this Day Ordered by the Commons in Parliament Assembled, That the
Propositions from both Houses to His Majesty, and His Majesty's Answer unto
them, this day received, be forthwith Printed and Published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1642.

By special Command.

WE Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, having in our thoughts the glory of God, Your Majesty's
Honor, and the prosperity of Your People; and being most grievously afflicted
with the pressing miseries and calamities which have overwhelmed Your two
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, since Your Majesty has by the persuasion of
evil Counselors withdrawn Your self from Your Parliament, raised an Army
against it, and by force thereof protected Delinquents from the Justice of it,
and constraining us to take Arms for the defense of our Religion, Laws,
Liberties and Privileges of Parliament, and for the sitting of the Parliament
in safety; Which Fears and Dangers are continued and increased by the raising,
drawing together, and arming of great numbers of Papists under the Command of
the Earl of Newcastle, likewise by making the Lord Herbert of Ragland, and
other known Papists, Commanders of great Forces, whereby many grievous
Oppressions, Rapines, and Cruelties have bin and are daily exercised upon the
Persons and Estates of Your People, Much innocent blood has been spilt, and
the Papists have attained means of attempting, with hopes of effecting their
mischievous design of rooting out the Reformed Religion, and destroying the
Professors thereof.

In the tender sense and compassion of these Evils under which the People and
Kingdom lie, according to the Duty which we owe to God, Your Majesty, and the
Kingdom, for which we are trusted, Do most earnestly desire that an end may be
put to these great Distempers and Distractions, for the preventing that
Desolation which does threaten all Your Majesty's Dominions, and as we have
rendered, and still are ready to render to Your Majesty, that Subjection,
Obedience, and Service, which we owe unto You; So we most humbly beseech Your
Majesty to remove the Causes of this War, and to vouchsafe us that Peace and
Protection which we and our Ancestors have formerly enjoyed under Your Majesty
and Your Royal Predecessors, and graciously to accept and grant these our most
humble Desires and Propositions.

I.
THat Your Majesty will be pleased to disband Your Armies, as we likewise shall
be ready to disband all those Forces which we have raised; and that you will be
pleased to return to Your Parliament.

II.
That You will leave Delinquents to a Legal Trial, and Judgment of
Parliament.

III.
That the Papists may not only be disbanded, but disarmed according to Law.

IV.
That Your Majesty will be pleased to give Your Royal assent unto the Bill for
taking away Superstitious Innovations; To the Bill against scandalous
Ministers; To the Bill against Pluralities; To the Bill for the utter
abolishing and taking away of all Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors and
Commissaries, Deans, Sub-Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Canons and
Prebendaries, and all Chantors, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers,
Succentors and Sacrists, And all Vicars, Chorall and Choristers, Old Vicars and
New Vicars of any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all other their
Underofficers out of the Church of England. And to the Bill for Consultation
to be had with godly, religious, and learned Divines; That Your Majesty will
be pleased to promise to pass such other good Bills for settling of
Church Government, as upon Consultation with the Assembly of the said Divines
shall be resolved on by both Houses of Parliament, and by them be presented to
Your Majesty.

V.
That Your Majesty having expressed in Your Answer to the Nineteen Propositions
of both Houses of Parliament, a hearty Affection and Intention for the rooting
out of Popery out of this Kingdom. And that if both the Houses of Parliament
can yet find a more effectual course to disable Jesuits, Priests, and Popish
Recusants from disturbing the State or eluding the Laws, that you would
willingly give your consent unto it.

That You would be graciously pleased, for the better discovery and speedier
conviction of Recusants, that an oath may be established by Act of Parliament,
to be administered in such manner as by both Houses shall be agreed on, wherein
they shall abjure and renownce the Popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, Worshipping of the consecrated Host; crucifixes
and images; and the refusing of the said oath being tendered in such manner as
shall be appointed by Act of Parliament, shall be a sufficient conviction in
law of Recusancie.

And that Your Majesty will be Graciously pleased to give Your Royal Assent
unto a Bill, for the education of the Children of Papists, by Protestants, in
the Protestant Religion.

That for the more effectual execution of the Laws against Popish Recusants,
Your Majesty would be pleased to consent to a Bill for the true leavying of the
Penalties against them, and that the same Penalties may be leavied and disposed
of in such manner as both Houses of Parliament shall agree on, so as Your
Majesty be at no loss: And likewise to a Bill whereby the practices of Papists
against the State may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly executed.

VI.
That the Earl of Bristoll be removed from Your Majesty's Counsels, and that
both he and the Lord Harbert, eldest Son to the Earl of Worcester, may likewise
be restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court, and that they may not
bear any Office, or have any employments concerning the State or Commonwealth.

VII.
That Your Majesty would be graciously pleased by Act of Parliament to settle
the Militia both by Sea and Land, and for the Forts and Ports of the Kingdom,
in such manner as shall be agreed on by both Houses.

VIII.
That Your Majesty will be pleased by Your Letters Patents, to make Sir John
Bramston Chief Justice of Your Court of Kings Bench, William Lenthall Esquire,
the now Speaker of the Commons House Master of the Rolls, and to continue the
Lord Chief Justice Banks, Chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, and
likewise to-make Master Sergeant Wild, Chief Baron of Your Court of the
Exchequer, and that Master Justice Bacon may be continued, and Master Sergeant
Rolls, and Master Sergeant Atkins made Justices of the King Bench; that Master
Justice Reeve, and Master Justice Forster may be continued, Sergeant Pheasant
made one of Your Judges of Your Court of Common Pleas; That Mr. Sergeant
Creswell, Mr. Samuel Brown, and Mr. John Puleston may be Barons of the
Exchequor, and that all these and all the Judges of the same Courts for the
times to come, may hold their places by Letters Patents under the great Seal,
Quamdiu se been Gesserint, and that the several persons not before named, that
do now hold any of these places before mentioned, may be removed.

IX.
That all such persons as have been put out of the Commissions of peace, or of
Oyer and Terminer, or from being Custodes Rotulorum since the first day of
April, 1642. (other then such as were put out by the desire of both or either
Houses of Parliament) may again be put into those Commissions and Offices, and
that such persons may be put out of those Commissions and Offices as shall be
excepted against by both Houses of Parliament.

X.
That your Majesty will be pleased to pass the Bill now presented to your
Majesty, to vindicate and secure the Privilege of Parliament, from the ill
consequence of the late president in the charge and proceedings against the
Lord Kimbolton now Earl of Manchester, and the five Members of the House of
Commons.

XI.
That your Majesty's Royal assent may be given unto such Acts as shall be
advised by both Houses of Parliament, for the satisfying and paying of the
debts and damages wherein the two Houses of Parliament have engaged the
Public Faith of the Kingdom.

XII.
That your Majesty will be pleased according to a gracious Answer heretofore
received from you, to enter into a more strict Alliance with the States of the
United Provinces and other neighbor Princes, and States of the Protestant
Religion, for the defense and maintenance thereof, against all Designs and
Attempts of the Popish and Jesuiticall Faction to subvert and suppress it,
whereby Your Subjects may hope to be free from the mischiefs which this
Kingdom has endured through the power which some of that party have had in
your Counsels, and will be much encouraged in a Parliamentary way, for Your
aid and assistence in restoring Your Royal Sister and Prince Elector to those
Dignities and Dominions which belong unto them, and relieving the other
Protestant Princes, who have suffered in the same Cause.

XIII.
That in the general Pardon which Your Majesty has been pleased to offer to
Your Subjects, all Offenses and Misdemeanors committed before the 10. of Jan.
1641. which have been or shall be questioned, or proceeded against in
Parliament upon complaint in the House of Commons, before the 10. of Jan. 1643.
shall be excepted, which Offenses and Misdemeanors shall nevertheless be taken
and adjudged to be fully discharged, against all other inferior Courts.

That likewise there shall be an exception of all offenses committed by any
person or persons, which has or have had any hand or practice in the Rebellion
of Ireland, which has or have given any council, assistence, or
encouragement, to the Rebels there for the maintenance of that Rebellion, as
likewise an exception of William Earl of Newcastle, and George Lord Digby*

XIIII.
That Your Majesty will be pleased to restore such Members of either House of
Parliament to their several places of service and employment, out of which
they have been put since the beginning of this Parliament, that they may
receive satisfaction and reparation for those places, and for the profits which
they have lost by such removal, upon the Petition of both Houses of
Parliament: And that all others may be restored to their Offices and
Employments, who have bin put out of the same upon any displeasure conceived
against them, for any assistence given to both Houses of Parliament, or obeying
their Commands, or forbearing to leave their Attendance upon the Parliament
without License, or for any other occasion arising from these unhappy
differences betwixt Your Majesty and both Houses of Parliament, upon the like
Petition of both Houses.

These things being granted and performed, as it has always been our hearty
prayers, so shall we be enabled to make it our hopeful endeavor, That Your
Majesty and Your people may enjoy the blessngs of Peace, Truth, and Justice,
The Royalty and Greatness of Your Throne may be supported by Your loyal and
bountiful Affections of Your People, Their Liberties and Privileges
maintained by Your Majesty's Protection and Justice, And this public Honor
and Happiness of Your Majesty and all Your Dominions, communicated to other
Churches and States of Your Alliance, and derived to Your Royal Posterity, and
the future Generations of this Kingdom for ever.

His MAJESTY'S Answer.
IF His Majesty had not given up all the Faculties of His Soul to an earnest
endeavor of a Peace and Reconciliation with His People, Or if He would suffer
Himself by any provocation to be drawn to a sharpness of Language, at a time
when there seems somewhat like an Overture of Accommodation, He could not but
resent the heavy charges upon Him in the Preamble of these Propositions, and
would not suffer Himself to be reproached with protecting of Delinquents by
force from Justice (His Majesty's desire having always been, That all Men
should be tried by the known Law, and having been refused it) with raising an
Army against His Parliament: And to be told, That Arms have been taken up
against Him for the defense of Religion, Laws, Liberties, Privileges of
Parliament; And for the sitting of the Parliament in safety, with many other
particulars in that Preamble, so often and so fully answered by His Majesty
without remembering the world of the time, and circumstances of raising those
Arms against Him; When His Majesty was so far from being in a condition to
invade other men's Rights, that He was not able to maintain and defend His own
from violence. And without telling His good Subjects, That their Religion (the
true Protestant Religion in which His Majesty was born, has faithfully lived,
and to which He will dye a willing Sacrifice) their Laws, Liberties,
Privileges, and safety of Parliament, were so amply settled and established,
or offered to be so by His Majesty, before any Army was raised against Him,
and long before any raised by Him for His defense, That if nothing had been
directed, but that Peace and Protection which His Subjects, and their Ancectors
had in the best times enjoyed under His Majesty, or His Royal Predecessors,
this misunderstanding and distance between His Majesty and His People; and this
general misery and distraction upon the Face of the whole Kingdom had not been
now the Discourse of Christendom; But His Majesty will forbear any expressions
of bitterness, or of a sense of His own sufferings, That if it be possible the
memory thereof may be lost to the World; And therefore though many of the
Propositions presented to His Majesty by both Houses appear to Him very
derogatory from, and destructive to His Just Power and Prerogative, and no way
beneficial to His Subjects; few of them being already due unto them by the Laws
established (And how unparliamentary it is by Arms to require new Laws, all the
world may judge) yet (because these may be waved, or mollified, and many things
that are now dark, or doubtful in them, cleared and explained upon debate) His
Majesty is pleased (such is His sense of the miseries this Kingdom suffers by
this unnatural War. and His earnest desire to remove them by a happy peace)
That a speedy time and place be agreed upon for the meeting of such Persons as
His Majesty and both Houses shall appoint, to discuss these Propositions, and
such others here following, as His Majesty does propose to them.

I. THat His Majesty's own Revenue, Magazines, Towns, Forts, and Ships, which
have been taken or kept from Him by Force, be forthwith restored unto Him.

II. That whatsoever has been done or Published contrary to the known Laws of
the Land, or derogatory to His Majesty's Legal and known Power, and Rights, be
renounced and recalled, that no seed may remain for the like to spring out of,
for the future.

III. That whatsoever Illegal Power has been claimed and exercised by, or
over His Subjects, as Imprisoning their Persons, without Law stopping their
Hebeas Corpusses, and imposings upon their Estates without Act of Parliament,
etc. Either by both or either Houses, or any Committee of both or either, or by
any Persons appointed by any of them, be disclai^^d, and all such Persons so
committed forthwith discharged.

IV. That as His Majesty will readily consent (having done so heretofore) to
the Execution of all Laws already made, and to any good Acts to be made for the
suppressing of Popery, and for the firm settling of the Protestant Religion now
established by Law; So He desires that a good Bill may be framed for the better
preserving of the Book of Common Prayer, from the scorn and violence of
Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, with such Clauses for the ease of
tender Consciences as His Majesty has formerly offered.

V. That all such Persons as upon the Treaty shall be excepted out of the
general pardon, shall be tried per Pares, according to the usual Course and
known Laws of the Land; and that it be left to that, either to acquit or
condemn them.

VI. And to the intent this Treaty may not suffer Interruption by any
intervening accidents, That a Cessation of Arms, and a free trade for all His
Majesty's Subjects may be first agreed upon.

This Offer and desire of His Majesty, He hopes will be so cheerfully
entertained, that a speedy and blessed Peace may be accomplished: If it shall
be rejected, or by insisting upon unreasonable Circumstances be made impossible
(which He hopes God in his mercy to this Nation, will not suffer) the guilt of
the Blood which will be shed, and the desolation which must follow, will lie
upon the Heads of the refusers; However His Majesty is resolved, through what
Accidents soever, He shall be compelled to recover His Rights, and with what
prosperous successes soever it shall please God to bless Him, That by his
earnest constant Endeavors to Propogate and Promote the true Protestant
Religion, and by His governing according to the known Laws of the Land, and
upholding the just Privileges of Parliament, according to His frequent
Protestations made before Almighty God, which He will always inviolably
observe; the world shall see, That He has undergone all these difficulties,
and hazards, for the defense and maintenance of those; The zealous preservation
of which, His Majesty well knows, is the only foundation and means for the
true happiness of Him and His People.

FINIS.

