The Humble PETITION, And DECLARATION Of both Houses of PARLIAMENT, To the
Kings most Excellent MAJESTY:

Sent to York, by one Lord, and two Members of the House of Commons, on
Wednesday the 23. of March. 1641.

In Answer to every particular of his Majesty's Speech at New Market: which he
made to the Committee of both Houses when they presented the last Declaration.

With their Additionall Information received from the Governor of Roterdam,
concerning the great Fleet prepared in Denmark, which by means of the Lord
Digby should have been transported over to Hull.

London, Printed for F. Coules, and T. Bates. 1641.

March 23. 1641.
TO THE KINGS most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition and Declaration of the Lords and Commons, assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
May it please Your Majesty,
YOur Majesty's most loyal Subjects the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
cannot conceive that the Declaration which your Majesty received from us at
New Market, was such as did deserve that censure your Majesty was pleased to
lay upon us, in that Speech which your Majesty made to our Committees there,
and sent in writing to both Houses; our address therein being accompanied with
plainness, humility, and faithfulness, we thought more proper for removing the
distraction of the Kingdom, then if we had then proceeded according to your
Majesty's message of the 20. of January. By which your Majesty was pleased to
desire, that we would declare what we intended to do for your Majesty, and
what we expected to be done for our selves. In both which we have bin very
much hindered by your Majesty's denial to secure us and the whole Kingdom, by
disposing the Militia as we had diverse times most humbly petitioned, and yet
we have not bin altogether negligent of either, having lately made good
proceedings in preparing a book of Rates to be passed in a Bill of Tunnage and
Poundage: and likewise the most material heads of those humble desires which
we intended to make to your Majesty for the good and contentment of your
Majesty and your people: but none of these could be perfected before the
Kingdom be put into safety, by settling the Militia; And until your Majesty
shall be pleased to concur with your Parliament in these necessary things, we
hold it impossible for you to give the World or your people such satisfaction
concerning the fears and jealousies which we have expressed, as we hope your
Majesty has already received touching that exception which you were pleased to
take to Master Pyms Speech.

As for your Majesty's fears and doubts, the ground whereof is from seditious
Pamphlets and Sermons, we shall be as careful to endeavor the removal, as
soon as we shall understand what pamphlets and Sermons are by your Majesty
intended; as we have been to prevent all dangerous Tumults. And if any
extraordinary concourse of people out of the City to WESTMINSTER, had the face
and show of tumult and danger in your Majesty's apprehension, it will appear
to be caused by your Majesty's denial of such a Guard to your Parliament as
they might have cause to conside in, And by taking into White Hall such a Guard
for your self, as gave just cause of jealousy to the Parliament; and of
terror and offense to your people. We seek nothing but your Majesty's
Honor, and the peace and prosperity of your Kingdoms. And we are heartily
sorry we have such plentiful matter of an answer to that question, whether
you had violated our Laws? We beseech your Majesty to remember that the
government of this Kingdom as it was in a great part managed by your
Ministers before the beginning of this Parliament, consisted of many continued
and multiplied Acts of violation of Laws, the wounds whereof were scarcely
healed, when the extremity of all these violations, was far exceeded by the
late strange and unheard of breach of our Laws in the accusation of the Lord
Kimbolton, and the five Members of the Commons House and in the proceedings
thereupon: for which we have yet received no full satisfaction.

To your Majesty's next question, Whether you had denied any Bill for the ease
and security of your Subjects, we wish we could stop in the midst of our
answer; that with much thankfulness we acknowledge that your Majesty has past
many good Bills full of contentment, and advantage to your people: But Truth and
Necessity enforces us to add this, That even in or about the time of passing
those Bills, some design or other had been afoot, which if it had taken
effect, would not only have deprived us of the fruit of those Bills, but have
reduced us to a worse condition of confusion then that wherein the Parliament
found us.

And if your Majesty had asked us the third question intimated in that speech,
what we had done for your self, our answer would have been much more easy,
That we have paid two Armies wherewith the Kingdom was burdened last year;
and have undergone the charge of the war in Ireland at this time; when
through many other excessive charges and pressures, whereby your Subjects have
bin exhausted, and the stock of the Kingdom very much diminished; which great
mischiefs, and the charges thereupon ensuing, have been occasioned by the evil
Counsels so powerful with your Majesty, which have and will cost this Kingdom
more then two millions; all which in Justice ought to have been borne by your
Majesty.

As for that free and general pardon your Majesty has been pleased to offer,
it can be no security to our fears and Iealousies, for which your Majesty
seems to propound it; because they arise not from any guilt of our own
actions, but from the evil designs and attempts of others.

To this our humble answer to that speech, we desire to add an information
which we lately received from the Deputy governor of the Merchant adventurers
at Rotterdam in Holland, That an unknown person appertaining to the Lord Digby
did lately solicit one James Henly a Mariner to go to Elsenore, and to take
charge of a ship in the fleet of the King of Denmark there prepared, which he
should conduct to Hull: In which fleet likewise he said a great Army was to be
transported. And although we are not apt to give credit to informations of this
nature, yet we cannot altogether think it fit to be neglected, but that it may
justly ad somewhat to the weight of our fears and jealousies, considering with
what circumstances it is accompanied of the Lord Digbyes preceding expressions
in his Letter to her Majesty, and Sir Lewis Dives; and your Majesty's
succeeding course of withdrawing your self Northward from your Parliament, in
a manner very suitable and correspondent to that evil Counsel.

Which we doubt will make much deeper impression in the generality of your
people. And therefore we most humbly advise and beseech your Majesty for the
procuring and settling the confidence of your parliament and all your Subjects,
and for the other important reasons concerning the recovery of Ireland, and
securing this Kingdom, which have bin formerly presented to your Majesty, you
will be graciously pleased with all convenient speed to return to these
parts, and to close with the Counsel and desire of your parliament: where you
shall find their dutiful affections and endeavors, ready to attend your
Majesty with such entertainment, as shall not only give your Majesty just
cause of security in their faithfulness; but other manifold evidences of their
earnest intentions and endeavors to advance your Majesty's service, honor,
and contentment; and to establish it upon the sure foundation of the peace an^
prosperity of all your Kingdoms.

FINIS.
Tudor rose C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
Scottish thistle
His Majesty's Answer To the Petition of both Houses of PARLIAMENT, Presented
to Him at York on Saturday the 26 of March, 1642. by the Lord Willoughby, Lord
Dungarvan, and Sir Anthony Irby.
IF you would have had the patience to have expected Our Answer to your last
Declaration (which, considering the nature of it, has not been long in coming)
We believe you would have saved your selves the labor of saying much of this
Message. And We could wish that Our Privileges on all parts were so Stated,
that this way of Correspondencie might be preserved with that Freedom which
has been used of old: For We must tell you, that if you may ask any thing of
Us by Message or Petition, and in what language (how unusual soever) you think
fit, and We must neither deny the thing you ask, nor give a reason why We
cannot grant it, without being taxed of breaking your Privileges, or being
counseled by those who are enemies to the Peace of the Kingdom, and favorers
of the Irish Rebellion (for We have seen your Printed Votes, upon Our Message
from Huntington) you will reduce all Our Answers hereafter into a very little
room; In plain English, It is to take away the Freedom of Our Vote, which were
We but a Subject, were High Injustice; but being your King, We leave all the
world to judge what it is.

Is this the way to compose all misunderstandings? We thought We showed you one
by our Message of the 20. of January, if you have a better or readier, We shall
willingly hearken to it, for hitherto you have showed Us none. But why the
refusal to consent to your Order, (which you call a denial of the Militia)
should be any interruption to it, We cannot understand. For the Militia (which
We always thought necessary to be settled) We never denied the thing (as We
told you in Our Answer of the 28. of January, to the Petition of the House of
Commons, for We accepted the persons, (except for Corporations) We only denied
the way. You ask it by way of Ordinance, and with such a preface as We can
neither with Justice to Our Honor, or innocence consent to: You exclude Us for
any Power in the disposition or execution of it, together with you, and for a
time utterly unlimited. We tell you We would have the thing done; Allow the
persons (with that exception;) Desire a Bill (the only good old way of
imposing on Our Subjects.) We are extremely unsatisfied what an Ordinance is,
but well satisfied, that without Our Consent it is nothing, not binding: And it
is evident by the long time spent in this Argument, the necessity and danger
was not so imminent, but a Bill might have well been prepared, which if it
shall yet be done with that due regard to Us, and care of Our People, in the
limitation of the power and other circumstances, We shall recede from nothing
We formerly expressed in that Answer to your Order, otherwise We must declare
to all the world, That We are not satisfied with, or shall ever allow Our
Subjects to be bound by your printed Votes, of the fifteenth or sixteenth of
this month, or that under pretense of declaring what the Law of the Land is,
you shall without Us make a new Law, which is plainly the case of the Militia:
And what is this but to introduce an Arbitrarie way of Government?

Concerning Pyms Speech, you will have found by what the Lord Compton, and Mr.
Baynton brought from Us, in answer to that Message they brought to Us, that as
yet We rest nothing satisfied in that particular.

As for the seditious Pamphlets and Sermons, We are both sorry and ashamed in
so great a variety, and in which Our Rights, Honor and Authority, are so
insolently slighted and vilified, and in which the Dignity and Freedom of
Parliament is so much invaded and violated, it should be asked of Us to name
any; the mentioning of the Protestation protested, the Apprentices
Protestation, To your Tents, O Israel, or any other, would be too great an
excuse for the rest. If you think them not worth your inquiry, We have done.
But We think it most strange, to be told, that Our denial of a Guard (which We
yet never denied, but granted in another manner, and under a Command at that
time most accustomed in the Kingdom) or the denial of any thing else (which is
in Our power legally to deny) which in Our understanding (of which God has
surely given Us some use) is not fit to be granted, should be any excuse for so
dangerous concourse of people, which not only in our apprehension, but (we
believe) in the interpretation of Law it self, has bin always held most
tumultuous and seditious. And We must wonder, what, and whence comes the
Instructions and Informations that those people have, who can so easily think
themselves obliged by the Protestation to assemble in such a manner, for the
defense of Privileges, which cannot be so clearly known to any of them, and so
negligently pass over the consideration, and defense of Our Rights so
beneficial and necessary for themselves, and scarce unknown to any of them,
which by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy (and even by the same
Protestation) they are at least equally obliged to defend. And what
interruptions such kind of Assemblies may be to the freedom of future
Parliaments (if not seasonably discountenanced and suppressed) We must advise
you to consider, as likewise whether both Our powers may not by such means be
usurped, by hands not trusted by the Constitution of this Kingdom. For Our
Guard, We refer you to Our answer to your Declaration.

By that Question of Violating your Laws; by which We endeavored to express
Our care and resolution to observe them; We did not expect you would have been
invited to have looked back so many years, for which you have had so ample
Reparation; Neither looked We to be reproached with the Actions of our
Ministers (then against the Laws) whilst We express so great a zeal for the
present defense of them, it being Our Resolution, upon observation of the
mischief which then grew by Arbitrary power (though made plausible to Us by the
suggestions of necessity and imminent danger, and take you heed ye fall not
into the same error upon the same suggestions) hereafter to keep the Rule Our
self, and to Our power require the same from all others: But above all, We must
be most sensible of what you cast upon Us for requital of those good Bills you
cannot deny. We have denied any such Design, and as God Almighty must judge
in that point between Us, who knows Our upright intentions at the passing
those Laws: So in the mean time We defy the Devil to prove that there was any
Design (with Our knowledge or Privity) in or about the time of passing those
Bills, that had it taken effect could have deprived Our subjects of the fruit
of them: And therefore We demand full Reparation in this point, that We may be
cleared in the sight of all the world, and chiefly in the eyes of our loving
Subjects, from so notorious and false an imputation as this is.

We are far from denying what you have done, For We acknowledge the charge our
people have sustained in keeping the two Armies, and in relieving Ireland, of
the which We are so sensible, that in regard of those great Burdens Our People
have undergone, We have and do patiently suffer those extreme personal wants,
as Our Predecessors have been seldom put to, rather then We would press upon
them: which We hope (in time) will be considered on your parts.

In Our offer of a General* Pardon, Our intent was to compose and secure the
general condition of Our Subjects, conceiving that in these times of great
Distractions, the good Laws of the Land have not been enough observed; But it
is a strange world when Princes proffered Favors are counted Reproaches: yet if
you like not this Our offer We have done.

Concerning any discourses of Foreign Forces, though We have given you a full
Answer in Ours to your last Declaration, yet We must tell you, We have neither
so ill an opinion of Our own merit, or the Affections of Our good Subjects, as
to think Our self in need of any Foreign Force to preserve Us from Oppression
(and We shall not need for any other purpose) but are confident (through Gods
providence) not to want the good wishes and assistance of the whole Kingdom,
being resolved to build upon that sure Foundation, the Law of the Land. And We
take it very ill that any general Discourses between an unknown Person and a
Mariner, or inferences upon Letters should be able to prevail in matters so
improbable in themselves, and scandalous to Us, for which We cannot but
likewise ask Reparation, not only for the vindicating of Our Own Honor, but
also thereby to settle the minds of Our Subject^, whose Fears and Iealousies
would so^n vanish, were they not fed and maintained by such false and malicious
Rumors as these.

For our return to Our Parliament, We have given you a full Answer in Ours to
your Declaration, and you ought to look on Us as not gone but driven (We say
not by you, yet) from you. And if it be not so easy for you to make Our
Residence in London so safe as We could desire, We are, and will be contented
that Our Parliament be adjourned to such a place, where We may be fitly and
safely with you. For though we are not pleased to be at this distance, yet ye
are not to expect Our Presence, Until ye shall both secure Us concerning Our
just apprehensions of Tumultuary insolences, And likewise give Us satisfaction
for those Insupportable and Insolent Scandals that are raised upon Us.

To conclude, As We have or shall not Refuse any way agreeable to Justice or
Honor, which shall be offered to Us for the beget^^^^

(...)
