A Letter sent from both Houses of Parliament, to all the High-Sheriffs of this
Kingdom, concerning the late Propositions for Ireland.
Master Sheriff.
THe Lords and Commons being deeply sensible of the unspeakable calamities
which his Majesty's good Subjects of the Kingdom of Ireland do now suffer, by
the barbarous cruelties and massacres of the Rebels there, and conceiving
these printed Propositions herewith sent (being ratified by his Majesty's
Royal assent, and the unanimous approbation of both Houses of Parliament) do
undoubtedly tend to the speedy and effectual reducing of those bloody Rebels,
the propagating of the Protestant Religion, the augmenting of the greatness
and the Revenue of the Crown of England, and the establishing of an happy and
firm peace for the future in his Majesty's three Kingdoms; and all this to be
effected (by Gods gracious assistance) without the general charge of the
Subject, and to the great advantage of those that shall under-write; have
thought fit to require you to publish these printed Propositions and
Instructions at this Lent Assizes, to the intent that all his Majesty's good
people within your County, may take notice of the benefit they may receive by
under-writing in due time; And that so many of them then present and willing to
subscribe, may give up a Note of their Names, Sums, and dates of their
Subscriptions to you, to be entered in the Paperbook mentioned in the printed
Instructions, which is forthwith to be sent unto you. And you are further
directed hereby, at this Lent Assizes (if they be not past) by the advice and
assistance of the Justices of Peace for your County, then present, to appoint
certain days and places most convenient for this service; when and where your
self, and the Justices of Peace within each division, will be present, to
receive the Names, Sums, and times of Subscription, of such of his Majesty's
well-affected Subjects within your County as shall not have subscribed at this
Lent Assizes, their Names Sums, and times of Subscription, to be likewise
entered in the Paperbook. And if this Letter come to your hands after the
Assizes, then to appoint such times and places as may best speed this service.
And further, your self, and the Justices of Peace, the Ministers of Gods Word,
and persons of quality within your County, are hereby earnestly desired to show
themselves active and exemplary in advancing this great and pious work; It Is a
service tending so much to the glory of God, the honor and profit of his
Majesty, and the peace and tranquillity of his three Kingdoms for the future.
And you are likewise to inform those that shall under-write, that the Act of
Parliament (which his Majesty has promised to pass* for the settling of those
two Millions and half of Acres) is already in hand, and that the Lands are to
be divided so indifferently by Lot amongst them that under-write, that no one
man, whatsoever, shall have more respect or advantage than another, in the
division. And lastly, You are to give a speedy account to the Parliament of
your proceedings herein, and of those that do really advance this service. Thus
not doubting of your utmost care and diligence herein, we bid you heartily
farewell.

The Propositions.
I That two Millions and an half of those Acres may be assigned, allotted, and
divided amongst them after this proportion, viz. For each adventure of 200 li.
1000 Acres in Ulster. 300 li. 1000 Acres in Conaght. 450 li. 1000 Acres in
Munster. 600 li. 1000 Acres in Leinster.


All according to the English measure, and consisting of Meadow, Arrable, and
profitable Pasture, the Bogs, Woods, and barren Mountains being cast in over
and above. These two Millions and a half of Acres to be holden in free and
common Soccage of the King* as of his Castle of Doublin.

II. That out of these two Millions and an half of Acres, a constant rent
shall be reserved to the Crown of England, after this proportion, viz Out of
each Acre thereof in Ulster 1d -- Conaght 1d -- ob Munster 2d -- que Leinster.
3d --


Whereby His Majesty's Revenue out of those Lands will be much improved,
besides the advantages that He will have by the coming to his ands of all
other the Lands of the Rebels, and their personal estates, without any charge
unto his Majesty.

III That for the erecting of Manors, settling of Waste and Commons,
maintaining of Preaching Ministers, creating of Corporations, and regulating of
the several Plantations, one or more Commissions be hereafter granted by
Authority of Parliament.

IV. That Moneys for this great occasion may be the more speedily advanced, All
the Undertakers in the City of London, and within twenty Miles distrant
thereof, shall under-write their several sums before the twentieth day of
March, 1641. and all within sixty miles of London, before the first day of
April, 1642, And the rest of the Kingdom before the first day of May, 1642.

V. That the several sums to be underwritten, shall be paid in at four
payments, viz. one fourth part within ten days after such under-writing; and
the other three parts at three Months, three Months, and three Months: all
to be paid into the Chamber of London.

VI. That for the better securing of the said several sums accordingly, every
one that does so under-write, shall at the time of his subscription pay down
the twentieth part of the total sum that shall be by him then underwritten.

And in case that the residue of his first fourth part be not paid in to such
person or persons as shall be appointed to receive the same within the ten
days before limited, then such party shall not only forfeit the twentieth
part of the sum total formerly deposited, but so much more of his first fourth
payment to be added thereunto, as shall make up the one moity of the said first
payment. And if the same person shall fail in any other of the three payments,
he shall then forfeit his entire first fourth part, and all the benefit of his
subscription; which forfeiture shall accrue to the common benefit of the rest
of the undertakers.

March 11. London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.


