The Humble DESIRES AND PROPOSITIONS OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, Presented to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty at his Court at
Oxford, February 3. 1642.

With His MAJESTY'S ANSWER thereunto, and six Propositions propounded by him to
both Houses, to be debated upon with the rest.

Die Lunae. Feb. 6. 1642.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament that these
Propositions with his Majesty's Answer thereunto shall be forthwith printed and
published.

Io. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Feb. 7. Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey. 1642.

The Humble Petition of the Lords and Commons to the King.
WE your MAJESTY'S most humble and faithful Subjects, The Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, having in our thoughts the glory of God, your Majesty's
honor, and the prosperity of your people, and being most grievously afflicted
with the pressing miseries, and calamites, which have overwhelmed your two
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, since your Majesty has by the persuasion of
evil Counselors, withrawn your self from the Parliament, raised an army
against it, And by force thereof protected delinquents, from the Justice of it,
constrayning us to take Arms for the defense of our Religion, Laws,
Liberties, Privileges of Parliament, and for the fitting of the Parliament in
safety; which fears and dangers are continued and increased by the raising,
drawing together and arming of great numbers of Papists under the command of
the Earl of New Castle, likewise by making the Lord Herbert of Ragland and
other known Papists Commanders of great Forces, whereby many grievous
Oppressions, Rapines, and cruelties have been and are daily exercised upon the
persons and states of your people, much innocent blood has been spilt and the
Papists have obtained means of attempting with hopes of affecting their
mischievous designs of rooting out the reformed Religion, and destroying the
professors thereof, in tender sense and compassion of these evils under which
your People and Kingdom lie, (according to the duty which we owe to God your
Majesty and the Kingdom for which we are trusted) do most earnestly desire
that an end may be put to these great distempers and distractions, for the
prevention of that desolation which does threaten all your Majesty's Dominions,
and as we have rendered, and still are ready to render to your Majesty that
subjection, obedience and service which we owe unto you, so we most humbly
beseech your Majesty to remove the causes of this War, and to vouchsafe us that
peace and protection which we and our Ancestors have formerly enjoyed, under
your Majesty and royal Predecessors, and graciously to accept and grant those
our most humble desires and propositions: 1. that your Majesty will be pleased
to disband your Armies as we likewise shall be ready to disband all those
Forces which we have raised, and that you will be pleased to return to your
Parliament.

2. That you will leave Delinquents to a legal trial and judgment of
Parliament.

3. That the Papists may not only be disbanded but disarmed, according to the
Law.

4 That your Majesty will be pleased to give your royal assent unto the Bill
for taking away superstitious innovations; To the Bill for the utter abolishing
and taking away of all Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and
Commissaries, Deanes, Sub-deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons Canons, and
Prebendaries and all Chantors, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-treasurers,
Succentors and Sacrists, and all Vicars Chorall, and Choristers, old Vicars,
and new Vicars, of any Cathedral or Collegiate Church and all other their
under Officers out of the Church of England, to the Bill against scandalous
Ministers; To the Bill against Pluralities. And to the Bill for Consultation to
be had with godly, Religious and learned Divines, that your Majesty will be
pleased to promise to pass such other good Bills, for settling of
Church Government as upon consultation with the Assembly of the said Divines,
shall be resolved on by both Houses of Parliament; and by them be presented to
your Majesty.

5. That your Majesty having expressed in your Answer, to the ninteene
propositions of both Houses of Parliament, an hearty affection and intention
for the rooting out of popery out of this Kingdom. And that if both the Houses
of Parliament can yet find a more effectual course to disable Jesuits,
Priests and Popish Recusants from disturbing the state, or Deluding the Laws,
that you would willingly give your consent unto it.

That you would be graciously pleased for the better discovery, and speedier
conviction of Recusants, that an Oath may be established by Act of Parliament,
To be administered in such manner as by both Houses shall be agreed on, where in
they shall abjure and renounce the Popes supremacy, the doctrine of
Transsubstantiation, Purgatory, worshipping of the consecrated Hosts, Crucifixes
and Images and the refusing of the said Oath being tendered in such manner as
shall be appointed by Act of Parliament, shall be a sufficient conviction in Law
of Recusancy.

And that your Majesty will be graciously pleased to give your Royal assent
unto a Bill, for the education of the children of Papists by Protestants, in
the Protestant Religion.

That for the more effectual execution of the Laws against Popish Recusants,
your Majesty will be pleased to consent to a Bill for the true levying of the
penalties against them, and that the same penalties may be levied, and disposed
of in such manner as both Houses of Parliament shall agree on, so as your
Majesty be at no loss; And likewise to a Bill whereby the practice of Papists
against the state may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly executed.

6. That the Earl of Bristoll may be removed from your Majesty's Counsels,
and that both he, and the Lord Herbert, eldest son to the Earl of Worcester,
may likewise be restrained from coming within the verge of the Court, and that
they may not bear any Office or have any employment concerning the state or
Commonwealth.

7. That your Majesty will be graciously pleased by Act of Parliament, to
settle the Militia both by Sea and Land, and for the Forts and ports of the
Kingdom in such a manner, as shall be agreed on by both Houses.

8. That your Majesty will be pleased, by your Letters patents to make Sir John
Bramston, chief Justice of your Court of King's Bench, William Lenthall Esquire
the now speaker of the Commons House, Mr. of the Rolls, and to continue the
Lord chief Justice Banks, chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas; And
likewise to make Mr. Sergeant Wyld chief Baron of your Court of the Exchequer,
And that Mr. Justice Bacon may be continued, and Mr. Sergeant Roles, and Mr.
Sergeant Atkins made Justices of the Kings Bench. That Mr. Justice Reenes, and
Mr. Justice Foster may be continued, and Mr. Sergeant Phesant made one of the
Justices of your Court of Common Pleas. That Mr. Sergeant Creswell, Mr. Samuel
Brown, and Mr. John Puleston may be Barons of the Exchequer and that all
these, and all the Judges of the same Courts for the time to come, may hold
their places by Letters patents under the great Seal, Quam diu se been
gesserint. And that the several persons not before named that do hold any of
these places before mentioned may be removed.

9. That all such persons as have bin put out of the Commissions of peace or of
Oyer, and Terminer or from being Custodes Rotulorum since the first day of
April. 1642. (Others then such as were put out by the desire of both or either
of the Houses of Parliament may again be put into those Commissions and
Offices; And that such persons may be put out of those Commissions and Offices
as shall be excepted against by both Houses of Parliament.

10. That your Majesty will be pleased to pass the Bill now presented to your
Majesty, to vindicate and secure the privileges of Parliament from the ill
consequence of the late president in the charge and proceedings against the
Lord Kimbolton now Earl of Manchester, and the five members of the House of
Commons.

11. That your Majesty's Royal Assent may be given unto such Acts as shall be
advised by both Houses of Parliament, for the satisfying and paying the debts
and damages, wherein the two Houses of Parliament have engaged the public
Faith of the Kingdom.

12. That your Majesty will be pleased according to a gracious Answer
heretofore received from you, to enter into a more strict alliance with the
states of the united Provinces, and other Neighbor Princes, and states of the
Protestant Religion for the defense and maintenance thereof, against all
designs, and attempts of the Popish and Jesuiticall faction, to subvert and
suppress it; whereby your subjects may hope to be free from the mischiefs,
which this Kingdom has endured through the power which some of that party
have had in your Council, and will be much encouraged in a Parliamentary way
for your aid and assistance, in restoring your Royal Sister and the Prince
Elector to those Dignities and Dominions which belong unto them, and the
relieving the other distressed Protestant Princes, who have suffered in the
same cause.

13. That in the General pardon that your Majesty has bin pleased to offer to
your Subjects, all offenses and misdemeanors committed before the tenth of
January, 1641. which have bin or shall be questioned or proceeded against in
Parliament upon complaint in the House of Commons before the tenth of January,
1643. shall be excepted, which offenses and misdemeanors shall nevertheless be
taken and adjudged to be fully discharged against all other inferiors Courts,
That likewise there shall be an exception of all offenses committed by any
person or persons which has or have had any hand or practice in the rebellion
of Ireland, which has or have given any Counsel, assistance or encouragement
to the Rebels there, for the maintenance of that rebellion, as likewise an
exception of William Earl of New Castle, and George Lord Digby.

14. That your Majesty will be pleased to restore such Members of either House
of Parliament to their several place of service and employment out of which
they have bin put, since the beginning of this Parliament, that they may
receive satisfaction and reparation for those places and for the profits which
they have lost by such removal* upon the Petition of both houses of
Parliament, and that all others may be restored to their offices and
employments who have bin put out of the same upon any displeasure conceived
against them for any assistance given to both Houses of Parliament, or obeying
their Commands, or forbearing to leave their attendance upon the Parliament
without license; Or for any other occasion arising from these unhappy
differences betwixt your Majesty and both Houses of Parliament upon the like
Petition of both Houses.

These things being granted and performed, as it has allwaies bin our hearty
prayers, so shall we be enabled to make it our hopeful endeavor, that your
Majesty and your people may enjoy the blessings of Peace, Truth, and Justice;
The Royalty, and greatness of your Throne may be supported by the Loyal and
bountiful affections of your people, their Liberties and Privileges
maintained by your Majesty's prot^ction and Justice, and this public Honor
and Happiness of your Majesty and all your Dominions, communicated to other
Churches and States of your Alliance, and derived to your Royal posterity, and
the future Generations in this Kingdom for ever.

HIS MAJESTY'S Answer and Propositions to the Lords and Commons in PARLIAMENT.
IF His Majesty had not given up all the faculties of His soul to an earnest
endeavor of a peace, and reconciliation with His people; Or if He would suffer
himself by any provocation to be drawn to a sharpness of language at a time
when there seems somewhat like an overture of Accommodation; He could not but
resent the heavy charges upon Him in the preamble of these Propositions; And
would not suffer himself to be reproached with protecting of Delinquents by
force from Justice (His Majesty's desire having always been, that all men
should be tried by the known Laws, and having been refused it) with raising an
Army against His Parliament; And to be told that Arms have been taken up
against Him for defense of Religion, Laws, Liberties, Privileges of
Parliament, and for sitting of the Parliament in safety, with many other
particulars in that preamble, so often and so fully answered by His Majesty,
without remembering the World of the time and circumstances of raising these
Arms against him, when His Majesty was so far from being in a condition to
invade other men's Rights, that He was not able to maintain and defend His own
from violence; And without telling His good Subjects, that their Religion (the
true Protestant Religion, in which His Majesty was borne, has faithfully
lived, and to which He will die a willing sacrifice) Their Laws, Liberties,
Privileges, and safety of Parliament, were so amply settled, and established,
or offered to be so by His Majesty, before any Army was raised against him, and
long before any raised by him for his defense; That if nothing had been
desired, but that peace and protection which His Subjects and their Ancestors
had in the best times enjoyed under His Majesty, or His Royal Predecessors,
this misunderstanding, and distance between His Majesty and His People, and
this general misery and distraction upon the face of the whole Kingdom had
not now been the discourse of Christendom. But His Majesty will forbear any
expressions of bitterness, or of a sense of His own sufferings, that if it be
possible the memory thereof may be lost to the World; And therefore, though
many of the Propositions presented to His Majesty by both Houses appear to Him
very derogatory from and destructive to His Just Power and Prerogative, and no
way beneficial to His Subjects, few of them being already due to them by the
Laws established (and how un-Parliamentary it is by Arms to require new Laws,
all the world may Judge) yet because these may be waved or mollified, and many
that are now dark or doubtful in them cleared and explained upon debate) his
Majesty is pleased (such is his sense of the miseries this Kingdom suffers by
this unnatural War, and His earnest desire to remove them by a happy peace)
that a speedy Time and Place be agreed upon for the meeting of such persons as
His Majesty, and both Houses shall appoint to discuss these Propositions, and
such others here following as His Majesty does propose to them.

1. That His Majesty's own Revenue, Magazines, Towns, Forts, and Ships, which
have been taken or kept from Him by force, be forthwith restored unto Him.

2. That whatsoever has been done or published, contrary to the known Laws
of the Land, and derogatory to His Majesty's legal and known Power and
Rights, be renounced and recalled, that no seed may remain for the like to
spring out of for the future.

3. That whatsoever illegal power has been claimed, and exercised by or over
his Subjects, as imprisoning their persons without Law, stopping their Habeas
Corpusses; And imposing upon their Estates, without Act of Parliament, etc.
either by both or either House, or any Committee by both or either, or by any
persons appointed by any of them be disclaimed, and all such persons so
committed, forthwith discharged.

4. That as His Majesty will readily consent (having done so heretofore) to the
execution of all Laws already made, and to any good Acts to be made for the
suppressing of Popery, and for the firm settling of the Protestant Religion now
established by Law; So he desires that a good Bill may be framed for the better
preserving of the Book of Common Prayer from the scorn and violence of
Brownists, Anabaptists, and other Sectaries, with such clauses for the ease of
tender consciences, as his Majesty has formerly offered:

5. That all such persons as upon the Treaty shall be excepted out of the
general pardon, shall be tried per Pares according to the usual course and
known Law of the Land, and that it be left to that either to acquit or
condemn them.

6. And to the intent this Treaty may not suffer interruption by any
intervening Accidents, That a cessation of Arms, and free Trade for all his
Majesty's Subjects may be first agreed upon.

This offer and desire of his Majesty he hopes will be so cheerfully
entertained, That a speedy and blessed peace may be accomplished: if it shall
be rejected, or by insisting upon imreasonable circumstances, be made
impossible, which he hopes (God in his mercy to this Nation will not suffer)
The guilt of the blood which will be shed and the desolation, which must follow
will lie upon the heads of the refusers; however, his Majesty is resolved
through what accidents soever he shall be compelled to recover his rights, and
with what prosperous successes soever it shall please God to bless him, That
by his earnest constant endeavors to Propagate and promote the true protestant
Religion, And by his governing according to the known Laws of the Land, and
upholding the Just Privileges of Parliament, according to his frequent
Protestations made before Almighty God, which be will always inviolably
observe, The World shall see that he has undergone all these difficulties and
hazzards for the defense and maintenance of these, The zealous preservation of
which his Majesty well knows is the only foundation and means for the true
happiness of him and his People.

FINIS.

