Die Sabbati, 29. Januarii. 1641.
An Order made by both Houses of Parliament, to prevent the going over of
Popish Commanders into Ireland, and also to hinder the transportation of Arms,
Ammunition, Money, Corn, Victuals, and all other Provision to the Rebels, And
for the sending back of the Irish Papists lately come over.
WHereas great numbers of Papists, both English and Irish, some whereof have
been, and are Commanders in the Wars; and others, such as have estates in
England, have gone out of this Kingdom into Ireland, immediately before and
during the barbarous and bloody Rebellion there, and traitorously joined
themselves with the Rebels of that Nation, against His Majesty, and the Crown
of England; And likewise diverse other Popish Commanders, and such as have
estates in England, are daily preparing to go thither, to the same wicked ends:
And great store of Arms, Ammunition, Money, Corn, and other Victuals and
Provisions have been sent, and are daily preparing to be sent to that Kingdom,
for the assistance and encouragement of those Rebels: For prevention whereof,
The Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, Do hereby Order and
straightly charge and command, all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors,
Bailiffs, Constables, and other His Majesty's Officers within the Realm of
England, and Dominion of Wales; That they apprehend and examine all such
Persons, as they shall suspect to be Papists, and going out of this Kingdom, or
the Dominion of Wales into Ireland. And that they make also stay of all Arms,
Munition, Money, Corn, and other Victuals and Provisions, which they shall
suspect to be preparing for transportation into Ireland, for the aid and relief
of the Rebels there; And to give speedy notice thereof unto the Parliament.

And whereas, Also diverse poor People, Men, Women, and Children, of the Irish
Nation, and Papists, have lately come in great numbers out of Ireland, into
Cornwall, Devon and other parts of this Kingdom, where they have been, and are
very disorderly, and much terrify the Inhabitants where they come, and due
care is not taken in all places for the suppressing and punishing of them. The
Lords and Commons in this Parliament Assembled, Do hereby further Order and
require, all Officers before mentioned, That they put the Laws in due exetion
against such wandering Irish Papists before expressed, and that they cause them
to be forthwith conveyed back into that Kingdom.

This Order was read, and by Vote upon the Question assented unto, and ordered
to be fair Written and sent up to the Lords by Master Carew.

Master Carew brings answer, That the Lords do fully agree with the House in
this Order.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.


