Die Martis, 23 Martii, 1646.
AN ORDER OF The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, FOR Putting in due
execution the Laws and Ordinances for observing the Lord's Day, and public
Fast days, and for preventing of Disorders and Tumults on those days.
UPon Information of the great Disorders and Tumults committed in Moor-fields
the last Lord's Day (being the Lord's Day) by diverse loose irreligious people in
disorderly Alehouses, It is Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, That the Lord Major, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers of
the City of London and Liberties thereof; and the Sheriffs of London and
Middlesex, the Justices of Peace and Officers of the County of Middlesex and
Westminster, and the Liberties; the Justices of Peace of Surrey, and the
Borough of Southwark, be hereby enjoined to take especial care, That the Laws
and Ordinances for the due observing of the Lord's Day, and the public Fast
days, be observed, and put in strict execution; and that they do suppress all
unnecessary Alehouses, and all Alehouses where any disorders shall be committed.
And the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled do Declare, That they will
take notice of all Justices of Peace, or other Officers, as shall not with
diligence perform their duties in putting in due execution the Laws and
Ordinances for the observing of the Lord's Day, and the public Fast days. It
is further Ordered, That this Order be forthwith printed, and published the
next Lord's Day by the several Ministers in London, Westminster, and Lines of
Communication, and at the next quarter Sessions in London and Middlesex, and in
the Borough of Southwark, and at the next Assizes in the County of Surrey.

Io: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


Die Martis, 23 Martii, 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Order be forthwith
printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
March 24. 1646.


