AN ORDER From the High Court of PARLIAMENT, Which was read on Sunday last, in
every Church, being the 19. Day of December, 1641.

Subscribed by Alderman Soames, and Captain Ven, Burgesses for the honorable
City of London.

ALSO THE TRUE COPPIE OF A Seditious Paper, delivered in the Pulpit to the
Minister of Christ church upon Sunday, being the 19. of December, And
afterward presented to the Lord Major by Mr. Mamsbridge, Reader of
Christ-church, and Petti-canon of Saint Paul's, London.

Likewise the Sermon which was preached in the church of St. Sepulchers by a
Brownnist on Sunday last, which caused a great disturbance, and how the Author
was committed. His text was taken out of the 1. of Revelations, and the 14.
verse. His head and his ears were white, as white wool, and as show, and his
eyes were as a flame of fire.

With the Relation of the Congregation of Brownists the same day at the sign
of the Lock in fleetstreet.

London, Printed for William Bowden, 1641.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

The true COPY Of a seditious PAPER Delivered In the Pulpit to the Minister of
Christ-Church upon Sunday, being the 19. of December, 1641. and afterward
presented to the Lord Major, by Mr. Mamsbridge, Reader of Christ-church.
COmfort ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord: but where is that comfort to
be had; for there be traitors in the house of Israel, and Judah is possessed
with a region of Devils, Truth is banished, and Piety is not to be found, Error
is made an Emperous, and distraction his beloved Minion.

There is daily halting between opinions, Divisions are dispearsed throughout
the whole Land, the spouse o Christ is in her mourning habit, her weeds be
desolution and anguish of heart: why? because the Sonr of men forsake her, and
run a whoring after their own inventions, and are covered with deceit, and yet
have they a pretenc^ of goodness, Religion is made their stalking horse, which
every Ploughman in those days does ride, should J say almost to the death J
should not lie. If they perceive any way of settling and bringing of it to a
uniformity, out of zeal they sind a hole in religions coat, which every
Tradesman forsooth, must have a hand in mending, or else it cannot be well
concerning what sort of people my meaning is may easily be understood, J know
you will say they be Brownists, who took their name from one Brown of Corpus
Christi College in Cambridg, this sort of people were once but a handful, and
then they creeped in corners, for fear they should be discovered, but now they
are like to the Egyptian least they overthrow the whole Land.

They are now grown to that height of impudency, that it is a common thing
for them to command the preacher what he shall lay, and no more.

A company upon the Sabbath day seeing the Minister have a surplice on, they
most profane miscreants plucked it off from him, and in the Church raised war
against the King of heaven, and every one tryumphed, as if they had got a
greater victory than ever Alexand^^ the Great could attain unto, nay an old
woman which could scarce see, like a young Amazonian boasted, saying, that with
this hand did I pluck the babylonish garment from off his back.

More villainy has bin by them lately acted, consisting of such matter, as is
sufficient to make a good Christians hair to stand upright.

Upon sunday being the 19. day of December. the Minister at Christ-church,
London, going to pray for the sick, and to desire the Congregation to join
with him: he had a Note delivered unto him, instead of the name and place of
some visited body, to this effect.

Sir be pleased to direct your prayers to God, and move the Congregation of
Saints here met, to join with you, that he would be pleased to assist the
Apprentices and others with strength and power and to bless their
undertakings, which, are speedily to root out superstition out of this and all
other Churches, and to extirpate all Innovations of the Bishops, and Clergy.

This paper after Sermon was finished, and was carried by Mr. Mamsbridge,
Reader of Christ-Church, and Petti canon of the Church of St. Paul's, unto the
Lord Major.

Concerning St. Sepulchers Church, December. 19.
Disturbance also upon the same day was in the Church of St. Sepulchers,
London; for Sermon being finished in the Afternoon, there stood up a fellow in
the Masters gallery, who spoke after this manner.

Men and Brethren give attension unto me; for you shall find it thus written,
in the 2. of the Revelations, and the 14 verse, But I have a few things against
you all, etc.

Add after he had read the words of his text, he went about to go on, but the
people being religiously bent, stopped his mouth with a ne plus ultra, carrying
him out of the Church, who afterward was committed, and he made no Sermon at
all.

A great tumult in Fleet Street.
Upon the same day also, there was a Congregation of sedition sowers gathered
together at the sign of the Lock in Fleet Street, who being discovered, the
Constable was fetched, who was accompanied with some watchmen, went up to the
place whereas their Teacher was prating, his Pulpit was made of a half tub,
having a black velvet cloth hanging down: the Constable spoke some certain
words to their Parrot, who as wisely as he could, made answer again, the
Constable bid him pr^ceed, and for a space left them,

But about evening a great company was gathered together, as in an uproare,
before the house where the Brownists were, some of whom ran into one room,
some into another: but the Constable coming, all those which he took he
committed. I pray that all of the same faction may be served so, that they may
daily have whipping cheer at Christmas.

A story of a cheating Puritanicall, or rather hypocritical Cutpurse.
At the Church in Milke-street was a very great Assembly: it is the usual
church where Mr. Case uses to preach: whither came a seeming religious man,
with a bible under his arm, but seeing the person which sometimes preaches,
there he made bold to borrow 9* pounds ten shillings, and a watch out of his
pocket* but was taken doing the deed, and he gave the money and watch to a boy,
his confederate, who carried it away: but for his part, he was committed to
the Poultry Counter, it being about dinner time, where I will leave him.

An Order from the High Court of Parliament.
THere was also an order read in every church the same day from the Parliament
house, for a Fast to be kept next Wednesday,

Subscribed by Alderman Soames, and Captain Ven, Burgesses for the Honorable
City of London,

Imprimatur

per me Iohannem Cuffe. Cap: Do: Epi: Vtop.


