An Order made by both Houses of Parliament, for the bringing in of Corn,
Meal, or any other Victual whatsoever, into the several Ports of Dublin,
Carrickvergus, Yonghall and Londonderry.
WHereas His Majesty's Liege People of the Kingdom of Ireland have been much
infested through the violent outrages, and oppressions committed on them by the
Traitorous practices of the Popish Inhabitants within that Kingdom, whereby
they are rendered, incapable of relieving either themselves, or others, and are
exposed to extreme want, even of those things which are most necessary, for
sustentation of life. For remedy whereof, And that His Majesty's forces already
sent, and hereafter to be transported thither, may not be exposed to any
extremity through want of Victual, or other necessary Provisions.

It is ordered by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, That
whosoever, either Merchant, or others, shall bring into any of the Ports of
Dublin, Carrickvergus, Yonghall, or Londonderry, any proportion of Goods, and
wholesome Corn, Meal, or other Victual, or any other Provision necessary for
their sustenance, And deliver the same unto the Victualers, appointed for those
several Parts, at such rates as he, or they shall agree upon, and shall bring
Certificates under the hand and Seal of the said Victualers and Treasurer or
Vice-Treasurer, or whomsoever he shall appoint therein in the said several
Ports, of the certain sums agreed upon, to be received for the same, That
upon delivery of such Certificates unto those Officers which shall be assigned
thereunto here in London, the Seller of the said Victuals or other Provisions,
or his Assigns shall receive certain and full payment, of such sum or sums
of money out of the Chamber of London, as shall appear due upon such
Certificate within thirty days after the producing the same. Provided always,
That the money to be so paid here, or such Certificate for the Victual and
Provision aforesaid, Shall not exceed in the Port of Dublin, ten thousand
pounds; in the Port of Carrickvergus, fifteen thousand pounds; in the Port of
Yonghall, five thousand pounds; in the Port of Londonderry, five thousand
pounds; until the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament, shall give
further order herein, for the further victualling of these Parts, after such
Provision of Victual brought into those Parts and satisfied for, as is
directed by this Ordinance of Parliament.

And the Houses of Parliament are of opinion, and do declare, That if any
Person whatsoever shall send, or supply, or cause to be sent, or supplied to
the Rebels in Ireland, or any of them, any Corn, Victual, Powder, Ammunition,
Arms, or other Provisions, for, or toward the Assistance, or support of the
Rebels, or any of them; such Persons is thereby guilty of high Treason, and
thereby forfits his life and Estate.

This Order was read, and by Vote upon the Question assented unto, and Ordered
to be fair Written and sent up to the Lords, by Sir John Clotworthy Knight.

Sir John Clotworthy brings answer, That the Lords do fully agree with the
House of Commons in this Order.

Ordered (upon the Question) by the House of Commons, That this Ordinance of
Parliament shall be Printed.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Joseph Hunscott.


