An Order of the Committee of the Lords and Commons at Guild Hall for the
defense of the Kingdom, for the disarming and securing the persons of such as
are disaffected to the Parliament and Commonwealth; with city of Lodon and
Westminster, and the Suburbs within three miles of the City. With a
Proclamation by the Lord Mayor of London.
IT is this day ordered by the said Committee of the Lords and Commons, that
the (...) hereafter mentioned, shall be disarmed, and their persons secured;
That is to say,

First, all of ability and estate, who have not contributed to the defense of
the Kingdom, upon the propositions heretofore issued for that purpose, whose
names are contained in a Roll hereunto annexed under the hand of the Clerk of
the Commons House of Parliament.

All such as by name have been voted by both or either of the Houses of
Parliament, to be disarmed or to be delinquents. A Roll whereof is hereunto
annexed under the hands of the foresaid Committee.

All Popish Recusants, or justly suspected of Popery, or whose wives are Popish
Recusants, or whose children are Popishly bred: all that have contributed to
the wars against the Patlirment.

The Arms and Horses to be found in the Houses of any Bishops or Deane, and
Chapters, or other supected places to be ceised and brought to any of the
places hereafter appointed, and the persons that are to disarme and secure the
parsons hereby intended to be disarmed and secured shallhereb have power and
authority to enter into and search the houses of the said Bishops, Deanes and
Chapters, and all other Towns and places where any suspected persons do
usually lodge or abide, and to seize and secure the said suspected persons.

For the effecting of the premises, the several and respective Colonels,
Lieutenant Colonels, Captains, and other Officers of the trained Bands of the
several Wards within the City of London, are hereby authorized and required
to disarme the persons before mentioned within their several Wards, and other
their places within their Liberties; and to take and ceize all their Horses,
Arms, and Ammunition, or other provision of war, and to ceise upon and
secure their persons.

The several Aldermen and Aldermens Deputies, common Council men, Constables,
and all other persons are required to be assisting and aiding to the said
several Officers and trained Bands in the execution of the premises.

That the premises may with the better effect and speed be executed, It, will
be convenient that the trained Bands in each Ward be divided inth three or
more several Companies, which is hereby required, unless the respective
Officers and persons entrusted with the service upon the place, and upon
emergencies shall find cause to do otherwise.

The Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs of the City of London, Sergeant Mayor
General Skippon, together with such persons as they shall think fit to call
to their assistance, are hereby required to use all care and diligence that the
premises be executed according to the intent of these presents.

The persons of such as by intent of this Order are to be secured, shallbe
brought unto the places hereafter mentioned, that is to say, unto Gresham
College, and Crosby House in Bishops-gate-street, Winchester house in or near
the Borough of Southwarke.; the house of the Bishop of London, near the Church
of S. Paul's; Lambeth house, the house of the Deane and Chapter of Westminster,
and Ely house. And it is left to the discretion of the Officers of the
respective trained Bands, to which of the said houses they shall carry the
persons of those whom they shall apprehend.

The several houses and places where the persons apprehended shall remain,
shall have guards set about them of such number of the trained Bands, or
others, as the said Lord Mayor and Shariffes of the City of London, and
Sergeant Mayor General Skippon, or any of them shall appoint. And those that
shall be appointed to make those guards, shall have allowance of one shilling
fix pence per diem, during the time they continue in the said services, the
same to be paid at the charge of the persons so restrained, in such manner as
by the Lords and Commons shall be appointed.

For the better effecting of the premises about the Suburbs of London, and
within the City of Westminster, the Burough of Southwark, and other places
within three miles of the City of London, the several Colonels, Lieutenant
Colonels, Captains, and other Officers of the trained Bands of the several
Wards within the City of London, and of the respective Colonels, Lieutenant
Colonels, Captains, and other Officers of the trained Bands of those
respective places without the City of London, are hereby authorized and
required to disarme the persons before mentioned therein residing, and to take
and ceize all their Horses, Arms and Ammunition, and other provisions of
war, and to ceize upon and secure their persons.

The Lord Lieutenants, and Deputy Lieutenants, and the Knights and Burgesses
serving in this presont Parliament, for the Counties, Cities, and Burroughes in
the said several places; as likewise all Constables, Headburroughes, and other
persons abiding therein respectively, are required to be assistant and aiding
unto the several Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Captains, and other Officers,
and the trained Bands in the execution of the premises. In respect that it may
so fall out, that in some of the Wards within the city of London, and some
other of the places without the city of London, there may not occasion of use
for the full number of their trained Bands, but that they may be spared and
sent into other places within the respective limits. The Officers of the
trained Bands therefore respectively within the city of London, and without
the city, are required to be aiding and assisting unto each other in the
execution of the premises, whereby the service may with greater speed be
performed. The arms and ammunition, and other provision of war, shall be
ceized in any the places aforesaid, as well without the city of London as
within, shall be brought to such of the Halles belonging to the several
companies of the city of London, as shall be nearest to the places where such
ceisure shall be made only fittest for that use, and the horses with their
furniture shall be brought to such places as the Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs
of the city of London, Sergeant Mayor Skippon, or any of them shall appoint.
All the horses, arms or ammunition and provision for war, which shall be
ceised by virtue of this Order, or to be Inventoried and listed by the Captains
and Lieutenants of the respective companies of the teained Bands, and certified
under their hands to the Lord Mayor, to the end it may better appear where
such horses and ammunition remain, and to whom they belong. And authority is
hereby given to the said Lord Mayor of London, Sheriffs, Leiutenants,
Colonels, Lieutenant Colonels, Captains and other Officers, and to every of
them, before or at the time of the execution of the premises, to make
proclamation in the several Wards within the said city of London, and
likewise in such several places within the suburbs thereof, the city of
Westminster, Borough of Southwarke, and other places and precincts within three
miles of the city of London, as they or any of them shall think convenient
thereby commanding all and every the person and persons, which according to the
true intent and meaning of this Order, are to be disarmed, and their persons
secured, that they and every of them from and after the time of the making of
the said proclamation, shall repair unto, continue and abide, in their
several houses, lodgings, or places of their usual abode, until the premises
shall be duly executed and performed, and during such time only and in such
manner, as by the said several proclamations shall be enjoined.

Proclamations to be made at or before the time of disarming and securing the
Malignants in and about the City of London and the Suburbs, in the form of
words ensuing.
ALL Popish Recusants, or whose wives are Papists, or wwhose children are
Popishly bred,: All that have contributed to this present war against the
Parliament.

All of ability and estate, who have not contributed to the defense of the
Kingdom, upon the Propositions heretofore issued for that purpose, together
with such others as shall receive particular directions for that purpose.

Ate by the authority of both Houses of Parliament, commanded to repair unto,
remanie and abide within their several houses, lodgings, and usual places of
abode, until they shall have further directions from both Houses of
Parliament, upon the pains and penalties that may ensue thereupon.

London printed for I. Iackson, G. Tomlinson, and T. Homer, and are to be sold
in the Old Baily, 1642.


