AN ORDER OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Concerning His
Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chases: commanded to be published in all
Parishes where they are.
WHereas information has been given to the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, hat diverse lewd and disordered persons since the sitting
of this Parliament, have in great assemblies, and in a riotous manner,
unlawfully chased, killed, and destroyed many of his Majesty's Dear within his
Forests of Windsor, and Waltham, according to the known bounds, as now they
are limited and set out by virtue of the late Act of Parliament. And that they
together with diverse other the like persons do threaten and give out, that
they intend to commit the like outrages in other His Majesty's Forest, Chases,
and Parkes, presuming with their numbers, multitudes and menaces, to terrify
and disable His Majesty's Officers of his Forests, Chases, and Parkes, from
doing their respective duties by apprehending their bodies, or otherwise
bringing them to condign punishment for such their misdoings, according to the
Laws of the Forests; which offenses committed with force and violence (as
scandalous to the public justice of the Kingdom if not punished, and
dangerous for the future) unless they be timely prevented, are at no time,
(much less sitting the Parliament) to be suffered. The Lords and Commons
therefore taking the premises into their consideration, and finding that by the
Forest laws, and other the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, there is already
full prov^sion made for the preventing, removing, and punishing of all attempts
and offenses of this kind. And in case the Officers of the Forests by reason
of the great numbers of offenders, by arresting of their persons, or
otherwise, be not able to suppress them, for the present, That by the Statutes
made 13 Hen. 4 cap. 7: and 2. H. 5. cap. 8. and other the Laws and Statutes of
the Realm, the Sheriff and under-Sheriffe, and any two Justices of the Peace
in the County where such, or any riots are committed, ought to do it, and have
sufficient power and authority so to do, as likewise for the punishment of
offenders: And that in this case nothing is wanting but only the care and
diligence of the Officers in putting of those Laws in execution which is
hereby required as well for the punishment of what is past since the sitting of
this Parliament, as for prevention of the like in the time to come. And they
do further declare, that in case any just complaints of this nature shall
hereafter be made unto them, that they will use all just means, that the
penalties of those Laws may be fully put in execution against the respective
Officers that shall be found negligent therein, as the best means they can
think of for the prevention of such offenses, and the several officers of His
Majesty's Forests, Chases, and Parkes are hereby required to publish this
Order in the several Parishes where these Forests, Chases, and Parks do lie.

Die Iovis 12. Maii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lord and Commons in Parliament assembled, That this Order shall
be forthwith printed and published.

John Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for John Wright, 1642.


