NINETEEN PROPOSITIONS MADE BY BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT, TO THE KINGS
MAJESTY, FOR A RECONCILIATION Of the differences between His MAJESTY, and the
said HOUSES.

Whereunto is annexed, two Orders of Parliament, the one Concerning the
JEWELS of the CROWN.

The other, for the speedy Return of the Members of the Honorable house of
Commons, by the sixteenth of this Month of June, 1642.

And also, Sir John Hothams Letter to a worthy Member of the House of COMMONS;
Concerning the late discovery at HULL.

And the Oaths of the Kings of ENGLAND, taken out of the Parliament Roll. 1. H.
4. N. 17.

Die Iovis 2. die Iunii. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that these Propositions, with the two
Orders, be forthwith Printed, and published.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.



LONDON: Printed the fourth of June, for W. Gaye. 1642.

YOur Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, having nothing in their thoughts and desires more precious, and of
higher esteem (next to the honor and immediate service of God) then the just
and faithful performance of their duty to Your Majesty and this Kingdom; And
being very sensible of the great distractions, and distempers, and of the
imminent dangers and calamities which those distractions and distempers are
like to bring upon Your Majesty and Your Subjects, all which have proceeded
from the subtle insinuations, mischievous practices, and evil Counsels of men
disaffected to Gods true Religion, Your Majesty's honor and safety, and the
public peace and prosperity of your people. After a serious observation of
the causes of those mischiefs, do in all humility and sincerity present to
your Majesty their most dutiful Petition and advise, that out of your Princely
wisdom for the establishing your own honor and safety, and gracious
tenderness of the welfare and security of your Subjects and Dominions, you
will be pleased to grant and accept these their humble desires and
propositions, as the most necessary effectual means, through Gods blessing, of
removing those jealousies and differences which have unhappily fallen betwixt
you and your people, and procuring both Your Majesty and them a constant
course of honor, peace, and happiness.

1. That the Lords and others of your Majesty's Privy Council, and such great
Officers and Ministers of State, either at home or beyond the Seas, may be put
from your Privy Council, and from those Offices and employments, excepting
such as shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament. And that the Persons
put into the places and employments of those that are removed, may be approved
of by both Houses of Parliament: And that all Privy Counselors shall take an
Oath for the due execution of their places, in such form as shall be agreed
upon by both Houses of Parliament.

2. That the great affairs of this Kingdom may not be concluded or transacted
by the advice of private men, or by any unknown or unsworne Counselors; but
that such matters as concern the public, and are proper for the high Court
of Parliament, which is Your Majesty's great and supreme Council, may be
debated, resolved, and transacted only in Parliament, and not elsewhere; And
such as shall presume to do any thing to the contrary, shall be reserved to
the censure and judgment of Parliament; And such other matters of State as are
proper for your Majesty's Privy Council, shall be debated and concluded by
such of the Nobility and others as shall from time to time be chosen for that
place by approbation of both Houses of Parliament; And that no public Act
concerning the affairs of the Kingdom, which are proper for your Privy
Council, may be esteemed of any validity as proceeding from the royal
Authority, unless it be done by the advice and consent of the major part of
your Council attested under their hands. And that your Council may be limited
to a certain number, not exceeding twenty-five, nor under fifteen. And if any
Counselors place happen to be void in the Intervals of Parliament, it shall
not be supplied without the assent of the major part of the Council, which
choice shall be confirmed at the next sitting of the Parliament, or else to be
void.

3. That the Lord high Steward of England, Lord high Constable, Lord
Chauncellor, or Lord Keeper of the great Seal, Lord Treasurer, Lord Privy
Seal, Earl Marshall, Lord Admiral, Warden of the Cinque Ports, chief
Governor of Ireland, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the Wards,
Secretaries of State, two chief Justices and chief Baron, may always be
chosen with the approbation of both Houses of Parliament; And in the Intervalls
of Parliament by assent of the major part of the Council, in such manner as is
before expressed in the choice of Counselors.

4. That he or they unto whom the Government and education of the Kings
Children shall be committed, shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament,
and in the Intervalls of Parliaments, by the assent of the major part of the
Council, in such manner as is before expressed in the choice of Counselors; And
that all such servants (...) about them, against whom both Houses shall have
any just exception shall be removed.

5. That no Marriage shall be concluded, or treated for any of the Kings
Children, with any foreign Prince, or other person whatsoever abroad, or at
home, without the consent of Parliament, under the Penalty of a praemunire unto
such as shall so conclude, or treat any Marriage as aforesaid, And that the
said penalty shall not be pardoned, or dispensed with, but by the consent of
both Houses of Parliament.

6. That the Laws in force against Jesuits, Priests, and Popish Recusants, be
strictly put in execution, without any tolleration, or dispensation to the
contrary; And that some more effectual course may be enacted, by authority of
Parliament, to disable them from making any disturbance in the State, or
eluding the Law by trusts or otherwise.

7. That the Votes of Popish Lords in the House of Peers may be taken away, so
long as they continue Papists. And that his Majesty would consent to such a
Bill as shall be drawn for the education of the children of Papists by
Protestants, in the Protestant Religion.

8. That your Majesty will be pleased to consent that such a reformation be
made of the Church Government, and Liturgy, as both Houses of Parliament shall
advise, wherein they intend to have consultations with Divines, as is expressed
in their Declaration to that purpose. And that your Majesty will contribute
your best assistance to them, for the raising of a sufficient maintenance for
Preaching Ministers through the Kingdom. And that your Majesty will be pleased
to give your consent to Laws, for the taking away of innovations, and
superstition, and of pluralities, and against scandalous Ministers.

9. That your Majesty will be pleased to rest satisfied with that course that
the Lords and Commons have appointed for ordering the Militin, until the same
shall be further settled by a Bill. And that your Majesty will recall your
Declarations, and Proclamations against the Ordinance made by the Lords and
Commons concerning it.

10. That such Members of either House of Parliament, as have during this
present Parliament been put out of any place and office, may either be restored
to that place and office, or otherwise have satisfaction for the same, upon the
Petition of that House whereof he or they are Members.

11. That all Privy Counselors and Judges may take an Oath, the form whereof
to be agreed on and settled by act of Parliament, for the maintaining of the
Petition of Right, and of certain Statutes made by this Parliament, which
shall be mentioned by both Houses of Parliament. And that an inquiry of all the
breaches and violations of these Laws may be given in charge, by the Justices
of the Kings Bench every Term, and by the Judges of Assize in their Circuits,
and Justices of Peace at the Sessions, to be presented and punished according
to Law.

12. That all the Judges and all Officers placed by approbation of both Houses
of Parliament, may hold their places Quam diu been se gesserint.

13. That the Justice of Parliament may pass upon all Delinquents, whether
they be within the Kingdom, or fled out of it. And that all persons cited by
either House of Parliament may appear and abide the censure of Parliament.

14. That the general pardon offered by your Majesty may be granted with
such exceptions as shall be advised by both Houses of Parliament.

15. That the Forts and Castles of this Kingdom may be put under the command
and custody of such persons as your Majesty shall appoint, with the
approbation of your Parliament. And in the Intervalls of Parliament with the
approbation of the Major part of the Council in such manner as is before
expressed in the choice of Counselors.

16. That the extraordinary Guards and Military forces now attending your
Majesty, may be removed and discharged. And that for the future you will raise
no such guards or extraordinary forces, but according to Law, in case of
actual rebellion or invasion.

17. That your Majesty will be pleased to enter into a more strict alliance
with the States of the united Provinces and other Neighbor Princes and States
of the Protestant Religion, for the defense and maintenance thereof against all
designs and attempts of the Pope and his adherents to subvert and suppress
it, whereby your Majesty will obtain a great access of strength and
reputation, and your subjects be much encouraged and enabled in a Parliamentary
way for your aid and assistance, in restoring your royal Sister, and the
Princely Issue, to those dignities and dominions which belong unto them, and
relieving the other distressed Protestant Princes, who have suffered in the
same cause.

18. That Your Majesty will be pleased by Act of Parliament, to clear the Lord
Kimbolton, and the five Members of the House of Commons, in such manner, that
future Parliaments may be secured from the Consequence of that evil President.

19. That Your Majesty will be graciously pleased to pass a Bill for
restraining Peers made hereafter, from Sitting, or Voting in Parliament;
Unless they be admitted thereunto, with the Consent of both Houses of
Parliament.

And these Our humble desires, being granted by Your Majesty, We shall
forthwith apply Our selves to regulate Your present revenew, in such sort as
may be for Your best advantage; and likewise to settle such an ordinary and
constant increase of it, as shall be sufficient to support. Your Royal
dignity, in Honor and plenty, beyond the proportion of any former Grants of
the Subjects of this Kingdom to your Majesty's Royal Predecessors.

We shall likewise put the Town of Hull, into such hands as Your Majesty
shall appoint, with the Consent and approbation of Parliament, and deliver up a
Just account of all the Magazine; and cheerfully employ the uttermost of Our
power and endeavor, in the real expression and performance of our most
dutiful and Loyal affections, to the preserving, and maintaining the Royal
Honor, Greatness, and Safety of Your Majesty, and your Posterity.

Die Iovis 2. Iunii. 1642.
Whereas it does appear to the Lords and Commons in Parliament; That the King,
seduced by wicked Counsel does intend to leavy War against his Parliament; and
whereas Information has been given, That the Jewels of the Crown (which by the
Law of the Land ought not to be alienated) are either pawned or sold in
Amsterdam; or some other parts beyond the Seas, and thereby great Sums of Money
provided to be returned to York, or to some other of His Majesty's Servants or
Agents for His Majesty's use: And whereas it is more then probable, That this
great Provision of Moneys in such an extraordinary way, is to maintain this
intended War, and thereby to bring the whole Kingdom into utter ruin and
combustion. It is therefore declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
That whosoever has been, or shall be an Actor in the selling or pawning of any
of the Jewels of the Crown; or has, or shall pay, lend, send, or bring any
Money in Specie into this Kingdom, for, or upon any of those Jewels; Or
whosoever has; or shall accept of any Bill from beyond the Seas, for the
payment of any sum of Money for, or upon any of those Jewels, and shall pass
any sum according to such Bill; after notice of this Order, without acquainting
this House with the receipt or such Bill before he accept the same, Or if he
have already accepted any such Bill, then with the acceptance thereof before
the payment of the Money, Every such person shall be held and accounted a
promoter of this intended War, an enemy to the State, and ought to give
satisfaction for this public damage out of his own Estate.

H. Elsynge. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Iovis 2d. Iunii. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, That the
several Members of this House, do forthwith give their Attendance upon the
public Service of this Commonwealth with which they are entrusted by their
Countries. And the Sheriffs of the several Counties of this Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales are required to give Notice of this Order unto all such
Members of the House of Commons as are within their respective Counties; and
speedily to make return of such their doings, unto the Speaker of that House:
And all such as shall not make their personal appearance by the sixteenth day
of this instant June, in the House of Commons, shall each one forfeit One
hundred pounds, to be disposed of to the Wars in (...) and undergo such further
censure and punishment as the said House shall think fit for so great neglect
of their duty in a time that so necessarily requires their assistance.

Provided always, That all such as are specially employed by this House, are
to remain in such employments, until they shall have particular directions for
their return.

Ordered that it be forthwith Printed. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Sir John Hothams Letter to a worthy Member of the House of Commons, concerning
the late discovery at Hull.
SIR,
SInce my last to you, It has pleased Almighty God, out of his great mercy to
us here, and the Kingdom, to preserve us from, an eminent danger, and ruin
plotted against us here, which I thought fit to acquaint you with. I writ a
word of it to the Committee at York, but since have made a more ample
discovery. I have within my Company, a Lieutenant, his name is Foolks, son in
law to one Master Thomas Beckwith a Recusant, at Beverley, a good Soldier, but
poor. This man, his father in law, thought a fit Instrument to work upon, and
to that end, sent for him, to come over to him. The Gentleman presently
acquaints me with it, and asked my leave and advice therein; Protesting, that
both in regard of the honor of a Soldier, and a Gentleman, nothing should
pass, but I should know. He had formerly been obliged to me, and therefore I
gave him leave to go with directions to yield to such Propositions, as should
be made him; for otherwise being in their power, I knew not how they might have
used him. At his return he told me, that at his first coming, after an unusual
kind welcome, that Master Beckwith broke the matter to him, That if he would do
service, etc. he should be rewarded in a great measure, intimating to him, how
unable I was to prefer him in any way of subsistence. To be short, He made a
plain contract with him, That if he could betray a Port, he should have five
hundred pound in hand, and two hundred and fifty pound, per annum, for his
life, this he willingly accepted; then Beckwith discoursed with him of the
means, how he could do this: he told him. That upon Thursday night, the 26. day
of this May, he had the guard at the Northgate, and if Alarm were given at
another Gate, called Hassell Gate, he could then let them in. This thus
overnight concluded upon next morning he was brought into the presence of one
Trist, he was a Papist, and commanded Mr. Percies Troop of Horse at the defeat
at Newbourn, and one Captain Courtney, and six others; some of which, his
father in-law told him, were Lords disguised: these promised him to make good
his reward; but they doubted, unless some Captain might likewise be aiding, it
might miss of performance, and therefore propounded to him to draw his Captain
into the business. Lowanger a Dutch man (a man truly of that faith, courage,
and ability, that were I to manage an enterprise of the greatest moment that
might be, I would not wish a better second) they propounded to him that he
should have in reward 1000 pounds, 500 pounds for his life, and be made a
Knight. You see, Sir, what ever the performance would have been, they were not
spare in promises. Trist told him he had a man of his, whom under color of
carrying Arms as a Voluntiere, he might employ as he saw cause, Beckwith, if
appears before, had an eye to have corrupted Lowanger, for he had invited
Lowanger to his house, and sent him word he would bestow a Gelding upon him,
which he presently then acquainted me with, and told me he thought there was
some ill meant in it, and so would not go: He has exceedingly labored in the
discovery of this, being in a great measure sensible of his honor herein. Upon
Tuesday we caused the Lieutenant to write back to his father in-law that
Lowanger liked well of the business, but desired some better assurance of his
reward then Trist and Courtneys words, and sent a boy with the Letter; and that
it might appear to Mr. Beckwith to be carried with more secrecy, the boy was
caused to put the Letter in his Shoe: the return was this Letter enclosed; the
original (being well known to be his hand) I keep (to be sent when the
Parliament shall command) lest it might miscarry, as some other Letters of his,
whereby his hand may be known. I have Trists man in hold, who confesses he was
sent hither by Trist under color to carry Arms to give Intelligence: and I
find he had endeavored to send to York diver^ of my soldiers. This morning I
received a Letter from Mr. Major of Beverley, the Copy of which I send you, of
diverse assembled at Mr. Beckwiths house, We had another as I think, to surprise
the Block-house, being the strong Fort of the Town; but now that is, I have not
yet made a full discovery.

I have sent to the Major of Beverley to search Mr. Beckwiths house, being a
Recusant, and to tender them the oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and to know
their names. If there had been open War, I could soon have told what to have
done in this business. And truly, If I should have let the Plot gone on, and
given them what they deserved, I think, being they came that way to have taken
the Town, I might have justified it before God and man: But being loath to be
the first letter of blood, I resolved of another course, which was, To
advertise (...) Majesty of the Plot discovered, lest some should advise Him
upon a design m^ prove dishonorable and dangerous to Him. This dispatch I
sent away last night I shall trouble you no farther, but rest,

Hull, 1642. Your affectionate faithful friend, John Hotham.

The true Copy of Master Beckwiths Letter, a Recusant.
SOn, the Iron is hot, I guess at the sense of your Letter, that all is right
as was intended for more security, in the morning, I expect strong here. My Son
went yesternight to York, comes with great ones this night Lor: I send what I
have from you this night thither: if it may breed suspicion, Let your friend
believe well, and not come to morrow; If I could send safe, I would, But the
trust holds on our part, as I shall be advised by your Fathers Master to
morrow, I must work; yet this Boy is a fine way to come and return; Your
Letters are so wasted in his shoe, as I guess at the sense, Yet send it broken
with my exposition, for I dare not bogle with promises, no doubt is to be made
of any thing promised; J write more confidently, because, J know your hand, J
name none but your self, he cannot come to morrow J fear, without suspicion,
But J refer all to your selves, wishing to see him J mean (in the morning) it
will be better satisfaction to him, to all here.

T. B.

The Oath of the Kings of ENGLAND, taken out of the Parliament Roll, 1 H. ^. N.
17.
The form of the Oath wont and accustomed to be taken upon their Coronation.

YOu shall keep the Church of God, the Clergy and people, entirely in peace and
concord in God, according to your power.

He shall answer, I will keep them.

You shall cause equal and right justice in all your judgments and
discretion, in mercy and truth, according to your power.

He shall answer, I will do it.

You shall grant just Laws and Customs to be kept, and you shall promise that
those shall be protected by you, and to the honor of God to be strengthened,
which the common people shall choose, according to your power.

He shall answer, I grant and promise it.

FINIS.

