A NEW DECLARATION OF BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.

Die Jovis 12. Maii 1642,
Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that the abovesaid
Declaration shall be forthwith Printed and Published.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parl.



Together, With a Letter of thanks from Master Speaker, of the House of the
Lords, to the Right Worshipful the high Sheriff, and the rest of the Gentry,
in the County of YORK.

May 16. London Printed for John Wright, 1642.

Die Iovis, 12 Maii, 1642.
The Declaration of both Houses of Parliament.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, That they are
resolved to maintain those Lords and Gentlemen, Committees of both Houses of
Parliament, residing at York, in those things they have done, and shall further
do, in obedience of their commands, for the preserving the peace of the
Kingdom.

The Lords and Commons do declare, That if any person whatsoever shall arrest
or imprison the persons of those Lords and Gentlemen, or any of them, or any
other Member of either House, that are, Or shall be employed in the service of
both Houses of Parliament; or shall off^r violence to them, or any of them, for
doing of any thing in pursuance of their commands, or the instructions of both
Houses, given unto them, shall be held disturbers of the proceedings of
Parliament, and public enemies of the State. And that all persons are bound
by their Protestation, to endeavor to bring them to condign punishment.

The Lords and Commons do declare, That those of the City of London, and all
other persons that have obeyed the Ordinance for the Militia, and done any
thing in execution thereof, have done it according to the Law of the Land, and
in pursuance of what they were commanded by both Houses of Parliament, and for
the defense and safty of the King and Kingdom, and shall have the assistance
of both Houses of Parliament, against any that shall presume to question them,
for yielding their obedience to the said command in this necessary and
important service; and that whosoever shall obey the said Ordinance for the
time to come, shall receive the same approbation and assistance from both
Houses of Parliament.

A Letter of thanks from the Lords in Parliament assembled, to the County of
YORK.
THis house has read the Petition from the County of York, the expressions
wherein, are so full of affections to the public good of the Kingdom, and
Parliament, that they receive it with much content, and satisfaction, and
assure you by me, that your zeal to the commonwealth, has added much to the
honor of your Country; commanding me in their names, to return their very
hearty thanks; the House concures with you in opinion, that the only remedy
for this distracted Kingdom to recover its ancient strength, happiness, and
luster, is unity; which as it has ever been the aim and scope of all their
proceedings, so shall it ever be the chiefest of their endeavors. And for
this purpose they are already upon framing their humble desires to his
Majesty, wherein they shall request such things as they conceive do* chiefly
tend to the honor of God, the greatness and prosperity of his Majesty, and
the public good of this Commonwealth, these were almost perfected before the
receipt of your Petition, and will very speedily be sent to the King, which had
been done ere this, but that his Majesty withdrawing himself so far from
the Parliament, and those many denyals they have had in those things they have
desired, have necessitated them to spend much of their time in Messages, and
diverted them from their other more necessary businesses, but they doubt not
but in these desires they will make such clear demonstrations of their duty to
the King, and love to his people, who have entrusted them, that they shall
fully acquit themselves thereof, both to him and them. Sir this is what at this
time I am commanded to write to you, only adding, that I am etc.

Jo* Banks.

FINIS.

