EDINBURGH, June the first.
SInce our last we have an account, that the late Earl of Argyle did on the
twenty sixth of the last Month march from Campletoun in Kintire with two Troops
of Horse (such as could be had in that Country) and seven hundred Foot to
Tarbert, and met three hundred of the Ila men, and two hundred more were
expected, where they were all to Muster the twenty eight. His three Ships came
from Campletoun on Tuesday; and the next day went into Tarbert, the greatest
carrying thirty Guns, the other twelve, and the third six; He has another small
Vessel with him which he took upon the Coast laden with Corn. The twenty ninth
he loosed from the Tarbert accompanied with Auchinbreck, (who we have already
told you had joined him) and came into the Town of Rosa in the Isle of Boot,
where he took a nights Provision for himself and his men. The thirtieth he
sailed round the Island with his three Ships and twenty small Boats, and came
again to the Town of Rosa, and fired seven Guns at his landing, having with
him, as we are informed, in all about two thousand and five hundred men. He
endeavors to persuade and encourage the People to rise with him by assuring
them that there are already great Risings in England, as you will see by a
Letter all Written and Signed by himself, directed for the Lord of Lupe, which
is herewith sent, and is as follows.

CAMPLETOWN, May 22. 1685. Loving Friend,
IT has pleased GOD to bring me safe to to this place, where several of both
Nations does appear with me for defense of the Protestant Religion, our Lives
and Liberties, against Popery and Arbitrary Government, whereof the Particulars
are in two Declarations emitted by those Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others, and
by me for my self. Your Father and I lived in great Friendship, and I am glad
to serve you his Son in the Protestant Religion, and I will be ready to do it
in your particular when there is occasion. I beseech you let not any out of
fear or other bad principles persuade you to neglect your Duty to GOD and your
Country at this time, or to believe that D. York is not a Papist, or that
being one, he can be a righteous King. Then know that all England is in Arms in
three several places, and the Duke of Monmouth appears at the same time upon
the same grounds we do, and few places in Scotland, but soon will join, and the
South and West wants but till they hear I am landed, for so we resolved before
I left Holland. Now I beseech you make no delay to separate from those abuse
you, and are carrying on a Popish design, and come with all the men of your
command to assist the Cause of Religion, where you shall be most welcome to

Your Loving Friend to serve you, ARGYLE.
P. S. Let this serve Young Loigie, Skipnage and Charles Mc. Echan.

We have certain advice that His Majesty's Yacht the Charlotte is come into the
River of Clyde, the Commander of which does daily expect the Kings Ships upon
that Coast.



Edinburgh, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most
Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1685.


