An Order and Ordinance of Parliament, For punishing such of the Trained-Bands,
and others, as shall not appear in their Arms upon beat of Drum, and do such
service as is required of them for the safety of the Parliament and City.
Die Mercurii, 4. Januarii, 1642.
WHereas many of the Trained Bands and others, listed under several Colonels
and Captains, inhabiting within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the
County of Middlesex, have neglected to make their appearance in Arms to do
such Service by day or night, within the Cities and Liberties aforesaid, and in
the Tower of London, as of them has been required, being lawfully summoned
thereunto by beat of Drum, or otherwise for the defense of King and Parliament;
the safety of the Cities and Tower of London, with the adjacent parts, in the
County of Middlesex: for the Reformation of so great a neglect, and for the
avoiding of so eminent evils in these dangerous times, that might ensue
thereupon; It is this day ordered by the Lords and Commons now Assembled in
Parliament, That the Colonels, Captains, and Lievtenants of the Trained Bands
or others in the Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, and
the County of Middlesex, may inflict the punishment of two days Imprisonment
Two days imprisonment or five shillings Upon such Soldiers as do not repair
to their colors, and do their duties.
without Bail or main-prise, or the mulct of five shillings, for supply of the
service, upon such Soldiers under their commands, as shall not repair to their
Colors at the time appointed, and do their duties there, when, and as often
as they shall be thereunto required, unless they be reasonably excused, and
that made known to the Captain or other chief Officers; or being come to their
colors, shall depart before they be lodged, or being to find Arms for others,
shall refuse to provide them, or to deliver them, when, and as often as they
shall be thereunto required.

Die Martis, 2. Maii, 1643.
WHereas by an Order of Parliament, of the fourth of January last, It was
ordered that the Colonels, Captains, and Lievtenants of the Trained Bands or
others in the Cities of London, and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, and
the County of Middlesex, might inflict the punishment of two days Imprisoment
without Bail or main-prize, or the mulct of five shillings for supply of the
Service, upon such Soldiers under their commands as should not repair to their
Colors at the time appointed, and Imprisonment, mulct of five shilling on
soldiers that repair not to their Colors.
to do their duties there, when, and as often as they should be thereunto
required, unless they be reasonably excused by their Captain or Lieutenant;
Which Order is not only troublesome, but begets much disaffection betwixt the
chief Officers and Soldiers, And therefore it is not so fully executed upon
the Offenders as it ought to be; Therefore it is this day Ordered by the Lords
and Commons now Assembled in Parliament, That for the better Execution of the
foresaid order in every particular branch therein contained, (which every
Captain respectively is hereby required to do) every of the said Captains
respectively shall elect and appoint, one able person to be Marshall of his
Trained Band, who A Marshall to be elected
shall by virtue of this Ordinance repair to such Soldiers as his Captain or
Lieutenant shall from time to time give him notice of, that have made breach of
the foresaid order of the fourth of January, or any part thereof: Which
Marshall so elected, shall with a Constable, who is hereby required to assist
him and such Constables to assist him.
others as he shall call to aid him, in the name of his Captain, inflict
(according to the same Order) the punishment of two days imprisonment upon him
or them, or the Mulct of five shillings, which he shall Two days imprisonment
or five shillings to be paid the captain, etc.
forth with after the Receipt of the same, deliver and pay to his Captain, to
be employed as by the same order is appointed; And for the pains taken of every
such Marshall, and to encourage him the better to perform his office, It is
also ordered, that every Captain respectively shall allow unto him the said
Marshall, out of every five shillings so collected as aforesaid, the sum of
twelve pence: And if any such Marshall And to encourage the Marshall 12. pence.
shall be found remiss, negligent, or partial, in not performing the trust in
him resposed: It is likewise ordered, that every Captain may at his pleasure
dismiss him from his place, and elect another in his stead, which he shall
conceive to be more faithful to perform the same; Also it is ordered by the
Lords Captain may dismiss the Marshal, if remiss.
and Commons now Assembled in Parliament, That if any Soldier or Soldiers,
Listed under any of the Captains before mentioned, shall in the time of his or
their Service, when he or they shall be commanded to do duty, revile, or give
any ill beseeming language to the Captain, or other Officers belonging unto Ill
language. Soldiers to be committed that neglect duty Captain saved harmless.
him, or neglect to do such duty as at any time ought or shall be imposed upon
him, or them, that then the Captain or Lieutenant, may upon the Examination
thereof, commit such Soldier or Soldiers as shall so offend to Prison, there
to remain 24 hours without Bail or Main-prise; And that every Captain
respectively shall be saved harmless by the authority of both Houses of
Parliament, for executing the several orders aforesaid or any of them.

Io. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.


London Printed by Richard Cotes, 1648.


