AN ORDINANCE BY THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT; For the
preservation of the Western parts of the KINGDOM.

John Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed by R. Ohen and G. Dexter, for Henry Overton, and are to be
sold at his Shop in Popes head Alley. MDCXLII.

Die Sabbati 24. December. 1642.
WHereas diverse persons well affected to the good and safety of this Kingdom,
have contributed in Money, Plate and Horse, for suppression of the present
Rebellion, and Insurrection by Papists, Delinquents, and other Malignant
persons in the Western parts, under the Command of Sir Ralph Hopton, and his
Adherents Rebels, and Traitors: and for the rrliefe of the good Subjects
there. It is therefore Ordered, and ordained by the Lords and Commons now
assembled in Parliament, that all and every such Person and Persons, as have
already, or shall raise, either Money, Plate, or Horse for the said service,
shall be satisfied and repaide again with in six months, with interest for
the same, out of the first moneys that shall be levied and raised in the
Counties of Cornewell, Devon* Sommerset, Dorset* wil^shire and Southampton, and
the Counties and Cities of Bristoll, and Exon. and the Town and County of
Poole, upon any Order or Ordinance of one, or both Houses of Parliament. Or by
any other Levies or Collections, made or to be made in the said several and
respective Counties, and Places for that end and purpose; And it is further
ordered and ordained, by the Authority aforesaid, that Hugh Sowden, and Thomas
Young of the City of London, Merchants, shall be Treasurers for the receiving
and disbursing of all, and every sum or sums of money which shall be raised
for the use abovesaid, who are hereby nominated, constituted, and appointed
Treasurers, and Receivers as aforesaid.

And it is further ordered and ordained, by the Authority aforesaid, that the
said Hugh Sowden, and Thomas Young, shall and may pay and deliver out of the
said Contributions, such moneys and Horse to such Person, or Persons, and in
such manner, and form, as the Committee of the Lords and Commons for the
defense of the Western parts, or any four or more of them, by any writings
under their hands shall limitt, appoint, and declare: And that the Warrant or
Warrants of the said Committee, for the issuing our of the said Moneys, or
deliverie of the said Horses; or of any four, or more of them, together with
the Acquittance, or the Acquittances Receipt or Receipts in writings, under the
hand of the Person or Persons, which shall be appointed as aforesaid by the
said Committee, or four or more of them, shall be a sufficient discharge to
the Treasurers or Receivers in this Ordinance named, for so much money, or such
Horse or Horses, as shall be comprehended in such Acquittance, or Acquittances,
for the issuing out, and payment of the said sum, or sums of money, or
delivery of such Horse and Horses respectively.

And it is further ordered by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasuers and
Receivers shall not at all pay any sum, or sums of Money, or deliver, or
cause to be delivered any Horse or Horses, or Plate to be by them received
upon any other direction, Warrant, or demand whatsoever.

FINIS.

