ORDERS OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, For the Regulating of
those Soldiers that are gone, and are to go, under The Command of his
EXCELLENCY, Robert Earl of ESSEX, Lord General for this Expedition.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that
the several Lord Lieutenants appointed by Parliament, their Deputy
Lieutenants, the Justices of the Peace, and other his Majesty's Officers within
the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, shall take special care to
prevent and suppress all Ryots, Tumults, breaking into, or Robbing houses,
breaking into Churches, taking away of the Goods of any person, or taking of
Victuals, without due payment for the same, and to take and apprehend all such
person or persons as shall do or commit any such Outrages as aforesaid, and
to proceed against them according to Law. And it is further Ordered, that the
Commanders and several Officers, shall give their best assistance for the
apprehension and punishment of all such persons which shall be found guilty of
the misdemeanors aforesaid.

Die Jovis, August 18, 1642.
WHereas there have bin diverse Complaints made unto us of many disorders
committed by the Soldiers in their marching, and in such places wherein they
have bin quartered or Billited, which disorders (as is informed) have bin
partly occasioned by the neglect of their Officers to go along with them and
Conduct them: It is therefore Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, that the Lord General be desired to give Command to all his
Officers, that they take care to attend according to the Duty of their several
places, that the Soldiers thereby may be hereafter kept from straggling up and
down the Countries: And to that end to lay his Command upon the Officers of
each Company, both in the Marching, Quartering, and Billetting, to be in
Person amongst the Soldiers themselves, to prevent any disorders whatsoever,
and punish such as shall offend.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that these Orders be
forthwith Printed and Published.

John Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

August 19. London Printed for John Wright. 1642.


