A NEW DECLARATION From both HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT,
Die Martis, May 17. 1642.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament do declare, That it is against the Laws
and Liberties of the Kingdom, that any of the Sub^ects thereof, should be
commanded by the King to attend him at his pleasure, but such as are bound
thereto by special Service; and that whosoever upon pretense of his Majesty's
command shall take Arms, and gather together with others in a warlike manner,
to the terror of the Kings People, shall be esteemed disturbers of the public
peace, and to do that which may introduce a president of very dangerous
consequence for the future, and produce most mischievous effects for the
present, considering the great distempers of the Kingdom, and what pernicious
Counselors and lncendiaries, are now about the King, and how desperate and ill
affected diverse persons attending upon his Majesty, have showed themselves to
the Parliament, and to his other good Sub^ects, threatening and reproaching them
publicly, even in his Majesty's presence, and for preventing and avoiding such
great mischiefs as may thereupon ensue.

It is Ordered and Ordained by both Houses of Parliament, That if the Trained
bands, or any other his Majesty's Subjects, shall upon pretense of any such
command be drawn together, and put into a posture of War, the Sheriff of
that County where there shall be such raising, or drawing together of armed
men; Do forthwith raise the power of the County to suppress them, and to
keep his Majesty's peace according to the Law. And that the Lord Lieutenants,
Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of the Peace, and all other his Majesty's
Subjects, be aiding and assisting to the several and respective Sheriffs in
performance hereof, as they will answer the contray at their peril.

Hen Elsing* Cler. Par. D. Com.

His Majesty's Letter to the Gentry of Yorkshire, May 16. 1642.
To our right trusty and well beloved the Gentry of York and others of this our
County of York, whom it does or may concern.
WE have with great contentment considered your dutiful and affectionate
answer to our proposition concerning the unsufferable affront which we received
at Hull: We have not been deceived in that confidence we have had in your
affection, Wherefore we desire you to assure the rest of your Contrymen, wh^
through negligence were omitted to be summoned: that We shall never abuse your
love by any power wherewith God shall enable us to the least violation of the
least of your liberties, or the d^minution of those immunities which we have
granted you this P^rliament, though they be beyond the Acts of most (if not
all) on Predecessors; being resolved with a constant and firm resolution to
have the Law of this Land duly observed, and shall endeavor only so to
preserve our just Royal Rights, as may enable us to protect our Kingdom and
People, according to the ancient honors of the Kings of ENGLAND, and according
to the trust which by the Law of God and this Land, is put into the Crown,
being sufficiently warned by the last affront at Hull, not to transfer the
same out of our power; concerning which affront we will take some time to
advise, which way we may employ your affections. In the mean time we shall
take it well from all such as shall personally attend us, so followed and
provided, as they shall think fit for the better safety of our person, because
we know not what sudden violence or affront may be offered unto us, having
lately received such an actual testimony of rebellious intentions, as Sir John
Hotham has expressed at Hull. Being thus secured by your affections and
assistance, we promise you our protection against any contrary power
whatsoever. And that you shall not be molested for your humble and modest
Petition, as of late you have been threatened.

Given at our Court at York May 16. 1642.
Die Martis 17. May, 1642.
WHereas the Lords in Parliament, have this day been Informed, That the King is
resolved to adjourn the next Term from Westminster to York; Upon which, The
Lords sent a Committee to the Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England* to know
of him, whether he had received any Command touching the same, who acquainted
the said Committee, tha^ he had received command from his Majesty, to issue
Proclam^tions, and Writs, to that purpose. Whereupon, this House taking tbe
said matter into consideration, has voted: That the Kings removal of the Term
to York, from Westminster, sitting this Parliament, is illegal.

And has further Ordered, That the said Lord Keeper shall not issue out any
Writs, or Seal any Proclamation* for adjourning the said next Term from
Westminster to York, as aforesaid.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Imprinted at London for W. G. May the 20. 1642.


