A NEW DECLARATION Of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, Concerning the
execution of the Militia, 20. June, 1642.
As also concerning a Writ sent to the High Sheriff of Essex, by his Majesty
for the publishing of his late Proclamation to forbid all his loving Subjects
to Raise, March, Muster, or exercise by virtue of any Order or Ordinance of
both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons, that this be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsyng Cler. Par. D. Com.



WHereas Robert Smith Esquire, now high Sheriff of the County of Essex, has
lately received a Writ bearing date the twenty seventh day of May, in the
eighteenth year of his now Majesty's reign, thereby commanding him to publish
a Proclamation, whereby all his Majesty's Subjects belonging to the Trained
Bands or Militia of this Kingdom, are forbidden to raise, March, Muster, or
exercise by virtue of any Order or Ordinance, of one or both Houses of
Parliament, without consent or warrant from his Majesty upon pain of
punishment according to the Laws. And whereas the said high Sheriff has now
addressed himself to both Houses of Parliament, for advice and directions
therein concerning the said Proclamation to be contrariant and repugnant to the
Oedinance and Judgment of both Houses of Parliament concerning the Militia.

It is therefore Declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament (they
intending nothing by the said Ordinance, but the protection and security of his
Majesty's person the defense of the Kingdom against Foreign invasion, and
preservation of the public peace against intestine Rebellions and
Insurrections here at home, the maintenance of the Privileges and Authority of
Parliament according to the Protestation.

That the said Writ is illegal for that the constitution and policy of this
Kingdom, and the King by his Proclamation cannot declare the Law contrary to
the resolution of any of the inferior Courts of Justice, much less against
the high Court of Parliament. And likewise for that this Writ forbids that
to be done which they are obliged unto by their duty to God, their alleagiance
to his Majesty, and the trust reposed in them by the Commonwealth, (the Law
having entrusted them to provide for the good and safety thereof.) And that the
said high Sheriff has done nothing in forbearing to publish the said
Proclamation, but according to his duty, and in obedience to the Order of both
Houses. And he is hereby required not to publish the said Proclamation, or any
other Proclamations or Declarations of the like nature, that concern the
Parliament, without first acquainting the said Houses.

And it is further declared that the said high Sheriff and other Sheriffs of
other Counties within this Kingdom of England, and the Dominion of Wales, for
their obedience to the Orders and Ordinances of Parliament; Or that have, or
hereafter shall do any thing in the execution thereof, shall be protected by
the power and authority of both the said Houses.

London Printed for Thomas Androes, 1642.


