AN ORDER FROM THE COMMITEE, That Eleven Thousand three Hundred Horse should be
conducted by Sir Simon Harecolt into IRELAND. AS ALSO, Letters read in the
Parliament, sent from the Mayre of Dublin and other Justices of the Peace, how
Tredagl is besieged and Dublin in great fear of the Rebels. As likewise The
Spanish Fleet overthrown in the Sea, going to assist the Rebels in Ireland. In
a Relation of a great number of Spaniards that were resolved to go into
Ireland, and help the Rebels to persecute the Protestants there more cruelly.
Being the just Judgment of God on those bloody minded Tyrants, showing how in
a sudden Tempest they were all Drowned in the devouring Sea. With the Copy of
a Letter sent from the Spanish Fleet to the Lord Donmadoffe the Arch-Rebel in
Ireland.

London, Printed for WR 1642.

THE SPANISH FLEET Overthrown in the Sea going to assist the Rebels in Ireland.
Envy is the badge of ensuing cruelty, malice is the Typical Idaea of tyranie,
for when as intestine malice becomes inveterate, nothing can satisfy it, but
blood, nothing can quench the aspiring flame of their ardent intentions, but
the immolation of blood, nothing lastly can stop the impetuous violence of the
swift running torrent of their greedy minds, but humane flesh. O horred
Tyranny, Yea where Envy is entertained in the habitacle of the mind, there men
will not desist to plough over the Ocean, until they come to the object of
their resolutions, where like in a luxurious harvest they will glutt their
hungry swords in humane flesh, and make drunk their thirsty spears with
mortal blood, and cut down the trunkes of living men, as the ravenous sith
devoures the trembling come. This malice I say, so tyrannical, so bloody, so
nefarious have been lodged in the intestine breasts of the Spaniard a long
time: who have always intended to depopulate, and subvert the British Nation
to the utter demolition of Protestant Religion. But being oftentimes prevented
in their designs, they have been more vehemently desirous to come to the
object of their former intended conspiracies against the British Nation.
Wherefore having some oppertunity in Ireland having there Rebels that would
connive with them, and concur in a bloody Massacre they sent over before St.
Patricke Devons with a numerous multitude of men to the number of above five
thousand and more in Arms, Who went in a Navy into Ireland to the auxiliation
of the Rebels. Where although at their first arrival Turone and his
confederates joyfully entertained him with respective congratulation for his
love: yet the Earl of Clanrickards afterward saluted him with a valley of
shot and slew most of his men that were under his command. Having such ill
success in their first Navy, they congregated another three times greater
then the former, to the number of fiveteene thousand men transporting with them
many Arms and military Ammunition to re-asist the Rebels. Thus being armed as
well internally in their resolutions as enternally, they took Shipping, and
with great alacrity Navem ascenderunt, they thus proceeded to Ireland very
jocund; having sent a Herald of Arms before to the Rebels giving them notice
of their coming; but at length as they were all tuned in their luxurious
thoughts of inhumane cruelty, a sudden and violent Tempest arose, which
dissipated their ships, beat them vehemently upon a Rock, and their Navy
being impetuously disjected in pieces, they were drowned in the all-devouring
Sea. Thus we may see the just Judgment of Almighty God, whose omnipotency
will not permit such ravenous Wolves to devour his little Flock. For although
like the Egyptians they did follow us, as they did the Israelites, yet like
Pharaoh, and all his Host, they were overwhelmed in the Sea. But not to
digress from my intended Subject in a too errant deviation, I will recall my
Pen to it is former discourse. The Rebels being frustrated of their expectation
in the Spanish Fleet, and perceiving they were all drowned in the Ocean, began
to deplore and condole their inauspitious fate, greatly lamenting their
disastrous fortune. But would to God, while they pampe forth gushing tears
from their eyes, for the overthrow of the Spaniards, that it might swell to a
Deluge, and like them, overwhelme themselves in the inundation of their own
tears. But to omit the superfluous description of their grief, I will
express the Letter which was sent from the Spanish Fleet by the Herald of
Arms to the Lord Donmadoffe the Arch Rebel in Ireland.

To the Right Honorable, and thrice Noble the Lord Donmadoffe in Clogam in the
County of Manahom, etc.
Right Honorable,
THE plausible commendation of your magnanimous courage in prosecution of the
Protestant party being oftentimes annunciated unto us, have at this time
respectively induced us to present an auxiliary Army unto your honors gracious
acceptance: which is the height of our ambition to obtain. We have maturely
considered of the multiplicitie of the numerous confronts given you heretofore
by the Protestants, and of the abusive insultations which they have usurped
over you, and sometimes over our selves too: we therefore are resolved to
vindicate both our own cause, and yours: which apparently shall be
demonstrated, and sufficiently declared to the British Nation at our first
arrival. My Lord, if your Honor would vouchsafe to concur with us in a
conjunction of our Armies we doubt not but we shall subvert them at our first
salutation, and become so victorious, that we may return with an Olive branch
in our hands. In the mean time what we most implore in our ardent desires is
your acceptance of our service: which if you grant, shall be a perfect Type of
our obsequious opitulation and a sufficient Caractar of our ensuing victory.

An Order from the Committee that 11300 Horse should be conducted by Sir Simon
Harecolt. into IRELAND. As also, A Letter read in the Parliament, sent from the
Mayer of Doublin and other Justices of the Peace, how Tredagh is besieged, and
Doublin in great fear of the Enemy.
THe Committee having maturely and judiciously considered of the extreme
calamity, and great misery which the Protestants in Ireland daily undergo, by
those bloody and inhumane Tyrants, the Rebels: who have neither mercy nor
partiality in them: did forthwith Order, that present and auxiliary aid should
be immediately provided for the assistance of the Protestant party; and they
appointed more-over, That Sir Simon Harecolt should conduct eleven thousand and
three hundred Horse for the same purpose. For they had diverse Letters directed
unto them from the Mayre of Dublin, and other Justices of Peace, intimating,
That Tredagh was besieged by the Rebels, and Dublin likewise in great danger of
their tyrannical inhumanity. Their proceedings are so nefariously abominable,
that they seem not only to be detestable in the sight of God, but also odious
in the ears of Men. And whosoever truly perpends the Afflictions of the
British Nation, and what calamity they are involved, cannot but eliciate
tears from his heart, were it of a mere Adamantine Composition. Their
inhumanity is not terminated in the limitation of humane lenity, but has been
so merciless, that the Parliament have respectively been endued to send them
an expedient and necessary auxiliation.

FINIS.

