AN ORDINANCE And DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.

That no Person within the City of London, and Liberties thereof, shall be of
the Common Council, or in any Office of Trust within the said City, that has
not taken the late Solemn League and Covenant.

Die Mercurii, 20. December. 1643.

ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and Published.

John Btowne, Cler. Parliamentor.

December. 21. Printed for John Wright in the Old-B^iley. 1643.

An Ordinance to disable any person within the City of London and Liberties
thereof, to be of the Common Council, or in any Office of trust within the
said City, that shall not take the late solemn League and Covenant.
Die Mercurii, 20 December. 1643.
THe Lords and Commons taking into their consideration, that the well
Government and Peace of the City of London, and the Liberties thereof, does
chiefly depend upon the faithfulness and integrity of the persons that have
and bear the public Offices and places of Trust therein, And that in these
times of trouble, more then ordinary care is to be taken, in the choice and
Election of them. And that their good affection to the true Protestant
Religion, and to the Parliament, and Peace of the City and Kingdom, should be
openly testified and made known before they be admitted unto any such place or
Office. And whereas by the ancient Customs, and usages of the said City, those
of the Common Council, and some other Officers of the City are to be chosen,
at, or about the one and twenty day of this instant December.

The Lords and Commons do Ordain and Declare, That no person shall be Elected
into any the said offices, nor shall be capable thereof, nor shall have voice
in any such Election, whose person has bin imprisoned, or his estate
sequestered for malignancy against the Parliament, or that before the Election
or vote in such Election respectively, shall not have taken the late solemn
League and Covenant, for reformation and defense of Religion, the honor and
happiness of the King, and the peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland, and Ireland; and Sir John Wollaston Knight, Lord Major of
the City of London, and the Aldermen in their several Wards, and all other
persons to whom the Election of any the said officers shall appertain, are
hereby required to see this Ordinance duly put in Execution.

Eodum Die.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that this Ordinance shall be forthwith
Printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

