official insignia
AN ORDINANCE For the better raising and levying of Marinors, Saylors and
others for the present guarding of the Seas, and necessary defense of the
Realm and other His Majesty's Dominions.
Die Veneris 3. Die Feb. 1642.
WHereas it has been thought fit by both Houses of Parliament to appoint
great Fleets this year to be prepared for service with all possible expedition
for the guarding the Narrow Seas, preservation of Trade and for the necessary
defense of this Kingdom, and other His Majesty's Dominions, which at this time
is of more necessity then ever considering not only the homebred distractions
of this Kingdom and of Ireland, But the great preparations which are marching
already in foreign parts in aid and encouragement of the Papists, and
il-affected party amongst our selves, now up in Arms against the Parliament:
And whereas the said Fleets now in preparation to be set forth cannot timely
enough be expedited unless the same be furnished with fit, and sufficient men
for that service.

Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, that the Committees of the Admiralty appointed by both Houses or any
three of them shall, and may at any time or times, between the first of
Febuary, 1642. To the last of December next coming by themselves their
Commissioner, or Commissioners or their Officer, or Officers or any of them
shall raise leavy and impresse such, and so many Mariners, Sailors, Watermen,
Chirurgions, Gunners, Caukers, Shipcarpinters and Whoymen, as also Carmen for
the said carriage of Victuals as shall be requisite, and necessary for this
present expedition, or for any such further defense of this Realm, or any
other of His Majesty's Dominions, which said Marines, Saylors and other such
persons so to be levied, and impressed as aforesaid, and every of them shall
have paid and delivered unto him upon such his impressing by the person that
shall so impresse him, for conduct money for every mile from the place where he
shall be so impressed, to the Ship or place where he shall be appointed to make
his repair the some of one penny, and the like some of one penny for every
mile from the place of his discharge unto the place of his aboade, and shall be
allowed for this service, the best wages and intertainement which have, or has
been allowed by His Majesty to any such person or persons respectively at any
time within three years last past; And to the end that the common Seamen may
be the better encouraged, with Alacrity and cherfulness to undertake this
service; Be it further ordained that an addition of wages be allowed from 15s.
Per mencem unto 19s. Per mencem to every common Seaman, as also unto such
Watermen as have been already at Sea in His Majesty's Ships or others, and can
do their labors as Seamen and not otherwise; And if any Marinor, Saylor,
Waterman, Surgeon, Gunner, Ship-captenter, Cauker, Whoy-man, or Carman shall
wilfully refuse to be impressed in or for the said service or shall
voluntarily, hide and absent himself at the time of such press to avoid the
said service, or receaving his said conduct moneys do not appear at such
places and times as by his Ticket he is appointed, That then any such person so
offending shall suffer imprisonment by the space of three months without bail
or mayneprise. Provided always and be it ordained, that no Money or other
reward shall be taken, or any corrupt practice used by any the persons
Authorized by this Ordinance, in or for the pressing, changing, spairing or
discharging of any person or persons to be impressed as aforesaid as they will
answer such offense in Parliament; And all deputy Lieutenants, Majors,
Bailiffs, Constables and all other inferior Officers, are hereby required and
enjoined to be Aiding and Assisting, from time to time the persons Authorized
by this Ordinance, according to the true intent and meaning thereof. Provided,
always that this Ordinance shall not extend, to the pressing of any Master or
Masters-mate, Gunner, Carpenter, or Boateswaine of any Ship or Vessel that is
or shall be in employment.

Die Veneris 3. Febuary 4. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance
shall be forthwith Printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for I. Wright in the Old baily, Febuary, 4. 1642.


