ORDERS From the High Court of PARLIAMENT FOR The settling of these Kingdoms in
peace.

As also, a Relation of 4000 REDSHANKS that are sent over into Ireland with
General Lesley.

With the Orders that are taken for their succor, And the names of the
Commanders, for that purpose.

And the Answers, or Demurres, which the Bishops have put into their Bill of
Impeachment.

With a Relation of a golden Cope, Crucifixies, and popish Books, taken, and
brought to the House, November. the 20. 1641.

Whereunto is annexed, A WORTHY SPEECH That was spoken by Mr. KERTON.

London Printed for V. V. 1641.

ORDERS
THAT there shall account be taken of all the chief Papists in London, and
that there shall be two Lords appointed to raise Forces to secure the Kingdom;
beyond and on this side Trent, and the Officers appointed by the parliament.

2. That the members of the house of Commons, should give up the names of them
they knew, in their several Countries unto a select committee, which met about
it, to report the same to the house.

3. That Sir Henry Bedding field of Norff, be sent for, declaring great
troubles threatened etc.

4. The House appointed a Committee to view all bills; for, and against
Bishops. To enquire by what means they have been procured and what hands are
set to them.

THe house of Commons having read the Bishops Answer or demurre to their bill
of charge. And upon debate it was conceived to be insufficient. Afterward
falliug upon their answer agaie; there was a great debate upon it, not only in
respect of their demune, but also touching their calling, end votes of
Episcopacy.

They fallng upon it again after some deoate it was refer to a select
commit.

And oue Captane Beale being brought before the house, upon a complaint made
against him, for the undue procuring of petitions on the Bishops behalf he
used very perentory speeches to the Committees appointed to examine him. Iuhw
afterward was committed to th cloi^custody of a Sergiant at Arms.

There was a Report made to the house, that thel Parliament in Scotland had
ordered, that General- Lesley should go over with 4000. Redshanks to ses cure
Dublin, until such time as the English forces should be made ready. Afterward
a Committee oe both houses met in the painted Chamber, about the aforesaid
Irish affairs: and they then ordered thae 12 ancient Commanders should be
joined to the Committee to assist them, touching the landing of forces in the
most eminent and needful places in Ireland, and other things pertinent to that
service.

The Commanders Names, appointed for this Service.

The Lord Wilmot. The Lord Conway. Sir Jacob Ashley. Sir John Conyers. Sir
Simon Harcocke. Sergeant Major Berry. Coronell Mandro. Captain Atkins. Sergeant
Major Howell.
In the house of Peers there were three Commissions drawn up,

One for the Lord of Liecester, for his Generalship of Ireland. And another for
the Earl of Essex, and Lord General beyond Trent, to enable him likewise to
do the same. And a Conference being desired upon it; they were read and
approved of.

Afterward Letters being read in the house of Peers (which came from Ireland,)
and report being carried to the house of Commons to this effect. Intimating a
present necessity of aid, as well of provision as men. And after a long
debate, and conference with the house of Commons, there was an order drawn up
and directed to the Earl of Nathnmberland; Lord Admiral, for to make ready 4.
Ships, and to victual them for 8, months, which are to transport ammunition
thither, and to lie upon the Coasts of Ireland.

In the letters from Ireland there was a report made whereby information was
given, against one Sir Henry Beddingfield for saying viz.

The Report.
That the said Sir Henry Beddinfield should say that before the next Christmas,
there would come the greatest troubles upon England and Ireland, that has
hapened this hundred years.

There was a house fearched by the Gate House on this day, upon notice given
where Priests that are prisoners there daiely resorted, and met privately,
which being searched there was found a Cope, and many Romish relics and
Bopish books, which were taken away and brought to the House.

A worthy Speech make by M. Kerton.
Mr. Speaker,
IF ever, now is the time to speak, we see what men are risen to: this
business we have in hand is of dangerous consequence, if it be not thoroughly
looked into, J think no man that sits here, but it sensible in what danger now
it stands: if this honorable house do not find some present remedy for it. It
is apparent to every man, what new opinions are brought in to disturb the
peace our church was formerly in, the meaning of it can be no other, but to
bring in the Romish Religion amongst us; for it ever has bin Jesuitish policy,
first to work a disturbance, then after a change; we must seek a cause: I
shall freely speak my mind, which is, that this proceeds from the ambition of
some of the Clergy that are nigh his Majesty; for it is well known, that that
which the church of Rome anciently professed, and that we now do profess,
were all one, and the ambition of the Clergy, begot and brought in those
differences that are now betwixt us.

The highest dignity they can attain unto here in England, is an
Archbishopric; for a Cardinals cap is not here to be had, J believe some of
these affect that too well, and in some we see how they affect, how they change
their opinions for advantage, and how they will turn white into black, and
black into white, This being so, our endeavor must be to take away the root,
and then the branches will decay themselves: it is not the calling in the
appeal to Caesar that will do it, for if they can get a Bishopric by, etc.

It behooves us all, every man, according to our best ability, to apply
himself, for the search of these things, that we may find out the matter, and
the men, and so present them, and the danger this Kingdom now stands in by
them, to his Majesty: And for mine own part, I (as God shall enable me) will
do my best endeavor herein.

FINIS.

