An ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT For giving power
to all the Classical Presbyteries Within their respective Bounds to Examine,
Approve, and Ordain Ministers for several Congregations.

Die Lunae 10. November. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance for
Ordination of Ministers be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1645.

Die Sabbathi 8 November. 1644. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled
in Parliament, For the Ordination of Ministers.
WHereas the word Presbyter, that is to say, Elder, and the word Bishop, do in
the Scripture intend and signify one and the same Function, although the Title
of Bishop has been by corrupt custom appropriated to one, and that unto him
ascribed, and by him assumed, as in other things, so in the matter of
Ordination, that was not meet; which Ordination notwithstanding being performed
by him, a Presbyter joined with other Presbyters, we hold for substance to be
valid and not to be disclaimed by any that have received it; and that
Presbyters so ordained; being lawfully thereunto appointed and authorized, may
ordain other Presbyters: And whereas it is also manifest by the Word of God,
that no man ought to take upon him the Office of a Minister, until he be
lawfully called and ordained thereunto; and that the work of Ordination, that
is to say, an outward solemn setting a part of persons for the Office of the
Ministry in the Church by preaching Presbyters, is an Ordinance of Christ, and
is to be performed with all due care, wisdom, gravity, and solemnity. It is
Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the authority
of the same, (after advice had with the Assembly of Divines now convened at
Westminster,) That the several and respective Classical Presbyters which in
their several and respective bounds, may examine, approve and ordain
Presbyters, according to the Directory for Ordination, and Rules for
Examination, hereafter expressed, that is to say; First,

First, That he that is to be ordained, must address himself to the
Presbytery, and bring with him a testimon^^ll of his taking the Covenant of the
three Kingdoms; of his diligence and proficiency in his Studies; what Degrees
he has taken in the University, and what has been the time of his abode
there, and withal of his age, which is to be twenty four years at least; but
especially of his life and conversation.

Secondly, the Presbytery shall proceed to enquire touching the grace of God in
him, and whether he be of such holiness of life as is requisite in a Minister
of the Gospel, and to examine him touching his learning and sufficiency, and
touching the evidence of his calling to the holy Ministry, and in particular,
his fair and direct calling to that place to which he is designed.

The Rules for Examination are these.
1 THat the party examined be deall with in a brotherly way, with mildness of
spirit, and with special respect to the gravity, modesty, and quality of every
one. 2 He shall be examined touching his skill in the Original Tongues; and
that trial to be made by reading the Hebrew and Greek Testament, and rendering
some portions of them into Latin; and inquiry also shall be made after his
other learning, and whether he has skill in Logic and Philosophy. 3 What
Authors in Divinity he has read and is best acquainted with; and trial shall
be made of his knowledge in the chief grounds of Religion, and of his ability
to defend the Orthodox Doctrine contained in them, against all unsound and
Erroneous opinions, especially those of the present age; of his skill in the
sense and meaning of such places of Scripture, as shall be proposed unto him in
cases of Conscience, and in the Chronology of Scripture, and of the
Ecclesiastical History. 4 If he has not before preached in public, with
approbation of such as are able to judge; he shall at a competent time assigned
him, and before the Presbytery, expound such a place of Scripture as shall be
given him. 5 He shall in a competent time also frame a discourse in Latin,
upon such a common place or controversy in Divinity, as shall be assigned him,
and exhibit to the Presbytery such Theses as express the sum thereof, and
maintain a dispute upon them 6 He shall preach before the people, the
Presbytery, or some of the Ministers of the Word, appointed by them, being
present. 7 The proportion of his gifts in relation to the place unto which he
is called, shall be considered. 8 Besides the trial of his gifts in preaching,
he shall undergo an examination in the Premises two several days or more,
if the Presbytery shall judge it necessary.
Thirdly, After which, he being approved, is to be sent to the Church or other
place where he is to serve, (if it may be done with safety and convenience,)
there to preach three several days, and to converse with the people, that
they may have trial of his gifts for their edification, and may have time and
leisure to inquire into, and the better to know his life and conversation.

Fourthly, In the last of those three days appointed for the making known of
his gifts in preaching, there shall be sent from the Presbytery to the
Congregation, (if it may be done with safety and convenience,) a public
instrument in writing, which shall publicly be read before the people, and
after affixed to the Church door, to signify such a day any member or members
of the said Congregation, or any other person or persons whatsoever, or any of
them, may put in with all Christian discretion and meekness, what exceptions
they have against him; and if upon the day appointed there be no just
exceptions against him, the Presbytery shall proceed to Ordination.

Fifthly, Upon the day appointed for Ordination (which is to be performed in
that Church where he that is to be ordained is to serve, (if it may be done
with safety and convenience,) a solemn Fast shall be kept by the Congregation,
that they may more earnestly join in prayer to God for a blessing upon the
person and labor of this his servant, solemnly to be set apart to the Office
of the Ministry for their good; the Presbytery shall come to the place, or
some Ministers of the Word, at the least shall be sent from the Presbytery,
whereof one shall Preach to the people concerning the office and duty of the
Ministers of Christ, and how the people ought to esteem him for the works sake.

Sixthly, After the Sermon ended, the Minister which has preached shall in the
face of the Congregation, demand of him who is now to be ordained, concerning
his faith in Christ Jesus, and his persuasion of the truth of the reformed
Religion, according to the Scriptures; his sincere intentions and ends in
desiring to enter into this calling, his resolution to be diligent in Prayer,
reading, meditation, preaching, ministering the Sacraments, and doing all
ministerial duties toward his charge; his zeal and faithfulness in maintaining
the truth of the Gospel, and purity of the Church, against Error and Schism;
his care that himself and family may be unblameable, and examples to the Flock;
and his resolution to continue in his duty, against all trouble and persecution.

Seventhly, In all which having declared himself, professed his willingness,
and promised his endeavors by the help of God; the Presbytery, or the
Ministers sent from them, shall solemnly set him apart to the office and work
of the Ministry, laying their hands on him, with a short Prayer or blessing,
to this effect.

THankefully acknowledging the great mercy of God in sending Jesus Christ for
the redemption of his people, and for his Ascension to the right hand of Gd the
Father, and there pouring out his Spirit, and giving gifts to Men, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and Teachers for the gathering and building up
of his Church, and for fitting and inclining this man to this great Work, to
beseech him to fill him with his holy Spirit, who in his name we Here let them
impose their hands upon his head.
set apart to this holy Service, to fulfill the work of his Ministry in all
things, that he may both save himself and the people committed to his charge.
Eighthly, This, or the like Form of Prayer, or blessing, being ended, let the
Minister who preached, briefly exhort him to consider the greatness of his
Office and Work, the danger of negligence, both to himself and his people, the
blessing which will accompany his faithfulness in this life, and that to come;
with all let him exhort and charge the people in the Name of God, willingly to
receive and acknowledge him as the Minister of Christ, and to maintain,
encourage, and assist him in all the parts of his Office. And so by Prayer
commending both him and his Flock to the grace of God, after the singing of a
Psalm, let the Assembly be dismissed with a blessing.

Ninthly, Let such as are chosen or appointed for the Service of the Army, or
Navy, or Colleges, or other Charge, be Ordained as abovesaid, in such Church
as the Classical Presbytery to which they shall address themselves, shall
think fit; and such Alterations made by the Minister that Ordains, from the
Exhortation last before prescribed, as the circumstance of place and person
shall require.

And be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, and by the authority
aforesaid, That every person formerly Ordained a Presbyter, according to the
form of Ordination, which has been held in the Church of England, and is to
be removed to another Charge, do bring the Presbytery where he is to be placed,
a Testimonial of his Ordination, and of his abilities and conversation,
whereupon his fitness for that place where he is to be removed, shall be tried
by his preaching there, and (if it shall be judged necessary) by a further
examination, and so, without any new Ordination, he shall be admitted, if he be
appointed as fit for that place: And if any person Ordained Minister in
Scotland, or in any other Reformed Church, be designed to a Congregation in
England, he is to bring from that Church to the Presbytery where he is to be
placed, a sufficient testimonial of his Ordination, of his life and
conversation while he lived with them, and of the causes of his removal; and
to undergo such a Trial of his fitness and sufficiency; and to have the same
course held with him in other particulars, as is set down in the foregoing Rule
and Provision touching the Examination and Admission of persons formerly
Ordained in England.

And it is further Ordained, That Records be carefully kept by the Register, to
be nominated by the Presbytery, of the names of the persons Ordained, with
their testimonial of the time and place of their Ordination, and of the
Ministers who did ordain them, and of the Charge to which they are appointed;
and that no money or gift, of what kind soever, shall be received from the
person to be Ordained, or from any on his behalf, for Ordination, or ought
else belonging to it, by the Presbytery or any of them, or any appertaining to
any of them, upon what pretense soever, except to the Register, for the entry,
Instruments and Testimonials of his Ordination, which shall not exceed the sum
of ten shillings for each person Ordained.

And it is yet further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that all persons
who shall be Ordained Presbyters, according to this Directory, shall be for
ever reputed and taken to all intents and purposes, for lawful, and
sufficiently authorized Ministers of the Church of England, and as capable of
any Ministerial employment in the Church, with the rights and profits
belonging thereunto, as any other Presbyters whatsoever, already ordained, or
hereafter to be Ordained; And that all Presbyters, who are hereby appointed and
authorized to ordain, and shall (according to this present Directory,) ordain
any Presbyters are hereby declared, to perform an acceptable service to this
Church and Kingdom, and shall have the protection of both Houses of Parliament
for their indemnity.

Provided that this Ordinance shall stand in force for twelve Months and no
longer: Any thing in this Ordinance contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

FINIS.
Die Veneris 20. Febr. 1645.
Resolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled.
THat there be forthwith a Choice made of Elders thorowout the Kingdom of
England and Dominion of Wales in the respective Parish Churches and Chapels,
according to such Directions as have already passed both Houses, bearing date
the 19. of August 1645. and since that time: And all Classes and Parochial
Congregations respectively are hereby authorized and required forthwith
effectually to proceed therein accordingly.

Resolved, etc.
THat notice of the Election of Parochial and Congregationall Elders, and of
the time when it shall be, be given by the Minister in the public Assembly the
next Lords Day but one before: And that on that said Lords Day a Sermon be
preached preparatory to that weighty business.

Resolved, etc.
THat such Election shall be made by the Congregation, or the major part of
them then assembled, being such as have taken the National Covenant, and are
not Persons under age, nor Servants that have no Families.

Resolved, etc.
THat these three Votes be forthwith communicated to the Lord Mayor, and
immediately put in due execution.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Jovis 26. Febr. 1645.
Resolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled.
THat the Tryers of Elections of Elders shall have power to hear and determine
all Exceptions brought unto them concerning undue Elections, as well as to
receive them; And also to call before them all persons Elected to be Elders,
(and accepting such Election) against whom any Exceptions shall be brought in;
And to send for such Witnesses as shall be nominated to them, by such persons
as shall bring in the said Exceptions; And shall have power to examine upon
Oath, both the persons bringing in such Exceptions, and the said Witnesses,
concerning any undue proceedings in the manner of the said Election, and
concerning all matters of Ignorance and Scandal, objected against the person
elected, and expressed in any Ordinance of Parliament, to be a sufficient
cause of Suspention from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and of which any
Eldership by Ordinance of Parliament, has cognizance and jurisdiction; And
that shall be prooved to have been committed within one whole year before the
Exceptions exhibited; And that the person against whom the Exceptions are
taken, shall have the like liberty to produce Witnesses to be examined in like
manner on his behalf.

Resolved, etc.
THat the Triers shall have power to examine whether the Elders that are to be
chosen, be so qualified as is expressed in the Ordinance which has passed both
Houses.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.


