AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: Concerning The
Company of Merchants Trading into FRANCE:

Die Jovis, 19 October. 1648.

ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1648.

Die Jovis, 19. October. 1648.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, finding as well by the
complaints of the Merchants commonly known by the name of the Governor and
Company of Merchants of London, trading into France, as otherwise, that
several Arrests and Seizures have been of late unduly made in the Dominions of
the French King, on the Ships and Goods of English Merchants trading thither
upon private men's Actions and pretenses, whereas in truth the same are of
general and public concernment to this State; in which cases for want of a
public Stock, and Ministers to be thereon employed, the Trade of this Kingdom
has been much obstructed, and particular men's interests much prejudiced, to
the very great damage of the said particular Merchants, and their
discouragement in Trade and Commerce; Do therefore her by Order and Ordain,
That all and every person and persons, as well Natives as Strangers, which shall
during the space of two years now next ensuing export out of this Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, any Goods, Wares, or Merchandise of any nature
or kind whatsoever into any the parts of the Dominions of the French King
without the Streights of Gibraltar, or which shall import any Goods, Wares, or
Merchandise from thence into this Kingdom or Dominion of Wales, shall pay five
shillings upon every 100. l. value of the said Goods which shall be so
exported, or imported, according to the Book of Rates established by authority
of this present Parliament (Wines only excepted) and Sixpence upon every Tun
of Wine of the growth of France, which shall during that time be imported into
this Kingdom, and Dominion of Wales; And that the Governor and Company of
Merchants of London trading into France shall, and may for and during the said
space of two years now next ensuing, take, receive, and Collect of every
person and persons, as well Natives as Strangers, that shall during the said
space of two years now next ensuing, export out of this Kingdom of England
and Dominion of Wales any Goods, Wares, or Merchandises whatsoever into any the
parts of the Dominions of the French King; o^ which shall import any Goods,
Wares, or Merchandise from thence into this Kingdom or Dominion of Wales, the
said duty of five shillings upon every 100. l. value of the said Goods,
according to the said Book of Rates, and Sixpence upon every Tun of Wine of
the growth of France, which shall during that time be imported into this
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales; And that the said Governor of the
said Company of Merchants of London trading into France for the time being, or
his Deputy or Deputies, shall and may from time to time nominate and appoint
Collectors, who are hereby enabled to receive at the several Custom-houses in
the Port of London, and out-Ports, all such sums of Money as shall hereafter
during the continuance of this Ordinance be payable, or paid for and in respect
of the said duty.

And it is further Ordained, that all such sums of money as shall be Collected
and received for the duty aforesaid, in the port of London, shall be issued
and disposed of by the said Governor, his Deputy or Deputies, with the advice
and consent of the Major part of the Assistance of the said company for the
time being, and the Moneys Collected in the several Out-ports within this
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, shall be issued and disposed of by
the said Governor, or his Deputy or Deputies, with the advice and consent of
the Burgesses serving in Parliament for the said Out-ports, or any four of
them respectively and not otherwise, for and toward the defraying of the
charges of Suits, and other charges of like nature, by reason of Arrests, and
Seizures heretofore made, or hereafter to be made in France of the Ships and
Goods of the Merchants of this Kingdom trading thither, and for payment of the
Salaries of such Officers and Ministers as the said Governor and company of
Merchants of London trading into France have employed sithence the year of our
Lord, 1640. or shall employ about those affairs in such manner, as in their
wisdoms shall be thought meet for maintenance and support of their trade and
commerce; And that the said duty may be duly Collected and paid according to
the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance, It is Ordained that no Officer,
or Officers belonging to any Custom-house in this Kingdom and Dominion of
Wales, do upon forfeiture and loss of his or their places pass any Warrant,
Cocquet, or Bill, or permit any goods which shall be exported out of this
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, into any the parts of the Dominions
of the French King, or which shall be imported from thence hither to pass by
any Warrant, Cocquet, or Bill, unless the same be signed or subscribed by the
Governor of the said company of Merchants of London trading into France, his
Deputy or Deputies, or by such person or persons as shall be by him or them
authorized by writ^ng under the common Seal of the said Company, to Collect
and receive the said duty, who are hereby required to attend at the several
Custom-houses in the ports of London, and out-ports at the usual hours,
between nine and twelve in the morning to receive the same, and to take such
further course for the dispatch of the service as he or they in their wisdoms
shall think fit; And it is further Ordered and Ordained, That if any person or
persons that are or shall be, according to the true intent and meaning of this
Ordinance, liable to the payment of the said duty, shall refuse or omit to pay
the same, that all and every such person and persons so refusing or omitting to
pay the said duty, shall upon proof made thereof, pay double the value of the
said duty, for all such Goods, Merchandise and Wines, for which he shall so
refuse, or omit to pay the said duty in this Ordinance expressed, according to
the tenor thereof. Provided that neither this Ordinanee nor any thing therein
contained shall compel any person of the Out-ports trading into France to pay
this duty, except they shall declare their assent thereunto before the five and
twentieth of May, which shall be in the year of our Lord, 1649. at the
Assurance Office in London, to the Merchants commonly known by the name of the
Governor and Company of Merchants of London trading into Frane.

Ioh. Brown. Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

