AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Concerning the
EXCISE OF TOBACCO.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes and John Raworth.

Tudor rose depiction of Irish harp Scottish thistle
DIE SABBAT. DECEMBER. 23. 1643.
FORASMUCH as the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament have taken notice,
That the Rate of four pence lately imposed, by Ordinance of the eleventh of
September last, upon every pound of Tobacco of the English Plantations by way
of Excise, has something intermitted Trade in that Commodity:

Be it therefore Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, and by Authority of the same, for the encouragement and ease, as
well of the Importer, as Ingrosser and Seller of such Tobacco's; That all
Tobacco's of the English Plantations imported, and remaining on the hands of
the Merchant or Importer, or the Ingrosser or Seller thereof, before the
eleventh of September last past, shall pay only one penny upon every pound:
And all such Tobacco's imported since the eleventh of September last, and
remaining on the hands, either of the Merchant, Importer, Ingrosser, or Seller
thereof, at the day of the date of this Ordinance, shall be liable to, and pay
two pence upon every pound: And for all such Tobacco of the English
Plantations, as shall hereafter, from the day of the date hereof, be imported
into the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port and Town of Berwick,
shall pay after the rate of four pence upon every pound, according to the
former Ordinance dated the eleventh of September last; The respective sums of
one penny, two pence, and four pence upon every pound, to be paid by the
Ingrosser, or Seller, upon sale thereof, as is therein prescribed: Provided
always, That no person shall have any benefit of the aforesaid Moderation to
one penny and two pence upon every pound of Tobacco respectively before
mentioned, but such only as shall within fourteen days after the publication
of this Ordinance, make his personal appearance at such Office of Excise under
which his dwelling place shall be, and there deliver in, upon oath, a true and
just Particular of all Tobacco by him sold, since the eleventh of September
last, unto the time he shall make his appearance; As also, at the same time
declare upon oath, and deliver in a like true Particular of all Tobacco's
either remaining upon his hands at that time, of such Tobacco's as were upon
his hands before the eleventh of September, as of such Tobacco's as have been
by him imported or brought, and are remaining upon his hands at the time of his
appearance; and shall presently, according to the respective Rates of one penny
and two pence, pay and clear the duty of Excise, as well for all Tobacco by him
sold since the eleventh of September last, as for all Tobacco by him imported,
and remaining at that time upon his hands as aforesaid, but be proceeded
against without favor or pardon, according to the former Ordinance of the
eleventh of September last.

Provided also, That no Abatement or Allowance shall be made, under pretense of
this Ordinance, for any Tobacco's which have already paid Excise, according to
the said Ordinance of the eleventh of September last, before the date hereof.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

