Die Martis xxx. Ianuarii 1643*
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
Authorizing the Commissioners of the great Seal of England, to call before
them all Officers, Ministers, and other Attendants on the great Seal, or Court
of Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas, Exchequer, and Court of Wards and
Liveries, and to tender unto every of them, the solemn League and Covenant for
Reformation, etc. And for making void as well the Places and Offices of such as
shall refuse or neglect to take the same. As also for restrayning of all
Lawyers, Attourneys, Clerks or Solicitors, to practice or solicit in any of
the said Courts, before they shall have taken the said solemn League and
Covenant.

IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, That
the Commissioners of the great Seal of England be Authorized, and are hereby
required, to call before them all and every the Officers and Ministers, and all
other Attendants on the Great Seal or Court of Chancery, Kings Bench, Common
Pleas* Exchequer, and Court of Wards and Lyveries, and to tender unto every of
them the solemn League and Covenant for Reformation and defense of Religion.
the Honor and happiness of the King, and the Peace and safety of the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland; And such as shall either refuse or
neglect to take the same, and all such as shall not make their appearance, and
give their personal attendance in their several Places and Offices before the
last day of this Term, not having a just excuse for their absence, shall
forfeit their several and respective Offices and Places, and the same shall be
determined, and become absolutely void to all intents and purposes, as if such
Persons, Officers and Ministers were naturally dead. And it is further Ordered
by the said Lords and Commons, That no Sergeant at Law, or other Lawyer,
Attorney, Clerk, or Sollicitour, shall be admitted to practice before the
said Commissioners in the Court of Chancery, or in the Kings Bench, Common
Pleas, Exchequer, or Court of Wards and Lyveries, or to prosecute or Solicit
any Cause in any of the said Courts before he shall have taken the said solemn
League and Covenant, which the said Commissioners are hereby likewise
Authorized and required to tender, and Administer unto them.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London Printed for Humphrey Tuckey at the Black spread Eagle in Fleet Street,
1644.


