AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons, Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For appointing
a solemn Day of Thanksgiving, for the happy Success of the Forces under Sir
William Waller and Sir William Balfore, against the Forces under the Command of
Sir Ralph Hopton, who were totally routed on the 29. of March last, 1644.

Together with an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament,
to enable the Merchants of Levant Company, to Import in English Bottomes any
CURRANTS, and to land them within any Port within the power of the Parliament.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that these Ordinances be forthwith
printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Edward Husbands, April 4. 1644.

Die Lunae, 1. April: 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, appointing a
solemn day of Thanksgiving, etc.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, having certain Information of
the great mercy of our good God, in the happy success of the Forces of the
Parliament, under the command of Sir William Waller and Sir William Balfore, on
Friday last the 29 of March, 1644. Do in their acknowledgement of Gods mercy
herein Order, That upon the Lords day, which will be on the 14. of this instant
April, public Thanksgiving be given in all churches and chapels on the South
side of Trent, within the power of the Parliament, unto the Lord of hosts that
gives all Victory, for the seasonable and extraordinary blessing, whereby the
Army under the command of Sir Ralph Hopton was totally routed, with the loss
of very few of the Parliaments Forces; And all Ministers in their respective
churches and chapels, are hereby directed and commanded to give notice thereof,
and to exhort and excite their people to acknowledge and improve this great
blessing in a spiritual way, that as this mercy was bestowed in return of our
prayers and humiliation, upon the late and solemn Fast the Wednesday before
this Victory, so God may have the sole honor and glory of it in our praises
and Thanksgivings, and that the like Thanksgiving shall be made on the North
side of Trent fourteen days after, which will be on the 28. of this instant
April.

Ordered that this Ordinance for Public Thanksgiving be forthwith Printed and
published; And that the Printer of the House do bring in a convenient number to
the Members of the House, to be sent into the several Counties.

H: ELSYNGE, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Martis 19. Martii, 1643.
An Ordinance of the Lord and Commons in Parliament, concerning CVRRANS.
Whereas by an Ordinance of both houses of Parliament dated 26 Augusti, 1642
It is Ordained for the reasons therein expressed, that from and after the last
day of September, 1642 no Currants should be imported into the Kingdom of
England, or Dominion of Wales, by any Merchants or others, by way of
Merchandise, or otherwise from any Ports beyond the Seas, but the Importation
thereof is thereby utterly prohibited and forbidden. Now forasmuch as since the
making of the said Ordinance, the Enemy is poffessed of diverse Havens and Port
towns of the said Kingdom, where Currants are daily imported, whereby the
benefit of the said Ordinance cannot be made useful for the public good of
the Kingdom, as was intended; The Lords and Commons now Assembled in
Parliament, do Order, Ordain, and Declare, that from and after the Twelfth day
of February last it shall and may be lawful, to and for all Merchants of the
Levant company, by way of Merchandise or otherwise, to Import in English
bottoms any Currants of the growth of Zant and Cepholonia, and to land them into
the Port of London, or any other Port within the power of the Parliament,
within Twelve months next after the publication of this Ordinance, from any
Ports beyond the Seas, paying six shillins per cent: for every hundred weight
of the said Currants, over and above the Customs and Excise due for the same:
The said Ordinance of prohibition to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding:
And the Commissioners of the Customs are hereby required to take Entries for
the said Currants, and to receive of the said Merchants the said six shillings
per cent: for every hundred weight over and above the custom and Excise as
aforesaid, and the proceed of the said six shillings per cent: the said
Commissioners are hereby required to pay over to Nathaniel Stevens, Thomas
Hodges and Thomas Pury Esquires, Members of the House of Commons, for the use
of the Garrison of Gloucester upon account, taking their receipt for the same,
which shall be to the said Commissioners and every of them a sufficient
Discharge in that behalf.

H: Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

25 Martii. 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that the
Ordinance concerning Currants be Printed forthwith, and that the Commissioners
of the Customs do send Coppies of them, together with their Letters to the
several Ports, with directions unto them, to put the said Ordinance in
execution, and to be accomptable for this. Ordinance, and the Payments
thereupon arising, eswell as of any other duties payable upon any other
Ordinance, and monthly to send up the moneys hereupon received, and the
account thereof.

H. ELSTNGE, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

