A LETTER of that most religious and pious Prince K. Edward the sixth to
Nicholas Ridley Bishop of London, for the taking down of Altars, and setting
up the Table in the steed thereof, subscribed by nine of the said Kings Privy
Council, together with the said Kings six reasons for the same alteration; All
which are set forth in the Ecclesiastical History, containing the Acts and
Monuments or Martyrs, written by M. John Fox, and may there be read in the life
of that ever blessed King.

London, Printed 1641.

A Letter of that most Religious and pious Prince King Edward the sixth to
Nicholas Ridley, Bishop of London, for the taking down of Altars, and setting
up the Table, etc.
RIght reverend Father in God, right trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well;
And where it is come to our knowledge, that the Altars within the most part of
the Churches of this Realm, being already upon good and godly considerations
taken down, there do yet remain Altars standing in diverse other Churches, by
occasion whereof much variance and contention arises amongst sundry of our
Subjects, which if good foresight were not had, might perchance engender great
hurt and inconvenience: We let you wit, that minding to have all occasion of
contention taken away, which many times grows by those and such like
diversities; and considering that amongst other things belonging to our Royal
Office and care, We do account the greatest to be to maintain the common
quiet of our Realm, We have thought good, by the advice of our Counsel, to
require you, and nevertheless especially to charge and command you for the
avoiding of all matters of further contention and strife, about the standing or
taking away of the said Altars, to give substantial order throughout all your
Diocese, that with all diligence, all the Altars in every Church or Chapel,
as well in places exempted, as not exempted, within your said Diocese be taken
down, and in the steed thereof a Table to be set up in some convenient part of
the Chancell within every such Church or Chapel, to serve for the
ministration of the blessed Communion; and to the intent the same may be done
without offense of such our loving Subjects, as be not yet so well persuaded in
that behalf, as we would wish, we send unto you herewith certain
considerations gathered and collected, that make for the purpose, the which,
and such others as you shall think meet to be set forth to persuade the weak
to embrace our proceedings in this part, we pray you cause to be declared to
the people by some discreet Preachers, in such places as you shall think meet,
before the taking down of the said Altars, so as both the weak consciences of
others may be instructed and satisfied as much as may be, and this our pleasure
the more quietly executed; For the better doing whereof, we require you to open
the foresaid considerations in that our Cathedral Church in your own person,
if you conveniently may, or otherwise by your Chancellor, or some other grave
Preacher, both there, and in such other Market Towns, and most notable places
of your Diocese, as you may think most requisite.

Given under our Signet at our Palace at Westminster the 24 day of November, in
the fourth year of our Reign. Edward Somerset. Thomas Cranmer: William
Wiltshire. John Warwick. John Bedford. William North. Edw. Clinton. Hen.
Wentworth. Thom. Ely.


Reasons why the Lords Board should rather be after the form of a Table then
of an Altar.
The First Reason. Table shall more move the simple from the superstitious
opinions of the Popish Mass unto the right use of the Lords Supper; for the
use of an Altar is to make Sacrifice upon it, the use of a Table is to serve
for men to eat upon. Now when we come to the Lords Board, what do we come
for? to Sacrifice Christ again, and to Crucify him again, or to feed upon him,
that was once only crucified and offered up for us? If we come to feed upon
him, spiritually to eat his body, and spiritually to drink his blood, which
is a true use of the Lords Supper, then no man can deny but the form of a Table
is more meet for the Lords Board, then the form of an Altar.

mhe Second reason. Common Prayer makes mention of an Altar wherefore it is
not lawful to abolish that which the Book allows, to this it is thus
answered, The Book of Common Prayer calls the thing whereupon the Lords
supper is ministered indifferently a Table, an Altar, or the Lords Board,
without prescription of any form thereof, either of a Table or of an Altar; so
that whether the Lords board have the form of an Altar or of a Table the Book
of Common Prayer calls it both an Altar and a Table; For as it calls it an
Altar whereupon the Lords Supper is ministered a Table and the Lords board, so
it calls the Table where the holy Communion is distributed with lauds and
thanksgiving unto the Lord, an Altar, for that there is offered the same
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, and thus it appears that there is
nothing either said or meant contrary to the Book of Common Prayer.

The third Reason. Altar or at the least upon a Super-Altar to supply the fault
of the Altar, which must have had his prints and Character, or else it was
thought that the thing was not lawfully done; but this superstitious opinion is
more holden in the minds of the simple and ignorant by the form of an Altar
then of a Table, wherefore it is more meet for the abolishment of this
superstitious opinion, to have the Lords Board after the form of a Table then
of an Altar.

The Fourth Reason. Altar was ordained for the Sacrifices of the Law and
therefore the Altar in Greek is called (...) quasi Sacrificii locus, but now
both the Law and the Sacrifices thereof do cease, wherefore the Form of the
Altar used in the Altar ought to cease withal.

The Fifth Reason. Table and not at an Altar, as it appears manifestly by the
three Evangelists, and St. Paul calls the coming to the holy Communion the
coming unto the Lords Supper, and also it is not read that any of the Apostles
or the primitive Church did ever use any Altar in ministration of the holy
Communion; wherefore seeing the form of a Table is more agree^ble to Christ's
institution, and with the usage of the Apostles and of the Primitive Church,
then the form of an Altar, therefore the form of a Table is rather to be used
then the form of an Altar in the administration of the Holy Communion.

The Sixth Reason.

After these letters and reasons received, the forenamed Nicholas Ridley, Bp.
of London, consequently upon the same did hold his Visitation, wherein, amongst
other his Injunctions, the said Bp. exhorted those Churches in his Diocese
where the Altar then did remain to conform themselves unto those other
Churches which had taken them down, and had set up in stead of the multitude
of their Altars, one decent Table in every Church: Upon the occasion whereof
there arose a great diversity about the form of the Lords Board, some using it
after the form of a Table, and some of an Altar, wherein when the said Bishop
was required to say and determine what was most meet, he declared, he could do
no less of his bounden duty for appeasing of such diversity, and to procure one
godly uniformity, but to exhort all his Dioces unto that which he thought did
best agree with Scripture, with the usage of the Apostles, and with the
Primitive Church, and to that which is not only not contrary unto any thing
contained in the Book of Common Prayer, as is is before proved, but also might
highly further the Kings most godly proceedings, in abolishing of diverse vain
and superstitious opinions of the Popish mass out of the hearts of the simple,
and to bring them to the right use taught by holy Scripture of the Lords
Supper, and so appointed, he the form of a right Table to be used in his
Diocese, and in the Church of Paul brake down the wall standing then by the
High Altars side.

BY the preceding passages, the whole World may see, that in all times there
will be Champions found to defend all opinious; you see how Tables did then
cry down Altars, and how Altars of late have thrust out Tables, and Bishops
defending both according to the Current and humor of the time, or rather
according to the indisputable command of the Metropolitan; to whose papal
pride and Lording greatness all the rest of the Prelates by oath and Canonical
obedience are slavishly subservient. Which usurped and insufferable domination
has been the chief cause of all the (...) troubles and Innovations both in
Chur^^ (...) Common Wealth: But it is hoped that (...) generating order of
Bishops (under (...) this Kingdom groans) will by this P^^^^^ment be either
wholly taken away, or b^^^ded within such Limits, that their Lor^^ power, pride,
and cruelty, shall swell ^^^^more above the banks of moderation to t^^ ruin of
the Church and Common Wealth. (...) if any Dutiful son of the Church will
stan^ up in the defense of that order, and invocat^ the Holy Apostles to
justify the institution and antiquity of Episcopacie; if that shall be
yielded, then let them be reduced to that Primitive condition; or (because they
have so much abused bounty of Princes) for ever lose the plea and Title.

FINIS.

