An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, Enabling the
Committee of the County of WORCESTER, to raise 100. Horse, and 300. Foot, to
suppress all tumults in the said County, with power to Assesse 100. l. per
week, for the Maintenance of those Forces.
Die Mercurii 6 September. 1648.
IT is this day Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, for the preventing of many dangerous designs which have been
lately attempted, and are still on Foot within the County of Worcester and
parts adjacent for the Raising of a new War, and to the great indangering of
the public Peace and safety of the Kingdom, and for the better suppressing
of all Tumults and Insurrections within the said County; That the Committee of
the said County have power and authority, and are hereby authorized forthwith
to raise one hundred Horse, and three hundred Foot within the said County of
Worcester for the defense and safety thereof, according to the power formerly
given them by Ordinance of Parliament; And that for the maintenance thereof, a
weekly Tax and Assessment not exceeding 100. l. per. week, be laid and
Assessed upon the said County and the City of Worcester, by the said Committee
or any five or more of them in such manner, and with such power for leavying
thereof, as by Ordinance of Parliament, for the Raising of Sixty thousand
pounds per mensem for the maintenance of the Forces under the Command of Sir
Thomas Fairfax, now Lord Fairfax is appointed: And it is further Ordered and
Ordained by the authority aforesaid, that Will. Collins Gent. be Treasurer for
the receiving and paying of the said Moneys so to be Raised as aforesaid, And
that the several Collectors and other persons do pay the Moneys by them
received by virtue of this Order, unto the said Treasurer, who is hereby
authorized and required to pay all such Moneys to such person or persons as the
said Committee or any five, or more of them shall appoint the same to be
employed for the maintenance of the said Forces, and suppressing of the said
Insurrections, and not to or for any other use or purpose, And that the said
Treasurers shall issue out no Moneys without a Warrant, under the hands of the
said Committee, or any five or more of them by Order under their hands, And the
said Committee to issue out no Moneys but for the use aforesaid, otherwise then
for necessary Fees and Allowances for the Treasurers, Collectors and other
Officers to be employed in the said Service, who are to have no greater Fees or
Allowances then are appointed by the said recited Ordinance. This Ordinance to
continue for Six Months and no longer.

Die Mercurii, 6 September. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
Printed and published.

Joh. Brown. Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old-Bayley, 1648.


