Die Martis, 17. October. 1643
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament;
Concerning all Brewers and Makers of Beer, Ale, Cider, or Perry; for payment
of the Excise imposed by an Ordinance of Parliament, before the delivering
thereof, upon pain of forfeiture of double the value of the said Commodities*

FOr further Explanation of the late Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament,
touching the Excise, or New-Impost, upon the several Commodities therein
mentioned.

Be it now Declared and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament,
for the better inabling and encouraging of the Brewers, and Makers of Beer,
Ale, Perry, and Cider, (who are the parties that are to pay the Excise, as by
the said Ordinance is appointed) to make due payment thereof accordingly, That
no Beer, Ale, Perry or Cider, shall be delivered out by the Brewer or Maker
thereof, or any for them, to any Retailer or other Buyer thereof, till the Rate
and Price which is by them to be paid, for, and in respect of the Excise, be
paid by the Victualler or Retailer thereof, to the Brewer, or first Seller
thereof, on pain, That as well the Retailer or Buyer, as the Brewer, or the
first Seller thereof, shall forfeit for the first offense, double the value of
every quantity of Beer, Ale, Perry, or Cider, so delivered out, or received by
the party so offending, and for the second offense treble the value thereof,
and the party so offending, to be disabled from using their said Trades or
Professions, respectively for the space of one whole year then next ensuing,
the said forfeitures to be levied and employed in such manner and to such uses,
as by the said Ordinance is appointed for the penalties therein mentioned. And
be it Declared, and further Ordained, That the Rates set upon every Barrel of
Beer and Ale, by the said Ordinance, shall be paid for every greater or lesser
quantity, proportionably after the same Rate; And be it also further Ordered
and Ordained, That for all Beer of four shillings the Barrel or under, the
Excise shall be paid after the Rate of six pence for every Barrel, and so
after that Rate for a greater or lesser quantity, under the penalties and
forfeitures in and by the said Ordinance appointed: Provided always, and be it
Ordained, That no Brewers, or Retailers of any Beer, Ale, Perry or Cider, shall
take any more in the Price thereof upon the sale of the same Commodities, then
according to the usual Rates and Prices appointed by Law for the same
(excepting only the Rate of the Excise) as they will answer their contempts
herein to both Houses of Parliament.

And as touching old and new Draperies, It is Declared and Ordained, That the
Excise due and payable for the same, shall be paid by the Shopkeeper, who buys
the same to sell again.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printe^ (...) (...)d John Raworth. 1643.


