AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: FOR Bringing in
of the Arrears for the Garrisons of the Eastern Association.

Die Jovis 10 December. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1646.

Die Jovis 10 December. 1646.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For bringing in
the Arrears of the Garrisons of the Eastern Association.
Whereas by two several Ordinances of the third of September, 1645. and the
sixth of August, 1646. sixteen Months and seven days Tax was Ordained to be
Assessed, Collected, and paid for maintenance of the Garrisons of the Eastern
Association; And whereas a great part of the Moneys payable by virtue of the
said Ordinances, is still in Arreare, and uncollected, and by means thereof
the sums of Money still due to the said Garrisons for their Pay, during the
time of their continuance, and to the Inhabitants thereof, and of the Adjacent
Counties for Quarters, are become very great: Now that the said Arreares may be
brought in, and issued forth according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Ordinances, Be it Ordained, and it is Ordained by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, That the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Eastern
Association, and the Committees of the several Counties mentioned in the said
Ordinances, shall have Power, and are hereby Authorized to execute the said
several Ordinances according to the Powers and Authorities to them thereby
granted respectively. And the said Committees are hereby Ordered to take
effectual care for the full and speedy Assessing, Raising, Levying, and
Collecting of all the said Arreares: And be it further Ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, That the said Committee of Lords and Commons for the
Eastern Association, shall have Power to employ and dispose of all the said
Arreares, to the intents and purposes of the said several Ordinances,
according to the Authority to them hereby granted.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliam.


