The Confident Questionist Questioned: OR, The Examination of the DOCTRINE
Delivered by Mr. THOMAS WILLS in certain QVERIES. Published by Mr. Jeremiah
Ives. Examined by COUNTER-QUERIES.

By N. E. With a Letter of Mr. Tho. Wills.

Gal. 1.6. I marvel, that you are so soon removed from Him that called you into
the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel.

7 Which is not another, but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert
the Gospel of Christ.

8 But though we, or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you,
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed.

9 As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other Gospel
unto you, then that you have received, let him be accursed.

2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and
being deceived.

14 But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been
assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Newberry, and are to be sold at his shop in
Sweetings-Rents in Cornhil, near the Exchange 1658.

Reader,
IF thou art a Friend to the Truth, probably thou have been somewhat ere this
grieved to see the Host of Israel routed, and the Philistims to carry the
sacred Ark into their Idol-Temple; to see the Ministry so much shattered, and
uncircumcised ones to take the holy Gospel, and dispense it after their own
humane inventions. Blessed be God that this Foundation-Truth is undertaken to
be rescued, and that by a worthy hand; for thou (if thou have heard) wilt say
with many more, that we have cause to bless God for that light and discovery of
the truth there has been, and for that satisfaction that was given to many
honest hearts. I doubt not but by this time Mr. Ives his Queries have fallen
into thy hands: I shall not so far question thy judgment, as to say that he
has staggered thee in the belief of what Mr. Wills has delivered; If he
has, to settle thee, who art too soon moved, I have sent thee some
Counter-Queries; Judge, and try, and then I hope thou will blush at thy
inconstancy: And for a further settlement, I advise thee to attend Mr. Wills
his Lecture in Crooked-Lane.

But if thou art an enemy to the Truth, I am confident thou have sung many
Iopaeans, and have triumphed before the victory's got; Should Mr. Brooks or his
Church invite this man to be the Patron of their cause, we might guess them
miserably baffled, and that they have too much inclination to his other Errors:
thou can not expect that Mr. Wills by taking notice of these slight Queries,
should hinder his more serious discussion of this weighty point, which he has
undertaken in the foresaid Lecture. Seriously and impartially Catechize the
Questionist by the Questions a meaner hand has prepared; try if here is not
enough to puzzle him, Modesty forbids to say more. I have printed a letter of
Mr. Wills his for thy satisfaction in some things, which I received for my
own. If I have mistook in any thing, as a Christian, forgive, because not
wilful, and learn not in any thing to attribute the weaknese of the Author to
the cause: I could wish that thou and I could prevail with Mr. Wills to
publish his solid and serious Discourses concerning this subject, that the
enemies may be confounded, Christians established, and directed, the Truth
vindicated, seduced ones reduced: For which blessed effect I should join with
thee in prayer, who am.

Thy Christian Brother, N. E.

The Copy of a Letter to Mr. Wills.
Mr. Wills,
I Lately met with a Book of Mr. Ives, that questions your confidence in the
truth; I judge him too bold, if not worse, seeing his grounds and warrant for
it are so slight: For truly my mean judgment is scarcely shaken, much less
routed by this assault: I beg not therefore your Reply to recruit your Cause,
neither do I think any else do cry out for your help but those that are more
afraid than hurt: I only desire to be informed of some private and personal
transactions which he hints, and of some Expressions he lays to your charge.

1 In what sense you assert the baptizing of the children of wicked Parents. Q.
40. I suppose you mean only of those that are Church Members, and not cast out;
as having a visible right?

2 I desire to know what were your own words concerning the fifth Monarchy men.
Q. 42.

3 Whether did you positively assert him to be a Jesuit or not? Q. 47.

4 And I pray give me some brief account concerning your private discourse
with him.

An Advertisement concerning these Particulars will be satisfaction both to
me and to others. If any thing shall appear in print in answer to the whole;
it will beg your Patronage of its cause, your pardon of its weakness: this
only I further crave, viz. that you will love, and pray for him who is

Your Friend and Servant N. E.
The Answer I received to this Letter follows.



THE Copy of Mr. Wills his Letter.
Sir,
THe Book, or printed Papers you speak of, were sent to my hand, from the
Author himself, who (if you know him not) was once a soldier, is now, by
Trade, a Chees-monger, and for Sect, an Anabaptist. He came openly to oppose
me at my Lecture at Fish-street-hill, whereby he occasioned a very great
disturbance, which might have proved to his own peril. But for the pacification
of the tumult, I openly declared to all the people, that if any of them had any
thing to object against the Doctrine by me delivered, if they would be
pleased to signify their objections to me in Word or Writing, at any
convenient time, I would answer all that were material in my further
prosecution of that subject at Michaels Crooked-lane. Hereupon Mr. Ives, with
some others, came unto me, pretending to desire satisfaction, though (as it
afterward appeared) the intent was rather opposition. The principal thing that
Mr. Ives stuck upon, was, the Call of our first Reformers. Two principles I
propounded to him as the grounds of his satisfaction, which were no other than
what I had publicly delivered, viz.

1 That Ministers in an ordinary way and case were to be ordained by Ministers.

2 That in a case of necessity, where there were no Ministers to ordain, fit
persons might become Ministers without ordination. For a positive Law gives
place to necessity, Mat. 12. 1-5. Both these he owned and acknowledged to be
true before sundry witnesses, and particularly declared his high esteem of the
latter.

Hereupon I offered him satisfaction as to the call of our first Reformers,
after the prevalency of Popery in the Land. For if he would say the Popish
Priests and Bishops were no Ministers of Christ, and had no power to ordain,
then did the case of Necessity warrant the Call of our first Reformers; for as
much as then there was no such Ordination, as he would acknowledge valid, to
be had.

But if he should say there was no such Necessity, then must he needs
acknowledge the Popish Bishops to have power of Ordination, for as much as
there was no other Ministers to ordain; and from them they had received
Ordination. So that which way soever he should turn, their Call would appear
to be clear and certain. Neither could the opinion of the Receivers null or
annihilate the truth of their Call, which could not depend upon their opinion,
but must needs consist in the conformity of their Ordination (as to the
substance of it) to the primitive Institution, or the necessity of the
susception, of the work of the Ministry, as in an extraordinary case, without
Ordination; But he refusing either to receive satisfaction from, or to make
any direct: Reply unto this fair Proposal, manifested his intents, by offering
an open opposition to both in a public Dispute, if he might be admitted
thereunto, notwithstanding his Concession of both principles, and thereby
manifested his desire of contention, rather than love of Truth and Peace, the
great Interests of all good Christians, and upon this account his offer was
(and I conceive) most justly rejected.

For my part, I know no ground we have in the Gospel to admit the enemies of
the Truth, and open opposites to the Gospel Ministry (as are the Sect of the
Anabaptists) publicly to dispute in Christian Assemblies against our Doctrine
and Ministry, which we hold forth in concurrence with the universal Christian
Church, from the Word and Gospel. Though I do believe there may be a
sufficient ground for dispute against the enemies of the Truth, and true
Religion, when the Gospel cannot well by other means get footing, or it may be
conducible for the further propagation of it amongst such as have not embraced
it. What ground there may be for some particular dispute, upon some special
occasion, with special Cautions and Rules to regulate it, I shall not here
define; but only say, such things are to be ordered by Prudence, according to
the general Rules of the holy Scripture.

Thus as to that which you last desired, I have, I hope, in the first place,
given you some satisfaction. Only this I Will add, that I received from him, and
some of those that were with him, what I told them I expected from them, from
some words they spoke unto that purpose, even an unchristian-like abuse in
slanderous and reproachful reports, that I could not make good my Calling to
the Ministry, nor maintain in private what I had delivered in public. But
besides the Testimony of persons of credit that were then present, I hope I
shall be able (through divine Assistance) to evidence that I can make good the
doctrine I have delivered.

Now as for your other Questions, I shall answer them in order,

1 As for what I spoke concerning the baptizing of the children of wicked
Parents; I spoke only (as might plainly appear to them that heard me) of such
as being under the outward Administration of the Covenant of Grace, were to be
accounted Members of the Visible Church, till juridically ejected by
excommunication. And I see no reason why the children of such Parents may not
be baptized under the Gospel, as well as the children of the wicked Jews were
to be circumcized under the Law. When God in the times of the Gospel does more
largely extend the grace of the Covenant, what ground have we to abridge any of
any such Ordinance, whereby that grace may be communicated? And do not we
often see that God passes by the children of good and godly Parents, and chooses
the children of those that are evil and wicked? And if it be the outward
subjection unto the external Administration of the Covenant of grace in the
Parents, that gives children right to this outward privilege of Baptism, why
are not the children of wicked Parents, living under this outward
Administration, to be admitted to Baptism, of equal right with the children
of those that are truly godly and religious? Now it must needs be the Parents
outward profession of the true Religion, or submission to the Administration of
the Covenant of grace, or the inward possession of the grace of the Covenant
that must give them right for their children to Baptism. The latter it cannot
be, viz. the inward possession of the grace of the Covenant; because this
falls not under man's cognizance; but now visible Administration requires some
visible Evidence of the parties interest in, or right to that Ordinance which
is to be visibly administered.

And therefore the latter it must needs be, viz. an outward profession of the
true Religion, an outward submission to the Administration of the Covenant of
grace. And therefore the children of wicked Parents being members of the
Visible Church, and so having a true right (in Foro Ecclesiae) to the Sacrament
of Baptism, ought as well to be baptized, as the children of Parents are (to
repeat the very words as I delivered them in public) the more need there is
that their children should be solemnly engaged to God, I judge it very
necessary that a solemn obligation to the duties of Christianity should by
Baptism be laid upon them. But I see not why Mr. Ives should enter his
exception against the baptizing of the children of wicked Parents, as such
(unless he sought to color his opinion which has ever been exploded in the
Christian Church) when it is well known he is against the baptizing of any
children at all.

2 As for what I spoke of the fifth Monarchy-men (I mean that generation which
in these days is called by that name) take my very words at large (which were
but briefly rehearsed in the Sermon, excepted against, for the correction of a
mistake under which they were censured) take them thus; some there are, that do
openly decry the Ministry, their Call, Maintenance and Administrations, as
Anti-Evangelical, and Antichristian. Such are these foul-mouthed Sectaries,
Seducers and Heretics, Quakers, Anabaptists, and Fifth-Monarchy-men, whose
breath is the very smoke of the bottomless Pit; smelling strong of the
Brimstone of Hell. This I spoke in allusion to that, whereby such like Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies as are vented now adays by men of these Sects, are
prophetically represented, Rev. 9.2, 3. as some do interpret it. If there are
not some of all these Sects as bad as I have represented them, I confess I am
under a great mistake, and I could heartily wish it was but only my error.

3 And as for that charge that I should tell any Gentleman, that I was informed
that Mr. Ives was a Jesuit, and should stir him up, upon that account to
apprehend him, I must needs reckon it amongst those slanders and reproaches
that have been most injuriously raised against me. For though I suppose you
are not ignorant that Mr. Ives is openly and commonly reported to be a
Jesuit, though upon what grounds I know not, whether because of his erroneous
principles, and extravagant Practices, in his intrusion into the Office, and
yet opposing the Call of the true Ministry, as Antichristian, and their
doctrines as erroneous, and occasioning disturbances in Christian Assemblies,
or upon what other account I do not understand; yet for my part I assure you I
never affirmed him upon any information to be a Jesuit, nor did I ever
instigate any one to apprehend him, or solicit any prosecution of him upon that
account. Neither do I imagine who it should be that should so maliciously
raise this slander against me, unless it be that Gentleman, who under the
pretense of much Christian moderation and sobriety, did sufficiently discover
his malice against the true Ministers of the Gospel, in saying before many
witnesses, that he had rather hear the Devil, than an ordained man.

If this be the man (as I cannot possibly imagine any other) I discovered so
much of his spirit while he was with me, that he well knows, I told him at
his departure, I expected no better from him, than the worst reproach he could
well invent.

And therefore this is no more than I expected. And truly since I perceived so
many bitter enemies were enraged against me, I sometimes thought with my self
what slander the Devil by his Agents would fasten upon me, as a piece of
revenge for that little service I have been instrumental to do the Lord Jesus
Christ, against his Kingdom. Now I perceive one is broken out, and what the
next will be, I know not. But I desire to quiet my self in an humble
confidence in his protection, who has called me forth unto his service. I
should be unworthy to be honored with the high title of a Minister of Jesus
Christ, if I should not be freely content to suffer a thousand reproaches for
his sake.

Thus I have endeavored your satisfaction in answer to the Questions
propounded. If you or any shall appear in public in answer to that Pamphlet
that has been printed against me, I shall be engaged to them for their
pains, and so far only under take the Patronage of what shall be done in
this kind, as it shall fall under the defense of that Doctrine which I am
engaged to maintain.

In those captious Queries this Sophistical Anabaptist, you may easily
perceive, has not discovered so much strength, as subtlety. And therefore
though the wise may easily discern their weakness, yet may they serve for a
while to amuze the Vulgar. And therefore I confess I think it not amiss, if
any that perceive the weak in danger to stumble, shall spurn away this
stumbling block that is cast before them. In this one thing be pleased to
know, that Mr. Ives has dealt ingenuously with me, viz. in a right stateing
of the Case, as I laid it down, which he has truly expressed in the position he
has prefixed to his Queries. Thus committing you to the tuition of the
Almighty, and the direction of the Spirit of Truth, craving your earnest
prayers for a divine assistance to carry me on in that work which God has
called me unto, who am the meanest and unworthiest of all his servants; I
rest, Sir,

Your Friend and Servant, in the Gospel of Christ, Tho. Wills.
December 22. 1657.
For his much esteemed Friend, Mr. N. E. at the sign of the (...) in (...)
POSTSCRIPT.
SIr, If you desire a more particular Information of what past betwixt Mr. Ives
and me at my house, and any further confirmation of the account thereof which
I have given you; be pleased to know that Mr. Good, Minister of Alhallows
Staining, London, Mr. Nathaniel Hawes, Mr. Stace, Mr. Robert Swale, Mr. Andrew
Hawes, and Mr. John Hawes, Gentlemen of known Integrity, of the Parish of
Buttolphs-Billingsgate, were present at that Discourse (in whole or in part)
which was held at my house with Mr. Ives, and those that came along with him.
If you please to enquire any thing touching this matter of any of these
Gentlemen, I assure you, you may safely rest in their Information.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To The Reverend, his Worthy Friend Mr THOMAS WILLS.
Sir,
IF I promise to my self in this, the common ends of Dedications, I hope you
will not condemn me as unworthy in my aims. I slatter not, as too many
fawning Scriblers do, whilst I say this is to testify my love to you; because
I hope, through grace, your piety and Doctrine has tied me to you by
spiritual bonds: Neither can I judge my self base in my design, by this to
ingratiate my self more into your favor; for I am ambitious of your
acquaintance: Neither am I ashamed to say, by this I beg your Patronage; for
I am sensible of my own weakness, and you to be not only able, but engaged, to
defend this cause. I only presume to be your armor-bearer, and whilst I may
fight under your shield, I doubt not but to give the enemy a stand; Whilst I
was a spectatour of those furious shocks, whereby you shattered the choicest
ranks of your enemies; and saw you deal about such fatal blows, that their
choicest Champions fell before you; I was encouraged to give a diversion to
this unworthy enemy that would fall upon you whilst you are engaged in other
encounters. Remember therefore I only engage this enemy in ambush, expecting
that he will fly as soon as he sees one ready to enter the lists with him;
but for the management of the Maine Battallia; I Leave it to your self, and to
God, to whom I shall pray for your success, and be ready to serve you and the
Truth, in what I am able.

N. E.

Mr. Ives,
I Hope my rashness is not so great as was Eliabs to David, 1 Samuel 17.18, --
28. If I say; seeing it is your business to carry loaves and cheeses to the
Camp, out of the pride and naughtiness of your heart, you above all should
single out a Champion to encounter with: if you mind Religion, as a Christian,
I exhort you to search your heart what was the moving argument: what can I say
but that either you were uncivil to take Mr. Brooks his work out of his hands;
or that you too highly valued your self, that you could manage it better; ought
we not as Christians to esteem others better than our selves? Oh! undaunted
boldness. And are these the Queries for whose sake such a daring public
challenge must be made for disputation! where errors have blinded the eyes of
the judgment, men rush on any thing without fear or wit. Sir, I am one that
have not only heard, but through grace, received good from Mr. Wills, and
therefore cannot but love and honor him; yet if I know my own heart, I side
not so much with a party, as with a cause which I judge to be right; and if I,
one ex faece -- can so easily see the light of truth through that cloud you
have cast on it, what a poor mist will it be before an Eagles eye? you are
very inquisitive, and therefore I shall answer some Queries you will probably
propound to me. Q. 1 Who are you? A. Truly I am homo nullius nominis. Q. 2 But
why would not Mr. Wills answer me? A. I suppose I prevented him; truly it is
not worthy the while; and is not this your cunning, by such Pamphlets to draw
him off by employing him, from further prosecuting this subject? Q. 3 But why
will not Mr. Wills dispute with me? A. Alas you see what rashness you are
guilty of, by seeing how a mean man can deal with you; and what little need
there was of it. Q. 4 But why were the people so rude when I desired public
satisfaction? A. It is the trick of the Devil, first to be the cause of an
offense, and then to accuse for it. Q. 5 But why do I answer you by
Counter-Queries? A. That you may see how easy it is for a fool to ask more
Questions than a wise man can answer.

The Confident QUESTIONIST QUESTIONED.
OR, The Querists Questions, Answered by COUNTER-QUERIES.
The Question stated by Mr. Ives.
Mr. Wills.
ONe thing asserted by you, was, That it was not lawful for any to preach
ordinarily and constantly, but such as were ordained, except it was for
approbation, or in cases of necessity, when such Ordination cannot be had.

SIR,
Reply.

YOu have so ingenuously stated the Question, that I hope in my following
Queries I shall not need upon every occasion to mention the terms [ordinarily
and constantly] and the exceptions, viz. the cases of [approbation and
necessity.]

Query 1.

Whether any thing can be charged as sin upon any, but what is against a
Divine Law? since the Apostle says, Romans 4.5. Where there is no Law, there is
no transgression, 1 John 3.4. Sin is the transgression of a Law.

Counter-Query.

As that must needs be a sin which is against a Divine Law, 1 John 3.4. so is
not that a sin which is practiced as a Gospel duty, and has no law or
foundation in the Gospel? Who has required these things at your hands?

Query 2.

Whether by any Law of God it is a sin for men that are gifted for the
Ministry, to preach the truth of Christ to the edification of their Brothren,
although they were not put upon it by reason of your supposed necessity, or
though they should never be ordained to office?

Counter-Query.

Must not then unordained men's preaching be sinful, seeing they not only have
no law for it (if they have, show it) but unwarrantably transgress a Divine
institution?

Query 3.

If there be any Law manifesting such a practice to be sinful, pray tell me
where that Law is written, that so I may see my error, and reform.

Counter-Query.

First, Is not that an Apostolical Institution, for the ordination of
Ministers? Tit. 1.5. Ordain Elders in every City. 2 Is not public teaching an
act of that office, as well as baptizing, being both joined in the same
commission, Mat. 28.19. Is there any difference put? 3 Are not unordained men
that are teachers, usurpers upon that office, and transgressors of that Divine
Institution? do not you see your error by this?

Query 4.

If there be a liberty for gifted men to preach in order to their approbation
for Office, as you confess, pray tell me whether they do not preach in the
capacity of gifted Brethren, before their Ordination; since they cannot preach
by virtue of Office, while as yet they are not in it?

Counter-Query.

Is there not a third thing which you forget? viz. that Approbationers preach
neither as mere gifted Brethren, nor as lawfully constituted Officers; But as
having by consent of Ministers (who have power to confer the Office) leave to
preach in relation to an Office? Does a Boy you take upon likeing sell your
Cheese as he is fit to sell it; or as your Apprentice? if as fit to sell it,
then every boy may have that right that is so fitted? as your Apprentice he
can not, because not bound; therefore datur tertium, he sells it with your
consent, in relation to be bound.

Query 5.

If they preach as gifted Brethren before their Ordination, then I quere, How
long they may thus preach till their preaching becomes sinful?

Counter-Query.

Is it not a sin and an usurpation all the while they preach without the
forementioned relation? Do you preach as a gifted Brother or not? if as a
gifted brother, ought you not to show what law you have expressly to warrant it?
if as one in Office, how came you by it? were you ordained by Ministers or not?
if by Ministers, whether by Protestant or Popish, that you may assure us of
your Office: But if by a Church, I ask, are not Election and Ordination
distinct things? do you ever read that the Church did any thing but elect?
ought you not to show some authority from a Divine Institution the Church has
to ordain? or else do you not run before sent?

Query 6.

If you say, Till the Ministry of Presbyters approve them, and are very well
satisfied with their abilities and qualifications for that employment: then I
quere, How if this man whom they approve of, is unsatisfied with their power to
ordain him; is it then a sin for him to preach till he is satisfied with their
power?

Counter-Query.

Seeing Approbationers preach in relation to an Office, ought not others to be
accounted rather intruders, than Approbationers? But if truly Approbationers
ought they to preach any longer than till approved? can you think Ministers
would approve him to be in Office, that owned not their power to ordain him?
does he preach by virtue of the Ministers consent in relation to an Office,
that owns not their power? but rather as a gifted brother, and a transgressour
of the Gospel Order and Institution? How can you be satisfied with the power
of the Church to ordain? had it been the Churches work, why did not the Apostle
enjoin the Romans, Corinthians, Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians,
Thessalanions, to ordain Ministers rather than Timothy and Titus? If it be as
you say, why did he mention it at all to these Ministers, Timothy and Titus?
and why is he quite silent of it to the Churches in all those Epistles, if it
be not rather the Ministers work than the Churches?

Query 7.

How if a man be gifted and enabled to preach the Gospel to edification and
comfort, and yet finds himself very short of a power to rule the Church of God
as that Office requires, or it may be wants faithful Children, such as are not
accused of riot; it may be he has not power over his passion, but may be
soon angry, etc. which are those qualifications that Paul tells Timothy and
Titus MUST be found in such officers: See 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. Tit. 1.6, 7. I quere
from hence, whether a man should sin to use those gifts (God has blessed him
withal) out of Office, because he has not all those qualifications that are
required, before he be admitted to Office?

Counter-Query.

Are you not bound, ere there will be any strength in this Query, to show by
some law that a man may exercise a part of that office with which he is not
invested? is not your Query in short this? If one be fit for part of the
office, but not for the whole; if fit to preach, but not to rule, why may he
not exercise that he is fit for out of office? I answer from the same place, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3. what if one be the Husband of many Wives? what if given to Wine, a
mere drunkard, and so is unfit to be admitted to office? why may he not
exercise his gift of preaching, if God has blessed him with it? why does His
Highness turn such out? why may not ignorant, yea prophan persons, that may be
fit to rule in your Church at least for some acts of government do that they
are able, or fit for? these Queries have the same foundation with yours. Again,
ought you not to prove that preaching is not an act of the Ministerial Office?
2 Or that acts of Office may be performed by him that has not that office? 3
Or that acts of Office may be communicated? 4 Yea and that where the whole
Office it self ought not to be-conferred? when you were a soldier you left off
box-making, when a Cheesmonger, souldiering; and is not this Query one ground
why since you were a pretended Minister (as it is reported) you may excuse your
self from what acts of this Office you please, and take the liberty of being a
Chees-monger still?

Query 8.

And whereas you say it is a sin for people to hear such as are not ordained,
except as before excepted, I quere,

Whether there is any Law of God broken when I hear the truth of Christ
preached by any that are not ordained? if so, show me where that Law is to be
found?

Counter-Query.

As to your Query concerning the peoples sin in hearing unordained men. I Quere,

If he that preaches sins in usurping that act of the Ministerial Office,
then do not they sin that shall wittingly and willingly submit to this
usurpation in hearing? if he has no lawful call to preach, Romans 10.15. can
they have a lawful call to hear? is not the receiver as bad as the thief?

Query 9.

Whether or no Apollos did not preach the Gospel, as is recorded? Act. 18.24,
25, 26, 27, 28. publicly and frequently; and whether he could he an Officer
of the Church at that time, seeing he knew ONLY the baptism of John, or was
not acquainted with the baptism of the Spirit? therefore pray show us that he
was at this time an Officer, or else that he preached for approbation to it,
or that he preached by virtue of any necessity. By virtue of necessity he did
not preach: for, there were able Christians before, such as the Text says did
instruct him. And if he preached at this time as an Officer, or for
approbation thereunto, pray show how that appears.

Counter-Query.

Ought you not to have answered what Dr. Seaman, Mr. Gilespy, Chemnitius, etc.
have answered to this? is it not the part of an unwise man to ask that which
has been so often answered without the least show of a new cause of
dissatisfaction? shall we not suppose you intended to seduce the Vulgar that
read not books? But not to shun your strength: Is this a good Argument?

Apollos taught in a Jewish Synagogue, where we read of but two Christians
Aquila and Priscilla, and those Paul brought with him; therefore a gifted
brother may teach in our Christian Congregations?

Can a particular example in a Church not constituted be a rule for ordinary
practice in a Church constituted? Again, is it not evident that Apollos was in
Office, and therefore called a Minister? 1 Cor. 3.5. therefore to sift it more
narrowly, how will you prove Apollos not to be in Office?

1 Must you not prove either that he was no Priest? for they were the ordinary
Teachers in the Synagogues; or that he had not given any testimony to the Jews
that he was a Prophet, for these likewise had that liberty (had they not such
apprehensions of Christ and his Apostles, because of their miracles?) or else
are you not bound to show upon what account besides, the Jews let him teach in
the Synagogue? was he not thus in Office?

2 Must you not prove that John did not authorize him to teach, if he was not
acquainted, as you say, with the Baptism of the Spirit, if he had not those
Gospel gifts that not only enabled, but stirred up men to preach, if he was
not informed of such a duty or work? if likewise you consider how suddenly he
undertook it as his duty without any solicitations; is it not very probable
he was sent by John? and if so, must you not prove that John's mission to
Apollos was not as vallid as his Baptism to Christ; was he not thus in Office?

3 Ought you not to prove, that there was no necessity which we both agree is
sufficient to authorize? As 1 Was there any constituted organical Church, and
Officers in it to preach? 2 Or was the Apostolical institution as yet practiced
there? 3 Or were any there to ordain him? 4 Or did he know of such a thing to
be had from the Apostles, or others? 5 Was there not need and a way open to
teach? was not here evident necessity then if all, or but some of these stand?
if so, did he preach as a mere gifted Brother?

4 How will you prove that even then he was not called, or in office, when you
consider these particulars?

1 It Is very certain he was in Office. For, 1 Can you deny but that he did
the work of an Evangelist in watering those Churches Paul had planted? 1 Cor.
3.6. and that he was to have been sent by Paul, as Timothy was, 1 Cor. 16.12. 2
Was not his worth and name the head of a faction, as was Paul's, I am of Paul, I
of Apollos, etc. 1 Cor. 1.12. was he then an ordinary gifted brother? 3 Is he
not called in express terms a Minister, and that in the same sense that Paul
was? 1 Cor. 3.5. He was an Officer then sure.
2 Do you ever find he had any call to this Office after his preaching here?
Act. 18.24, 25. if so, show it I pray. 3 Do not these things prove that he was
in Office now? 1 Why did not Aquila teach then, and rather than Apollos? for
though Apollos was eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures, yet Aquila taught
him, verse 26. give then any rational account why Apollos rather preached than
Aquila; if it were not because Apollos was in Office, and Aquila not; surely
Apollos being so ignorant, his eloquence could not make him more fit to teach
than Aquila's knowledge of the Gospel. 2 Was it not upon this account of his
Office that the brethren in Achaia are written to, to receive him to help them,
v. 27. especially if you compare it with Mat. 10.40, 41. -- Where you see that
such receiving is put for owning as an Officer? 3 Why may we not say that his
HELPING them which believed THROUGH GRACE; hinteth to us his Office and Call?
for thus the word signifies, Romans 1.5. and 15.15. 1 Cor, 3.10. All these
things lie upon you to consider ere you can evince that this particular Example
may be an exception to that positive institut ion; ad more must be said ere
you can make this particular instance a foundation for the constant and
ordinary practice of unordained men?

Query 10.

It is said, Mal. 3.16. that THEY that feared the Lord, SPOKE OFTEN one to
another, etc. And Heb. 10.25. It is required that we should not forsake the
assembling of our selves together, but exhort one another daily, etc. where by
the light of these Texts it does not appear, 1 That Gods people ought to meet
often together. 2 That they may and ought to exhort one another, being thus
assembled. 3 Whether by one another we are not to understand any one that has
a word or gift of Exhortation, as well such as are no Officers, as those that
are?

Counter-Query.

Does this Text, Mal. 3.16. and Heb. 10.25. prove any authoritative act of
preaching to be done by unordained men? where is one such word or rational
consequence? do not you know that we acknowledge Christians ought to meet
together, to edify one another in mutual exhortations? but ought it not be
done according to Gospel order and rule?

Query 11.

Is it not written, Romans 2.1, 2. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art that judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self: for thou that judge do the same things. Verse 3. And
think thou this, O man, that judge them that do such things, and do the
same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God? Verse 22. Thou that
abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege?

Whether by the light of these Scriptures, your darkness is not discovered, who
told the people how sinful and dangerous it was to hear such as Mr. Brooks;
when your self has heard him once and again? And whether all the excuses that
you have for such a practice, will not be arguments to justify others, as
well as you? And since you cried the hearing of such men down, as a general
evil, without any exception; pray tell me (let your pretense in hearing be
what it will) how can you do evil that good may come? And whether, by the same
pretense that you can make to hear Mr. Brooks (if to hear him be sinful, which
is not yet proved) any man may not hear in an Idols Temple, or eat meat in an
Idols temple, and so cause his weak brother to be emboldened in his way, and
make him to perish for whom Christ dyed, contrary to that in 1 Cor. 8.10, 11.

Counter-Query.

Though the people are not called to hear him that is not called to preach,
Romans 10.14, with 15. how shall they hear without a sent-Preacher? yet may not
Mr. Wills be called to correct him that is not called to preach? is he not
called to that very place to instruct and teach? is he not bound to convince
gainsayers then? and is he not bound to hear therefore that he may convince
them? has any of the Congregation such a Call as this? may not a Captain, even
while his troop is marching up against an enemy, go out of his rank to view the
enemy, when it is death to a common soldier? ought not the sheep to run away
from the Wolf, yet the Shepherd may stand him, and pursue? May not a Physician
go to one sick of the Plague, yet it will be a tempting of providence for
others to do it? Has not the Minister a better Call to pluck up tares, than
the people to receive them? But is not this a slander you lay upon Mr. Wills?
or do you remember the reasons of his dehortation?

Query 12.

It is said, Heb. 5.12. That when for the time ye OUGHT to be Teachers, etc.
I query from hence, Whether here is not a Duty required, and whether the Duty
be not Teaching? Again, whether the persons that the Text says, OUGHT to
teach, were not members out of Office? If so, then I query, whether that this
Teaching might not as lawfully have been performed in public Assemblies, as in
private Families: Since neither this, nor any other Text makes the one any more
unlawful than the other; provided, they have abilities to the one as well as to
the other.

Counter-Query.

Is there in the 5. of the Heb. 12. the least ground for gifted brethrens
teaching? if they ought to be Teachers, ought it not to be according to the
Gospel rule? Masters of families to their families, Ministers to their
Congregations? But consider, that this Text is meant either that they ought to
be able to be Teachers, or to be actually Teachers; if it speak of only the
ability and power, it is nothing to your purpose, yet much to the Apostles, who
would shame them for their ignorance that had opportunity enough to be more
knowing: this sense may be probable. 1 Does he not plainly blame their
ignorance under such means of knowledge; because they were not capable of hard
things, Verse 11. so that it is a reproof that they could not understand those
mysteries he would tell them; not that they were not Teachers? 2 Had they been
such Teachers as they ought, had they not been receivers of strong meat, verse.
12. not stewards to provide it for others? 2 But if you say it is meant of
being actually Teachers; you must prove it first, and secondly, That it is not
meant of private teaching in families, etc. but if without reason you will say
it is meant of actually public teaching, you must prove it ere we shall
believe you; is not this spoke in general to all the Jewish Christians? women
are not excepted, and ought they to be teachers? 2 If all the Jewish Church
ought to be actually public teachers, do not they sin in your Church, that
are not so? tell them the next time, as indefinitely as the Text is, all you my
Church sin if you do not all actually practice public preaching? if all the
Church ought to be a tongue, where will the hearing be?

Query 13.

It is said, 1 Cor. 14.1. Follow after charity, and desire spiritual gifts; but
rather that ye may PROPHECY, etc. compare this Verse with the 24. but if ALL
prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, etc. and Verse 31. Ye may
ALL prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted.

From these Texts I query, whether that this was a prophesying by Gift or
Office? if it shall be said, it was by Office; then I query, whether it was by
ordinary or extraordinary Office? If it shall be said, That it was by
extraordinary Office, then it follows, That the Apostle exhorted the whole
Church, to covet after extraordinary Offices, when he exhorted them to follow
after charity, and desire spiritual gifts, but rather that THEY might
PROPHECY, v. 1.

Counter-Query.

Is this to ask a Question for conscience sake, when you will not take notice
of what Answers have been given unto this, as well as other Queries? is it not
vainglory to make the world believe that the London Ministers in their jus
Divinum Min. chapter 6. from p. 95. to 103. that Mr. Collins in his vindication,
Min. from p. 49. to 56. that Mr. Thomas Hall, p. 56, to 59. and many others who
writ concerning this Text, have done nothing worthy Mr. Ives his regard of it?

1 Is not an extraordinary Call by extraordinary gifts such an authority from
God, that no ordinary gifted brother as such may presume to have?

2 Were not these in 1 Cor. 14 thus extraordinarily called? 3 Were they not
expressly called Prophets, which is an Office (improperly so called) pro tempore:

4 You may all prophecy; can this be meant of any but Prophets? is it an
argument then for gifted brethren? but you say: then were all the Church
exhorted to covet after extraordinary Offices. Answ. The word Office here is
somewhat improper; again, it was but temporary; and well may it be said, that
they all ought to seek after these extraordinary gifts which thus qualified
them: when a Judges place falls, all the Sergeants in Town may lawfully seek
for it, though all cannot obtain it; God had promised such gifts, and ought
they not to seek for them?

Query 14

If it shall be said that prophesying here was an ordinary Office; then it
follows, That the whole Church are exhorted to covet to be ordinary Officers:
which would be, to make the whole Body of Christ monstrous. If it shall be
said, That they were not exhorted to prophecy, as extraordinary, or as
ordinary Offices; Then I query, whether they were not to do it as gifted
Brethren? since we never heard of any other way.

Counter-Query.

This Query is worth nothing; only I query, why may not your whole Church covet
to be all ordinary Officers, as well as to be preaching gifted brethren? if
because it is monstrous to have so many ruling heads, is it not as monstrous to
have as many speaking tongues in the body of Christ?

Query 15.

Whereas you say, That none ought to preach, but those that are ordained,
except as before excepted: I query: Among those several Ordinations that are in
Christendom, which of those, whether some one of them, or all of them, be
that which Christ approves of? If you say, All of them; and that the errors of
the Administrators in some Circumstances, does not make the Ordination a
Nullity?

Counter-Query.

1 Is not this the essential of Ordination; viz. a setting apart Men to the
Ministry by Ministers? 2 Is not this the purity of it, viz. when fit persons
are duly set apart by Gospel Ministers, in that Gospel way, and for those
Gospel ends a Ministry is appointed, there being no superstitious corruption
accompanying this Ordinance? 3 May there not be some circumstantial
differences even among those that practice this purity in this Ordinance? 4 May
we not say then that all the Ordinations in Christendom are approved by
Christ that differ but thus circumstantially, as well as men of opinions
different in many things are accepted by him?

Query 16.

Whether one may not by this Opinion, be lawfully ordained at Rome?

Counter-Query.

1 Dare you say that Rome observes that Gospel purity in this Ordinance? 2
Though the substance may be there, yet is it not exceeding sinful NOW for US to
submit to their impurities? Considering that these three things only excuse in
errors circumstantial? 1 When the error is so slight, that it is no prejudice
to the substance, nor does engage to other pernicious errors? does not
Ordination among the Papists do this? does it not oblige to obedience to, and
Mission by that Autichristian See? (Note that the cases following excuse when
this cannot be pleaded.) 2 When a sincere aim at the substance is accompanied
with ignorance of the errors in circumstance; can we plead ignorance of the
errors of Rome? or shall we say that man has a sincere aim that shall go
thither to submit to it NOW? 3 When a case of necessity is, viz. 1 When we are
bound to have the Ordinance its self. 2 And when it cannot be elsewhere had
but with these errors and impurities. 3 Or when greater evils than those
errors would follow. Is this our case NOW with Rome? though Preachers are
bound to submit to that Ordinance of Ordination, yet can they not have it else
where than at Rome in more purity? Answer, Sir, Is it not in more purity done
by the Ministers in England, than by those at Rome?

Query 17.

If you shall say, The Protestant-Ordination is lawful, and that only; then I
query, which of those, whether the Episcopal, Presbyterian or Independent
Ordination, be that which is approved by Christ to empower the Ministers to
preach? since all these are Protestants, and greatly differ in this thing.

Counter-Query.

Do you not easily see by what has been said, that the Protestant Ordination
only is acknowledged to be lawful to us NOW? Do you not as easily see the
Episcopal, Presbyterian, and the most sober independent Ministers, own the
essence of this Ordinance, viz. that it is a setting apart men to the Ministry
by Ministers? 2 That they practice the purity by setting apart fit men in a
Gospel way, for those Gospel ends a Ministry is appointed, without
superstitious intermixtures? 3. Ought we not then to say that ordination by
all or any of them is approved by Christ, and true Christians to empower
Ministers to preach, notwithstanding they may differ in some circumstantials?

Query 18.

If you say, All of these are lawful; then were not the Ministers of the
Episcopal way greatly out, in crying up the Ordination by Bishops to be the
only Authoritative Ordination, in opposition to that of the Presbytery? And
that they did so, will appear, if you consult Dr. Jer. Tailor, Chaplain to the
late King, in his Book called Episcopacy asserted, page 120, 121, 122. It is
clear (says he) that Bishops were to do some Acts which the Presbyters COULD
NOT do; one of which he calls Ordination by imposition of hands, which he
says was not to be done by Presbyters. Again, the said Doctor says, That the
Apostles did impose Hands for confirmation, which (says he) was to continue
in the Church; and could not be done by the seventy, or any MERE Presbyter.
And for this he cites the constant practice of the Fathers, and the Opinions
of diverse Churches. Therefore pray tell me if this be that Ordination which a
man must have, without which his Preaching is sinful?

Counter-Query.

Is it not unchristian to charge the error of one man (though a worthy man)
upon the rest of the Episcopal way? is it not evident that the most of them
judged themselves to ordain as Ministers, and not as mere Bishops? Does not Mr.
Baxter say in his second sheet, that Bishop Usher did acknowledge Ordination by
Presbyters without a Bishop to be vallid, and that he answered King Charles by
an instance that Hierom and Evag. tells us of? viz. that the Presbyters of
Alexandria, till the days of Heroclas, and Dionysius took one from among
themselves, and made him a Bishop; therefore they may make Presbyters which is
less; were not the Bishops wont to have Presbyters to join with them in this
work? Has not a sheet of this Reverend Bishops written for accommodation at
the Isle of Wight, hinted this to be his judgment? Ask the more moderate
Presbyterians if they could not close with it? Has not the Rubric told us,
that Bishops ordained as Presbyters? Doctor Pride. in his Fasciculus therefore
subscribes himself in the Epistle Dedicatory, Episcopus vester and
sympresbyter; Does not the Vindication of the Ministry by the London Ministers
bring abundant testimony of this? Lastly, ask the most rigid Episcopal man in
England, and try if he will not say, that Ministers ordained by Presbyters are
more lawfully Ministers than those that have a pretended Ordination from
Churches?

Query 19.

Again, if you say, All or any the forementioned Ordinations be lawful, then
how vain a thing was it for the Presbyterians, to throw down the Government
of Episcopacy? Why did they not rather reform it, than cashiere it, seeing it
was a power by which Ministers might have been authorized to preach, according
to Gods Ordinance?

Counter-Query.

Do you go on still to your unchristian charges, whereby you would not only
lay injustice, but blood upon the heads of Presbyterians? Dare you assert,
speak out, that the Presbyterians did throw down the Government of Episcopacy
merely for this error in Ordination? Was this the only reason of such sad
miseries? May we not more safely say the Anabaptistical spirits (which usually
are bloody, witness those in Germany) egged on to ruin whilst only Reformation
was intended? Did not they make the civil wounds turn to fatal deaths? Did not
they blow up that unbrotherly fire, which might have been timely quenched, into
a destroying flame, and then with joy warmed their hands at it?

Query 20.

If the Bishops, as Bishops, had this lawful Power, when did any Power from
Christ divest them?

Counter-Query.

If Bishops not as Bishops, but as Ministers had this lawful power, may we not
be confident that Christ has not divested those that are lawfully Ministers of
this Power? we will never so far distrust his promise, as to doubt but he
will be with them to the end of the world Matthew. 28.20.

Query 21.

If Episcopal Authority were of God, as the Bishops pretend, why may not a man
lawfully go still to them for Ordination, in case this Authority was never
taken from them in an Ecclesiastical way?

Counter-Query.

1 Can that Authority which is founded upon the Word of God, be taken from any
in an Ecclesiastical way? What do you mean?

2 Is not this Episcopal authority of Ordaining as Ministers founded on the
Word?

3 Can the contrary opinion either of the Ordainer, or the Ordained, null this
lawful authority?

4 May not a man lawfully go to them, if they will Ordain as Ministers?

5 If not, ought he not in conscience, since no necessity binds now to the
contrary, take it where it is more purely administered?

Query 22.

If you say, That both Presbyterian and Episcopal Ordination is lawful; then I
query, whether that Christ ever erected two ways of Ordination of Ministers,
one contrary to the other, and yet both lawful? for such is the state of
Episcopacy and Presbytery in England; one says, that the Presbytery has no
power to ordain, the other says they have.

Counter-Query.

Is not both Episcopal and Presbyterian Ordination the same as to the
substance, as is already hinted, and as esteemed lawful the same as to purity,
only differing in Circumstances? How irrational then, and me thinks, if Logic
be rational, illogical is it to say there is contrariety where there is but one
thing, viz. Ordination by Ministers? Surely only two distinct things can be
called contraries: Must you not bring better Arguments the next time to prove
this, then to say, because some Circumstances differ, therefore there is a
contrariety, etc. because Episcopal and Presbyterian Ministers contradict one
another, therefore Ordination by each is contrary each to other? If there be
such an essential agreement, and only a circumstantial difference, what reason
then for such a Query, whether did Christ erect two ways of Ordination?

Query 23.

If it is that Ordination that is among the Independents, then we have that we
run for; then if one have their suffrage and Ordination, and this be lawful
(which I think you will not say) then wherein is Master Brooks in this to be
condemned?

Counter-Query.

Have you urged any thing yet that should force us to own any Ordination among
Independents but what is according to the Gospel-rule, viz. by Ministers? Would
you make the world believe you run for Independancy? Are you not past it, and
got to Anabaptisme? Would you not feign have this as a cloak, that your
design may be the more plausible? Or is it that you tun for the defense of Mr.
Brooks only? Must we not necessarily hence suspect either that Mr. Brooks, or
his Church were staggered, and that they got you to be their Patron? or that
you were guilty of presumption, by intruding into their Cause uncalled?

Query 24.

Again, If you say, That Ordination by the Presbytery is the only Ordination;
then where was an Ordination to be had in England thirty years ago?

Counter-Query.

Since Ordination, as I have said, is by Ministers, were there not true and
lawful Ministers in England thirty years ago? Do you think so easily by your
Sophistry to persuade us there cannot be a true Ministry under the name of
Episcopacy and Presbytery? As if Bishops thirty years ago could not be true
Ministers, and Ordain true Ministers? or as if Presbyters now cannot be true
Ministers, nor ordain true Ministers? prove this by the next.

Query 25.

Is it not very strange that you should tell the people they sin, in hearing
those that are not Ordained, when you never tell them, whether you mean any
Ordination may serve, nor what Ordination of those diverse kinds it is that God
approves of?

Counter-Query.

How Mr. Ives! dare you thus charge Mr. Wills? either you heard him all his
Sermons there or not, if not, how durst you say that he never told the people
what Ordination he meant? If you did hear him, then, how dare you falsely charge
him with that, that hundreds of people can witness against? Did he not
publicly declare that they ought to hear none but Ministers ordained by
Ministers, and that he was rigidly neither for the aforesaid Independancy,
Presbytery, or Episcopacy, but for a moderation, seeing they differ in this but
circumstantially? and that he held Ordination performed by Ministers of any of
these three ways to be valid and good. Be not a Talebearer, and take not up
a false report against thy Neighbor.

Query 26.

Since you say, That none ought to preach, but they must be Ordained, except
as before excepted; then I query, whether your Ordination be derived from the
Line of Succession, or whether it had its Original from Necessity, because such
an Ordination by Succession could not be had? This Question is grounded,
partly upon what you preached, partly upon what you granted me at your House,
viz. That where it cannot be had from a lawful successive power, there a man
may lawfully officiate in the Office of the Ministry without it, and that
because he is put upon it through necessity. Since therefore (you say) there is
but these two ways by which a man may be justified in preaching, or the poeple
in hearing; I query now (as I did at your House) by which of these two ways
came you into the Ministry? for you told us, That none could pretend to
Necessity, when it might be had by Succession.

Counter-Query.

Do not you grant, 1 That a true Succession makes true Ministers? 2 That where
Succession is broken off, there is a case of necessity? 3 That such a case of
Necessity (to which a positive Law gives place) makes true Ministers? Is not
here then an unanswerable Argument, that the present Ministry of England are
true and lawful Ministers, because the first Reformers were such from whom they
received it? For,

If the true Line of Succession was quite broke off, then the first Reformers
were true Ministers by a case of necessity;

If the true Line of Succession was not broke off, then they were true
Ministers by Succession; so that if the first Reformers must needs be true
Ministers, then these likewise must needs be so that received it from them.

Sir, I challenge you to answer this Argument by the next; don't you miserably
shuffle off answering by propounding Queries? and do the following Queries any
way answer the Argument? If your Queries prove there were no Succession
evidently, there was a Necessity; or if they prove no Necessity, must there not
needs be a Succession? Are not therefore your Queries to the Fortieth to no
purpose? But to follow you.

Query 27.

If you say, By Succession, then surely you succeed from Rome; if so, then I
query, whether the Church of Rome was the Spouse of Christ, and her Ministry
and Ordinances the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ, when your Predecessors
received their Ordination from them? if so, then,

Counter-Query.

Why may there not be a lawful Succession from the Apostles by Rome? If you say
a Necessity and Succession cannot be consistent at the same time, because if
there be a Necessity there can be no Succession, and if a Succession, no
Necessity; then I query, whether though there be not an absolute Necessity of
the susception of the Office without Ordination, when an Ordination may be
had; yet there may not be so far a necessity as to make valid an impurer
Ordination, when no better can be had? for as much as the essentialls of
Ordination may remain, notwithstanding circumstantial corruptions?

Consider 1 Have not Ordinances their foundation upon the Word of God? do they
not consist in a conformity to the Divine institution? 2 Has Ordination any
dependence as to its essence upon the opinions or practices of men whilst they
hold this conformity as to the substance of the Ordinance? 3 Can then the
corruptions either of Receiver or of Dispenser null this Ordinance of
Ordination? If the corruption of the first Popish corrupt Receivers, or the
corruptions of the Popish Dispensers of it, could not null this Ordinance, then
there was a true succession of it, and the Papists could not break off this
succession, either in their receiving or giving, and therefore it was truly
handed down to our first Reformers. I shall therefore prove,

1 That the corruptions of the first corrupt receivers, that first received
this Ordinance from the Apostles or their successors, that did purely
administer it, could not null this Ordinance, or break off this line of
succession: If because we are corrupt and unholy the Ordinances are no
Ordinances, then Gods Ordinance depends upon man's holiness: so that if all the
world in a sense should be corrupt, God should have no Laws or Ordinances in
the world? then you may well recant your Book against the Quakers, and tell us
now that we must look to our light and holiness within, more than to the word
of God. If so, then, every time any of your Rebaptized ones proves corrupt, or
is guilty of any backslidings is drunk, etc. he has nulled his Baptism, and
must be baptized again over and over as often as he sins; or if the
corruption of the receiver nulled an Ordinance, then none could be guilty of
abusing Ordinances, because his corruption makes it to be no Ordinance; Then
none can be guilty of the body and blood of Christ in receiving the Lords
Supper, for if he be worthy, he is not guilty, if unworthy, then he is
corrupt, and (if the former principle be true) the Sacrament is nulled, and it
represents not the body and blood of Christ: But S. Paul hints that the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is an Ordinance to one that is a corrupt
receiver, and therefore he is guilty of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor.
11, 27. Because a man's a villain, a rogue, etc. may he not therefore have
justice from the Law against him that would rob him of Land that he has a
true title to? can the corruption of the receiver null the Law? was that
miracle of Christ's not to be esteemed a mercy, because bestowed upon
ungrateful blind men? does it not appear then that the succession was not
broke by the corruption of the first corrupt receivers?

2 The corruptions of the corrupt dispensers of it, viz. of Popish Priests
could not break this line of succession: A Judge probably may deserve to be
hanged for bribery and injustice, does therefore the Law lose its force,
because pronounced by such a one? Suppose Judas had baptized one while he was
a traitor in his heart, had it been no Baptism? Suppose that one of your
Rebaptizers or Dippers was an errant Hypocrite, Deceiver, etc. was whatever he
had done nulled, and must all be dipped again? if this Opinion be true, can we
ever be assured that we have true Ordinances? if the Minister that dispenses
it be corrupt, it is no Ordinance, and can I search his heart? or know his
head and opinions? Is not this a sad case and condition for Christ to leave his
Spouse in? Is not this to make the Ordinances man's, and not God's? If I am
assured the Proclamation comes from the supreme Magistrate, am I not bound to
obey it, though it be read by a Rebel, if sent to do it? shall gold be gold,
though in a dunghill, and shall the Ordinances of God, those rare Jewels, not
only lose their lusty, but essence because in wicked hands? Ordinancess have
their foundation on the word, and therefore depend not upon the corruption or
holiness of any man. Reader, now Judge; If the corruption of the corrupt Popish
receivers of Ordination, and the corruption of the corrupt Popish dispensers of
it ever since could not break off the line of succession, because it has not
its foundation in men, but in the Word of God: then our first Reformers must
needs be true Ministers by succession? and the present Ministry of England
true, as having received it from them: Are not the Ordinances and Ministry of
Rome, the Ministry and Ordinances of Christ so far as they are according to the
Word?

Object. But may you say, this is it I wish for, then my sixteenth Query is not
answered, may we not go lawfully then to Rome to be ordained?

A. View my sixteenth Counter-Query. 1 Dare you say it is lawful to submit to
such corruptions that lead to Popery? 2 Since we know it? 3 And that there is
no necessity for it, but it may be had purer here? was not this an
unpardonable sin in the Israelites, to offer Sacrifice under every green tree,
when there was a Temple to Sacrifice in? Remember therefore these things; 1
That Ordination is an Ordinance founded upon the Word. 2 That the corruption of
Receivers or Dispensers cannot null it. 3 That our first Reformers were
lawfully ordained by the corrupt Popish Bishops, because it was a case of
ignorance or necessity. 4 That it is exceeding sinful and unlawful to receive
Ordination NOW, from Popish Bishops, because no such excuse.

A second Argument, to prove the line of succession not to be broke.

Since Christianity was professed, can you say there were not a company of true
Believers, a Church for so many years that England was under Popery? If there
was a Church, then she had Ministers or not; if no Ministers, what became of
that promise, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. that the Saints shall have a Ministry till
they come to a perfect man, etc. If there was a true Ministry, then they were
ordained ones, or unordained ones; If ordained ones, we have that we run for,
viz. that the line of succession was not broke off; if unordained ones, show us
it where they preached, in what Church, who they were; give us an instance in
one, during all that time.

Query 28.

Whether the Church of Rome was not as good a Church when your Predecessors
left her, as she was when they received Ordination from her, which was but a
little before?

Counter-Query.

Probably she was as good, what then? we left her not as she was the Spouse
of Christ, but as she was an Harlot; we left not her Ordinances as they were
Christ's, but her corruptions and Idolatries.

Query 29.

If you shall say, Here was a succession of British Ministers in England
before the Papal Power had to do here, or before Gregory the Pope sent Austine
the Monk to convert the Saxons then I query, whether all those Ministers were
not brought into subjection to the Papal Power, and so were swallowed up in the Sea of Rome? If not, then,

Counter-Query.

Does not Gildas report of a Ministry in England before Austin the Monk was
sent over? Might there not then be thousands that had not bowed the knee to
Baal, 1 King. 19.14. and we not know of it?

Query 30.

Whether there was any Succession of a true Church in England, who were
separated from the Church of Rome? if there was, show us where that Church was
all the time the Papal Power was exercised here, and who were they that
governed it; and also how your Ordination proceeded from this reformed, rather
than from the Papal Line.

Counter-Query.

If as before, might not there be a Succession from such, and we not know of
it? Is not God wont to make his own ways to flourish most, though many times
secretly? ought you not to believe that God has ordered all for the best? it
is more becoming us to wonder at, then search, admire, then sound, the secret
works of God.

Query 31.

If you say, It came from Rome, and not from that presupposed Succession; then
I query, if Rome was a little before Henry the Eights time entrusted with the
Administration of Christ's Ordinances, as a Church of Christ, whether it was not
your sin to leave her as a cage of every unclean thing?

Counter-Query.

But if it came from Rome, and the sacred Ordinances of God were there, may not
Rome notwithstanding be accounted a cage of every unclean thing? what if a
thief has a Bible in his pocket, is he not therefore a thief? can the
possession of Ordinances make holy? Then never a Minister can be an unholy
man. If Rome was unclean, notwithstanding those Ordinances (as indeed she was)
ought we not then to depart from her corruptions, Numb. 16.37. the Censers of
Korah, and his company, wherein they burned incense to the Lord, were holy, yet
the Israelites were to separate from them, that they might be destroyed.

Query 32.

If you say truly of her (as indeed you do) that she was the cage of every
unclean thing; how then could she dispense at that time so sacred an
Ordinance, as Ordination of Gospel Ministers is by you judged to be?

Counter-Query.

Is it not strange that you ask such a Query and not show any reason why? Why
could she not dispense such a sacred Ordinance as Ordination, notwithstanding
her uncleanenesse? Must those accounts in your Book, which you know to be just
and right be nulled, and may others disowne their debts there, because through
the fault of your Boy, they are naughtily written, or blotted and blurred?
would you serve God as you would not be served?

Query 33.

If you say, She had power as a Church, and you did separate because of her
corruptions, that you might serve the Lord with more purity; then I query,
whether you are not guilty of that evil your self (if yet it be an evil) which
you charge upon Mr. Brooks in separating from the halt and maimed?

Counter-Query.

If we say she had power as a Church, why did you not disprove it? For if
she was a Church, then her Ministers were true Ministers, though corrupt, and
the Succession was not broken off. To what end then have all your former
Queries been? Reader, thou may be the more convinced, that the Line of
Succession was not broke, because the adversary yields up his own weapons; thus
thou may see he has more of subtlety to puzzle, than of strength to
convince. But Sir, do you think by your yielding to draw us into ambush, that
Mr. Brooks may separate as well from the halt and maimed, as we from Papists?
consider, either he acknowledged his Parishioners of Margarets-New-Fish-street
to be a Church, or not; if not,

1 Must he not condemn then Mr. Froysell and other godly Ministers that have
acknowledged them a Church, and upon that account were their Ministers, and
gave them the Sacrament?

2 Must he not prove that such a company of believers that have been baptized,
and thereby admitted Members of a Visible Church, that will still publicly own
this Baptism; that were never cast out by any Church Censures, are not a
Visible Church, to whom belongs all the Ordinances?

3 Did not he himself acknowledge such as these are to be the matter of a
Church (though the former particular proves them actually a Church) to use his
own words? Is it not then his duty, either to convince them that they are not
believers, that they are scandalous by evident proofs from their lives? (which
he never did, yea before he knew them he disclaimed them; yea in a Book
called Pills to PURGE Malignants, etc. he unchristianly branded them with vile
Names, and this as he confesses before he knew them: O sad! was this to come
as an Ambassador of Christ among them?) or else if he cannot, is it not his
very great sin to see stones and timber fit for a spiritual building, and not
to build them up to be a Church of Christ? much more must he not be
accountable for plucking down, and endeavoring not to leave one stone upon
another in that which is already a Church of Christ?

4 Or must he not prove that some corruptions unchurch them? Were not the
Corinthians some carnal? 1 Cor. 3.3. some proud? 1 Cor. 4.18. did not some go
to law before the unjust? chapter 6.1. were not some defrauders? chapter 6.8. some
drunken, chapter 11.21. some unworthy receivers, chapter 11.27, 28, 29. some ignorant
of God, and of the resurrection? 1 Cor. 15.34, 35. yet the Corinthians were a
Church for all this, as Mr. Wills urged. Thus some of the seven Churches of
Asia were corrupt, yet were styled Churches still, Rev. 3.14, 15. some of the
Church of Pergamos held the doctrine of Balaam, and of the Nicolaitans;
Thyatira, v. 20. suffered the woman Jezebel to seduce. The Laodiceans were
luke-war me, etc.

2 But if his Parishioners be a Church; I query, whether does he separate
from them as a Church, or as corrupt?

If as a Church, is it not an horrid schism, such as the Protestants justly
plead not guilty of to the Papists? or ought he not to let this company of
Visible Saints to enjoy their own means and meeting place, that they may get to
themselves a Minister that shall give them the Ordinances? How dares he in
conscience hinder a Church of Christ from uniting, and from enjoying his
Ordinances which he has left for it? How will he answer it at the day of
judgment before Christ? Ought not his own Church (as he calls them) to have
a meeting place of their own, and not to rob these of their liberty? How durst
he thrust himself upon a flock to sheere the fleeces, but will not be their
Shepherd? But if he separate only from their corruptions to make your Query
sound any thing, ought he not to show his Parishioners that they be guilty of
such corruptions as made us separate from Rome? The Papists worship Saints, and
Images, and make more Mediators than one: These and more I can make evident
upon proof; can Mr. Brooks evidently prove his Parishioners to be guilty of
these or such like corruptions? do you read of any that ever suffered so great
a Church-punishment (as being kept from the Ordinances is) unless first there
were conviction of a notorious scandal? 2 Brotherly admonitions, Matthew. 18.15,
16, 17, 18. 3 And a casting out by Church Censures, 1 Cor. 5. Again, could
there have been any Corruptions in that Church but through his neglect? For,
has he not power upon evident conviction to keep back the scandalous? I say,
upon evident conviction, for God never intended his Ministers should search the
hearts of men, as to say they are formal and wicked, and censure their hearts,
when they can evidently prove nothing from their lives? Is it not likewise his
duty to instruct the ignorant? Is he not bound in charity to judge all others
to be true visible Christians? How then can he plead that he separates from
that Church because of her corruptions, seeing it is his duty, and in his
power, according to the Rules of the Gospel, to have reformed it? Will not
these Schisms and separations lie heavy at his door and yours? Ought you not
to clear your selves to the world?

Query 34.

Whether it has not been common for those of your way, to separate from the
Papists, and yet take their Tithes, and (to use your own phrase) sheer those
lame and diseased Sheep, which you have denied to admit into the Fold with you?

Counter-Query.

Are not Tithes settled in Parishes for the maintenance of those that take the
care and charge of those Parishes? Does not therefore the Tithes belong to
those of Master Wills his way, that take this charge? Does Mr. Brooks do
thus? Does he not declare that he takes no more charge of the Parish as their
Minister than of any other? Do those of Mr. Wills his way deny the Papists
any thing that is their right and due? Has not the Church debarred them from
communion with us? Is it not equity then they should not deny their due? Does
Master Brooks do thus? When were his Parishioners cut off from Church
Communion? how, or by whom? Have not those of Mr. Wills his way the consent of
those Parishes they take the charge, from whom they require their maintenance?
But has not Mr. Brooks unworthily crowded in by might, and yet never intended
to take the charge for which the Tithes were intended? Yea, and has he not
troubled his Parishioners for the non-payment of them?

Query 35.

If you say, They might (if they would reform) have communion with you; I
query then, whether this very Objection that causes you to exclude Papists, be
not the reason why Mr. Brooks refuses scandalous Protestants, and other
profane people, viz. because they do not reform?

Counter-Query.

We do say, if they would reform and turn Protestants, that the Churches of
England would have communion with them; will Mr. Brooks say thus of his
Parish? Nay, would it not be a rejoicing to many honest hearts, if he could
make it manifest, that he refuses none but scandalous and profane people, and
that because they are such, and will not reform? Does Mr. Brooks exclude the
whole Parish because scandalous and profane? Is it not evident that they are
counted profane, and excluded as Papists, because they will not own his
Church, and dis-own their own? Would he not own some of these very men, and
count them reformed ones if they would but own his Schismatical way, to whom
he never yet otherwise would tender the Ordinances? Did ever Christ intend
that his Ordinances should be tied up to Mr. Brooks his opinion? How will you,
or this man excuse his conscience in this?

Query 36.

If you shall deny this Succession, and say, That there was none, and that it
was lost; then I query, whether this be not a singular and private Opinion of
your own, differing from the rest of your Brethren?

Counter-Query.

Don't you easily see by this time that we have no need to deny a Succession?
and that your Queries have been very vain all the way? Is not this the opinion
of the most godly and sober Protestant Ministers? I suppose Mr. Wills did not
assert Necessity in opposition to Succession as his opinion, but brought it as
one branch of that Dilemma he brought for your satisfaction, viz. that the
first Reformers must needs be true Ministers, either by necessity, or by
Succession, which you have not answered. Reader, take notice then, that in my
answering his following Queries I plead not for Necessity, as if there were no
Succession, but to show you, supposing that succession was broken off, how
weakly he argues against Necessity.

Query 37.

If that Ordination from Rome, and receiving Holy Orders from thence, was
thrown off upon a politic account, as doubtless it was at first, (though
since we have declined it upon more religious considerations) then I query,
how any body could pretend to the Argument of Necessity to preach without
Ordination?

Counter-Query.

Have you proved plainly, clearly, and convincingly that there was no true
Succession, are you sure of it? Have you done it with the true strength of
Argument rather than with subtilty: Is it certain Reader, art thou convinced?
Then, has he not as clearly proved the first Reformers to be Ministers by
Necessity? Can you deny it, but that there is a case of Necessity when
Ordinationcan't be had from Succession, and does not such a case of Necessity
make them true Ministers, that cannot in the ordinary way be Ordained? why then
dare you thus to seem to unsay what you have said, by pleading against
Necessity, notwithstanding you have argued that there was no Succession? But if
we should suppose Succession was lost, is your Query of any force against
Necessity? what if the religious considerations of the first Reformers embraced
that opportunity, which Political Interests gave, were they therefore impious?
Or what though through ignorance of the loss of Succession they did not
pretend to the Argument of Necessity, does it follow they lost this title
therefore? What if a man should not know that the writing is lost whereby he
has a right title to his House, of which he and his Ancestors have had an
unquestionable possession an hundred years, does it follow that because he does
not plead the right of prescription, that therefore he has not that right?
Thus might not the first Reformers be truly Ministers by Necessity (it being
supposed) though they pleaded it not?

Query 38.

Whether or no, when the Line of Succession was broke, it was not lawful THEN
for every one to preach that could; although it might not have been lawful
before? because Necessity puts one lawfully upon that work; where a successive
Ordination cannot be had, by your own Maxim.

Counter-Query.

1. Does not a case of Necessity rather give that right which a positive Law
should give in an ordinary way then make a new Law? 2 Does not such a case of
Necessity then rather put men into office, as does the positive Law, Tit. 1.5.
then give liberty to mere gifted Brethren to preach, for which there is no Law
in the whole Word of God? 3 Do not then those that are by a case of Necessity
put upon the work of the Ministry act as men in Office, and not as meet gifted
Brethren? 4 Or does this case of Necessity make any Ministers but those that
are fittest, and undertake the Ministerial Charge? 5 Do not they then preach
without Authority from this case, and so sin, that preach as not in Office by
this case, notwithstanding their gifts?

Query 39.

If it were true (as you say) that none ought to preach while the successive
Ordination of Christ remains un-interrupted, but such as are lawfully ordained
(which is the great thing in question) how does it become a sin for men that
are gifted to preach, since there is no such Ordination now on foot, but that
which men put themselves upon through necessity, and want of the other by
Succession?

Counter-Query.

Seeing therefore none but those that are in Office, either by lawful
Ordination in the ordinary way, or by a Case of Necessity are to preach: is it
not a sin for mere gifted brethren to preach? If there was a Case of Necessity,
did not this put our first Reformers in Office? 2 (Supposing this Case of
Necessity which is not yet granted) you insinuate they did not pretend to that
Argument, how could they then through Necessity put themselves upon the Office,
would not providence (supposing the Case) plainly put them upon it? 3 Supposing
they were actually in Office by this Necessity, is there not at least a lawful
Succession from THEM? 4 Can any then in an ordinary lawful way be in Office,
but those that have it from that Succession? And are not likewise the present
Ministry true and lawful that thus have it?

Query 40

Whereas you say, You can baptize the children of wicked Parents; I query, what
ground you have in Scripture so to do?

Counter-Query.

Do you not handsomely and neatly endeavor to delude? one while by pretending
to run for Independency, when you are an Anabaptist already; another while by
pleading against the baptizing of the children of wicked Parents, when you are
against the baptizing of any children? Do not you acknowledge that those that
have a right to be Members of the Visible Church ought to be baptized? may
not they then as well baptize the children of those that are Church Members, as
having a right to Membership upon their Principles?

Query 41.

Whether to baptize the children of wicked Parents, be not contrary to the
Opinion of those which your self calls the Reformed Churches?

Counter-Query.

In the sense Mr. Wills asserts this Baptism, it is easy to see it belongs to
the children of those that are Members of the Church; And do not most Reformed
Churches thus judge? I Will propound one Query concerning what you probably know,
or at the least wish to be: Whether or no is Mr. Brooks inclinable to
Anabaptisme? had be not very favorable thoughts of it when he pleaded so
much for men of that opinion? Either he owns the Baptism of children, or not:
if he does, why does he not acknowledge all the Parishioners of
Margarets-New-Fish-street to be members of the Visible Church, since they have
been baptized, and were never cut off? why has he ever since he came,
without cause, or at least proof of cause, debarred them from those Privileges
that belong to them as Members of a Visible Church? If he does not own
paedobaptisme; then may we not say this is the reason, why for thus many years
he never gave the Lords Supper to one Master of a Family in his Parish,
unless to an Alehouse-keeper, who now is dead; notwithstanding there are many
sober and godly men there? May we not hence guess the reason why he spoke so
many good words for them? may we not hence guess why he denies to baptize so
many children, that when they might be engaged by this to be Christ's
Disciples, he is unwilling to it, yea, and when he has nothing to say but the
Parents may be as godly, as if they were of his Church? therefore I could wish
I knew how to convince my self that he does not baptize the children of those
of his own Church out of self ends, rather than out of respects to the
Ordinance it self.

Again, has he not too evidently asserted that the Ordination of the Ministry
of England is Antichristian; it will follow then, that it is unlawful, and that
all they have baptized, are unlawfully baptized, must he not then be for
Anabaptisme? may we not therefore justly fear that he and his are in great
danger to fall to Anabaptisme, as others of that way have done? how does my
heart tremble whilst thus I argue! I could heartily wish I could not plead so
strongly to sadden honest hearts, and to please such as you are.

Query 42.

Where as you said, that the Fifth-Monarchy-men were as the smoke of the
bottomeless pit, and that their Principles did raze the Foundation of Religion;
I quere, whether they were not called Fifth-Monarchy-men, because they did
believe, that when the Caldean Monarchy, and the Monarchy of the Medes and
Persians, and the Grecian and Rom in Monarchy should be wholly extirpated,
that then the Lord himself should set up a Fifth-Monarchy, which should succeed
these four, of whose Kingdom there should be no end; according to that of Dan.
7.23, 24.

Counter-Query.

This you speak of may be the reason of the Apellation of Fifth-Monarchy-men;
But is it to yours or my purpose to examine whether there is sufficient ground
for this Opinion? I do confess there are diverse sober men of this judgment.
But did not Mr. Wills speak of the Fifth-Monarchy-men that are so infamously
famous for decrying both Magistracy and Ministry? what is this but the smoke of
the bottomless pit?

Query 43.

If this principle were grounded upon this and such like sayings in Scripture,
what reason had you to cry out against it?

Counter-Query.

Was not this reason enough (setting aside that the point its self is so
clearly questionable) that with such raving rage they joined together with
others to cry down, and more, such standing Ordinances?

Query 44.

If you say, It was because of the evil practice of some of them in these
latter times; I do thereupon query, If this be a good Argument: Some of their
practices were bad; Ergo, their principle is bad. Whether a man might not have
said the same both of the Episcopal and Presbyterian way, since that some of
them were such as engaged the Nation in war and blood, more than ever those
were like to do you call Fifth-Monarchy-men? but this surely is un-man-like
reasoning.

Counter-Query.

Did Mr. Wills at all speak for or against the Opinion of the Fifth
Monarchy-men as such? Did he not so emphatically express Fifth Monarchy-men,
and upon such an account and occasion (speaking then against those that decry'd
the Ministry) that you as well as I, and many more, might easily know he meant
those that this City not long since rung of so much? those great decryers of
Magistracy and Ministry? Is it not unman-like arguing then from so poor an
Argument to lay blood upon on the heads of Episcopal-men, and Presbyterians? If
the War was carried on by some for a while with honest intentions, yet you may
see by my nineteenth Counter-query whose hands I guess to be most embrued in
blood.

Query 45.

Whereas you would seem to blame Mr. Books for harsh Judgment, I query,
whether your Judgment was charitable when you decryed the Fifth Monarchy-men
as so many monstrous Heretics, that raze the Foundation without any kind of
exception; especially considering what Ground there is for it in Gods Word, and
also that it was the opinion of many men both ancient and modern; for Justin
Martyr in his Apology to Antonius the Emperor, asserts the thousand years
Reign of Christ upon Earth; and he further says in his Dialogue against
Tryphon, that is was the belief OF ALL CHRISTIANS exactly Orthodox. And of
latter times, we have Mr. Robert Matton, Mr. Archer, Mr. Mead, Doctor Twisse,
Mr. Ephraim Hewit, Mr. Parker of New England, Doctor Homes, Mr. Thomas Goodwin,
and Mr. Joseph Caryl, who upon his perusal of Doctor Homes his Book, says,
That it is truth confirmed by Scripture, and the testimony of Ancient and
Modern Writers of all sorts.

Counter-Query.

Do they not strike at the Foundation, whilst they would pluck down such
corner stones? Is this harst Judgment? probably to you it is, if you only fear
Magistracy, and hate the Ministry. I suppose those you hereafter mention were
not guilty of this evil of denying Magistracy and Ministry; Are all these then
you mention of the same opinon as to Christ's Personal Reign? But this is not a
place now to consider it; as for Mr. Brooks, we may guess him as harsh to Mr.
Wills (as by his misrepresenting his words, and insinuating those unchristian
charges of Deceiver, Hypocrite, etc. appears) as he is too facile in his
judgment to Dr. Everard, to whose Book (which I judge to be very erroneous, I
had almost said Blasphemous) he has writ an Epistle very much commendatory,
to which Mr, Barker has set his hand; and I wonder by what trick they got an
Imprimatur to it from that Reverend, Pious, and Learned Mr. Caryl.

Query 46.

And whereas you told me when I was at your House, you would stop my mouth, I
cannot think you meant to stop my mouth with sound Arguments, for that you
refused to do, though I did desire it of you once and again; and if you meant
to do it, it must be either by a secular power, or animating the people to
rudeness, for I know no other way, seeing you refused the first; then I query,
whether in so doing (supposing me to have erred) you walk according to that
Rule that tells you, that with meekness you should instruct those that oppose
themselves? etc. 2 Timothy 2.24.

Counter-Query.

If Arguments would have stopped your mouth, ought you not to have been silent
now? Why did you not answer in these Queries that Argument which he urged to
you at his house for your satisfaction, which he mentions in his Letter, and
which I have laid down in my six and twentieth Counter-Query? But if your
tongue be an unruly Member, and will not be quieted with Reason; ought it not
to be quieted some other way? And if those that oppose themselves will not be
instructed with meekness in an orderly way, ought they then to be allowed in
public disorders and oppositions? Are you not sensible that all Churches would
be filled with nothing but disputes and disorders? If this should be permitted,
may not every man plead for this liberty, as well as you? would you desire this
should be, if you had not a design to bring confusions into our public
worship, and to trouble the weak with doubtful disputations?

Query 47.

Does not the Scripture say, That the Minister of Christ must be an example to
a Believer in charity? 1 Timothy 4.12. I query then, whether backbiting,
tale-bearing, and taking up a reproach against your Neighbor, be not contrary
to the Law of Charity; and whether you were not guilty of this, when you told a
Gentleman that lives at High-gate, who is ready to witness the truth hereof,
That you were informed I was a Jesuit; and therefore told him he would do
well to apprehend me. Truly Sir, if you do not tell me who informed you, I
shall say it was a slander of your own devising, either thereby to take away
my life; for that is the punishment the Law has provided for Jesuits, by the
Stat. of Eliz. 27.2. or else (if that Gentlemn would have been ruled by you)
that I might have been laid in Goal right or wrong, to the undoing of my self
and Family, till I could have cleared my self of the supposed Crime in open
Sessions. This must needs be your design, otherwise why did you encourage him
to apprehend me as a Jesuit? but more of this in a more convenient place,
where I doubt not of reparation: only let me tell you, That if you could as
easily prove the Affirmative, viz. That you are sent of God to preach, and that
all you preach is true, as I can prove the Negative, that I am no Jesuit, the
controversy between us would soon be ended.

Counter-Query.

Do you not see by Mr. Wills his Letter how much you are to blame; thus in
Print, to take up a reproach against him? and that upon the bare information of
such a single person? did he ever assert you to be a Jesuit? At the most he
only said you were suspected, and this he spoke in private: And indeed who
would not suspect that man to be Jesuitical, who was cried out on to be such to
his face in a great Congregation at Clements beyond Temple Bar, that has the
vox populi to accuse him of it? That is reported to have converse with
Jesuits? that lived a concealed, I had almost said a suspected life for some
years together in and about London, that has Jesuitical opinions and designs;
especially to pluck down the Ministry of England, or to make it odious? That
these grounds of suspicion may be had concerning you I shall not assert; but
only wish that we had no more ground to suspect you to be Jesuitical, then Mr.
Wills to be uncharitable in accusing you, or erroneous in what is here
controverted, and I make no question but you would in your next subscribe your
self a friend to Mr. Wills and this Truth, in some measure vindicated. Confess
the Truth, and glorify God. Amen.

Reader, there are faults in the printing which are not much material, only
correct p. 31. l. 4. read with for as.

POSTSCRIPT.
REader, I thought it necessary to advertise thee of a few things.

1 That to me it is a great sign that that is a Truth, and a Truth of great
concernment, which when it is asserted, or taught, men of corrupt minds, are
enraged at, and oppose: They would have the Servants sleep, that being their
time of sowing Tares: therefore it is very observeable, that when ever
godliness was most likely to increase, when the Ministry have been most famous
and active, then the Devil has stirred up deadly enemies and opposers: this
has been in all ages, this we sadly experience in our days. Was there ever a
more learned, pious, famous Ministry in England, than now there is? I challenge
even its enemies, and amongst them Mr. Ives to contradict it if they can: And
(shall we not sigh at it) had ever the Ministry of England so great and so
many Designers to undermine it? But the Father of Truth usually so blesses his
own cause, that it gets by opposition; thus we can say of this truth of
Ordination of Ministers, which in my knowledge has gotten ground by these late
Broils. Gather your selves together, and you shall be broken in pieces, for
the Lord is with us, Isa. 8.9, 10. Mat. 28.20.

2 That those that have Designs against the Truth, have usually some plausible
pretense to carry them on: the Devil has got the Art now adays to wrap
himself in a Prophets Mantle; to appear as an Angel of light in his choycest
Instruments, who usually with a seeming religious garb footh up with soft words
till they may opportunely change their Court-ships into calumnies. Has not Mr.
Ives worthily shown himself for Ordination of Ministers, as he pretends) that
would make the world believe that the present godly Ministry is Antichristian
if he could? and that has thus thrust himself into a quarrel against it?

3 That those that design the propagating of their errors, will for the most
part oppose: their hands will be against every man; but seldom assert their
own opinion, and prove it: is it not, because it is easier to quarrel with
truth, than to prove an error? and because that is a time to break in, when
the ranks are first shattered; to broach errors when men are staggered in the
truth? or is not this the end, viz. to be always accusing of others, that they
themselves may never be questioned or called to justify their own practices?
Has not Mr. Ives played his part in this, by opposing every man not of his own
way, that we might believe what he asserts to be truth? Has he not done so
in these Queries? where does he bring the least positive truth, or one
Argument to justify his own practice, or to state what is right? Has he
brought one probable Argument to prove that gifted brethren may preach? or that
people may hear them? that the Church ought to ordain, and not Ministers? has
he unfolded any of those independent Riddles, viz. that a company of those
that are baptized, and own their Baptism, are not Members of a Visible
Church? Or that a Minister being such in relation to his Church, acts no longer
as in Office, than to his Church, and that at one and the same time and place
he preaches as a mere gifted Brother to those that are not of his Church, and
as a Minister to those of his Church? thus thou may see his spirit of
Opposition, and his design, to cry out on others, that none may suspect his
cause; as cut-purses, that they may may not be accused: Ought he not to do
otherwise the next time?

4 That this task I have here undertaken is the first, and therefore may be
guilty of mistakes, of which I beg thy pardon, and do promise thee, that
nothing but what is more than ordinarily material shall provoke me to spend my
own time in writing, or thine in reading. Be zealous for the truth; pray for
its progress; and be thankful to God for any satisfaction thou shall receive
by him who is,

thy concealed Friend N. E.

FINIS.

