An ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT Containing
certain INSTRUCTIONS To be issued by the Committee for the Admiralty and
Cinque Ports, to such fit Persons as shall desire to set forth Ships as private
men of War.

Die Iovis 29 Ianuarii 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1645.

Die Iovis, 29. January, 1645. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled
in Parliament, concerning certain Instructions to be issued by the Committee
for the Admiralty and Cinque Ports, etc.
WHereas the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Admiralty and Cinque Ports,
are by an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament authorized and enabled to do
and execute all such things as appertain to the Office of Lord High Admiral
of England. And whereas it is Ordained by another Ordinance of Parliament,
dated 30 November 1643. That it shall and may be lawful for any his Majesty's
good Subjects, that shall be approved and thereunto appointed by the Lord High
Admiral of England, appointed by both Houses for the time being, in warlike
manner to Equipp, arm, furnish, Man, and set out to Sea, such and so many
Ships as they shall think fitting, and with the same to seize, surprise, and
take all and all manner of Ships, and Vessels, which they shall meet withal,
in or outward bound from any Port, or place within any his Majesty's
Dominions, being in Hostility against the Parliament, or coming from, or
returning to any such Port or place; or that shall be found to have Traded with
the Inhabitants of any such Port or place, since their defection from the King
and Parliament; and also to seize, surprise and take all, and all manner of
Pirates, and Sea-Rovers of what Nation soever, and their Ships and Goods
whatsoever; And that the Ships to be so employed shall have liberty to seek,
and take their purchase where, and how they please, according to such
instructions as shall from time to time be given them by the Lord High Admiral
of England, or the Commissioners of the Admiralty appointed by both Houses for
the time being. And whereas this Committee has been Petitioned, by (...)
Owners of the Ship the (...) (...) for our approving of them, to employ the
shid Ship under Command of Captain (...) in execution of the powers granted by
the said Ordinance; We do hereby signify and declare, That we have approved
and appointed, and do hereby approve, and appoint the said Petitioners in
warlike manner to Equipp, furnish, and arm the said Ship, the (...) and to
place in her a competent number of Soldiers, Mariners, and Gunners, with
necessary Arms and Provisions, and the same so Manned, Equipped, Armed, and
provided to set forth to Sea, under command of the said Captain (...) (...)
And the said Captain (...) to employ the said Ship, for doing and performing
the Services hereafter mentioned; That is to say, For the seazing, taking, and
surprising of all Ships, and Vessels belonging to any of his Majesty's
Subjects, which the said Ship shall meet withal, in or outward bound from
any Port or place, within any of his Majesty's Dominions being in Hostility
against the Parliament, together with all the Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals,
Goods, Commanders and Soldiers therein; as also for the seazing, surprising,
and taking of all and all manner of Ships, and Vessels whatsoever, with the
Ordnance, Ammunition, Victuals, and Goods therein belonging to any Rebel or
Rebels in Ireland; and also the Ships and Goods of any other Person whatsoever,
Forraigner or other, which shall be going to or coming from any Port or place
in Ireland in Hostility against the Parliament; as also for the seazing,
surprising, and taking of all and all manner of Ships, and Vessels belonging to
any Forraigner or foreign Nation, going to any Port or place in Hostility
against the Parliament, with Arms, Ammunition, or other Contrabando Goods for
supply of the Forces raised against the Parliament, and adjudging and
condemning the same, together with the Goods themselves, and all such other
Goods as belong to the Masters, or Laders of such Contrabando Goods as also for
the seazing, surprising, and taking of all Pirates, and Sea-Rovers of what
Nation soever, and their Ships and Goods whatsoever, according to the
authority, meaning, and true intent of the said Ordinance of the 30. of
November, 1643. Provided that before the going forth of the said Ship, the said
Captain (...) together with the Master, and principal Officers thereof, or
such other sufficient persons in their behalf, as shall be accepted of by the
Judge of the Admiralty for the time being, do and shall enter into Bond of two
thousand pounds in the Admiralty Court, with condition, That neither the said
Commander of the said Ship, nor the Master or Company, or any of them, shall
(under pretext of the said Ordinance, or of these Instructions) spoil or
damage any of the Kings Subjects, nor any of the friends or Allies of this
Kingdom, other then such as are intended by the said Ordinance and these
Instructions; As also, that for justification of the prize or prizes that the
said Commander shall take, he shall bring into the Registry of the High Court
of Admiralty, all such Cocquets, Bills of Lading, and other Documents and
Writings, as he or any of his Company shall take or find in any such Ship or
Vessel, and shall bring in with every such Ship or Vessel, two or three of the
principal Officers thereof taken in the same, to be examined by the Judge of
the Admiralty, or such as he shall appoint, concerning the property of the said
Ship, Vessel or goods therein, and to such other questions and Interogatories,
as he shall think fit to administer in that behalf: And also that neither he,
they, nor any of them, shall break Bulk, spoil, wast, or diminish any of the
said Ships, or Goods, until they shall be adjudged in the High Court of
Admiralty to have been lawfully taken, according to the true intent and meaning
of the said Ordinance, and these Instructions; and a true and just Inventory
and appraisement be taken and made of the same: And the Judge of the Admiralty
is hereby prayed and required to take Bond accordingly, and to certify the
same under the Seal of the Admiralty Court, without which no benefit is to
accrue to the said Commander, Officers, Mariners, or any others interessed in
the said Ship, by any thing done in pursuance thereof; And the said Captain
(...) shall truly pay and deliver to such Collectors or Receivers as both
Houses of Parliament, the Committee of the Admiralty, or the Lord High Admiral
for the time being, appointed by both Houses of Parliament, have or shall
appoint the full Tenthes of every such prize, as shall be taken by virtue of
the said Ordinance, or these Instructions.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the Committee
for the Admiralty, do give Instructions to such fit persons as shall desire to
set forth Ships as private men of War, according to the tenor aforesaid,
notwithstanding any former Order or Ordinance to the contrary.

Io. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


FINIS.

