AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
BEING An Exhortation to all His MAJESTY'S good Subjects in the Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, to the duty of Repentance and Humiliation, with
an earnest confession of particular and National sins. For the obtaining a
firm and happy Peace, now in agitation. To be used privately in Families, but
especially publicly in Congregations.

THat flourishing Kingdoms have bin ruined by Impenitent going on in a course
of Sinning, the Sacred Story does plainly tell us; and how near to such a
Ruin our sinful Nation now is, the present lamentable Face of it does too
apparently show. And though we should feel the heavy strokes of God, yet
seven times more, It is our duty to accept the punishment of our Iniquity, and
to say, Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy Judgments.

Yet because the Lord who is just, is also Merciful, and in his infinite Mercy
has left the excellent and successful remedy of Repentance to Nations
brought near to the Gates of destruction and despair, O let not England be
negligent in the application of it. Humble addresses of a penitent People to a
merciful God have prevailed with Him. They prevailed for Nineveh when the
sentence seemed to be gone out against her, and may also prevail for England.

It is therefore thought most necessary by the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
that all his Majesty's Subjects in this Kingdom of England, be excited and
stirred up, speedily to lay hold upon this only and unfailing Remedy of
Repentance; freely acknowledging, and heartily bewailing even with the deepest
humiliation, godly sorrow, and detestation, secretly and in Families, but
especially publicly in Congregations, both their own personal sins, and
chiefly those sins that are and have bin the sins of this Nation: A confession
of National Sins being most agreeable to the National Judgments, under which
the Land Groans, and most likely to be effectual for the removing of them.

Neither ought this confession to slight or light, when there is so heavy a
weight of Sins, infinite in number, and heinous in nature, that lies upon this
Nation. Such are the high Contempt of Gods holy Ordinances, and of Holiness it
self: Gross and affected Ignorance, under the glorious light of the Gospel
clearly shining among us; unfruitfulnesse under the precious means of Grace,
Ingratitude for Mercies, Incorrigiblenes under Judgments, multitudes of Oaths,
and Blasphemies, wicked Prophanations of the Lords Day, by Sports and Gamings,
formerly encouraged even by Authority; All sorts of uncleanness; Luxury, and
Excess in Eating and Drinking; Vanity, Pride, and Prodigality in Apparel;
Envy, Contention, and unnatural Divisions, Oppression, Fraud, and Violence;
From diverse of which Sins, and many other, not one Person throughout the whole
Nation, can say that he is wholly free; but all must confess that they have
contributed toward the great Stock of National Sins; And so have increased the
Treasure of Wrath, against these days of Wrath; and therefore since, according
to the Language of the Holy Ghost, we are a sinful Nation, a People laden with
Iniquity, and that from the sole of the Foot, to the Head, there is no
soundness in Us, we may justly expect the desolations that are denounced
against so great and general a corruption.

And as it is our duty to humble our selves and to give glory to God, the
searcher of all Hearts, by confessing all Sins; So ought we to be affected and
humbled with deepest sense of sorrow, for those most crying Sins, which now we
find, by too sad Experience, to have a more immediate Influence upon the
Destruction of a Kingdom; some of which are Idolatry and Bloodshed.

That of Idolatry, as it was the Sin of our Ancestors, so it is the spreading
Sin of these latter times, while by a general connivence, and almost
Tolleration, it has been several ways Fomented and encouraged: The grievous
Effects whereof this Kingdom of England now begins to feel, from multitudes
of Armed Papists and their Abettors, and the Kingdom of Ireland far more
heavily has felt, being brought almost to utter Ruin, by the Intestine Wars
of Romish Idolaters.

And for that other crying and cruel Sin of Bloodshed, that calls aloud for
Vengeance (besides many Murders not expiated, and the blood-guilty pardoned)
did it not go hand in hand with that abominable Idol of the Mass, in the
days of Queen Mary, and some of her Predecessors, when many hundreds of the
dear Martirs and Saints of God lost their precious Lives in flames and
prisons? And though several Acts by which that Innocent blood was shed, have
been repealed by Parliament: yet to this very day, was never ordained such a
solemn Public and National acknowledgment of this Sin, as might appease the
wrath of that Jealous God against whom, and against whose People, with so high
a hand it was committed.

Now that all the Sin and Misery of this Polluted and Afficted Nation may be
bitterly sorrowed for, with such grief of heart, and preparedness for a
through Reformation, as God may be pleased graciously to accept: It is required
and Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That every Minister and
Preacher of Gods Word, in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, in
their several Auditories and Congregations, especially upon the Fast days,
shall most earnestly persuade and Inculcate the constant practice of this
public acknowledgement and deep humiliation, for these, and all our
National and crying sins, and likewise the necessity of a Personal and
National Reformation, and shall publish this Ordinance concerning the same:
That so at length we may obtain a firm and happy Peace both with God and man,
That Glory may dwell in our Land, and the prosperity of the Gospel, with all
the privileges accompanying it, may Crown this Nation unto all succeeding Ages.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance
shall be forthwith Printed and published, and read in all Parish Churches and
Chapels throughout the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, by the
Parsons, Vicars, and Curates of the same.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey. Febr. 11. 1644.


