Die Mercurii 2 October. 1644.
ORdered, that this Ordinance for Ordination of Ministers, pro Tempore, be
forthwith Printed, and that it be sent to the Assembly of Divines to take care
of the printing thereof; And that no man do print the same, but such as shall
be thereunto appointed by the Assembly.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

October 3.
ORdered by the Assembly of Divines, That the Scribes of the Assembly take care
of the Printing of this Ordinance.

We do appoint Ralph Smith to print this Ordinance,

Henry Robrough, Adoniram Byfield.


AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT. After Advice
had with the Assembly of DIVINES, for the Ordination of Mininisters pro
Tempore, according to the Directory for Ordination, and Rules for Examination,
therein expressed.

Die Mercurii, 2 October. 1644.
ORdered, that this Ordinance for Ordination, of Ministers pro Tempore, be
forthwith Printed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



LONDON, Printed for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at his shop, at the sign
of the Bible in Corne-bill, near the Royal Exchange. 1644.

AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: FOR THE
Ordination of Ministers pro Tempore.
WHereas the word Presbyter, that is to say, Elder, and the word Bishop do in
the Scriptures intend and signify one and the same Function, although the
Title of Bishop has been by corrupt custom appropriated to one, and that
unto him ascribed, and by him assumed, as in other things, so in the matter of
Ordination, that was not meet. Which Ordination notwithstanding being performed
by him a Presbyter joined with other Presbyters, we hold for substance to be
valid, and not to be disclaimed by any that have received it. And that
Presbyters so ordained being lawfully thereunto appointed and authorized, may
ordain other Presbyters. And whereas it is also manifest by the word of God,
That no man ought to take upon him the Office of a Minister until he be
lawfully called and ordained thereunto; And that the work of Ordination, that
is to say, An outward Solemn setting apart of Persons for the Office of the
Ministry in the Church by Preaching Presbyters, is an Ordinance of Christ, and
is to be performed with all due Care, Wisdom, Gravity, and Solemnity: It is
Ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority
of the same (after advice had with the Assembly of Divines now convened at
Westminster) that during the present exigencies of the Armies, of the Navy and
of many Congregations destitute of able and faithful Ministers of the Gospel,
and until a Government of the Church be formed up to the full power and Work
of it, and the whole course of Ordination of Ministers in an ordinary way be
set up and settled for all the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, These persons in the City of London, being Presbyters; Viz. Doctor
Cornelius Burges, one of the Assessors of the Assembly, Dr. William Gouge, Mr.
John Ley, Mr. George Walker, Mr. Edmund Calamy, Mr. Daniel Cawdry, Mr. Stanley
Gower, Mr. John Conant, Mr. Humphrey Chambers, Members of the Assembly of
Divines, Mr. Henry Robrough one of the Scribes of the Assembly, Mr. John
Downham, Mr. Charles Offspring, Mr. Richard Lee, Mr. Timothy Dod, Mr. James
Cranford, Mr. Thomas Horton, Mr. Thomas Clenden, Mr. Arthur Jackson, Mr. Samuel
Clerk, Mr. Emanuel Bourne, Mr. Foulke Bellers, Mr. Francis Roberts, Mr.
Leonard Cook, or any seven of them being the whole number present, or any
seven or more of them, being the major part of them that shall be present, may
examine, approve, and ordain Presbyters according to the Directory for
Ordination, and Rules for Examination hereafter expressed, that is to say;

First, That he that is to be Ordained, must address himself to the
Ministers appointed to ordain, and bring with him a testimonial of his taking
the Covenant of the three Kingdoms, of his diligence and proficiency in his
Studies, what degrees he has taken in the University, and what has been the
time of his abode there, and withal of his age, which is to be twenty four
years at the least; but especially of his life and conversation.

Secondly, the Ministers appointed to ordain shall proceed to inquire touching
the grace of God in him; and whether he be of such holiness of life as is
requisite in a Minister of the Gospel, and to examine him touching his Learning
and sufficiency, and touching the evidence of his Calling to the holy
Ministry, and in particular, his fair and direct calling to that place, to
which he is designed.

THE RVLES for EXAMINATION ARE THESE:
1. THat the party Examined be dealt with in a Brotherly way, with mildness
of spirit, and with special respect to the gravity, modesty, and quality of
every one. 2. He shall be examined touching his skill in the Original
Tongues, and that Trial to be made by reading the Hebrew and Greek
Testaments, and rendering some portions of them into Latin; And inquiry also
shall be made after his other Learning, and whether he has skill in Logic
and Philosophy. 3. What Authors in Divinity he has read, and is best
acquainted with, and trial shall be made of his knowledge in the chief
Grounds of Religion, and of his ability to defend the Orthodox Doctrine
contained in them against all unsound and erroneous opinions, especially those
of the present age: Of his skill, In the sense and meaning of such places of
Scripture as shall be proposed unto him, In cases of Conscience, and in the
Chronology of Scripture, and of the Ecclesiastical History. 4. If he has
not before Preached in public, with approbation of such as are able to judge,
he shall, at a competent time assigned him, and before the Ministers appointed
to Ordain, expound such a place of Scripture as shall be given him. 5. He
shall in a competent time also frame a Discourse in Latin upon such a common
place, or controversy in Divinity, as shall be assigned him, and exhibit to
the Ministers appointed to ordain, such Theses as express the sum thereof,
and maintain a Dispute upon them. 6. He shall Preach before the People, and
the Ministers appointed to Ordain, or some of them. 7. The proportion of his
gifts, in relation to the place, unto which he is called, shall be
considered. 8. Besides the Trial of his gifts in preaching he shall undergo
an Examination in the Premises, two several days, or more, if the Ministers
appointed to Ordain, shall judge it necessary.
Thirdly, After which he being approved, is to be sent to the Church, or
other place where he is to serve, (if it may be done with safety, and
convenience) there to Preach three several days, and to converse with the
people, that they may have trial of his gifts for their edification, and may
have time and leisure to inquire into, and the better to know his life and
conversation.

Fourthly, In the last of those three days appointed for the making known of
his gifts in Preaching, there shall be sent by the Ministers appointed to
ordain (if it may be done with safety and convenience) a public Instrument
in writing, which shall publicly be read before the people, and after
affixed to the Church door, to signify such a day, any member or members of
the said Congregation, or any other person or persons whatsoever, or any of
them may put in, with all Christian discretion, and meekness, what exceptions
they have against him; and if upon the day appointed, there be no just
exceptions against him, the Ministers appointed to ordain shall proceed to
Ordination.

Fifthly, In the day appointed for Ordination, which is to be performed in that
Church where he that is to be ordained is to serve, (if it may be done with
safety and convenience) a Solemn Fast shall be kept by the Congregation, that
they may more earnestly join in Prayer to God for a blessing upon the Person
and Labors of this his Servant, solemnly to be set a part to the Office of
the Ministry for their good: The Ministers appointed to ordain, or seven of
them shall come to the place, whereof one shall Preach to the people concerning
the Office and Duty of the Ministers of Christ, and how the People ought to
esteem him for the works sake.

Sixthly, After the Sermon ended, the Minister which has Preached, shall in
the face of the Congregation demand of him who is now to be Ordained
concerning his Faith in Christ Jesus, and his persuasion of the Truth of the
Reformed Religion, according to the Scriptures, his sincere intentions and
ends, in desiring to enter into this calling, his resolution to be diligent in
Prayer, Reading, Meditation, Preaching, Ministering the Sacraments, and doing
all Ministerial duties toward his charge, his Zeal, and Faithfulness in
maintaining the Truth of the Gospel, and unity of the Church against Error and
Schism, his Care that himself and family may be unblamable, and examples to
the Flock, and his Resolution to continue in his duty against all trouble and
persecution.

Seventhly, In all which having declared himself, professed his willingness,
and promised his endeavors by the help of God; the Ministers appointed to
ordain, shall solemnly set him apart to the Office and work of the Ministry,
laying their hands on him, with a short Prayer or blessing to this effect.

Thankefully acknowledging the great Mercy of God in sending Jesus Christ for
the Redemption of his people, and for his Ascension to the right hand of God
the Father, and there pouring out his Spirit, and giving gifts to Men,
Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, for the gathering and
building up of his Church, and for fitting and inclining this man to this great
Work, to beseech him to fill him with his holy Spirit, whom in his name, we
Here let them impose their hands on his head.
set apart to this holy Service, to fulfill the work of his Ministry in all
things, that he may both save himself and the people committed to his charge.
Eigthly, This, or the like form of Prayer, or blessing being ended, let the
Minister who preached, briefly exhort him to consider the greatness of his
Office and Work, the danger of negligence both to himself and his people, the
blessing which will accompany his faithfulness in this life, and that to come;
and withal let him Exhort and Charge the people in the name of God, willingly
to receive and acknowledge him as the Minister of Christ, and to maintain,
encourage, and assist him in all the parts of his Office. And so by prayer
commending both him and his Flock to the grace of God, after the singing of a
Psalm, let the Assembly be dismissed with a blessing.

9. Let such as are chosen or appointed for the Service of the Army, or Navy,
or Colleges, or other Charge, be Ordained as abovesaid, in such Church, as the
Ministers appointed to Ordain shall think fit; and such Alterations made by
the Minister that Ordains, from the Exhortation last before prescribed, as
the Circumstances of Place and Persons shall require.

And be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, and by the
Authority aforesaid, that every Person formerly Ordained a Presbyter,
according to the form of Ordination, which has been held in the Church of
England, and is to be removed to another Charge, do bring to the Ministers
appointed to Ordain for that County where he is to be placed, a Testimonial
of his Ordination, and of his Abilities and Conversation, whereupon his
fitness for that place whither he is to be removed, shall be tried by his
preaching there, and (if it shall be judged necessary) by a farther
Examination, and so, without any new Ordination, he shall be admitted, if he be
a proved as fit for that place: And if any Person Ordained Minister in
Scotland, or in any other Reformed Church, be designed to a Congregation in
England, he is to bring from that Church, to the Ministers appointed to Ordain
for that County, where he is to be placed, a sufficient Testimonial of his
Ordination, of his life and conversation while he lived with them, and of the
Causes of his Removal; and to undergo such a Trial of his fitness and
sufficiency, and to have the same Course held with him in other particulars,
as is set down in the foregoing Rule and Provision touching the Examination
and admission of Persons formerly Ordained in England.

And it is further Ordained that Records be carefully kept by the Register to
be nominated by the Ministers appointed to Ordain, of the Names of the Persons
Ordained, with their Testimonial, the time and place of their Ordination, and
of the Ministers who did Ordain them, and of the Charge to which they are
appointed: And that no Money or Gift of what kind soever shall be received from
the Person to be Ordained, or from any on his behalf, for Ordination or ought
else belonging to it, by any of the Ministers appointed to Ordain, or any
appertaining to any of them, upon what pretense soever, Except to the Register
for the Entry, Instruments and Testimonials of his Ordination, which shall not
exceed the sum of Ten Shillings for each Person Ordained.

And it is yet further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that all Persons
who shall be Ordained Presbyters according to this Directorie, shall be for
ever reputed and taken to all intents and purposes for lawful and sufficiently
authorized Ministers of the Church of England, and as Capeable of any
Ministerial employment in the Church, with the Rights and Profitts belonging
thereunto, as any other Presbyters whatsoever already Ordained, or hereafter to
be Ordained; And that all Presbyters who are hereby appointed and authorized to
Ordain, and shall (according to this present Directory) Ordain any
Presbyters, are hereby declared to perform an acceptable Service to this
Church and Kingdom, and shall have the Protection of both Houses of Parliament
for their Indemnitie.

Provided, That this Ordinance shall stand in force for twelve Months and no
longer; Any thing in this Ordinance contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

FINIS.

