AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For Execution
of Martial Law, According to the meaning of this Ordinance, to continue for
the space of four Months from the date hereof.

Together with the Names of such Commissioners as are appointed for the
Execution thereof.

16. August, 1644.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed
and published.

Henry Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Edward Husbands, August 17.

August 16. 1644.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for execution
of Martial Law, according to the meaning of the Ordinance, to continue for the
space of four Months from the date hereof.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by
authority of the same, That Robert Earl of Essex, Captain General of the
Forces raised by the authority of Parliament, Algernon Earl of Northumberland,
Henry Earl of Kent, Philip Earl of Pembroke, William Earl of Salisbury, Oliver
Earl of Bullingbrook, Edward Earl of Manchester, Basil Earl of Denbigh, William
Lord Viscount Say and Seal, Philip Lord Whatton, Dudley Lord North, William
Lord Gray of Werk, John Lord Roberts, Philip Lord Lisle, Sir William Waller,
Sir Arthur Haslerig, Sir John Corbet, Sir John Bamfield, Sir Henry Heyman,
Colonel Alexander Popham, Col: Stapeley, Col: Whitehead, Col: Morley, Col:
Purefoy, Col: Ven, Edward Bainton Esquire Col: William Jephson, Col: Alexander
Rigby, Tho: Arundell Esquire Sergeant Major General Skippon, Sir Nathaniel Brent,
Doctor Tho: Eden, John Bradshaw Esquire William Steel Esquire Sir James Harrington,
Col: Brown, Col: West, Col: Charles Fleetwood, Col: William Strode, Col: Turner,
Col: Manwaring, Col: Whitchcote, Col: Pyndar, Lieutenant Col: Welden,
Lieutenant Col: Underwood, Lieutenant Col: Wilson, Major Salloway, Major
Titchborn, Col: Humfrey, Col: Player, Col: Prince, Col: Harsnet, Major
Camfield, (...) Molyns, Col: Owen, Lieutenant Col: Web, Lieutenant Col:
Bradley, or any Twelve or more of them, whereof such of the Members of either
House of Parliament, as have Commission and commands in any of the Armies or
Garrisons; and Sir William Waller, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Sir John Corbet, Sir
Henry Heyman, Col. Alexander Rigby, Col: William Jephson, Col: Ven, Sir
Nathaniel Brent, always to be Three, shall be Commissioners, and shall have
full power and authority to hear and determine all such causes as belong to
Military cognizance, according to the Articles in this present Ordinance
mentioned; And to proceed to the Trial, Condemnation, and Execution of all
Offenders against the said Articles, and to inflict upon the Offenders such
punishment, either by Death or otherwise corporally, as the said Commissioners
or the major part of them then present shall judge to appertain to Justice,
according to the nature of the Offense, and Articles here ensuing:

I. NO persons whatsoever shall from henceforth voluntarily repair or go from
the Cities of London and Westminster, or from any other parts of the kingdom,
under the power of the Parliament, unto the person of the King or Queen, or
Lords of the Counsel abiding with him or her, or to any Commander or Officer
of the Kings Army, or shall give or hold any Intelligence by Letters, Messages
or otherwise with any in Arms against the Parliament, without consent of both
Houses of Parliament, or the Committee appointed by Ordinance of Parliament for
managing the war, the Lord General of the forces raised by the two Houses, or
from the respective Officers that shall Command in chief any of the said
forces, upon pain of death, or other Corporal punishment at discretion.

II. Whosoever has or shall Plot, Contrive, or endeavor the betraying,
surrendering, or yielding up to the Enemy, or has or shall contrary to the
rules of War, surrender, yield up or betray any Cities, Towns, Forts,
Magazines, or forces which now are, or hereafter shall be under the power of
the Parliament, shall be punished with death.

III. No Person or Persons whatsoever not under the power of the Enemy, shall
voluntarily relieve any Person being in Arms against the Parliament, knowing
him to have been so in Arms, with any money, victuals, or Ammunition, upon
pain of death or other corporal punishment at discretion, or shall
voluntarily and knowingly harbor or receive any being in Arms as aforesaid,
upon pain of punishment at discretion.

IIII. No Officer or Soldier shall make any mutinous assemblies, or be
assisting thereunto upon pain of death.

V. No Guardian, or Officer of any Prison, shall wilfully suffer any Prisoner
of War to escape under pain of death, or negligently under pain of
imprisonment, and further punishment at discretion.

VI. Whosoever shall voluntarily take up Arms against the Parliament, having
taken the National Covenant, shall dye without mercy.

VII. Whatsoever Officer, or Commander, has or shall desert their trust, and
adheare to the enemy, shall dye without mercy.

And it is hereby further Ordained by the authority aforesaid, that the said
Commissioners, or any twelve or more of them, whereof such of the Members of
either House of Parliament as have Commissions, and commands in any of the
Armies or Garrisons, and sir William Waller, sir Arther Haslerig, sir John
Corbet, sir Henry Heyman, Colonel Alexander Rigby, Col. William Iephson, Col.
Venn, sir Nathaniell Brent, always to be three, shall be authorized from time
to time so often as they shall think fit, or shall be ordered thereunto by
both or either House of Parliament, to sit in some convenient place within the
cities of London and Westminster, or Lines of Communication, and to appoint a
Judge Advocate, a Provost Martial, and all other Officers needful. And it is
hereby further Ordained, that all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
Constables, Bailiffes, and other Officers shall be aiding and assisting to the
said Commissioners in the execution of the Premises, and that the said
Commissioners, and every of them, and all and every other Person and Persons,
that shall be aiding and assisting to them in the execution of the Premises,
shall be saved harmless and indempnified for what they shall do therein by
authority of Parliament, provided nevertheless that no Member of either Houses
of Parliament, or Assistants of the house of Peers shall be questioned, or
tried before the Commissioners appointed by virtue of this present Ordinance,
without assent and leave first had and obtained of both Houses of Parliament.

And be it also provided, that this present Ordinance, and the authority hereby
given, and appointed to the Persons hereby nominated, shall endure and have
continuance for four months from the making hereof.

Provided that this Ordinance for any offense hereafter to be committed shall
not take place, or be of force until eight days after the publication hereof,
any thing in this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.

