AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: Authorizing the
Committee of the Militia of the City of LONDON, and all Deputy Lieutenants,
Committees, High-Constables and Petty-Constables in the several Divisions in
all the Counties under the power of the Parliament, to make search for all
Soldiers that have been or shall be Listed or Imprested to serve for the
defense of the Kingdom, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax.

And that they forthwith repair to their Colors within six days after the
publishing of this Ordinance, upon pain of death.

Die Jovis 24. April 1645.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
be forthwith printed, and published in all Market Towns and Parish Churches in
the several Counties under the power of the Parliament.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 25.
April. 1645.

Die Jovis 24. April 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: For punishing
Soldiers Imprested and forsaking their Colors.
WHereas by Ordinance of Parliament entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, For the speedy Raising and Impresting of Men
for the recruiting of the forces under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax in the
defense of the Kingdom. It is Ordained ( inter^alia) that the Committee of the
Militia for the City of London, the Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of
Parliament, in every County, City, or place within this Realm, or any two or
more of them, within their several Limits and Jurisdictions, shall be and are
thereby Authorized, Required, and Enjoined from time to time to Raise, Leavy,
and Impresse such number of Soldiers for the defense of the King, Parliament,
and Kingdom as shall be appointed by both Houses of Parliament, by the
Committee of both Kingdoms, or by Sir Thomas Fairfax. The said Lords and
Commons for preventing abuses which may happen by the soldiers absenting
themselves from their Colors and the Army, and by the harboring and
concealing of Soldiers so Raised, Leavied, and Imprested, as aforesaid, do
therefore Order and Ordain, That all Soldiers already Raised, Listed, or
Imprested, or which hereafter shall be Raised, Listed or Imprested under the
command o^ Sir Thomas Fairfax, shall upon pain of death to be inflicted
without mercy repair to their Colors within six days after publication
hereof: And for such as shall be hereafter Imprested and Listed, within six
days after their Listing; and constantly abide there, and not depart without
License under the hand of Sir Thomas Fairfax, or of the superior Officer then
present of the Regiment wherein such Soldier or Soldiers shall serve. And for
the better discovery of all such persons who have been Imprested or Listed, as
already have, or hereafter shall absent themselves from their Colors, The said
Lords and Commons do hereby require and command all High Con stables, petty
Constables, Lithingmen, and Headboroughs in their several Divisions, Hundreds,
Towns, and Parishes, to make strict search and inquiry in the several Houses
within their respective Limits and Parishes, for finding out such Soldiers as
may be harbored there. And if any Soldier or Soldiers shall be found
remaining in any of the Towns and Places aforesaid the high Constables and
petty Constables aforementioned, are hereby authorized and required to
apprehend their persons, and carry them before such of the Deputy Lieutenants,
Committees of Parliament, or Justices of Peace as are nearest to the places
where they are so apprehended; who are hereby authorized and required to commit
such Soldiers to the County-Goale, or other Prison, and to secure their
Horses, Arms, soldiers clothes, and Moneys, if they have any, for the service
of the State. And for the preventing the harboring and concealing any soldier
or soldiers, as aforesaid, who shall depart out, or absent himself from the
said service without license, It is further Ordained and Declared, that every
Town or Parish wherein such soldier or soldiers shall be found to be
harbored or concealed, shall forfeit and pay the sum of ten pounds; and
every person harboring or concealing any soldier or soldiers, as aforesaid,
shall pay for every soldier so concealed and harbored forty shillings: All
which said several sums of Money to be forfeited as aforesaid, shall be
collected, leavied, and paid in such sort, manner, way, and form, and shall be
employed to the same uses as are prescribed and set down for leavying of Money
in the former Ordinance of Parliament, For raising and maintaining Forces for
defense of the Kingdom under the command of sir Thomas Fairfax. And to the
intent that all soldiers under the command of the said sir Thomas Fairfax, and
all and every other person and persons concerned in the premises may take
notice hereof, It is further Ordained, That this present Ordinance be forthwith
printed, and published in the several Market Towns and Parish Churches of
every County within the power of the Parliament within fire days next
following the receipt thereof, that none may pretend ignorance of any of the
particulars before mentioned.

And it is hereby further Ordained, That the Deputy Lieutenants, Committees of
Parliaments, all Majors, Bailiffs, Sheriffs, Governors of Towns, and Justices
of peace of the several Counties, Cities and places within this Kingdom,
shall take special care to put this Ordinance in due execution, according to
the purport and true meaning thereof.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

