AN ORDINANCE, MADE BY THE LORDS AND COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, For the
better and more speedy execution, of the late Ordinance of the 29. of November,
1642.
WHEREAS according to an Ordinance and Declaration of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, of the 29. of November last, the persons whose names
are subscribed are appointed and since approved of, by both Houses of
Parliament, to be Assessors and Collectors of (...) It is now ordered by the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. And the said persons, are hereby
required and authorized, upon the Receipt of this order, forthwith to proceed,
effectually and diligently, to execute the said Ordinance, according to the
tenor thereof, in every behalf, without omission, favor, dread, malice, or
any other thing, to be attempted, by them, or any of them, to the contrary
thereof: And for that end; It is further Ordained and Declared: That the said
Assessors, shall hereby have authority to call before them, as well such
persons, as they shall think fit to their assistance: As also, all or any such
persons, as are to be assessed. And the said Assessors shall appoint the said
Collectors, in their several Divisions and Precincts, for gathering the sums
that shall be assessed; And give notice of the sum and sums of money, at
which every person, in their divisions and precincts shall be particularly
assessed. And WHEREAS it is expressed, in the said Ordinance, (So as the
assessement exceed not the twentieth part of the estates of the persons to be
assessed) It is hereby Declared, for prevention of all inequality in the said
assessement: That if the said Assessors, or any four of them, proceeding in
their assessement according to their Judgments, and best Information, shall
assesse any person, above the twentieth part of his estate; And that the person
so assessed, does find himself grieved, with the same assessing or Rating:
That then the party so assessed, (paying one moiety of the sum he shall be
assessed at, within six days next after assessement, and notice thereof
given, or left, at the dwelling house of the party so assessed) may, (during
six days, after his having paid the said Moiety, as aforesaid) have liberty,
and may address himself for remedy and relief, unto the persons nominated by
the said Ordinance, to nominate the Assessors, or any four of them, and may
tender his voluntary Oath, or Protestation, to such persons, that he is
over-rated, and of the true value of his estate (if he please) and after due
examination, and perfect knowledge thereof had, and perceived; The said Persons
authorized to nominate Assessors as aforesaid, or any four of them, shall
hereby have power to Order such abatement of the said assessement, according as
shall appear unto them just, and equal upon the same examination. And it is
hereby further Ordained and Declared, that the person so assessed and sworn,
shall within three days next after the Order of abatement, in that behalf
made, pay unto, or be repaid by the Treasurers who received the other moiety of
such assessement, such sum or sums of money, as by the said Order of
abatement shall be appointed: And in case the said person, so sworn and
assessed, shall not pay within the said three days, next after Order of
abatement made, the sum thereby ordered to be paid; That then the same sum,
shall be recovered by distress, or otherwise, as is provided in the said
Ordinance of the 29. of November last, (in case the sums assessed shall not
be paid into the Guild Hall, London, according to the true meaning of the same)
And if it be proved by witnesses, or by the parties own confession, or other
lawful ways or means, within six months after any such Oath made, that
the same person so rated, and sworn, was of any better or greater estate, in
Lands, Goods, or other things above specified, at the time of the making the
said Ordinance, then the said person so sworn, did declare upon his Oath. That
then every person so offending, shall lose and forfeit, so much lawful money
of England, as he the same person so sworn, was first assessed at, or taxed to
pay, by virtue of the Ordinance aforesaid: To be recovered, by distress, or
otherwise, as is provided, in the said Ordinance of the 29. of November last,
(in case the sums of money to be assessed by virtue of the said Ordinance
shall not be paid into the Guild Hall London, according to the true meaning of
the same) And it is hereby further Ordained and Declared, That the said
Assessors and Collectors shall incur no damage by reason of their
over-valuing the estate of any person assessed, or to be assessed, or
recovering or receiving the same, by virtue of the Ordinance aforesaid, unless
some corruption or indirect carriage therein, shall be proved in Parliament
against them.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons a^^^^bled in Parliament that this Ordinance
be forthwith Printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

At the Committee of Lords and Commons for Advance of Money and other
necessaries for the Army.
IT is Ordered that the Assessors of the Ward or place hereunder written, for
raising money, according to the Ordinance of the 29. of November last, do
forthwith give under their hands, or of four of them, to the Collectors of the
same Ward or place, a Roll of the names of such persons as are by them
Assessed, and of the several sums of money, at which they are Assessed. And
so from time to time, until all the persons in the said Ward or place (which
the said Assessors shall hold meet) shall be assessed. And that the said
Assessors deliver forthwith in writing, and so from henceforth weekly, unto the
Clerk of this Committee, the names of the persons, and the sums of money so
assessed. And that according to the said Ordinance, and of another Ordinance of
the 14. of this instant December, notice be given or left at the dwelling
houses of the persons assessed, to pay in the sums of money, at which they
are assessed, according to the said Ordinance. And it is further ordered, that
the Collectors of each Ward and place, do deliver in writing, to the Clerk of
this Committee, an account of the moneys levied or received, or to be levied or
received, and of the several days that notice was given to the parties
assessed, of the assessement aforesaid, every Friday in the afternoon, at
Haberdashers hall, London. Whereof they are not to fail.

Ordered that this be Printed, and the names of the Assessors and Collecters in
each Ward and place be underwritten by the Clerk of this Committee, and sent
to them forthwith.

London Printed for Robert Dunscomb. January 2. 1642.


