Die Jovis, 20 Januarii. 1647.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, For enabling a
Committee in the County of Kent to put in execution all former Ordinances of
Parliament concerning Indemnity.
THe Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, having by an Ordinance of
Parliament of the one and twentieth day of May, 1647. And by an Additionall
Ordinance of the seventh day of June last, provided for the saving harmless
and indempnified all such Soldiers and others, as have acted by the Authority
of Parliament, or for the service thereof. And finding by several complaints
made to them, that it is a great charge and trouble to very many poor
Soldiers and others, to whom a due relief is intended by the said Ordinances,
to make their repaires to the City of London, and to attend the Committee of
Lords and Commons appointed by the said Ordinances for the execution thereof;
The said Lords and Commons, in consideration thereof, have thought fit to Order
and Ordain; And it is hereby Ordered and Ordained, That Sir John Rivers Knight
and Baronet, and Sir Edward Moyns, Sir Thomas Style, Sir Richard Harders, Sir
Thomas Pierce Baronets, Sir Anthony Welden, Sir John Honywood, Sir Nicholas
Miller Knights, Thomas Plumer, John Twesleton, Lambert Godfry, Richard Porter,
George Newman, Thomas Seylard, William James, Richard Beale, John Brown,
William Skenner, William Boothby, William Kenwrick, George Hall, John Bix Esquire
John Boys of Elmington, Robert Scot, Thomas Blunt Esquire Robert Hales Esquire Sir
Edward Masters Knight, Thomas Den, Robert Ladd, John Nutts Esquire Sir James
Oxinden Knight, Thomas Broadnex, John Holland, Thomas Boys of Wilsbourgh Esquire
George Duke Esquire Be and are hereby appointed to be a Committee for the County of
Kent, for the putting in execution the several Powers contained in the said
Ordinances. And the said persons, or any five or more of them within the County
aforesaid, are hereby authorized and appointed to take care from time to time
duly to execute and perform the Powers given by the said Ordinances, as by
the same is expressed and Ordained.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the old Bayley. 1647.


