AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For Securing of
the Eighty thousand Pounds advanced by, and under the eight Treasurers
hereafter named:

And for a further Provision, for the raising and maintaining of the Forces
under the Command of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

31. Martii, 1645.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed at London for Edward Husbands.

April 2. 1645.

31. Martii, 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, For securing of
the Eighty Thousand pounds, advanced by and under the eight Treasurers
hereafter named, and for a further Provision for the Raising and Maintaining of
the Forces under the Command of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.

FOr the better securing of the Eighty thousand pounds, undertaken to be lent
by diverse persons, as well Aldermen as Merchants and others, and for the more
orderly receiving and issuing out of the Moneys appointed to be Taxed and
Leavied by the Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, made the fifteenth of
February last; for the raising, and maintaining the Forces under the command of
Sir Thomas Fairfax: Be it Ordained, and it is Ordained by the Lords and Commons
in Parliament assembled; That Sir John Wollaston Knight, Thomas Adams, John
Warner, and Thomas Andrews, Aldermen of the City of London; Abraham,
Chamberlain, George Witham, Francis Allen, and John Dethicke of London,
Merchants; shall be Treasurers at War during the ten Months mentioned in the
said former Ordinance of the fifteenth of February last: And be it likewise
Ordained, That the said Treasurers at War shall receive from the several
Lenders of the said Money, the Sum of Eighty thousand pounds, and from the
several Collectors of all other the Moneys to be Taxed, Leavied, and paid by
virtue of the said former Ordinance of the fifteenth of February last, the said
Sums to be Leavied, Taxed, and paid; which several Sums of Money shall be by
them paid to the said Treasurers, and issued forth for the raising and
maintaining of the said Forces, and the charges incident to the same; And for
the re-imbursing and repayment of the said Lenders, the said Sum of Eighty
thousand pounds, with the interest thereof, after the Rate of Eight pounds per
Cent. from the time of the lending thereof, to the time of the re-payment
thereof, to the several Lenders of the same, their Executors and
Administrators, or such other person or persons, to whom the said Lenders,
their Executors or Administrators shall under their respective hands in writing,
appoint the same or any part thereof to be paid, and the said Treasurers or any
two of them (one of them being an Alderman, the other a Commoner) shall have
power, and are hereby authorized, enjoined and required to re-pay the said
Eighty thousand pounds unto the said Lenders, their Executors or Assigns, or
such person or persons their Assignees as aforesaid, in manner and form
following: viz. Twenty six thousand, six hundred, sixty six pounds, thirteen
shillings and four pence; with such interest thereof at one entire payment out
of the moneys to be Taxed, Leavied and paid for the Collection of the fifth
month; by virtue of the said former Ordinances; Twenty six thousand, six
hundred, sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings four pence, with the interest
thereof, at one entire payment out of the moneys to be Taxed, Leavied, and paid
for the sixth months Collection, by virtue of the said former Ordinance: And
twenty six thousand, six hundred, sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings, four
pence, with interest after the same Rate, at one entire payment out of the
moneys to be Taxed, Leavied, and paid for the seventh months Collection, by
force of the said Ordinance of the fifteenth of February: The said several
sums of Twenty six thousand, six hundred, sixty six pounds, thirteen shillings
four pence, with interest thereof, to be paid out of the first moneys to be
received in, or for the said several and respective fifth, sixth, and seventh
Months Collection, by force of the said recited Ordinance, and of this present
Ordinance. And in case there be not sufficient raised out of the fifth, sixth
and seventh months Leavy, tax or receipt, That then the said Treasurers, or
any two of them, (one of them being an Alderman the other of them a Commoner)
shall have power, and they are hereby authorized, enjoined and required to pay
the said Eighty thousand pounds, with interest as aforesaid, or the remainder
thereof, to the said Lenders, their Executors, or Assigns as aforesaid, out of
such sums of money as shall be Taxed, Leavied, and paid, by virtue of the said
Ordinance of the fifteenth of February last, and this present Ordinance, for
the eighth, ninth, and tenth months in the said recited Ordinance mentioned;
The same to be paid proportionably to each Lender, his Executors, or Assigns
as aforesaid, according to the sum by him or them advanced by way of Loan, upon
his demand thereof from the said Treasurers or any two of them, the one of them
being an Alderman, the other a Commoner. And if there shall be a failer of the
payment of the said Eighty Thousand Pounds, and the interest thereof at such
rate as aforesaid, or any part of the same out of the said monthly Collections
hereby appointed for the payment thereof: It is hereby ordained, That so much
thereof as shall be unpaid, shall be paid out of such other receipts as are
hereafter mentioned, or as shall be in the power of both Houses of Parliament
to dispose of, or by some other ways or means to be provided for by both
Houses of Parliament, who undertake the provision thereof accordingly: And that
every County, City, Borough and other place may be fully assessed according to
the Rate by the said Ordinance, intended to be Taxed and Assessed upon them, in
case there should be default in any of the Committees appointed by the said
Ordinance, in the making of the said Assessment, or in any County, City,
Borough, or other place, in paying of the sums Assessed, or any negligence or
default in any Collector to be appointed by virtue of the said former
Ordinance, for raising and maintaining the said Forces, or Collecting of the
same, or otherwise; Be it Ordained, That the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl
of Kent, the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Pembrook, the Earl of Salisbury, the
Earl of Denbigh, the Earl of Bullingbrook, the Lord Viscount Say and Seal, the
Lord Wharton, the Lord Howard, Master Solicitor, Sir Henry Vane Junior, Mr.
Crew, Mr. Pierrepont, Mr. Stroad, Mr. Recorder, Sir John Evelyn, Mr. Ellis, Mr.
Reynolds, Colonel Ven, Sir Thomas Soame, Mr. Jennour, Mr. Hodges, Mr. Pury,
Mr. Prideaux, Mr. Benningfield; Mr. Bond, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Scawen, and
Sir Gilbert Gerard, Members of the Commons House of Parliament, and the said
eight Treasurers, or any four of them, (whereof two to be Aldermen, and two to
be Commoners) calling unto them such of the Lenders as they or the greater
number of them shall think fit, shall have full power and they are hereby
authorized to take and set town such order as they shall think meet and fit
for the full assessing, and the due collecting of the said several sums of
Money to be taxed, leaviod, and paid, and leavying the Arrears hereafter in
this present Ordinance mentioned, and all incident Charges touching the same.
And such order shall be obeyed by every person and persons in such manner and
form as shall be by the Persons before named, or any eight of them (^oure of
them at the least being Members of the Commons House of Parliament) directed
and prescribed, The same power not to exceed that already given to the
respective Committees by the said recited Ordinance of the fifteenth of
February last.

And be it further Ordained, that the said Treasurers at Wars, or any two of
them (whereof one of them to be an Alderman, and the other a Commoner) shall
subscribe every receipt to such person or persons, as shall advance by way of
Loan any sum or sums of Money toward the said eighty thousand pounds
undertaken to be Advanced, and such receipt shall interest and entitle every
person or persons, to whom the same shall be given their and his Executors,
Administratours and Assigns, as aforesaid, into the security and benefit of
this present Ordinance for the repayment of the said eighty thousand pounds,
with such interest thereof as aforesaid.

And be it further Ordained, that the Receipt of the said Treasurers, or any
two of them, (the one of them being an Alderman, and the other a Commoner)
shall be a sufficient discharge to every Collector, or other person that shall
pay in any Money, that shall be taxed, leavied, and paid by virtue of the said
Ordinance of the fifteenth of February last, or this present Ordinance. And
that the said Members of the House of Commons, or any five of them shall have
Power, and are hereby Authorized to be a Committee to give Warrants to the
said Treasurers at War, or any two of them, for the issuing forth of the said
eighty thousand pounds advanced by way of loan, and all other the Moneys that
they shall receive by virtue of the said former, and of this present Ordinance,
and in the same Warrant it shall be expressed for what purpose the Money
contained in the same is to be issued, and the said Warrants with a receipt
thereupon under the hand of the party to whom the same is directed to be paid,
or his Assignee or Assignees, shall be a sufficient discharge to the said
Treasurers, and every of them, for so much as they shall thereupon issue forth,
Except for the several sums of twenty six thousand, six hundred sixty six
pounds thirteen shillings and four pence, with interest thereof, as
aforesaid; Which sums are to be paid to the persons advancing the said
eighty thousand pounds as aforesaid, and not otherwise employed.

And it is also Ordained, that the said eighty thousand pounds advanced by the
said Lenders, and all Moneys to be raised by virtue of the said Ordinance of
the fifteenth of February last, shall be employed only for she purposes,
uses, and intents in this Ordinance and the forementioned Ordinance of the
fifteenth of February expressed, and no otherwise, and no Warrants shall be
made from the said Committee or any other, or if issued, shall be obeyed, but
only for the purposes aforesaid.

And it is also further Ordained, that the said Treasurers at War for their
pains in receiving, and issuing forth of the said eighty thousand pounds; and
the Moneys to be raised and received by virtue of the laid recited Ordinance,
and this present Ordinance, and in Consideration they shall execute the
employment of the Treasurer at Wars shall have three pence for every pound,
they shall receive and issue forth of the Moneys to be taxed, levied and paid
by virtue of the said recited Ordinance; And shall also have three pounds five
shillings four pence per diem to be disposed of as they shall think fit for
the payment of such persons as they shall think meet to make use of, for the
better execution of the said employment of Treasurer at Wars, and all other
charges allowed to Sir Gilbert Gerrard, as Treasurer at Wars, and shall issue
the Moneys without any further or other allowance, the said allowances to be
paid monthly.

And be it further Ordained, that all arrears which are or shall be due upon
the Ordinance of the fifteenth of February, and all arrearages of Weekly
Assessements due upon any Ordinance from any of the Inhabitants within the
Cities of London and Westminster, or the County of Middlesex. And all Moneys
that shall be due from any Accomptant or Accomptants, Collectors or Treasurers
by virtue of any Ordinance for taking of the Accounts of the whole Kingdom
shall be employed, toward the raising and maintaining of the Forces under the
Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, and other the purposes in this Ordinance
mentioned.

Provided, That all such Moneys that by any Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament, or Order of the Commons House of Parliament, before the passing
hereof, are to be paid out of the said Arrears or Moneys that shall be due from
any Accomptant or Accomptants, Collectors or Treasurers shall be first paid,
notwithstanding this Ordinance, or any thing herein contained to the Contrary.

Provided also, that this Ordinance, shall not extend to the Raising or
Leavying of the last Months Tax or Assessement upon the County of Kent, but
that the same shall and may be employed for the Garrison of Plymouth.

Provided, and it is Ordained, that the tax and Assessement on the several
Counties and places in the said Ordinance of the fifteenth of February
mentioned, and all power for Collecting, Raising, Leavying and receiving the
same, shall be in force, and stand in being, and put in execution until the
sum of eighty thousand pounds with interest as aforesaid be repaid, although
this present War continue not so long.

Provided that, Whereas by the said former Ordinance; It is appointed that the
sums therein mentioned shall be taxed, levied, and paid from the first day of
February last, till the first day of December next, which comprehends more
then ten Months reckening, eight and twenty days to the month, Whereupon
some doubt has arisen, touching the Computation of the said Months; for
clearing whereof, It is hereby Declared and Ordained, that the said Monthly
Tax be made according to the Callender, and not otherwise.

And whereas by the said former Ordinance, the several Committees, or any two
of them are Authorized, and required to allow the several allowances of one
penny, and one half penny therein mentioned: And it is necessary that the
several sums of Money Collected be paid to the said Treasurers in the
Guild Hall London.

It is Ordained, that the said sums be paid at the Guild Hall London
aforesaid, according to the intent of this Ordinance by the said Collectors,
And upon payment thereof the said Treasurers or any two of them (the one of
them being an Alderman, and the other a Commoner) shall give allowance of the
said one penny, and one half penny to the said Collectors, and to free the
said Committees from trouble therein. It is also Ordained that the said power,
as to the allowing of the said one penny, and one half penny, by the said
Committees be hereby discharged the former Ordinance notwithstanding.

FINIS.

