An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
for the enabling of the Commissioners of the great Seal and the other
Committees in their several Counties, to tender an Oath to all such persons of
what degree or quality soever, that shall come into the protection of the
Parliament.

Die Sabbathi 5 April* 1645.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that all and
every person of what degree or quality soever, that has lived or shall live
within the Kings quarters, or been aiding, assisting, or adhering unto the
Forces raised against the Parliament, and has or shall come to inhabit or
reside under the power and protection of the Parliament, shall swear upon the
holy Evangelist in manner following:

I A. B. do swear from my heart, that J will not directly nor indirectly
adhere unto, or willingly assist the King in this War, or in this cause
against the Parliament, nor any Forces raised without the consent of the two
Houses of Parliament in this Cause or War. And I do likewise swear that my
coming and submitting my self under the power and protection of the
Parliament, is without any manner of design whatsoever to the prejudice of the
proceedings of the two Houses of this present Parliament, and without the
direction, privity, or advice of the King, or any of his Council, or Officers,
other then what I have now made known. So help me God, and the Contents of
this Book.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the Commissioners
for keeping of the Great Seal of England for the time being, shall have power,
and are hereby authorized to tender and administer the said Oath unto any
Peer, or Wife or Widow of any Peer, so coming to inhabit as abovesaid. And
it shall be lawful to and for the Committee of the House of Commons for
Examinations, the Committee for the Militia in London, and all Committees of
Parliament in the several Counties and Cities of the Kingdom, to tender and
administer the said Oath unto every other person so coming to inhabit as
abovesaid. And if any person (not being a Member of, or assistant unto either
of the Houses of the Parliament) shall refuse or neglect to take the said Oath
so duly tendered unto him or her, as abovesaid, the said Commissioners and
Committees respectively, shall and may commit the same person to some prison,
there to remain without Bail or Mainprize until he shall conform thereunto.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

London Printed for Edward Husband, 1645.


