AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For
re-imbursing of Captain WILLIAM EDWARDS the moneys to him due for the service
of the State, and for his better enabling to proceed on in the said service.

Die Martis, 28 Mati. 1644.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that this Ordinance shall be
forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for J. Wright in the Old Bailey. 1644.

Die Martis, 28 Maii. 1644.
WHereas Captain William Edwards, Alderman of Chester, Captain of a Troop of
Horse under the command of Sir William Brereton, has done good service, and
suffered much in his estate for his fidelity to the Parliament, as by
sufficient testimony appears; The Lords and Commons thereof taking notice,
and that there is an arreare to him, his Officers and Troopers; the sum of
three thousand forty one pound four shilling and six pence; and that unless
the same be paid, or he some other way competently provided for, he can neither
recrute or maintain his Troop and charge, or proceed to do more service,
which he is willing to do, do think sit that some course should be held for
his encouragement and further supply. And whereas some Citizens of London and
others have debts owing unto them by delinquents within the County of Chester,
and the County of the City of Chester, and have also some debts owing unto them
by well affected persons in the said County and City who were of sufficient
abilities, but are of late plundered and destroyed in their estates by the
Commissioners of Array in the said County and City for their adherence and good
affection to the public cause of the Parliament and Kingdom, some of them
having suffered long imprisonment, and others fled for their safety with loss
of their estates; Be it therefore on the said Captains behalf, and for and
toward his better satisfaction ordered and ordained, in case any such
creditors shall now advance by way of loan to the said Captain Edwards, for
and toward the said recruit and satisfaction of his said arreares the value of
the fifth part of such debts as are to them owing, as aforesaid; The said
Captain Edwards shall have and hereby has full power and authority to receive
the same, and to take the subscriptions of such Citizens and others as will
lend the said fifth part, and to give Notes or Acquittances for the same
endorsed on this Ordinance, or upon such true Copy thereof as shall be
published in print, and therein mentioning the sums due unto them, and the
Debtors names and place of their dwelling. And in such cases it shall be
lawful for Sir William Brereton Baronet, or in his absence for the Committees
of Sequestration, or any three or more of the Deputy Lieutenants of the said
County of Chester, or the County of the City of Chester, when the said City and
places respectively spectively shall be reduced to obedience to the Parliament,
to set and let by Lease or Leases unto the said Creditors so much of the Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments of Deliquents which shall be seized and sequestered
in the said County, and County of the City of Chester respectively (to wit,
such as are already by Ordinance of Parliament ordered and disposed of for
maintenance of the Forces under the command of the Parliament, for reducing of
those parts to obedience, and to be put in execution by the said Sir William
Brereton, whose express assent is hereunto) as may serve not only to satisfy
the said fifth part so contributed and lent with interest at eight pound per
cent. for the same, but also the residue of such their just debts respectively,
whereof they shall make such contribution as aforesaid. And the said Captain
is to give account to the said Sir William Brereton, or in his absence to the
Committees or Deputy Lieutenants of the sums, or what he shall receive by
virtue of this Ordinance, so as the same may not exceed the proportions
intended and owing unto the said Captain as aforesaid. And the said Sir
William Brereton and the said Committees and Deputy Lieutenants are hereof to
take notice, and the said Captain Edwards is also to be accomptable to the
Lords and Commons, or such as they shall appoint, for what he shall execute,
do, or receive by virtue of the premises.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.


