AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, FOR Raising
Moneys to be employed for the maintenance of the Forces under the Command of
Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight.

20 Martii, 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
March 23. 1647.

AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, For Raising
Moneys to be employed for the maintenance of the Forces under the Commnand of
Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, for the due paying of such
Forces under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight (as the great and many
dangers and distempers do require to be kept up within this Kingdom for the
present) and to the end that the Subjects in this Kingdom may not be
impoverished by F^^e quarter, but that all Officers and Soldiers may justly and
duly pay and discharge their Quarters, Do Order and Ordain, and be it therefore
Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and
by Authority of the same, That the sum of Sixty thousand pounds per mensem, by
the several sums of Money hereafter mentioned, shall be Monthly (according to
the ordinary computation) Taxed, Collected, Leavied, and Paid for the purposes
aforesaid, from the Twenty fifth day of March, 1648. until the Nine and
twentieth day of September thence next following, in such manner and form as is
Mentioned, Expressed, and Declared in an Ordinance of Parliament of the Three
and twentieth of June, 1647. Entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, for the Raising of Moneys to be employed toward the
Maintenance of Forces within this Kingdom, under the Command of Sir Thomas
Fairfax Knight.

VIZ. Upon the county of Bedford, the monthly sum of six hundred seventy three
pounds thirteen shillings, eleven pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Berks, the monthly sum of six hundred eighty three pounds,
fifteen shillings and nine pence.

Upon the county of Buckingham, the monthly sum of eight hundred fifteen
pounds, eight shillings.

Upon the county of Cambridge, the monthly sum of One thousand four hundred
sixty two pounds, sixteen shillings six pence farthing.

Upon the Isle of Ely, the monthly sum of Four hundred ninety pounds, eighteen
shillings one half penny.

Upon the county of Chester, the monthly sum of Three hundred forty five
pounds, four shillings eleven pence farthing.

Upon the city and county of Chester, the monthly sum of Thirty nine pounds,
thirteen shillings and eleven pence.

Upon the county of Comwal, the monthly sum of One thousand two hundred twenty
eight pounds, five shillings six pence farthing.

Upon the county of Cumberland, the monthly sum of Seventy seven pounds, one
penny three farthings.

Upon the county of Derby, the monthly sum of Three hundred forty two pounds,
nine shillings four pence.

Upon the county of Devon, the monthly sum of Three thousand five hundred
twenty seven pounds, six shillings penny half penny.

Upon the city and county of Exon, the monthly such of One hundred twenty
seven pounds, nine shillings two pence farthing.

Upon the county of Dorset, the monthly sum of Nine hundred thirty five
pounds, ten shillings ten pence three farthings.

Upon the town and county of Pool, the monthly sum of nine pounds sixteen
shillings, seven pence half penny.

Upon the county of Durham, the monthly sum of One hundred fifty nine pounds,
two shillings.

Upon the county of York, and the city and county of York, the monthly sum of
Two thousand two hundred sixty pounds, nineteen shillings two pence.

Upon the town and county of Kingston upon Hull, the monthly sum of Fifty
pounds, eighteen shillings nine pence.

Upon the county of Essex, the monthly sum of Four thousand five hundred forty
seven pounds, nine shillings five pence.

Upon the county of Gloucester, the monthly sum of One thousand two hundred
twelve pounds, three shillings six pence three farthings.

Upon the city and county of Gloucester, the monthly sum of One hundred thirty
four pounds, thirteen shillings nine pence.

Upon the county of Hereford, the monthly sum of Eight hundred sixty eight
pounds, two shillings three pence.

Upon the county of Hertford, the monthly sum of One thousand six hundred
thirty eight pounds, fifteen shillings five pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Huntington, the monthly sum of Six hundred eighty seven
pounds, three shillings five pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Kent, with the city and county of Canterbury, and the
cinque ports within the county of Kent, the monthly sum of Four thousand seven
hundred sixty three pounds, one shilling one penny.

Upon (...) county of Lancaster, the monthly (...) hundred twenty nine pounds,
three (...) p^nce.

Upon the county of Leicester, the monthly sum of Four hundred sixty seven
pounds, nine shillings ten pence half penny.

Upon the county of Lincoln (and the City and county of Lincoln) the monthly
sum of One thousand six hundred thirty eight pounds, one shilling half penny.

Upon the city of London, the monthly sum of Three thousand nine hundred and
seven pounds, nineteen shillings and two pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Middlesex, City and Liberty of Westminster, the monthly
sum of One thousand five hundred twenty one pounds, seventeen shillings nine
pence.

Upon the county of Monmouth, the monthly sum of One hundred ninety two
pounds, nineteen shillings and one penny.

Upon the county of Northampton, the monthly sum of Five hundred ninety one
pounds, eleven shillings eleven pence farthing.

Upon the county of Notingham, the monthly sum of Three hundred fifty three
pounds, nineteen shillings three pence.

Upon the town and county of Notingham, the monthly sum of Eleven pounds,
fourteen shillings six pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Norfolk, the monthly sum of Four thousand seven hundred
sixty three pounds, one shilling one penny.

Upon the city and county of Norwich, the monthly sum of Two hundred forty six
pounds, (...) shillings five pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Northumberland, the monthly sum of One hundred pounds,
sixteen shillings ten pence three farthings.

Upon the Town of Newcastle, the monthly sum of Twenty nine pounds, seventeen
shillings.

Upon the county of Oxon, the monthly sum of seven hundred seventy nine
pounds, thirteen shillings eleven pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Rutland, the monthly sum of One hundred twenty eight
pounds, one shilling and one farthing.

Upon the county of Salop, the monthly sum of Five hundred fifty three pounds,
nineteen shillings nine pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Stafford, and upon the city and county of the city of
Litchfield, the monthly sum of Four hundred sixty five pounds, ten shillings
three farthings.

Upon the county of Somerset, the monthly sum of Two thousand and fifty
pounds, eleven shillings and five pence.

Upon the city and county of Bristol, the monthly sum of One hundred and
twelve pounds, twelve shillings ten pence half penny.

Upon the county of Southampton, the monthly sum of One thousand five hundred
and fourteen pounds, four shillings five pence farthing.

Upon the town and county of Southampton, the monthly sum of Sixty two pounds,
eight shillings one farthing.

Upon the Isle of Wight, the monthly sum of Two hundred and eight pounds, two
shillings six pence farthing.

Upon the county of Suffolk, the monthly sum of Four thousand seven hundred
sixty three pounds, one shilling and a penny.

Upon the county of Surrey, with the Borough of Southwark, the monthly sum of
One thousand three hundred forty seven pounds eight shillings.

Upon the County of Sussex, and the ports within the county of Sussex, the
monthly sum of Two thousand six hundred forty six pounds, two shillings nine
pence three farthings:

Upon the county of Warwick, the monthly sum of Six hundred twenty one pounds,
three shillings six pence farthing.

Upon the city and county of Coventry, the monthly sum of Seventy nine pounds,
nineteen shillings.

Upon the county of Worcester, and upon the city and county of Worcester, the
monthly sum of Seven hundred forty eight pounds, three shillings seven pence
farthing.

Upon the county of Wilts, the monthly sum of One thousand four hundred twenty
one pounds, eighteen shillings and nine pence farthing.

Upon the county of Westmerland, the monthly sum of Sixty six pounds, nine
shillings two pence half penny.

Upon the Isle of Anglesey, the monthly sum of Fifty pounds, seventeen
shillings and ten pence.

Upon the county of Brecknock, the monthly sum of One hundred and three
pounds, six shillings and eleven pence.

Upon the county of Cardigan, the monthly sum of One hundred twenty two
pounds, nine shillings ten pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Carmarthen, the monthly sum of One hundred pounds, fifteen
shillings six pence.

Upon the county of Carnarvan, the monthly sum of Forty two pounds, six
shillings five pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Denbigh, the monthly sum of Fifty four pounds, six
shillings ten pence half penny.

Upon the county of Flint, the monthly sum of Thirty three pounds, six
shillings four pence half penny.

Upon the county of Glamorgan, the monthly sum of One hundred thirty one
pounds, fifteen shillings ten pence.

Upon the county of Merioneth, the monthly sum of thirty one pounds eleven
shillings six pence.

Upon the county of Montgomery, the monthly sum of One hundr^d twenty three
pounds, two shillings eight pence farthing.

Upon the county of Pembrook, the monthly sum of One hundred sixteen pounds,
four shillings seven pence farthing.

Upon the county of Radnor, the monthly sum of Seventy three pounds, two
shillings seven pence haf penny.

Upon the town of Haverford. West, the monthly sum of ten pounds, two
shillings six pence three farthings.

And that the said several sums of Money may be duly Taxed, Leavied and Paid as
is directed, Be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
Persons named in an Ordinance of Parliament, Dated the sixteenth day of
February, 1647. Entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, for raising Twenty thousand pounds a Month for the Relief of
Ireland; And the persons hereafter named, shall be Commissioners for the
several and respective Counties, Cities and Places in the said Ordinance
mentioned and expressed, to put this Ordinance in execution in the said several
and respective Counties, Cities and Places, for which they are thereby
respectively appointed Commissioners: And it is further Ordained, That the said
respective Commissioners, in the said several and respective Counties, Cities
and Places, or any three or more of them, shall and may, for the more effectual
proceeding in the said Service, use, exercise, and put in execution, all and
every the Powers and Authorities, given limited or appointed by and in an
Ordinance of the three and twentieth of June, 1647. Entitled, An Ordinance of
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For the raising of moneys to be
employed toward the maintenance of Forces within this Kingdom, under the
command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, and for the speedy transporting of and
paying the Forces for carrying on the War in Ireland; and one other Ordinance
of the four and twentieth of December, 1647. Entitled An Ordinance for the
several Commissioners in the respective Counties, to make a Collector for the
monthly Assessment of Threescore thousand pounds. And it is further Ordered,
That the persons hereafter named shall be Commissioners added to the
Commissoners mentioned as aforesaid.

For the County of Berks,
John Blagrave, Richard Knollis, Esquires, George Wooldridge, Peter Weaver
Gent. The Major of Redding for the time being, and Mr. Thomas Bateman Alderman.
Buckingham,
Sir Peter Wentworth Knight of the Bath, George More, Robert Aldridge, John
Green, Toby Terril, Francis Ingolsby, Edward Greenfield, and William Bowyer,
Esquires, Toby Terril Esquire and Francis Ingolsby.
Cheshire,
Edward Hide, Colonel John Leigh, Thomas Manwaring, Jonathan Brewen, Colonel
Thomas Croxton, and Thomas Marbury, Esquires.
Cornwall,
William Griger, Esquire
Cambridgeshire,
James Chennery and William Janes, Esquires.
Durham,
George Lilburn Esquire
Derbyshire,
Anthony Moorwood and Lionel Fanshaw, Esquires.
Essex,
George Tompson Esquire
Hertfordshire,
William Brigs, Toby Combs, William Ashton, Esqs The Major of Hertford for the
time being.
Hereford,
Bennet Hoskins, and Edmund Weaver, Esquires; James Lane Gentleman, The Major
of Hereford for the time being, Edward Freeman, Thomas Dunet, Isaac Seward,
Esquires; Francis Hall, Walter Wall, John Cooper and John Hering, Gentlemen.
Ipswich,
Jacob Caly Gentleman.
Hampshire,
Humphrey Edwards, Robert Reynolds, Francis Allen, Esquires.
Hull,
John Anlaby, Christopher Ledger Esqs
Lincolnshire-Lindsey,
William Lord Mounson, Edward Nelthorp, Thomas Williamson, Esquires, Thomas
Cuney Gent. Thomas Welby Esquire.
Middlesex,
Sir Anthony Irby Knight.
Norfolk,
Valentine Walton Esquire, Col: Charles Fleetwood.
Notingham,
John Oddingsels Esquire
Northumberland and Newcastle,
Sir Arthur Hasierig Baronet.
Oxon,
Sir Thomas Read, Sir Francis Norris, Knights; George Greenwood, Henry Knap,
John Tavernor, Edmond Lenthal and Walter Elwood, Esquires.
Surrey,
Thomas Scot, John Blackwel and Francis Allen, Esquires; Peter de Laney, Henry
Bradley, and William Hicocks, Gentlemen.
Wilts,
Edward Michel, Edward Mildcot, George Dier, William Temple, William Adlam,
William Radish, Gent.
Worcestershire,
William Ligon, John Egioke, Edward Pit, Henry Bramley of Vpton, Charles
Cornwallis, Thomas Young, Humphrey Greswold, Daniel Dobbins, and Ta^bot Badger,
Esquires; The Major of Evesham for the time being, Mr. William Martin of
Evesham, Gent.
Yorkshire East Riding,
Philip Saltmarsh and John Tomlins, Esquires.
North Riding,
Robert Walters, John Oddingsels junior, Esquires, Sir Henry Heyman Knight and
Baronet.
West Riding,
Sir Arthur Ingram Knight, Laurence Parsons and Sampson Stanely, Esquires.
Devon,
John Roll of Stevenston Esquire John Wollacomb, John Yeo, Robert Dillon,
Esquires, and Mr. William Nottle of Barnstable, Merchant.
Suffolk,
Henry Parker and John Branlin, Esquires.
Norwich,
William Gosselin Alderman.
Carnarvanshire,
John Bodarda Esquire Robert VVyn of Carnarvan Gent. William Thomas and William
Stodarte, Gent.
For the City of Bath,
The Major for the time being, John Atwood, Thomas Burford, John Big, Matthew
Clift, Aldermen; John Parker and John Pierce, Gent.

Provided, That the proportions of Rates set upon the several counties in this
Ordinance expressed, shall not be drawn into president for the time to come.
Any thing in this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided, That the Town of Lyn in Norfolk pay no more then according to that
proportion which the Committee of Lords and Commons for the Eastern Association
ordered that Town should pay, as by their Order of the twentieth of November,
1645. appears.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

