AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, FOR The
bringing in the Arreares of the Assessements for the Army, within the City of
London and Liberties thereof.

With the names of the Persons in each Ward appointed for executing the same.

Die Lunae, 24 April. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1648.

Die Lunae 24 April. 1648.
An Ordinance for the speedy bringing in the Arreares of the Assessements in
the City of London and Liberties thereof.

WHereas by an Ordinance of Parliament of the fifteenth of February 1644.
Entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, For
raising and maintaining of Forces for the defense of the Kingdom, under the
Command of the Lord Fairfax by the name of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, a
Monthly Assessement to continue for ten Months from the first of February,
1644. to the first of December then next following, was Ordained to be taxed
and leavied upon the City of London and other places and Counties in the said
Ordinance mentioned: And by another Ordinance of Parliament, dated the
thirteenth day of August, 1645. the said Monthly assessement for maintenance
of the said Army was Ordained, and appointed to continue and endure for six
Months longer from the said first day of December 1645. unto the first day of
June then next following; And whereas by an Ordinance of Parliament dated the
sixteenth pay of April, 1646. the said Ordinance of the fifteenth of February,
1644. with all the Taxes, and payments therein mentioned were to continue for
four Months longer, from the said first of June, 1646. until the first of
October. following; And whereas also by another Ordinance of Parliament of the
three and twentieth day of June last, 1647. several sums of money were to be
taxed, leavied, and paid for maintenance of the said Army by a Monthly
assessement, to continue for twelve Months from the five and twentieth day of
March, 1647. to the five and twentieth day of March, 1648. And whereas by an
Ordinance of Parliament of the fifteenth of March last, 1647. the like sums
of money upon the said City are to be taxed, leavied, and paid for maintenance
of the said Army by a Monthly assessement, to continue for six Months longer
from the five and twentieth of March last to the nine and twentieth of
September now next ensuing, as by the said several Ordinances may appear, And
whereas many great and considerable sums of money remain in Arreare, and yet
unpaid upon the said several Ordinances within the said City of London and
Liberties thereof, to the discouragement of those that have willingly paid
their proportion, very evil example of others, and great hinderance of payment
of the Army; and to the end the said Arrears may be speedily gotten in, and all
obstructions that hinder the coming in thereof be removed, It is Ordained by
the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and be it Ordained by the
authority thereof, That the several persons hereafter named shall be, and are
hereby appointed Commissioners for the said several taxes and assessements in
the said City, and in the several Wards, and Liberties in and belonging to the
said City respectively, to put the said several Ordinances in execution, and
have power, and are hereby authorized to execute, and perform all and every
the powers and authorities comprised in the said Ordinances, or in any the
Ordinances mentioned in the said last recited ordinance of the fifteenth of
March last, or every of them, in as full and ample manner to all intents and
purposes as any the Committees or Commissioners in the said ordinances named,
or any of them might or could do, or perform the same.

Aldersgate within.
RIchard Morrall Josias Hams Thomas Nowell. Richard Gibbs John Sherman Roger
Jenkinson
Aldersgate without
John Johnson Richard Coats Miles Flesher John Billingsley George Osburneston
William Lawrence
Algate Ward.
RIchard Cheverton John Owfield John Dethick Sammel Moyer John Merryat
Christopher Blackston
Basingshaw.
EEdwin Brown George Dunn Capt. Winstandley Thomas Clarke
Broad-street Ward
THomas Clowes James Storey Richard Clutterbuck Robert Hanch Rowland Wilson,
Senior. Nicholas Could Hogan Hovell William Allen
Bridge Ward.
TObias Lisle Richard Young Stephen Estwick Thomas Player Edward Bellamy Isaac
Foster Thomas Ward Tho. Andrews, junior Samuel Lee William Mulins Capt.
Nathaniel Lacy
Bread-street Ward.
RIchard Turner Francis Water-house Thomas Steyne, senior Major Hitchcock John
Harper John Pocock Richard Hutchison Capt. Edward Storey Richard Rigglesworth
Martin Nowell Francis Crafts
Billingsgate Ward.
RObert Wood John Wallington William Harris Randolph Baskervill Thomas Lenthall
Richard Batson Dennis Gawden Thomas Radburne George Greimes
Bishopsgate Ward.
WIll. Pease Deputy Thomas Stock Hugh Norris Richard Hardmeat William Brumwitch
William Manby John Everet William Bartley Richard Warring Edward Abell William
Fletcher William Hedges Edward Salisbury Griffith Owen
Chandlewick Ward.
HVmphrey Hally Thomas Andrews Richard Warner Zouch Watson Richard Dawes Thomas
Waters Grace Harding
Cordwayner Ward.
MAurice Gethin Tempest Milner Nathaniell Hall James Cook Richard Perry Henry
Coleburne William Wallis
Cripplegate within
Walter Boothby Anthony Webster Richard Floyd Hugh Wood Francis Ash William
Blackwell
Cripplegate without
RObert Manwaring Henry Green Charles Mynne Ralph Tasker Walter Price Francis
Webb Robert Arden
Colemanstreet
ANdrew Kendrick Col. Owen Row Ralph Hartley Mark Hildersly Thomas
Barn^rdiston Richard Ashurst Thomas Bower
Cheap-VVard
Will. Adams Dep. Daniel Waldow George Hadley Robert Winch Giles Dent John
Iurion Thomas Allen William Goddard Thomas Brown Thomas Benson Matthew Abott
Jeremy Royston Edmund Sleigh
Castle Beynard
THomas Gee William Gibb William Antrobus Thomas Cole Draper Andrew Neale
Jeremy Richardson Henry Coals D^niel Tailor John Ireton Henry Barton Vincent
Limbrow John Wine Dyer
Cornhill ward
FRancis Moss Gilbret Morewood Francis Coleing Phillip Mead Major Wollaston
Thomas Harris
Dowgate ward
John Green Deputy Major Colson John Bennet William Brumskill Edward
Hollingshed Peregrine Pretty William Roberts Thomas Fisher
Farringdon within
RIchard Glide John Fenton L. Col. Edward Vaughan Edward Honywood Anthony Dowse
Patricke Banford Peter Mills Hugh Ratcliffe John Strange William Greenhill
Edward Parkes Michael Raynor George Clarke John Jones
Tower ward
John Bennet Andrew Richard William Bateman Henry Sweet John Milton Thomas
Burnell Gilbert Keat John Langley Nathaniel Wright George Hanger
Farrington without on Fleet Street side.
THo. Arnoll Deputy Matthew Fox Joseph Parrot Stephen Sedgewicke William
Perkins Francis Allen Alexander Normington Thomas Watkins Edward Lightmaker
Sepulcher side.
Nathaniel Camfield Giles Rowles John Wilcox Thomas Knowles John Gregory Miles
Petty John King Benjamin Potter James Stephens James Martin
Lime-street.
ABraham Chamberlen Roger Peele Richard Middleton John Freebody
Langborne.
John Babington Robert Sweet Tobias Dixon Robert Dicer Thomas Manering Robert
Render Jasper Cleyton Andrew Hyde Geffery Howland Thomas Turgis
Port-soken Ward
LEonard Towers John Haies Richard Berisford Richard Grasforth William Wats^n
Edward Ansloe
Queene-hith.
EDmund Whitwell William Ball Henry Hickman Thomas Churchman Richard Irons
Vrian Normansell
Vintry.
MArtin Bradgate Henry Waller John Cook Andrew Bitgood Humphrey Gould Colonel
Shepherd Thomas Caffin Ralph Baily Robert Norwood
Walbrooke.
THomas Dawney William Rawson Robert Mead Francis Clay Edward Stock Michaell
Hearing Thomas Walker John Adams.
FINIS.

