official insignia
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
For the Apprehending and bringing to condign punishment, all such lewd
persons as shall steal, sell, buy, inveigle, purloyne, convey, or receive any
little Children. And for the strict and diligent search of all Ships and other
Vessels on the River, or at the Downs.

Die Veneris, 9 Maii. 1645.
WHereas the Houses of Parliament are informed, that diverse lewd Persons do
go up and down the City of London, and elsewhere, and in a most barbarous and
wicked manner steal away many little Children, It is ordered by the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, That all Officers and Ministers of Justice be
hereby straightly charged and required to be very diligent in apprehending all
such persons as are faulty in this kind, either in stealing, selling, buying,
inveigling, purloyning, conveying, or receiving Children so stolen, and to
keep them in safe imprisonment, till they may be brought to severe and
exemplary punishment.

It is further ordered, That the Marshals of the Admiralty, and the
Cinque Ports, do immediately make strict and diligent search in all Ships and
Vessels upon the River, and at the Downs, for all such Children, according to
such directions as they have or shall receive from the Committee of the
Admiralty, and Cinque Ports.

It is further ordered, That that this Ordinance be forthwith published in
Print, and Proclaimed in the usual manner as other Proclamations, in all parts
of the City of London, within the Lines of communication, and in all Parishes
within the Bills of mortality, presently: And in all Churches and Chapels by
the Ministers, within the Line of communication, and Bills of mortality, on the
next Lords day: And in all other Churches and Chapels elsewhere respectively,
the next Lords day after the recept hereof, that it may appear to the World,
how careful the Parliament is to prevent such mischiefs, and how far they
do detest a crime of so much villainy.

Mr. Spurstow, Mr. Vassal, and Collonell Venn, (Members of the House of
Commons) are desired to go to the Lord Major, and to acquaint him with this
Order, and to take care that it may be Proclaimed presently, and Published
according to the directions, on the next Lords day.

Die Veneris, 9 Maii. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance
shall be forthwith Printed and published presently, and read in all Parish
Churches and Chapels within the Line of Communication and Bills of mortality,
the next Lords day: and in all other Churches and Chapels elsewhere
respectively, the next Lords day after the receipt hereof.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for John Wright at the sign of the King's Head in the
Old Bailey, May 9. 1644.


