AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT;

For Raising an Army of Horse and Foot in the several Counties and Cities
herein mentioned.

To be ready to march the Twentieth day of this instant July, and to continue
only for the space of Two months.

The said Forces to be paid by their several Counties, according to their
several proportions.

Die Veneris, 12. Julii; 1644.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed; And that the Gentlemen of the several Counties, Members of the House
of Commons, on which any proportions are set, are hereby required to send
Copies of them down into their several Counties, and to write to the several
and respective Committees, to take care that this Ordinance may be forthwith
put in execution.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands, July 15. 1644.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for raising an
Army of Horse and Foot in the several Counties herein expressed.
WHereas the Counties of Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, and other counties and places
have lately raised diverse great Forces both of Horse and Foot, to withstand the
incursion of the Enemy, and to preserve themselves from plundering, and their
Countries from ruin and destruction, which Forces should they be continued
abroad any long time would not only be a prejudice to those Countries in
respect of their Harvest, but would be too great a charge for them to bear.
And for as much as it is necessary that some course be taken for the keeping of
the Enemy from plundering and spoiling, and securing the Countries from the
danger of Alarms, which otherwise will enforce them to continual rising,
disturb them in their Harvest, and other necessary employment, and make their
charge insupportable; To the end therefore the Trained Bands now upon these
late Alarms raised, may return home, and their Country secured from such
further trouble, Be it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, that the several Counties, Cities, and places hereafter
mentioned, shall immediately after the receipt of this Ordinance, raise such
forces of Horse and Foot well and sufficiently armed, as are hereafter
particularly set down, to be ready to march the twentieth day of this present
July, one thousand six hundred forty four; That is to say:

The county of Essex, one thousand Foot, one hundred Horse, and one hundred
Dragoones.

The county of Suffolk, one thousand Foot, one hundred Horse, and one hundred
Dragoones.

The County of Norfolk, and City of Norwich, one thousand Foot, one hundred
Horse, and one hundred Dragoones.

The County of Hertford, five hundred Foot, fifty Horse, and fifty Dragoones.

The Counties of Huntington and Cambridge, with the Isle of Ely, eight hundred
Foot, one hundred Horse, and one hundred Dragoones.

The County of Bedford, five hundred Foot, fifty Horse, and fifty Dragoones.

The County of Kent, and the City and County of the City of Canterbury, and the
Cinque Port, one thousand Foot, one hundred Horse, and one hundred Dragoones.

The City of London, and County of Middlesex, two hundred Horse.

The Counties of Oxon, Berks, and Buckingham, one thousand Foot, two hundred
Horse, and two hundred Dragoones.

The county of Northampton, three hundred Foot, two hundred Horse, and one
hundred Dragoones.

The county of Warwick, the City and County of the City of Coventry, three
hundred Foot, one hundred Horse, and one hundred Dragoones.

The county of Gloucester, the City and County of the City of Gloucester, five
hundred Foot, one hundred Horse, and one hundred Dragoones.

The county of Wilts, five hundred Foot, one hundred Horse, and one hundred
Dragoones.

The counties of Sussex and Surrey, one thousand Foot, one hundred Horse, and
one hundred Dragoones.

And the county of Hampshire, and the Town and county of Southampton, six
hundred Foot, one hundred Horse, and fifty Dragoones, which said Forces so
levied are to be employed about Oxon, or such other places as by both Houses of
Parliament, or the Committee of both Kingdoms shall be thought necessary for
the purposes aforesaid, and to continue only for the space of two Months,
from the time that they shall come to the place of general Rendezvous.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the several
and respective Committees of Parliament, of the several counties, cities, and
places aforesaid, or any three of them, are hereby authorized and required, to
cause this Ordinance to be put in speedy execution. And for the more speedy
execution of this Ordinance, and that the Committees of Parliament (unto whose
care and fidelity the same is especially entrusted, and recommended to be
forthwith dispatched) may be armed with power sufficient for the effecting the
same, Be it likewise Ordained by the authority aforesaid, that it shall and may
be lawful for them, or any three of them respectively, by such reason able
ways and means as they shall find most convenient, to raise and levy such
moneys out of the several counties, cities and places aforesaid, as shall
enable them to raise and arm the said Forces of Horse, Foot, and Dragoones,
and pay them during the time they shall be employed; And if any person or
persons shall neglect to pay any sum of money whereat he shall be so rated or
assessed, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Committees,
or any three of them respectively, to appoint a distress of the goods of such
persons to be taken and sold for satisfaction of the same, restoring unto the
owner the overplus after all necessary charges deducted; and further power and
authority is hereby given to the said respective Committees, or any three of
them respectively, to use all good ways and means for the effecting of this
service, as they in their wisdoms shall think convenient; And if any person
shall show himself opposite or refractory unto this service, so as the same by
means thereof shall be delayed, disturbed, or hindered; it shall and may be
lawful to the said several Committees, or any three of them respectively, to
impose a reasonable Fine upon such person for his contempt therein, so as the
same exceed not the sum of ten pounds for any one offense; and to levy the
same by sequestration of his Estate, or imprisonment of his body. And because
it is not expected that the Trained Band-men should in this time of Harvest be
employed in this service without their own consents, or an absolute necessity,
and that probably it may be difficult to find so many volunteers as will be
sufficient to make up the full numbers in this Ordinance expressed;

It is hereby further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the said
respective Committees or any three of them, are hereby authorized in their
respective counties, cities and places, to Impressed fit and able men for this
service, and to imprison such persons as shall refuse to give obedience, until
they conform thereunto.

And it is lastly Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, that the said respective
Committees or any three of them, in their respective counties, cities and
places, are hereby authorized to reduce the said Foot forces respectively into
companies and Regiments, and the Horse and Dragoons into Troops, and nominate
and place over them Colonels, Captains, and other Officers, except the Majors
of the said Regiments, whose several and respective companies are to be
commanded by the respective Lieutenants thereof, to the place of Rendezvous.
Provided that no Regiment of Foot shall consist of less then One thousand
Foot, besides Officers, and no Troop of Horse or Dragoons of less then One
hundred, besides Officers; and where any county is hereby to raise a less
number of men then will make up an entire Regiment, the several and respective
Committees of such counties and places, are to meet together with what
conveniencie they shall think most fit, and to join their Forces into Regiments
as aforesaid.

And the Committee of both Kingdoms are hereby authorized to nominate a Major
of every Regiment of Foot, and to form the Horse and Dragoons into Regiments,
and nominate the Field-Officers, the said Majors and Field-Officers to be
approved by both Houses of Parliament.

Provided always, That this Ordinance shall not extend to the Pressing of any
Clergyman, Scholar, or Student in any the Universities, Inues of Court or
Chancery, or Houses of Law, or any the Trained Bands in any county, city or
place, or of any person rated in the last Subsidies granted by the Parliament,
or the son of any person rated at Fine pounds Goods, or three pound Lands in
the Subsidy Books; or of any person of the rank or degree of an Esquire or
upwards, or the son of any such person, or the son of the widow of any such
person; or to the Pressing of any person under the age of Eighteen or above the
age of Fifty; or of the Members or Officers of either House of Parliament; or
of the Meniall servants of the Members or Officers of either of the said
Houses, or any the Assistants of the Lords House, or any of their Meniall
servants; or any the Inhabitants of the I^les of Wight or Anglesey, or Cinque
Ports, or of any Mariner, Seaman or Fisherman.

FINIS.

