Die Mercurij 8. Februar. 1642.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT.
For the better Levying and receiving of Moneys Assessed by virtue of the late
Ordinance of 29. November. 1642.
WHEREAS Information is given, That diverse Collectors, nominated for the
Collecting, Levying, and receiving of the sums of money Assessed by virtue of
the late Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, of the 29. of November last,
for Assessements, by reason their other Employments in the Public Affairs of
the State, have been taken off, from the due execution of the same Ordinance,
whereby well affected Persons are still occasionally pressed to further
contributions, whilst those that have not contributed, or not in proportion to
their Estates, do not make a proportionable supply; Be it therefore Ordained,
and Declared by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Collectors nominated or to be nominated by virtue of the said Ordinance, shall
from and after the eleventh day of this instant month of February, only give
notice to the Persons assessed, or to be assessed of the several sums of
money at which they are or shall be assessed; And after the days limited by
the said Ordinance for payment, shall be elapsed, shall repair to the houses
of the persons assessed, or to be assessed, and demand the several sums of
money, at which they are or shall be assessed; and if the same be unpaid, then
to take notice whether sufficient distress may be had, to satisfy the sums
assessed or no, and accordingly to certify the same under their hands, to the
Committee of Lords and Commons for Advance of money and other necessaries for
the Army; And the said Collectors are hereby required and authorized to enquire
of any sum or sums of money due, or to be due unto the persons respectively
assessed, or to be assessed, from any person or persons for any Rents, Tithes,
Goods, or Debts, or for any other thing or cause whatsoever; And to compound
and receive the same, and give discharges therefore, according to the power to
them formerly given by the said Ordinance; And it is hereby further Ordained,
that where the said Collectors shall certify that a sufficient Distress may
be had for the sums of money assessed, or to be assessed; That Colonel
Randall Manwaring, Colonel Richard Brown, Captain Edmund Harvey, Captain
Robert Manwaring, Captain Heriot Washborne, and such Captains, Lieutenants,
Officers, and Soldiers under their several and respective Commands, as they
or any of them shall appoint; Upon notice thereof given, shall immediately
repair unto the several houses of the persons assessed, or to be assessed,
and certified as aforesaid; And levy the sums of money so assessed, by
distress, in as ample manner, as by the said Ordinance of 29. November, and an
Order of both Houses of Parliament, of the third of this instant month of
February, the Collectors nominated upon the said Ordinance are authorized and
appointed to do and perform: And the distress and distresses so had and
taken, to carry into Guild Hall London, or Crosseby-house in Bishops-gate
street London, or to such other place or places as the said Committee shall
appoint; To be sold and disposed of, for or toward satisfaction of the sums
assessed, at such times, and by such persons, and in such manner, as by the
said Committee shall be directed; And in case certificate be made by the said
Collectors, that no sufficient distress can be had, or found, and the sums of
money assessed, cannot be levied by any of the ways or means in the said
Ordinance mentioned. Then the said Colonel Randall Manwaring, Colonel Richard
Brown, Captain Edmund Harvey, Captain Robert Manwaring, Captain Heriot
Washborne, and such Captains, Lieutenants, Officers and Soldiers under their
Command, as they or any of them shall Command and appoint, shall repair unto
the dwelling houses of such person or persons, as are or shall be assessed, and
certified as aforesaid, and there or within any other place within this
Kingdom, where such person or persons shall be suspected to be, to make
diligent search, and him, her, or them, to apprehend and bring in safe custody
before the Committee of the house of Commons for Examinations, who have power
to imprison them in such places of this Kingdom, and for so long time, as the
same Committee shall appoint and Order; And the said Colonells and Captains,
and other the Captains, Lieutenants, Officers, and Soldiers, under the
command of them or any of them, shall have power to break open any of the
locks and doors of any room or other place in or belonging to the said
houses or places where search shall be made for the parties assessed, or to be
assessed, respectively; and the Goods, Debts, Money, and Estate of such persons
as already are imprisoned, or to be imprisoned, shall still be liable, and
shall and may be seized on, sold, received, and disposed of, for satisfaction
of the sums assessed, wheresoever, or in whose hands soever the same shall be
found: And the Families of such Persons Assessed, or to be Assessed, who have
or shall absent themselves from their dwelling houses, or places of aboade,
within the Cities of London and Westminster, the Suburbs of the same, and the
Borough of Southwarke, shall be further proceeded against, as in the said
Ordinance of 29. November. is provided. And the said Collectors, and all
Colonels, Captains, Lieutenants, Officers, Soldiers, and other person or
persons as shall be appointed or employed, in, and for the better execution of
the said Ordinance as aforesaid, shall have the protection of both Houses of
Parliament for their indemnity in this service; And if any thing not mentioned
in the said Ordinance of 29. November. or this present Ordinance, may conduce
to the more effectual levying and receiving of moneys to be assessed upon the
said Ordinance of 29. November, the same is hereby referred to the wisdom and
care of the said Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of money and other
necessaries for the Army; And lastly it is Ordered that this Ordinance shall be
Printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
Die Veneris 3. Feb. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, that
the Collectors made upon the Ordinance of the 29. of November, for
Assessements, shall have power to break open any Chests, Trunkes, Boxes,
Doors, or other things, whereby to take a Distress for the sums of money
assessed upon any person, and unpaid; And the time limited for payment by the
said Ordinance elapsed; And also if they find any Chests, money, or other
Goods in the hands of any persons, which shall be proved or confessed to belong
to any person assessed, that has not satisfied the assessement; That the said
Collectors shall have power to seize such Chests, money, or Goods, for
satisfaction of the sums assessed.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



Printed at London for Robert Dunscomb. February 11. 1642.


