An ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT For making the
Covent Garden Church Parochial.

And for dividing the same from the Parish of Martins in the Fields, upon
several Articles and Conditions.

Also for giving power to 34. persons who are made Governors of the said
Parish to assesse and leavy Maneys for the payment of two Ministers, and for
other Parochial uses, and to nominate Constables and all other Officers of the
said Parish.

LONDON, Printed for William Beesley, and are to be sold at his shop in
Covent Garden, near the Piazza. 1646.

Die Mercurii, 7. Ianuarii, 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the making
of the Precinct of Covent Garden Perochiall.
WWhereas the right Honorable Francis, late Earl of Bedford deceased, did
erect a Fabrique of a Church for the use of the Inhabitants within the Precinct
of Covent Garden, and did intend to settle a certain yearly Stipend of 100. l.
per annum: And the House hereafter mentioned, to be in the tenure of William
Russell, toward the maintenance, and for the habitation of a Minister, to
officiate in the said Church; And whereas it is found necessary, for the better
accommodation and Government of the Precinct hereafter mentioned, That the same
be made Parochial, and divided from the Parish of Saint Martins in the Fields,
And that a further increase of maintenance may be provided for an able
Minister, as is hereafter expressed. It is therefore Ordained by the Lords and
Commons assembled in Parliament, That all that Precinct included within the
Bounds and Limits hereafter expressed, that is to say, beginning in the Strand,
at the East end of the Message, called Bedford House, and including the said
House, with all the out Houses, Gardens, Yards, Buildings, and Backsides
thereunto belonging; And all those Houses within the narrow Bounds, that is to
say, forty Foot without the Brick Wall, And all Houses, Edifices, and
Buildings, and Lands within the said Bounds and Precinct, be from henceforth
for ever a distinct Parish of it self: And that the said Precinct be divided
and exempted from the said Parish of Saint Martins, and from all Dependence,
Offices, Charges, and Contributions, for, or in respect thereof, and from the
cure of the Rector and Vicar of the Parish of Saint Martins, and their
respective successors; And also discharged of all Tithes, Oblations,
Obventions, Mortuaries, Easter Books, and all other Parochial duties
whatsoever. And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the
said new erected Church, within the said Precinct of the said new intended
Parish, shall be the Parish Church for the said Precinct: And that the Right
Honorable William Earl of Bedford, Son and Heir of the said Francis, late
Earl of Bedford, and his Heirs and Assigns for ever, shall have the Patronage
of the said Church; And shall and may from time to time nominate some fit
person to be Rector of the said Church now, and as often as the same shall
become void: And that the Rector of the said Church, and his Successors, shall
be incorporate, and shall have capacity and succession by the name of the
Rector of the Parish Church of Covent Garden, and shall have the cure of souls
of the Inhabitants within the said new intended Parish; and shall hold and
enjoy all that house in Covent Garden, late in the occupation of Maurice Obert,
next adjoining to the Piazza, for and during all the term of twenty seven
years, from the twenty five day of June, Anno 1644. subject nevertheless to
the same yearly Rent, Conditions, Reservations, and Agreements, under which the
same were demized to the said Maurice Obert, by the said Francis, late Earl of
Bedford, and from and after the determination of that term, then all that
House in Covent Garden, aforesaid, late in the occupation of William Russel.
And it is further Ordained, That the said Rector and his Successors, shall have
one yearly Rent of 100. l. to be issuing out of the several Houses situate in
Covent Garden, aforesaid, late in the occupation of Sir Edm. Varney, Knight,
Sir Charles Gaudy, Knight, and Sir Edward Sydenham, Knight, payable upon every
sixteenth day of January, sixteenth day of April, sixteenth day of July, and
twentieth day of October. yearly by equal portions, with power to distrain for
the same Rent of 100.l. or any part or parcel thereof, in or upon the said
Houses; charged with the said Rent. And it is further Ordained, That the
Governors hereafter named, and their Successors, or the greater number of
them, shall and may from time to time nominate some able Divine to be assistant
to the said Rector, and his Successors; And the said Assistant and his
Successors shall have for their habitation that Message in Covent Garden, late
in the occupation of Matthew Plowman, for and during the Sequestration thereof,
subject to the yearly Rent, Conditions, Reservations, and Agreements, contained
in the Demize thereof, made to the said Matthew Plowman, by the said Francis,
late Earl of Bedford: And for the better regulating of the said affairs of the
said Parish, and provision of further maintenance for the said Rector and
Assistant, It is Further Ordained, That there shall be thirty four persons,
Inhabitants of the said Precinct, who shall be called the Governors of the
said new erected Parish; And that the Right Honorable William, Earl of
Bedford, Denzill Hollis, Esquire Sir William Uvedale, Knight, Sir John Evelin,
Knight, Sir John Seaton, Knight, Robert Wallop, Zouch Tate, John Trenchard,
Robert Scawen, Matthew Hale, Anthony Wither, Edw. Carter, Will. Martin, James
Davenport, and John Austee, Esquires, Minian Cunningham, John Hover, Thomas
Constable, Richard Harris, Richard Brigham, Josias Fendall, Duncan Manro,
Richard Reete, Samuel Smith, William Clifton, Richard Lazenby, Thomas Man,
Humphrey Groves, Robert Pattison, Gilbert Meese, Peter Nichols, James Mickle,
Christopher Jackson, and James Moore, Gentlemen, shall be the first Governors of
the said Precinct; And that as often as any of the said Governors shall die,
or be removed, the House-holders, Inhabitants within the said new erected
Parish, or the major part of them, within the space of two Months after such
death, or removal, and in default thereof, the remaining Governors, or the
greater number of them, may choose another in the place of him or them dying,
or removed: which said Governors and their Successors, or the greater number
of such of them, as shall be assembled together upon public warning, shall from
henceforth have power from time to time to nominate a Clerk, Sextons,
Constables, Scavingers, and all other Officers for the said Precinct. And it is
further Ordained, That the yearly sum of 400 li. shall from henceforth be
charged upon the Inhabitants of the said new erected Parish, according to their
respective abilities, except Bedford-House, with the appurtenances, the same to
be Assessed by the said Governors, or the greater number of such of them, as
shall be Assembled together upon public notice, and paid unto them at such
time or times, as to them shall seem fit: Provided always, That no
Inhabitants be assessed by virtue of this Ordinance, or any thing therein
contained, above the yearly rate of eighteen pence in the pound, according to
the true value of the yearly Rent of the House, wherein such Inhabitant shall
dwell within the said Parish, at the time of making of this Assessement: which
rate shall not be charged on the Rent of any Inhabitants, Person, or Landlord
of any house, but shall be Assessed on the several Inhabitants, according to
their abilities, not exceeding the said Sum of eighteen pence per pound, in
proportion to their several Rents, as aforesaid, for any one year, and so
proportionable for a greater or lesser time. And it is further Ordained by the
Authority aforesaid, That in case the said Sums be not paid in manner
aforesaid, That then the said Governors, or any three of them, shall or may
from time to time authorize any person or persons to Leavie the same by
distress, and sale of the goods of such person as shall be so in arreare,
returning the overplus to the Owner, or else recover the same in Action of
Debt, to be brought in the name of the Rector for the time being, wherein no
Wager of Law to be allowed to the defendants. And it is further Ordained, That
the said Governors and their Successors, shall out of the Moneys so by them
received, pay unto the said Rector and his Successors, the yearly Sum of 150
pounds: To the said Assistant and his Successors, the yearly Sum of 150
pounds; the same payments to be made at the days aforesaid, or within twenty
one days after; And that the said Governors, and their Successors, shall hold
and enjoy the said house, late in the occupation of the said William Russell,
during the Term of the aforesaid twenty seven years, and shall convert and
employ, as well the profits of the said house, during the said Term of twenty
seven years, as also all other moneys remaining in their hands, over and
above the said three hundred pounds, for the wages of the said Church Officers,
and such other public uses, as shall seem fit to the said Governors, or the
greater number of such of them, as upon a public warning shall assemble
together; so as the number so assembled, exceed the number of seven persons.
And it is further Ordained, That in case any default of payment happen of any
the Sums aforesaid, the Lord Keeper, or Commissioners of the great Seal for
the time being, shall and may upon the complaint of the party grieved in this
behalf, give relief, according to the true intent of this Ordinance; And for
as much as there is several demands made by the Parish of S. Martins, against
the said new erected Parish, touching Contribution to the Debts, Poor, and
Highways of the Parish of Saint Martins, and also there are several demands
made by the said new erected Parish, of contribution to the Debts of the said
new erected Parish, and touching a proportionable part of the public Revenues
of the said Parish of Saint Martins, and what proportion each Precinct should
bear in public Charges and Assessements. It is therefore further Ordained by
the Authority aforesaid, That the said new Parish of Covent Garden shall pay
one Fifth part of the Public Debts of the Parish of Saint Martins, the said
Debts being audited, and then allowed by the Commissioners of the great Seal;
and shall also pay one Fifth part toward the mending of the Highways of the
Parish of Saint Martins; And shall also pay the Sum of one Hundred Seventeene
Pounds, One shilling, Four pence farthing, half farthing, and the Fifth part
of an half farthing, Quarterly to be paid unto the Parish of Saint Martins,
for the maintenance of their poor: which said Sum shall be paid by the
Parish of Covent Garden to the Parish of Saint Martins for ever. And the said
Parish of Covent Garden shall receive one Fifth part of the Public Revenue of
the Parish of Saint Martins forever, toward the payment aforesaid; And if the
said Sums aforesaid shall not be paid, it shall be lawful for the Parish of
Saint Martins to Leavie the aforesaid Rate for the poor, and the proportion
for the Highways, by all such lawful means as they may do in their own
Parish, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm: Provided, that for the
neglect of their payment of the Rate of the Poor, the same shall not extend to
the making liable Bedford-House, to distress for the same: Provided always,
And it is nevertheless Declared, That this present Ordinance, and the matters
therein Ordained, shall be subject to such Regulation as the Lords and Commons
in Parliament shall hereafter Ordain.

John Brown, Cler. Parl. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


Die Sabbati, 31. Jan. 1645.
WHereas in an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, touching the
making of the Precinct of Covent Garden Parochial, there is a Clause, touching
Allowance to be made by the said Parish of Covent Garden to the Poor of the
Parish of S. Martins, in these words following, (That is to say) And shall also
pay the sum of one Hundred seventeene Pounds, one Shilling, four Pence
Farthing, half Farthing, and the fifth part of a half Farthing, Quarterly to
be paid unto the Parish of S. Martins, for the maintenance of their Poor:
Which said sum shall be paid by the Parish of Covent Garden to the Parish of
S. Martins for ever; As by the said Ordinance, amongst other things contained,
it does appear.

For Explanation of the said Clause, it is hereby declared and Ordained by the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the true meaning of the said Clause was,
and is, and shall be taken to be, that the yearly sum of one Hundred
seventeene Pounds, one Shilling, four Pence Farthing, half Farthing, and the
fifth part of a half Farthing, shall be every Year for ever paid by the said
Parish of Covent Garden, to the said Parish of S. Martins, at four Terms in
the Year, viz. Upon every five and twentieth day of March, four and twentieth
day of June, three and twentieth day of September, and three and twentieth day
of December, by equal Portions, for and toward the maintenance of the Poor
of the said Parish of S. Martins, and in full discharge of the said Parish of
Covent Garden from all further Contributions thereunto.

John Brown, Cler. Parliament.


