2o Decembris. 1646.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament for the better
Observation of the MONTHLY FAST.
THE LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament Assembled, Taking notice of the great
neglect and profanation of the Monthly Fast, in diverse places of this
Kingdom, do for prevention thereof in time to come, Order and Ordain, and be
it Ordained by the said LORDS and COMMONS, that all Justices of the Peace,
Mayors, Bayliffes, Constables, and other Officers and Ministers whatsoever in
their respective places shall put in Execution all Orders, and Ordinances of
PARLIAMENT heretofore made for the due observation of the said monthly Fast,
and are hereby authorized and required to use and exercise the same power, and
to inflict penalties upon the offenders therein in such manner and form as is
limited and appointed by any Statute Law, Order, or Ordinance whatsoever now in
force for the Sanctification of the Lords Day, or against the profanation
thereof: And for the better encouragement of all such Persons as have or shall
testify their good affections to the State by their readiness in observing
and putting in Execution of this and other the Ordinances of this PARLIAMENT,
and for prevention of causeless and contentious suits against them; It is
further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons that if any Action, Bill,
Plaint, or Suite upon the Case, Trespass, Battery, or false Imprisonment now
be or hereafter shall be brought, for or concerning any matter, cause, or thing
done, or to be done hereafter by any Person or Persons whatsoever, by Virtue of
any Ordinance of PARLIAMHNT or by any Person or Persons in their aid and
assistance or by their Commandment, according to any such Ordinance of
PARLIAMENT, the said Action, Bill, Plaint, or Suite shall be laid within the
County where the Trespass or Fact was or shall be done, and committed and not
elsewhere; and that it shall be lawful to and for all and every Person, and
Persons aforesaid to plead thereunto the General issue that he or they are not
Guilty, And for their Justification to give in Evidence to the Jury which shall
try the same, any Ordinance, or Ordinance of PARLIAMENT which they or any of
them shall produce, by virtue whereof the Fact Complained of was done or
Committed. And that if upon the Trial of any such Action, Bil, Plaint, or Suit
the Plaitiffe or Plaintiffs therein shall not prove to the Jury which shall try
the same, that the Trespass, Batterv, Imprisonment, or other Fact or Cause of
his, her, or their said Action, Bil, Plaint, or Suit was or were, had, made,
committed, or done, within the County wherein such Action, Bil, Plaint, or
Suit, is or shall be laid, That then in every such Case the Jury which shall Try
the same, shall find the Defendant or Defendants in every such Action, Bil,
Plaint, or Suit not Guilty without having regard or respect to any evidence
given by the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs therein touching the Trespass, Battery,
Imprisonment, or other Cause for which the same Action, Bil, Plaint, or Suit,
is or shall be Brought: And if the Verdit shall Pass with the Defendant or
Defendants in any such Action, Bil, Plaint, or Suit, or the Plaintiff or
Plaintiffs therein become Non-suits or suffer any discountenance thereof, that
in every such Case the Justices, or Justice, or such other Judge, before whom
the said Matter shall be tried, shall by force, and virtue of this Ordinance
allow unto the Defendant, or Defendants, his, or their double Costs, which he
or they shall have sustained by reason of their wrongful vexation in Defense of
the said Action, or Suit, for which the said Defendant or Defendants shall have
remedy as in other Cases, where Costs, by the Laws of the Realm are given to
the Defendants.

Die Mercurii 2o Decembr. 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Ordinance for the
better Observation of the Fast Day be forthwith Printed, and that the Knights
and Burgesses, Members of this House, do take Care of the sending down
convenient Numbers of the said Ordinances unto the several Counties and Places
for which they serve.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands, Printer to the Honorable House of
COMMONS. 1646.


