Die Mercurii 3. April. 1644.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, For the
encouragement and security of all such vvell-affected Persons as shall
forthwith advance any sums of Money, To enable the Committee of the Militia,
speedily to send forth and maintain a considerable number of Horse and Foot,
for the pursuit of that great Victory which Almighty God has given the
Parliament Forces, under command of Sir William Waller, and Sir William Belfour.
IT having pleased Almighty God to give the Forces under the Conduct of Sir
William Waller, and Sir William Belfour, for the service of the King and
Parliament, a late Victory against the Enemy, which being timely pursued, may,
by his Omnipotent blessing, put an end unto these unnatural Civil Wars. And
the Committee of the Militia of the City of London, having to this purpose, (at
the desire of the Committee of both Kingdoms) agreed, forthwith to send out
some of the Horse and Foot under their Command, as well the better to enable
the said Committee for this Service, as for the encouragement, and security of
all such well-affected Persons as shall Advance and lend any Moneys toward the
payment of the Brigade of General Major Brown, already sent, and of other
Forces, from time to time to be sent by the said Committee, for the Service
aforesaid, according to the establishment of the Kingdom.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled do declare, That the advancing
of the said Money shall be taken for a very acceptable service, and an evident
testimony of the continuance of their zeal to the service of the King and
Parliament, and the preservation of the Kingdom from ruin. And do further
ordain, That all such Moneys so advanced, and lent as aforesaid, (not
exceeding the sum of twenty thousand pound) shall be repaid, with interest,
after the rate of eight pounds per cent. Out of the Receipts of the Excise and
new Impost, granted by Ordinance of Parliament dated the eleventh of September
last, which is to be continued for one year longer: To wit, the first half
years Interest at six months after the Loan of the said Moneys, and the last
half years Interest, together with the Principal, at the end of the next six
Months following; All which sums of Money so advanced, and lent as
aforesaid, are forthwith to be brought in, and paid to the Treasurers for
Money and Plate at Guild Hall; whose Receipt or Receipts under the hands of any
two of them, shall be a sufficient security and warrant for the repayment of
such Moneys with Interest, at the times before expressed, unto such person or
persons as shall Advance and Lend any Money upon the Conditions aforesaid;
which Moneys are again to be issued, and paid out by the said Treasurers,
according as they shall be directed by the said Committee of the Militia of
London for the uses aforesaid.

And the said Lords and Commons do hereby authorize the Commissioners of the
Excise and new Impost for the time being, to pay the said twenty thousand
pounds or so much thereof as shall be lent and advanced for the service, with
the Interest after the rate of eight pounds per cent. at the times before
mentioned, unto such person or persons as shall advance the same, or any part
thereof. And do further ordain, That as no Ordinance or Assignment which is
not already passed upon the receipt of Excise, except the ten thousand pounds,
remainder of the twenty thousand pounds assigned for Recruting my Lord
Generals Army, and except the twenty thousand pound promised for the Western
Counties, shall precede this Ordinance; Whereby the Moneys thereby advanced may
not be (...) paid at the time herein expressed; So in case these Receipts of
the Excise should in the interim surcease, or otherwise fall short, (...) Lords
and Commons do hereby declare, That they will provide by some other ways, and
means, for the re-imbursement of (...) shall advance and lend the Moneys
aforesaid according to the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance: And the
said Lord (...) (...)mons do further ordain, That the said Committee of the
Militia, shall from time to time give account to both or either Ho^^^
(...)(...)meant, or to whom they shall direct, how they have caused the said
Moneys to be issued out, to the end it may appear it is disbursed for the
uses expressed in the Ordinance, and not otherwise.

John Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London, by Richard Cotes, 1644.


