AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, FOR The better
Execution of the former ORDINANCES for Sequestration of Delinquents and Papists
ESTATES.

Together with an OATH that is to be taken within Ten days after notice given
of this present Ordinance, by the several Sequestrators, Committees, and
persons employed by virtue of the said Ordinance.

Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, that this Ordinance be forthwith printed
and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed for Laurence Blaiklock. May 27. 1644.

An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament for the better
Execution of the former Ordinances for Sequestration of Delinquents and Papists
Estates.
WHereas the former Ordinances of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament
for Sequestration of Delinquents Estates, have not been put into such
effectual and speedy Execution in diverse places as was expected, to the great
disservice of the Commonwealth;

For remedy thereof, and for the more speedy Collecting and bringing in of all
such Moneys, Rents, and Goods as are or shall be due upon the said Ordinances
or any of them, the said Lords and Commons do further Declare and Ordain in
manner and form following:

I. That the several Sequestrators and Committees heretofore or hereafter to
be appointed by Authority of Parliament, and the several Sollicitors,
Collectors, Treasurers, Appraisors, and all other persons by them employed by
virtue of the said Ordinances, or either of them, shall within ten days after
notice of this present Ordinance to them given, or before the intermedling
therewith take this ensuing Oath:

J A. B. do swear, that J shall well and truly according to the trust reposed
in me, Execute for the best advantage of the Common wealth, all and every of
the Ordinances made by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, for
Sequestration of Delinquents and Papists Estates; and that J shall not for
fear, favor, reward, or affection, spare, connive at, or discharge any of the
said Delinquents or Papists; So help me God.

Which Oath shall be taken by the said Committees before any Deputy Lieutenant,
Justice of Peace of the County, City, Borough, or place where such Committees
shall sit, who are by this Ordinance authorized to Administer the said Oath,
and by the said Sollicitors Collectors, Appraisors, and other Officers before
the said Committees or any two of them, who are also hereby Authorized to
Administer the same; which said Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of Peace, and
Committees respectively are hereby required and enjoined to certify unto the
Speaker of the House of Commons the Names of all such persons as shall take the
said Oath, and also the names of all such as shall neglect or refuse to take
the same.

II. That all Officers, and every other person whatsoever, who has in his
custody any Goods of any person whose Estate is sequestered, shall bring the
same into the several and respective Committees of sequestration within the
said County within ten days after notice of this Ordinance, or otherwise
within five days after the Expiration of the said ten days, pay ready money
to the Committees for the same, according to such Rates as they shall be
appraised upon Oath, by two able appraisors appointed by the said Committees,
and in default of bringing in such Goods or payment for the same, shall forfeit
for every week he or they shall detain or not pay the same, the sum of two
shillings six pence for every twenty shillings worth of such Goods, to the use
of the Commonwealth.

III. That all suspentions of Sequestrations of any Delinquents or Papists
estates, made by the Committees in any County or Corporation, without express
Order of both Houses of Parliament, shall be forthwith taken off, and cleared,
and no suspention or excuse of persons Sequestered allowed, but what is
warranted by the Ordinances of both Houses.

IIII. That all Debts made for goods sold, shall within ten days after this
Ordinance be paid in by the persons owing the same to the Treasurers of the
several places where they are due, and in default thereof the said Debts
immediately after the said ten days, to be paid by the several parties that
sold the same, under pain of forfeiting the sum of two shillings six pence in
every pound for every week they remain unpaid after the said ten days, in
regard the Ordinances appoint no sale but for ready moneys.

V. That all the sequestered Houses and Lands now standing void and unlet, shall
forthwith be let, Tenanted, or improved by the respective Committees, and their
Officers for the best advantage of the Commonwealth, upon pain of such
punishments in case of wilful negligence as the Houses shall inflict.

VI. That active, able, trusty men, who will diligently attend this service,
shall be added to all Committees of sequestrations where there is cause, and
that the Committees of accounts of the Kingdom shall from time to time present
the names of such persons to both Houses of Parliament.

VII. That the several Committees for Sequestration in each County, three or
more of them shall constantly meet and sit upon this service two set days at
the least every week to be by them appointed, and shall increase or alter the
number of their Collectors; and if any neglect or misdemeanour shall be found
in any Solicitor in the execution of his said Office, the said Committee or
any three or more of them shall certify the same unto the Committee of Lords
and Commons for sequestrations.

VIII. That no Treasurer appointed by the Sequestrators, shall be allowed above
two pence in the pound for moneys received by him, and that every Committee and
Treasurer residing in the City of London, or within the Line of Communication,
who shall receive any sum or sums of moneys upon sequestrations, shall pay
the same to the Treasurers for sequestrations at Guild Hall London within six
days after his or their receipt thereof; and the Committees and Treasurers
that are to pay in their money to the said Treasurers at Guild Hall aforesaid,
residing within forty miles of London, shall pay the moneys they receive within
15. days after the receipt thereof, and such Commitees and Treasurers who live
above 40. miles from London, shall within thirty days after the receipt
thereof pay the same to the said Treasurers, under pain of forfeiting two
shillings six pence in the pound for every week he or they shall detain the
same, after the respective times herein limited.

IX. That the several Collectors and Sollicitors for sequestrations, that have
not heretofore pursued, or shall not hereafter pursue the several Ordinances
of sequestrations, and the trust thereby in them reposed; shall be disalowed
upon their Accounts, all fees, or sums of money appointed unto them by any
Ordinance whatsoever.

X. That the several Sollicitors and Collectors for sequestrations shall from
henceforth keep several exact accounts of all Goods, Lands, Rents, and
profits sequestered, and enter the same into several Books of Accounts to be
kept for that purpose, and shall within ten days next after notice of this
present Ordinance make several books of account of all Debts, Rents, and
profits then arreere, unreceived and uncollected, and of the particulars and
values of all the Goods, Lands, Rents, Tenements, and Revenues of every person
sequestered within their several divisions, and shall likewise quarterly make
and deliver the like accounts unto the several Committees under whom they are
employed, to the end the certain value of the sequestration may be discovered,
and a constant revenue raised.

XI. And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that all and
every of the penalties in and by this present Ordinance imposed, or to be
inflicted upon any person or persons offending contrary to this Ordinance or
any Article therein contained, shall be leavied by the said respective
Committees, their Collectors and Agents, by distress and sale of the parties
goods so offending.

XII. And it is further ordained, that no Committee or Committees whatsoever
shall without valuable consideration dispose of any sequestered goods, or make
any loanes thereof without the consent of both Houses of Parliament.

XIII. That all Officers, and every other person whatsoever, who has detained
in his hands any sequestration moneys, or has received any of the said Moneys
without a sufficient Warrant for his so doing, and contrary to former
Ordinances, shall bring in and pay all such moneys so by them detained or
received to the Treasurers for sequestrations at Guild Hall London, within
twenty days after notice of this Ordinance, and in default thereof shall
forfeit two shillings six pence for every twenty shillings, for every week he
or they shall detain or not pay the same to the uses aforesaid; and the moneys
so detained, together with the said forfeiture, shall be leavied by the said
Respective Committees, their Collectors or Agents, by distress or sale of the
parties goods so offending: and where no sufficient distress can be found,
the parties so offending, to be committed to prison till the money be paid as
aforesaid.

XIIII. And it is further Ordained, that for the prevention of all fraudulent
and indirect dealing, and for the present and future satisfaction of the
Kingdom, All Treasurers and Collectors in the Associated Counties, under the
command of the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Manchester; as also in the
County of Kent and Surrey, where by several Ordinances of Parliament they have
power to detain one third part of all the Sequestation money within the said
Counties, for the better maintaining of the Forces by them Raised, respectively
for the preservation of the Parliament and Kingdom; shall bring in to the
Treasurers of Sequestrations at Guildhall London, every three months, or
oftener, if they shall be thereunto required, an exact account of all the
Sequestration moneys by them received and issued out for the third part as
aforesaid or otherwise, and produce Receipts for the same; to the end the said
Treasurers at Guildhall may keep account of all the Sequestration moneys, as by
former Ordinances was Ordained, and to take care that the said moneys be
equally divided and applied, as by the said Ordinances is intended; and that
the like course is to be observed by all particular men for all Sequestration
moneys they shall receive, in any County or place under the Power or Command of
the Parliament, by virtue of any particular Ordinance obtained by them, that
they may receive no more then is intended and appointed by their several
Ordinances Respectively.

XV. And it is further Ordained, that John Madden Gentleman, shall be a
General Solicitor for the better Execution of this and the former Ordinances
of Sequestrations, And is hereby Authorized to keep due correspondence with all
Committees, Solicitors, Treasurers, Collectors, and other Officers, employed
about the Sequestrations; and shall give his best advice and assistance to the
said Treasurers at Guild Hall for the better promoting and advancing of the
said service: And when he shall discover any obstruction or disorder in any
person or persons therein employed, he shall acquaint the Committee of the
Lords and Commons for Sequestrations therewith: And for his pains and
attendance on this service, the said Treasurers at Guild Hall shall pay unto
him weekly twenty shillings; and shall also pay to the said John Madden all his
necessary charges and expenses which he shall disburse, if he shall find it
needful, with the advice of the said Treasurers at Guild Hall, to travel into
any of the Counties under the power and Command of the Parliament, for the
better and more speedy effecting of the Premises, and for Postage of Letters.

FINIS.
Die Veneris, Maii 24. 1644.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that this
Declaration and Ordinance for Sequestration of Delinquents and Papists Estates,
be forthwith Printed and published.

Henry Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


