An ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT FOR The
continuance of the weekly Assessement for the relief of the British Army in
Ireland For six months longer, to commence the first of May, 1646.

ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1646.

Die Lunae 9. Martii 1645.
WHereas the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, have by
their Ordinance of the 18. of October 1644. (which in some Printed Copies
bears date the 16. of October, 1644.) Ordained, That a weekly Assessement
should be had, made, and leavied through the Kingdom of England, and Dominion
of Wales, for the relief of the British Army in Ireland, to commence from the
first day of September then last past, and to continue for one whole year, as
by the said Ordinance more at large appears. And whereas the said Lords and
Commons, have by another Ordinance of theirs, dated the 15. day of August,
1645. Ordained and Declared, that the before mentioned Ordinance of the 18. of
October, 1644. for laying the said weekly Assessement for one whole year,
should after the time limited therein, for continuance thereof be revived, and
have continuance for the space of six Months longer; to commence the first of
November, 1645. and to end the last of April, 1646. with the alterations,
limitations, and provisoes therein mentioned. As by the said Ordinance of the
15. of August, 1645. (relation being thereunto had) more at large may appear.
For as much now, as it is found most expedient, that considerable numbers of
Horse and Foot be added to those that are already in Ireland, and that supplies
of all sorts be further provided, and sent thither for the carrying on of that
War this next Summer, which will require a further expense of moneys then can
be raised by the said weekly Assessements for the time set, and limited in the
Ordinances aforesaid. Be it hereby Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in
this present Parliament, That the said weekly Assessement first to be charged,
rated, taxed, and leavied for one whole year by the aforesaid Ordinance of the
18. of October, 1644. entitled, An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, for an Assessement through the Kingdom of England,
and Dominion of Wales, for the present relief of the British Armies in
Ireland; and since revived, and continued by another Ordinance of the 15. of
August, 1645. for six Months longer, to commence the first of November, 1645.
and end the last of April, 1646. shall after the time limited in those
Ordinances, have continuance for the space of six Months longer; to commence
the first day of May, 1646. and end the last day of October then next
following, and shall be Assessed, leavied, collected, and paid according to the
true intent and meaning of the aforesaid Ordinances.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. Hen. Esynge Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.


