Die Martis. 23 May 1648.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
For settling of the Militia in the County of Hereford.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that these
persons following, viz. Walter Lord Viscount Hereford, Leicester Devereux
Esquire, Sir Edward Powell Baronet, Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Sir
Robert Pie Senior Knight, Franc(...) Kirle Esquire, High Sheriff of the County
of Hereford, Edward Harley, Thomas Baskervile Edward Pit Esquires, Walter
Kirle, William Littleton, Robert Kyrle Robert Harley, John Scudamore of Ken
Church, Samuel Mare, Bennet Hoskins, John Birch, William Crowther, Ambrose
Elton Junior John Puteshall, Francis Pember, John Flacket, Junior, Thomas
Rawlins Esquires; Major Thomas Blaney, Captain Priamus Davies, and Thomas
Eaton Gentleman; Shall be Commissioners for the Militia, in the County of
Hereford, for the better securing and safety of the Parliament and the sai(...)
County; And shall have power and Authority, and are hereby Authorized by
themselves, o(...) any five or more of them to put the said County into a
posture of defense, and to raise Forces Horse and Foot, and them to List, Arm,
and exercise; and to form them into Regiments, Troops and Companies, and them
to Muster, Array and weapon from time to time in places fit for that purpose:
And to appoint over them Colonels, Captains, and other Officers from time to
time by Commissions under the hands and seals of the said Commissioners, or
any seven of them, as often as there shall(...) be occasion in that behalf: And
shall have power, and are hereby authorized by themselves, or they(...) said
Commanders and Officers to lead, conduct and employ the said persons arrayed,
and weaponed fo(...) the suppression of all Rebellions and Insurrections that
shall or may happen within the County aforesaid According as the said
Commissioners, or any five of them shall from time to time give directions, or
shall(...) be otherwise directed from time to time by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, or th(...) Committee sitting at Derby house: Any former
Order, Declaration, or other matter to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And for all and every their doings herein, the said
Commissioners and all and every the said Person and Persons shall be saved
harmless and indempnified by the Authorit(...) of Parliament. Provided that
this Ordinance and every thing therein contained shall continue fo(...) the
space of six Months, and no longer.

Die Martis. 23 May 1648.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
Printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1648.


