Die Mercurii, 11 Octobr. 1643.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS IN PARLIAMENT ASSEMBLED, For the
upholding the Government of the Fellowship of Merchants Adventurers of England,
to the better maintenance of the Trade of Clothing, and Woollen Manufacture
of the KINGDOM.
FOR the better encouragement and supportation of the Fellowship of Merchant
Adventurers of England, which has been found very serviceable and profitable
unto this State; And for the better Government and regulation of Trade,
especially, that ancient and great Trade of Clothing, whereby the same will be
much advanced to the common good, and benefit of the people: The Lords and
Commons in Parliament, do ordain that the said Fellowship shall continue and
be a Corporation, and shall have power to levy Moneys on the Members of their
Corporation, and their goods, for their necessary charge and maintenance of
their Government: And that no person shall Trade into those Parts, limited by
their Incorporation, but such as are Free of that Corporation, upon forfeiture
of their Goods. Provided, that the said Fellowship shall not exclude any person
from his Freedom and admission into the said Fellowship, which shall desire it
by way of redemption, if such person by their custom be capable thereof, and
has been bred a Merchant, and shall pay one hundred pounds for the same, if
he be Free, and an Inhabitant of the City of London, and Trade from that Port,
or fifty pounds, if he be not Free, and no Inhabitant of the said City, and
Trade not from thence; and that the faid Fellowship shall have power to
imprison Members of their Company in matters of government, and to give such an
oath, or oaths to them, as shall be approved of by both Houses of Parliament.
Provided, that all Rights confirmed by Act of Parliament, or ancient Charters,
shall be hereby saved. And the said Lords and Commons do further ordain, That
with all convenient expedition, a Bill shall be prepared in order to an Act of
Parliament to be passed in this present Parliament for the further settling and
full confirming of the Privileges to the said Fellowship, with such other
clauses and provisions as shall be found expedient by both Houses of
Parliament: This Ordinance to remain in full force, until a Bill or Act shall
be prepared and passed, according to the intent and true meaning of this
Ordinance. And it is ordered, that this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and
published, that all persons concerned therein may take notice thereof, as
appertains.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsyng Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.



