AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the
maintenance and pay of the GARRISONS OF Newport Pagnel, Bedford, Lyn Regis, and
other Garrisons in the Eastern Association.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be Printed
and Published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Sept. 4. 1645.

Die Mercurii 3. Sept. 1645.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Whereas by a former Ordinance made in or about the eighteenth of December,
1643. It was provided and Ordained, That the Town of Newport Pagnell in the
County of Buckingham should be Fortified, and the Garrison there maintained at
the charges of several Counties near adjoining, but no provision is thereby
made for the Garrisons of Bedford in the county of Bedford; of Huntington in
the county of Huntington; of the Castle of Cambridge in the county of
Cambridge, or Lyn Regis in the county of Norfolk; and at present there is no
provision or maintenance made for the said last recited Garrisons.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, taking into their serious
consideration, how the said Garrisons may for the time to come be maintained,
and have constant pay provided for the Officers and Soldiers of the said
Garrisons; Have Ordered, and be it by authority of Parliament Ordained, That
the said Ordinance, made, in or about the eighteenth of December, 1643. for the
maintaining the said Garrison of Newport Pagnell, be repealed and made void
from the first day of June in the year of our Lord God, 1645. And the said
Lords and Commons do further Declare and Ordain, That for the maintaining the
said Garrisons of Newport Pagnell, Bedford, Huntington, Castle at Cambridge and
Lyn Regis, from the said first day of June, 1645. there shall be monthly
raised, within all the counties, cities and places, hereafter named, the
monthly Sum of Three thousand, seven hundred, forty and six pounds, the same
to be Assessed, raised, and Leavied, within the said counties and cities
respectively, in manner and form following: Viz.

In the county of Bedford, the monthly sum of One hundred seventy three
pounds, and three pence.

In the county of Hertford, the monthly sum of Two hundred ninety seven
pounds, sixteen shillings and a penny,

In the county of Cambridge, the monthly sum of Two hundred forty five pounds,
six shillings and eight pence.

In the Isle of Ely, the monthly sum of Ninety pounds, seventeen shillings and
eleven pence.

In the County of Huntington, the monthly sum of One hundred thirty nine
pounds, sixteen shillings and seven pence.

In the County of Norfolk, the monthly sum of Eight hundred sixty six pounds,
nineteen shillings and five pence.

In the County of Suffolk, the monthly sum of Eight hundred and fifteen
pounds, eleven shillings and nine pence.

In the County of Essex, the monthly sum of Seven hundred and fourteen pounds,
four shillings and seven pence.

In the County of the City of Norwich, the monthly sum of One hundred pounds,
thirteen shillings and seven pence.

In the County of Northampton, the monthly sum of Two hundred pounds.

In the county of Buckingham, the monthly sum of Eighty pounds.

And it is also Ordained, That the first month and time of payment shall begin
and be Accounted from the first day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1645. and
to continue for the space of one whole year, next after the first of June last
past.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the several
Lords Lieutenants of the respective Counties of the Eastern Association, shall
be, and are hereby appointed, to be of the Committee of the said Association;
And that the several sums of money monthly raised within the said counties,
shall be employed and disposed of for the maintenance and pay of such and so
many Officers within the said several Garrisons, as by the said Committee for
the Eastern Association shall be nominated and appointed: and also for the
maintenance of the several Soldiers, within the said several Garrisons, as
hereafter follows: Viz.

At Newport Pagnell, Eight hundred Foot, and One hundred and twenty Horse. At
the Town of Bedford, Eighty foot, and Forty Dragoons. At the Town of
Huntington, Eighty Foot, and Forty Dragoons. At the castle of Cambridge, One
hundred and twenty Foot, and ten Horse; which said Horse are to be ordered and
directed, by the said Committee of the Eastern Association. At the Town of Lyn
Regis, One thousand Foot, whereof Three hundred are to be sent to Boston, for
the better securing of that Garrison, as they shall be ordered and directed by
both Houses of Parliament, or the Committee of both Kingdoms, or by the said
Committee of the House of Commons for the Eastern Association.

And be it further Ordained, That the said Committee for the said Eastern
Association, shall and may, from time to time, nominate and appoint, such
person and persons to be Treasurer and treasurers, for the receiving and paying
such Sums of money, to be raised within the said counties as abovesaid, as they
shall think fit; and that the several Collectors, and other persons within the
said several counties, do pay all moneys by them received, and to be received
and collected by virtue of this Ordinance, to such Treasurer or Treasurers, so
to be named and appointed as aforesaid.

And be it further ordained and declared, That all the sums of money to be
assessed and raised by virtue of this Ordinance, shall be wholly employed in
the maintaining and paying the Officers and Soldiers of the said Garrisons,
and in and about the said Garrisons, and necessary preservation of them, and to
no other use whatsoever; And that the said Treasurer and Treasurers shall issue
forth, and pay no sum of money, but for the uses and intents aforesaid, and
that by warrant and Order in writing, to be from time to time had, and made
from the said Committee for the Eastern Association, under five or more of
their hands, which said Committee are to issue forth no Order or warrant, but
for the uses and intents aforesaid, other then in allowances of necessary Fees
and charges to Treasurers, Collectors, and other persons employed in the
collecting, raising, and paying of the said moneys; which said Treasurers,
Collectors, and other persons, are to have no greater Fees or allowances, then
is allowed to the Treasurers, Collectors, and other persons appointed for the
collecting the several Sums of money, raised by the several Ordinances of
Parliament, for the payment of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes Army.

And it is further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for the Assessing,
Leavying, and raising the several monthly Sums aforesaid upon the several
counties aforesaid, The Comittees, or any three or more of them of the several
counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Isle of Ely, Huntington,
Northampton, Bedford, Buckingham, and city of Norwich respectively, already
established, and appointed by Parliament, for the Assessing, Raising, and
Leavying the several Sums of money, for the payment of the Army under the
command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, shall and may have power to nominate Assessors,
Collectors, and other Officers and persons for the assessing, raising,
collecting and leavying the monthly Sums of money within the said several
counties, cities and places; and shall have power to assesse, tax, raise,
collect and leavy the said several sums of money within the said respective
counties, with the best equality they may, upon each Parish, Township or place,
within the said several counties: And shall, and may send forth their warrants
to the high Constables, or such other persons, as they or any three of them
shall think fitting, for the rating, assessing, and collecting of the several
sums taxed, or rated upon the said several Parishes, Townships and places;
which Sums so Rated and Taxed, to be raised by distress and sale of the goods
of all and singular such persons as shall refuse or neglect, after lawful
demand, to pay their proportions so rated upon them, by Warrant under the hand
of any two or more of the said Co^mittees respectively: And if any person shall
find himself grieved by any such Tax, That such person, upon complaint to the
said committees, or any two of them respectively, if they shall think fit,
shall be relieved in such sort, as they or any two of them respectively shall
find reasonable: Provided, That such complaint be made within six days after
notice of his said Tax; And if any person or persons within the said respective
counties, which by virtue of this Ordinance shall be Rated to pay any Sum or
Sums of money, shall obstinately refuse to pay the same; And if no goods of
such person or persons can be found, whereby he may be distrained for payment
thereof, That then it shall be lawful to, and for the said Committees, or any
three or more of them respectively to cause such person, not being a Peer of
this Realm, or assistant of the house of Peers, so refusing or neglecting to be
imprisoned, and there to be detained and kept, until he or they shall pay
their said rates and Taxes.

And it is further Ordained, That for the better raising of the said several
Sums of money, within the said several counties, that all person and persons,
bodies politic and corporate; all Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, and
Hereditaments, goods and chattels whatsoever within the said counties, that are
liable and chargeable with the taxes and payment of any money for the payment
of the said Army under Sir Tho: Fairfax, within the said counties, are and
shall be liable to the payment of the said several Sums to be raised by virtue
of this Ordinance: And the said Committees of the said several counties or any
three or more of them, shall and may, do and execute all such power and
authority for the raising of the faid several Sums of money to be raised
within the said counties by virtue of this Ordinance, as to them or any three
of them is given by virtue of the said ordinances for the payment of the army
under the command of Sir Tho: Fairfax, upon al persons not being a Peer of this
realm or assistant of the house of Peers, and shall and may give such allowance
and allowances to Officers, and Fine and imprison, except as aforesaid, such as
shall neglect or refuse their several duties and offices, in such sort and
manner as in and by the said Ordinance for the payment of Sir Tho: Fairfaxes
Army is appointed.

And it is further Ordered and Declared, That all Sum and Sums of money not yet
assessed, collected or paid from the several counties, named in and by the
said Ordinance, made in or about the Eighteenth of December 1643. for the
execting and maintaining of the Garrison of Newport Pagnell, until the said
first day of June 1645. shall and may be forthwith assessed, collected and paid
in such manner, and by such person and persons, as in and by this Ordinance is
appointed and declared, unto the said Treasurer and Treasurers to be appointed
by virtue of this present Ordinance; which said Sums of money shall be paid and
disposed for the payment and discharge of the Billet and Quarter due by the
Officers and Soldiers of Newport Pagnell, unto the Inhabitants of Newport
Pagnell, and three hundreds of Newport, and other Towns and places near
adjoining; and after such Quarter and Billet first paid, then the remainder and
overplus (if any be) to such person and persons, as by the said Committee for
the Eastern Association shall be appointed and declared.

And it is further Ordained and declared, That the said Committee for the
Eastern Association, shall and may from time to time, cause Musters to be taken
within the said Garrisons, so often as they shall hold fitting; and that they
shall and may nominate and appoint such person and persons as they please, to
take such Musters.

FINIS.

