AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the
maintaining of the Forces of the seven associated Counties under the Command of
EDWARD Earl of MANCHESTER.

By a Weekly payment upon the said associated Counties; to begin the first day
of September, and to continue for four Months next ensuing.

September. 26. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed
and published.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands.

26 September, 1644.
WHereas the Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex, Lincoln, and other Counties
with them Associated, out of their loyal respect to His Majesty, their pious
disposition to the peace and happiness of this Kingdom; in obedience to the
Orders of Parliament, have raised and maintained to the number of Fourteen
thousand Horse, Foot, and Dragoones, or thereabouts, and with them have done
many great services against the Common Enemy, tending much to the safety of
the Kingdom; And have also bought many Arms and Ammunition, and must buy
more, whereby to furnish themselves with a train of Artillery; and have been,
and must be at great charges in maintaining and recruiting the said Forces, and
in keeping several Garrisons, making and erecting of Fortifications,
Magazines, Courts of Guards, and other things requisite and necessary for the
defense and safety of the said association against the incursions of the
Enemy: By all which means the said Association is become much indebted, and
without the speedy raising of large and considerable sums of money
proportionable to their vast expenses, cannot long subsist in a condition to
keep themselves from ruin, and to advance the public safety. It is
thereupon Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same, That for the intents and purposes aforesaid, the
several weekly sums of money hereafter in this Ordinance mentioned, shall be
charged, rated, taxed and levied upon the several Counties, according to the
proportions herein expressed; The same to be paid in weekly to the several
Collectors, and by them to the Treasurer or Treasurers appointed by this
Ordinance for the receiving hereof. That is to say,

Upon the County of Essex, the weekly sum of one thousand six hundred eighty
seven pounds ten shillings.

Upon the County of Suffolk, the weekly sum of one thousand eight hundred
seventy five pounds.

Upon the County of Norfolk and City of Norwich, the weekly sum of one thousand
eight hundred seventy five pounds.

Upon the County of Hertford, the weekly sum of six hundred seventy five
pounds.

Upon the County of Cambridge, the weekly sum of five hundred sixty two pounds
ten shillings.

Upon the County of Huntington, the weekly sum of three hundred and thirty
pounds.

Upon the County of Lincoln and City of Lincoln, the weekly sum of one
thousand two hundred eighteen pounds fifteen shillings.

Upon the Isle of Ely, the weekly sum of two hundred twenty one pounds five
shillings.

And the said weekly Payments are to begin from the first day of September, in
the year of our Lord 1644. and so to continue weekly for four months next
ensuing from the said first of September.

And be it further ordained, that every person or persons that were to be
assessed or taxed by any former Ordinance of Parliament, shall be assessed and
taxed by this Ordinance, and shall be liable to as great forfeitures and
penalties for not paying of the sum or sums to be assessed, as they should have
been, if the same had been assessed by virtue of the last Ordinance for the
weekly payment for the said Association, made the 20. of September last: And
the several respective Deputy Lieutenants and Committees named and trusted
within the said Association or any part thereof, by the said recited Ordinance,
to take care for the assessing, collecting or levying of any moneys, are named
and trusted by this Ordinance, and have as full power and authority given by
this Ordinance, to nominate and appoint Collectors and Assessors, and to
distraine, fine and imprison, or sequester, as they or any of them had by
virtue of the said recited Ordinance, in all or any part of the said associated
Counties.

And the several Collectors shall pay the several sums by them collected, at
the place or several places where the Earl of Manchester and the Committee for
the Association attending the said Earl, shall appoint to the Treasurer or
Treasurers, to be by them named; which Treasurer or Treasurers are to issue out
the moneys received for the purposes aforementioned, according to the Warrants
or directions of the said Earl of Manchester, and of any two of the said
Committees for the said Association, which shall be appointed thereunto by the
said Earl, and a full Committee consisting of one for every County at the least,
and of the Commissary General for the time being of the said Earl of
Manchester; And that no moneys be issued out without order under the hand of
the said Earl, such two of the said Committees, and the said Commissary
General, nor yet without the privitie of the whole Committee attending the
said Earl.

And the said Lords and Commons do further ordain, that all moneys collected
and not disposed of, or to be collected upon the fifth and twentieth part of
men's estates, or of the last four months pay; and all the moneys or other
benefit arising by virtue of any Ordinance for the third part of the
Sequestration settled upon the Earl of Manchester, shall be paid unto the
Treasurers appointed as aforesaid, and from thence to issue out again for ye
intents and purposes aforementioned; and the said Earl and Committee for the
said association have thereby power given them to call all Collectors,
Treasurers, or others that have or are thought to have any of the said moneys
in their hands, to an account, and to cause the said money in their hands to be
paid unto the Treasurers appointed by the former Ordinances.

And if any Collectors, Treasurers, or others shall refuse to account or to pay
in the moneys wherewith they are charged: then the said Earl and committee shall
fine them double the sum charged upon them, which if it be not paid within six
days after the sum is set, and notice thereof left at his or their dwelling
house: it shall be lawful to distrein for the same: and if there be not
sufficient distress wherewith to satisfy, then the said Earl and Committee
may imprison the offender herein; and sequester his estate, until the money
charged and fine set be leavied and paid.

And it is further Ordained, that four pence in the pound shall be allowed for
every sum of money which shall be Collected, and paid to the said Treasurer,
whereof two pence shall be for the Collectors, and two pence for the Treasurer:
And the said Treasurer shall keep a Register book, of the several sums
received and paid by them, and shall render an account thereof, unto the said
Earl and Committee, once every month at least.

And be it further Ordained, that three Commissioners hereafter to be nominated
and appointed, to reside in the Army, shall take special care that they keep
constant correspondency with the two Houses of Parliament, and with the
Committee of the Members of the House of Commons, appointed for the Associated
Counties; and that they take such course that no Commander or Officer shall
receive any pay, but such as duly attend their charge: And it is desired, that
the said Earl of Manchester do admit to his Counsel for the purposes
aforesaid, the said Commissioners residing in his Army, to advise with them,
and arm them with power to view and examine the Musters of the said Army; and
to take such course as shall be thought most fit for the preventing of dead
payments, false Musters, free quartering without warrants, Plundering, Seizing
of Horses or Arms, or for the avoiding of any other misdemeanor, which may
turn to the prejudice of the Common wealth. And that the said Commissioners,
shall once in a month, certify the state of the Army, and give an account of
their proceedings unto the Parliament, or to the aforesaid Committee, for the
Associated Counties, and likewise certify what further instructions shall be
agreed upon by the Counsel of War, touching the same, and the aforesaid
Commissioners shall be nominated and appointed, by the Committee for the
associated Counties sitting at Cambridge, or the major part of them out of
their own number.

And be it Lastly Ordained, that the said Earl, Deputy Lieutenants, Committees,
collectors, assessors, and every one of them, and every other person, that
shall be ayding and assisting to them, or any of them, in doing any thing by
virtue of this Ordinance, shall be defended and saved harmless therein by
authority of both Houses of Parliament.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


