AN ORDINANCE Of the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the relief
of the distressed Protestants come out of IRELAND.

Die Sabbati, 28. August, 1647.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, that this Ordinance be
forthwith Printed and published.

Jo: Brown Cler: Parl.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings head in the Olde-Baily, 1647.

Die Sabbati, 28. August, 1647.
AN ORDINANCE FOR The relief of the distressed Protestants come out of IRELAND.
THE Lords and Commmons Assembled in Parliament taking into consideration the
sad and miserable condition of diverse distressed Protestants who have been
stripped of their Estates, and forced to fly from the Kingdom of Ireland (by
those barbarous and bloody Rebels) and do now remain about the Cities of
London and Westminster, and places adjacent mentioned in the Weekly Bills of
Mortality. Do order, and ordain, And be it hereby ordered and ordained that
there be upon Tuesday the last of this present August, being the day of
public Thanksgiving for Gods great goodness in giving so glorious a Victory
over the bloody Rebels by the Forces under the Command of Colonel MICHAEL
JONES in the Province of Lymster in the Kingdom of Ireland, a Collection for
the relief of the said distressed Protestants in all Churches, and Chappells
within the Cities of London and Westminster, and places adjacent mentioned in
the weekly Bills of mortality, and the moneys so collected are to be paid in
by the several Churchwardens, or Collectors unto Mr. John Poacock, William
Greenhill, John Randall, and (...) Hutchinson. Treasurers at Christ-Church
London. And it is further ordered and ordained by the authority aforesaid, That
there be a Collection in all other Churches and Chappells within the Kingdom
of England and Dominion of Wales upon Tuesday seven night next following being
the day of public thanksgiving for the blessing aforesaid. And the moneys so
collected, are to be paid in to the Sheriffs of every county respectively, who
are speedily to pay in the same unto the Treasurers above mentioned, and are to
receive an Acquintance from the said Treasurers signed under their hands, or
the hands of any two of them, And the said Treasurers are to issue out the
money to such distressed Protestants, and in such sums as they shall receive
warrant for, from such Committee as shall be appointed by both Houses of
Parliament. And especial care is to be taken that such only have warrants
granted, who are real Protestants, and have constantly opposed the horred
Rebellion, who are to have Certificates or Certificates of their quality and
Lesses under the hands of three Persons of good quality at the least, who have
had public employment under the Parliament within the Kingdom of Ireland.
And it is likewise ordered and ordained, That such warrant with an Acquittance
under the hand of the party, or his or her Assigns that receive any sum;
shall be a sufficient discharge to the Treasurers for any such sum so paid
and received. And lastly it is ordained that the Lord Major of the City of
London, and the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex do send to each Church and
Chapel within the Cities of London and Westminster, and parts adjacent,
expressed in the Weekly Bills of Mortality, one printed Copy of this
Ordinance, and the Knights and Burgesses serving in Parliament shall send into
their respective Counties within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales,
such number of printed Coppies to the Sheriffs of their Counties as shall be
sufficient for every Church and Chapel, who is to dispose them to every Chuch
and Chapel, and the Ministers of every church and chapel, are to publish or
cause to be published this Ordinance in the Church or Chapel on the said
days, and are to exhort the people to contribute hereunto. And in case this
Ordinance be not timely brought to any Minister so that it may be published as
abovesaid, then shall the Minister the next Lords day after the receipt of it
publish or cause to be published the same in the Church or Chapel, and exhort
the people to contribute to this so pious and charitable work.

FINIS.

