AN ORDINANCE OF The Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT; For the
upholding the Government and Fellowship of Merchants of England Trading in the
LEVANT Seas, For the maintenance of Clothing, and Woollen Manufactures, the
venting of LEAD, TIN, and sundry other Commodities of this Kingdom.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith printed
and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



MARCH 11. 1643. London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his
shop in the Middle Temple. 1643.

9. Martii, 1643.
FOr the better encouragement and supportation of the Fellowship of Merchants
of England trading in the LEVANT Seas; which, besides the building and
maintaining of diverse great Ships, both for Defense and Burden, the venting of
Kersies, Says, Perpetuanies, and several other commodities, Has been found
very serviceable and profitable to this State, by advancing Navigation, and
transporting into Foreign parts for several years together, above Twenty
thousand Broad-clothes per Annum, besides other commodities dyed and dressed in
their full Manufacture: And for the better Government and Regulating of Trade,
especially that of Clothing, whereby the poor people are set on work, and the
whole Kingdom receives benefit, The Lords and Commons in Parliament do Ordain,
that the said Fellowship of Merchants of England trading into the LEVANT Seas,
shall continue and be a Corporation, That they shall have the free choice and
removal of all Ministers and Officers, which are to be by them maintained
either at home or abroad, whether they be dignified, or called by the title or
name of Ambassadors, Governors, Deputies, Consulls, or otherwise; And shall
have power to Leavie Moneys on the Members of their Corporation, and Strangers,
upon all Goods that shall be shipped in English Bottomes, as also upon all the
Goods of English shipped in Strangers Bottomes, which go into or come from the
LEVANT Seas, for and toward the necessary charge and maintenance, and supply
of their Ministers, Officers, Government. And that the said Fellowship shall
have further power to Leavie such sum and sums of Money on the Members of their
corporation, and their Goods, as shall be advanced for the use and benefit of
the State, by the Approbation of both Houses of Parliament.: And that no person
shall bring from, or send Goods or ships into those parts Limited by their
Incorporation, but such as are Free Brothers, or otherwise Licensed by the
aforesaid corporation, or forfeiture of the whole, or other lesser Penalty to
be imposed by the said corporation, on their said Goods or ships so sent or
traded in unduly.

Provided that the said Fellowship shall not exclude any person from his
Freedom and Admission into the said Fellowship, who shall defire it by way of
Redemption, if such person be a mere Merchant, and otherwise capable thereof,
and shall pay Fifty pounds for the same, if he be above the age of twenty seve^
years, or twenty five pounds if he be under that age, or so much less, as
their Fellowship shall think fitting. And that the said Fellowship shall have
power to impose a Fine upon any person or persons wilfully contemning, or
disobeying the Order or Orders in matter of Government, so as the Fine do not
exceed the sum of Twenty pounds, for any one offense; And in default of
payment of such Fine, the said Fellowship shall have power to distrain the Goods
of such person or persons so fined; And if no sufficient distress can be
found, then the said Fellowship shall have power to imprison the said person or
persons for their said contempt, until such person or persons shall pay such
Fine or Fines, or otherwise conform themselves to the Act and Government of the
said Fellowship; And the said Fellowship shall have power to give such an Oath
or Oaths, to the Officers and Members of their Corporation, as shall be
approved of by both Houses of Parliament: Provided that all Rights or Charters
granted under the Broad Seal of England or otherwise, shall be hereby saved.

And the said Lords and Commons do further Ordain, That with all convenient
expedition, a Bill shall be prepared, in order to an Act of Parliament to be
passed in this present Parliament, for the further settling, and full
confirmation of the Privileges of the said Fellowship herein before mentioned,
with such other clauses and Provisions, as shall be found expedient by both
Houses of Parliament; This Ordinance to remain in full force, until a Bill or
Act shall be prepared and passed according to the intent and true meaning of
this Ordinance.

And it is Ordered, that this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published,
that all Persons concerned may take notice thereof as appertains.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

