Die Veneris, 13 Junii, 1645.

AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, FOR THE More
speedy getting in of the Moneys in Arreare, formerly Imposed upon the Bill of
400000 li. The Ordinances for the Fifty Subsidies, Weekly Assessement, and
Weekly Meal, within the City of LONDON and Liberties thereof.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.


Printed at London by Richard Cotes 1645.

AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
Die Veneris 13 Junii. 1645.
WHereas by an Act of Parliament made in the seventeenth year of his Majesty's
Reign that now is; Entitled, An Act for the raising and levying of Moneys for
the necessary Defense and great Affairs of the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, and for the payment of Debts undertaken by the Parliament; It was
amongst other things thereby Enacted, that the sum of four hundred thousand
pounds should be Assessed, levied, and paid to such persons, and in such
manner, as in the said Act is contained: And whereas by three severail
Ordinances of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, diverse great sums
of money have been taxed and assessed, viz. The one of them bearing date on the
fourth day of March, 1642. Inti^uled, An Ordinance for the speedy raising, and
levying of Moneys for the maintenance of the Army raised by the Parliament, and
other great affairs of the Commonwealth, by a weekly Assessement.

One other of them bearing date, on, or about the eighteenth day of August
1643. For the speedy supply of Moneys within the City of London and Liberties
thereof, for the relief and maintenance of the Armies raised, and to be
raised for the necessary Defense of the said City and Liberties.

And the other of them bearing date, on, or about the six and twentyeth day of
March, 1644. Entitled, An Ordinance for the Contribution of the value of One
Meal in a Week. A great part of which Moneys Assessed by virtue of the
aforesaid Act and Ordinances, are yet unpaid, chiefly through the default of
the several Collectors, Subcollectors, and other Officers appointed for those
services, to the great discouragement of those who have willingly contributed
and paid their several Rates and Assessements imposed upon them, to the great
disservice of the Commonwealth.

And forasmuch as the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London,
in Common Council assembled, out of their care to advance the public service,
have by several Acts and Orders of the said Common Council, nominated and
appointed several persons, Members of the said Common Council, to be a
Committee for the gathering in of Arrears, which said Committee for want of a
sufficient power as well to compel Collectors and Officers heretofore
appointed for the service aforesaid, to bring in to them their Accounts and
Moneys received, as also the persons rated and taxed to pay the said several
sums in arreare, could not perform such service as otherwise they might have
done.

For remedy whereof, be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the
several persons hereafter nominated and appointed by the said Court of
Common Council for the getting in of the Arreares aforesaid, viz. Sir John
Wollaston Knight and Alderman, John Warner, and Thomas Andrews, Aldermen of the
said City, and Richard Glyd, William Antrobus, Walter Boothby, Francis Peck,
Francis Ash; Colonel Francis West, Thomas Nowell, Thomas Blackwell,
Christopher Pack, John Green, John Sadler, James Story, John Babbington,
Thomas Arnold, John Dethicke, John Holliday, Tobias Lisle, Thomas Lenthall,
Thomas Brightwell, Peter Jones, Edwyn Brown, William Jesson, Randall
Baskervile, Richard Young, Thomas Clowes, Alexander Jones, Richard Willet,
Philip Parker, Jo. Jurian, Richard Chiverton, James Wal^am, James Harbert,
Hoogan Hovell, William Rowell, and William Beak, or any six of them shall be a
Committee, and shall have hereby Power and Authority by themselves, or such as
they shall appoint, to gather, levy and receive of all such person and persons
as have been taxed and assessed within the Cities of London, and Liberties
thereof, their Executors, or Administrators having sufficient Assets, all such
sum and sums of money now in Arreare and rated, taxed and imposed upon them
by virtue of the said Act and Ordinances, or any of them, and to send for any
such person or persons wheresoever they shall inhabit or be found.

And it is Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That all High-Collectors,
Sub-Collectors, and other Officers which are already appointed by virtue of the
said Act and Ordinances, shall within three days after demand made by the said
Committee, or such person or persons as the said Committee, or any of them
shall appoint, after notice thereof given or left at his usual dwelling or
place of abode, bring in their several Rolls, Books of Accounts, and
Receipts, concerning the several sums taxed, levied, or received by virtue
of the said Act and Ordinances; and also as well the said High-Collectors,
Sub-Collectors, and other Officers, having moneys in their hands, or due from
them by virtue of the said Act and Ordinances, as all other person and persons
in Arreare and taxed, rated, or assessed by virtue thereof; shall immediately
pay the same to the said Committee, or to the Treasurer or Treasurers by them
appointed to receive the same, any thing to the contrary heretofore ordained
notwithstanding. And if any High-Collector, Sub-Collector, or other Officer
already appointed for the service aforesaid, or any other person or persons
whatsoever in Arreare as aforesaid, shall fail therein, that then the said
Committee by such person or persons as they shall appoint by virtue of a
Warrant from the Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of moneys and other
necessaries for the Army now sitting at Haberdashers-Hall, shall levy the same
sum and sums of moneys so rated, taxed, or assessed, or in the hands and
custody of every such person and persons as aforesaid, by distress of the
Goods and Chattels of such person and persons neglecting or refusing to pay the
same in manner aforesaid, and sell the Goods so distrained for the service
aforefaid. And if any person or persons shall stand out or forbear to make
payment of any sum and sums of money so in Arreare, or in his custody as
aforesaid, until a distress shall be taken for the same; that then he or
they so standing out or forbearing, shall pay all reasonable charges for all
such distress, removal and sale of their Goods, as the said Committee shall
direct or appoint. And if no sufficient distress can be found or come by, that
then the said Committee by such person or persons as they shall appoint, and by
such warrant as aforesaid, shall have hereby power and authority to commit
every such person and persons to safe custody, until he or they shall satisfy
and pay unto the said Committee, or to the Treasurer or Treasurers by them
appointed, the said several sums of money.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That if any such
High-Collector, Sub-Collector, or other Officer heretofore appointed to levy,
gather or receive any the sums of money aforesaid, shall fail after demand
made as aforesaid, to bring in to the said Committee as aforesaid the said
Rolls, Books of Accounts, or other Receipts concerning the several sums of
money taxed, rated, or received by virtue of the said Act or Ordinances as
aforesaid, shall be committed to safe Custody, by virtue of such Warrant as
aforesaid, till he or they shall conform him or themselves, and give
satisfaction to the said Committee touching the same.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that all moneys
received and now in the hands of the said Committee, appointed by the said
Common Council, and which hereafter shall be received by the said Committee
or the Treasurer or Treasurers by them appointed upon the said Act for the
Royal Subsidies, shall be from time to time by the said Committee or
Treasurer paid into the Chamber of the City of London, and the Acquitances of
the Chamberlain for the time being, shall be to them a sufficient discharge,
to be disposed of as by the said Act is directed; Any Proviso heretofore made
to the contrary not withstanding: And all Money recelved, and to be received
by the said Committee, or the Treasurer or Treasurers by them appointed, or to
be appointed, upon any other Assessement or Ordinance aforesaid, shall be by
the said Committee, Treasurer, or Treasurers paid to such purposes, as by the
said several Ordinances is directed, and appointed.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that it shall and
may beelawfull, and the said Committee shall hereby have full power and
authority to use and employ all such Officers as now are, or which hereafter
shall be nominated and chosen by the said Committee, for the furtherance and
better carrying on of the service aforesaid.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Common^ that it shall and may
be lawful to and for the laid Committee upon receipt of the said several
sums of Money in the hands of any of the Collectors, Sub-collectors, and
other Officers to make such allowance thereout to the said High Collectors,
Sub-collectors, and other Officers, as by the said Act and Ordinances are to be
allowed.

And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in regard of the
great charges necessarlly required to the getting in of the said several
Arreares, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Committee, to
deduct out of all such Moneys, as have been or shall be brought in to them as
aforesaid, to be disposed of by the laid Committee for payment of Officers,
and such other Occasions as they shall think sit, except such moneys as have
been already received upon the said Act of Parliament for the Royell Subsidy,
so much as to them shall be thought necessary; So the same do not exceed the
sum of three pence per pound.

And it is Ordained, that all Majors, Sheriffs, Captains, Lieutenants,
Bayliffes, Constables, and all other Officers and Soldiers shall be aiding
and assifting to the said Committee, and all such Officers as shall be
employed by them for the better Execution and performance of the said Service.

And it is lastly Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that whatsoever the
said Court of Common Council, or the said Committee appointed by the said
Court as aforesaid, or any of them, or the Persons employed and to be employed
by them, have heretofore done, or shall hereafter do for the furtherance of
this Service, according to the Tenor and Purport of this or any former
Ordinance, or the Act of Parliament mentioned in this Ordinance, they shall be
saved and kept harmless and indemonifyed for the same, by the Authority of
both Houses of Parliament.

Provided always, that this Ordinance, or any Clause, therein contained, shall
not extend to the distraining of the Goods or commitment of the person of any.
Pear of this Realm, nor any Assistant, Officer, or Attendant of the House of
Peers, nor to any Member or Officer of the House of Commons, nor to the
sending for any of the Persons aforesaid.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl, Dom. Com.


FINIS.

