An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled. Prohibiting the
Importation of Whale-Oyle, Fins, or Gils, but by Ships set forth from hence,
and by English Subjects.
Die Martis 6. Maii. 1645.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in the High Court of Parliament of England,
taking into consideration* That nothing more inricheth this Kingdom then
Commerce, whereby the Navigation thereof is much increased, especially in
Fishing Voyages, and therefore ought to be encouraged. Upon the humble Petition
presented from the Fellowship of Merchants of England, for discovery of new
Trades Adventurers to Greenland: showing, That they were the first Discoverers
of that Country, and for many years successively have maintained the Fishing
there, which has been a great increase of many Seamen, and many Ships
^eerely employed, to the great benefit of this Kingdom. But of late years have
been much prejudiced, for that great quantities of Whale Oil of Strangers
Fishing are permitted to be imported into this Kingdom more then it can spend.
By means whereof, the said Petitioners, and others His Majesty's Subjects
trading thither, have not vent for theirs: Which without some speedy prevention
will disable them from continuing their Fishings into those parts, to the
hazard of the loss of that Country unto Strangers (so long desired by them)
being subject to the Crown of England. And likewise taking into consideration,
That in other Kingdoms and States the importation of Whale Oil and Fins are
not permitted to any but the Subjects of those Kingdoms and States of their
own Fishing, Do therefore Order and Ordain, That no Whale Oil, nor Fins,
nor Gils, commonly called Whale-bone, either wrought or unwrought, shall
hereafter be imported into any Port, Haven, or Greek of this Kingdom from any
foreign parts whatsoever, other then what are immediately fished in Greenland
by the Subjects of this Kingdom, and in Ships set out from hence, under
penalty of Confiscation. And all Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, Waiters,
and all other Officers in their several and respective places are hereby
required to attend the due execution thereof, and not to permit or suffer any
Whale Oil, nor Fins, nor Gils, as aforesaid, to be imported into this
Kingdom, or colourably customed for any other Goods or Merchandise, but that
they do forthwith seize and take the same into their custody, one Moiety for
the use and benefit of the State, and the other Moiety for the said Fellowship
toward their charges. And all Justices of the Peace, Majors, Bailiffs,
Sheriffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other His Majesty's Officers in
their several and respective places are hereby commanded and required to be
aiding and assisting therein, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 8. May.
1645.


