AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. For the
Visitation and Reformation of the Universitie of OXFORD And the several
Colleges and Halls therein. With the names of the Committee and Visitors for
the better regulating of the same.

Die Sabbathi 1. Maii. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance for the
Visitation of Oxford be forthwith printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



London Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Sabbathi 1. Maii. 1647.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the
Visitation and Reformation of the University of Oxford, and the several
Colleges and Halls therein.
FOr the better regulating and Reformation of the University of Oxford, and the
several Colleges and Halls in the same; and for the due correction of
offenses, abuses, and disorders, especially of late time committed there: Be it
Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority
of the same, That Sir Nathaniel Brent, Master Edward Corbet, Master John
Pulipeton, of the middle Temple, Master Henry Wilkinson, Master William Prynne
of Lincolnes Inn, Master William Typing, Sir William Cobb, Master George
Greenwood, Dector John Wilkinson, Master Edward Reynolds, Master Robert Harris,
Master Francis Cheynell, Master John Packer, Master John Wilkinson, Master John
Mills, Master Christopher Rogers, Master William Cope, Master Bartholomew Hall
of the middle Temple, Master Thomas Knight of Lincolnes Inn, Master John
Heling of Crayes Inn, William Draper, Gabriel Beck of Lincolnes Inn, John
Cartwright, and Samuel Dunch Esquires, shall be, and they and every of them,
are hereby appointed to be Visitours of the said University, and of all and
every the said Colleges and Halls, And of all and every the Masters,
Scholars, Fellows, Members, and Officers of the said University, and of the
said Colleges and Halls, and every of them respectively. And be it further
Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Visitors, or any five of
them, may and shall visit the said University, Colleges, Halls, Masters,
Scholars, Fellows, Members, and Officers; and inquire of, and hear and
determine all and every crimes, offenses, abuses, disorders, and all other
matters whatsoever, which by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, or by the
Customs or Statutes rightly established of the said University, or by the
several Statutes of the said Colleges or Halls, or any of them respectively,
may lawfully be inquired of, and heard, and determined in the course and way of
Visitation of the said University, or of the said Colleges, Halls, Masters,
Scholars, Fellows, Members, and Officers, or of any of them respectively: And
that they may and shall therein proceed to all intents and purposes, as and
according as by the said Laws, Statutes, and Customs, or by any of them, any
other Vifitors, by any Authority whatsoever appointed, might proceed
respectively. And be it also further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
the said Visitors, or any five of them, may inquire by Oath viva voce, to be
taken before them respectively, of and concerning all the Master, Scholars,
Fellows, and Officers of the respective foundations of all and every the said
Halls and Colleges, and of all and every the Officers belonging to them, or to
the said University, concerning those that neglect to take the Solemn League
and Covenant, and the Negative Oath being tendered to them, by such as are
authorized thereunto by Parliament; and likewise concerning those that oppose
the execution of the Ordinances of Parliament concerning the Discipline and
Directory, or shall not promote and cause the same to be put in execution,
according to their several places and callings; And likewise concerning those
that shall teach or write against any point of Doctrine, the ignorance whereof
does exclude from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And be it also further
Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Visitors, or any five of
them, may and shall inquire upon Oath, viva voce, to be taken before them
respectively, of all and every the Masters, Scholars, Fellows, and Officers,
of the respective Foundations, of and concerning all and every the said Halls
and Colleges, and of all and every the Officers belonging to any of them, or
to the said University, that have taken up or been in Arms against the
Parliament, or against any Forces raised by Authority thereof, or that have
been active in assisting or encouraging the Forces raised against the
parliament; and may and shall call all and every such person and Witnesses
concerning the same before them respectively; and the same Witnesses, and any
Witness or Witnesses to be produced by the Party accused of, or charged with
any such offenses put to their Oaths Viva voce concerning the Premises, and
that they, or any five of them shall from time to time certify to the
Committee of Lords and Commons, hereafter in this Ordinance appointed, what
Masters, Scholars, Fellows, Members, or Officers as aforesaid they find to
have committed any of the said offenses, and in what manner, and the especial
quality and condition of the offenders; That so such further proceedings may be
thereupon had, as to the said Committee of Lords and Commons shall be thought
meet. And be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the said Visitors
shall have power, and are hereby authorized to Examine, and consider of all
such Oaths as are enjoined by the Statutes of the said University, or of all
or any of the respective Colleges and Halls in them, as are not fit to be
taken, and to present their Opinions concerning the same to the Committee of
Lords and Commons in this Ordinance named, to the end that such course may be
therein taken as may be agreeable to the intended Reformation of the said
University; Provided always, and it is further Ordained, That if any of the
said Musters, Scholars, Fellows, Members, or Officers, shall find themselves
grieved in, or upon any Sentence definitive given by the said Visitors, or any
of them as aforesaid, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Party so grieved, summarily by representing his Case, to appeal and seek
remedy and redress thereupon before the said Committee of Lords and Commons,
who are hereby authorized findly to hear and determine every such Case so
brought to them by appeal, according as to Justice shall appertain. And it is
further Ordained by the authority aforesaid; That Algernon Earl of
Northumberland, Henry Earl of Kent, John Earl of Rutland, Philip Earl of
Pembrooke and Mountgomery, Theophilus Earl of Lincoln, Charles Earl of
Notringham, James Earl of Sustolk, William Earl of Salisbury, Robert Earl of
Warwick, Bazil Earl of Denbigh, James Earl of Middlesex, Edward Earl of
Manchester, Edmund Earl of Mulgrave, Henry Earl of Stamford, Walter Lord
Viscount Hereford, William Lord Viscount Say and Seal, Charles Lord De la
War, George Lord Berkley, Philip Lord Wharton, Francis Lord Willoughby,
Dudley Lord North, John Lord Huasden, William Lord Gray of Warke, John Lord
Roberts, Edward Lord Howard of Escr. Tho. Lord Bruce, Members of the House of
Peers. And Sir Christopher Yelverton, Sir John Danvers, Mr. John Seldom, Mr.
(...) West, Mr. Francis Rous, Mr. John Crew, Sir William Jews, Mr. Bulstrode
Whitlocke, Sir Thomas Witherington, Mr. (...) Poole, Sir Peter Wentworth,
Colonel (...) Leigh, Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes, Mr. Walter Long, Sir Philip
Stapleton, Mr. William Wheeler, Mr. (...) Swinfen, Mr. Samuel Broune, Mr.
Nicholas Love, Sir Willam Brereton, Thomas Lord Wenman, James Fiennes Esquire
William Lenthall, Esquire Speaker of the House of Commons, Denzell Holles Esquire and
Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Humphrey Sallaway Esquire Mr. Lisle, Mr. John
Lenthall, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Mr. Scot, Sir Thomas Wroth, Mr. Doyly, Mr.
Prideaux, Mr. Tate, Mr. Bond, Mr. Ashurst, Mr. Bulckley, Mr. Kirle, Mr.
Recorder, Mr. Martin, Sir John Burgoyne, Sir Themas Dacres, Mr. Nicell, Sir
John Maynard, Mr. Geurden, Mr. Grimston, Doctor Bond, Mr. Morley, Mr. Green,
Mr. Reynolds, Mr. Grove, and Mr. Knightly, Members of the House of Commons, and
every five of them shall be, and are hereby authorized to be a standing
Committee, and to fit at such time and place as they respectively shall
appoint, to receive upon appeal as asoresaid such matters as shall be so
brought and represented to them: and thereupon summarily to proceed according
as the justice of the Case requires, and also to receive such matters as shall
be as aforesaid certified to them; and thereupon to proceed and determine,
according as they shall find the quality and condition of the Cases and
Persons so certified to them respectively. Provided also, that nothing
contained in this Ordinance shall take away the right and authority of the
Chancellor for the time being.

FINIS.

