Die Lunae 24 April. 1648.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the
redressing of the oppressions of Soldiers by taking Free Quarter, contrary to
the Orders of PARLIAMENT.
WHereas it has been informed that Free Quarter has been and is yet taken in
several places in this Kingdom, contrary to several Ordinances and
Declarations of both Houses of Parliament, to the great dishonor of the
Parliament, and grievous oppression of the Subject, It is therefore Ordered and
Ordained by the Lords and Commons now Assembled in Parliament, for the more
speedy, easy, and effectual redress of the same, That the Commissioners
named in the last Ordinance for 60000 l. per mensem, or any two of them, upon
complaint made against any Officers or Soldiers, for taking Free Quarter, or
committing any other misdemeanour contrary to the Declarations and Ordinances
aforesaid, shall have power, and are hereby authorized and required, to call
any person or persons so complained of before them, and such witnesses as shall
be desired to be produced on either side touching the premises, and to take
their examinations and informations upon Oath, and to certify the same to
Thomas Lord Fairfax General of the Army, who is hereby required to give
redress, and to do justice therein according to the Ordinances and
Declarations of Parliament in that case made and provided; as also according to
the Laws, Articles, and Discipline of War, allowed of and established by
Authority of both Houses of Parliament. And it is hereby further Ordained by
the Authority aforesaid, That the said Commissioners so authorized to examine
as aforesaid, Shall give notice to the chief Officer in Commission then
resident in the County where such offense or misdemeanour is complained of as
aforesaid, of the time and place by the said Commissioners appointed for the
taking of the said examinations and informations as aforesaid; which said
chief Officer in Commission may be present and assist the said Commissioners
in taking the said Examinations and Informations.

Die Lunae, 24 April. 1648.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1648.


