AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, For the more
speedy raising of the Moneys formerly Imposed, and yet unpaid, within the City
of London and Liberties thereof.

Die Lunae, 23 Octobris. 1643.
ORdered that this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. H Elsyng. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1643.

Die Lunae, 23. October. 1643. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
PARLIAMENT.
THE Lords and Commons taking into their consideration the great burden and
charge hitherto for the most part undergone by the willing part of the City of
London and Liberties thereof, by their ready payments and contributions, in
pursuance of several Acts and Ordinances of Parliament, heretofore made for
that purpose, whilst others, through want of the due execution thereof, have
either paid and contributed nothing, or not considerably thereunto: For remedy
thereof, do Ordain, and be it Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that
the several persons hereafter named, shall within the several Wards of the
said City and Liberties, be employed as agents to put in execution the several
Acts and Ordinances hereafter mentioned, in manner as is hereby Declared, viz,

In the Ward of Cheap and Cornehill Edward Lynsey. John Pain
Algate Matthew Bugge Samuel Poole
Bassingshaw Colemanstreet James Wight Samuel Wight
Bishopsgate within and without Francis Laurence Jeremy Arnold
Bridgeward Candlewicke Richard Cole Thomas Baker
Billingsgate Tower Ward Humphrey Burey Lynam Robins
Breadstreete Cordweyners Arthur Coleman John Anckle
Vintrey Thomas Lindsey John Eames.
Cripplegate within George Comes Thomas Hamersley
Cripplegate without Thomas Layton Jervis Goffe
Dowgate Walbrooke William Rudgdale Thomas Williamson
Queenehithe William Bridges Edward Cole
Aldersgate Henry Whittingham John Morton
Broadstreet Henry Wilson Thomas Thorneton
Portsoken John Ford Thomas Downall
Farringdon within Joseph Hunscot Maximilian Buck
Farringdon without the East division Clement Carter Henry Hastings
Farringdon without Fleetstreet division John Digby Laurence Forden
Castle Baynard Thomas Jervis Adam Houghton
Langborn Limestreet Francis Burrist Edward Edmonds



Which said several persons, or any other that the Committee for the Militia
of London shall add, who are hereby enabled thereunto, upon notice given them
by the Collectors or any of them, of the last Subsidies, for four hundred
thousand pounds, and of the weekly Assesments or any Fifteenes heretofore
granted by the Common Council of the City of London, who are hereby required
upon the request of the persons above named to give notice thereof accordingly,
what persons within their several Wards, or Precincts have refused, or
neglected to pay their said Subsidies, Weekly Assessements, and Fifteenes; And
what the said Arrerages are, and upon notice also given to the Persons above
named, by the Treasurors appointed to receive the moneys brought in upon the
late Ordinance of the 18. of August last; or by any of the Common Council men
of any Ward, what Arrerages are due thereupon, and from whom, (who are also
required hereby upon the request of the Persons above named to give notice
thereof accordingly) shall together with the said Collectors of each several
Ward, or any of them, forthwith repair to the several Persons so in Arreare,
or to the usual places of their abode. And if upon demand thereof made, such
persons shall neglect or refuse to pay the said weekly Assessements, Subsidies
or the said Fifteenes, to the said Collectors or any of them; And shall neglect
or refuse forthwith to pay the Arrerages due upon the said late Ordinance of
the eighteenth of August, to the Treasurors appointed for that purpose; That
then it shall and may be lawful to and for the persons above named, in the
presence of the said Collectors, or any of them, or of the Constables of the
said several Wards, and Precincts, who are hereby required to be ayding and
assisting herein, within their several Precincts, and Wards, to destreyne,
seize, take, and carry away from the several persons so in Arreares, so much
of the Goods and Estate of every such person, so refusing or neglecting to pay
the same as aforesaid, as may fully satisfy the said Arrerages, with all
charges of seisures, and removal thereof; And it is also ordained, that all
the goods so seized, and distreined as aforesaid, shall be forthwith Inventoried
by the said persons above named in the presence of the said Constables, and
Collectors, or some of them; And also appraised by such Persons as shall be for
that purpose appointed, by William Rowell, Richard Willet, Henry Cole, Richard
Everet, Robert Doleman, (...) Stock, Thomas Vincent, and John Bret, or any two
of them, who are hereby appointed a Committee to sit at Gresham College, to
receive the said Inventories, and Goods so appraised; Which said Inventories
are to be subscribed by the persons hereby appointed to distreine, together
with the Constables or Collectors that shall be present at the distress. And
in case neither the persons whose goods shall be seized, or distreyned, nor
any in his behalf do within three days after seizure, redeem the same, as
they shall be appraised, Then the said Committee or any two of them, to sell
the same for the best advantage; And from time to time to deliver the Moneys so
received for the same, to the Treasurers sitting at Guild Hall London appointed
by the said Ordinance of the eighteenth of August last; and to restore the
overplus, if any be, to the persons so seized and distreined as aforesaid.

And it is hereby further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that the
persons above named, shall hereby have power and Authority in the presence of
the said Collectors, and Constables, or any of them, as well within any
privileged places, as without, to break open all Locks, Doors, or other
strength whatsoever, where the Estates, Money, or Goods belonging to any such
person so in arreare, are, or shall be; And the Trained Bands, Voluntires and
other Forces, their Commanders and Officers, and also the several Constables
and other Officers, within their Limits, are hereby required and enjoined to be
ayding and assisting to the persons above nominated and employed, for the
service aforesaid; And it is further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons,
that the said Committee, or any two of them, shall allow to the persons above
named and appointed, to make seisures as aforesaid three pence for every pound,
which the goods so distreined by them and sold shall amount unto, and also such
other allowance to such other person or persons necessarily employed for the
service aforesaid, as the said Committee shall think requisite, to be paid
out of the money taken for the sale of the said goods. It is also ordained by
the said Lords and Commons to the end both this, and the Ordinance for
Sequestration formerly made, may be effectually put in execution, and that as
well the several Committees for Sequestrations, both within the said City of
London and Liberties, and elsewhere, appointed in pursuance of the Ordinances
for Sequestrations formerly made, as also the said Committee hereby appointed
to sit at Gresham College, shall have power at such times as the said
Committees, or any of them think fit, to cause the said Collectors, or any
other their Underofficers, to give an account upon oath, to the said
Committee, or any of them, concerning any the dealings and proceedings of the
said Collectors, and Underofficers in their several employments under the
said Committees. And to the end this present Ordinance, or any thing therein
contained, may not hinder the due and orderly execution of the said Ordinances
formerly made for the sequestrations of the estates of Papists and Delinquents
within the said City of London and liberties thereof;

Be it therefore ordained, that all such as shall fraudulently imbezele,
conceal, or convey away all, or any part of their goods, money, or estate,
without valuable consideration, Bona fide, thereby preventing or avoiding the
payment of any Taxes or Assessements, laid upon them by any Ordinance of both
Houses of Parliament, or any distress or seizure in case of non payment
thereof, or that after any such Tax or Assessements convey themselves away, or
refuse to be spoken with, whereby any such Tax or Assessement laid on them by
any Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament cannot be executed upon them, or
their estates, according to the true meaning and purport thereof, shall be
still taken to be delinquents, only within the said Ordinance of
Sequestration, and their Estates sequestered by the said sequestrators (the
Common Council men and Collectors of each Ward and Precinct within the said
City and Liberties, being hereby required upon request made to them, or any of
them, by the said Committee for sequestrations, or the Collectors apapointed by
the said Committee, to give a Catalogue or other notice of such persons now or
heretofore inhabiting within their several Wards, This present Ordinance or
any thing therein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding; And it
is also ordained by the said Lords and Commons, that if the said Collectors,
Constables or any other persons hereby appointed or to be appointed for the
purposes mentioned in this Ordinance, and in pursuance thereof shall refuse or
neglect to execute and do what hereby is required from them or any of them,
that then upon proof made thereof to the Committee of the House of Commons for
examinations, sitting at Westminster, or to the Militia for the City of
London, every person so refusing, or neglecting as aforesaid, shall be by the
said Committees, or either of them committed to safe custody without Bail or
Maineprise, or Assessed to pay such sums of money by way of fine, as the said
Committee, or Militia shall think fit, so the same exceed not the sum of ten
pounds for any one offense, and every person and persons doing and performing
any thing in pursuance of this present Ordinance shall be therefore from time
to time kept harmless by the authority of both Houses of Parliament.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

