An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, For the putting
out of the Cities of London and Westminster, and late Lines of Communication,
and Twenty miles distant, for Six Months, all Delinquents, Papists, and others
that have been in Arms against the Parliament.
Die Veneris, 17. December. 1647.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do Declare and Ordain, and be
it by Authority of Parliament Ordained and Declared, That all Papists
whatsoever, and all Officers and Soldiers of Fortune, and all other persons
whatsoever that have born Arms against the Parliament, or have adhered to, or
willingly assisted the Enemy in this late War, not being under restraint, and
not hereafter excepted, shall at, or before the Three and twentyeth day of this
instant December, depart the Cities of London and Westminster, and the late
Lines of Communication, and all other places within Twenty miles of the said
late Lines of Communication; and if any of the persons aforesaid shall continue
within the said Lines, or within twenty miles distance of the said late Lines
of Communication after the said three and twentyeth day of this instant
December, such person or persons shall be apprehended, imprisoned, and
proceeded against as Traitors.

And for the better execution of this Ordinance, it is further Ordained and
Declared by the said Lords and Commons, and by Authority of Parliament, That
the Lord Major of the City of London, and all Justices of Peace within the said
City and Liberties thereof; and the Committee of the Militia of the said City,
or any two or more of them, and Justices of Peace of the several Counties of
Middlesex, Hertford, Essex, Kent, and Surrey, and of the City of Westminster,
and Liberties thereof, and of the several Committees of the Militia of the
said Cities of Westminster, and Liberties thereof, and of the Borough of
Southwark, Hamblets of the Tower and Suburbs, or any two or more of them in
their respective Liberties and Jurisdictions shall and may, and are hereby
authorized and required to make search for, and apprehend, or cause to be
apprehended all Papists and Popish Recusants, whatsoever, and all Officers and
Soldiers whatsoever that have born Arms against the Parliament of England, or
have adhered to, or willingly assisted the Enemy in this late War, that are
or shall be found within the said Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs
and Liberties thereof, or within the said late Lines of communication, or
Twenty miles distant thereof, after the said Three and twentyeth day of this
instant December; And all such persons so apprehended and taken, and brought
before them, or any two of them as abovesaid, to imprison, and commit to some
common Jail or Prison, or to safe custody.

And all Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other his Majesty's Officers
and Subjects are to be aiding to the said Justices of Peace, and Committees of
Militia in execution of this Ordinance.

And in case any Jailer, Constable, or other Officer to whom any the persons
aforesaid shall be committed, shall permit such person or persons to go at
liberty without the special Warrant or discharge of the said Lord Major,
Justices of Peace, or Committees of Militia by whom they were so committed,
that the same shall be taken and adjudged an escape; And such Jailer,
Constable, and other Officer shall be proceeded against, and punished as for
an escape according to Law; And this Ordinance is to continue for the space of
Six months from the said Three and twentyeth day of this instant December.

Provided, that nothing in this Ordinance shall extend to such persons
aforesaid, who having their habitations within the Lines of communication, or
within the said space of Twenty miles have made their compositions, and paid
in, or secured their Fines, or have taken the negative Oath and covenant, or
that shall be authorized by both Houses of Parliament, or being really
attending their compositions at Goldsmiths-Hall, shall be permitted by the
Committee of Lords and Commons for compositions, there to continue within the
said late Lines of communication for the perfecting their said compositions.

Ioh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi, 22. Januarii, 1647.
BE it Ordered and Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
That any person or persons nominated and appointed by the Lord Major of the
City of London, or by the Justices of Peace, or Committee of the Militia in the
said City, or by any Three or more of them, or by the Justices and Committees
of Militia in the County of Middlesex, and in the City of Westminster, and
liberties thereof, and Borough of Southwark, or by any Three or more of them
respectively, are hereby authorized within their respective Limits to search
for, and apprehend all Papists and Popish Recusants, and all Officers and
Soldiers whatsoever who have borne Arms against the Parliament of England, or
have adhered to the Enemy in the late War, according to an Ordinance passed
in that behalf, bearing date the 17. of December, One thousand six hundred
forty seven.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.
Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Veneris, 24. Decembr. 1647.
Ordered,
THat the several Committees of the Militia of London, Westminster, Hamblets,
and Borough of Southwark, do take especial care, That all the Malignant
Ministers that have adhered to the Enemy, be forthwith put out of the late
Lines of Communication, in pursuance of the Ordinance for putting Malignants
out of the Lines of Communication.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

BY virtue of the Ordinances and Order above mentioned, we the Committee of the
Militia of London, and the Liberties thereof, do hereby Authorize and appoint
you to make diligent search in all places within (...) and to begin on (...)
and such offenders as you shall apprehend in the search, you are to commit to
safe Custody, and to give us notice thereof, to the end that they may be
proceeded against according to the said Ordinances and Order of Parliament: And
all Constables, Officers, and other persons are required to be aiding and
assisting unto you in the execution hereof.

Dated at Guild Hall, London, the (...) (...)o the Deputy and
Common-Councell-men in the (...)




