Die Sabathi 28, Februarii. 1645.
AN ORDINANCE Of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for twenty
thousand pounds to be paid out of the Excise, to the Forces Raised by the
Eastern Association for blocking up Newarke.
BE it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the
sum of twenty thousand pounds shall be paid for the use of the three
Regiments of Horse, of Major Le Hunt, Major Gibb, and Major Haines, and of
Captain Waylets Company of Dragoons, Raised, sent out, and Maintained by the
Eastern association, lately advanced for blocking up of Newarke, and parts
adjacent in course, after other affignments already charged shall fall due, out
of the Receipts of Excize by Ordinance of the 11. of September 1643. And the
Commissioners of Excize and new Impost, are hereby authorized to pay the same
accordingly unto Thomas Toll esquire; a Member of the house of Commons, or his
asignes, together with Interest for the same, after the rate of eight pounds
per centum for so long time as the same shall be forborne before it become due
as aforesaid, and his or their Receipt, to be their, the said Commissioners of
Excize, sufficient warrant and discharge, for the said twente thousand pounds
and Interest, and every part and parcel thereof; And that the said Thomas Toll
or his assigns do pay the Money by him so received, to such persons of the
several Counties of the said association, as the Committee of Lords and
Commons for the Eastern association or any five or more of them and as the
standing Committee of the several Counties of that association respectively or
any five or more of them under their hands in writing shall noate and appoint,
according to the proportions of Horse assessed, and set, upon the Counties of
the said association respectively.

Provided nevertheless, That the charging of the said twenty thousand pounds
upon the Receipts of the Excize, shall not prejudice or post pone the payment
of any sums of money charged upon the said Receipts by any former Order of
this House.

Henry Elsynge, Cler. Parliam. Dom. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of
Commons. March. 10. 1645.


