AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in SPARLIAMENT, FOR THE
Raising of Moneys for Redemption OF Distressed Captives.

Die Martis, 28. Jan. 1644.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be
forthwith printed:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



Printed at London for Laurence Blaiklock. Jan. 30. 1644

Die Martis, 28. Ian. 1644.
Whereas by an Act made this present Parliament, entitled, An Act for the
Relief of the Captives taken by the Turkish, Morish, and other Pirates: And to
prevent the taking of others in time to come, A Subsidy of One per Centum was
imposed on all Goods, Wares, and Merchandise, of what nature, kind, or quality
whatsoever to be exported out of, or imported into this Kingdom of England and
Dominion of Wales; which Subsidy or imposition was to continue by the said Act,
during the space of three years, expiring the tenth of December, 1644. And
whereas the Lords and Commons by their Ordinance of the twenty fourth of
October, 1644. for the carrying on that so pious a work, the Releasing of the
said distressed Captives: And withal, having respect to the Encouragement of
Merchants in their Trade, did thereby Declare and Order, That only one Fourth
part of the Moneys due on the several Bonds taken and due by the said Act;
That is to say, one Fourth part of the One per Cent. which is one shilling in
every Twenty shillings paid for Custom and Subsidy, according to the now Book
of Rates established by Authority of this present Parliament, should be paid by
the several Merchants so indebted, and to continue the payment of the said
fourth part of one per Cent. as before, upon all Goods and Merchandise exported
and imported unto the expiration of the said Act.

Now the said Lords and Commons finding the said work will require far greater
sums of money then could be raised by virtue of the said former Act and
Ordinance, during the time therein limited by the said one fourth part, do
Order and Ordain: That the said Ordinance of the twenty fourth of October,
1644. concerning the Collecting of the said duty and imposition of one fourth
part of one per Cent. which is one shilling in every twenty shillings, paid for
Custom and Subsidy, according to the now Book of Rates established by
Authority of this present Parliament, upon all Goods and Merchandise exported
or imported into this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Port and Town
of Barwick, shall stand and continue in full force and power, from the said
Tenth of December, 1644. inclusive, unto the Eleventh of December, 1645. And
that the Chamberlain of the City of London for the time being, his Deputy or
Deputies, be hereby appointed Collectors, who are hereby enabled to receive all
such sums of Money as shall hereafter, during the continuance of this
Ordinance, be payable or paid for, and in respect of the said duty, who are
hereby required to attend at the several Custome-houses in the Port of
London, and out-Ports, at the usual hours, between Nine and Twelve in the
morning, to receive the same, And to take such further course for dispatch of
the service, as he or they in their wisdoms shall think fit.

And it is further Ordained, That all such sums of Money as shall be collected
and received for the said duty aforesaid, shall from time to time be issued,
employed, disposed and paid by the said Chamberlain, for and toward the
Redemption of the said distressed Captives, in such manner as by the Lord
Admiral for the time being, and the Committee for the Navy of the Commons
House of Parliament, or in the absence of the Lord Admiral, by the Committee
of the Navy shall be ordered and directed, whose order from time to time shall
be his sufficient discharge.

And that the said duty may be duly collected and paid according to the true
intent and meaning of this Ordinance, It is Ordained, That no Officer or
Officers belonging to any Customehouse in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, and Town of Barwick, do pass any Warrant Cocquet, or permit any Goods
to pass by any Warrant cocquet, unless the same be signed or subscribed by
the Chamberlain of London, his Deputy or Deputies.

And for the better encouragement of the said Chamberlain, The Lords and
Commons do Ordain, That whatsoever Act or Acts, the said Chamberlain, his
Deputy, Deputies, or any one of them, shall do in the Execution of this
Ordinance: And whatsoever money they shall receive and Issue out by virtue of
the same; They, their Heirs, Executors and Administrators shall be acquitted,
discharged, and saved harmless, by the Power and Authority of both Houses of
Parliament. Provided, That the said duty be not demanded or levied of the
Merchant-Strangers, Trading upon the Composition Trade at Dover. Provided also,
And it is the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance, That no
Merchant-Stranger whatsoever, as to this duty, do pay any more then the
Merchant-Denizen does; and likewise, that as touching the duty hereby Imposed,
there be no Deduction or Defalkation of fifteen pounds per Cent. any thing
contained in this Ordinance to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Io: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


FINIS.

