AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT, Inhibiting the
importation of CURRANTS.
WHereas it is found by daily experience, that the Importation of Currants into
this Kingdom (it being a Commodity of little or no use at all, but a mere
superfluity, and may well be spared) is a matter of great concernment, not
only to the Merchant, but to this Nation, in regard the said Commodity cannot
be had in the parts beyond the Seas, where the same are bought, without ready
money, an hundred thousand pound per annum at least being bestowed in Currants,
which otherwise would be brought into this Kingdom, is wholly diverted;
whereas formerly (till of later years) the said Currants were bought for
Commodities of this Kingdom, exported hence of small value, besides the great
advantage which is yearly made upon the Merchant (where the said Currants are
laden) to their exceeding prejudice by the high and excessive Rates and Taxes
which are there imposed upon the said Commodity.

For the prevention of the like mischief for time to come, the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, at the instance and desire of the
Merchants of this Kingdom, and by and with their consent, do order, ordain,
and declare, that from and after the last day of September, which shall be in
the year of our Lord God 1642, That no Currants be imported into the Kingdom
of England, or Dominion of Wales, by any Merchants strangers, Denizens, or
others by way of Merchandise or otherwise, from any parts beyond the Seas; But
the importation thereof from and after the said last day of September, is
hereby utterly prohibited and forbidden.

And further by the Authority aforesaid, it is ordered and declared, That from
and after the said last day of September, no Entries be taken of any Currants
that shall be imported into this Kingdom or Dominion of Wales, by any Officer
whatsoever, in any of the Custome-Houses or elsewhere; And in case any Merchant
Denizen, or Alien, or any other person whatsoever contrary to this Ordinance,
shall presume to Import and unlade any Currants within this Kingdom or Dominion
of Wales after the said last day of September, that it shall be lawful for the
Officers of the Custom House respectively, to seize, take, and carry away all
such Currants, and them to detain until they shall receive further order from
both the Houses of Parliament in that behalf; And that every person that shall
offend herein, shall be liable to such further punishment and censure as the
Lords and Commons in a Parliamentary way shall inflict or impose.

And it is further ordered that the respective Officers of the Custome-houses
do take special care to put this Ordinance in execution, or do cause it to
be fully executed in every point according to the true intention of the same,
and that such persons as shall not obey in any of the premises shall answer
their neglect and contempt before the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and not
otherwise or elsewhere.

And lastly, it is ordered and declared, That from and after the three and
twentieth day of August, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, 1642.
that no Currants which are already bought in the parts beyond the Seas, and
brought into this Kingdom or the Dominion of Wales, shall be sold by retaile
for more than after the rate of five pence the pound, and that if any person
(that shall sell the same) shall offend contrary to this Ordinance, that he
shall be liable to receive such punishment as the Lords and Commons in a
Parliamentary way shall impose for his contempt in that behalf.

Veneris 26 August. 1642.
It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons, that this Ordinance
concerning Currants be forthwith printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London printed for Laurence Blaiklock, Anno Domini, 1642.


