AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT,

FOR The Raising of Moneys to be employed toward the maintenance of Forces
within this Kingdom, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight.

AND For the speedy transporting of and paying the Forces for carrying on the
War of Ireland.

7 Julii, 1647.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Husband do forthwith
print Six thousand of the Ordinance for raising Moneys for maintenance of the
Army under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
1647.

Die Mercurii, 23 Junii, 1647. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled
in Parliament, For the raising of Moneys to be employed toward the maintenance
of Forces within this Kingdom, under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight.
And for the speedy transporting of and paying the Forces for the carrying on
the WAR of IRELAND.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, for the due paying of such
Forces under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight (as the great and many
Dangers and Distempers do require to be kept up within this Kingdom for the
present) in such manner as the Subjects in this Kingdom may be no more
impoverished by Free Quarter as formerly; But that all Officers and Soldiers
may justly and duly pay and discharge their Quarters for the future, whereunto
they are hereby straightly charged and required: And for the effectual and more
vigorous carrying on the War of IRELAND, which Kingdom is in most imminent
Danger to be for ever cut off from this Crown, and the Protestant Religion
entirely rooted out of that Kingdom, by the countenance and assistance which
those barbarous and bloody Rebels do daily receive, Do Order and Ordain, and be
it therefore Ordered and Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in Parliament
Assembled, and by Authority of the same, That the several sums of Money
hereafter mentioned, shall be Monthly (according to the ordinary computation)
taxed, collected, leavied, and paid, for the purposes aforesaid, from the Five
and twentieth day of MARCH* One thousand six hundred forty seven, until the
Five and twentieth day of MARCH, One thousand six hundred forty eight in such
manner and form as hereafter is expressed:

VIZ.
Upon the county of Bedford, the monthly sum of Six hundred seventy three
pounds thirteen shillings and eleven pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Berks, the monthly sum of Six hundred eighty three pounds
fifteen shillings and nine pence.

Upon the county of Buckingham, the monthly sum of Eight hundred fifteen
pounds and eight shillings.

Upon the county of Cambridge, the monthly sum of One thousand four hundred
sixty two pounds sixteen shillings six pence farthing.

Upon the Isle of Ely, the monthly sum of Four hundred ninety pounds eighteen
shillings and a half penny.

Upon the county of Chester, the monthly sum of Three hundred forty five
pounds four shillings and eleven pence farthing.

Upon the city and county of Chester, the monthly sum of Thirty nine pounds
thirteen shillings and eleven pence.

Upon the county of Cornwall, the monthly sum of One thousand two hundred
twenty eight pounds five shillings and six pence farthing.

Upon the county of Cumberland, the monthly sum of Seventy seven pounds one
penny and three farthings.

Upon the county of Derby, the monthly sum of Three hundred forty two pounds
nine shillings and four pence.

Upon the county of Devon, the monthly sum of Three thousand five hundred
twenty seven pounds six shillings and three half pence.

Upon the city and county of Exon, the monthly sum of One hundred twenty seven
pounds nine shillings and two pence farthing.

Upon the county of Dorset, the monthly sum of Nine hundred thirty five pounds
ten shillings and ten pence three farthings.

Upon the town and county of Pool, the monthly sum of Nine pounds sixteen
shillings and seven pence half penny.

Upon the county of Durham, the monthly sum of One hundred fifty nine pounds
and two shillings.

Upon the county of York, the monthly sum of Two thousand one hundred eleven
pounds seven shillings and eight pence three farthings.

Upon the city and county of York, the monthly sum of One hundred forty nine
pounds eleven shillings and five pence half penny.

Upon the town of Kingston upon Hull, the monthly sum of Fifty pounds eighteen
shillings and nine pence.

Upon the county of Essex, the monthly sum of Four thousand five hundred forty
seven pounds nine shillings and five pence.

Upon the county of Gloucester, the monthly sum of One thousand two hundred
twelve pounds three shillings and six pence three farthings.

Upon the city and county of Gloucester, the monthly sum of One hundred thirty
four pounds thirteen shillings and nine pence.

Upon the county of Hereford, the monthly sum of Eight hundred sixty eight
pounds two shillings and three pence.

Upon the county of Hertford, the monthly sum of One thousand six hundred
thirty eight pounds fifteen shillings and five pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Huntington, the monthly sum of Six hundry eighty seven
pounds three shillings and five pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Kent, with the city and county of Canterbury, and the
Cinque Ports within the county of Kent, the monthly sum of Four thousand seven
hundred sixty three pounds one shilling and a penny.

Upon the county of Lancaster, the monthly sum of Five hundred twenty nine
pounds three shillings and two pence.

Upon the county of Leicester, the monthly sum of Four hundred sixty seven
pounds nine shillings and ten pence half penny.

Upon the county of Lincoln, the monthly sum of One thousand five hundred
seventy three pounds eight shillings and three half pence.

Upon the city and county of Lincoln, the monthly sum of Sixy four pounds
twelve shillings and nine pence half penny.

Upon the city of London, the monthly sum of Three thousand nine hundred seven
pounds nineteen shillings and two pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Middlesex, city and Liberty of Westminster, the monthly
sum of One thousand five hundred twenty one pounds seventeen shillings and nine
pence.

Upon the county of Monmouth, the monthly sum of One hundred ninety two pounds
nineteen shillings and a penny.

Upon the county of Northampton, the monthly sum of Five hundred ninety one
pounds eleven shillings and eleven pence farthing.

Upon the county of Notingham, the monthly sum of Three hundred fifty three
pounds nineteen shillings and three pence.

Upon the town and county of Notingham, the monthly sum of Eleven pounds
fourteen shillings and six pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Norfolk, the monthly sum of Four thousand seven hundred
sixty three pounds one shilling and a penny.

Upon the city and county of Norwich, the monthly sum of Two hundred forty six
pounds eleven shillings and five pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Northumberland, the monthly sum of One hundred pounds
sixteen shillings and ten pence three farthings.

Upon the town of Newcastle, the monthly sum of Twenty nine pounds and
seventeen shillings.

Upon the county of Oxon, the monthly sum of Seven hundred seventy nine pounds
thirteen shillings and eleven pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Rutland, the monthly sum of One hundred twenty eight
pounds one shilling and a farthing.

Upon the county of Salop, the monthly sum of Five hundred fifty three pounds
nineteen shillings and nine pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Stafford, the monthly sum of Four hundred fifty four
pounds fifteen shillings and four pence three farthings.

Upon the town of Litchfield, the monthly sum of Ten pounds fourteen shillings
and eight pence.

Upon the county of Somerset, the monthly sum of Two thousand and fifty
pounds, eleven shillings and five pence.

Upon the city and county of Bristol, the monthly sum of One hundred and
twelve pounds twelve shillings and ten pence half penny.

Upon the county of Southampton, the monthly sum of One thousand five hundred
and fourteen pounds four shillings and five pence farthing.

Upon the town and county of Southampton, the monthly sum of Sixty two pounds
eight shillings and eight pence farthing.

Upon the Isle of Wight, Two hundred and eight pounds two shillings and six
pence farthing.

Upon the county of Suffolk, the monthly sum of Four thousand seven hundred
sixty three pounds one shilling and a penny.

Upon the county of Surrey, with the Borough of Southwark, the monthly sum of
One thousand three hundred forty seven pounds and eight shillings.

Upon the county of Sussex, and the Ports within the county of Sussex, the
monthly sum of Two thousand six hundred forty six pounds two shillings and
nine pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Warwick, the monthly sum of Six hundred twenty one pounds
three shillings and six pence farthing.

Upon the city and county of Coventry, the monthly sum of Seventy nine pounds
and nineteen shillings.

Upon the county of Worcester, the monthly sum of Seven hundred and four
pounds eighteen shillings and a half penny.

Upon the city and county of Worcester, the monthly sum of Forty three pounds
five shillings and six pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Wilts, the monthly sum of One thousand four hundred twenty
one pounds eighteen shillings and nine pence farthing.

Upon the county of Westmerland, the monthly sum of Sixty six pounds nine
shillings and two pence half penny.

Upon the Isle of Anglesey, the monthly sum of Fifty pounds seventeen
shillings and ten pence.

Upon the county of Brecknock, the monthly sum of One hundred and three pounds
six shillings and eleven pence.

Upon the county of Cardigan, the monthly sum of One hundred twenty two pounds
nine shillings and ten pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Carmarthen, the monthly sum of One hundred pounds fifteen
shillings and six pence.

Upon the county of Carnarvan, the monthly sum of Forty two pounds six
shillings and five pence three farthings.

Upon the county of Denbigh, the monthly sum of Fifty four pounds six
shillings and ten pence half penny.

Upon the county of Flint, the monthly sum of Thirty three pounds six
shillings and four pence half penny.

Upon the county of Glamorgan, the monthly sum of One hundred thirty one
pounds fifteen shillings and ten pence.

Upon the county of Merioneth, the monthly sum of Thirty one pounds eleven
shillings and six pence.

Upon the county of Montgomery, the monthly sum of One hundred twenty three
pounds two shillings and eight pence farthing.

Upon the county of Pembroke, the monthly sum of One hundred and sixteen
pounds four shillings and seven pence farthing.

Upon the county of Radnor, the monthly sum of Seventy three pounds two
shillings and seven pence half penny.

Upon the town of Haverford-west, the monthly sum of Ten pounds two shillings
and six pence three farthings.

And that the said several sums of money may be duly taxed, levied and paid as
is hereafter directed; Be it farther Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That
the persons hereafter named shall be Commissioners for the several Cities,
Counties and Places herein mentioned, to put this Ordinance in execution in the
said several and respective Counties, Cities and Places for which they are
hereby respectively appointed Commissioners; viz.

For the County of Bedford. SIr Beauchamp St. John Knight, Sir John Burgoyn
Baronet, Sir Thomas Alston Knight and Baronet, Sir Oliver Luke Knight, Sir
Samuel Luke, Sir John Rolt, Sir Roger Burgoine, Sir William Boteler, and Sir
John Thomson, Knights, Thomas Rolt, Thomas Sadler, James Beverley, Lewis Monox,
Edward O shorn, Robert Staughton, Samuel Brown, Onstow Winch, John Harvey, and
Edward Cater Esqs Clement Armiger Esquire; Humphrey Monox, William Duncomb, John
Vaux; Humphrey Fish, John Neal, and Thomas Dacres, Esquires.

For the Town of Bedford. The Major of the Town of Bedford for the time being,
Samuel Brown Recorder there, Francis Banister Doctor in Physic, Robert Hawes,
Thomas Haws, Thomas Paradine, and Mr. Dacres.

For the County of Berks. William Lenthal Esquire; Speaker of the House of Commons,
and Master of the Rolls, Sir Francis Knollis Knight, Sir Francis Pile Baronet,
Sir Robert Pie Knight Senior, Sir Benjamin Rudyard Knight, Henry Martin, Edmond
Dunch, Richard Whitehead, Peregrine Hobby, Tanfield Vachel, John Lenthal, Will.
Ball, Cornelius Holland, John Buckley, John Packer, Robert Packer, Daniel
Blagrave, George Purefoy, Samuel Dunch, Roger Knight, Humphrey Dolman, William
Barker, William Hide, Will. Trumbal, Thomas Fetteplace, John Southby, Thomas
Morris, and Samuel Wightwick Esqs

For the County of Buckingham. Thomas Lord Viscount Wenman, Sir Peter Temple
Knight and Baronet, Richard Winwood, Bulstrode Whitlock Esquires, Sir William
Andrews, Sir Richard Piggot, and Sir William Cob, Knights, Francis Drake Esquire;
Isaac Pennington Alderman of London, George Fleetwood Esquire; Sir Richard
Ingoldsby Knight, Anthony Ratcliff, Thomas Lane, John Dormer, Richard Sergeant,
Edmond West, Thomas Bulstrade, Simon Main, Henry Beck, Anthony Carpenter,
Thomas Scot, Christopher Egleton, Thomas Aires, Thomas Lygo, John Lane, William
Russel, William Theed of Craston, William Wheeler of Redding Court, and John
Doily, Esquires, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, Christopher Hen, Thomas Wyan,
Richard Baldwin and John Barringer Gent. Richard Brown Esquire; Sir Gregory Norton
Baronet, Valentine Walton, Thomas Shilbourn, George Baldwin and William Short
Esquires, Cornelius Holland Esquire; Thomas Terrel, Richard Greenvile, Esquires,
Sir Richard Napier Knight, John Deverel, Thomas Theed Gent. Henry Andrews, John
Eccleston Esquires.

For the County of Cambridge. Sir Dudley North Knight of the Bath, Sir John
Maynard Knight of the Bath, Sir Miles Sandis, Sir James Reynolds, Knights,
Oliver Cromwell, James Reynolds, Francis Russel, Robert Reynolds, Thomas
Symonds, Thomas Ducket, Robert Castle, John Crane, Michael Dalton, Killiphet
Russell, Talbot Pepis, William Lemman, Dudley Pope, Thomas Bendish, Esquires,
Robert Clerk, John Welbore, Edward Clench, Edward Leeds, James Thomson, William
James, John Chevery, John Raven Mr. Reynolds of Triploe, Dr. Sawyer, John
Robson Gent. Philip Story, Dr. Richard Stone, John Roper, John Parker.



For the University and Town of Cambridge. The Major for the time being, John
Lowry Alderman, Samuel Spalding, Alderman French, Alderman Robson, Talbot
Pepys, Richard Foxton, Richard Temes, Esquires, James Blackley, Alderman Temes,
Edward Almond, Henry Lucas.

Isle of Ely. Sir Miles Sands, Sir Edward Patherich, Oliver Cromwell, George
Clapthorn, John Hubbert, and William March Esquires, Richard Stone Doctor of
physic, Thomas Castle, Tristrum Diamond, George Farwell, and William Fisher
Esquires,

For the County of Chester. Sir George Booth Knight and Baronet, Sir William
Brereton, Thomas Stanley, Henry Brook, John Bradshaw, Robert Duckenfield, Henry
Vernon, John Crew, Thomas Morbury, George Booth, Henry Birkhead, Henry Green,
William Towchet, Roger Wilbraham, Peter Warberton and William Davies, Esquires,
John Wetnal Gent. George Warburton Esquire; Philip Manwaring Esquire; Henry Delves Esquire;
Robert Venables and William Massey, Esquires, Robert Greg, and James Louden
Gent.

For the City of Chest^r. The Major for the time being, John Ratcliff Esquire;
Recorder, John Aldersay, Peter Leigh, William Edwards, Merchants, Richard
Leicester, Alderman Calven, Calven Bruen, Samuel Buck, Robert Greg, Merchants,
and Mr. Robert Wright, Alderman, Christopher Blease, Robert Whitby, Edward
Bradshaw, Owen Hughes, Richard Bradshaw, John Whittle, William Crompton, and
John Johnson Aldermen, and John Wyn Citizen.

For the County of Cornwall. Francis Buller, Richard Erysey, Thomas Arundel,
Francis G^dolphin of Trevenger, Anthony Nicol, Sir Samuel Rolls Knight, Robert
Scawen Esquire; John Elliot, John St. Aubin, John Trefusis, John Moil, Hugh
Boscawen, George Kekewich, John Trefusis junior, Thomas Gewen, Richard
Chiverton, Christopher Worthival, Anthony Rowse, Nicholas Waddam, Henry Wills,
Robert Bennet, Richard Carter, Edward Elliot, John Martin, Richard Penwarren,
William Ceely, Robert Martin and John Carry of Penwarden, Esquires, Leonard
Trecy Esquire; Robert Roll, Nicholas Trefusis, Edward Herle, Francis Wills, John
Vivian, Francis Buller of Tregarick, Peter Jenking, John Penrose, John Thomas,
James Parker, William Glyn, Edmond Prideaux of Badstow, Francis Courtney,
Richard Lovis, John Nicol, Roger Porter, John Jugo, Nicholas Seache, Thomas
Waddon, James Eresey, John Penrose.

For the County of Cumberland. Sir Wilford Lawson Knight, William Lawson,
William Briscoe, Thomas Lamplough, Richard Barwis, John Barwis Senior,
Esquires, William Armyn, and Richard Tolson, Esquires; John Skeleton of
Armathwaite, Thomas Curwen of Sellapark Esquire; Miles Halton, Thomas Barwis,
Michael Studholm, John Hudson, John Stoddard, Richard Vriel Gent. Thomas
Croiston, Thomas Crostwhait Merchants, Henry Tolson Colonel Cholmley Esquires,
and Ambrose Nicholson Esquire;

For the County of Darby.M Sir George Grisley, and Sir John Curson Knights and
Baronets, Sir John Gell, Sir Edward Cook, and Sir Francis Burder, Baronets, Sir
Edward Leich, Sir John Cook, and Sir Samuel Sleigh, Knights, Ralph Clark,
Christopher Horton, William Wolly, Nicholas Leak, Esquires, Rowland Moremood,
John Monday, Randolph Ashenhurst, Henry Wigfal, John Wigley, and Robert Eure,
Esquires, Thomas Sanders, George Pool, Edward Large, William Savil, and Edward
Charlto^ Gent. and Francis Revel Esquire; Darby.
The Major for the time being, Robert Wilmot, James Abney, Esquires, Thomas
Gell Esquire; Recorder; Nathaniel Hallows, Luke Whitington, and Robert Meller
Aldermen, Mr. Edward Peg, Gervas Bennet, Nicholas Wilmot, Esqs and Francis
Revel Gent.



For the County of Devon. Sir Samuel Role Knight, Sir John Bampfield Baronet,
Sir Richard Strode, Sir Edmund Fowel, Edmund Fowel Esquire; Josias Caldmady, Sir
Henry Rosewel, and Sir John Young, Knights, Walter Young, Edmund Prideaux, John
Maynard, John Harris of Hain, Francis Rouse, John Waddon, John Rolls, William
Fry, Philip Crooker, Robert Savery, Elias Grimes, Arthur Vpton, Richard
Gilbert, John Mullock of Axmouth, Thomas Crew, Charles Vaugham, John Bear,
Henry Pollexfin, John Kelly of Kelly Esquire; Philip Skippon Esquire; Major General,
The Major of Plymouth for the time being, John Barton of Silverton, John
Champneys, Thomas Boon, Philip Harris, Joseph Huntkine, John Marshal, Philip
Francis, Thomas Ceely, Richard Evans, Timothy Alsop, Justinian Peard,
Christopher Ceely, Sampson Heal Esquire; Sir Gregory Norton Baronet, Sir Francis
Drake Baronet, John Drake of Ash Esquire; William Bastard Esquire; Christopher Savery
Esquire; Sir John Pool Baronet, Christopher Wood Esquire; Robert Duke of Otterton Esquire;
William Fowel Esquire; Thomas Drake of Wiscomb Esquire; Matthew Hele Esquire; Peter Bevis,
Robert Roll Esqs; John Doddrig Esquire; Richard Wood Esquire; Edmond Davis, John Drake,
John Elford, John Tuckfield Esqs; Sir Nicholas Martin Knight, Sir John Northcot
Baronet, Lewis Grimes, Hugh Fortescue, and John Fortescue Esquires, The Major
of Dartmouth for the time being, Hugh Trevilian Esquire; Peter Specot, William
Morris, Esquires, John Fountain Esquire; John Bury, John Quick, Esquires, Edmund
Parker Edmund Anscot, John Wallacobe, and Nicholas Prideaux, Nicholas Roop,
John Vaughan, and John Carew Esquires, the Major of Phymouth.

For the City and County of Exon. The Major for the time being, Walter White
Major, Edmund Prideaux Esquire; Recorder, Simon Snow Esquire; John Hackwel, Adam
Bennet, Richard Saunders, Christopher Clark, James Gould, Richard Crossing,
John Lavering, Richard Evans, Samuel Clark, Nicholas Broc^in Gent.

For the County of Dorset. Charles Lord Cranborn, Denzil Hol^s Esquire; Sir Walter
Earl Knight, John Brown, Ed^ond Prideaux, Thomas Earl, Thomas Moor, John
Trenchard, Dean^^ Bond, Thomas Grove, Roger Hill, Giles Green, Richard Rose,
Esquires; Sir Thomas Trenchard Knight, John Bond Doctor of the Civil Law, John
Fitz-james junior, Francis Chettle, Thomas Crompton, Elias Bond, William
Hussy, Bartholomew Hall, Thomas Ceely, Henry Henley, and John Hill, Esquires,
and Richard Bury Gent. William Sydenham sen. William Sydenham jun. John
Whiteway, William Derby, George Thornhill, John Bingham Esquire; Sir Anthony
Ashley-Cooper Baronet, Richard Bingham Esquire; Richard Bradret, John Foy Esquire;
Christopher Earl, John Squib Esqs Walter Foy Esquire; Robert Bo^^ler Esquire; Jo:
Arthur Esquire; Lewis Williams Esquire; John Arnold Gent.

For the Town and County of Pool. The Major for the time being, John Bingham
Esquire; George Scut Senior, Auran Durel, Haviland Healy, William Scut, and John
Melmouth Gentlemen, Henry Harding, George Scut Junior.

For the County of Durham. Sir Henry Vane Senior Knight, Sir Henry Vane Junior,
Sir Richard Bellasis Knight, Sir George Vane, John Blackstone, Charles Vane,
Richard Lilbourn, Henry Warmouth, George Lilbourn, Robert Hutton, Thomas
Shadfurth, Christopher Falthorp, Clement Falthorp, Francis Wren, E^quires, Sir
William Selby, Thomas Mitford Esquire; The Major of Durham for the time being,
Christopher Foulthorp, Thomas Bows, Clement Foulthorp, Timothy Whittingham,
Thomas Shadfurth, George Gray, Gentlemen.

For the East Riding of the County of York. Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas
Fairfax Knight, Sir Francis Bointon Baronet, Sir William Constable Baronet, Sir
Richard Darley Knight, Vice-com. Sir William Strickland Knight and Baronet, Sir
Philip Stapleton, Knight, Sir William Allenson Knight, Sir William Saint
Quainton Baronet, Francis Thorp, John Anlaby, Richard Darley, John Allured,
John Nelthorp, James Nelthorp, The Major of Beverly for the time being, Joseph
Micklethwait, Robert Legard, Christopher Ridley, John Stillington, Richard
Robinson, and Walter Strickland, Esquires, Charles Bows Esquire;

For the North Riding. Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Sir
John Danvers, Sir Francis Bointon Baronet, Sir William Strickland Baronet, Sir
Richard Darley Knight, Sir John Bourchier Knight, Sir William Allenson Knight,
Sir Henry Cholmley Knight, Sir Thomas Norcliff, Sir Henry Franklin Knights,
John Wastel, Henry Darley, Brian Stapleton, Luke Robinson, Thomas Hoil, Walter
Strickland, Francis Lassels, Thomas Challenor, James Challenor, William
Aiscough, George Trotter, George Marwood, Ralph Reymeir, John Waters, Esquires,
George Ewre, Esquire; Henry Franklin Esquire; The Bailiffs of Scarborough for the time
being, and the Aldermen of Richmond.

For the west Riding. Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Sir
Thomas Maleverer Baronet, Sir Philip Stapleton Knight, Sir William Lister
Knight, Sir Charles Egerton, Knight, Sir Henry Cholmley, Henry Arthington,
William White, Thomas Stockdale, Esquires, Sir Edward Rhodes, Sir John Savile,
and Sir Robert Barwick, Knights, Charles Fairfax, John Farer, Thomas St.
Nicholas, Thomas Dickinson, William Armitage, John Claiton, Alexander Johnson,
Esquires, and Sampson Cooper Alderman of Rippon.

For the City of York. The Lord Major for the time being, Ferdinando Lord
Fairfax, Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, Sir William Allenson Knight, Sir Thomas
Widdrington Knight and Recorder, Sir Robert Barwick Knight, Thomas Hoil, Henry
Thomson, John Geldard, Stephen Watson, Thomas Dickinson, Robert Horner, and
Leonard Thomson, Aldermen.

For the Town and County of kingston upon Hull. The Major for the time being,
Sir Henry Vane Junior, Peregrine Pelham, Esquire; John Barnard, Lancelot Roper,
Thomas Rakes, John Rogers and Richard Wood, Gentlemen, Nicholas Denman, William
Pople, John Chambers, Joseph, Blades, Aldermen.

For the County of Essex. Sir John Barrington Knight and Baronet, Sir Harbottle
Grimston Knight and Baronet, Sir William Hicks, Sir William Masham, Sir Richard
Everard, Baronets, Sir Martin Lumley Knight and Baronet, Sir Thomas Cheek, Sir
Henry Mildmay of Wanstead, Sir William Roe, Sir Henry Hol^roft, Sir Thomas
Honywood, Sir William Martin, Sir Robert Kempe Knights, Harbottle Grimston,
James Camble, William Masham, John Sai^r, Timothy Middleton, Henry Mildmay of
Graces, Edward Birk^ head, William Vmphrevile, Oliver Raymond, Anthony Luther,
Deane Tindall, Robert Barrington, Robert Smith, Sampson Sheffe^ld, Thomas
Cook, Carey Mildmay, Richard Harlackenden, Robert Wiseman of Mayland, John
Eldred, John Joslin, Robert Bourne, John Meed, John Eden, Thomas Clapton,
Arthur Barnardiston, Isaac Allen of Haseley, William Gouldingham, William
Atwood, John Atwod, Peter Whitcombe, John Brook, John Harvey, Henry Wiseman,
Henry Barrington, Robert Young, Francis Stonehard, George Walton, John Watkins,
John Langley, Ioachim Matthewes Esquires, Richard Wiseman, John Langley of
Colchester, Thomas Cook, John Sorrel, William Turner of Wimbich, Robert
Vesay, Jeremy Ailett, William Collard, Robert Crane, Doctor Read of
Beauchanger, Robert Calthrop, Thomas Adams of Thackstead, Richard Hawkin of
Harwich, John Aliston, William Harlackenden, John Thorogood of Walden, Isaac
Wincoll, Thomas Talcott, Samuel Plume, John Shaw the younger, Francis
Williamson of Walden, Francis Nicholson, John Feimige, Robert Talcott, Thomas
Allyett, Robert Maidstone Gentlemen, John Brewster Gentleman, Samuel Fryborne
Esquire, Colonel Thomas Ayloffe.

Colchester. The Major of Colchester for the time being, Harbottle Grimstone
Esquire Recorder, John Ioselin Deputy Recorder. Henry Barrington, John Langley,
Robert Buckstone, Ralph Harrison, Thomas Wade, Mr. Cox and Willaim Cook,
Aldermen.

For the County of Gloucester. Sir Giles Overbury Knight, James Fiennis
Esquire, Nathaniell Stephens Esquire, Sir John Horton Knight, Edward Stephens,
Sir Richard Onflow Knight, Sir William Hicks Baronet, John Stephens, Thomas
Stephens Esquires, Richard Stephens Esquire, Sir John Seymour Knight, Edward
Popham, John Lenthall Esquires, Walter Kirle, Anthony Clifford Esquires,
William Leigh, Silvanus Wood, Thomas Hodges, Samuel Codrington, Thomas Pury,
William Brown, William Try, Thomas Walter, Robert Holdsworth, William
Sheppard, Matthew Herbert Esquires, John Codrington Esquire; John Fettiplace,
Thomas Eastcourt Esquires, Steven Fowler Gentleman, Matthew Huntley, William
Stafford and Philip Langley Senior, John Sarkvill, Anthony Kinscott, Thomas
Walter of Hartfield and Richard Aldworth Esquires.

For the City of Gloucester, and the County of the City. The Major for the time
being, William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons, and Recorder
of the said City, John Lenthall, Thomas Pury, John Brewster, Thomas Hill,
William Singleton, Dennis Wise, Nicholas Webb, and John Dorney Esquires.

For the County of Hereford. Sir Robert Harley Knight of the Bath, Sir Edward
Powell Knight and Baronet, Sir John Kirle Baronet, Sir Robert Pie Knight
senior, Walter Kirle, Francis Kirle, Edward Harley, Robert Kirle, Thomas
Baskervile, Ambrose Elton senior, William Littleton, Edward Broughton, Samuel
Moor, John Flacket senior, John Flacket Junior, Thomas Rawlins, Martin
Husbands, Francis Pember, Samuel Trotman, John Patshall, William Crowther, John
James, Henry Jones, John Cholmeley, Colonel John Birth, and Thomas Blaney
Esquires, Nathaniel Wright Doctor in Physic.

For the County of Hertford. Charles Lord Viscount Cranborne, Robert Cerill
Esquire, Sir Richard Lucy Knight and Baronet; Sir John Garratt, and Sir John
Read Baronetts, Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir William Litton, and Sir John Witterronge
Knights, Richard Iennings, Row. Litton, Ralph Freeman, W. Leamon, W. Priestly,
Thomas Took, Edward Wingate, and John Heydon Esquires, John King Doctor of
Physic, Alexander Wild, Richard Porter, Gabriell Barber, Captain Scroggs,
and Gravely Norton Esquires, William Carter, Thomas Meade, William Dawges,
Isaac Pulper Gentlemen, John Healing, John Humerston, John Robotham, Joseph
Dalton of Hertford, William Foxwist Esquire, John Pemberton and Roger Pemberton
Esquires, Sir Brockett Spencer Baronet, Thomas Dockwray John Humerston senior,
Edmund Smith, and Thomas Dacres Esquires.

St Albans. The Major for the time being, William Foxwist Esquire Recorder,
John King Doctor of Physic, John Robotham, and John Pemberton Esquires, Roger
Pemberton and William Leaman Esquires.

For the County of Huntington George Mountague, Edward Mountague, Valentine
Walton, Onflow Winch, Abraham Burrell, Terrill Iocelin, and Oliver Cromwell
Esquires, Sir William Armine Knight and Baronet, Thomas Templer, John Bonner,
Robert Vintner, and William Drury Gentlemen, Master Robert Robson, Doctor
Simcots, William Leaman Esquire, Sir Thomas Dacres, Knight, John Baldwin, Adam
Hill, Nicholas Pedly and John Castle Esquires.

Kent. John Bois of Fretvill Esquire, John Bois of Beauchanger Esquire, Sir
William Strickeland, Sir Edward Monins, Sir James Oxenden Knights, Henry
Oxenden Esquire, Sir Thomas Pierce, John Dixwell, Colonel Henry Honywood, Sir
Richard Hardresse, Alderman Sabine, Robert Hales Esquire, Sir Thomas Godfrey,
Sir Michaell Livesay, Colonel William Kenwricke, Master Bixe, Captain Humphrey
Scott, Captain Plummer Senior, Captain Thomas Plummer Junior, Sir Edward
Scot, Master Robert Scot, Sir John Hony-wood, Captain Thomas Westrow, Captain
Thomas Broadnax, Sir Henry Heyman, Sir Peter Godfrey, Lambert Godfrey, Richard
Brown, Colonel John Brown, Sir John Sedley. The Major of Maidstone for the
time being, Sir John Rivers, Sir Humphrey Tufton, Sir Isaac Sedley, Captain
Augustine Skinner, Captain Richard Beale, Captain Richard Lee, Master Goerge
Newman, Sir John Rayney, Sir Nicholas Miller, William James, William Skinner,
and Anthony Hammond Esquires; Sir Thomas Walsingham, Sir Thomas Styles
Baronets, Sir Anthony Weldon, Master Tho. Blunt, Master Thomas Seliard, William
Boothby, Edward Bois of Beauchanger Esquire, William Read of Folkstone. The
Major of Dover for the time being; Stephen Monins, William Skinner Esquire,
John Twisleton, Colonel Tomson, John Golwell Esquire and Edward Ash Esquire,
Sir Edward Masters, John Nut Esquire, and Sir William Man.

For the City and County of the City of Canterbury. The Mayor for the time
being, Sir Edward Masters, Sir William Man, Sir John Roberts, Knights; Thomas
Den Recorder, John Nutt, Edward Masters, Thomas Scot, Esquires; Avery Sabine,
Allen Epps Gent. John Ladd and John Lee Aldermen.

For the County of Lancaster. Sir Ralph Ashton, S r Thomas Stanley Baronets;
Richard Ashton of Downham, Ralph Ashton of Middleton, Richard Chuttleworth,
Alexander Rigby, John Moore, Richard Holland, Edward Butterworth, John
Bradshaw, William Ashhurst, Peter Egerton, John Nowel, George Dodding, Nicholas
Conliffe, John Starkey, Thomas Birch, and Thomas Fell Esquires; Robert
Conliffe, Robert Curwin Gent. Thomas Chittam of Nuthurst, Savile Ratcliffe
Esquire, John Halstead of Rooly, William Shaw, Edward Werden, and Samuel Birch
of Ardwick, Gent.

For the County of Leicester. Thomas Lord Gray, Theophilus Gray, Sir Edward
Hartop senior, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Sir George Villers Baronet, Sir Martin
Lister, Sir Thomas Hartop, Sir Roger Smith, Quarles, John St. John, Thomas
Babington, Peter Temple, Arthur Stavely, Henry Smith, Thomas Haslerigg, William
Hewit, William Noel and Francis Hacker, Thomas Beaumont, William Danvers,
Thomas Cotton, John Stafford, Thomas Puchin, William Shereman, Thomas Goddard,
and William Jesson Esquires; John Goodman, John Swinfield, and Francis Smalley
Gentlemen; William Stanley, Richard Ludlam and Edward Cradock Aldermen;
William Benbridge.

For the County of Lincoln. Lindsey. Edward Lord Clinton, Will. Pierpont,
Nathaniel Fiennes Esquires; Sir John Wray Knight and Baronet, Sir William
Armin Baronet, Sir Edward Ayscough, Sir Hamond VVhichcot, Sir Anthony Irby
Knights; John Wray, Francis Fines alias Clinton, Edmund Ayscough, Thomas
Grantham, Thomas Hatthet, Edmund Andarson; Mollineux Disney, Henry Pelham
Esquires; Edward Rossiter, William Wray, Francis Thornah, William Owfield,
Francis Mussenden, William VVolley, Charles Hall, Henry Massenbeard, Deyner
Massenbeard, Alexander Emersor, Thomas Rosseter, John Sheffeild, William
Broxholme, John Nelthorp (...) Richard Brian, Isaac Knight, Edward Skinner, and
Vincent Amcotts Esquires; Thomas Rand, and Nehemiah Rausan Gentlemen.

For the parts of Kesteven. Kesteven. Edward Lord Clinton, William Pierpont
Esquire, Sir William Armin, Sir Richard Earl, Sir John Brownelow, Sir
William Brownelow, Sir Thomas Trollopp Baronets; Sir Hamond Whichcott Knight,
Thomas Grantham, Thomas Hatcher, Alexander Popham, Thomas Lister, Mountague
Cholmeley, Francis Pierpont, William Armin, Henry Pelham, Edmund Hall,
William VVelby, John Weaver, Richard Williams, William Dowman, Thomas
Disney, Mollineux Disney, William Ellis Esquires; Edward Skipwith, John
Archer, William Bury, William Savile, Thomas Cornewallis, William Thompson
Esquires; the Alderman of Stamford and the Alderman of Grantham for the time
being.

For the parts of Holland. Holland. Sir Thomas Trollopp Baronet, Sir Anthony
Irby Knight, William Ellis, William Lorton, James Harrington, Thomas Ogle,
Thomas Read, John Harrington, Thomas Irby, John Hobson, John Willesby, Samuel
Cust, Francis Mussenden Esquires; Thomas (...) William Hobson, Francis Empson,
Thomas Hall, Wyat Perkins, Edward Tylson, John (...) Martin Johnson Gentlemen.

For the Borough of Boston in the County of Lincoln. Boston. The Major for the
time being; William Ellis Esquire, Recorder, Edward Tilson, John Whiting,
Thomas Askam, Charles Emson, Thomas Welby, Thomas Law, Thomas Tooley Aldermen;
Edmund Tilson Alderman, John Hobson, William Hobson, Francis Empson, John
Brown, Charles Empson, Wyat Perkins, John Whiting, Thomas Welby, Thomas Hall,
and Martin Johnson Gent.

For the City of Lincoln. The Major for the time being, Henry Pelham Recorder,
William Marshal Alderman, Thomas Marshal Alderman, Alderman Goodnap, Alderman
Brasbridge, Captain Origin Pert Alderman, Edward Emis Alderman.

The City of London. Sir John Gayer Knight, Lord Major of London, the Lord
Major for the time being, Isaac Penington Alderman, Sir John Wollaston Knight,
Thomas Atkins Alderman, Thomas Adams Alderman, John Glyn Esquire, Recorder, Sir
John Cordall, Sir Thomas Soame, Sir Jacob Gerrard, Knights and Aldermen; John
Warner Alderman, Abraham Renoldson, Sir George Garrard Knight and Alderman, Sir
George Clerk Knight and Alderman, John Langham, Thomas Andrews, John Foulke,
James Bunce, William Gibbs, Richard Chambers, Thomas Foot, John Kenricke,
Thomas Cullam, Simon Edmonds, Samuel Avery, George Witham, John Bide, Thomas
Vinor, Aldermen; Samuel Vassal and John Venne Esquires.

For the County of Middlesex, City and Liberty of Westminster. George Earl of
Desmond, Sir Henry Vane senior Knight, Sir Richard Win Knight and Baronet;
Sir Gilbert Gerrard Baronet, Sir Edward Barkham Knight and Baronet, Sir Thomas
Fowler Knight and Baronet, Sir Richard Sprignall Baronet, Sir Gregory Norton
Baronet, Sir Edward Hungerford Knight of the Bath, Sir John Danvers, Sir John
Franklin, Sir Robert Pie senior, Sir John Hippesley, Sir William Roberts, Sir
John Trevor, Sir James Harrington, Sir Edward Powell Knights, the Lieutenant of
the Tower of London for the time being, John Glyn Esquire, Recorder of the
Cities of London and Westminster, Laurence Whittacre, Francis Gerrard, John
Huxley, John Trenchard, William Wheeler, John Morris, Richard Dounton, Thomas
Lane, John Spelman, Robert Scawen, Humphrey Edwards, John Brown, John Packer,
Robert Packer, Justinian Pagett, and Thomas Swallow, Thomas Falconbridge, and
Laurence Swetman Esquires; William Bell, George Manley, William Hawkins, John
Brigham, William Barnes, Stephen Bourman, and Edward Martin Gent. Silvanus
Tailor; John Honor, James Parcoll, Ralph Hall, Isaac Penington Alderman of
London, William Leaman, William Jones Esquires; Sir Tho. Middleton Knight,
Edward Carter, Solomon Smith, Daniel Procter, John Hooker, Josias Barners,
Gilbert Gerrard, John Hawtree, Thomas Marsh, William Ball, Thomas Hubard, James
Prince Esquires.

For the County of Monmouth. John Herbert Esquire, Sir Trevor Williams, Thomas
Morgan, William Herbert, Henry Herbert, William Morgan, Edmond Morgan, Thomas
Herbert, Thomas Hughs, William Jones, William Baker, Thomas Pury jun. Henry
Baker, John Parry, John Walter, John Hanbury Esquires; Henry Vaughan,
Christopher Catchney, William Blethin, Roger Williams, William Packer, Rice
Williams Gent.

For the County of Northampton. Lord Fitz-Williams, William Ward Esquire; high
Sheriff of the County, Sir John Dreydon, Sir Gilbert Pickering Baronet; George
Mountague, John Crew, Zouch Tate Esquires; Sir Christopher Yelverton Knight and
Baronet, Richard Knightley Esquire, Sir John Norwich, sir Edward Nichols
Baronets, sir Richard Samuel, sir Humphrey Orme Knights; John Barnard, Richard
Knightley, Edward Hanbury, Philip Holeman, Edward Harby, Richard Samuel, John
Norton, John Claypoole, John Thornton, Thomas Pentloe, Richard Owsley, Thomas
Elmes senior, and William Iesson, John Cartwright, William Lifle, Thomas
Andrews and Richard Andrews Esquires; sir John Egerton, sir Samuel Danvers
Baronets; sir John Danvers Knight, Robert Andrews Esquire, Oliver Saint-John,
Toby Chancey, Thomas Brook, Richard Trist, John Wiseman, William Dreyden,
Erasmus Dreyden, William Barnard, Esquires; Henry Freeman, Francis Quarles the
younger, Richard Trist the younger Gent. John Clerk, Edward Shughburgh, Ed.
Farmer, Edw. Only, John Parker, John Cleypoole Esquires; William Lewis Gent.

For the Town of Northampton. The Major of Northampton for the time being, Io.
Gifford, John Fisher, and Francis Rushworth, Aldermen.

For the County of Nottingham. Densell Hollis, Will. Pierpont F. Pierpoint Esquire;
sir Ed. Wortley Knight, Sir William Lister Knight, Francis Thornhagh, John
Hutchinson, Gervas Piggot, Gilbert Millington, Joseph Widmerpool, Charles
White, Nicholas Charlton, Clement Spelman, Iervis Raynes, Henry Ireton, Edward
Ayscough Esquires, John Mason, Gervas Lomax, Will. Nix, John Martin Gent.

Retford. The Bailiff of Retford for the time being, Sir Hardolph Wastneyes
Baronet, Hardolph Wastneyes, Edward Nevil, Richard Dobson, William Clerkson,
Miles Newton. Esquires, Christopher Hussy, Thomas Bristow, and John Pinder
Gent.

For the Town and County of Nottingham. The Mayor for the time being, Francis
Pierpont, Gilhert Millington, James Chadwick Esquires, Huntington Plumtree
Doctor of Physic, John James Alderman, William Nix Alderman, Charles White
Esquire, Nicholas Charleton Esquire; John Gregory Gent. Gervas Lomax Gent.

For the County of Norfolk. Sir Thomas Woodhouse. Knight and Baronet, sir John
Holland Baronet, Sir John Pots Knight and Baronet, Sir John Hobart Knight and
Baronet, Sir William Paston Baronet, Sir John Palgrave Knight and Baronet, Sir
Richard Berney Baronet, Sir Isaac Astley Knight and Baronet, Sir William
Playter Knight and Baronet, Sir Ralph Hare Baronet, Sir Valentine Pell Knight,
Sir Miles Hubart Knight of the Bath, Sir William Doyley Knight, Sir Thomas
Beddingfield, Sir Thomas Guibon, Sir Thomas Gaudy, Sir Edward Astley, Sir
Thomas Hoogan; and Sir George Windham Knights, William Heveningham, Framlingbam
Gaudy, John Spelman, John Coke, James Calthorpe, Erasmus Earl, Miles Corbet,
Francis Iermy, Robert Wood, Thomas Windham, Thomas Atkin, John Buxton, Gregory
Gawsell, Philip Skippon, Philip Beddingfeild, John Houghton, Robert Haughton,
Ia. Scamler, Io. Walpoole, To. Walpoole, Ed. Chamberlain, Tho. Russell, Robert
Wilton, Robert Iermy, Hamond Ward, Thomas Wild, Samuel Smith, Thomas
Southerton, Rob. Sheppard, Edw. Heyward, Roger Townsend, Thomas Waller, Thomas
Wright, Robert Long, John Web, James de Gray Esquires, John Reimes, Henry King,
William Coney, John Brewster Gent. Edward Gaudy, Robert Rich, Martin Sedley,
Henry Tailor, George Hunt Esquire; Toby Friar, Thomas Toll, Esquire; Gabriell Barber
Dr. of Physic, Simon Smith, and John Beckham Esquires, Thomas Lincoln of
Thetford.

For Lynn Regis. The Major of Lynne Regis for the time being, Miles Corbe^
Esquire Recorder, Thomas Toll Esquire; John May of Lynn Alderman, Thomas Nelson
Alderman, Thomas Robinson Alderman, Bartholomew Wormall Alderman.

For Yarmouth. Edward Owner and Charles Gooth Bailiffs, and the Bailiffs of
Yarmouth for the time being, Miles Corbet Esquire; Recorder, Thomas Johnson, and
Robert Gower of Yarmouth Ald.

For the City and County of Norwich. Henry Wats Major, and the Major for the
time being; Samuel Smith, Recorder; Erasmus Earl Steward, Thomas Arkin,
Alderman of London; Jo. Tooley, Jo. Thacker, Chr. Barret, Tho-Baker, and Adrian
Parmenter, Esquires; Master Thomas Barret and Master Barnard Church, and the
Sheriffs for the time being; Matthew Peckoyer, Henry Wats, Samuel Puckell,
Matthew Linsey, Thomas ^ofts and William Symonds, Aldermen; John Salter, John
Gray, samuel Brewster, John Cullier, John Tofts, Henry King and Thomas Wasted,
Gent.

For the County of Northumberland. Sir John Fenwicke, Knight and Baronet; Sir
John de la Vall, Sir Thomas Widdrington, Sir Robert Collingwood, Sir William
Selby (...) Twisell, Knight; Thomas Middleton, George Fenwicke, William
^enwicke, Robert Clavering, William Shaftoe, Robert Fenwicke, Thomas Lorraigne
Henry Ogle. John Salkeild, Charles Middleton, ^dward Fenwicke of Stanton,
William Babingham, and John Hall, ^squires; Ralph Salkeild, Gent. Thomas Pie,
Gent. Henry Horsley, ^ent. Edward Fenton of Stanton, Esquire; George Payler,
Esquire.

For the County of Oxford. William Lenthall Esquire Speaker of the House of
Commons, and Master of the Rolls, Thomas Lord Viscount Wenman, Sir John
^anvers, Knight; James Fiennes, John Fiennes, Esquires; Sir ^eter Temple,
Knight and Baronet: Sir Robert Pie, sen. Knight; ^ir Will. Cobb, Knight; John
Doiley, John Thynn, Thomas Knight, William Tipping, Robert Scroop, Edward
Clarke, Edmund Dunch, ^^^d Bulstrode Whitlocke Esquires; Sir Peter Wentworth,
Knight (...) the Bath; Sir Nathaniel Brent Knight; Sir James Harrington,
^night; John Lenthall, Thomas Tipping, Edward Dynon, Bar^olomew Hall, William
Draper, Thomas Apletree Robert Ien^nson, Richard Cope, Esquires; Henry Goodwin,
William Bar^olomew, Gent. John Tanner, and Thomas Hales, Esquires; ^incent
Barry, Esquire.

For the University and City of Oxford. The Major for the time being, Bulstrode
VVhitelocke, Esquire ^corder, John Doyley, Esquires; Sir Nathaniel Brent,
Knight; ^^hn Seldom, Esquire; D. Cleyton, Dr. Saunders, Diggery Wheare ^nt.
Alderman Southam, John Nixon, Alderman; Alderman ^histler, and M. Thomas
Dennis.

For the County of Rutland. Thomas Lord Gray of Grooby, Sir Edward Harrington,
Knight and Baronet; Sir James Harrington, Knight; Evers Armin, Thomas Wait,
John Osborne, Thomas Levet, Christopher Brown Robert Horseman, and Samuel
Barker, Esquires; John Hatcher John Green and William Busby, Gent. Win. Srice,
Gent. and Edward Hor^ man, Gent.

For the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne. The Major for the time being
John B^akiston, Esquire; Edward Wright Esquire Recorder; Henry Warmouth, Henry
Dawson, Thomas Ledyard. William Dawson, Thomas Bonner, George Dawson, Aldermen;
Henry Rawlin^, Sheriff; Edward Man, Christopher Nicholson, Robert Ellison,
Gent. George Fenwicke, Robert Young George Blakiston Phineas Allen Gent. M.
Pailer.

For the County of Salop. William Pierpoint, Esquire; Sir John Corbet, Baronet;
Robert Wallop, Thomas Mitton, Thomas Nichols, Humphrey Mackworth, Walter Long
Robert Corbet, Andrew Floyd of Aston, Lanceld Lee, Thomas Hunt, John Corbet,
Esquires; Sir Humphrey Brigg Knight and Baronet; Sir Thomas Middleton, Knight;
Robert Powell, Samuel Moore, William Steventon, William Littleton Francis
Foster, Thomas Kettleby, Edward Whichcott, Robert Clive, Robert Charlton,
Thomas Mackworth Rowland Hunt Humphrey Edwards, Leighton Owen, Roger Rowley,
William Jone, Esquire^ Thomas Moore, Creswell Tailor, Isaiah Thomas, and John
Proud Gentlemen; Arthur Chamber, Esquire; Hercules Kinnersley a^^ Thomas Baker,
Gentlemen; Thomas Clive, Esquire; Rowland Hill Thomas Locher, and William
Cockton, Esquires; The Major (...) Shrewsbury for the time being, Arthur Wa^d,
Richard Whitehal^ John Wybunbury, Samuel Sanford, Gentlemen; John Thyn D^ctor
William Child, Samuel Towers, Esquires; Jeremiah Powell Richard Harris, Henry
Powell of Worthen, Edward Cresset, France Harris and Michael Stevens,
Gentlemen; Isaac Shepherd, Esquire

For the County of Stafford. Sir Richard Skeffington, Sir William Brereton, Sir
Charles Egerton, and Sir John Merrick, Knights; John Bowyer, Edward Leigh.
Michael Noble, John Swinfin, Samuel Fenwick, Thoma^ Crompton, Edward Manwaring,
William Jolly, Edward Bromston Esquires; Henry Stone, Philip Jackson, Leicester
Burder, Joseph Whitehugh, Thomas Pudsey, William Bendy, and John Simco^
Gentlemen.

For the City of Litchfield. The Bailiffes for the said City for the time
being, The Sheriff of the City for the time being, Ralph Biddolph, Esquire;
Michael Noble, Esquire; Richard Draffgate, Thomas Saxon, Henry Met, and Thomas
Miners, Gentlemen.

For the County of Somerset. Sir Edward Hungerford, Knight of the Bath, Sir
John Horner, Sir Samuel Roll, Alexander Popham, Robert Wallop, Edmund Prideaux,
Hugh Rogers, Roger Hill de Pounsford, John Ash, Esquires; Sir Thomas Wroth, Sir
Robert Gorges, Knights, Edward Popham, William Strode, Richard Norton, Clement
Walker, Thomas Hodges, Robert Blake, John Harrington, John Pyne, John Palmer,
George Searle, Thomas Grove, Lillisbone Long, George Horner, James Ash,
Esquires; Colonel John Venn, William Strode Junior, Esquires; John Preston
Henry Henley, Henry Bonner, William Capell, Thomas Hippesley, Jonathan Pyts;
Richard Cole, John Buckland, John Whitby, Robert Gough, John Wroth, Charles
Stemings, Edward Baber, Thomas Bampfield Nicholas Saunders. George Lutterell
Robert Harbin, Esquires; Giles Strangwaies of East Charleton, Esquire; Will.
Prin, Esquire. and Sir George Farewell. Knight; John Saintbarbe, John Carew, James
Strowde William Orange Esquires; and Master Souddersinns, Gent. and the Major
of Taunton for the time being.

For the City and County of Bristoll. The Major for the time being, Edmund
Prideaux Recorder Richard Aldworth, John Gouning, Luke Hodges, Esquires; John
Birch, Henry Gibs, James Powell, Edward Tyson, and Robert Aldworth, Hugh
Brown. George Heart, Josias Clutterbucke, Joseph ^ackson, Walter Sandy,
Sheriff; John Hagett Gent. John Young, John Orey John Pope, William Grigg
Dennis Hollester, Thomas Shewell and Robert Haines Esquires.

For the County of Sout ^a upton. Sir Henry Worsley, and Sir William Lewis,
Baronets; Sir William Uvedale, Sir William Waller Sir Thomas Gervoice, Sir John
Evelin, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Sir John Compton Knights; Robert Wallop, Richard
Whitehead Richard Norton, William Iepson Lieutenant Genesis Cromwell, Edward
Doddington, John Lifle Ioh. Button Will. Wheeler, Edw. Hooper, Ioh. Bulkley
John Remp, Will. Stephens, Arth. Hide, Esquires; Ioh. S. Barbe Edward Goddard,
Ioh. Hook, Nich. Love, Will. Pit, Thom. Husse^ Richard Major, Ioh. Button jun.
Ioh. Woolridge, Edw. Dowse Hen. Campion. Tho. Bet worth, Francis Tilney John
Fielder, William Ball, William Wither, Francis Rivet, Tho. Cole, Hen.
Bromfield fames Tutt, Ric. Moore, Ric. Moore, Tho. Creswell of Heckfield, and
Io^^ Pitman Esqs. Edw. Boat, John Hildesley, Alex. Wilson William VVouldgar,
Moore Fantleroy, Tho. Dowse of Elden, Will. Geor^ and Tho. Gale, Gent. The
Mayor of Winton for the time beig^ Ralph Riggs, and (...) White Aldermen; Ed.
Exton, and Georg^ Gallop, Esquires.

For the Jsle of Wight. Sir Hen. VVoorsley Baronet, Sir Will. Lisle, and Sir
John Leig^ Knights; Ioh. Lisle, Ioh. Bulkeley, Ioh. Kempe, Esquire; Sir Robert
Dilington, Barenet; Sir Ioh. Barrington, Knight and Baronet; Rob^ Dillington,
VVil. Oglander, VVil. Boreman, John VVorsley, Thom^ Boreman, Will. Stevens,
Esqs; Edw. Dennis, Ioh. Richards, Esqu^^ Thomas VVavel, and Tho. Leg Gent.
Eustace Man, Gent. and (...) John Dingley, Knight.

For the Town and County of the Town of Southampton. The Major for the time
being, George Gallop, Edward Exto^ Thomas Mason, Richard Whitehead, Paul
Mercer, and Richa^ Major William Stanley, Robert Wroth, Henry Brasbridge
(...) Peter Legay, Merchants.

For the County of Suffolk. Lester Devereux, Esquire; Sir Edm. Bacon, Knight. and Bar.
Sir VVilli^ Playters, Sir Sym. D'ewes, Kts. and Baronets; Sir Will. Spring,
(...) Butts Bacon, Baronets; Sir Roger North, Sir John Wentwoth, (...) Tho.
Beddingfield, Sir Nath. Barnardiston, Sir Will. Soame, Sir John Rous, Sir Phil.
Parker sir Tho. Barnardiston, Kts. Will. Hevening^ ham, Brampton Gourdon sen.
Hen. North sen. Mauris Barrow, Isa^ Appleton, Hen. North jun. Nich. Bacon,
Charles Fleetwood, Rober^ Reynolds, Ioh. Gourden, Tho. Bacon, Nath. Bacon,
Fran. Bacon, Io^^ Brook, Will. Bloice, Tho. Blosse Tho. Scot, Brampton Gourden
j^^ Tho. Terrill, Tho. Cole, Ioh. Hodges, Ioh. Colton, Rich. Pepis, Ed^^
Harvey, Gibson Lucas, Rob. Brewster, Theo. Vaughan. James Hobart, Francis
Brewster, William Laurence, Alexander Bence Squire Bence, Esquires; Thomas Gypp
of Berry, Master Manning Giles Barnardiston, Sam. Faireweather of Halsworth,
and Maste^ Thomas Dandy.

For the Town of Ipswich. The Bailiffes for the time being, Nath. Bacon,
Esquire Recorder; Francis Bacon, John Aldus, Robert Duncon, Peter Fisher.

For Bury-S. Edmonds. The Aldermen for the time being, Thomas Chaplin, Samuel
Moody, and Master Clarke.

For Aldburgh. The Bayliffes for the time being, Francis Bacon, Recorder;
Thomas Johnson, John Bence, Henry Cheaney, Thomas Gipps, Gentlemen.

For the County of Surrey with the Borough of Southwark. William Lord Mounson,
Denzill Hollis Esquire, Benjamin Weston Esquire, John Glyn Esquire, Recorder of
London, Sir Ambrose ^rown Baronet, Sir Thomas Gervois, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir
John Maynard Knight of the Bath, Sir John Dingley, Sir John Howland, Sir
William Elliot, sir Richard Bettison, sir Matthew Brand, fir Thomas Walsingham,
sir Robert Needham, sir Robert Parkhurst, sir To. Wood sir Robert Gorges, and
sir John Evelin, sir John Lenthall, sir Ed^und Burgess Knights, Edmund
Jordain, Thomas Sands, Nicholas love, James Sherley, Nicholas Staughton, George
Farewell, Henry Ton^all, Arthur Onslow, Robert Wood, Francis Drake, George
Evelin of VVatton, Joh. Goodwin, Robert Goodwin, Joh. Farewell, Hen. Weston,
Thomas Lock, John Turner, John Cartwright, Sackford Gonson, To. ^urse, Robert
mead, and Lancelot Johnson Esquires, Robert Hullman, George Thompson, Robert
Haughton Cornellus Cook, Richard Wright, George Snelling, Thomas Hudson, Henry
Hardwick Gentlemen, Willi^n Oldfield, Herbert Hay, George Duncombe, Arthur
Squib, Samuel ^ous, Robert Titchborn, John Loyd, Esquires, William Wymershall
High Sheriff of the County of Surry, sir Poynings Moore, Thomas ^mith, and
Edward Bish Junior.

For the County of Sussex. Sir Thomas Pelham, sir Thomas Parker, sir John
Chapman, sir Gre^ory Norton, Baronets, Anthony Stapley, Herbert Morley, sir
Thomas ^rsfield of Den, Henry Shelly, John Baker, Hall Ravenscroft, Edward
^owse, William Hay, John Busbridge, Herbert Board, Herbert Sprin^ate, Herbert
Hay, Peter Farnden, Tho. Jefferay, William Michelborn ^ho. Collins, John Board,
Anthony Crutenden, Anthony Fows, Francis ^elwin, William Newton senior, William
Cawley, Thomas Middleton, ^h. Downs, George Oglander, James Temple, Tho. Chase,
Ralph Coo^er, George Churcher, and Peter Bettisworth of Fining Esquires, Tho.
^enshaw, Will, Freeman, Tho. Green of Marden, Thomas Millet of ^arden, William
Cook, Nich. Shephard, John Fag, Will. Morley, Hum^rey Edwards, Arthur
Bettisworth, George Green, Phil. Jermin Ser^ent at Law, Steven Humphrey,
Nathaniel Studley, Robert Spence, Ro^er Gratwick, Will. Spence, Robert Heath,
John Everenden, Edward ^anning. Thomas White, Richard Yates, John Roberts, Tho.
Chalo^^ Esquires, Capt. Simon Everenden, Tho. Brian, Hen. Peck Esquires, the
Major of Chichester for the time being, Ambrose Trayton, T^^ Springet Esquire
fir Edward Culpepper, Baronet, sir Thomas He^^ Knight, and Master Whitfield.

For the C^^irty of Warwick. Sir Peter Wentworth Knight of the Bath, sir
Richard Skeffing Mr William Jesson, Godfrey Bossevile, William Purefoy Joh.
Bar^^ John Hales, William Colemore, Ph. Willoughby, Tho. Boughton, ^ thony
Staughton Esquire, Gamaliel Puresoy, George Abbot, Wal^^ Willington, Thomas
Bassenet and Robert Wilcox, Esquire; sir Robert^ ton, Collonell Archar, and
Collonell Peito.

Upon the City and County of Coventry. The Major for the time being, William
Jesson, John Barker, J^ Rogerson Aldermen Henry Harwell Esquire, Master Matthew
Su^^ Mr. Samuel Snell, and Mr. John VVightwick.

For the County of Worcester. Sir Thomas Rous, Baronet, John VVild Sergeant at
Law, Rich Cresheld Sergeant at Law, Humphrey Salway, Edward Dingley, Je^ Buck
Esquires, Edmund Giles, William Hopkins, William Stephen Henry Hunt, Tho.
Symonds Gentlemen, William Ligon, Hen. Bron^ ley of Vpton, William Brown,
William Moore, William Collins, The Cook, Thomas Milward, and John Gyles
Gentlemen, John Dor^ Edward Thomas, William Jefferies, John Latham, Thomas
Jolly ^ mund Wild, Nicholas Lechmere, Thomas Graves, William Di^^^ Esquires.

For the City and County of VVercester. The Major for the time being, John Wild
Sergeant at Law, Re^ der, John Nash, and Henry Ford, Aldermen, Robert Stirrup,
and D^ niell Dobbins Gentlemen, James Tailor, and Nicholas Wildy G^ tlemen.

For the County of Wilts. Philip Lord Herbert, Charles Lord Cranborn, James
Herbert Eson^ Denzell Hollis Esquire, Benjamin Weston Esquire, sir Edward H^
gerford Knight of the Bath, Sir Nevil Poole, sir Edw. Bainton K^^^ sir John
Evelin Knight, Edward, Bainton, Alexander Popham, W^ Long, Edward Poole, Robert
Jennor; Thomas Hodges, Rich. Whither Thomas Moore, Joh. Ash, Rob. Nicholas,
William VVneeler, Phil. Sm^^ and Edward Ash, Esquires; sir John Danvers Knight,
sir Anthony Ashley ^ooper Baronet, Edmund Ludlow senior, Edmund Ludlow junior,
^lexander rhistleth wait, William Sadler, Edw. Goddard, Tho. Ben^t of Norton,
Robert Hippesley, and Edmund Wainford, John Lisle, ^hn Bulkley, Will. Stevens,
Thomas Grove, Hen. Hungerford, Edward ^ucker esquires, John Goddard, Edward
Martin, Gabriel Martin, ^homas Goddard, Edward Stokes, Richard Talbors, Richard
G^fford, ^ill. Iessey, Thomas Baily, Robert Good and Rob. Brown, Gentlemen,
^ohn Stephens, William Huffey and Thomas Hussy Esquires, Richard ^rouch
William Coals, Thomas Carter, Robert Nicholas of Semley Ed^ard Stratton, Edward
Manning, and Edward Nicholas Gentlemen; ^^hn Dove Esquire, William Ball, John
Laurence, and Thomas Hunt, ^squires, Humphrey Ditton Gentleman, The Major of
Sarum for the ^ne being, John Ivy Senior, Gentleman, Fran^is Dove Gentleman,
^hn Read Gentleman.

For the County of Westmerland. James Bellingham of Levant, Henry Laurence,
Richard Salway ^enry Ireton, Edward Wilson, Nicholas Fisher, Rowland Dawson,
Al^n Bellingham Esquires, Roger Bateman, Richard Brainthwait, Ger^se Benson,
gentlemen. James Bellingham of Gathorn, Thomas Brath^ait, John Cowell, William
Knipe, Anthony Knipe, Joseph Booth Ro^rt Stevenson Gentlemen.

For the Isle of Anglesey. Sir Thomas Middleton, Thomas Buckley, Nicholas
Bagnall, Tho. ^itton, Thomas Glyn Esquires, John Glyn Recorder of London, John
^ood, Hugh Owen, Richard Wood Esquires, Richard Owen-Theo^ esquire, Owen
Holland gentleman, William Griffith Doctor of Law, ^illiam Bold, Henry Owen,
Paris Loyd, and Richard Mer^k Esquires, Owen Wood, William Jones, Esquires.

For Bracknok Sir William Lewis Baronet, Hoar Games, Howell Gwyn of Glan^ane,
John VValebife, Edward Rumsey, Edmund Games, Thomas ^wis Gentlemen.

For Cardiggan. Sir Richard Price Knight and Baronet, Thomas VV^gan, James ^wis
Esquires, David Lewis, John Lloyd Verdr. Gentlemen, Thomas ^ans, Thomas Lloyd,
and George Howell Gentlemen, James Phillips Esquires, James Jones, Henry
Middleton, John Lewis, Daniel (...) Oliver Lloyd, Morris Vaughan Richard
Herbert and John Io^^ Gent. The Major of Cardiganfor the time being James Lewis
of Al^ ranvahan, James Philips, John Jones Esquires Tho. Parry Gent. Abe^
Grissith John Vaughan Aldermen David Sturlook, George Gw^^ Recorder.

For the County of Carnarvan. Sir Richard Winn Sir, Thomas Middleton Sir Will.
Williams, J^^ Glynn Recorder of London, Thomas Glynn of Glynulluine Esqun^^
Griffith Jones Owen Wynn Maurice Wynn, Thomas Madrin Jo^^ Bodarda William Lloyd
Esquires, Edmund Glynn Gentleman Th^^ mas Williams, William Foxwist Esquires,
Robert Coitmore, Ri^^ Winn, Esquires, Edward Williams Esquire. Grissith Bodarda
Gent. (...) Griffith Thomas Esquire.

For Carmarthen. Arthur Anslow. John Lloyd Will. Davies, Hen. Rice, Anthony Ri^^
Esquires Sir Edward Vaughan Knight, Howell Gwinn, Francis Lloy^ Nicholas
Williams James Jones, Tho. Williams, Henry Price Da^^ Philips, Richard Vaughan,
John Mansell, Evan Thomas, Char^^ Gwinn, Francis Jones, John Lewis John Harris,
and Geo. Jones F^ Sir Rice Rudd, John Vaughan, Henry Middleton, and Rowla^^
Gwinn Esquires.

For the Borough of Carmarthen. The Major for the time being, Sir Rice Rudd,
John Bloome, Io^ Vaughan, Henry Middleton, Rowland Gwin, Thomas Woodfor^ Rich.
Thomas Esquires.

For the County of Denbigh. Sir Thomas Middleton Knight, Sir Will. Middleton
Baronet, ^ John Trevor Knight, Sir Robert Needham Knight Tho. Middle^^ Esquire;
Simon Thelwall Jun. John Trevor Esquire; Robert Soutley, O^^ Sa^isbury, Owen
Brereton, Rich. Middleton, Owen Thelwall, Io^ Edgbury Ed. Wyn of Llangthan,
Rich. Basnet, John Peck, Wat^^ Kyfin. Ed. Tailor, and Ralph Crutchley Gent.
Rich. Egerton, Rich^ vies, Col. John Jones, Roger Wilbraham Gentlemen.

For Flintshire. Sir Tho. Middleton Knight, Thomas Mitton Esquire; Sir John Tre^^
Knight, Thomas Moulton Esquire. Simon Thelwall of (...) Esquire. Thomas Ravenscroft
Esquire. Roger Hanmer Esquire. Roger Ellis, Luke Lloid, John Aldersey, Ralph Hughes,
John Salisbury of Railegrige the elder, and Tho. Halford Esquire. Robert Gethin,
and Thomas Dymocke, Genesis and John Trevor, Esquire.

Glamorgau. Philip Lord Herbert, Algernon Sidney, Walter Strickland Esquires.
Edward Lewis, Bussey Mansell, Edward Prichard, Evan Seys, Willi. Basset,
Humphrey Windham, Thomas Carne Will. Herbert, Edward Herbert, Edward Stradsing
John Herbert, Tho. Spencer, Rich Jones, Philip Jones, John Price, Rowland
Dawkins.

Merioueth. Sir Thomas Middleton, Thomas Mitton John Pough, Colonel John
^ones, David Lloid, Theodor John Vaughan of Trowscot John Owen Rowland Lewis
Esquire. Edward Vaughan, Owen Salisbury, Rob. Amoyll, ^owell Vaughan, Will. Win,
Rob. Win John Vaughan, and Ed^und Meyrick, Esquires.

Mountgemery. Sir Thomas Middleton Knight; Sir John Wittiwrong, Knight; Thomas
Mitton, Isaac Thomas John Corbert, Francis Buller, Roger Pope, Rich. Owen
Brochwell Griffithes, Edward Vaughan Esquire. Rees Vaughan, Richard Price. Evan
Lloid Richard Griffith of Sutton, ^ugh Derwas, Thomas Rogers Charles Lloid of
Dolobren, John Ni^olls, Lodewick Middleton, Richard Glynne, and Lodowick Lewis
Esquires; Rowland Hunt John Price and Matthew Morgan Esquires; ^ich. Harris,
Robert Griffith Edward Owen, Rich. Griffith, Samuel ^iggs Gentlemen; Simon
Thelwall, Thomas Hunt, Samuel Moore, Sabrel Win, Esquires.

Radnor. Sir Robert Harley, Knight of the Bath; Richard Knightly Richard
^owler, Edward Broughton. William Beamount, Francis Pember, ^enry Williams,
Silvanus Tailor John Williams, Esquires; John ^avies of Bringwin, David Lloid
of Dissert, William Sugdon of Bre^^g; Samuel Lloid of Knighton, Walter Vaughan
of Bringwinn, Gen^^men.

For the cou^ty of Pembrook. Arthur Annesley, Esquire; Sir John Meyricke
Knight; Sir Richard ^hillips, Barrouet; Rowland Laughorne, William Davies,
Arthur Owen, William Phillips, George Bowen Walter Conney, Hugh Phi^lips,
Abraham Woogan Maurice Cannon, Thomas Warren, Th^mas Powell John Mathias, Hugh
Laughorne, Colonel James Lewis, and Griffith White Esquires, George Hayward,
William Laughor^^, Tho. Barlow, George William Griffith and Henry Bowen,
Gentlemen. The Major of the Town of Pembrooke and Tenby for the time being.



Haverford West. Elthred VVogon, Ienkin Howell, Will. Meylor, Will. Bowen,
VVil. Walter, Will, Williams.

And be it further Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, Tha^ the several
and respective Commissioners, hereby appointed for the several and respective
Cities, Counties, and places aforesaid, shall within eight days next ensuing,
the publication hereof meet together at some convenient place, in every of the
said Cities, Countie^ and places respectively, And afterward three or more of
them at the least shall once in every week at the least, meet at such
convenient places as they shall think fit and appoint for the more speedy
execution of this Ordinance; and the said respective Commisioners are hereby
required and authorized at the days and places of their first meeting to
divide and apportion the several sums of money appointed b^ this Ordinance to
be levied for the maintenance of the said Force^ upon the several and
respective Wards, Divisions, Hundreds, Lathe^ and Wappentakes, within the
several Cities, Counties and place aforesaid, according to the usual
proportions, and divisions ^ rates in the said places, and likewise shall and
may there agree ^ devide and sever themselves for the better execution of this
Ord^ nance into such Wards, hundred places and divisions within the respective
Cities, Counties and places as to them shall seem axpedent, And to take to
their Assistance for the more speedy execune^ of the said service in their
several divisions, such able and fu^^ent persons as they shall think fit, and
to assemble and meet ^ often as to them shall seem good, and forthwith the
(...) Commissioners, or any two or more of them respectively are (...)
authorized and re^uired to direct their warrants to such (...) or persons as
they shall think fit within their several and respe^ divisions, to be
Assessors of the said Rates, which said persons are hereby authorized, and
required to ^ssesse all and every person and persons having any real or
personal Estate, within the Limits, Circuits and bounds of their respective
divisions according to the rate and proportion in this Ordinance mentioned, And
be it further Ordained, That the several and respective Commissioners in each
of the several Counties, Cities and places, or such as they or any two of them
shall nominate and appoint, shall have power to Assesse and levy the several
sums before mentioned upon the Lands, Goods, Annuities, Rents Offices, or
other estate real or personal, in such manner and form, and according to the
most equal and usual Rates for levying of money, for maintenance of the
Forces, for the defense of the King and Parliament, or by a certain Rate upon
the true yearly values of Lands, Rents, Annuities, Offices, Hereditaments, and
according to the true value of goods, Chattells, Debts, or other Estate real
or personal within the said several Counties, Cities, Limits, or places
respectively, And to the end the said Rates be equally and indifferently
Assessed, and the moneys duly collected and true account thereof made, The said
Assessors are hereby required within six days after such Assessement made, to
deliver one Copy of their respective Assessements fairly written and subscribed
by them unto the said respective Commissioners, and the said respective
Commissioners are hereby ordered and required, to sign and Seal three
duplicates of the said respective Assessements, whereof one Duplicate the said
respective Commissioners are to deliver to the respective Collectors, with
warrant to them to collect the said Assessements; And one other, Duplicate to
such person or persons, as the Houses of Parliament shall afterward appoint
for the receiving of the Monyes to be levied by virtue of this Ordinance; And
the third duplicate unto the Committee of the Accounts of the Kingdom who are
hereby authorized to administer and Oath to the person that shall bring the
said Duplicates to the Committee for the accounts, as has been accustomed in
the Court of Exchequer in case of the Estreats of Subsidies: and the said
several commissioners or any two of them are hereby respectively authorized
from time to time to nominate one or more sufficient and honest persons in
every division or ^l^^tment, to be Collectors of the said Moneys so assessed
and rated, which said Collectors are hereby authorized and required to collect
the said Moneys so assesed; and the said Commissioners, or any three or more of
them are hereby authorized to allow and pay to the said respective Collectors,
and their subcollectors one penny a piece in the pound for their pains in
collecting the said moneys, and one penny in the pound to the Commissioners
Clerks respectively for their pains in fair writing, the said Afsessements,
and Duplicates, And if any person shall refuse or neglect to pay any sum of
money, whereat he shall be rated or assessed, That then it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said Collectors, or any of them who are hereby required
and authorized thereunto to levy the sum so assesed by distress and sale of
the goods of such person so refusing, or neglecting to pay, deducting the sum
assessed and the reasonable charges of distre^ning, and restore the overplus to
the owner thereof: and to break open any House, Chest, trunk, box or other
thing where any such goods are, and to call to their assistance any of the
Trained bands, or any other forces within the Cities, Counties or places where
any resistancy shall be made, or any other person or persons whatsoever, which
said forces and persons are hereby required to be aiding and assisting in the
premises, as they shall answer the contrary at their perils. And if any
question or difference happen upon the taking of such distress between the
parties distrained or distreining, The same shall be ended and determined by
the said Commisioners, or any two or more of them And the said several
Commissioners or any two or more of them are hereby authorized to use such
other lawful ways or means for the speedy levying of the said assessements,
as to them shall be thought fit; and if any person or persons; shall neglect or
refuse to pay his assessement, and convey his or their Goods, or other
personal Estate, whereby the sum of money so assessed, cannot be levied
according to this Ordinance, then the said respective Commissioners or any two
or more of them are hereby authorized to imprison the persons and sequester the
estate of every such person for the advancement of the said service, and the
tenants of all Houses and Lands which shall be rated by virtue of this
Ordinance, are hereby required and authorized to pay such sums of money as
shall be rated upon such House, and Lands, and to deduct out of their Rents, so
much of the said rates as in respect of the Rents of every such House and
Lands, the Landlords should, or ought to pay and bear, and the Landlords both
mediate and immediate, according to their respective interest are hereby
required to allow-such deductions, and payments upon the receipt of the residue
of their Rents: And be it provided, that every Tenant paying the said
Assesment, shall be acquitted and discharged, for so much money as the said
assessement shall amount unto, as if the same had been actually paid unto such
person or persons unto who^ his Rents should have been due and payable.
Provided also and be it Ordained; That all Fee-farme Rents or other Rents due
to his Majesty all Rents, and other sums reserved by the late Court of
Wards, out of any Wards, Infants, or Lunatic estates and all other manner of
Rents payments, and sums of money, and all Annuities issuing out of any Lands
within any City or County, shall be liable toward the payment of any sum by
this Ordinance to be Taxed and Leavied. And all the Tenants of any Fee-farme
Rent, other Rent, sums of money, or Annuities aforesaid, are hereby directed
and authorized to pay them proportionably according to the Rates and
Assessements by this Ordinance appointed and Ordained. And all such Tenants
shall be hereby saved and kept harmless by authority of both Houses of
Parliament from any further payment of such portion of any such Rent, Rents
Sums or Annuities either to the Exchequer, to the Co^mittee of the Revenue, to
the Court of wards, or to any other person or persons to whom any such Rent
Rents payments, sums of money, or annuities as aforesaid, shall or ought to be
paid, to all intents and purposes whatsoever, as fully, and as amply as if they
had paid the same into the Exchequer to the Committee of the Revenue, or to any
person or persons, to whom the same is reserved and become due. And if any
diffrence shall arise between Landlord and Tenant, or any other concerning the
said rates, The said several Commissioners or any two or more of them in their
several divisions have hereby power to settle the same, as they shall think
fit. And it is further ordained that if any person or persons, shall find him
or themselves agrieved, that he or they is or are over rated, and shall within
six days after demand made, complain to the Commissioners who signed or
allowed his or their assessement, the major part of the said Commissioners who
signed or allowed his or their assesment, shall have power upon examination
within 8 days after the demand as aforesaid, to relieve such person or persons
as they shall see cause: and the said collectors and every of them are hereby
required from time to time to pay such s^m and sums of money as shall be by
them collected by virtue of this O^dinance, to such person or persons as the
houses of Parliament shall afterward appoint for the receiving of the moneys
to be levied by virtue of this Ordinance. And be it further ordained by the
said Lords and Commons that if any person or persons shall wilfully neglect or
refuse to perform his duty in the due and speedy execution of this present
Ordinance, the said respective Commissioners, or any five, or more of them,
have hereby power to impose upon such person or persons so refusing or
neglecting their duties such fine or fines, as to them shall be thought fit, and
cause the same to be levied by distress and sale of goods in manner and form
aforesaid; provided that no fine to be imposed by any of the said Commissioners
shall for any one offense exceed the sum of twenty pounds, to be paid for the
Forces raised by virtue of this ordinance, and that no fine to be imposed upon
any Assessor, Collector or other person to be employed by the said
Commissioners in the said service, shall for any Offense exceed the sum of
forty shillings, which said fine not exceeding forty shillings shall and may be
assefsed and imposed by the said commisioners, or any three or more of them
and that no privileged place, or person, Body politic or Corporate within
the Cities, Counties, and places aforesaid, shall be exempted from the said
Assessements and Taxes. And be it further Ordained, that the said several and
respective Commissioners, and every of them shall from time to time give a true
and perfect account of all their doings and proceedings in the execution of
this Ordinance to the two houses of Parliament, or to suck persons as they
shall appoint; Provided always that such Rates and assessments that shall be
made by virtue of this Ordinance upon any Peers, Members, Assistants, or
Attendants upon either of the Houses of Parliament, for any Rate or Tax made
within the Cities of London and Westminster, or Lines of Communication, shall
before the same be Leavied, be presented to the respective Houses, where any
Peers, Members, Assistants, or Attendants shall be concerned therein
respectively, and by such respective House allowed, and approved of, any thing
in this Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding, provided also, that every
Lord Lieutenant who is not disabled by Ordinance of Parliaments to sit in the
house of Peers shall in their several and respective Counties be
Commissioners now appointed by this Ordinance.

Provided always, That nothing contained in this Ordinance shall be extended
to charge either of the Universities, or any of the Colleges, or Halls within
the said Universities, nor any the Rents and Revenues due and payable to the
said Universities or Colleges, or any of them, nor to charge any Master,
Fellow, or Scholar of any of the said Colleges, nor any Reader, Officer, or
Minister of the said Universities, or Colleges, or any of them for and in
regard of any stipend, wages, or profit whatsoever arising or growing due to
them, or any of them, in respect of their said several places, and employments
in the said Vnivesities; and that nothing in this Ordinance contained shall be
extended to charge any of the Colleges of Winchester, Eaton or Westminster, or
any Hospital, or Almes-house, or any free School, or any the Rents and
Revenues due and payable to them, or any of them; and that the Tenant, and
Tenants of all and every the said Universities, Colleges, Halls, Hospitalls,
Almes-houses, and free Schools respectively, shall be charged by virtue of
this Ordinance, for so much only as the Lands and Tenements held by the said
Tenant, or Tenants respectively are worth by the year, over and above the Rent
or Revenue therefore respectively due or payable to the said Universities,
Colleges, Halls, Hospitalls, and Almes-houses, or any of them respectively,
any thing in this present Ordinance to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

