AN ORDINANCE OF The LORDS and COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT,

For the speedy raising and leavying of Money thorowout the whole Kingdom of
England and Dominion of Wales, for the relief of the COMMONWEALTH, By taxing
such as have not at all Contributed or Lent, or not according to their ESTATES
and ABILITIES.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons, That this Ordinance be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Joh. Brown. Cleric. Parl. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.




LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Middle Temple. May 11.

MDCXLIII.

An Ordinance of the LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament.
WHereas the King seduced by evil Council has raised an Army and leavied War
against His Parliament, and great numbers of Forces are daily raised under the
Commands of Papists and other ill affected persons, by Commissions from His
Majesty. And whereas diverse Delinquents are protected by His Majesty's said
Army from public Justice, and sundry outrages and Rapines are daily committed
by the Soldiers of the said Army, who neither respect the Laws of God or the
Land, but burn and Plunder the houses, and seize and destroy the persons and
goods of diverse His Majesty's Su^j^cts: And whereas for the maintenance of the
said Army, diverse Assesments are made upon several Counties and persons of
vast and insupportable sums of money, and His Majesty's Subjects are compelled
to pay the same, which said Army (^f it should continue) would soon ruin and
waste the Kingdom, and utterly overthrow Religion, Law, and Liberty. For
suppressing of which said Army and ill affected persons, there is no probable
way under God, but by the Army raised by the authority of the Lords and
Commons in Parliament, which said Army cannot be maintained without great sums
of money: Yet for raising such sums, by reason of His Majesty's withdrawing
himself from the advice of the Parliament, there can be no Act of Parliament
passed with His Majesty's assent, albeit there is great justice that the said
moneys should be raised.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament, taking the same into their serious
consideration, and knowing that the said Army raised by them has been hitherto
for the most part maintained by the voluntary and free Contribution and Loans
of diverse well affected persons, who have freely Contributed or Lent to the
maintenance thereof, according to their abilities, but considering there are
diverse within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, that have not
Contributed or Lent at all toward the maintenance of the said Army, or (if
they have yet not in any reasonable measure answerable to their Estates) who
notwithstanding do and may receive benefit and Protection by the said Army
raised by the Parliament, as well as any others, and therefore it is most just
that they as well as others should be charged to Contribute or Lend to the
maintenance thereof.

Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
That the persons hereafter named shall be Committees for the several and
respective Counties and places hereafter mentioned, That is to say,

FOr the County and Town of Bedford, Sir John Burgoyn, Baronet, Sir Thomas
Ashton Knight and Baronet, Tho. Rolf, Tho. Bedford.
Sadler, James Beverley, Hampton Monox, Edw. Osborn, Rob^rt Stanton Esquires,
Sir Roger Burgoyn Baronet, Sir Oliver Luke Knight, Sir Samuel Luk^ Knight,
Samuel Brown Esquire.

For the County of Berks, Sir Francis Knollis senr' Sir Francis Pil^, Sir
Francis Knollis junr' Knights, Peregrine Hobby, Roger Knight, Berks.
Henry Powl, Thomas Fetiplace Esquires.

For the Town of Reading, Sir Fran is Knollis senr', Sir Francis Knollis junr',
the Major, Henry Martin, Tanfield Vachel Esquires.

For the County of Bucks, Sir Richard Ingolshy Knight, Henry Buckingham.
Bulstrode, Tho. Tirrill, Richard Grenvil Esquires, Sir Peter Temple Baronet,
Antho. Ratcliff, Thomas Westall Esquires, Sir Will. Andrews, Sir Tho. Sanders
Knights, Boulstrode Whitlock, John Hampden, Arthur Goodwyn, Richard Winwood
Esquires.

For the County of Cambridge, Sir Dudley North, Sir John Cutts, Cambridge.
Sir Tho. Martin, Sir Miles Sands, Tho. Becket, Walter Clopton, Rob. Castl^,
Tho. Bendis^, John Wellbor^, Rob. Clark, Michael Dalton junr' Captain Symonds,
Dudley Hope, Francis Russell, Tho. Parker, John Hubberd, Tho. Castle, George
Glapthorne, John Towers, Ed. Leedes Esquir^s, Oliver Cromwell, William Fisher,
Thomas Thompson, Tho.

William Marsh, Hummerston March Esquires.

For the Town and University of Cambridge, The Major for the University of
Cambridge.
time being, Talbot Pep^s Recorder, Esquire, John Sherwood, Samuel Spaulden,
Thomas French, Robert Robson.

For the County of Chester, Sir George Booth Knight and Baronet, Sir William
Brereton Baronet, Thomas Stanley, Henry Manwaring, Henry Brook, John Bradshaw,
Robert Duckenfield, Henry Vernon, John Crow, William Marbury Esquires.

For the City of Chester, Civit. Chester.


For the County of Cornwall, Sir Richard Carew Baronet, Francis Cornub.
Buller, Alexander Carew, John Trefucis, John St Aubin, Rich. Eris^y, John
Moyl^, Francis Godolphin, Thomas Thewen, John Carter, Thomas Arundell Esquires.

For the County of Devon. Sir Peter Prideaux, Sir George Chud^igh, Devon.
Sir John Poole, Sir John Northcott Baronets, Sir Edmond Fowell, Sir Samuel
Roll, Sir Sh^lston Callmady, Sir Nicholas Martyn Knights, Sir Francis Drake
Baronet, Robert Savery, Henry Wallron Esquires, John Dany Baronet, John Worthy,
Hugh Fortescue, Arthur Vpton, George Trobridge Esquires.

For the City of Exon. Christopher Clerk Major, Richard Sanders, Thomas
Crossinge, Adam Benn^t, Walth. White, John Hakewill, Aldermen, Exon.
and James Gould Sheriff of the said City.

For the County of Cumberland, Sir George Dalston Knight, Cumberland.
William Lawson, William Brisco^, Thomas Lamplugh, Richard Barwis Esquires.

For the County of Derbey, Derbey.


For the County of Dorset, Sir Tho. Trenchard, Sir Walter Earl, Dorset.
John Brown, John Fitz-James, Tho. Tregunell, John Bingham, John Faunham, John
Trenchard, Denis Bond, Rich. Rodriffs Esquires.

For the Town and County of Poole, Poole.


For the County of Duresme, Henry Warmooth, George Lilborne, Duresme.
Thomas Mitford, Robert Hutton, Thomas Shadforth, Richard Lilborne, Francis
Wren, John Blakston, Henry Draper, John Brockenbury, Esquires.

For the County of Essex, Sir Thomas Barrington, Sir Henry Mil^may Essex.
of Marsted, Sir Martin Lum^^y, Sir Richard Everard, Sir Will. Hicks, Sir Henry
Holcroft, Sir William Row, Sir Thomas Honywood, Sir William Martin, Sir John
Barringtor, Sir William Massam, John Wright, Master Raymond, Harbottle
Grimston, John Say^r, John Burket, Anthony Luther, Timothy Middleton, Captain
Thomas, Dean Tyndall, James Hearn, William Goldingham, John A^twood, John
Sorrel, Richard Harlockenden, Esquires.

For Colehester, The Mayor for the time being, and Master Henry Colchester.
Barrington.

For the East Riding, Sir John Hotham Knight and Baronet, Sir Ebor: the
East-Ryding.
Philip Stapleton, Sir William Strickland, Sir Thomas Rymmington, Richard
Rymmington, John Hotham, John Anlabey, Henry Darley, Rich* Darley, John
Alludred, Esquires.

For the North Riding, Sir William Sheiffeild, Sir Henry Fowls, North-Ryding.
Bryan Stapleton, Henry Darley, Henry Anderson, John Wastall, Christopher
Perchley, George Trotter, Matthew Smelt, John Legard de Malton, Francis
Lassells, Jeffery Gate, John Dent, Thomas Robinson, Francis Boynton, Esquires,
Sir Matthew Boynton.

For the West Riding, Fardinando Lord Fairefax, Sir Thomas Malleverer,
West-Ryding.
Sir William Lyster, Sir Arthur Ingram, Sir Edward Rodes, Sir William Fairefax,
Sir Jarvis Cutler, Sir John Savill, Sir Thomas Fairefax, Charles Fairefax,
Henry Ardington, Master West, John Farrer, William White, Thomas Malleverer,
George Marwood, John Robinson, Thomas Stockdale, Thomas Westbey, John Bright,
Thomas Bossevile, Godfrey Bossevile, Sir John Reresby.

For the City of York, Sir Thomas Fairefax, Sir Thomas W^th^rington, City of
York.
Knights, Thomas Hodson, James Hutchinson, John Vaux, Aldermen.

For the County of Gloucester, Nathaniel Fienis, Sir Robert Cook, Gloucester.
Knight, Nathaniel Stephin, John George, Edward Stephans, Thomas Pury, Esquires.

For the County of the City of Gloucester, Nathaniel Fienis.

City of Gloucester. Bristoll. Southampton.
For Bristoll, Richard Allworth Mayor, Joseph Jackson, Hugh Brown, Sheriffs,
Richard Hallworthy Alderman, Luke Hodges, Henry Gibbs.

For the County of Southampton, Sir Thomas Iervoyse, Sir William Waller,
Knights, Master Withers, John Feilde^, John Button, Richard Whitehead, John
Dorrington, John Lisle, Robert Wallop, George Withers, Baynard, Esquires.

For the I Will of Wight, Sir Henry Worscley, Sir Henry Lee, Sir John I Will of Wight.
Lee, Thomas Kerne, John Lisle, John Bulkley, John Buller, Esquires.

For the Town and County of Southampton. Town of Southampton. Winchester.
Hertford.


For the City Winchester.

For the County of Hertford, Charles Lord Viscount Cranborn, Robert Cecill,
Esquire, Sir John Garrat Baronet, Sir Thomas Dacres, Sir John Witterounge,
Knights, Richard Jennings, Ralph Freeman, Will. Leamon, William Prisley, John
Heydon, Alexander Wild, Rich. Porter, Adam Washington, Esquires.

For Saint Albons, The Mayor for the time being, Charles Lord S. Albons
Viscount Cranborn, Robert Cecill, Esquire, Sir John Garret Baronet, Sir Thomas
Dacres, Sir John Witterounge, Knights, Richard Jennings, Ralph Freeman, William
Leamon, William Prisley, John Heydon, Alexander Wild, Richard Porter, Adam
Washington, John Robotham, Ralph Pemberton, Esquires.

For the County of Hereford, Sir Robert Harly Knight of the Bath, Hereford.
Walter Kirl^, Rich. Hobson, John Brocket, Mast: (...) Vaugham, Esquire.

For the City of Hereford. City of Hereford.


For the County of Huntingdon, Sir Thomas Cotton, Sir John Hewet Huntingdon.
Baronets, Onslow Winch, Torrell Ioslelyne, Tho: Templer, John Castle, Oliver
Cromwell, Abraham Burwell, Edward Mountagu^, Esquires.

For the County of Kent, Sir Thomas Walsingham, Sir Anthony Kent.
W^ldon, Sir Edward Boyse, Sir John Sydley, Sir Humphrey Tufton, Sir Basil
Dizwell, Sir Edward S^^^, Sir Henry Heyman, Knight and Baronet, Sir Henry Van^
Junior, Sir Edward Hales, Sir George Sands, Sir John Honywood, Sir William
Brook, Sir Michael Lewcey, Tho. Sistiard, John Boy^ Senior, Augustine Skinner,
Richard Lee, Thomas Blunt, Esquires.

For the City of Rochester, The Mayor for the time being, Richard Lee, Esquire.
City of Rochester City of Canterbury.


For the City and County of Canterbury, The Mayor for the time being, Sir
William Master, Sir William Man, Knights, Thomas Courth^^^, Esquire, Avery
Savine Alderman.

For Kingston super Hull, Sir John Hotham Knight and Baronet, Hull.
John Hotham Esquire, Thomas Raykes Mayor, Launcelet Roper, John Barnard,
Joshua Hall, Nicholas Denman, William Popple, Gentlemen.

For the County of Lancaster, Sir Ralph Ashton, Sir Thom. Stanley, Lancaster
Baronets, Ralph Ashton, Richard Shuttleworth, Alezander Rigby, John Moore,
Richard Holland, Edward Butterworth, John Bradshaw, Peter Egerton, George
Dodding, Nicholas Cunliff, Thomas Fell, Esquires.

For the County of Leicester, Henry Lord Gray of Ruthen, Thomas Leicester.
Lord Gray, Sir Arthur Hasterigg, Baronet, Sir Edward (...), Sir Thomas Harcopp
Will: Hewit, John Bembridge, Peter Temple, George Ashby, William Roberts,
Richard Bent, Arthur Stav^l^y, William Danvers, John Goodwyn, Esquires.

For the Town of Leicester, The Mayor for the time being, William Town of
Leicester.
Stanly Alderman.

For the County of Lincoln, Sir John Wray, Sir Edward Ascough, Lindsey parts.
Sir Samuel Ofeild, Knights, John Wray, Willoughby Hickman, Edmond Hichcott,
Edmond Anderson, Edward Rossist^r, (...) Massingburgh, John Br^xholm, Esquires.

For Kestaven parts, Sir William Armyn, Sir Hamond Whitchcott, Si^ John
Brownlow, Sir Thomas. Trollopp, Thomas Grantham, Thomas Kestaven parts.
Lister, John Archer, Esquires.

For the City of Lincoln, and the Close of Lincoln, The Mayor City of Lincoln.
for the time being, Thomas Grantham, John Broxholm, Esquires, Robert
Moorcroft, William Watson, Steven Dawson, Aldermen.

For the County of Middlesex, Sir Gilbert Gerrard, Sir John Frankklyn,
Middle-sex.
Sir Edward Backham, Sir John Hipp^sley, Sir William Roberts, Sir (...)
Sprignall, Laurence Whittaker, Thamas Wilcox, John Morris, Richard Dunton,
Esquires.

For the County of Monmouth. Monmouth. County of Norfolk.
.

For the County of Norfolk, Sir Thomas Woodhouse, Sir John Hollond, Sir John
Potts, Sir John Hubert, Sir M^les Hubert, Sir Thomas Hugger, John Cook, John
Spelman, Philip B^ddingfi^ld, Samuel Smith, The Sheriffs of Norwich, The
Bailiffs for Yarmouth, Master Toll, For the City and County of Norwich.
and Master Percivall of Lyn, Thomas Windham, Francis J^rmy, Robert Wood,
Gregory Gawsell, John Haughton, Thomas W^ld, Martyn Sedley, Thomas Sotherton,
William Heveningham, William Cook, Robert Rich, Brigg Fountain, Esquires, Sir
Edmond Mountford, Sir Rich: Bern^y, Barognets, Sir Isaac Ashly, Sir John
Palgrave, Knights.

For the County of Northampton, Sir Rowland Saint-John, Knight Northampton.
of the Bath, Sir John Norwich, Sir Gilbert Pickering, Baronet, Sir Richard
Samuel, Knight, John Crew, John Barnard, Edward Harb^y, John Sawyer, Edward
Farmer, John Norton, John Chappol^, Esquires, Sir John Draydon, Richard
Knightley, Esquires. Town of Northampton. Newcastle.


For the Town of Northampton, The Mayor for the time being, Thomas Martin, John
Fisher, Aldermen.

For the Town and County of Newcastle.

For the County of Northumberland, Sir John Fenwicke Northumberland.
Baronet, Sir John Dallevell, Knight; Thomas Middleton, William Shafto, Michael
Weldon, Henry Ogle, Esquires.

For Newcastle upon Tyne, Henry Warmouth, Ralph Newcastle upon Tyne. Barwick.
Gray, Henry Lawson, John Blackston Esquire.

For Barwicke upon Tweed, John sleigh major; Sir Robert Jackson, Knight; Ralph
Salkeld, Esquires.

For the County of Nottingham, Francis Pierpoint, Esquire; Nottingham.
Sir Francis Thornhagh, Knight; Francis Thornhagh, Joseph Widmerpole, Robert
Reins, Gilbert Millington, Thomas Hutchinson, Esquires; Sir Francis Molinoux,
Charles White, Henry Ireton, Esquires.

For the Town of Not. The Major for the time being, Town of Not.
Francis Chadwick, Esquire; Huntington Plumtree, Doctor in Physic, John
James, Alderman; John Gregory, Gent.

For the County of Oxon. Oxon.


For the County of Rutland* Sir Edward Harrington, Knight. Evers Rutland.
Armyne, Robert Horseman, John Osbotne, Christopher Brown, Robert Horseman
junior, Thomas Wait Esquires.

For the County of Suffolk, Sir Nathaniel Barnardiston, Sir William Spring,
Baronet; Sir Roger North, Sir Thomas Suffolk.
Barnardiston, Knights; William Heveningham, Nathaniel Bacon of Freeston.
Nicholas Bacon, Henry North, Robert Brewster, Francis Bacon, Theophilus Vangham
of Beckles, William Cage, John Gurdon, Edmond Harvey, John Basse Esquires.

The Bailiffes of the Town of Ipswich, John Sicklemer, Richard Ipswich.
Puplet, John Aldus, gentlemen.

For Saint Edmonds Bury, Master Samuel Moody, Master St. Edmondsbury.
Thomas Cole, Master Chaplyn. The Bailiffes of the Town of Aldborough.

For the County of Surrey, for the West divison, Sir Richard Surrey.
Onslowe, Sir William Elliot, Sir Robert Parkhurst, Knights; Nicholas Stawton,
George Evelin of Wottan, Henry Weston, Athur Onslowe, Esquires.

For the middle division, Sir Ambrose Brown, Sir Anthony Middle Division.
Vincent, Sir John Dingley, Sir Matthew Brand, Knights; Francis Drake, Thomas
Sands, George Mine, William Ma^schampe, Esquires.

For the East division, Sir John Howland, Knight; Jo. Goodwyn, Esquire; Master
Vaughan, Mr. Cornelius Cook, gent. East Drvision. Sussex.


For the County of Sussex, Sir Thomas Pelham, Baronet; Anthony Staple, Harbert
Morley, Thomas Whitfield, John Baker, Herbert Hay, Esquires. Ralph Cooper, Hall
Ravenscroft, Edward Apsley, John Downs, William Carolp, George Oglander,
George Simpson, James Bacheler, gentlemen.

For the County of Somerset, Sir John Horner, Sir Thomas Wroth, Sir George
Farewell, Knights; Christopher Walker, Somerset.
William Strode, Richard Cole, John Harrington, John Hippisley, William Long,
John Preston, Henry Henley, Henry Sampford, John Pyre, James Ash, Esquires.
Roger Hill George Searle, Jesper Chaplyn Gent. William Capell, William Bull,
Robert Harbin, John Hunt, Alexander Popham, Esquires.

For the County of Salop, Sir John Corbet, William Salop.
Perepoint, Richard Moore, Thomas Mytton, Walter Barker, Thomas Nichols, Robert
Corbet of Stannerden, Humphrey Mackworth, Andrew Lloyde of Aston, Lancelot Lee,
Esquires.

For the City of Lichfield, The Bailiffs for the time being, the Lichfield.
Sheriff for the time being, Richard Brasgate, Richard Barter, Thomas Burns,
Gentlemen; Michael Noble, Esquires.

For the County of Stafford, Sir Richard Sceffington, Richard Pyot, Mich.
Bidolphe, Edward Manwaring, Matthew Morton, Stafford.
John Birch, Philip Rudyard, Michael Low, Edw: Leigh, Esquires; Sir Walter
Wrotesley, Sir Edward Littleton, Baronets.

For the County of Warwick, and City of Coventry, the Major Warwick.
for the time being.

Of the City of Coventry, Sir Peter Wentworth, M. John Coventry.
Hales, M. Godfrey Boswell, M. John Barker, M. William Purefoye, M. Anthony
Staughton, M. George Abbot, M. Thomas Boughton, M. William Colmore, M. Thomas
Basnet, M. William Jesson, M. Gamaliel Purefroy, Thomas Willoughby, Esquires.

For the County of Wilts, Sir Edward Hungerford, Sir Edward Wilts.
Bainton, Sir Nevill Pool, Sir John Evelyn, Knights; Edward Bainton, Edward
Tucker, Edward Goddard, Alexander Thistlewhaite junior, Edward Poole, Thomas
Moore, Edward Ash, Robert Jennor, Esquiers. Westmerland


For the County of Westmerland, Sir Henry Bellingham, Knight and Baronet;
George Cilpin, Edward Wilson, Nicholas Fisher, Thomas Sleddall, Rowland Dawson,
Allen Bellingham, Esquires; Roger Bateman, Rich: Branthwaite, Robert Philipson
Gervase Benson, Gentlemen.

For the County of Worcester, Sergeant Wild, Humphrey Worcester.
Salway, Edward Dingley, Edward Dingley, Edward Pytt, Thomas Greves, William
Jeffereyes, Ambrose Elton, Sergeant Creswell, Esquires.

For the City of Worcester, Henry Ford, Esquire, Major: City of Worcester.
Roger Seaborn Henry Philips, Aldermen: John Rea.

Which said several Committees of the said several and respective Counties
and Places or the greatest part of them shall with all convenient speed after
notice of this Ordinance given to the^ or any of them meet together within the
said several Counties and places respectively where they are Committees, in
some convenient place within the same Counties or places, and may there agree
to sever and divide themselves for the execution of the said service into such
hundreds, Places and Divisions within their respective Counties and places, as
to them shall seem meet and expedient.

And afterward the said Committees, or any two of them respectively shall
direct their Warrants to such number of persons, as they shall think fit
within their several and respective Divisions, to appear before them, or any
two of them, and upon their appearance, the said respective Committees or any
two of them shall nominate and appoint such persons as they shall think fit
within their respective Divisions, which said persons so nominated or any two
of them shall respectively have power to inquire by the best means of any that
shall remayn or be within such respective Divisions that have not contributed,
or lent upon the Propositions of both Houses of Parliament, for raising Money,
Plate, Horse, Horsemen and Arms for the defense of the King, Kingdom and
Parliaor shall not contribute or lend according to their abilities aforesaid,
within ten days after such persons are named for the Parishes or places where
they shall inhabit, and also of such as are able, and have contributed or lent,
yet not according to their abilities and estates; And the persons so nominated
to make enquiry as aforesaid, or any two of them within their several and
respective limits, shall have power to assesse such person and persons as are
of ability, and have not contributed or lent, and also such other able persons
as have contributed and lent, yet not according to their abilities, to pay such
sum or sums of money to the uses aforesaid according to their Estates in Lands
and Goods, as the said respective Assessors or any two of them shall
respectively think fit and reasonable, so as for their Lands they be not rated
above the fifth part of their yearly Revenue, and for their goods and chattels,
and personal estate, not above the twentieth part of the value of them. And it
is further ordained, that the said respective Committees, or any two of them
shall have full power and authority within their several and respective
Divisions, where they shall execute this Ordinance to nominate Collectors for
the money so assessed and rated, as aforesaid, according to this Ordinance, who
shall collect the said moneys so assessed, and pay the same to the Treasurers
for receiving of Money, and Plate at Guildhall London, before the four and
twentieth day of June, 1643. And if any person or persons shall refuse to pay
the moneys assessed upon him or them, or shall not pay the same upon demand
made at the place where such person shall be assessed, It shall be lawful to
and for the respective Collectors, or any of them to leavy all and every such
sum or sums so assessed by way of distress, and sale of the goods of the
person or persons so assessed, and refusing wheresoever the same shall be
found, and to break open any House, where any such goods are.

And if any person so distrained, or other shall make resistance, It shall be
lawful to and for the said respective Collectors, or any of them as they shall
see cause, to call to their assistance any of the Trained Bands, or Companies
of Volunteers, or other forces of or within the County or Counties, place or
places where such resistance shall be made or any other person or persons
whatsoever, dwelling in or near the place, And the Trained Bands, Volunteers,
or Forces, or other person so to be called, are hereby required to be aiding,
and assisting to the said respective Collectors in the premises, as they will
answer the contrary thereof. And if any under-tenant shall be distrained for
any sum to be assessed by virtue of this Ordinance, which the Landlord ought
to pay, according to the purport and true meaning hereof, Then it shall be
lawful for such Tenant to deduct such sum out of the next payment of his Rent,
and this Ordinance shall be his discharge. And if no sufficient distress be
found, then the said Collectors respectively shall have power to inquire of any
sum or sums of money due, or to be due unto the persons respectively so
assessed as aforesaid, from any person or persons, for any Rents, Tithes, goods
or Debts, or for any other thing or cause whatsoever. And to compound any of
the said Rents, Tithes, Goods or Debts due unto the said person so assessed
respectively as aforesaid, with any person or persons, by whom the said Rents,
Tithes, Goods, or Debts, are or shall be owing; as also to give full and ample
discharge for the money by them so received upon Composition or otherwise,
which discharge shall be good and effectual to all intents and purposes.

And be it further Ordained, that if any person or persons shall find
themselves aggrieved, that he or they are, or is over-rated, such person or
persons at any time before distress taken of his or their goods (he or they
then paying the one moity of what he or they shall be assessed at to the
Collectors for the place or places where such person or persons shall be
assessed) may complain to the respective Committees, who have executed this
Ordinance within the division or limit, where any such person or persons
over-rated shall inhabit, which said respective Committees, or any two of them
shall have power upon examination, to releeve such person or persons if they
shall see cause.

And for the better encouragement of the Collectors in the said service; It is
ordained, That the said respective Collectors shall have for the money so to be
Collected by them which they shall pay in to the said Treasurers at Guild Hall
London two pence in the pound, for every sum by them, or any of them, paid in
there according to this Ordinance, which said allowance the treasurers
aforesaid, are hereby Authorized to make accordingly.

And to the end all the moneys aforesaid may be duly collected. Be it further
Ordained that the several and respective Assessors within the Kingdom of
England, and Dominion of Wales, shall within one week next after their
respective Assessements made, return their several Assessements unto the
respective Committees aforesaid for the respective divisions or limits where
the said Assessements shall be made, who or any two of them are hereby
respectively required within ten days after the respective returns of such
several Assessements to deliver a Copy thereof, subscribed with their or two
of their hands, to the several Collectors, within their said respective
Divisions or Limits. And also within the like ten days to send up another
Copy thereof to the said Treasurers in Guild Hall London* to the end the said
Treasurers may thereby know what they are to receive of every Parish and place
within this Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

And if any Assessor or Collector nominated as aforesaid shall be negligent or
faulty in the said service. The said Committees for the Division or limit where
such Assessor shall so be negligent or faulty, or any two of them shall have
power to commit such Assessor or Collector to Prison, and to set such fine upon
him as they shall think fit, not exceeding the sum of one hundred pounds,
the same to be leavied by distress, and sale of the offenders goods to the
uses herein mentioned, in such sort, as is herein before appointed, for such as
refuse to pay the Rates assessed upon them; And shall have power to nominate
other Assessors and Collectors in their Rooms, and shall also certify the
said Offense to the Lords and Commons in Parliament.

And it is further Ordained, that if any person or persons so assessed as
aforesaid, shall within ten days next after the Assessement made, and demand
thereof made, or notice left in writing, at his or their usual place of
residence* or abode of the sum so assessed, voluntarily pay the sum on such
person or persons assessed, to the Collector or Collectors, for the place where
he or they shall be assessed without being distrained for the same, Then the
said Collector or Collectors, shall give such person or persons, an Acquittance
for such sum and sums of money, and the same shall be repaid upon the
public faith, in such sort as moneys lent upon the Propositions aforesaid are
to be repaid.

And if any person or persons so assessed and rated as aforesaid, shall
conceal or convey away, his or their goods, so that no distress can be taken,
or that the said sum or sums so assessed upon him, cannot be had or levied
by any the ways or means in this Ordinance mentioned, then the said
Collectors shall respectively certify the same to the Committee of the Commons
house in Parliament for Examinations, who shall hereby have power to send for
such person or persons as Delinquents, and to commit him or them prisoners to
such place or places within this Kingdom, and for so long time as the said
Committee shall by the said Ordinance appoint. Provided also, that where any
former Ordinance of both houses of Parliament, has been made for the taxing
and assessing of any County, City, or place, according to the Tenor or effect
of this present Ordinance, Which former Ordinance is, by the Committees therein
named, executed in part, and not wholly; That there the Committees appointed by
such former Ordinance shall proceed in the full, and through execution of the
same former Ordinance, and that this present Ordinance shall not be there
executed.

Provided always, and be it further Ordained, that such which have been rated
and Assessed in London, Westminster, Southwarke, or the Suburbs of London or
Westminster, by virtue of an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons in Parliament
of the twenty ninth of November last past, and have paid their Assesments, or
their said assesments fully satisfied by distress, shall not again be rated in
any other place by virtue hereof.

And be it lastly ordained, That all and every the Assessors and Collectors
aforesaid, and all that shall assist them in the premises, shall be protected
by both Houses of Parliament, from all damage that may come to them, or any of
them by this service: And shall further receive such allowances for their pains
and charges in the execution of the premises, as the Committee of Lords and
Commons for advance of moneys, and other necessaries for the Army raised by the
Parliament shall limit and appoint.

Provided also, That no person shall be rated or assessed by force of this
Ordinance, who is not truly worth ten pounds, per annum, in Lands or other
yearly profits, or worth one hundred pounds in goods, or personal estate at
the time of such Assesment.

Lastly, be it ordained, That where no Committees are by this Ordinance named,
for any County, City, or place, That such other Committees as shall be
hereafter nominated by both Houses of Parliament, or any two of such
Committees, shall and may put this Ordinance in execution, within any such
County, City, or Place, in such manner and form as the Committees herein
named, or any two of them may, according to the purport and true meaning
thereof.

Provided that no Evidences, or Conveyances, or Writings concerning Lands of
any person or persons whatsoever shall be distreined, or taken away by virtue
of this Ordinance, or any thing herein contained.

Provided always that no Member of either of the Houses of Parliament, or any
assistant of the House of Peers shall be rated assessed, taxed, distremged, or
otherwise molested, by virtue, or reason of this Ordinance, or any thing herein
contained in any wise. But that the Members of either House shall be assessed
by that House whereof they are Members and the assistants of the Peers by the
Peers, by the House of Peers.

FINIS.

