The Truth Of our bad News FROM EXETER, Sent in a Letter, dated May 20, 1643.
from a considerable man there, to an eminent Merchant in London: And may serve
as a Confutation of our Malignants boasting, who take all advantages to
discourage the well-affected Party.

LONDON, Printed for John Rothwell, at the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. May 24.
1643.

The truth of our bad News FROM EXETER, Sent from a considerable man there, to
an eminent Merchant in London; And may serve as a Confutation of our Malignants
boasting, who take all advantages to discourage the well-affected Party.
Master Agher,
Yours of the 16. present I received, with the enclosed from our Friend Master
Newgate; I shall only entreat you at present to give conveyance to this
enclosed by the next Post.

The Parliament forces in these parts have on Tuseday last received a very
great defeat by the Cornish, at Stratton in Cornwall, where were about five
thousand foot, and not one Horse, they being twenty Miles farther in Cornwall,
to prevent the raising of the country upon the Posse Comitatus. The enemy was
four thousand foot and five hundred horse; the fight continued twelve Hours,
in all which time our poor Gray-coats and Volunteers did their parts very
manfully; but our base cow-hearted trained Soldiers, as soon as they came to
do service ran all away, and brought the whole Army into an utter confusion.
They had one troop of Horse, or more, in the Rear, which forced them on to
fight; and the rest of the Horse seeing we had none to oppose did great spoil.

We have lost three hundred men, with those that were taken Prisoners, two
thousand Arms, Powder, Mat^h: We had four thousand pounds there in Money,
which was all preserved to a small matter.

Our Horse, being six hundred, and about a thousand Dragooners, were at Bodmin
in the midst of Cornwall, where they released an hundred and fifty Prisoners,
and many country people came in to them; but hearing of this defeat presently
revolted, and began to set upon our Horse; but they behaved themselves so well,
that they cleared their way through them, killed many of them, and took up
Horses in the country and horst their Prisoners, whom they had set free, and
are safely come to Plymouth.

Our strength was so great, and so well accommodated, that doubtless the
hearts of Gods people were too much set upon them and therefore Gods presence
being withdrawn, we had no more left then an Arm of flesh.

It has been apparent since these troubles began, the Lord has been pleased
to work greater deliverances by weak means, then by a powerful Army; but I
confidently believe this Victory the enemy has obtained will but heighten
their pride, and make them the more fit for destruction, and flesh them up
against the day of Slaughter.

God will not be wanting on his part, if we be not wanting on ours.

Yours at command, N. E.
Exon. May 20. 1643.

