An ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament. Together with
Rules and Directions concerning Suspention from the Sacrament of The Lords
Supper In cases of Ignorance and Scandal. Also the names of such Ministers and
others that are appointed Triers and Judges of the ability of Elders in the
twelve Classes within the Province of LONDON.

Die Lunae 20. October. 1645.
ORdered by the LORDS Assembled in Parliament, That the Ordinance, Rules, and
Directions concerning Suspension from the Lords Supper, with the names of the
Ministers and others to try the Elders, be forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1645.

Die Lunae, 20. October. 1645. An Ordinance of the LORDS and Commons assembled in
Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons considering the wonderful providence of God in calling
them to this great and difficult work of reforming and purging his Church and
people, his guidance and manifest protection of them in it, do acknowledge
that never any of his servants since the foundation of the world had more high
and strong engagements heartily and sincerely to endeavor the complete
establishment of Purity and Unity in the Church of God then they have; they do
therefore require all Ministers and Elders, that they be careful to walk with
understanding in the House of God, that by Example, Exhortations, and
Admonitions, they endeavor to build up the people of the Lord in love, that
with Humility and Meekness of spirit they adorn their holy Profession, and
win souls to the love of the Truth. That they be diligent and faithful in the
Work, as those that must give an account: And where gross Ignorance or
notorious Scandal shall appear, for the remedy thereof, and to prevent the
evils that may come thereby, The Lords and Commons do Ordain, and it is
hereby Ordained, That the several Elderships respectively within their
respective Bounds and Limits, have power to suspend from the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper all Ignorant and Scandalous persons within the Rules hereafter
following, and according to the said Rules and Directions.

RULES and DIRECTIONS concerning suspention from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, in cases of Ignorance.
1. ALl such persons who shall be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
ought to know that there is a God, that there is but one ever-living and true
God, maker of Heaven and Earth, and Governor of all things; That this only
true God, is the God whom we worship; that this God is but one, yet three
distinct Persons, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all equally God.

2 That God created man after his own Image, in knowledge, righteousness, and
true holiness; That by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned; That thereby they
are all dead in trespasses and sins, and are by nature the children of wrath,
and so liable to eternal death, the wages of every sin.

3 That there is but one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus,
who is also over all, God blessed for ever, neither is there salvation in any
other; That he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary;
That he dyed upon the cross to save his people from their sins, That he rose
again the third day from the dead, ascended into Heaven, sits at the right
hand of God, and makes continual intercession for us, of whose fullness we
receive all grace necessary to salvation.

4 That Christ and his benefits are applied only by faith; That faith is the
gift of God, and that we have it not of our selves, but it is wrought in us by
the Word and Spirit of God.

That faith is that grace whereby we believe and trust in Christ for remission
of sins and life everlasting, according to the promise of the Gospel, that
whosoever believes not on the Son of God, shall not see life, but shall perish
eternally.

That they who truly repent of their sins, do see them, sorrow for them, and
turn from them, to the Lord, and that except men repent they shall surely
perish.

That a godly life is conscionably ordered according to the Word of God, in
Holiness and Righteousness, without which no man shall see God.

That the Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant of Grace in the blood of
Christ: That the Sacraments of the New Testament are Baptism and the Lords
Supper, that the outward Elements in the Lords Supperare Bread and Wine, and do
signify the Body and Blood of Christ Crucified, which the worthy receiver by
faith does partake of in this Sacrament, which Christ has likewise ordained
for the remembrance of his death, that whosoever eats and drinks unworthily,
is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord, and therefore that every one is to
examine him self, lest he eat and drink judgment to himself, not discerning
the Lords Body.

That the souls of the faithful after death do immediately live with Christ
in blessedness, and that the souls of the wicked do immediately go into Hell
torments. That there shall be a Resurrection of the Bodies, both of the just
and unjust at the last Day, at which time all shall appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to what they have done in the
body, whether it be good or evil: And that the righteous shall go into life
eternal, and the wicked into everlasting punishment.

And it is further ordained by the Lords and Commons, that those who have a
competent measure of understanding concerning the matters contained in these
Articles shall not be kept back from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for
Ignorance; And that the Examination and judgment of such persons as shall for
their ignorance of the aforesaid points of Religion not be admitted to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is to be in the power of the Eldership of every
Congregation.

Rules and Directions concerning Suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, in cases of Scandal.
THe several and respective Elderships shall have power to suspend from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper all scandalous persons hereafter mentioned,
appearing to be such upon just proof thereof made, in such manner as is by
this present Ordinance hereafter appointed, and not otherwise, until it be
otherwise declared by both Houses of Parliament how notoriously scandalous
Persons, other then such as are herein expressed, shall be kept from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper: That is to say; All persons that shall
blasphemously speak or write any thing of God, his holy Word, or Sacraments. An
Incestuous person. An Adulterer. A Fornicator. A Drunkard. A profane swearer
or curser. One that has taken away the life of any Person maliciously. All
worshippers of Images, Crosses, Crucifixes, of Relics; all that shall make
any Images of the Trinity, or of any Person thereof. All Religious worshipers
of Saints, Angels, or any mere Creature. Any person that shall profess
himself not to be in charity with his Neighbor. Any Person that shall
challenge any other person by Word, Message, or Writing, to fight, or that
shall accept such challenge and agree thereto. Any Person that shall knowingly
carry any such challenge by word, message, or writing. Any person that shall
upon the Lords Day use any Dancing, playing at Dice, or Cards, or any other
Game; Masking, Wake, Shooting, Bowling, playing at Football, or Stool-ball,
Wrestling, or that shall make, or resort unto any Plays, Interludes, Fencing,
Bul-baiting, or Bearebaiting, or that shall use Hawking, Hunting, or Coursing,
Fishing, or Fowling, or that shall publicly expose any Wares to sale*
otherwise then as is provided by an Ordinance of Parliament of the 6. of April.
1644. Any person that shall travel on the Lords Day without reasonable cause.
Any Person that keeps a known Stews or Brothel-house, or that shall solicit
the chastity of any person for himself or any other. Any person, Father or
Mother, that shall consent to the marriage of their child to a Papist, or any
person that shall marry a Papist. Any person that shall repair for any advice
unto any Witch, Wizard, or Fortune Tellers. Any person that shall assault his
Parents, or any Magistrate, Minister, or Elder in the execution of his Office.
Any person that shall be legally attainted of Barretry, Forgery, Extortion, or
Bribery. And the several and respective Elderships shall have power likewise
to suspend from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper all Ministers that shall be
duly proved to be guilty of any of the crimes aforesaid, from giving or
receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

And it is further ordained by the Lords and Commons, That the Eldership of
every Congregation shall have power to examine any person complained of for any
matter of scandal aforesaid, and upon confession of the party before the
Eldership to have committed such an offense, to suspend any such person from
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The Eldership of every Congregation shall
examine upon oath such witnesses as shall be produced before them, either for
the acquitting or condemning of the party accused of any of the scandalous
crimes aforesaid, not capital. The Eldership of every Congregation shall judge
the matter of scandal aforesaid, being not capital, upon the testimony of two
credible witnesses, at the least. Satisfaction shall be given to the Eldership
of every Congregation by sufficient manifestation of the Offenders repentance
before a person lawfully convicted of such matters of scandal as aforesaid,
and thereupon suspended from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be admitted
thereunto. If any person suspended from the Lords Supper shall find himself
grieved with the proceedings before the Eldership of any Congregation, he shall
have liberty to appeal to the Classical Eldership, and from thence to the
Provincial Assembly, from thence to the National, and from thence to the
Parliament. And be it further ordained by the Lords and Commons, That the
several and respective Elderships in their several respective proceedings
shall observe these ensuings cautions.

Caution 1. That cognizance and examination of any capital offense shall be by
the Magistrate thereunto appointed by the Law of the Kingdom, who if he shall
commit the party questioned to prison, or secure him or her by bail, he shall
there of make a certificate unto the Eldership of the Congregation where he or
she did last reside, or to any other neighboring Eldership, who shall
thereupon have power to suspend the party from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper.

2 The Presbetery or Eldership shall not have cognizance of any thing wherein
any matter of payment, contract, or demand is concerned or of any matter of
conveyance, title, interest, or property, in Lands or Goods.

3 No use shall be made of any confession or proof made before the Eldership
at any trial at Law of any person for any offense.

And it is further ordained, that the Members of both Houses that now are
members of the assembly of divines or any seven of them be a standing Committee
of both Houses of Parliament, to consider of causes of suspension from the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, not contained in this Ordinance; unto which
Committee any Eldership shall present such causes, to the end that the
Parliament, if need require, may hear and determine the same. That if any
other notorious and scandalous sins besides those nominated in this
Ordinance, which may be conceived to be a cause to suspend from the Lords
Supper shall be certified to any Classis either from any Congregationall
Eldership, or otherwise, which the said Classis shall think fit, to present to
the standing Committee of Parliament. That the said Classis shall present the
same to the said Committee, to the end that the Parliament if need require may
hear and determine the same.

Die Veneris 26. Sept. 1646. A List of the names of such Persons as shall be,
and are hereby Ordained to be Tryers and Judges of the Integrity and Ability of
such as are to be chosen Elders in the Twelve Classis within the Province of
London, and of the duenesse of their Election, according to such Rules and
Directions as have formerly passed both Houses in that behalf
The first Classis
Ministers.
DOctor William Gouge of Blackfriars. Mr. George Walker of John Evangelist.
Mr. Lazarus Seaman of Alhallowes in Breadstreet.
Others.
Mr. Richard Brown Esquire of Blackfriars. Mr. Richard Turner Senior of
Austins Parish. Mr. William Kendall of Alhallowes in Breadstreat. John Clarke
Doctor of Physic of Martins Ludgate. Mr. Tho. Steines of Mildred Breadstreet.
Mr. Christopher Merideth of Faiths.
The second Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. William Reyner of John Baptists. Mr. Charles Offspring of Antholins. Mr.
William Thomas of Pancras Soperlane.
Others.
Mr. Alex. Jones of John Baptists. Mr. Ralph Triplet of Nicholas Cole-Abby. Mr.
Thomas Coffin of Michael Royal. Mr. James Hayes of Bennet Sheerhogge. Mr. John
Cock of James Garlickhith. Mr. Philip Owen of Mary Magdalins Old Fishstreet.
The third Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. Humphrey Chambers of Stephens Walbrook. Mr. John Rawlinson of Mary
Abchurch. Mr. John Cardell of Alhallowes Lumbardstreet.
Others.
Mr. John Warner Alderman, of Stephens Walbrooke. Mr. Robert Sweet of Mary
Wolnoth. Mr. Michael Herring of Mary Woolchurch. Mr. Richard Young of
Alhallowes Lumbarstreete. Mr. Richard Warner of Mary Abchurch. Mr. Robert Meade
of Laurence Pountney.
The fourth Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. John Lee of Mary on the Hill. Mr. Joseph Carill of Magnus. M. Fulk Bellers
of Michael Cornehill.
Others.
Mr. James Bunce Alderman, of Bennet Grace church. Mr. Edward Hooker of Mary on
the Hill. Mr. John Bellamy of Michael Cornehill. Mr. John Gase of Andrew in
Hubbert. Mr. John Hatler of Magnes. Mr. William Bramwitch of Peter's Cornehill.
The fifth Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. John Conant of Botolph Aldersgate. Mr. Anthony Tuckney of Michael at
Corn, alias Querne. Mr. Simon Ash of Brides.
Others.
Sir John Wollastone Knight, of John Zacharies. Mr. Edward Honywood of Michael
at Corn, alias Querne. Mr. William Heart of Christchurch. Mr. John Johnson of
Botolph Aldersgate. Mr. Richard Flood of Peter's Cheap. Mr. John Sherman of
Anne Aldersgate.
The sixth Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. Edmund Calamy of Mary Aldermanbury. Mr. John Arrowsmith of Martins
Iremongerlane. Mr. Arthur Iackson of Michael Woodstreete.
Others.
Mr. Walter Boothbey of Mary Aldermanbury. Mr. William Webb of Martins
Iremongerlane. Mr. William Bisby of Laurence Jury. Mr. Thomas Bregstwell. Giles
Cripplegate. Mr. Robert Manwaring. Giles Cripplegate. Mr. Laurence Brinley of
Mary Magdalens Milkstreete.
The seventh Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. Robert Harris of Botolph Bishopsgate. Mr. Samuel Clarke of Bennet Fynk.
Mr. Charles Newton, of Michael Basinshaw. Mr. Leonard Cook. of Michael
Basinshaw.
Others.
Mr. Christopher Pack, of Michael Basingshaw. Mr. James Russell of Stephens
Coleman-street. Mr. William Williamson, of Christophers. Mr. Robert Launt, of
Peter's poor. Mr. James Story of Bennet Fynk. Mr. Samuel Harsnet, of
Bartholomew Exchange.
The eight Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. William Spurstow, of Hackney. Mr. Thomas Porter, of Katherine
Creed-Church. Mr. Elidad Blackwell, of Andrew-Undershaft.
Others.
Sir David Watkins, Knight. of Andrew Undershaft. Mr John Smith. of Andrew
Undershaft. Mr. George Clarke of Hackney. Mr. Richard Shute, of Cree-church.
Mr. Alexander Bence, of Algate. Mr. Thomas Hutchins, of Hellens.
The ninth Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. Thomas Clandon, of Alhollowes Barking. Mr. Thomas Valentine, of Mary
Whitchurch. Mr. Thomas Carter, of Olaves Hart-street.
Others.
Sir Edward Harrington Knight of Olaves Hart-street. Mr. Francis West,
Lieutenant of the Tower. Mr. Edmund Trench, of Alhallowes Staining. Mr. Maurice
Thomptson of Dunstans East. Mr. Stafford Clare of Dunstans East. Mr. Solomon
Smith, of Katherine Tower.
The tenth Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. Thomas Gataker, of Rotherhithe. Mr. Jeremy Whitaker, of Mary Magdalen
Bermonsey. Mr. Samuel Bolton, of Mary Overy.
Others.
Mr. Thomas Hudson, of Georges Southwarke. Mr. George Snelling, of Olaves
Southwarke. Mr. Robert Haughton, of Olaves Southwarke. Mr. George Thompson, of
Olaves Southwarke. Mr. Daniel Santon, of Mary Overy. Mr. Henry Helmer, of Mary
Magdalen Bermonsey.
The eleventh Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. Harbert Palmer, of New-Church Westminster. Mr. Richard Vines, of Clements
Danes. Mr. Henry Cornish, of Giles in the fields. Mr. Cawdry, of Martins in the
fields. Mr. Gibson, of Margarets Westminster.
Others.
Sir William Ashton. of Westminster. Mr. John Packer. of Westminster. Mr.
Thomas Fauconbridg of Westminster. Mr. Laurence Swetnam. of Westminster. Mr.
John Briham. of Westminster. Mr. George Pryn. of Westminster. Mr. Edward
Martin. of Westminster. Mr. James Prince, of Clement Danes. Mr. Silvanus
Tailor, of Clement Danes. Mr. Walter Biggs, of Giles in the fields. Mr. Edward
Carter, of Covent Garden.
The twelfth Classis.
Ministers.
Mr. Obadiah Sedgswick, of Andrews Holborne. Mr. Immanuell Bourne, of
Sepulchers. Mr. Andrew Perne, of Dunstons West.
Others.
Mr. Roger Drake, Dr. of Physic, of Andrews Holborn. Mr. William Iesop, of
Andrews Holborn. Mr. Thomas Smith, of Sepulchers. Mr. Nathaniel Camfield, of
Sepulchers. Mr. William Ball, of Dunstons West. Mr. Francis Allen, of Dunstons
West.
Resolved by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled:
THat in all these twelve Classes, that which shall be done by the major part
of the Triers that be present, (not being under the number of seven in each
Classis) shall be esteemed as the act of all the Triers of that Classis.

Resolved, etc.
That the Peers and assistants of the house of Peers shall be Triers within
that Classis whereof the Parish wherein they live is a part.

Resolved, etc.
That all the Members of the house of Commons shall be Tryers within that
Classis whereof the parish wherein they live is a part.

Die Martis, 14. October. 1645.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That Dr. William
Gouge, Andrew Perne Minister of Dunstons West, Samuel Brown Esquire, Edmund
Prideaux Esquire, William Else Esquire, William Prynne Esquire, shall be
Tryers and Judges of such persons as shall be chosen to be Elders for the
Classis of the two Serjants Innes.

FINIS.

