THE PARLIAMENTS DESIRES TO THE EARL OF WARWICK: Wherein is Declared their
Resolutions concerning his going in Person to Hull, with 6. or 8. ships.

Together with the Earl of Warwicks Answer to the Parliaments Commands.

Also a Letter from the Earl of Warwick to the High Court of Parliament, read
in the House of Commons upon Monday, concerning his taking of two ships upon
the Sea, there being in one 42. Pieces of Ordinance, and great store of
Ammunition for War.

With the Parliaments Determination concerning all those that shall take up
Arms.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.



July 21. LONDON, Printed for Edward Johnson.

THE Earl of Warwicks Resolution concerning Sir John Hotham.
MAny and sundry times has flying Reports arrived in this Kingdom, and has
so far dived into the hearts of the Subjects of this Nation, that they have
bin much perplexed in mind, fearing a foreign invasion.

But praised be God he has prevented these Designs, and has of his gracious
affection which he bears to this Island, bestowed his blessings in abundance
upon us, prospering us with such gracious gifts, that no Nations under the Sun
ever enjoyed the like.

And has also out of his Divine Providence discovered many desperate Designs,
which were plotted and intended against this Kingdom.

And has also discovered many more Hellish Conspiracies, plotted by great
persons that were in emminent places, who when he see a sit and convenient
time, disclosed their wicked intentions, and revealed it to the hearts of this
our Honorable Assembly, who out of their vigilant and judicious Care
disanulled them of their places, and has chosen many worthy, pious, and
Religious men for the enjoying thereof.

But because I will not deviate too sarre from my intended purpose, I will now
proceed to my following Relation.

Both Houses having taken in consideration the Affairs of Hull, sent a Message
to the Earl of Warwick, concerning the same.

And they also received Letters from the said Earl, which were read in the
audience of both houses, informing them, how that he had taken one of the Kings
ships called the Lion, which was coming from Holland with great store of
Ammunition, and as he thought, and conjectured, bound for the North.

In which ship were Prince Robert, and his Brother Prince Maurice shipped to
come for England, but being taken sick at Sea, and troubled with an extreme
vomiting of Blood, they returned back, and landed again in another part of
Holland.

But the Captain of the ship having intelligence that the Ear of Warwick had
delivered up the Navy to the King, and that it was now under the Command of
Sir John Pennington, came very courageously amongst the ships, and very boldly
came aboard the Admiral, where he finding the Earl of Warwick, and
understanding he had still the Charge of the Navy (which he would not believe
until he had seed his Commission) was much amazed, and at the first refused to
submit himself, but the Earl of Warwick took him Prisoner, and possessed
himself of his ship and Ammunition, wherein was 42. pieces of Ordinance, with a
great quantiry of other provisions.

He also informed by the said Letters, that he had taken another ship laden
with Powder, and in it many other things belonging to war, which was also
bound for the North.

And upon Tuesday both Houses Ordered, that there should a Message forthwith be
sent with all speed to the Earl of Warwick, informing him the will and
pleasure of both Houses, which was, that he should take six or eight ships,
and go himself down to HUL, and lie thereabouts to relieve Sir John Hotham.

And also Ordered, That he should bring from HULL all such great Saddles as are
there, or other Furuiture for Horse or Horsemen, and the four Prisoners that
Sir John Hotham took in a ship going for Holland.

The Earl of Warwick having received this Command from both Houses, He called
a Council of War, and after some Debate thereof, he resolved to send an
Answer to the said Message, informing that he had called a Counsel of War to
consult of their last Commands concerning his going to Hull, but found that he
could not conveniently go himself, partly because his ship was of so great
Burden, she could not safely ride in that shallow Water to continue but he had
sent two of his ships, and would take order to send others after them, who
should carefully observe their Commands in all points, and fulfill it
accordingly.

And likewise certified them, that he had sent three other ships to HULL to
relieve Sir John Hotham, and desired them, that they would be pleased to send
him moneys with all speed, for to pay certain Captains discharged by him, by
reason that they refuse to obey his Command.

Whereupon both Houses Ordered, That there should be fifteen hundred pounds
forthwith sent.

Where it was also Voted, and jointly concluded of, that the said Earl should
have Thanks returned unto him for that good service, which was according
concluded of and a Messenger fortwith dispatched.

Both Houses resolved, That when soever the King makes War upon the
Parliament, it is a Breach of the Trust reposed in him by his people, contrary
to his Oath, and tending to the dissolution of this Government.

And also Resolved. That whosoever shall serve or assist him in such Wars,
are Traitors, etc.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parl.


