AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, WHEREIN The
County of Lincoln is added in the association of the six Counties of Norfolk,
Suffolk, Essex, Cambridge, Hartford, Huntington, for the mutual defense each
of other against the Popish Army in the North under the command of the
Marquess of Newcastle.

Also, giving power to the Earl of Manchester to nominate Governors over the
parts of Holland and Marchland; and if any person harbor a soldier that is
imprested to serve under him, he shall be fined; if he refuse to pay his fine,
his goods shall be sequestered, and he imprisoned till the fine be satisfied.

With the names of the Committees appointed for the collection of money to pay
the Forces raised for the preservation of those seven Counties.

Die Mercurii 20. September. 1643. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, that this Ordinance shall be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, September. 22. 1643.

Die Mercurii, 20 Sept. 1643.
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.
THe Lords and Commons in Parliament taking into their consideration the danger
to which the associated Counties of Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge,
Hartford, and Huntington are liable, in case the inhabitants of Lyn, who have
now declared themselves against the Parliament, should not be reduced to their
obedience; or the popish Northern Army, or any other Armies or Forces should
make a passage into any of the said associated Counties, have thought good to
afford the inhabitants of the said Counties all fit means for the timely
suppressing the rebellion at Lyn, and the preventing and withstanding all
mischievous designs which now are or hereafter shall be plotted against any of
the said Counties. And do therefore the better to strengthen them, Ordain
that the County of Lincoln, and the County of the City of Lincoln shall be
added to the said association. And further to enable them to maintain and pay
the Forces of Horse and Foot, now raised or hereafter to be raised by them.
That there shall be rated, taxed and leavied upon the several inhabitants of
the said Counties: viz. Upon the County of Essex, one thousand, one hundred,
twenty and five pounds. Upon the County of Suffolk, one thousand, two hundred,
and fifty pounds. Upon the County of Norfolk, with the City of Norwich, one
thousand, two hundred, and fifty pounds. Upon the County of Cambridge, three
hundred, threescore and fifteen pounds. Upon the Isle of Ely, one hundred,
forty, seven pounds, 10 shillings. Upon the County of Hartford, the sum of
four hundred, and fifty pounds. Upon the County of Huntington, two hundred and
twenty pounds. And upon the County of Lincoln, and City of Lincoln, eight
hundred and twelve pounds, ten shillings, weekly to be collected within the
several limits and hundreds of the said Counties and places. The first payment
of the said weekly sums so assessed by this Ordinance to be made at or
before the third day of October, 1643. And the said weekly payment to continue
weekly, for three months next ensuing, from the said third day of October.
And for expediting the said service, in leavying, assessing, and collecting the
said weekly sums in the said Counties: Be it Ordained, that the persons
hereafter named shall be Committees for the several and respective Counties
hereafter named. That is to say:

For the County of Essex, Sir Thomas Barrington Knight and Baronet, Essex.
Sir Harbottle Grimstone Knight and Baronet, Sir William Hicks, Sir William
Massam, Sir Richard Everard, Baronets; Sir Martin Lumly Knight and Baronet, Sir
Thomas Cheek, Sir Henry Mildmay of Wanstead, Sir William Roe, Sir Henry
Holcroft, Sir Thomas Honnywood, Sir William Martin, Sir John Barrington,
Knights; Harbottle Grimston, John Sayer, William Massam, Timothy Middleton,
Henry Myldemay, William Umphrevill, Nathaniell Baycon, Oliver Raymond, Anthony
Luther, Deane Tindell, John Wright, Robert Smith, Thomas Cook, Carey Mildmay,
Richard Harlackenden, Robert Wiseman of Mayland, John Eldred, John Jocelyn,
Robert Bouon, John Meed, John Eden, Thomas Clapton, Arthur Barnardiston, Isaac
Allen of Hasely, William Goldingham, William Atwood, John Atwood, Peter
Whitcome, John Brook, Henry Wise Man, Robert Young, Francis Stonehard, George
Walton, Captaye Cletheroe, John Watkins, Edward Berkhead, George Thorowgood,
Esquires; Richard Wiseman, John Langly of Colchester, Thomas Cook, John
Sorrill, William Turner of Wimbich, Robert Vesey, Jeremy Aylet, William
Collerd, Robert Crane, Doctor Read of Beauchanger, Robert Calthrop, Thomas
Adams of Thackstead, Richard Hankin of Harwich, John Allistone, William
Harlackenden, John Thorowgood of VVadden, Isaac VVincoll, Samuel Plain,
Francis Williamson of Walden, Francis Nicholson, John Fening, Robert Talcot
of Culchester, Thomas Allyet, and Robert Maidstone Gent.

For Colchester, the Mayor for the time being, Colchester.
Harbottle Grimston Recorder, John Jocelinne Deputy-Recorder; Henry Barrington,
John Langley, Robert Buckstone, Ralph Harrison, and William Cook, Aldermen.

For the County of Suffolk. Sir Edmond Bacon Baronet, Sir Nathaniel
Barnerdistone Knight, Sir William Spring Baronet, Suffolk.
Sir William Parker, Sir Roger North. Sir Thomas Barnerdistone Knights, Bramton
Gurden senior, Robert Reynalds, William Henemingham, Nathaniel Baycon of
Freston, Nicholas Bacon, Henry North, Robert Brewster, Francis Bacon,
Theophilus Vaughan of Becklesse, William Cage, Edmund Harvy, John* Gu^don
Esquire, John Bates Gentleman, Sir William Plater Knight and Baronet, Sir John
Wentworth Knight, Sir Philip Parker Knight, Morris Barrow, William Lawrence,
James Hubard, Nicholas Bacon, William Bloyse Esquires, Francis Brewster
Gentleman, Sir Butts Bacon Baronet, Sir Robert Brook, Sir Jo. Rowce, Sir
William Soame Knights, Thomas Baker, Brampton Garden junior, Wiseman
Bockhenham, Isaac Apleton, Henry North, Edward Read, Thomas Cole, Richard
Peapes, Nathaniel Bacon of Ipswich, Gibson Lucas, Esquires.

For Ipswich, the Bailiffes for the time being, Richard Purplet, and John
Aldus. Ipswich.


For Saint Edmonds Bury, the Aldermen of Saint Edmunds Bury for the time being,
Thomas Chapleyne, Thomas Gibb, S. Edmonds* Bury.
Samuel Moody, and Thomas Chapman.

(...) The Bailiffes of the Town of Alborough for the time being, and Thomas
Jackson. Alborough.


For the County of Norfolk, Sir Thomas Woodhouse Knight and Baronet, Norfolk.
Sir John Holland Baronet, Sir John Pots Baronet, Sir John Hoberd Knight and
Baronet, Sir Miles Hobert, Sir Thomas Hoggin, Knights; James Calthrop, John
Cook, John Sp^lman, Philip Beddingfeild Samuel Smith the Bailiffes of Ya^moth,
Thomas Toll, and John Percevell of Lynne, Thomas Wyndeham, Francis Jeremy,
Robert Wood, Gregory Gausey, John Haughton, Thomas Weld, Martin Sidly, Thomas
Sotherton, Esquires; William Henemingham, William Cook, Robert Rich, Esquires;
Sir Richard Berney, Sir Isaac Ashley, Sir John Palgrave Knights; Brigg
Fountain Esquire; Sir Edward Barkham Baronet, Sir Thomas Gaudy, Sir Edward
Ashly, Sir Thomas Guibon, Knights; Thomas Russell, John Walpoole, Robert
Wilton, Robert Jeremy, John Guibon, Robert Sheppard, John K^yves, Philip
Caltrope, Esquires; Toby Friar, Samuel Parkes, Thomas Johnson, Robert Rower,
Gent.

For the County and City of Norwich, Norwich.
the Major for the time being, Christopher Barret, Thomas Baker, John Tooly,
Adrian Parmiter, Richard Harman, and Samuel Smith, Esquires; Henry Watts
Alderman.

For the County of Cambridge, Cambridge. share.
Sir Dudly North, Sir John Cutts, Sir Thomas Martin, Knights; Thomas Symmonds,
Dudly Pope. Esquires; Sir Miles Sands Knight. Francis Russell, Oliver Cromwell,
Thomas Duckett, William Father, James Thompson, Walter Clapton, Robert Castle,
Thomas Bendish, Edward Clarke, John Welbo^e, Robert Clerk. Michael Dalton
juni^r, Thomas Parker John Hobe^t, George Clapthorne, John Towers, Henry
Butler, Edward Leeds, William Marsh, and Humberstone Marsh, Esquires.

For the Town and University of Cambridge, Cambridge.
the Major for the time being, Talbot Peaps Recorder, John Sherwood, Samuel
S^^^^den, Thomas French Robert Robson.

For the County of Hertford, Hertford.
Charles Lord Viscount Cranborne, Robert Cecill Esquire, Sir John Jerrat
Baronet, Sir Thomas Da^^^s, Sir William Litton, Sir John Witterong, Knights;
Sergeant Atkins, Richard Iennings, Edward Wingate, John Took, Ralph Freeman,
William Leman, William Presley, John Hayden, Alexander Wild, Gabriel Barber,
Richard Porter, Captain Scroggs, Ralph Freeman, Thomas Took, Esquires; Sir
John Read Baronet, Doctor King Doctor of Physic, John Humberstone Gentleman.

For Saint Albanes, the Major for the time being, John Robotham, S. Albanes.
Edward Wingate, Ralph Pemberton, R^chard Jennings, Esquires.

For the County of Huntington, Thomas Cotton Baronet, Huntington.
Sir John Newett Knight, Onslow Winch, Terrill Ioceline, Thomas Templer, John
Castle, Oliver Cromwell, Abraham Barwell, Edward Montague, and John Bulkeley,
Esquires.

For the County of Lincoln, Francis Lord Willoughby of Parham, Sir John Wray
Knight and Baronet, Lincolneshire.
Sir William Armyne, Sir John Brownloe, and Sir William Brownloe, Sir Thomas
Trallop, Baronets; Sir Edward Ascough, Sir Hamond Whitchcoat, Sir Chistopher
Wray, Sir Anthony I^by, Knights; Thomas Grantham, Thomas Hatcher, John
Broxholme, Montague Cholmely, John Archer, William Ellis, Esquires; Edward
Ascough, Maurice Cave, Thomas Cornwallis, John Harrington, Tho. Coppledike,
Francis Fines, Henry Massingberde, John Disney senior, Tho. Lister, Mullenax
Disney, Edward King, Edward Rocetter, Thomas Savyle, Will. Savyle, Humfry
VValcott, Captain John Harrington, Thomas I^by, Samuel Leigh, William Bury,
John VVillesby, Esquires; Edmund Tilson, Samuel Cust, Christopher Hudson,
Drayner Massingberd, Richard Bryan, Master Massingden, Master VVoolley, Master
William Hobson, Master Hall of Kettlethorpe, Alexander Emmerson, Thomas
VVelcome, Esquires; William Luddington, Edward Nelthorps, Edmond Anderson,
Master Bowtall, John Sheffeild, Robert Cawdron. Esquires; Edward Skipwith,
Charles Empson, Thomas VVelby, the Major of Boston for the time being, John
VVincock, Master Thompson, Wyatt Parkins, Martin Johnson, John Brown, John
Bernard, Nathaniel Tharrald, Gentlemen; Captain Thomas Hall, and Nehemiah
Rawson, and Master Hall of Kettlethorpe.

For the City of Lincoln, Masher Marshall the Major of Lincoln that now is,
Lincoln City.
Thomas Granth^m, John Brockshorne, Esquires; Robert Moorecroft, William
Watson, and Stephen Dawson, Aldermen.

Which said several Committees of the said several and respective Counties
and places, or any two of them, according to the former Ordinances for weekly
Assessements, shall nominate such persons as they shall think fit within their
respective Divisions, who shall have power to Assesse all and every person and
persons chargeable by this Ordinance, according to the weekly rates and
proportions in this Ordinance mentioned.

And the said Committees, or any two of them, shall likewise have power within
their several Limits and Divisions, to nominate Collectors, who shall collect
the said Money so Assessed, and pay the same to such person or persons as the
Deputy Lieutenants of the said respective Counties, or any two of them shall
appoint to be Treasurers for the said several Counties. And if any person or
persons, chargeable by this Ordinance, shall not upon demand pay the sum or
sums on him or them assessed, it shall be lawful for the said respective
Collectors, or any one of them, to leavie the same by way of distress and sale
of the goods of the person or persons so assessed; and to call to their
assistance any of the Trained Bands, or Companies of Volunteers or other
Forces, who are hereby required to be aiding and assisting to the said
Collectors in the premises, as they will answer the contrary thereof. And if
any person which shall be assessed, as aforesaid, toward the payment of the
said sum of money, shall refuse or neglect to pay his rate or assessement to
the Collector appointed within six days after it shall be demanded, the said
Committees, or any two of them, shall charge the said person so refusing or
neglecting with treble as much as the said person shall be rated at: And if the
said persons shall refuse or neglect to pay the same so trebled upon him, that
it shall be lawful for the said Committees, or any two of them, to commit the
said person so refusing or neglecting to prison; and also to sequester his
estate till the same be satisfied.

And be it Ordained, that every person shall be Rated for the Estate he has,
in the several places, in each several County; And if Land be ^et or let, to
or neete the yearly value thereof, such person or persons to whom the Rent
thereof belongs, to be solely chargeable therewith; But if the same be let
under value, then the sum Taxed to be apportioned between the party to whom
the Rent belongs, and the Tenant, as the Taxer shall think meet; And if
they, or any of them, shall do any injury in making their assessements, the
same to be rectified by the said Committees, or any two of them, within their
several Divisions, according to their discretions; And if any Assessors or
Collectors shall refuse the said service, or prove negligent or faulty therein,
the said Committee or any two of them, shall have power to commit such
Assessors or Collectors to Prison, or to set such a fine upon him or them, as
they shall think fit, not exceeding the sum of 100 li. and the said Fine to be
Levied by distress and sale of the Offenders goods. And it is Ordained, that
the Treasurers appointed by the said Committees, for the Respective Counties in
manner aforesaid, shall keep a Register Book of the several sums received
and paid out by them, that so they may give a just and perfect account thereof
unto the Committees of the said several Counties, when thereunto they shall be
by them required; And for the better encouragement of the said Collectors and
Treasurers, It is Ordained that 2 d. in the pound shall be allowed to the said
Collectors for every sum of Money collected and paid, by them to the said
Treasurers, and 2 d. in the pound to the said Treasurers for every sum of Money
received and disbursed by them according to this Ordinance; And that the
Treasurers of the said Counties shall issue out no sum or sums of Money to any
person or persons without Order, under the hands of the Deputy Lieutenants, of
the said respective Counties, or any two of them at least.

And it is further Ordained, that the Deputy Lieutenants of the said several
and respective Counties, shall hereby have power and authority to advance
Monyes by way of Loan for this Service or other, necessary charges, tending to
the safety and preservation of the said Counties; And for the security of such
persons as shall lend any Monyes for the uses aforesaid, to give them Warrants
under their hands or the hands of three of them at least, to receive the same
again of such Treasurer or Treasurers, to whom such Warrant or Warrants shall
be directed, who shall upon the sight of the said Warrant, and a Copy thereof
left with them, detain so much of the Monyes which he or they shall receive as
aforesaid to discharge the said Warrants; And if the said Treasurers or any of
them to whom such Warrants shall be directed, shall not after sight of such
Warrants and a Copy thereof left with them as aforesaid, stop and detaint so
much of the next Moneys which he shall so receive to satisfy the person or
persons, the Money so lent as aforesaid upon proof thereof made, the said
Deputy Lieutenants or any two of them, shall for his or their neglect or
default make out their Warrants to the high Constables of the hundreds where
such Treasurer or Treasurers shall dwell or inhabit, or to what other person
or persons they shall think fit to Levy so much Money, as the Warrant or
Warrants were made for, upon the goods of the said Treasurer or Treasurers by
way of distress and sale of their goods, to the use of the person or persons
so lending as aforesaid: And it is also Ordained, That whatsoever sums of Money
are or shall be set or imposed by virtue of this Ordinance upon any Landlords,
for and in respect of any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, held of them by
any Tenants, the same sum of Money shall be paid by their several respective
Tenants, which said sums of Money so to be paid by the said Tenants, for their
Landlords, they shall deduct and defalke out of the next Rents payable by them
to their Landlords, and for so doing, the said Tenants, their Heirs,
Excecutors, Administrators, and Assigns, shall be accquitted and saved
harmless, against the said Landlords, their Heirs, Excecutors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and Grant, Covenant, Condition, Writeing
Obligatory, or other matter whatsoever made to the contrary notwithstanding:
And it is Ordained, That the County of Lincoln, and the County and City of
Lincoln, shall have the advantage and benefit of the Ordinance for the Rating
of such as have not contributed upon the Propositions, or not in proportion
according to their Estates, to be raised in the same manner by the Committees
named in this Ordinance for that County, and to the same uses, for the
maintaining their Associated Forces, as the Lords and Commons have already by
another Ordinance confirmed and settled the same upon the rest of the said
Associated Counties; And it is Ordained, That the Deputy Lieutenants and
Committees of the said Counties, or any five or more of them, three whereof to
be Deputy Lieutenants, shall be a standing and constant Committee in their
several and respective Counties, who shall have power to take the accounts of
all Treasurers of Money, or keepers of Stores, or Ammunition, belonging to
their several and respective Counties, and to order all other the Affairs of
their several Counties, according to the Ordinances of Parliament now made, or
which hereafter shall be made; And for the better effecting of the premises,
The said Deputy Lieutenants and Committees, or any five of them as aforesaid,
shall be resident in some convenient place within their said respective
Counties, and shall have power to adjourn themselves from time to time and from
place to place within their several Counties as they shall think fit, And
after they or more of them shall have set foureteen days, Then the Minor half
of the said Committee to be free, and they to send for so many others in their
stead, and the Major half there still to remain other foureteen days, and
then they also are free, and then they also to send for three others, and so to
change the Committee successively during these Troubles, or till further order
be taken, giving notice from time to time to them which are to succeed six
days before they are to make their appearance at their appointed place; And
the Deputy Lieutenants and Committees of the said several and respective
Counties, are hereby required, to appoint a meeting at some convenient place
within their several and respective Counties so soon as coveniently they may,
and they then present are to agree amongst themselves of the first five who are
to begin this Service: And whereas Colonel Cromwell has ten Troops of Horse
already Armed, which were heretofore raised in the said Associated Counties, It
is Ordained that all the now Associated Counties shall discharge their pay till
this time, and so long as the said Troops shall be thought fit to be continued
together as one intyre Regiment, they shall be paid equally by all the said
Counties: And for as much as the preservation of the Isle of Ely, Holland, and
Marshland, in respect of the Avynewes and passages leading to them, does
mutually depend each of them upon the other, and that Colonel Cromwell is
already appointed Governor of the Isle of Ely, but no special Provision is
yet made for the parts of Holland and Marshland, the same is hereby recommended
to the Earl of Manchester, who by virtue of this Ordinance is authorized to
place such Governor or Governors in Holland or Marshland aforesaid (with the
approbation of the Lord General) with such directions for the mutual
preservation of them and the Isle of Ely, as in his judgment he shall conceive
to be most effectual for their joint preservation.

And lastly it is Ordained, That if any person or persons inhabitng within the
said Associated Counties, shall receive, harbor, and conceal, any that have
bin or shall hereafter be Imprested by virtue of any Ordinance of Parliament, to
be commanded by the Earl of Manchester, Major General of the said Associated
Forces, who shall withdraw themselves from the Service they now are, or shall
be by him the said Earlingaged in, for the Service of the Parliament, without
license from the Captain which he or they shall serve under; It shall be
lawful for the Deputy Lieutenants of the several and respective Counties, or
any two of them, to commit such persons as shall so withdraw themselves; As
also all such as shall knowingly harbor and conceal the persons so
withdrawing themselves, or to Fine any of them as they shall think fit, not
exceeding the sum of 10 li. And if the persons so withdrawing, or the persons
so concealing, shall refuse upon demand, to pay the said Fine so imposed upon
him or them as aforesaid, that then it shall be lawful for the said several
and respective Deputy Lieutenants or any two of them, to Sequester the Estates
of the said offenders, and Imprison their persons, until the said Fines be
satisfied and paid.

September, 21. 1643. Hen. Elsinge Cl. P. D. Co^.

FINIS.

