THE PARLIAMENTS VINDICATION OF JOHN PYM Esquire From his Majesty's exception
against Him.

Occasioned from his Speech delivered at a Conference with both Houses, Jan.
25. 1641 concerning Licenses granted by his Majesty's immediate Warrant, to
many of the chief Commanders now in the head of the Rebels in Ireland, for
their transporting thither, since the Ports were stopped by both Houses of
Parliament, against all IRISH Papists.

In which Vindication are,
1. Mr. Pym his Speech. 2. His Majesty's Message concerning his Speech. 3. The
Commons Answer to the Message. 4. His Majesty's Reply to the Commons Answer. 5.
The Commons Answer to the Reply. 6. His Majesty's second Reply.
Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, that Mr. Pym his Speech, His
Majesty's Message concerning his Speech, The Commons answer to the Message, His
Majesty's Reply to the Commons Answer, The Commons answer to that Reply, And
His Majesty's second Reply, be forthwith Printed together and Published.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON Printed for John Bull, 1643.

January 25. 1641.
At a Conference betwixt both HOUSES, concerning diverse Petitions presented to
the House of Commons; Mr. PYM appointed to manage that Conference.
My Lords,

I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled for the
Commons in Parliament, to present to your Lordships diverse Petitions, which
they have received from several parts, concerning the state of the Kingdom:
whereunto they are chiefly moved by that constant affection, which they have
always expressed, of maintaining a firm union and good correspondence with your
Lordships; wherein they have ever found much advantage and contentment; but
never held it more important and necessary, then at this time, wherein the
wisdom and resolution of Parliament have as many great dangers and
difficulties to pass through, as ever heretofore.

We are united in the public trust, which is derived from the Commonwealth,
in the common duty and obligation, whereby God does bind us to the discharge
of that trust: and the Commons desire to impart to your Lordships whatsoever
Information or Intelligence, whatsoever Encouragement or Assistance they have
received from those several Countries, which they represent, that so likewise
we may be united in the same intentions and endeavors of improving all to the
service of his Majesty, and the common good of the Kingdom.

The Petitions which I am directed to communicate to your Lordships, are
four: from London, Middlesex, Essex, and Hertfordshire. We have received many
more, but it would take up too much time, and be too great a trouble to peruse
all; and, in these four you may perceive the effect and sense of all: First I
am to desire your Lordships to hear them read, and then I shall pursue my
Instructions in propounding some Observations out of them.

The Petitions being read by four Members of the House, Mr. Pym resumed his
discourse.
My Lords,
IN these four Petitions you may hear the voice, or rather the cry, of all
England; and you cannot wonder if the urgencie, the extremity of the condition
wherein we are, do produce some earnestness and vehemency of expression more
then ordinary; the agony, terror and perplexity in which the Kingdom
labors, is universal, all parts are aff^cted with it; and therefore in these
you may observe the groans and miserable complaints of all.

Diverse reasons may be given why those diseases which are Epidemicall are more
dangerous then others: 1. The Cause of such diseases is universal and
supernall, not from an evil constitution, or evil diet, or any other
accident: and such causes work with more vigor and efficacy, then those which
are particular and inferior. 2. In such diseases there is a communicative
quality, whereby the malignitie of them is multiplied and enforced. 3. They
have a converting, transforming power that turns other diseases and evil
affections of men's bodies into their own nature.

The common and Epidemicall disease wherein this Commonwealth lies now
gasping, has a superior and universal cause from the evil Counsels and
designs of those, who under his Majesty bear the greatest sway in Government.
2. It has a contagious and infectious quality, whereby it is diffused and
dispersed through all parts of the Kingdom. 3. It is apt to take in the
discontents, evil affections, and designs of particular persons to increase
and fortify it self.

I shall take occ^sion from several branches of those Petitions which your
Lordships have heard, to observe:

1. The variety of Dangers to which this Kingdom is now subject. 2. The
manifold distempers which is the cause of those dangers. 3 The Multiplicitie of
those evil Influences, which are the Causes of that distemper.
The first Danger is from enemies abroad, this may seem a causeless and
impertinent observation at this time seeing we are in peace with all Nations
about us: But (my Lords) you may be pleased to consider that the safety of the
Kingdom ought not to depend upon the will and disposition of our Neighbors,
but upon our own strength and Provision; Betwixt States there are often sudden
changes, from peace to war, according to occasion and advantage. All the
States of Christendom are now Armd, and we have no reason to believe but that
those of greatest power have an evil eye upon us in respect of our Religion:
and if their private Differences should be composed, how dangerously, how
speedily might those great armies and other preparations now ready, be applied
to some enterprise and attempt against us? if there were no other cause, this
were sufficient to make us stand upon our Guard; but there are diverse more
especial symptoms of dangers of this kind.

We may perceive by several Advertisements from abroad, that they did foresee
our Dangers many Months before they broke out; they could foretell the Time
and Manner of them, which is a clear evidence they held intelligence with
those which were the contrivers and workers of the present troubles.

We may have dangerous Traitors and Fugitives now in other parts, who can
discover the weakness and distemper of the Kingdom; who hold Intelligence
with the ill affected party here, and by all cunning and subtle practices
endeavor to incite and provoke other Princes against us.

Some of the Ministers of our neighbor Princes may be justly suspected to have
had a more immediate hand and operation in the Insurrection and Rebellion of
Ireland, many of the Commanders, and most of the Soldiers levied for the
service of Spain, are now joined with the Rebels there; and those Irish Friars,
which were employed by the Spanish Ambassador for the making of those Levies,
are known to have been chief Incendiaries to this Rebellion, and are still very
active in the prosecution and encouragement of it.

The Rebels have a ready and speedy supply from some of our Neighbors. Two
Convoyes of Munition and Arms we are certainly informed of: one from Dunkirke;
the other from Nantes in Britanie: and certainly those that are so forward to
enable others to hurt us, will not forbear to hurt us themselves, as soon as
they shall have means and opportunity to do it.

Another Danger is from the Papists and ill-affected parties at home. The
Papists here are acted by the same principles, with those in Ireland; many of
the most active of them have lately been there, which argues an intercourse and
Communication of Counsels, They have still store of Arms and Munition at their
disposing, notwithstanding all our endeavors to disarme them; they have a free
resort to the City, and to the Court; they want no opportunities to consult
together; they have the same or greater Encouragements from above, and from
about them then ever, in respect of the example and success of the Rebels in
Ireland, and the great confusions and divisions which by their cunning and
subtle practices are raised and fomented amongst our selves at home.

3. A third danger is of Tumults and Insurrections of the meaner sort of
people: by reason of their ill vent of cloth, and other Manufactures, whereby
great multitudes are set on work, who live for the most part by their daily
gettings, and will in a short time be brought to great extremity, if not
employed; Nothing is more sharp and pressing then necessity and want; what they
cannot buy they will take, and from them the like necessity will quickly be
derived, to the Farmours and Husbandmen; and so, grow higher, and involve all
in an equality of misery and distress, if it be not p^evented. And at this
time such tumults will be dangerous, because the Kingdom is full of disbanded
Soldiers and Officers, which will be ready to head and to animate the
Multitude to commit Violence with more strength and advantage: and if they once
grow into a body, it will be much more difficult to reduce them into Order
again, because necessity and want, which are the causes of this disturbance
will still increase as the effects do increase.

A fourth danger is from the Rebels in Ireland, not only in respect of that
Kingdom, but in respect of this: They have seized upon the Body of that
Kingdom already, they abound in men of very able bodies, they increase in
Arms and Munition, they have great hopes of supplies from abroad, of
encouragement here, and are sure of good entertainment from the Popish Party,
so that they begin to speak already of the transporting themselves hither, and
making this Kingdom the seat of the War.

The Distemper which has produced these Dangers is various and exceeding
violent. Whenever nature is hindered in her proper operations and faculties,
distempers will necessarily follow.

The obstructions which have brought us into this distemper, are very many, so
that we cannot wonder at the strength and malignity of it. Some of the chiefest
of these obstructions. I shall endeavor to remember.

1. The obstruction of Reformation in matters of Religion: no Grievances are
sharper than those that press upon the tender consciences of men; and there
was never Church or State afflicted with more Grievances of this kind, then we
have been. And though they are by the wisdom of this Parliament partly eased
and diminished, yet many still remain: and as long as the Bishops and the
corrupt part of the Clergy continue in their Power there will be little hope of
Freedom either from the sense of those which continue or the fear of those
which are removed. And of this obstruction, (my Lords) I must clear the
Commons, we are in no part guilty of it* some good Bills have past us, and
others are in preparation, which might have been past before this, if we had
not found such ill success in the other. Whatsoever mischief this obstruction
shall produce, we are free from it: we may have our part of the Misery, we can
have no part in the guilt or dishonor.

2. The obstruction in Trade, it is the Trade that brings food and nourishment
to the Kingdom, It is that which preserves and increases the stock of the
whole, and distributes a convenient Portion of maintenance to every part of it:
therefore such an obstruction as this must needs be dangerous; the Freedom of
Trade being so necessary, the benefit so important, as that it gives life,
strength, and beauty to the whole body of the Commonwealth: but I must protest
the House of Commons has given no cause to this Obstruction; we have eased
Trade of many Burdens, and heavy Taxes, which are taken off; we have freed it
from many hard restraints by Pattents and Monopolies; we have been willing to
part with our own Privileges, to give it Encouragement; we have sought to put
the Merchants into Security, and confidence in respect of the Tower of London,
that so they might be invited to bring in their Bullion to the Mint, as
heretofore they have done: and we are no way guilty of the troubles, the
fears, and public dangers which make men withdraw their Stocks, and to keep
their Money by them to be ready for such sudden Exigents, as in these great
distractions we have too much cause to expect.

3. The obstruction in the relief of Ireland. It must needs be accounted a
great shame and dishonor to this Kingdom, that our neighbors have showed
themselves more forward to supply the Rebels, then we have bin to relieve our
distressed brethren, and fellow Subjects. But I must declare that the House of
Commons is altogether innocent of any neglect herein. As soon as the first
news of the Rebellion came over, we undertook the War, not by way of Supply
and aid, as in former Rebellions the Subjects have used to do, but we
undertook the whole charge of it, and we suffered not 24. hours to pass,
before we agreed to a great Levy of Money and Men, to be employed against the
Rebels, even in a larger proportion then the Lord Justices and Council there
did desire: and from time to time we have done all for the furtherance thereof
though in the midst of many distractions and diversions, but the want of
Commissions for levying Men, for issuing Arms, and diverse other Impediments,
have been the causes of that obstruction; and I wish we had not only found
impediments to our selves but also encouragements to them. Many of the chief
Commanders, now in the Head of the Rebels, after we had with your Lordships
concurrence stopped the Ports against all Irish Papists, have been suffered to
pass by his Majesty's immediate Warrant, much to the discouragement of the
Lord Justices and the Counsel there: and this procured, as we believe, by some
evil Instruments, too near his Regal person, without his Majesty's knowledge
and intention.

4 The obstruction in prosecution of Delinquents: many we have already brought
up to your Lordships: diverse others we have been discouraged to transmit; such
difficult proceedings have we met withal; such terrors and discountenance
have been cast upon our selves and our witnesses, those who have showed
themselves, their friends and Patrons, have found it the most ready way to
preferment; yea his Majesty's own hand has been obtained, his Majesty's Ships
employed for the transporting of diverse of those who have fled from the Justice
of the Parliament.

5. A general obstruction and interruption of the proceedings of Parliament,
by those manifold designs of violence (which through Gods mercy we have
escaped;) by the great and frequent breaches of Privilege; by the subtle
endeavors to raise parties in our House, and jealousies betwixt the two Houses.

6. The obstruction in providing for the defense of the Kingdom, that we
might be enabled to resist a foreign Enemy, to suppress all civil
Insurrections; and what a pressing necessity there is of this, the exceeding
great decaies in the Navy, in the Forts, the manifold defects in the power of
ordering the Militia of the Kingdom, and means of furnishing them with
Munition, are sufficient evidences known to none better then to your Lordships,
and what endeavor we have used to remove them (but hitherto without that
success and concurrence which we expected) and where the stop has been, and
upon what good grounds we may claim our own innocence and faithfulness in
this, we desire no other Witnesses but your selves.

Lastly, I come to the evil influences which have caused this distemper, and I
shall content my self to mention some few of those which are most apparent and
Important.

1. In the first place, I shall remember the evil Counsels about the King,
whereof we have often complained. Diseases of the brain are most dangerous,
because from thence Sense and Motion are derived to the whole body. The
malignity of evil Counsels will quickly be infused into all parts of the
State. None can doubt but we have exceedingly labored under most dangerous and
mischievous Counsels. This evil influence has been the cause of the
preparation of War with Scotland, of the procuring a Rebellion in Ireland, of
corrupting Religion, suppressing the Liberty of this Kingdom, and of many
fearful and horrid attempts, to the subverting the very being of Parliament,
which was the only hopeful means of opposing and preventing all the rest:
And this does still appear to be the most predominant evil of the time;
whereat we need not wonder, when we consider how Counselors have been
preferred and prepared. And herein I appeal to your Lordships own consciences,
whether the giving and the countenancing of evil Counsel, has not been
almost the only way to favor and advancement.

2. The discouragement of good Counsel: diverse honest and approved Counselors
have been put from their places: others so discountenanced, as that the way of
favor has been shut against them, and that of danger and destruction only
open to them,

3. The great power that an interessed and factious Party has in the
Parliament, by the continuance of the Votes of the Bishops and Popish Lords in
your Lordships House: and the taking in of others both out of the House of
Commons, and otherwise, to increase their strength.

4. The somenting and cherishing of a Malignant party throughout the whole
Kingome

5. The manifold jealousies betwixt the King, his Parliament, and good
Subjects, whereby his protection and favor has in a great measure been
withheld from them: their inclination and resolution to serve, and assist him,
has been very much hindered and interrupted: we have often suffered under the
mis-interpretation of good Actions, and false imputation of evil, which we
never intended. So that we may justly purge our selves from all guilt of being
Authors of this jealousy and misunderstanding: We have been, and are still
ready to serve his Majesty with our lives and fortunes, with as much
cheerfulness and earnestness of affection, as ever any Subjects were; and we
doubt not but our proceedings will so manifest this, that we shall be as clear
in the apprehension of the World, as we are in the Testimony of our own
Consciences.

I am now come to a conclusion, and I have nothing to propound to your
Lordships by way of request or desire from the House of Commons; I doubt not
but your judgments will tell you, what is to be done; your consciences, your
Honors, your interests will call upon you for the doing of it; The Commons
will be glad to have your help and concurrence in saving of the Kingdom; but
if they should fail of it, it shall not discourage them in doing their duty.
And whether the Kingdom be lost or saved (as through Gods blessing I hope it
will be) they shall be sorry that the story of this present Parliament should
tell Posterity, that in so great danger and extremity, the House of Commons
should be enforced alone to undertake those courses which are necessary for
the saving of it, and that the House of Peers should have no part in the
honor of those endeavors, your great Estates, and high degrees of Nobility,
giving you so large an Interrest in the good success of them.

My Lords, consider what the present necessities and dangers of the
Commonwealth require, what the Commons have reason to expect, to what
endeavors and Counsels the concurrent desires of all the people do invite
you: so that applying your selves to the preservation of the King and Kingdom,
I may be bold to assure you in the name of all the Commons of England; that
you shall be bravely seconded.

His Majesty's Message sent to the House of Commons, concerning Licenses
granted by his Majesty, to several persons to pass into IRELAND.
HIS Majesty taking notice of a Speech, pretending in the Title, to have been
delive^ed by M^. Pym in a Conference, and printed by Order of the House of
Commons, in which it is affirmed, That since the stop upon the Ports against
all Irish Papists by both Houses, many of the chief Commanders, now in the
head of the Rebels, have been suffered to pass by his Majesty's immediate
Warrant; and being very certain of having used extreme Caution in the granting
of Passeports into Ireland; So that He conceives, either this Paper not to have
been so delivered and printed, as it pretends, or this House to have received
some misinformation;

His Majesty would be resolved, whether this Speech were so delivered and
Printed; and if it were, would have this House to review upon what Informations
that particular was grounded, that either that may be found upon re-examination
to have been false, and both this House and his Majesty injured by it, or that
his Majesty may know by what means, and by whose fault, His Authority has
been so highly abused, as to be made to conduce to the assistance of that
Rebellion, which he so much detests and abhors, and that He may see himself
fully vindicated from all reflections of the least suspicion of that kind.

The Answer of the House of Commons.
YOur Majesty's most loyal and faithful Subjects, the Commons now assembled
in Parliament, have taken into their serious consideration the Message received
from your Majesty, the seventh of this instant February; and do acknowledge
that the Speech therein mentioned to be delivered by Master Pym in a
Conference, was Printed by their Order, and that what was therein delivered,
was agreeable to the sense of the House. And touching that passage wherein it
is affirmed, that since the stop upon the Ports against all Irish Papists by
both Houses, many of the chief Commanders now in the head of the Rebels, have
been suffered to pass by your Majesty's immediate Warrant, They present your
Majesty with this their humble Answer.

That they have received diverse advertisements, concerning the several
persons, Irish Papists and others, which have obtained your Majesty's immediate
Warrants for their passing into Ireland since the Order of Restraint of both
Houses; some of which (as they have been informed) since their coming into
Ireland, have joined with the Rebels, and been Commanders amongst them, and
some others have been staid, and are yet in safe Custody, particularly the Lord
Delvin, and four other persons in his company, whereof one is thought to be a
Priest: One Colonel Butler Brother to the Lord Minyart now in Rebellion, and
Sir George Hamilton, all which are Papists: And one other (as is reported)
being Son of the Lord Mettersfield, whose Father and Brother are both in
Reb^llion. The particular names of others we have not yet received, but doubt
not but upon examination they may be discovered.

And your Majesty's most faithful Subjects are very sorry, that the extreme
caution which your Majesty has used, has been so ill seconded, with the
diligence and faithfulness of your Mininisters; and that your Royal
Authority should be so highly abused; Although, as it was expressed in that
Speech by Master Pym, we believe it was by the procurement of some evil
Instruments too, near your Royal Person, without your Majesty's knowledge and
intention. And we beseech your Majesty to take such course, That not only
your Honor may be vindicated for the time passed, but your Kingdom may be
secured from the like mischief for the time to come.

His Majesty's Reply to the House of Commons Answer, Concerning Licenses
granted by the King to persons to go into IRELAND.
AS His Majesty has expressed a great desire to give His House of Commons all
possible satisfaction to all their just Requests, and a readiness to rectify
or retract any thing done by Himself, which might seem to trench upon their
Privileges by any mistake of His, so he doubts not they will be ready upon all
occasions to manifest an equal tenderness and regard of His Majesty's Honor
and Reputation with His good Subjects: and therefore His Majesty expects they
should review His Message of the seventh of this Month, concerning a passage
in Mastes Pyms Speech, and their Answer sent to his Majesty by some of their
Members on the tenth of the same, with which His Majesty can by no means rest
satisfied.

His Majesty's Exception in that Message was, That it was affirmed in that
Speech, That since the stop upon the Ports against all Irish Papists, by both
Houses, many of the chief Commanders now in the head of the Rebels, have been
suffered to pass by His Majesty's immediate Warrant.

To this the Answer is:
THat the Speech mentioned in that Message to be delivered by master Pym, was
printed by their Order, and that what was therein delivered was agreeable to
the sense of the House: that they have received diverse Advertisements
concerning several persons Irish Papists and others, who have obtained His
Majesty's immediate Warrant for their passing into Ireland, since the Order of
Restraint of both Houses, some of which, they have been informed, since their
coming into Ireland, have joined with the Rebels, and been Commanders amongst
them.

His Majesty is most assured, no such person has passed by His Warrant or
Privity, and then he desires His House of Commons to consider, whether such a
general Information and Advertisement (in which there is not so much as the
name of any particular person mentioned) be ground enough for such a direct and
positive Affirmation, as is made in that Speech, which in respect of the place
and Person, and being now acknowledged to be agreeable to the sense of the
House, is of that authority, that his Majesty may suffer in the affections of
many of His good Subjects, and fall under a possible construction (considering
many scandalous pamphlets to such a purpose) of not being sensible enough of
that Rebellion, so horrid and odious to all Christians, by which in this
distraction, such a danger might possibly ensue to His Majesty's Person and
Estate, as he is well assured His House of Commons will use their utmost
endeavors to prevent. And therefore His Majesty thinks it very necessary, and
expects that they name those persons who by His Majesty's License have passed
into Ireland, and are now there in the head of the Rebels; Or that if upon
their re-examination they do not find particular Evidence to prove that
Assertion (as His Majesty is confident they never can) as this Affirmation
which may reflect upon His Majesty, is very public, so they will publish such
a Declaration whereby that mistake may be discovered, His Majesty being the
more tender in that particular, which has reference to Ireland, as being most
assured that He has been, and is, from His Soul, resolved to discharge His
Duty (which God will require at His hands) for the relief of His poor
Protestant Subjects there and the utter rooting out that Rebellion; So that
Service has not suffered any, but necessary delays by any act of His
Majesty's, for the want of any thing proposed to His Majesty, or within His
Majesty's power to do.

For the persons named in the Answer, His Majesty says, that Colonel Butler,
and the son of the Lord Nettersfield, obtained His Warrants for their passage
into Ireland, at His Majesty's being in Scotland, which was long (as His
Majesty thinks) before the Order of both Houses: His Majesty knowing the former
of them to be one who has always made Professions to His Service, and to be
Uncle to the Earl of Ormond, of whose affection to the Protestant Religion,
and His Majesty's Service, His Majesty has great cause to be assured: And the
latter being a person of whom, at that time, there was no suspicion to His
Majesty's knowledge. For the other, it may be they have obtained Warrants from
his Majesty since the said Order, but his Majesty assures the Parliament that
he had no intimation of such an Order, till after stay made of Sir George
Hamilton, who was the last that had any License from his Matie to pass for
Ireland.

And His Majesty having since this Answer from the House of Commons used all
possible means, by the examining His own Memory, and the Notes of His
Secretaries, to find what Warrants have been granted by Him, and to what
persons, does not find, That He has granted any to any Irish, but those who
are named by the House of Commons, and in December last to the Earl of Saint
Albans, and to two of his servants and to one Walter Terrel a poor man, they
being such as His Majesty is assured are not with the Rebels, and much less
chief Commanders over them. And though it may be, the Persons named by the
House of Commons are Papists, yet His Majesty at that time thought it not fit
in respect of their Alliance in that Kingdom to such Persons of great power,
of whom His Majesty hoped well, to discover any suspicion of them, the Lords
Justices having declared by their Letters (which Letters were not disapproved
of by the Parliament here) that they were so far from owning a public
jealousy of all Papists there, that they had thought fit to put Arms into the
hands of diverse Noble men of the Pale of that Religion who made Professions to
His Majesty's Service and desired the same. And since so great a trust reposed
in some of the Lords of that Religion was not disapproved by the Parliament
here, His Majesty could not imagine it unsafe or unfit for Him to give Licenses
to some few to pass into that Kingdom, who, though Papists, professed due
Allegiance and Loyalty to His Majesty.

And therefore unless the first Affirmation of the House of Commons can be
made good by some particulars, His Majesty does not know that His Ministers
have failed in their diligence and faithfulness to His Majesty in this point,
or that His honor has suffered so much by any Act of His own, as that it
needs be vindicated for the time past by any other way then such a Declaration
which He expects from this House, as in Duty and Justice due to His Majesty.

The Answer of both Houses of Parliament to the Kings Message. Sent to his most
excellent Majesty, March 16. 1641.
May it please your Majesty.
YOur Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses of the Commons House of Parliament, having considered Your Majesty's
Reply to their Answer, touching such Persons as have been licensed by your
Majesty to pass into Ireland, do most humbly beseech your Majesty to believe,
that they shall always with thankfulness and joy receive from your Majesty
any satisfactory Answer to their just requests: And, as they hope, they shall
find in your Majesty a readiness to rectify those things which have been
done to their prejudice, so will they be careful to remove all apprehensions
of their actions or speeches, which may seem to cast any dishonor upon your
Majesty.

For your Majesty's better satisfaction concerning the positive affirmation,
that many of the chief Commanders now in the head of the Rebels (after the
Ports were stopped by order of both Houses) have been suffered to pass by your
Majesty's immediate Warrant. May it please your Majesty to consider that herein
they have affirmed nothing but what they had cause to believe was true, the
grounds whereof they most humbly present to your Majesty.

The first ground is this, that both Houses of Parliament, (having upon your
Majesty's commendation taken into their care the suppression of the Rebellion
of Ireland) had reason to be especially watchful over the Ports, because the
Rebels abounding in numbers of men, for the most part ignorant of the use of
their Arms, could by no means become dangerous or formidable to this
Kingdom, but by the access of Soldiers and Commanders, wherewith they were
like to be furnished either out of France, or Flanders, from both which places
the passage into Ireland is speedy and easy through this Kingdom, and thereof
they could not choose but be very sensible of whatsoever gave liberty or
opportunity to such a passage as of a very hurtful and dangerous grievance,
for prevention whereof they did upon the 7. of Novembeer agree upon an Order,
and restrain all passage into Ireland, but upon due and strict examination by
such persons as were trusted to make those Licenses.

A second ground, that the other License granted to the Lord Delvin, and then
acknowledged by your Majesty's Answer, were such, both in (regard of the
persons to whom they were granted, and the extent of the words in which they
were granted,) as were apt to produce such an effect as is mentioned in that
positive affirmation, that is to open a way for the passage of Papists and
other dangerous persons to join with the Rebels, and to be Heads and
Commanders amongst them, which is thus proved.

The Waarrant granted to Colonel Butler, (since the order of restraint by both
Houses of Parliament) did extend to all Ports of England and Scotland, and did
give free passage to himself and to his Company, without any qualification of
persons, or limitation of number, and this Colonel was himself a Papist, had
a brother in Rebellion, and General of the Rebels in M^^ster, was expected
and very much desired by those Rebels, who for a long time kept a Regiment to
be commanded by him, as we have been credibly informed.

The second was granted to a son of the Lord Nettersfield, which Lord had
four sons in England since the Rebellion, one of which is settled in England,
three others intended to pass into Ireland, and were all dangerous persons
being Papists, bred in the wars, in the service of the King of Spain, and
one of them lately become a Jesuit.

The third to the Lord Delvin extends to himself, and four persons more
unnamed, that one of those who should have past with him is taken to be a
Jesuit, and another who calls himself Ploncket, seems to be a man of some
breeding and quality, and like to have been serviceable to the Rebels, and to
have done mischief, if he had gone over.

The fourth to Sir George Hamelton, and three others unnamed: this Gentleman is
likewise a professed Papist, and may be doubted to be of the party of the
Rebels, one of that name being mentioned in the instructions of Sempill the
Jesuit, amongst diverse other dangerous persons of the Popish party in Scotland,
and Ireland, which instructions were found in a ship stayed in Cornwall, which
was going into Ireland, with diverse Jesuits, Soldiers and others, for the
encouragement of the Rebels.

A third ground is this, That by virtue and authority of these Licenses
several persons have passed over, which are now in actual rebellion, and
joined with the Rebels, and some have commanded amongst them, which is thus
proved:

One Captain Sutton, did by virtue and authority of your Majesty's License
imbarque at White-haven, in the Company of Colonel Butler, and was driven back
by foul weather; whereupon the Colonel stayed and went to Chester; but that
Captain reimbarqued himself in the same Bottom, and passed into Ireland,
where he went into Rebellion with the Lord Dunsany, and has since obtained the
place of a Colonel amongst the Rebels, as we are very credibly informed.

Two of the sons of the Lord Nettersfield, one a Jesuit, and the other a
Soldier, passed into Ireland in December last, both of them by virtue of your
Majesty's warrant, as we have cause to believe, for that they went both
together in one ship, and the License acknowledged to be granted by your
warrant, must needs be granted to one of them, seeing the other brother, who
lately endeavored to pass over, did produce no License, and upon his
examination does absolutely deny that he had any.

A fourth ground (which we humbly offer to your Majesty) is this. That your
Majesty cannot be assured that no other did pass upon your License, as your
Majesty does conceive, and are pleased to express in your Answer, and that we
had great cause to believe that diverse other had passed over by your Warrant,
besides the persons aforementioned, and that for these reasons:

1. Because we received such a general information, that diverse now in the
head of the Rebels were passed by your Majesty's License, which being true in
part, and easy to be effected, in regard of the nature and extent of the
Warrants* and probable to be attempted, in regard of the subtilty and vigilance
of that party, to make use of all advantages, seemed to deserve credit, which
we should not have given to it, if it had been a naked information without such
circumstances.

2. Because we had concurring advertisements from Ireland and Chester, that
diverse Priests, Jesuits, and Popish Commanders had passed over, and were
landed there and particularly some of Colonel Butlers Company and that the
Officers of the Ports had kept no entry of the names of these persons, or of
the Warrants by which they were transported.

These we hope will be sufficient to persuade your Majesty to believe, that as
we had some cause to give credit to the said informations, so we had no
intention to make any ill use of them to your Majesty's dishonor, but did
impute the blame to your Ministers, who might have been more careful to have
informed your Majesty of the Quality of those persons named in your Licenses,
and so to have limited them, that they might not have extended to others, as
they did how many and dangerous soever.

And they pray your Majesty to rest assured, that they shall always be tender
of your Honor and reputation with your good Subjects, and for this cause have
made this true Declaration of the full state of this matter, that they may
think no otherwise of it, then the truth, and in all things shall labor to
establish a good understanding and confidence, betwixt your Majesty, and your
people, which they heartily desire and pray for, as the chiefest means of
preserving the Honor, safety, and prosperity of your Majesty, and your Kingdom.

His Majesty's Answer to a Message sent to Him by the House of Commons,
concerning Licenses granted by Him to persons to go into IRELAND.
HIs Majesty has seen and considered the Message presented to him by the Lord
Compton, and Mr. Baynton, the 19. of March 1641. at York; Touching such persons
as have been licenced by his Majesty to pass into Ireland.

Though he will not insist upon what little reason they had to suspect that
some il-affected persons had passed into Ireland, under color of his Majesty's
License (Inferences being slender proofs to ground belief upon) yet he must
needs avow, that for any thing that is yet Declared, He cannot see any ground
why Mr. Pym should so boldly affirm before both Houses of Parliament, That
since the stop upon the Ports by both Houses against all Irish Papists, many of
the chief Commanders now in the head of the Rebels have been suffered to
pass by His Majesty's immediate Warrant; For as yet there is not any
particular person named that is now so much as in Rebellion (much less in the
Head of the Rebels) to whom His Majesty has given License;

And therefore according to his Majesty's Reply upon that Subject, His Majesty
expects, That his House of Commons publish such a Declaration, whereby this
mistaking may be cleared. That so all the World may see his Majesty's Caution
in giving of Passes; and likewise, that his Ministers have not abused His
Majesty's Trust, by any surreptitious Warrants.

And lastly, His Majesty expects. That henceforth there be more Wariness used,
before such public Aspersions be laid, unless the Grounds be beforehand
better warranted by sufficient Proofs.

FINIS

