THE PETITION OF RIGHT: Exhibited to his MAJESTY, By the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, concerning diverse Rights, and the Liberties of the
Subject; With his Majesty's several Answers to them.

Also his Majesty's Declaration upon the same.

Likewise, His Majesty's Commission of Array for Leicester Shire, written by the
King in Latin, and translated for the knowledge of the Commonwealth.

With the Votes of both Houses of Parliament concerning the same.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentrrum.

Together how Sir Henry Hastings and others had repulse, and were arested by a
Sergeant at Arms in the execution of the said Commission.

Printed at London for George Lindesay, and are to be sold by John Gyles at
his Shop in Holborne near David's Inn. 1642. June 28.

The Petition of Rights, Exhibited to his Majesty, by the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, etc.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
HVmbly show unto Our Sovereign Lord the KING, the Lords Spiritual, and
Temporal Commons in Parliament assembled, That where as it is declared and
enacted by a Satute made in the time of the Reign of King Edward the first,
commonly called Statutum de Tallagio non concedendo, That no Tallage or Aid
shall be laid or levied by the King or his Heirs in this Realm, without the
good will and assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Burgesses, and other the Freemen of the Commonalty of this Realm. And by
Authority of Parliament holden in the five and twentieth year of the Reign of
King Edward the third, it is declared and enacted, That from hence forth no
person should be compelled to make any Loanes to the King against his will,
because such Loanes were against reason, and the Franchise of the Land. And by
other Laws of this Realm it is provided, that none should be charged by any
charge or Imposition, called a Benevolence, nor by such like charge, by which
the Statutes before mentioned, and other the good Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, your Subjects have inherited this Freedom; That they should not be
compelled ^o contribute to any Tax, Tallage, Aid, or other like Charge, not
set by common consent in Parliament.

Yet nevertheless of late, diverse Commissions directed to sundry Commissioners
in several Counties with instructions, have issued; by means whereof your
people have been in diverse places assembled, and required to lend certain
sums of money unto your Majesty, and of them upon their refusal so to do, have
had an Oath administered unto them, not warrantable by the Laws or Statutes of
this Realm, and have been constrained to become bound to make appearance, and
give attendance before your Privy Council and in other places; and others of
them have been therefore Imprisoned, confined, and sundery other ways mo^ested
and disquieted. And diverse other charges have been levied upon your people in
several Counties, by Lord Lieutenants, Deputie-Lieutenants, Commissioners for
Musters, ^ustices of Peace, and others by Command of or Direction from your
Majesty, or your Privy Council against the Laws and free Customs of the
Realm.

And where also by the Statute called The great Charter of the Liberties of
England, It is declared and enacted, That no Freeman may be taken or
imprisoned, or be disseised of his Freehold, or Liberties, or his free
Customs, or be outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner de^troyed, but by the
lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the law of the Land.

And in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of King Edward the third,
it was decla^ed, and enacted by authority of Parliament, that no man of what
estate and condition that ^e be, should be put out of his Land or Tenements,
nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor disherited, ^or put to death without being
brought to answer by due Process of Law.

Nevertheless against the tenure of the said Statutes, and other the good
Laws and Statutes of your Realm, to that end provided, diverse of your
Subjects have of late been imprisoned without any cause showed: And when for
their deliverance they were brought before you Justices by your Majesty's Writs
of Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court should order, and
their keepers commanded to certify the causes of their detainer, no cause was
certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's special command,
signified by the Lords of your Privy Council, and yet were returned back to
several prisons without being charged with any thing to which they might make
answer according to Law.

And whereas of late, great Companies of Soldiers and Mariners, have been
dispersed into diverse Counties of the Realm, and the inhabitants, against
their wills, have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there
to suffer them to so journe against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and
to the great grievance and vexation of the people.

And whereas also by authority of Parliament, in the five and twentieth year
of the Reign of King Edward the third, it is declared and enacted that no man
should before judged of life or limb against the form of the Great Charter
and the Law of the Land; And by the said Great Charter, and other the Laws and
Statutes of this your Realm, no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the
Laws established in this your Realm, either by the Customs of the same
Realm, or by Acts of Parliament. And whereas no offender, of what kind soever,
is excepted from the proceedings to be used, and punishments to be inflicted by
the Laws and Statutes of this your Realm: Nevertheless, of late time diverse
Commissions under your Majesty's great Seal have issued forth, by which
certain persons have been assigned and appointed Commissioners with power and
authority to proceed within the Land, according to the Justice of Martial law,
against such soldiers or Mariners, or other dissolute persons joining with
them, as should commit any muther, robbery, felony, mutiny, or other outrage,
or misdimeanour whatsoever, and by such summary course and order, as is
agreeable to Martial Law, and as is used in Armies in time of War, to
proceed to the trial and condemnation of such offenders, and them to cause to
be executed and be put to death according to the Law Martial.

By pretext whereof some of your Majesty's Subjects have been by some of the
said Commissioners put to death, when and where, if by the Laws and Statutes
of the Land they had deserved death by the same Laws and Statutes also they
might, and by no other ought to have been judged and executed.

And also sundry grievous offenders by color thereof, claiming an exemption,
have escaped the punishments due to them by the Laws and Statutes of this your
Realm, by reason that diverse of your Officers and Ministers of Justice have
unjustly refused or forborne to proceed against such offenders, according to
the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said offenders were
punishable only by Martial Law, and by authority of such Commissioners as
aforesaid: Which Commissioners and all other of like nature are wholly and
directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

They do therefore humbly pray your most Excellent Majesty, hat no man hereafter
be compelled to make or yield any Gift or Loan, Benevolence, Tax or such like
Charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament. And that none be called to
make answer, or to take such Oath, or to give attendance, or be confined, or
otherwise molested, or disquieted concerning the same, or for refusal thereof.
And that no Freeman in any such manner as is before mentioned, be imprisoned or
detained. And that your Majesty would be pleased to remove the said Soldiers
and Mariners, and that your people may not be so burdened in time to come.
And that the foresaid Commissioners for proceeding by Martial Law may be
revoked, and annulled. And that hereafter no Commissions of like nature may
issue forth to any person or persons whatsoever, to be executed, as aforesaid,
lest by color of them any of your Maj^sties Subjects be destroyed or put to
death, contrary to the Laws and Franchise of the Land.

All which they most humbly pray, of your most Excellent Majesty, and their
Rights and Liberties, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare the Awards, doings and
proceedings, to the prejudice of your people, in any of the premises, shall
not be drawn hereafter into consequence of example. And that your Majesty
would be also graciously pleased, for the further comfort and safety of your
people, to declare your Royal will and pleasure, that in the things aforesaid,
all your Officers and Ministers shall serve you according to the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, as they tender the honor of your Majesty, and the
prosperity of this Kingdom.

Which Petition being read, the Kings answer was thus delivered unto it.

THe King wills, that Right be done according to the Laws and Customs of
this Realm: And that the Statutes be put in due execution, that his subjects
may have no cause to complain of any wrong, or oppositions, contrary to their
just rights and liberties: To the preservation whereof, He holds himself in
conscience as well obliged, as of His Prerogative.

But this answer not giving satisfaction, the King was again petitioned unto,
that he would give a full and satisfactory answer to their Petition in full
Parliament.

Whereupon the King in Person made this second answer.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe answer I have already given you, was made with so good deliberation, and
approved by the judgments of so many wise men, that I could not have imagined,
but that it should have given you full satisfaction, but to avoid al ambiguous
interpretations, and to show you that there is no doubleness in my meaning, I
am willing to please you in words, as well as in substance. Read your Petition,
and you shall have an answer that I am sure will please you.

And then causing the Petition to be distinctly read by the Clerk of the
Crown, the Clerk of the Parliament read the Kings answer thereto in these
words.

Soit droit fait come est desire, Let right be done as is desired.

Which being done, the King in Person said thus.

THis I am sure is full, yet no more then I granted you in my first answer, for
the meaning of that was, to confirm all your Liberties, knowing according to
your own protestations, that you neither mean, nor can hurt my Prerogative:
And I assure you my Maxim is, That the peoples Liberty strengthens the Kings
Prerogative, awd that the Kings Prerogative is to defend the peoples Liberties.

Ye see now, how ready I have showed my self to satisfy your demands, so that
I have done my part: Wherefore if this Parliament have not a happy conclusion,
the sin is yours, I am free of it.

And on the last day of the Session, His Majesty's Speech to both Houses before
his assent to the Bills, was this,

My Lords and Gentlemen,
IT may seem strange that I come so suddenly to end this Session, therefore
before I give my assent to the Bills, I will tell you the cause, though I must
avow that I owe an occount of my actions to none but God alone. It is known to
every one, that a while ago the House of Commons gave me a Remonstrance, how
acceptable every man may judge, and for the merit of it, I will not call that
in question, for I am sure no wise man can justify it.

(...) since I am certainly informed that a second Remonstrance is preparing
for me to take away ^ fit of Tonnage and Poundage (one of the chief
maintenances of the Crown) by alleging that I have given away my right
thereof, by my answer to your Petition.

This is prejudicial unto me, that I am forced to end this Sessions some few
hours before I meant it, being willing to receive any more Remonstrances, to
which I must give a harsh answer.

And since I see that even the House of Commons begins already to make false
instructions of what I granted in your Petition, lest it beworse interpreted in
the Country, I will now make a new Declaration concerning the true intent
thereof.

The profession of both Houses in the time of hammering this Petition, was no
ways to trench upon my Prerogative, saying, They had neither intention nor
power to hurt it.

Therefore it must needs be conceived, that I have granted no new, but only
confirmed the ancient Liberties of my Subjects; yet to show the clearness of
my intentions, that I neither repent nor mean to recede from any thing I have
promised you, I do here declare, that those things: which have been done,
whereby men had some cause to suspect the Liberty of the subjects to be trencht
upon (which indeed was the first and true ground of the Petition) shall not
hereafter be drawn into example for your prejudice: And in time to come (in
the words of a King) you shall not have the like cause to complain.

But as for Tonnoge and Poundage, it is a thing I cannot want, and was never
intended by you to ask, never meant (I am sure) by me to grant.

To conclude, I command you all that are here to take notice what I have spoken
at this time, to be the true intent and meaning of what I granted you in your
Petition. But especially you my Lords the Judges, for to you only under me
belongs the interpretation of Laws, for none of the House of Parliament,
jointly or separate (what new doctrine soever may be raised) have any power
either to make or declare a Law without my consent.

His Majesty's Commission of Array for Leicestershire.
CHarles by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To our dear and well-beloved, Henry Earl of
Huntington, and William Earl of Devon, and to our loving and faithful Henry
Hastings, Knight, son to the said Earl of Huntington, Henry Berkley, George
Villers, Thomas Burton, Baronets; Henry Skipwith, John Skeffington and Richard
Halford, Knights and Baronets; Wolstan Dix^y, Richard Roberts, John Bale,
Thomas Hartop, Erasmus de la Fountain, and William Jones Knights; Henry
Hastings of Humberston, George Ashby, and John Pate, Squires, and to our
Sheriff of the County of Leicester for the time during, health and greetings.
These are to let you know, that We, if the malice of our enemies should presume
to invaade our Kingdom of England, (which be far absent) are willing by the
Divine grace favoring Us to resist, and to dispose and order the same for the
safety and defense of our Self and of our Kingdom aforesaid, and of our Liege
people: We have assigned you, or any three of you, or more, to array and
exercise all and singular men of Arms, or men armed, and Archers remaining in
the County aforesaid, within the liberty and without, to cause all those to be
armed, who are able of body and fit to be armed, who are of sufficient ability
to arm themselves, viz. whosoever of them according to his state and faculty,
both to asside and contribute, according to the advisemen^ and discretion of
you, or any three or more of you: and also to strain and command all those who
are able in land or goods, and impotent by reason of the weakness of their
bodies, t^ labor to find according to the quantity of his Lands and goods, as
he may bear it rationably (his state being secure) to be armed: Men of Arms,
and men armed either with Bows or Arrows, so that they shall not delay, or
cause to be delayed at his own house in his own Country, in defense of the
said Kingdom, against our enemies, if danger should happen, that for their
delay they endanger not the Kingdom. And to the said men of Arms, or armed
men and Archers so arrayed and furnished continually in their arrayment as in
an hundred thousand, or other-wise, as it shall be held necessary and
convenient, but we do assign you, or any three or more of you, of whom we
intend you Henry Earl of Huntington aforesaid; and in your absence, you
William Earl of Devon, or you Henry Hastings aforesaid, son to the said
Earl of Huntington, should be one to command and enjoyne these men of Arms,
or men armed, and Archers so arrayed and habilited, as well at the Seacoasts,
as in any other places, where, and as often as it shall be necessary to expel,
beat back and destroy our enemies from time to time, when any danger shall
appear. We assign also you, and any three or more of you, to muster, or cause
those men of Arms, men armed, and Archers from time to time, as often as need
shall require, diligently to be done and supervised. And also to proclaim,
order, and diligently examine, that all and singular of these men of Arms, men
armed, or Archers, to be armed with their own, and no other Arms, upon
punishment of losing them: those only excepted, who ought to be armed at the
expenses of others, as is aforesaid, and to arest and take all and singular,
whom you shall find contrary and rebellious in this case, and to commit them
to our prison, and to remain in the same, till they be freed by the Law.
Therefore We command and enjoine you more strictly, that We may by the faith
and allegation whereby We are bound, that these Presents being seen, that you
may be more securely arrayed and prepared before you at certain days and
places, which shall seem more competent and expedient, and less hurtful to
our people, that all men staying in your Country, by whom the Arayment and
Ammunition may be better performed, come and are called, and those to be
arrayed, armed and habilited, and those so arrayed and habilited in this
arrayment, be co^pleated: and that you cause the signs to be set up called
Beakins, in the accustomed places, by which the Country may be fore-armed, and
forewarned of the coming of our enemies, in congruent times. And that you
cause those men so arrayed and habilited, when danger shall be feared, ^o march
out in defense of the King and Country, from time to time, as well at the
Seacoast, as in any other places, when it shall be more necessary, or that any
3. or more of you, whereof we intend that you, Henry Earl of Huntington, and
in your absence William Earl of Devon, or you Henry Hastings, son to the
aforesaid Earl of Huntington, shall be one that shall command them to march out,
as is aforesaid, so that for the defect of the defense, arayment, or marching
out of the said men of Arms, or by your negligence the loss of the Country
be not caused by our enemies in any manner: But we do grant to all and
singular Earls, Barons, Knights, Majors, Bailiffes, Constables, Ministers, and
other faithful and liege Earls aforesaid (as well within the liberty as
without) firmly by the tenor of these presents, in command that they be
intendant, counselling, and helping and assisting you, or either of you, in the
execution of the foresaid premises. And that you cause that all those in the
Counties foresaid, do meet before you, or before any three or more of you, at
certain days and places, which you, or any three or more of you, as
aforesaid, shall ordain most convenient, by whom the arayment, assession, and
ordination may be the better execute, and those to whom it shall happen to be
taken and arested for rebellion, to be kept in prison, as is aforesaid. In
testimony whereof we have made these our Letters Patents. Witness our Self the
eleventh day of June, in the eighteenth year of Our reign.

By the King,

W^llis,

Die Sabbathi 18. Iunit 1642.
Resolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.

THat this Commission of Array for Leicester is against Law and the liberty and
property of the Subject.

Die Lunae 20 Iunii. 1642.
Resolved upon the Question, etc.

THat all those that are Actors in the putting of the Commission of Array in
execution shall be esteemed as disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom, and
betrayers of the liberty of the Subject.

ORdered that this Commission of Array and the aforesaid Votes shall be
forthwith printed and published through the Kingdom.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

The Commission of Array put in Execution.
HIS Majesty having sent this Commission of Array unto the above-name^ which was
not with little acceptance received by Sir Henry Hastings, sonn^ to the Earl
of Huntington, Mr. Hofford of Wistoe, etc. by reason the Lo^ Ruthin, and Sir
Arthur Hasselridge, contrary to their desire and expectation prevailed with the
County, and were chosen Knights of the Shire, and worthily preferred in their
behalf to consult with the high and honorable Assembly of Parliament. And
therefore with all alacrity endeavor with all their power to oppose the
obedient endeavors to the Parliaments command of the Lord Ruthin and Sir
Arthr^ Hasselridge, etc.

On Wednesday, the 22. of this present June in the afternoon, the forenamed
Henr^ Hastings, with others, came to Leicester with a great number of
attendants, who sided wit^ them, to put their Commission of Array in execution,
thereby to nullify what the other ha^ already performed, and to imprison those
that should not assist them in this design, or should side with the other: so
that great commotions began to rise: for this hostile number so suddenly
coming upon them made the inhabitants fear, they came to surprise the Town.
The Lord Ruthin and Sir Arthur Hasselridge giving their personal attendance in
the fore-noon^ and had with their own hands and others stuck upon posts in the
market place, and other pl^ces, orders from the trusty and honorable House of
Parliament, which the said Henry Hastin^ with their company, pulled off, and
vilified with opprobrious words. At which the Townesme^ took it very heynously,
and said, It was a high affront, and great indignity to the Parliament.

And although the Lord Ruthin and Sir Arthur Hasselridge, were not present at
the instant of time, when these great disasters were like to befall, yet the
wisdom of the P^liament had provided (that if whom they had appointed
Lieutenants for that County, sho^ have any opposition) a Sergeant at Arms, who
was there present, and did in the Kings nam^ and in the name of the high Court
of Parliament, arest the said Henry Hastings and oth^ and would have their
bodies put into safe custody.

This sudden act persuaded their minds to desist, as was thought by the
changing of the color: and now began the Townsmen to bestirre themselves, to
have the Sergeant at Ar^ his Prisoners forth-comming.

But by reason of the multitude of the one, and the paucity of the other, after
much striv^ for the space of two hours, at length got the Prisoners mounted on
Horseback, and (...) once rode all away together.

FINIS.

