THE PARLIAMENTS INSTRUCTIONS Agreed on by the Lords and Commons for to be
observed by their several Committees, now Residing in the several Counties,
and those to be employed.

LIKEWISE, The Message and Order of both Houses of Parliament to the Alderman
of the City of London, August the 12. 1642.

Wherein is Declared their Desires to the said Aldermen, for to appear on
monday next at the time and place herein prefixed.

Ordered that this be forthwith printed and published

John. Brown. Cler. Parl.
C R


LONDON: Printed for J. Hansott. August 16. 16^^

Die Veneris Augusti 1642. Instructions agreed on by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, for to be observed by their several Committees.
I.
YOu shall observe and execute the Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament the
eighth of this month, for the suppression of the Rebellion and Commotion,
raised by the Marquess of Hartford in the County of Somerset, and other
Western Counties; and by the Earl of Northampton and others in the County of
Leicester Northampton, Warwick, and other adjoining parts.

II.
You shall conduct and lead all such Forces of Horse and Foot as shall be
appointed by the Lord General (the Earl of Essex) for this service, and shall
fight with, kill, and slay all such as shall by force oppose you in the
execution of that Ordinance, and all their Assistants, Ayders, and Abettors,
and you shall levy such other Forces of horse and foot, as his Excellence
shall by his Commission give you power to leavie, under such Colonels,
Commanders, and other Officers, as shall be by him appointed or directed? And
you shall pursue the said Rebels and Traitors, in the said Counties, or in any
other Counties, or parts of the Kingdom into which they shall retire
themselves.

All which Forces so to be raised shall have the same pay as the rest of the
Army is to have. And you shall defend and protect his Majesty's Subjects from
violence and oppression by the illegal Commission of Array, or otherwise; And
you shall hinder and forbid the execution of that illegal Commission, and in
all places to the uttermost of your power, endeavor to preserve and restore
the peace of the Kingdom.

III.
You are hereby authorized and required to disarme all popish Recusants, and
all such other dangerous and ill-affected persons, as well Clergy men as
others, as have testified or shall testify their ill-disposition to the peace
of the Kingdom.

IV.
You shall endeavor to clear the proceedings of Parliament from all
imputations and Aspersions, and shall from time to time certify us of all
things necessary for the public service, and that we may have a speedy
account of it, and directions to you, as well as your advertisements to us may
have a clear and ready passage, you shall lay a strict charg upon all
post-masters, that they do not suffer any Letters, or other Dispatches, to or
from the Parliament, to be intercepted or stayed: or if any shall presume to
make such stay of those Dispatches, you shall direct the Postmasters to repair
to the Justices of the Peace, Constables, and all other Officers, for their Aid
and Assistance, who are hereby required to take special care that there may
not be no such interruption.

V.
If you shall find any disaffected persons, raising any parties against the
Parliament, spreading scandals or aspersions on their proceedings, like to
disturb the peace of the Kingdom; you shall cause all such persons (upon good
proofs of their Misdemeanors) to be Arrested and sent up to answer such their
Offenses, as to Law and Justice shall appertain.

VI.
You shall take from the said Rebels and Traitors all such Arms, Ordinance, and
Ammunition, as they have taken from his Majesty's Subjects, and restore the
same to the Owner.

VII.
Whereas his Majesty seduced by wicked Councels has raised War against his
Parliament, and other his good subjects, and has drawn together great troops
of Papists and ill affected persons, and sent out Commission for the levying of
others, to the great hazard of Religion, and the public peace of the
Kingdom.

You are therefore required to suppress all persons whatsoever, who shall
leavie any Soldiers, or draw together any of the Trained Bands, by color or
pretense of any Commission from his Majesty, under the great Seal or otherwise;
And you shall ceize upon all Horses, Arms, Ammunition, money, Plate, or other
Provision whatsoever, raised or provided under pretense of his Majesty's
service, for the fomenting or maintaining any such unnatural and unlawful
war against his people.

VIII.
You shall observe and execute all such further Directions and Instructions as
you shall from time to time receive from both Houses of Parliament; As
likewise, such Instructions and Directions as you shall from time to time
receive from the Committees of the Lords and Commons appointed to take Care of
the safety of the Kingdom, and whatsoever you shall do therein, or any other
person in Aid or Assistance of you, it shall be accepted as a good and
necessary service to the Kingdom, and for their and your so doing, they and you
shall be defended and protected by the Authority of Parliament. And this
Resolution of the Lords and Commons, to protect those that shall obey and
further their Commands, you shall publish and declare upon all occasions, for
the better encouragement of the Subjects of this Kingdom in that behalf.

Die Veneris 12. Augusti. 1642.
IT is this Day Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That
every Alderman in every Ward within the City of London, or in his absence his
Deputy, shall summon every Subsidy man dwelling in his said Ward to appear on
Monday next, at their usual place of meeting by 8. of the clock in the
morning, where some members of the House of Commons will be present to acquaint
them with the present state and condition of the Kingdom, and City of London,
and to consider further what is fit for the safety of both.

And to that end you are to require all Inhabitants setting all excuses aside,
not to fail of giving their personal presence at the time and place appointed
by you. And every Alderman or Deputy is likewise hereby further required, upon
the day and time above-specified, to make return of the subscriptions of all
strangers in their particular Wards.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this be
forthwith printed and published. John Brown Cler. Parl.


