THE PARLIAMENT OF ENGLANDS MESSAGE To the Queen of SWEDEN; To be presented by
Mr. Atturney-General Prideaux; in the Name of Themselves, and the Commonwealth
of England.

ALSO, Their sending of a Letter to the King of Denmark; With a Narrative of
the proceedings of the States of Holland; And the Embassy of the King of
Scots, sent by the Lord Digby.

Likewise the concluding of a peace between the King of France, and the King of
Spain; and a Golden Staff presented to the said King of Scots, for his
composing the differences between both Crowns.

Imprinted at London for James Nichols, 1652.

IF ever there were a Season of Observation (or rather admiration) certainly it
is the present; wherein we have been eyewitnesses of so many outgoings of
God; presence among Us, and the many miraculous turns of Gods providence within
a short Revolution. One memorable hint be pleased to take notice of, that is,
the same day that the late King Charles set up his Standard-Royal at
Nottingham, being the 22 of August, the same day did his Son Charles set up his
Standard at Worcester, where he received the total Rout; and the same day of
the Month did M. Love receive his fatal Blow at Tower Hill, accounting it the
Day of his Glorification. But now observe, from whence came the rise of these
Distractions; Of which we may truly say, according to the old Proverb used by
our Fathers, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum. All our evils have been
derived from the corruption of the Clergy, and such as the Laity that have been
wedded to their Faction. The end therefore of this observation is, to show,
That it concerns the peace of every Commonwealth, to see that the Civil
Interest be secured out of the reach of any Clerical Encroachments or
Pretenses. But to Intelligence.

The Copy of a Letter from Holland.
SIR,
OUr Designs here run high and resolved; and since so unhappy a difference has
broken out, we are determined to second our enterprises, with all the intention
of spirit and prosecution, that either our estates or lives can reach; At
present it is the public care in dispa^ching Ambassadors to Germany and
Sweden, to heighten the Cause by all possible assistance, that either Money or
Rhetoric can engage. Van Trump has mustered our Mariners, and feasted the
Captains aboard with all variety of entertainment and language; great promises
are made of vast sums, to encourage the Instruments of the Design, and nothing
so little doubted of, as the infallible success of Victory: what
disparagements we can fasten either upon your Cause or Navy, we cannot fail to
brand you with. Great hopes we whisper to our selves of Mountains in the Moon,
which we seem confident of, in the Expedition to the Summer-Ilands; and to that
purpose a fleet is dispatching out.

The main business of the State now in agitation, is the election of a Captain
General, much struggling there is to renew the house of Orange, and much more to
confer the honor upon the King of Scots, for whom the Zealanders press hard,
and very many of our swaying Statesmen; so that it is conceived by the wisest
heads, he is the most likely, though the most dangerous to carry the Vote. Our
English prizes are now upon sale, both Goods and Barks, and nothing is wanting
to express our spleen and hatred to your Common wealth.

We hear that the King of Scots has concluded a Peace between France and Spain
for three years; for which office of Reconciliation, he has received the Golden
Staff from the Kings hand, which is as near an adm^t^ance into the bosom of
the Crown, as the dearest affection of the State can possibly express; and for
the support of his Majesty, he is granted and allowed the honor of a Guard of
Gentlemen to attend him, and whatsoever soldiers he shall entertain they are
involved within the community of the French pay.

The Lord Wilmot is gone for Germany to the Diet, to excite the free Princes
for the advancement of his Masters Interest in the new Engagement; in the mean
time, the Lo: Digby (by the assignation of his Majesty of France) has leave
given him for two months to negotiate for the King of Scots in Holland, till
such time he can provide to go over thither himself.

By my next you may expect an account of the great fleets putting to sea: in
the mean time, I am as by duty of affection ever bound,

Amsterdam November. 17. 1652. Your humble and obliged servant, T. Smith.

Sir George Carteret is very active at sea for his young Master Charles, and
does extremely infest the Western Channel; so that small Vessels dare not
venture forth, but are fain to make Holyday against their wills, to the great
prejudice of many poor families.

Thus Mars changes his element, and brings
The Seas in disputation for their Kings:
The Ark can take no rest, but tossing lies
Drenched in the Waves and Tides of Miseries:
Haven calm these waters, that the mountain tops
May once more rise in glory, and the crops
Of plenty, peace, religion, and content,
May crown th'obedient valleys by consent.
A Letter from the Queen of Bohemiahs Court at the Hague.
SIR,
NOthing but fire and sword will serve to allay the burning Choler of the
Princely party, who are grown to such an extreme height of arrogance, That down
with your Parliament now they cry, and say this is the time to set their poor
distressed Lord and Master in his Royal Saddle, and restore him to his
dis-joynted Throne. But alas, it is not their high Rants, nor their quaffing of
full bowls, that can bring to pass such mighty Revolutions, though they give
out, that all Emperors, Kings, and Princes in Europe, will be instrumental for
his Restoration; but indeed by the Eye of Reason, we must conclude this to be
incredible, if we seriously weigh and consider the several Links of his
infinite mercy, toward your Parliament and Army, and how he has sufficiently
manifested his own will and pleasure, with that loud Declaration from Heaven,
so mightily set forth in the late sudden Revolutions and Actions, before, and
at Worcester; whereby he unquestionably appears to have given a full and final
Decision of the Controversy, and seems as it were with his own finger, to
point out to all the World his Resolutions for England.

Utrech November. 22. stilo novo.
The Parliament of England are sending a Message to the Queen of Sweden, by
Attorney General Prideaux, for the concluding of a Truce, and entering into a
League of Amity, Offensive and Defensive between both States. An Ambassador is
likewise appointed for Denmark, to see what Truce or League may be made with
that fluttering Kingdom.

FINIS.

