PROPOSITIONS Agreed upon By Both HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT To be sent to the KINGS
MAJESTY FOR PEACE AND For settling of the Church and Kingdom, that His Majesty
may come to London, and sit with His Parliament.

WITH The Copy of a Letter from his Majesty's Court at Hampton Court.

London printed for V, V. and are to be sold at the Exchange, Anno Dom.
MDCXLVII.

PROPOSITIONS Agreed upon By Both HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT TO Be sent to the Kings
Majesty, for PEACE, And for settling of the Church, and Kingdom, that his
Majesty may come to London, and sit with his PARLIAMENT.
Die Veneris 27 August 1647.
THe House of Commons this day desired a conference with the Lords, about the
Propositions to be sent to the Kings Majesty, And accordingly their Lordships
met them in the Painted Chamber.

This conference was managed by Mr. Lisle of the House of Commons, who made a
learned speech before the Lords and Commons there present.

Mr. Lisle declared that he was commanded by the House of Commons to acquaint
their Lordships, that they do adhere to their former Votes in passing those
Propositions agreed upon by both Houses of the Parliament of England, and the
Parliament of Scotland, with as little alteration as may be.

Mr. Lisle also moved that the right Honorable the Earl of Salisbury may be
one of the Conservators for the Peace of the Kingdoms, in the place of the
deceased Earl of Essex.

Two Reasons were delivered at the Conference for the passing of the
Propositions, to be sent to the Kings Majesty, with no more alterations, then
what must of necessity be.

I. THat thereby they may be the speedier dispatched, for to make much
alterations, more then what must needs be done, would be an occasion to make
it longer before they can be dispatched, the speeding of which is of great
consequence to the settling of the peace and safety of the Kingdom.

II. That they have already passed both Houses, and there is the consent of the
Kingdom of Scotland; and therefore may with more speed be dispatched, without
alterations more then must of necessity be.

Die Veneris 27 Aug. 1647.
AFter this conference both Houses of Lord and Commons sat; And agreed upon
the Propositions to be sent to the Kings Majesty for a safe, and well grounded
Peace, in which Propositions, there are very few alterations from those that
were delivered to his Majesty at New Castle both concerning Religion, the
Covenant, the Militia, Ireland, and all other things therein expressed, The
greatest alterations being only about the sale of Bishops Lands, and some
other particulars which the change of the present state of things does
necessarily require.

Those Propositions (with the alterations) so passed both Houses of Parliament
are to be communicated to the Scotch Commissioners at Woster House in the
Strand, by Commissioners from the Houses, to desire their concurrence to the
Propositions that so they may be speedily sent to his Majesty to be passed.

THese Propositions being passed by his Majesty will (through Gods blessing)
conduce much, to the settling of the Kingdom in an happy Peace.

And so soon as the Commissioners of the Kingdom have given their consent,
they are to be dispatched away to the King.

The Copy of a Letter from his Majesty's Court at Hampton Court
SIR,
WE are yet here at Hampton Court, The Headquarters of the Army are removing
to Putney, and then I suppose the King will remove from hence nearer London.

It is supposed that the King will remove on Tuesday next, but whither is not
yet resolved; We have many flock to the Court, every day more then other, ten,
sixteen, and twenty Coaches in a day; And we perceive the coming of diverse
Malignants hither.

The King is very merry, but the old late Bishops, and Delinquent Clergy, are
much dejected, by reason of the Generals Excellencies stopping of their
designs, and by the Ordinance of the Parliament, which hinders them from
accomplishing their hoped ends to have crept into their livings again, by
their late stratagem The Propositions from the Parliament (I suppose) would now
come very seasonably to his Majesty The Lord direct his Majesty's heart to
pass them, for the settling of the Church, and Kingdom, that his Majesty may
come to London to sit with his Parliament. God direct all to a firm and
lasting Peace, to his glory and the comfort of this poor distressed Kingdom,
and of

Your unworthy Servant, WILL. CORBET
New Market 26 of August 1647.
FINIS.

