Die Lunae 6 September. 1647.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That from
henceforth no Moneys clipped, filed, or deminished, shall be payable, or received
in payment within this Kingdom.
FOr as much as during these distractions great sums of Moneys clipped and
unlawfully diminished, have been dispersed and given out amongst the people
thorowout the Kingdom; for the speedy suppression thereof and prevention of
the like in the future, Be it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, That from henceforth no Money diminished by clipping or filing shall
be current or payable in this Kingdom, or be offered in payment, or received
as due payment by any person whatsoever, but be esteemed as Bullion, and no
otherwise. And to the end that such Moneys as are by this present Ordinance
declared to be uncurrant, may not for the present become unusefull unto such as
live in remote parts of the Kingdom, and cannot sell them but at under rates;
Be it Ordained, That for three Months after the date hereof, the said clipped
Money shall be allowed of in payment, at four shillings ten pence per ounce
for Goldsmiths weight, which is troy weight, or four shillings four pence
half penny the ounce avordupoyz, which is the common weight. And all persons
may hereby take notice, that such clipped money will yield in London four
shillings and eleven pence per ounce for Goldsmiths weight, and four shilings
five pence halfpenny per ounce for avordupoyz weight at the least. Provided
nevertheless that it is not hereby intended that any old Moneys, which are
apparent not to be clipped, or otherwise unlawfully diminished, but only grown
light through waring and wasting, by long passing from hand to hand, shall be
included within this Order, but shall still be current without dispute as
formerly.

Die Lunae 6 September. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily. 1647.


