The Petition and Articles or several Charge exhibited in Parliament against
Edward Finch Vicar of Christ's Church in London, and brother to Sir John Finch,
late Lord Keeper, now a Fugitive for fear of this present Parliament, 1641.

Therefore the sin of the young men was very great before the Lord, for men
abhorred the offerings of the Lord.

1 Samuel 2.17. Thus says the Lord, I come against the Shepherds, and will
require my Sheep at their hands, and cause them to cease from feeding the
Sheep; neither shall the Shepherds feed themselves any more, for I will
deliver my Sheep from their mouths, and they shall no more devour them.

Ezekiel. 34.10. Ed: Finch his Perambulations
away for hamersmith


a priest, with open book in hand, walks after three men, who walk after a
coach and horses. A crowd follow them and a man looks on from a inn window.

LONDON, Sold by R. Harford at the Sign of the Bible in Queens-head Alley in
Paternoster-row. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS AND BVRGESSES OF the Commons House of
Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Parishioners of the Parish of Christ's Church, in
London,
Most humbly shows,
THat Master Edward Finch, Vicar of the said Parish, having set up their
Communion Table Altar-wise, does there administer the Sacrament, causing all
the Communicants to come to the Railes or Forms, and uses frequent and
unreasonable bowings before the said Table, in his approach unto it, and
return from it.

That he is of evil and scandalous life and conversation, not regarding
himself to instruct the Petitioners souls, and hindering them also of such
helps as therein they would otherwise have, and exacts of them unlawful and
unreasonable Fees and sums of money, as by the annexed Articles may appear,

That the Petitioners are troubled in the said Church with singing, Organs, and
other Instruments of Music, not understood by them, whereby they are greatly
distracted in the Service of God, the same being altogether unprofitable, and
no way tending to their spiritual edification.

They most humbly pray that your Honors will be pleased to take the Premises
into your grave consideration, and to grant unto them, such relief therein, as
to your great wisdoms shall seem meet.

And they shall daily pray, etc.
The Articles mentioned in the annexed Petition, against Master Edward Finch
Vicar of Christ's Church, in London.
FIrst, that the said Master Finch is very officious and observant in
worshipping the great Idol, lately erected in the said Church, viz. the Altar.

2. That he exacteth sometimes twenty shillings a piece, and many times more,
for funeral Sermons, himself seldom preaching any of them, and affirms his
Pulpit to be his Shop, and therefore must improve it to the utmost.

3. That he is very careless and negligent in executing his Pastoral duty,
having appeared scarce twice in twelve months to officiate the same, nay not
once in a year.

4. That he ordinarily preaches in his Surplice.

5. That he also wears his Surplice in going the perambulation of the Parish.

6. That he has not for many years been resident in the Parish, but lets to
farm his Vicaridge-house.

7. That he makes no conscience of Oaths, but is a frequent violater of Gods
holy Name, by often swearing thereby, with fearful and horrid Imprecations,
and Execrations, as was most abundantly proved.

8. That he is a common haunter of Tavernes, and Alehouses, and is often and
openly drunk.

9. That he has exacted excessive Fees, as ten shillings for a Christening.

10. That before he will perform his duty in Burials, and upon other occasions
he will have his lawless and unconscionable demands satisfied, whereof some of
the Petitioners have complained to the Diocesan, but it seems his correction
was gentle, for no amendment has followed.

11. That he has demanded and taken for Burials of Parishioners, ten and
twelve pounds a piece, and has shut, or caused to be shut up the Church
doors, and not suffered the ground to be broken for Parishioners, until his
undue exactions have been satisfied.

12. That he has administered the Communion to a dying woman, when he was so
drunk, that he forgot the Service, failed in rehearsing the Lords prayer, and
at his departure was not able to return to his place of abode without leading.

13. That at the same time he caused all present with the said woman to depart
the room, and then enjoined the sick party to confess unto him all her secret
sins.

14. That being so alone with the said woman, he demeaned himself so
uncivilly, and used such unseemly gestures toward her, that she was fain to
cry out for her husband to come in.

15. That afterward for performance of this good service about the said woman,
he sent for a Fee of three shillings four pence.

16. That November 5. 1639. he would suffer no Sermon to be preached, unless
out of the Collection for the Poor he might have a Fee of thirteen shillings
and four pence, but finding the Collection to be small, he took ten shillings.

17. That this last November 5. 1640. he would neither preach himself, nor
suffer any other to preach.

18. That he and his wife having for many years lived asunder with much
obloquie, he keeps company with diverse women suspected of incontinency.

19. That he has since his being Vicar of the said Parish much opposed the
Lecture, which without intermission has for many years been continued in the
West end of the said Church, called the Old or Lower Church, (early in the
morning on the Lords day) not suffering any one to preach the same, unless he
the said Vicar might have extraordinary hire for permitting of it, viz. about
forty pounds at one time, and twenty pounds at another time, and diverse other
sums at other several times, and at this present twenty pounds a year, and
yet not contented therewith, he threatens to arrest the present Lecturer,
unless he may have his unjust demands satisfied.

20. That he deteineth and keeps away diverse books belonging and
appertaining to the said Church.

21. That many times in receiving his own exacted Fees for Burials, he has
also received Duties due to the Church wardens for the use of the Poor of the
said Parish, and detained them to his own use.

The proofs of such of the foresaid Articles as were more fully and largely
opened in Parliament by several witnesses, follow here.
TO the first Article concerning his frequent and most lowly bowing to his
Idol-altar, (set up by himself and with his own hands in a most proud and
insolent manner) both at his approaches to it, departure from it, and passing
by it, there was proof much more than enough to to testify and clear it.

To the Articles of his exacting unjust and excessive Fees for Burials; it was
proved, that he at one time exacted, would have, and had before hand five
pounds for a Sermon, at the Funeral of one Master How, an ancient Parishioner;
but Master Finch hearing that there were gloves given to diverse, sent presently
for gloves for himself and his man, just about the time that the Corpse was
going to Church, but because there was none left, he was promised to have them
the next morning, yet notwithstanding because he had them not at that present,
he caused the Church doors to be shut up, made the Corpse and people stand a
great while in the street, at last letting them into the Church, yet
disappointed them of their Sermon, and yet kept the five pounds to himself,
without restitution of any part thereof.

It was further testified by another Parishioner who was made Executor to one
Master Darneton, a young man in the Parish, who upon his Deathbed desired that
Doctor Holdsworth should make his Funerall-Sermon, and to avoid all
differences, the Deceased very frankly gave M. Finch a legacy of forty
shillings, and a mourning Gown, conditionally, that he would give way for
Doctor Holdsworth to preach, but Master Finch not content with what the
Deceased left him in his will, he afterward understanding that the Doctor had
five pounds, and a mourning Gown left him as a Legacy, and his Legacy was not
so much; he again sends for the Executor, and demands of him, what he would
give him to let Holdsworth preach, as for the forty shillings legacy, that he
should not hinder him of, but ^ow he came upon new terms, to know what he
would give him, for he saw no reason but he should have as much to give way as
the other had for preaching, for the Pulpit was his; so that he did enforce the
Executor to keep the Corpse from Monday till Saturday, before it could be
buried, by reason of Master Finch his unreasonable demands, for he told this
Executor, and others, that had the like occasions with Master Finch, as was
then testified, That his Pulpit was his Shop, whereby he got his living, and
that he must improve his Shop to the utmost advantage, as well as they did
theirs: and further saying, That no Holdsworth should come into his Pulpit, to
eat the bread out of his mouth, for what was Holdsworth more than he? so that
in conclusion, he did cause the said Executor to disburse, to give him
satisfaction, to the value of thirteen pounds five shillings six pence, most of
it in money, and the rest in linen cloth, and notwithstanding the said Master
Finch performed no office at the funeral himself, but spent his time in the
Tavern at the same time, when the funeral was performed: and this was proved
to be his usual manner, to get his first demands fully into his hands, and
then by one trick or another to come over them again for a new supply, or else
there should be no ground broke nor Church-doores opened. These instances were
thought sufficient for the proof of this Charge though the Parishioners had
diverse more notorious prankes of his of this kind, and were then and there
ready prepared with witnesses to have testified them all.

To the Articles concerning his superstitious affection to the Surplice and
other Popish practices, it was testified (and further could have been proved
than was desired or could by time be permitted) that he usually preached in his
Surplice, wore it when he went about the Parish in the annual perambulation,
through the streets, and was so Popishly affected and addicted to it, that even
since his lying under the just condemnation of these things, he refused, on
last Ascension day, 1641. to accompany the Parishioners in their Perambulation,
because they would not suffer him to wear the Surplice, and read the Epistles
and Gospels at the stinted places and corners of the streets, as formerly. And
that he never read or pronounced the Name Jesus in either of the Sacraments,
Epistles, or Gospels, or in Sermons or Prayers, (though then on his knees) but
he most constantly ducked lowly at it; and in his Canonical prayer, before his
Homilies, (for all his preaching was continually a mere reading out of a
written book) he familiarly used to praise God for the Saints departed, but
especially for the Virgin Mary the Mother of God.

As for the Article touching his drunkenness, besides his accustomed practice
of that beastly sin, at other ordinary times; it was testified by very good
witness, that has seen him drunk on the Lords day, and at another time,
twice drunk in one and the same Lords day; first in the morning, and then laid
to sleep, and drunk again before night. Also another Parishioner being
employed to take order for the burial of a friend of his in the said Parish,
for which Master Finch (as his custom was) would have his morey before hand,
which he accordingly received, being 3 pounds, 13. s. upon the payment whereof,
the said Parishioner demanded on acquittance, but Master Finch and his man were
so drunk that they could not write, so that the party was fain to call
witness that it was paid, and very needful too, for the next day Master Finch
sent his man to demand the same money again, who answered, he had paid it
already the day before, and would not pay it twice. Some few days after the
Churchwardens came to the Parishioner for their Duties, which Master Finch had
received in the former sum, but Master Finch would not pay them any.

It was further also testified to full satisfaction of the Parliament, that he
was so drunk when he was fetched from a Tavern to give the Sacrament to a
dying woman, that he was fain to be led by the arm to the house, that there he
was not able to pronounce the Lords Prayer, but was out twice or thrice in
saying it, that he was not able to rise off from his knees without help, nor
being up to sit down; that he delivered the Elements without Consecration; And
also desiring the people to go forth of the room, he came to the dying woman,
to whom using many unfit gestures, and stroaking her cheeks, he said, That if
she would confess to him all her secret sins, then he would love her. The
woman thereupon, calling out as loud as she could for some to come in, they
found her much troubled in mind, and unsatisfied, by reason of Master Finch
his ill carriage and behavior, and therefore desired that the Sacrament might
be given her again by some other Minister, but she died before it was effected;
and Master Finch was fain to be led to the next Alehouse (as he desired) where
he lay all that night, and the next morning this wretched man was so
shameless, as to send for a fee of three shillings four pence for that his
most wicked and abominable service.

As for his Sermons on November 5 the Popish Powder Plot, it was testified
also, that one year he would permit no Sermon at all. Another year he would
permit none unless he might have a share of thirteen shillings four pence out
of the Collection for the Poor, which being but small, he took ten shillings
for his own use. Another year he preached himself, and in his Sermon (as it
was fully proved) he said words to this effect, That the Plotters in that
business were but a few male content persons, and that they desired at their
death, that this Act might be forgotten, and he thanked God it was so almost,
and he hoped it would be quite forgotten.

It was also testified that for the Sermons at seven of the clock, on Sabbath
day mornings in the Lower Church, he had of the Parish forty pounds to let
Master Davis come in, and about fifty five pounds when Master Brocket came in,
besides other sums at other times.

To the Article touching his incontinency, it was testified by the Coachman
that carried him and two others of his deboist Comrades of his own Coat and
condition, together with three women to Hamersmith, where being arrived in an
house fit for their intentions, every one chose his woman, and Master Finch his
mate (as the witness delivered it) being the fattest of the three, and this
Coachman being called up into the room unto them, saw them all use these women,
in his presence, with most vile and obscene gestures, upon beds, even to the
utmost of what hands could do under their clothes, but farther he could not
testify, for they had time enough in his absence; but bringing them back
again late into London, he set them down at Newgate, where he left them
altogether plotting what excuse the women should use to their husbands, and it
was resolved, that one must say, she had been at a woman's labor, another had
been to see a friend that was sick, etc.

It was also testified, that he was a constant frequenter of the company of two
men's wives, after a most familiar manner, both in City and Country journies,
namely one Mistress Valentine at the Chequer at Dowgate, and one Mistress
Stevenson at Christ's Hospital, and that he alone was seen at Barnet In their
two companies only, coming out of an Inn in a Coach. Also that one night,
Master Finch his wife (from whom he has wilfully lived apart these seven
years, whose company he could not abide) coming to the said Stevensons house
in Christ's Hospital a foresaid (where also was his frequent rendevous day and
night) to ask her husband for some maintenance for her self and children, he
most furiously and desperately drew his knife at her, whereat she ran out of
the house, and he after her with his knife in his hand, but she having
recovered the Cloister, he, it seems, beat her down forward, threw his knife
at her, and there she was found on the ground, crying out for help, her hat
beaten off from her head, and her hair all about her ears; whereat, he running
in again, she was forced thus to depart for the present.

It was also testified, that a Kinswoman of Mistress Valentines coming to see
her at the Chequer aforesaid, and M. Finch being there came to her, used many
flattering words and complements to her, and taking her at advantage, in a
private room, persuaded her to lie with him, which she refusing, he still
persisted in this his wicked and lustful desire, and at last showed her what
was most shameful to be seen or spoken of, and would by violence have had the
use of her body, which she still vehemently refusing, and he perceiving that
she would call out for help against him (as she told him she would, if he
would not forbear) he opened the door and called for a Chamber Pot, by which
means the door being opened, she ran out from him, and coming out of the
room, he affirmed and swore to Mistress Valentine, That this Puritan slut he
could not convert her. About two years after this also, the said party going
again to see her kinswoman Mistress Valentine, there she met Master Finch again,
who after many flattering complements, told her that if she would love him, he
would make her a Lady; and Mistress Valentine her good Cousin said thereupon to
her, That he might well do it, for he was very likely to be made a Bishop: this
was testified by the said Kinswoman her self publicly in the House of
Commons, to the great admiration of all then present that heard it.

It was further testified against him, that being in company he should affirm
and say, This point of Doctrine, I have preached and will preach it, and that to
all eterntty, that that man which has a handsome woman to his wife, and he were
jealous without a cause, that it was lawful for her to make him a Cuckold, and
rather than be should not be made one, he would ride an hundred miles to do it
him self.

It was also testified by another Parishioner that he frequented an house in
Christ's Church Parish, where two Sisters lived, married women, both very comely
for person, but not without great cause strongly suspected of incontinency; who
for their misbehaviours were forced to shift their dwelling from Parish to
Parish. And one of these women dying a while after in another Parish, she was
so rotten with the foul disease, and loathsome, that every one that knew thereof
was afraid to come nigh her; and she her self was not ashamed to tell thereof.
And (it is reported) that when she was coffened, her neck was so rotten and
perished with the said disease, that her head fell off from her body.

It was yet farther testified by the Porter of Christ's Hospital, that in the
time of Master Finch his lying at Master Stevensons house, as aforesaid, the
said Porter by his office attending the gates of the Hospital, observed Master
Finch most frequently to go out and come in, at very unseasonable hours in the
night with the said Master Stevensons wife, which the Porter had diverse times
told Master Stevenson himself of, fairly and privately, but no amendment
following, and the Porter still being disquieted, to let in Master Finch, etc.
to Master Stevesons house, one night after, or rather morning, about 2. or 3.
of the clock, he and Mistress Stevenson coming in, and the Porter thereby much
discontented to rise out of his bed at such hours, he began to wrangle and
grumble, whereupon words passing between them, and Master Finch in his
sweet-hearts company especially, impatient to bear them, fell very foul on the
said Porter, abused him in terms, caught him by his beard (which he wore very
broad and long, almost down to his girdle) and by violence and rage pulled
agreat piece off his beard from his chin, whereupon the Porter had him before
Sir Martin Lumley, then one of the City Justices, to bind Master Finch to his
good behavior, which he was never able to do, nor any else, as yet.

These and many mo such like foul and scandalous things have been most
plenteously proved against the said Master Finch: and after all, it being
demanded what answer he could make for all these things, he desired some time
to make answer, and to plead by Counsel, but it was replied, These things were
matters of fact, and not of Law; and therefore he knew at present whether they
were true or no: but he being silent, command was to withdraw; some other
witnesses were heard also, which spoke to the same effect, which for brevity
sake we omit, for if we should present you with all his extorted exactions for
Burials and Baptizings and other particular enormities of his life, it would
fill a volume, for almost every one he had to deal with in these kinds, in the
Parish, has experience what an heavy burden he has been to the Parish.

The whole Grand Committee for Religion receiving abundant sat is faction in
the truth hereof, and all the rest of the Articles forementioned, accordingly
proceeded to an unanimous Vote of his graceless and palpable guilt in them
all, and he now lies under the just censure of the House: yet (strange to be
spoken) this most impious and impudent men, like a right atheistical son of
Belial, puts on a whores forehead to this day, carries himself most proudly
and insolently (as ever before) amongst the Parishioners, officiates when he
lists, in his own shameless person, being still very vexatious to them; yea,
committing many of the foresaid condemned Superstitions, wicked and drunken
practices afresh, without any blushing or the least sign of relenting: in this
case much worse than wicked Achab, who though he had sold himself to work
wickedness, as the Scripture says, yet when the hand of God was on him, and a
judgment threatened against him, it is said, he humbled himself before the
Lord: but this most wicked and ungodly man, quite void of grace, yea, of common
civility, like his brazen-faced mother of Rome, (one of whose bold brats he in
heart and practice also, in a great measure shows himself) carries about with
him an unblushing whores forehead, and jets up and down with strange arrogance.

And indeed his most unbridled pride has principally occasioned the
publication of these his so foul and enormous carriages, and if he be not quite
past shame, it may serve a little to pull down his plumes, and tame his
insolences. For as yet, like wicked, yet foolish Agag, he falsely persuades
himfelfe, that the bitterness of sorrow or smart is past and gone. But I trust
the Lord will in mercy to his poor and too-too long abused Church, arise by our
Honorable Worthies in Parliament, and have mercy on Sion, in the ruin of all
her impious and implacable enemies, and all those rotten-hearted, scandalous
Baals Priests, and pay them home the just wages of their insufferable
iniquities and impieties, who have most miserably overspread, and almost quite
poisoned the whole Kingdom with their Popish and profane abominations; of whom
and their just reward the Lord himself complains, and testifies against them
by the Prophet, Ier. 23.9. My heart breaks within me, because of the Prophets
all my bones shake, etc. Which may (by lamentable experience to this Kingdom)
be properly applied to our wicked Prelates, and their scandalous and idolatrous
Priests; for when such men as these have been winkt at, nay, countenanced; and
on the other hand, such a number of able, heavenly, soul-directing Teachers,
for a few indifferent Ceremonies (as the imposers themselves acknowledged they
were) shall be suspended, censured, fined, imprisoned, banished, undone, etc.
as if power were put into their hands, only, to pull down the Throne of
Christ, and to advance the Kingdom of Satan.

And who they are, that have been the great Engineers to hinder the flourishing
of the Gospel in England, (whatsoever their flourishing pretenses have been) or
if ever it possibly can flourish so long as such stand, let wisdom judge,
Ierem. 23.10, 11. For the Land is full of Adulterers, and because of swearing
the Land mournes, the pleasant places are dried up, and their course is evil,
and their force is not right. For, both the Prophet and the Priest are
profane; yea, in mine house have I found their wickedness, says the Lord.
And again, verse 14, 15. I have seen also, in the Prophets of Icrusalem, an
horrible thing; They commit Adultery, and walk in lies; They strengthen also
the hands of evil doers, so that none can return from his wickedness: For
from the Prophets of Jerusalem, is wickedness gone forth into all the Land.
They are all of them unto me as So dome and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorah.
Therefore, thus says the Lord of Hosts concerning the Prophets; Behold, I will
feed them with Wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall etc.

O Lord, to whom vengeance belongs; O God to whom vengtance belongs; Lift
up thy self, thou Judge of the Earth, and render a reward to the proud. But do
good, O Lord, in thy good pleasure unto Sion, and build thou again the walls of
Ierasalem. Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

