blazon or coat of arms
By the Parliament. A PROCLAMATION FOR THE Discovery and Apprehending of CHARLES
STVART, and other Traitors his Adherents and Abettors.
WHereas CHARLES STUART Son to the late Tyrant, with diverse of the English and
Scottish Nation, have lately in a Traiterous and Hostile manner with an Army
invaded this Nation, which by the Blessing of God upon the Forces of this
Commonwealth have been defeated, and many of the chief Actors therein slain and
taken prisoners; but the said Charles Stuart is escaped: For the speedy
Apprehending of such a Malicious and Dangerous Traitor to the Peace of this
Commonwealth, The Parliament does straightly Charge and Command all Officers,
as well Civil as Military, and all other the good People of this Nation, That
they make diligent Search and Enquiry for the said Charles Stuart, and his
Abettors and Adherents in this Invasion, and use their best Endeavors for the
Discovery and Arresting the Bodies of them and every of them; and being
apprehended, to bring or cause to be brought forthwith and without delay, in
safe Custody before the Parliament or Council of State, to be proceeded with
and ordered as Justice shall require; And if any person shall knowingly Conceal
the said Charles Stuart, or any his Abettors or Adherents, or shall not Reveal
the Places of their Abode or Being, if it be in their power so to do, The
Parliament does Declare, That they will hold them as partakers and Abettors of
their Traiterous and Wicked Practices and Designs: And the Parliament does
further Publish and Declare, That whosoever shall apprehend the person of the
said Charles Stuart, and shall bring or cause him to be brought to the
Parliament or Council of State, shall have given and bestowed on him or them as
a Reward for such Service, the sum of One thousand pounds; And all Officers,
Civil and Military, are required to be aiding and assisting unto such person
and persons therein. Given at Westminster this Tenth day of September, One
thousand six hundred fifty one.

Wednesday the Tenth of September. 1651.
ORdered by the Parliament, That this Proclamation be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.


