THE PARLIAMENTS Directions to the Protestants in Ireland.
Concerning the taking of the Oa^h of Allegiance, in Confirmation, and Trial
of their Loyalty toward the King, and Kingdoms.
J K. K. Do with firm faith believe and profess all and singular the
Articles and points which the Catholic and Apostolic common Church believes
and confesses, and to my dying, will by Gods grace maintain and defend the
same Faith against all Secularies, Jews, Atheists, and Enemies whatsoever,
even with the loss of life, estate and goods.

I do now also, and in my Conscience sincerely believe and acknowledge, King
CHARLES to be my Sovereign Lord, and King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland; whose privilege and Prerogatives, and attribute Regal due unto his
Imperial Crown and Royal Dignity. I promise and vow to God, to maintain and
defend by Gods grace, against all evill-affected persons; be they of what
Country or Sect soever, even with the loss of life, estate and goods.

I promise and vow likewise, to be true to my poor oppressed Country, the
Kingdom of Ireland, with the loss of life, goods and estate: and will
endeavor to free it from the bondage and grievous government, and the
oppressions under which it groaneth, by the means of Evill-officers and
Ministers of Justice: contrary to His Majesty's gracious intentions.

I do vow and promise to wrong no Catholic, nor challenge any state of
Lands: if so they be possessed of it, before the Plantation begun in the
year, 1610. nor any Lands possessed by any of them; since then he or they
bought it or purchased it for money otherwise.

Item, further promise and vow to make no difference of dispacity betwixt the
mere Irish, and them of the Pale, or betwixt the Irish, and the new Irish; be
they of what standing, calling, or quality whatsoever: so they be Professors of
the holy Church, and Maintainers of the Countries, Liberties. All this, and
every of the precedent Articles. I the aforesaid K. K. do promise, vow, and
swear to maintain, and cause all others, over whom I shall have power to
maintain and defend inviolate by Gods grace: so God help all these of his
Gospel.

FINIS.
London, Printed for I. H. 1641.


