AN ORDINANCE with several PROPOSITIONS Of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in
Parliament,

For the speedy raising of Forces by Sea and Land, to reduce the Town of
Newcastle to obedience to the King and Parliament.

In the recovery whereof all persons are so much interessed, that it is hoped
none will be backward to contribute their best assistance toward the
performance thereof, that so Coals may again be bought at an easy rate, to
the great benefit of the poor as well as rich, according to true intent and
meaning of this Ordinance.

Die Lunae, 5 Jun. 1643.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Ordinance
with the Propositions shall be forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for I. Wright in the Old Bailey, June 8. 1643.

AN ORDINANCE with sundry PROPOSITIONS OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament.
WHereas the greatest part of this Kingdom, and more especially the City of
London and most Maritine Towns are served and furnished with Coals from the
Town of Newcastle upon Tine, and the adjacent parts of Northumberland, and the
Bishopric of Durham, which being now kept by Forces consisting of Papists,
and other ill affected persons, under the command of the Earl of Newcastle,
the City of London and all the greatest part of this Kingdom are like to
suffer very deeply in the want of that Commodity so absolutely necessary to the
maintenance and support of life, and which is like to be of very dangerous
consequence in the influence which it may have upon the necessities of the
meaner sort. And whereas it is also very dangerous to adventure shipping within
the command of the Forts there erected, as being subjected to a surprise, and
like enough to be made use of against the safety of the kingdom, if they
should make their voyage only manned as usually for trade; And how great use
has been made of the port of Newcastle, to the danger of the kingdom, since
it came into the hands of the said Earl is manifest to all. It is therefore
hoped that there are none that will be backward to contribute their best
assistance toward the reducing of that place, in the recovery whereof all men
are interessed, and the rather for the opportunity that is now given, if it be
speedily undertaken, and effectually prosecuted. And whereas in obedience to an
Order of the House of Commons the Committee of the Navy communicated their
opinions in writing to the Lord Major of London by what means the said City
may be furnished with Coals, with desire that his Lordship would impart the
same to the Aldermen of that City, or such other persons as his Lordship should
think fit, which Writing with the Petition and Propositions of diverse Citizens
of London, were read at a Common Council, held at Guildhall in London she
twentieth of this month, where the said Court taking all the premises into
their serious consideration did conceive that this great work might be
effected if both Houses of Parliament should think fit to approve of these
ensuing Propositions. Wherefore the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
upon mature'd liberation had of the Propositions following, and well approving
the good affections of the City of London to the public service, and of all
such other well affected persons as shall subscribe and pay in any considerable
sum of money according to the ensuing Propositions, for and toward this
great and necessary undertaking, do Order and Ordain in manner and form
following: And first the House of Commons do consent to nominate ten of their
own Members, And the Lords and Commons do order and ordain, that the
Common Council of London shall nominate a like number for the City, to be as a
Committee jointly to manage all affairs touching this Adventure, and to call
to their Assistance in this service such of the out-Ports or others as they
shall think fit.

2. That the said Committee so to be nominated shall have power to make
Sub-committees among themselves, and to give them such instructions as they
shall think fit, being pursuant and agreeable to these Propositions, and to
prepare books for such subscriptions to appoint persons from time to time in
all places to take the same, and to receive all such moneys as shall be
subscribed and paid in according to such subscriptions, and to return or issue
out the same to such persons, and in such manner as the said Committee or the
greater number of them shall direct.

3. That all moneys to be advanced upon these Propositions shall be paid to
such Treasurers as the said Committee shall appoint, and shall be only
employed by the said Committee for the reducing of the said Town of Newcastle,
and the said parts adjacent till the same be effected, and to none other
purpose whatsoever.

4. That they shall be accountable to such persons as shall be appointed by both
Houses; That every Owner or Master, of or in any Ship or Ship trading for
Coler, Salt or Glass, to the Towns of Newcastle, Sunderland or Blithe or to any
place adjacent now under the power of the E. of Newcastle, and not subscribing
one half of his stock which he has in any such Ship or Ships, to these
Propositions, within one month after these Propositions shall be agreed upon
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, shall pay to the persons to be
appointed by the said Committee to receive the same, for every Chaldron of
Coals he shall so buy there the sum of four shillings, and for every weigh of
Salt two shillings, and for every case of Glass one shilling more then shall
be paid by any Adventurer that shall buy there any of the said Commodities of
Coals, Salt, or Glass; The said payments to be made to the use of the
Adventurers upon Accounts, and to continue till the said Adventurers shall be
reimbursed, according to the ensuing propositions, and no longer.

5. That every person within the said City of London, or ten miles thereof, or
within such of the out-Ports or Cities, or dwelling upon any navigable River,
or within five miles of any of them which have or shall have their Coals from
any of the said Towns of New Castle, Sunderland, Blithe, or places adjacent,
which shall not subscribe to these Propositions within one month after the
same shall be agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament, a sum of Money at
least proportionable to the Coals he annually expends in his house in the
judgment of the said Committee (such as are not Subsidie-men only excepted)
shall pay ten shillings for every Chaldron of Coals more then others shall pay
that do subscribe, the same Paiments to be made and collected to the use of
the Adventurers upon account, in such manner as the said Committee shall
appoint, and to continue until the said Adventurers shall be reimbursed
according to the ensuing Propositions, and no longer.

6. That if any Subscriber shall use any fradulent or indirect means to furnish
any other person with Coals, that shall not subscribe within the time before
limited, such Subscriber shall forfeit the benefit of his own Subscription, and
both parties shall be liable to such further punishment as shall be inflicted
by both Houses of Parliament.

7 That no person shall be permitted to sell Coals in London, or any other port
or place, which is or shall be furnished with Coals from the said Towns of
Newcastle, Sunderland, Blithe, and places adjacent, unless such as shall
subscribe a sum proportionable to their trade, in the judgment of the said
Committee.

8. That two parts of the estates of Papists, not Delinquents, and all the
estates of such as are declared to be Delinquents, by the Ordinance of
Sequestration within the County of Northumberland, the County and Bishopric of
Durham, and in the Town and County of New castle upon Tyne, shall be
forthwith sequestered, and all such Moneys as shall be raised thereby, shall be
also pad to the use of the said Adventurers upon account, until the said
Adventurers shall be reimbursed, according to the ensuing Propositions, and no
longer.

9. That all such Customs, Duties, and Imposts as have been usually paid, or
shall be thought fit to be paid by any Ordinance of Parliament, for Coals,
Salt, and Glass, within the said Town and County of New Castle, the said
Town of Sunderland, Blithe, and the said parts adjacent, shall be paid to the
use of the said Adventurers upon account as aforesaid. That the said Committee
shall have power to propound all Officers for the Land-service of this design
to the Lord General for his approbation of them, who is hereby desired
forthwith to grant Commissions to such Officers so approved of by him,
according to the quality of their several commands.

10. That the said Committee shall have power to propound all Officers for the
Sea-service of this design to the Commissioners of the Admiraltie, and the
Earl of Warwick, for their approbation, and the said Earl of Warwick is
desired for the present to give Commissions and Instructions to the several
Sea-Officers so approved of according to the nature of their several
Employments.

11. That all the Forces that shall be raised by Land and Sea for this
Expedition, shall be ordered and disposed by the said Committee, yet so as the
said Land Forces shall be subject to the command and control of the Lord
General and the Lord Fairfax, and the Sea Forces subject to the command and
control of the Earl of Warwick, in such manner as shall most conduce to this
present Expedition.

12. That when the said Towns of Newcastle, Sunderland, and Blithe, and the
parts adjacent, now under the power of the Earl of Newcastle, shall be freed
from that grievous oppression, and reduced under the authority of King and
Parliament, then it shall be lawful for the said Committee to pay or cause to
be paid to every Subscriber, for every twenty shillings which he shall have
paid in for this service, one pound six shillings and eight pence, in such
manner as in the ensuing Article is expressed, and so after that rate for a
greater sum: And for the further encouragement to this Design, It is ordered
and ordained, That until the said. Towns of Newcastle, Sunderland, Blithe, and
the said parts adjacent be reduced, the Adventurers shall have Interest at 8.
per Cent. for their principal Adventure.

13. That all such persons as within London, or within five miles thereof,
shall subscribe and pay in a third part of the sum subscribed within ten days
after these Propositions shall be agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament,
and another third part within twenty eight days of such subscription, and the
last third part within fifty six days after such subscription. And all such
persons as in any other Port, City, or Town, shall subscribe and pay in a
third part of the sum subscribed to such persons as shall be appointed by the
said Committee to receive the said Subscriptions and Moneys within ten days
after these Propositions shall be delivered to the head Officers or head
Officer of such Port, City, or Town, and shall pay in the other two parts as
aforesaid, shall be repaid their Moneys together with their proceed by equal
proportions: And all such persons as shall subscribe after the said space of
ten days, and pay in their Moneys as aforesaid, shall be paid in such order as
they shall subscribe.

FINIS.

