Resolutions of Parliament, touching Delinquents and their Compositions.
Die Mercurii, 14 Martii, 1648.
Resolved by the Commons assembled in Parliament,

THat Sir John Stowel Knight, be proceeded against for life in the upper Bench.

Resolved, etc. That David Jenkin be proceeded against for a trial for life;
and that the Judges in that Circuit in Wales, be required to proceed to an
Indictment against him, in the proper county in the next Assizes.

Resolved, etc. That Charles Stuart, eldest Son to the late King, James Stuart,
second son of the late King, the Duke of Buckingham, John Earl of Bristol,
William Earl of Newcastle, Sir William Widdrington, George Lord Digby, Sir
Philip Musgrave, Sir Marmaduke Langdale, Sir Richard Greenvile, Sir Francis
Doddington, Sir John Culpepper, Sir John Byron, the Earl of Worcester, and Sir
John Winter, and all such persons as have been acting in the plotting,
designing or assisting the Rebellion in Ireland, shall be proscribed and
banished as Enemies and Traitors to the Commonwealth, and shall dye without
Mercy, where ever they shall be found within the limits of this Nation, and
their Estates shall be confiscate, and forthwith employed for the use of the
Commonwealth.

Resolved, etc. That Sir John Winter shall have convenient time to depart into
any foreign parts.

Die Sabbathi, 17 Martii, 1648.
Resolved, etc. That Col: Matthew Boynton, late Governor of Scarborough, sir
John Morley, and Col: Leveson, late Governor of Dudly Castle, shall be
proscribed and banished as Enemies and Traitors to the Commonwealth, etc.

Resolved, etc. That all other Delinquents, Members of this Commonwealth (not
comprehended in the former exceptions) shall be admitted to compound (except
Papists in Arms, for whose Compositions, rules are not yet agreed upon.)

Resolved, etc. That the time for the coming in of all Delinquents within the
Land, whose habitations are within eighty miles of London, and for the filing
of their petitions and particulars, shall be before the twentieth day of April
next; and for all others residing at a further distance, before the third day
of May.

Resolved, etc. That the times for perfecting the Compositions of such
Delinquents, that is to say, for submitting to their Fines, and paying one
Moiety, and securing the remainder at three months day, shall be six weeks
from the respective days before limited for filing their Petitions and
Particulars.

Resolved, etc. That the time for the coming in of Delinquents not excepted,
and now beyond Seas, and out of this Land, shall be the first of June next, for
the filing of their petitions and particulars, and six weeks after for the
perfecting of their Compositions, as is before expressed.

Resolved, etc. That the Rents and Profits of all sequestered Estates, (except
the persons before excepted) growing due at our Lady day next, shall be stayed
and detained in the Tenants hands, until the first day of June next.

Resolved, etc. That the Estates of all such persons who shall neglect to
render themselves, and submit to their Compositions at the respective times
before limited, shall be confiscate, and converted to the use of the
Commonwealth, and no further allowance shall be thenceforth made out of the
same to the wife or children of any such Delinquent.

Resolved, etc. That Delinquents who were formerly excepted from pardon by
their particular Names or Titles, who have not been formerly, but now are
admitted to Composition (except such as have already compounded) shall pay one
full moiety of the true value of their estates.

Die Mercurii, 21 Martii, 1648.
Resolved, etc. That all such Delinquents as have been Members of either House
of Parliament, and all Judges, Officers toward the Law, Common or Civil, and
all Sergeants, Counselors and Attorneys, Doctors, Advocates, Proctors of the
Law, Common or Civil, and all Bishops, Clergymen, Masters and Fellows of any
College or Hall, in either of the Universities or elsewhere; and all Masters
of Schools or Hospitals, and also Humphrey Bennet Esquire Sir Edward Foord, Sir
George Vaughan, And all other the persons named in the fourth Qualification of
the Propositions sent to Hampton Court, to pay one third (except such of the
said persons as were included in any Articles whereof they have the benefit,
shall pay one full third part of the true value of their estates.

Resolved, etc. That all other persons Delinquents (not included in any the
former Qualifications) shall pay one full sixth part of the true value of their
Estates.

Resolved, etc. That if any person not yet sequestered, who conceives or doubts
himself to be liable to sequestration, for any thing said or done in relation
to the War, and was not publicly and personally engaged in the latter War,
shall come in and discover his case to the Commissioners for Compositions,
before the first day of July, 1649. (being not before such discovery,
judicially impeached and discovered for the same by any other) then such person
(if his case so discovered shall be adjudged liable to Sequestration) shall be
admitted to compound, and discharged of his Delinquency, paying one years value
for Land, and a twentieth part for his personal Estate: But in case any such
Delinquent be first judicially impeached and discovered by another, or shall
not be discovered by himself before the said first day of July, 1649. then he
shall not be admitted to compound at any lower rate then is appointed for the
Qualification under which he falls.

Resolved, etc. That no promissary oath shall be imposed upon Compounders as a
condition, without which they may not compound.

Resolved, etc. That all persons who have formerly compounded, and have
concealed or undervalued any part of their Estates, and shall themselves
discover it before the first day of June next, shall be admitted to compound
for the same, at the same rate for which they did compound for the other part
of their Estates. But if any such concealment or undervalue shall be hereafter
discovered by any other person, before the Delinquent himself discover the
same, and shall not be compounded for (within the times herein before limited)
according to the rates heretofore imposed by Order of Parliament upon such
discoveries, that then such estate which is concealed, or so much as appears to
be above the value compounded for, shall be forfeit to the Commonwealth.

Resolved, etc. That all such persons as have been engaged in the latter War,
and not in any former engagement against the Parliament, shall pay one sixth
part of the true value of their Estates (except such as are included in any
particular qualification before mentioned, who are to pay according to the
several rates in those qualifications.)

Resolved, etc. That all such persons as have been engaged in the latter War
against the Parliament, and have formerly compounded, and have not paid their
whole Fines, shall make good the remainder of their Fines according to their
agreement.

Resolved, etc. That all such persons as have been engaged in the latter War
against the Parliament, and have formerly compounded, shall pay one full sixth
part of their Estates, over and above their former Fines.

Resolved, etc. That all such Delinquents as shall perfect their Compositions
by the respective days herein before limited, whose Sequestrations have
continued upon their Estates to this day, shall be exempted from paying any
fifth and twentieth part.

Die Sabbathi, 19 Maii, 1649.
Resolved, etc. That all such Delinquents that have compounded at
Goldsmiths-hall, and their Compositions reported and allowed, and their
Ordinances passed both Houses of Parliament, shall pay in their Moneys
according to their Compositions, without expecting any further Review; And that
all those whose Reports are made, and Ordinances passed this House, and not
passed in the House of Peers, upon what pretense whatsoever, except for the
breach of Articles, shall pay in their Moneys as aforesaid, without expecting
any Review.

Die Sabbathi, 19 Maii, 1649.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Cases of all such
Delinquents, as were appointed by Order to be taken into consideration this
day, be referred to the Committee at Goldsmiths-hall, to hear and determine the
same, as the merits of their particular cases shall require, according to the
rules formerly given by this House.

Die Mercurii, 23 Maii, 1649.
Resolved upon the question by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Reports of all such Fines as have not past either House, shall be forthwith
drawn up, and presented to the Commissioners mentioned in the Act, Entitled,
(An Act prescribing certain times to Delinquents for perfecting their
Compositions) for their better approbation in order to a final discharge.

Resolved, etc. That the said Reports shall be made to the Commissioners in
order of time as they were set, and not otherwise.

Resolved, etc. That such Reports being made, and the Fines allowed and
confirmed by the said Commissioners, a final discharge shall issue forth to
every such Compounder, according to the authority and directions expressed in
the said Act; and if any Compounder shall not pay in his whole Fine within six
weeks after his Composition shall be allowed and confirmed as aforesaid, that
then he shall incur the full penalties expressed in the aforesaid Act.

Resolved, etc. That the Cases of all Delinquents Compounders, who have
Petitioned for Mitigation of their Compositions, and all such whose Reports are
not yet made to this House, and are ordered to be specially reported (except
all such as are secluded by the Vote made the 19 of May, 1649. shall be, and
hereby are referred unto the Commissioners at Goldsmiths-hall to hear and
determine all the said Cases; the said Commissioners proceeding therein,
according to the Rules for Compositions given them by the House, and according
to such Artiticles as the Compounder has just right unto, the said Articles
being allowed and confirmed by both or either House of Parliament.

Die Sabbathi, 26 Maii, 1649.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That all the Rents and Profits
of the Estates of all sequestered persons (not excepted from Composition) which
were due at Lady day last, or at any time since, and which shall be due on or
before the four and twentieth of June next, be retained in the hands of the
several and respective Tenants of the said sequestered Lands, until the first
day of July next; and that the Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents
of Goldsmiths-hall, be required forthwith to give notice hereof to all
Committees and Sequestrators in the country, that the same may be observed;
And that it be referred to the Committee at Goldsmiths-hall to give order, that
the Rents and Profits of the Estate of such Delinquents, as have or shall
perfect their Compositions before the first of July next, which were due on the
five and twentieth day of March last, or that are or shall be due at any time
from thence before the first of July next, may be paid to such persons so
perfecting the Compositions as aforesaid.

Die Mercurii, 27 Junii, 1649.
Ordered, That all the several and respective days limited in the former late
Act or Orders concerning Compositions with Delinquents at Goldsmiths-hall, with
the several Qualifications, as well for the continuance of Rents in Tenants
hands, as otherwise, be prolonged until the first of August next, and no longer.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the Resolutions of the
House touching Delinquents and their Compositions, be forthwith Printed and
published.

Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti.

London, Printed by John Field for Edward Husband, Printer to the Parliament of
England, 1649.


