RULES AND INSTRVCTIONS To the Muster-masters of the Army.
THat the Commissaries of the Musters, do attend the Commander in chief, for
his Warrant to Muster, He being to Assign the Time, and Place; And that the
whole Army be Mustered in one day (if possible) and the Officers and Soldiers
are hereby required to appear in their Arms.

2. That the Commissary at every muster, call over each Company, or Troop, by
the Rolls of the former Muster, and note how many Officers or Soldiers be
dead, absent, or Recruited since the last Muster, and betwixt every Muster,
view the persons Recruited, before he enter, and be admitted into the new List;
After which, at every Muster, the Commissary is to certify upon the Roll, the
day whereon such Recruits were entered to the Treasurer of the Army, Who is
hereby required to pay those Recruits, according to the time they have been
upon Duty, for no longer time then from their entertainment into the service.

3. That Musters be made once a month at the least, before Payments be made,
if it may be done without prejudice to the Designs of the Army, And that the
Muster-masters of Horse, and Foot, at the request of the Commissioners, or any
of them, (or in default thereof, such persons as the Commissioners shall
appoint) shall cause any particular Regiment, Troop, or Company, the Train,
or any part thereof, to be viewed, and Mustered, at such time, and place, as
the Commissioners by consent of the Commander in chief, shall think most
convenient: And the Commissaries of the Musters, and their Deputies, are to
admit no Soldier upon the Muster, but such as shall appear upon the Place,
before the beginning of our General Muster, in case he be absent through his
own neglect, or not attested for, in such manner as is hereafter expressed,
viz.

That the Physician, the Apothecary of the Army, and the Surgeon of the
Regiment, or Train, or any one of them, do give Attestation of all such sick,
or wounded Soldiers as lie within the Quarters of the Army, The Minister and
Constable of the Parish for such as are sick, wounded, or absent upon Service,
without the Quarters* which absent Soldiers from their Quarters, the
Commissaries of the Musters shall continue in their Rolls, and certify them
every Muster to the Treasurer, and the Treasurer to reserve their several
Pays, till such time as the parties themselves return to the Army, or
otherwise can receive their own Money, in such a way as (upon Certificate
thereof made) the Commander in chief shall approve of; The Muster-masters, are
hereby Commanded, that the Attestations after any General, or particular
Muster be limited to the third day, and the Attestations to be certified under
the hands of the persons Attesting upon the Roll of every Company, or Troop so
Mustered; Or in some sheet fairly written, and annexed to the said Roll.

4. That the Commissaries take care, that no Captain, or other superior
Officer be absent from the Army without License of the Commander in chief, nor
any other inferior Officer or Soldier without License of his Colonel or next
Officer commanding the Regiment; Nor any Officer, Soldier, or person belonging
to the Train, without License of the Lieutenant General of the Ordnance,
which Lycences, and every of them, are to express and Limit a reasonable time
for the return of such Officer or other persons (so Licenced) to the Army, and
subscribed by the respective Officers Authorized as aforesaid* And after entered
with the respective Muster-masters, who is hereby required, that every such
Officer, Soldier, or other person as shall be so absent, or beyond the time
allowed him, shall not pass the Muster during such absence, But shall Forfeit
his pay, and be further punished at the discretion of the Commander in chief.

5. That every Captain, Livetenant or Ensign of every Troop, or Company,
shall once in six days, give notice in writing under one of their hands, to
the respective Muster-Masters of the names, and surnames of every Officer, or
Soldier of the Troop or Company that shall absent himself from his Colors
for any time and how long, between Muster and Musters without such Attestation
or License as aforesaid; And if upon due proof of the Commissioners for the
Army, it appears that the Captain, Lieutenant, Ensign, or Cornet, do
wilfully neglect or refuse to Certify such absent Officers or Soldiers within
the time aforesaid, That then the Captain, Livetenant, Ensign, or Cornet,
shall each of them forfeit a days pay, to be charged out of their next pay;
Which said forfeitures shall be disposed of by the Commissioners, and
distributed by the Muster-Masters to the Inferior Officers or Soldiers of
such Troop or Company, or such other as shall give true Information of false
Musters, Neglects, or absence as aforesaid.

6. That at every Muster, the Muster-Masters shall take special notice of
defective Horse and Arms, and to represent them duly to the Commissioners
aforesaid, who are hereby authorized to dispose of such unserviceable Horses,
and unfixed Arms for the best advantage of the public service.

7. That every Captain, Captain Livetenant, Cornet, and other Officers of
Horse, shall Muster such spare led Horses as are allowed him upon the List, And
no Officer shall have pay for any more spare or led Horses then he shall Master
from time to time over and besides his Troop, nor any Trooper that is
unmounted at any Muster, shall be allowed more then twelve pence per diem for
so long time as he remains unmounted.

8. That the Muster-Master, nor any of his Deputies, or Agents employed under
him, shall directly, or indirectly take any Reward or Gratuity for Mustering or
making up of the Rolls of the Muster, upon pain of severe punishment to be
inflicted by Parliament or by a Council of War.

All which Rules and Instructions the Muster-Masters are enjoined to observe,
and the Commissioners for the Army are hereby authorized and required to
Supervise, and to the uttermost of their abilities see performed.

Io: Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husband. 1645.


