SIXTEEN PROPOSITIONS in Parliament.

Touching the manner and form for Church Government, by Bishops and the
Clergy of this Kingdom.

Whereunto is added. The opinion of the English Doctors and Divines at the
Synod at Dort, Concerning Episcopacy and Lay Elders.

Also the Names of 14. Divines more which are Added to the Synod by the House
of PARLIAMENT.

With an Order by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, touching the Government
of the Church.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for I. T. 1642.

THE ORDER For Church-Governement Read in the House of COMMONS. 1642.
Imprimis EVery several Shire of England and Wales, to be a several Circuit
or Diocese, for the Ecclesiasticke Jurisdiction, excepting Yorkshire which is
to be divided into three.

II. A Constant Presbytery of Twelve choice Divines to be selected in every
Shire or Diocese.

III. A Constant President to be established as a Bishop over this Presbytery.

IV. This Bishop in each Diocese to ordain, suspend, deprive, degrade,
excommunicate by: and with the consent and assistance of seven Divines of his
Presbytery then present and not otherwise.

V. The times of Ordination throughout the land to be four times every year,
viz. the first of May, the first of August, the first of November, and the
first of February.

VI. Every Bishop constantly to reside within his Diocese, in some one prime,
or chief City or Town within his Diocese, as i^ particular.

VII. Every Bishop to have one special particular Congregation, to be chosen
out of the most convenient for distance of place, from his chief residence,
and the Richest in value that may be had: where he shall duly preach unless
he be lawfully hindered, and then shall take care that his Cure be well supplied
by another.

VIII. No Bishop shall remove or be translated from the Bishopric which he
shall first undertake.

IX. Upon every death, or other avoidance of a Bishop, the King to grant a
Conge d'elire to the whole Clergy of that Diocese, and they to present three
of the Presbyters aforesaid, and the King to choose and nominate whom he please
of them.

X. The first Presbyters of every shire to be named by the Parliament, and
afterward upon the death or other avoidance of any Presbyter, the remaining
Presbyters to choose another out of the Parish Ministers of that shire, and
this to be done within one month next after such death or avoidance.

XI. No Bishop or Clergie-man to exercise or have any Temorall Office, or
seculir employment, but only, for the present, to hold and keep the probate
of wills, until the Parliament shall otherwise resolve.

XII. The Bishop once a year (at Midsummer) to summon a Diocesan Synod, there
to hear, and by general vote, to determine all such matter of scandal in
Life and Doctrine among the Clergymen, as shall be presented unto them.

XIII. Every three years, a National Sinod to be, which for persons shall
consist of all the Bishops in the Land, and of two Presbiters to be chosen by
the rest out of each Presbitery, and of two Clerks to be chosen out of every
Diocese, by the Clergy thereof.

XIV. This National Synod to make and ordain Canons of the Government of the
Church, but they not to bind until they be confirmed by Parliament.

XV. Every Bishop to have over and above the Benefice aforesaid, a certain
constant Rent allowed and allotted proportional to the Diocese wherein he is
to-Officiate, that is to say, every Presbyter to have a constant yearly profit
above his Benefice.

XVI. As for the Revenue of the Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, etc. a strict
Survey to be taken of all their rents and profits, and the same to be
represented at the beginning of our next Convention, and in the mean time no
Lease to be renewed, nor Timber to be felled.

The opinion of the English Doctors and Divines at the Synod of Dort,
concerning Episcopacy and Lay Elders.
WE thought not fit to content our selves with warrantable silence, but
consulting together what was fit to be done in delivering our opinions. We
jointly conclude that howsever our Church Discipline had not been Synodically
taxed, nor theirs avowed, yet it was co^venient for us, (who were assured in
our consience^s that their Presbyteriall Parity, and Laicall Presbytery was
repugnant to the Discipline established by the Apostles, and retained in our
Church to declare our Judgment.

We therefore prosessed and declared our utter dissent in that point, and
further showed that by our Savior a Parity of Ministers was never Iustituted,
That Christ ordained Twelve Apostles, and seventy Disciples; That the Authority
of those twelve was above the other; That the Church preserved this Order left
by our Savior. And therefore when the extraordinary Authority of the Apostles
ceased, yet their ordinary Authority continued in Bishops, who succeeded them
who were by the Apostles themselves left in the government of the Church to
ordain Ministers, and to see that they who were so ordained should preach no
other Doctrine; That in an inferior degree the Ministers who were governed by
Bishops succeeded the 70. Disciples, That this Order has been maintained in
the Church, from the time of the Apostls. And herein we appealed to the
Judgment of Antiquity, or of any learned man now living, if any could speak to
the contrary: To this our exception and allegations, not one word was answered
by any of the Synodiques either strangers or Provincialls. Moreover, in our
Private conversing with the most eminent of the Ministry there, we found
diverse times (upon oceasion of our declaring unto them the Order and manner of
our Church Government) that they were more ready to deplore then defend their
own estate, and wished rather, then hoped to be made like the flourishing
Church of England.

Ita Testamur. Georgius Caleton. Gualter Balcanquall John Davenant. Samuel
Ward. Thomas Goad.


The Lords added 14. Divines to the Bill sent to them about the Assembly of
Divines which were there.
DOctor Hamond of Penthurst in Kent. Master Lance of Saint Michaels Querne
London. Doctor Marsh of Saint Dunstones in Fleetstreet. Master Earl of
Wiltshire. Master Gibbins of Waltham. Master Prophet. Doctor Westfield Bishop
of Bristoll. Master Pierce of Northampton. Master Hodges of Kinsington. Master
Carter of Denton in Buckinghamshire. Master Lifur, Vicar of Sh^rly. Doctor
Jones Prebend of Winsor. Doctor Story*
An Order by the Lords and Commons in Parliament touching the Government and
Liturgy of the Church.
THe Lords and Commons do declare, they intend a due and necessary reformation
of the Government and Liturgy of the Church, and to take away nothing in the
one or the other, but what shall be evil, and justly offencive, or at least
unnecessary and burdensome, and for the better effecting hereof, speedily to
have consultation with godly and learned Divines, and because this will never
of it self attain the end sought therein, they will therefore use their
utmost endeavors to establish Learned and Preaching Ministers, with a good and
sufficient maintenance throughout the whole Kingdom, wherein many dark corners
are miserably destitute of the means of salvation, and many poor Ministers
want necessary provision.

Hen. Elsyng. Cler. par. D. C.

FINIS.

