THE RESOLUTION of both Houses of PARLIAMENT: Concerning The KINGS Majesty's
last Letter.
ALSO An ANSWER from His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX: TO Papers from the
Kingdom of Scotland, Concerning the desires of the Estates of Scotland, about
their Commissioners with the Kings Majesty.

WITH The Resolutions of the Soldiers of the Army; and their Reasons therein.

7ber 22 LONDON, Printed for R. B. Anno Domini. 1647.

AN ANSWER from His Excellency Sir THO: FAIRFAX, to Papers from the Kingdom
of Scotland.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
IN pursuance of the Commands I received for enquiring into the business of
the affront done to the Earl of Loutherdale, I sent Order to Collonell Whaley,
to make enquiry of it, and to return to me an account thereof, I have hereupon
received from him a Narrative under his hand, of the occasions, and whole
carriage of that business (so far as his own knowledge or present
Informations concerning it do extend,) which I have sent you here enclosed, I
desire it may be imparted to both Houses, for their present better satisfaction
concerning that business, and if this do not amount to their full
satisfaction therein, but that they think fit to have any further enquiry or
Examination to be had about it, I shall upon further notice of their pleasures
therein give Order to Collonell Whaley accordingly, I remain.

Your Lordships humble Servant THO. FAIRFAX.
Putney 17. Sep. 1647.
Toward the latter end of July last, when the King lay at Woburne, the Lord
Louderdale came one morning about four five of the Clock to the Court, lost no
time, but presently made a repair to His Majesty with whom he had much
private communication. It was commonly reported and generally believed that he
had come post all the night before. But whether so or not, I know not, but this
I know, that his early coming and hasty speaking with His Majesty at that
Conjuncture of time, when that unparalled violence was committed upon the
Parliament, and that treasonable engagement for fetching the King to London,
and preparations for a new War, were so violently prosecuted in the City,
drove the Court into fears, and Soldiers into jealousies, that his Lordship
came to endeavor the perfecting at Court that design, which was begun and
prosecuted in the City and that which made them (as I conceive the more jealous
of his intentions, was a common report, that his Lordship was a fomenter of the
Cities Tumults, or corresponding with the Authors of them. And indeed I find,
that the Soldiers had long entertained harsh toughts of the Lord louderdale
ever since his Relation, concerning His Majesty's going from Holdenby, made in
the Painted Chamber so much to the prejudice and disadvantage of the Army; and
his undertaking there to engage the whole Kingdom of Scotland, as one man
against the Army; they were plain with him at New Market, then minding him of
it, and told him he had publicly declared himself their enemy; therefore they
could not but think he came to do them, and the Kingdom ill Offices.

And had not my self and other Officers interposed, they had then at least
persuaded him away from the Court, but at that time the Soldiers endured his
stay, though with some regret; But his Lordships second appearance at that time
and manner as before relared, so kightened, (it seems their former jealousies
and exasperated them into such resolutions, as that diverse of them whose names
I protest I know not, not so much as one for present) being of several
Regiaments came about five of the Clock, next morning, to his Lordships Chamber
door, desired to speak with him, upon notice whereof, I hastened to the Earl
of Louderdales Lodgings, and the Earl of Denby with me: We found the Soldiers
and the Lord Louderdale reasoning very calmly together, his Lordship telling
them he was a public person, and they could offer him no affront, but it would
reflect upon the Kingdom of Scotland, and tend to devide the two Nations, the
Soldiers told him, they found he many times acted as a private person, as when
in the painted Chamber he undertook for all Scotland to engage as one man
against the Army, (which as they heard) he had no Commission for from the State
of Scotland, what they did was in Reference to the Lord Louderdale and not to
the Scottish Nation: and had his Lordship showed any Commission, Pass, or
Warrant, testifying his being sent or employed thither as a public person
from the States of Scotland, or their Commissioners, I conceive it might have
satisfied.

The Earl of Denbigh endeavored with all the Reasons and arguments he could
to persuade them to let the Earl of Louderdale stay, and not meddle with him,
and my self commanded some of them to their Guard, and the rest to be gone.

But from commanding, (the discontent being very high) I was enforced, for the
present to fall to persuading, I confirmed what the Earl of Denbigh before had
said to them, that it might be construed as an injury to the State of
Scotland, that it would be an offense to the Parliament of Englaad, and added
that it was a contemning of the Generals power, when they would not obey
Commands, and would expose both themselves, and me to danger, but all in vain;
for indeed that horrid violence, so lately done to the Parliament, and the
forced flight of the Members of both Houses (whereby that highest Authority of
the kingdom seemed to be at a stand) as it put both the City and most parts of
the Kingdom into a monstrous vein of confusion, and of distracted and
licentious workings, and weakened (for present) the hands of all men in
Authority under the Parliament, so it wanted not its influence of like nature
upon the Army and Soldiery throughout the Kingdom, so as Officers could not
(at that time) have the like command of their Soldiers, as formerly, nor as
now again, since the Authority of the Parliament has been vindicated, and both
Houses (through Gods blessing) restored to their Honor and Freedom:

For my own part (as affairs then stood) I am confident the Lord Denbigh will
witness it for me? I did my utmost endeavors to have gotten the Soldiers
away, I commanded, I persuaded, but neither commands nor persuasions would
prevail, the Soldiers being unanimously resolved his Lordship should not stay
at Court, nor speak again with the King for that time.

And therefore they would not depart till his Lordship was ready and willing to
take Coach.

When I saw I could not exercise my commanding power for the present in that
matter, nor by it, nor by persuasion divert them from their Resolutions: I
desired them at least to be civil toward his Lordship, which they performed,
not giving his Lordship an ill word, nor laying any hands upon him, Mr. Cheesly
his Lordships Secretary likewise seconded me, desiring the Soldiers to be
civil, and to give his Lordship leave to say his Prayers, the Soldiers
answered with all their hearts, they would join with him; but his Lordship
told them he had not the gift of prayer, he would not pray publicly, and
presently after went quietly to his Coach, the Soldiers attending him.

Thus have I given a true relation of the demeanor, and Carriage of that
toward the Lord Loutherdale at VVoburne, for the confirmation whereof I
refer my self to the Earl of Denbigh, who was present all the while, and in
testimony of the truth hereof, I have hereunto set my hand.

Edward Whaley.

Die Martis Sep. 21. 1647.
Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled.
That the Kings Majesty's Answer from Hampton Court presented to both Houses
Sep. 14. 1647. Is a denial to the Propositions presented to Him from both
Kingdoms.

FINIS.

