A Replication of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
TO His MAJESTY'S last Answer, sent by the Right Honorable the Earl of HOLLAND.
THE Lords and Commons in Parliament having taken into their consideration His
Majesty's Answer to their Hvmble Petition for Peace, delivered by the Earl of
Holland, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Sir John Holland, and the demands which he
is thereupon pleased to make concerning the present delivery of the Town of
Hull, the Magazine, the Navy, disavowing the Ordinance of the Militia, the
laying down of all Arms raised by Authority of the two Houses of Parliament
and adjourning themselves to some other place, do beseech His Majesty to
accept this their most humble, and just excuse that they cannot for the present
with the discharge of the trust reposed in them for the safety of the KING, and
Kingdom; yield to those demands of His Majesty; the Reason why they took into
their custody the Town of Hull, the Magazeen, and Navy, passed the Ordinance
of the Militia, and made preparation of Arms, was for the security of
Religion, the safety of His Majesty's Person, of the Kingdom, and Parliament,
all which they did see in evident, and eminent Danger, from which when they
shall be secured, And that the Forces of the Kingdom shall not be used to the
Destruction thereof, they shall then be ready to withdraw the Garrison out of
Hull, to deliver the Magazeen, and Navy, and settle the Militia by Bill, in
such a way as shall be Honorable, and safe for His Majesty, most agreeable to
the Duty of Parliament, and effectual for the good of the Kingdom, as they
have professed in their late Petition, and for Adjourning the Parliament: they
Apprehend no Reason for His Majesty to require it, nor security for
themselves to consent to it. And as for that Reason which His Majesty is
pleased to express, they doubt not but the usual place will be as safe for
His Royal Person, as any other, considering the full assurance they have of
the Loyalty, and fidelity of the City of London to His Majesty, and the
care which His Parliament will ever have to prevent any danger, which His
Majesty may justly Apprehend; besides the manifold conveniences to be had
there, beyond other parts of the Kingdom. And as for the laying down of Arms,
when the causes which moved them to provide for the Defense of His Majesty,
the Kingdom and Parliament, and shall be taken away, they shall very
willingly, and cheerfully forbear any further preparations, and lay down
their Force already Raised.

Die Jovis 28. July, 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament; That the Petition of the Lords and Commons
in Parliament delivered to His Majesty the sixteenth Day of July, together with
His Majesty's Answer thereunto, and a replication of the said Lords and
Commons, to the said Answer, Dated the 26 of July 1642. shall be Read in all
Churches and Chapels within the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, by
the Parsons, Vicars or Curates of the same.

John Brown Cleric. parliamentorum.

Printed at London, August 1. 1642.


