THE Resolution and Votes Of the Parliament of ENGLAND Concerning Major
General BROWN; FOR The bringing of Him to a speedy Trial; and the particulars
of the Charge to be exhibited against him, touching the late Insurrection and
Rebellion within the Counties of KENT and ESSEX. WITH The names of those
Alderman of the City of London, who are disabled from bearing any public
Office or Employment in the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. AND A Letter from the
Major General to diverse Citizens touching the Parliament and Army; a Message to
the Lord Major, and a Proclamation to be proclaimed at the Royal Exchange; with
several Proposals to the people of England.

April 10. London Printed for R. W. 2649.

The Resolution and VOTES Of the Parliament of ENGLAND Concerning Major
General Brown, for the bringing of him to a speedy Trial; and the particulars
of the Charge exhibited against him.
THe Commons of England assembled in parliament taking into their serious
consideration, the great prejudice and danger that might befall this City and
Nation, if the four Aldermen formerly committed to the Tower, viz. Alderman
Bunch Alderman Langham, and -- and the late Lord Major should be continued any
Office, or public employment after mature deliberation in reference thereunto,
Ordered, that the said four Aldermen, and the late Lord Major Reynaldson should
be disabled Aldermen of the City of London, or bear any Office or Employment in
this Commonwealth, and that the Common Council do proceed to the election of
new Aldermen in their steads.

And upon information given, that there was matter of proof sufficient for
convicting Major Genesis Brown, now prisoner to the parl. the House spent some
time in debate thereof, and at the last came to this Result:

Resolved by the Commons of England assembled in parliament, That the said
Major Genesis Brown shall be forthwith brought to his Trial.

Resolved. etc. That a Charge be drawn up against him, for the convicting him
of such crimes and misdemeanors, as shall be exhibited and made good upon
matter of proof; it appearing that there is sufficient testimony and witness,
viz. 1. That he has been a great Instrument in abetting and promoting the
last Rebellion in Kent, Essex, and several other parts of this Nation. 2 That
there had been several levyes of money, and that he had received the sum of
10000, li. for the better faciliating and carrying on of that trayterus work
and design, against the Parl. and people of England, etc. For these, and many
other crimes and misdemeanors, he is adjudged (in the name of the Commons of
England) to be brought to a fair and legal trial, but the time and place not
yet prefixed.

The honorable Court of parl. have also taken into their serious consideration,
the manifold burdens and oppressures of the people of this Nation, and have
debated a way for the prevention thereof for the future, and have ordered a
Declaration to be brought in, consisting of several particulars touching
Religion, the composing of all differences, the redressing of grievances, the
easing of the people from all burdens and heavy oppressures, and the settling of
this distracted church and commonwealth, as it shall stand enacted and
confirmed for the future; and to the end that the people of this Nation may
receive a little glimpse of their future freedom, I shall here insert the chief
heads of the groundwork of their Declaration, viz. 1 That the Ministry of the
Gospel shall not have their Tithes taken away, until another way be provided for
them as a sufficient maintenance. 2 That the Government to be established in
England, shall be the presbyterian government, and to be erected in such a
manner, that the purity and splendour of the Gospel may shine forth through out
all corners of this Nation. 4 That a way shall be provided for admission of all
such churches as tend to godliness, and the advancement of the sacred Word of
Jesus Christ and to be without disturbance. 4 That all such Ministers, or other
persons whatsoever, who shall endeavor to promote sin, and dishonor the
truth, shall be suppressed, and proceeded against according to the penalty of
their Crime or Fact. These, and other particulars, are now in debate, which
will suddenly be of maturity for the public view. The commons have also
ordered that the committee of the Army be required to bring in an Act, with
certain Rules how to take off the Monster of Nature ^ree quarter, and all other
charges from the people, and therefore resolved, that a committee should be
nominated to advise with his Excellency, and the Officers of the Army, in
relation thereunto.

A Letter from Scotland.
SIR,
THe Lord Ogleby (with the Gourdion Forces) has taken the field, with a
Resolution to fight Lieutenant General Lesley, and so to advance to the city
of Edinburgh, for the paying of arreares (as they say) due to the ^arliament,
descending from the late Marq. of Huntley, who as they suggest, was
traitorously murdered, and put to death by the Parl. of Scotland; from whence,
col. Hume, col. Sinclare, colonel Ennis, and seven other Regiments of Horse
and foot are marching to intercept them in their pass^ge, and to relieve Lieut.
Genesis Lesley, who is in a very sad condition, being environed on all sides; but
its feared, that before they can bave a conjunction, his forces will be
surprised: for by letters from the North it is advertized, that there has
already bin some action between them near Athull castle, and that the Lord
Ogleby with a considerable party of Horse and Foot marched very obscure in the
night time, beat up their quarters, and after a hot dispute killed many, took
diverse prisoners, and put the rest to flight: in which conflict the parliaments
Forces disputed the place with great gallantry, and fought from house to house,
until they had no place left for refuge.

In which fight, we hear, that the Lieutenant General received some hurt, and
is retreated toward Atholl, where his scattered Forces have rallied and
gathered into a Body, being resolved to stand another charge; and to that end,
are preparing to receive the Enemy; so that in few days you will hear of
further ^ction.

During which respite of time, if the aforesaid Regiments can come in to his
assistance, no doubt but he will be able to give a good accom^t of the speedy
vanquishing of this insulting and blood thirsty enemy; othe^wise, he is in
great danger of receiving a fatal Blow, which if faciliated will prove very
disadvantagious and destructive to the present proceedings, in relation to the
public affairs of this Nation. In the aforesaid conflict many were slain and
wounded, a List whereof I have sent you here enclosed.

A List of the number killed and taken at the Fight near Atholl.
Of Lieut Genesis Lesley's party slain. One Captain. Two Sergeants. 4 Corporals.
40 private Soldiers. 30 taken prisoners. Their whole Body of Horse and Foot
2500 Of the Lord Oglebyes party killed. One Lieut. col. Two Captains. Three
Sergeants. 20 private Soldiers. Many wounded. Their whole Body of Horse and
Foot 3600.
We hear that perfidious Middleton is joined with the Gourdons, which make them
very numerous: the Jockies are much divided, and vary exceedingly in their
consultations touching the Prince. There has been lately some commotions and
Risings at Anwicke in Northumberland, by the Moss troopers, and other
discontented Spirits, who dispersed several papers up and down the country,
declaring for Charles the second; but upon timely discovery, the young plants
were lopt and the flowers blasted in the Budding, by a party from hence, who
soon frustrated their Design, and forced them all to fly for refuge and
sanctuary.

Barwick 5 April 1649.

By an Express from Lancashire it is intimated, that many of colonel
Shuttleworths men are resolved not to disband, and are strongly fortifying
Clethero castle, they pluuder the country, and fetch in great store of
provision, but were met withal on Sunday last, by a party of Maj. Genesis
Lamberts Horse, who fought them, ^illed two, took five prisoners, the rest
being well mounted, escaped. Col. Morris (the late valiant Governor of
pontefract) and his party, being two in number, are surprised in Lancashire,
but not without blows, for they fought very resolutely before they were taken.

Monday April 9. Letters from Windsor say, that M. G. Brown is pleasant and
merry, and that he has sent a Letter to diverse Citizens, intimating, His
present state of affairs, and what he has heard from some members since his
restraint, but desires them not to intermeddle with any particulars touching
the proceedings of the Parliament and Army; with other particulars, in relation
to his trial, saying, That he doubts not, but that his innocence in his
present sufferings, will in process of time, shine forth as the morning Star in
its own splendour and brightness, so pleaded others, who had the honor to go
before him.

A message is forthwith to be expedited to the Lord Mayor, requiring the
proclaiming of the Act at the Royal Exchange, and elsewhere, for the
abolishing of the Kingly Office in England and Ireland.

Imprimatur,

THEO: JENNINGS.

FINIS.

