THE CASTING DOWN of the last and strongest hold of Satan. OR, A TREATISE
Against Toleration And pretended Liberty of Conscience:

Wherein by Scripture, sound Reason, Fathers, Schoolmen, Casuists. Protestant
Divines of all Nations, Confessions of Faith of the Reformed Churches,
Ecclesiastical Histories, and constant practice of the most pious and wisest
Emperors, Princes, States, the best Writers of Politics, the experience of
all Ages; yea, by diverse Principles, Testimonies and Proceedings of Sectaries
themselves, as Donatists, Anabaptists, Brownists, Independents, the
unlawfulness and mischief in Christian Commonwealths and Kingdoms both of a
Universal Toleration of all Religions and Consciences, and of a limited and
bounded of some Sects only, are clearly proved and demonstrated, with all the
material Grounds and Reasons brought for such Tolerations fully answered.

By THOMAS EDWARD'S Minister of the Gospel.

The First Part.

2 Chronicles 34. 32, 33. And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the
Con(...) that pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that were
present in Israel to serve, even to s^ve the Lord their God. And caused all
that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin i^stand to it. London, Printed by
T. R. and E. M. for George Calvert, and are to be sold at the golden Fleece in
the Old-Change. 1647.

To the Christian Reader.
GOod Reader, I fully intended, and accordingly had provided that this first
Part of Anti-Toleration should have come into thy hands more complete and
perfect then it does for the present: I prepared an Epistle Dedicatory to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament suitable to the nature of Toleration and the
Times, as also a Preface and Introduction to that Argument and Subject wherein
laying down the Prolegomena and Praecognita of this Noble and famous Question
of Liberty of Conscience, as certain Distinctions about Magistrates and their
Power, of Errors and Opinions, of Persons holding them, of Toleration and
Liberty, as some Concessa, some Negata, certain mistakes and misrepresentations
of the state of the Question, with diverse other Particulars, I drew up the true
state of the Question both Theologically and Politically (it being a mixed
question) besides I purposed to have added to this Part further proofs out of
the New Testament against Toleration, and for the Magistrates power: But these
Preparatives and Additionals amounting to about some ^en sheets, (the
reviewing, perfecting, and printing whereof would take up at least twenty
days) and not knowing what a Day might bring forth, the Storm coming on so
fast, I thought it best, for fear this Book might be suppressed at the Press
and never see the Sun, to send it forth as it was, that the Church of God at
home and abroad might have the benefit of it, and to reserve the rest for a
second Part (if God spare life and liberty.) In this present Tractate is
handled the Scripturall part of Anti-Toleration (the best foundation and only
groundwork to build on) wherein there are not only the Scriptures produced for
proof, but made good by several reasons from the text and context, with all
the evasions to clude and put them off, fully answered. The subject matter of
this Book is the great Controversy of the times, Toleration being that very
thing for which God has a controversy with the Parliament and Land, having
most justly, (however it is most unjust on their part) raised up that Generation
not to suffer them, because they have against the council of God, yea against
all sense and reason, let them alone and suffered them to grow to this Head. I
remember what God said to his people Israel, Numb. 33. 52, 5.
that if they did not drive out the Canaanites and destroy their pictures etc.
they should be pricks in their eyes and thorns in their sides, and should vex
them with their wiles, ^ King 20. 42.
What of the King of Israel, because that he let go out of his hand a man
appointed to destruction, therefore his life should go for his life, and his
people for that people; as also what of the Angel of Thyatira, that Christ had
a quarrel with him for suffering that woman Jezabel to teach and to seduce his
servants. Revel. 2. 20.
And we may see how God has now fulfilled this upon the Parliament, Ministry,
City, Kingdom, vexing us and threatening heavy things against us by the
Sectaries, punishing us wherein we have offended. In all ages and histories of
the Church we shall find that Heretics and Sectaries, however whilst weak and
few, have pleaded for Toleration and Liberty, yet when they have come to grow
strong and to have power in their hands, they never would suffer the Orthodox,
but have been the greatest tyrants and persecutors, as the Arrians, Donatists,
Anabaptists, Arminians. It was the observation of Aug. contra Petil. l. 2. c.
83. Noli dicere, inquit Petiliano Augustinus, Absit, absit a conscientia nostra
ut ad nostram fidem aliquem compellamus: facitis enim ubi potestis; ubi autem
non facitis non pot^stis, sive legum sive invidiae tim^re, sive resistentium
multitudine.
Augustine many hundred years ago, and his answer to Petilian, That the
Donatists (however they pleaded far be it from them to compel any one to their
Tenets) where they had power, used to force the Orthodox violently; and where
they did not, it was not for want of will, but because they could not for fear
of the laws or the multitude of refusers; yea if any of their own party left
them and came to the Orthodox, they would fall upon them and beat them, yea
kill them; and that Sect of the Donatists which was strongest, would implore
the help of the Magistrate against their Schismatics the Maximinianistae and
Rogatistae: all which Austin shows. But for a conclusion, I shall turn my
prayers unto God, that he would give us to see and know our sin in our
punishment, and to give him glory in saying. Righteous art thou O Lord, and
just are thy judgments; And for the time to come to give Magistrates,
Ministers, and his People more zeal and wisdom then to tolerate and suffer
Errors, Heresies, and Schisms. And so commending these labors to the blessing
of Christ, who yet lives and raigns, (as Luther epist. ad Wences. Lin cum.
Christus meus vivit and regnat, and ego vivam and regnabo.
Luther speaks) and will reign till he has made all his enemies his footstool.

I remain, Yours in Christ, THOMAS EDWARDS.

The TABLE containing some of the principal Heads of this Book.
A Universal Toleration is against the whole current, scope and sense of all
Scripture, and sets up the polluted defiled consciences of men above the
Scriptures. p. 4, 5 What God commands Persons for themselves and their own
Practice, he commands to them being in Power and Authority for all under them.
p. 6, 7 There can be no reason given why all other persons in Authority, as
Fathers Masters, etc should be bound to have a care in matters of Religion over
children, Servants, and Magistrates should have none. p. 7, 8 The godly
Magistrates spoken of in Scripture did de facto make use of their Power to
suppress false Doctrine, Seducers. etc 8, 9, 10, 11 They did not only do it
de facto, but de jure, were approved of and rewarded by God for so doing. p.
11, 12 Those Magistrates who were good that out of any carnal respects,
forbore to use their power, were sharply reproved and punished by God for it.
p. 12, 13 Magistrates and Judges before Moses time, before the Judicial Laws
or Levitical Priesthood, did punish for matters of Religion, and command men
under their power to worship God. p. 13, 14 Other Kings besides those of Israel
and Judah used their Power for the worship of God against Idolaters,
Blasphemers, etc p. 14, 15, 16 That objection against the Kings of Israel and
Iudahs power in matters of Religion that they were tipes of Christ, and that
Land typical answered at large in eight distinct Answers, where diverse things
are opened concerning Types, and of those Kings being Types and how actions may
be Typical, and yet moral, from p. 16, to 27 Idolatry and Idolaters not the
adaequate object of the Magistrates coercive power under the old Testament, but
the whole worship and truth of God. from p. 27, to 34 The 17. of Deuteronomy. 18. 19.
opened and proved to give Magistrates the care of Religion. p. 34, 35, 36, 37
Under the Father in the fourth commandment, and under sanctifying the Sabbath,
the Magistrates duty to see the public worship of God observed by his
subjects, proved, p. 34, 40. 41 The Magistrates duty qua Magistrate in matters
of Religion proved, and yet with a difference of the Christian and Heathen
Magistrates power in such matters. p. 42, 43, 44 The commands in the Old
Testament for Magistrates punishing in matters of the first Table, as Exodus 22.
13. Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 5. Deuteronomy. 17. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5. Levit. 24. 16. Deuteronomy, 18, 20.
22. with diverse others laid down, p. 44, 45, 46 Reasons laid down to prove
these commands for punishing Idolaters false Prophets etc. Moral, of common
reason and equity given to all Nations, and for all Ages, from p. 46. to 53. Of
Judicial laws under the Old Testament being in force under the New, how far
and in what respects, with the reasons thereof, from p. 53. to 58. The
Magistrates punishing of sins immediately against God, as Blasphemy,
Apostasy, etc. is of the light of nature, p. 58, 59, 60, 61, 72, 73 The
Magistrates coercive power in matters of Religion, as necessary under the
Gospel for the glory of God, salvation of men's souls, peace of Church and
State, as under the Old; yea more reasons for it under the Gospel then under
the Law, p. 62, 63, 64 The Magistrates punishing false Prophets, etc. is an act
of our love to God and our Brethren, p. 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71 The reasons of
those commands in 13. and 17. chap. of Deuteronomy. concerning putting to death false
Prophets, Apostates have been, were, and are still the same, of a like nature
and force both before the commands given by Moses, in Moses time, and now under
the Gospel p. 76 77, 78 An Answer to that objection, that if Moses laws bind
now, then Moses is alive under the new Testament. p. 79, 80 A full Answer to
that objection, If the Law in Deuteronomy. 13. be in force now, it is in force in all
the particulars for the manner of the punishment for a whole City not only all the Inhabitants, but the cattle also etc. in which answer many things are
opened and cleared, what is moral in that Deuteronomy. 13. and what ceremonial; and
that the law concerning the destroying of a city, cattle etc. is no part of
the command spoken of in the first part of the 13. chap, of Deuteronomy. p. 81, 82,
83, 84, 85, 86, 87. 173, 174, 175. 195, 196 An answer to that objection, If
Moses laws bind under the New Testament, then every person in an idolatrous
State is bound to seek the death one of another, yea the Magistrate bound to
sentence to death all his subjects practicing idolatry without exception, p.
90, 91, 92, 93 A full answer to that Evasion of Hagiomastix against the Old
Testament laws, that the reason why the Magistrates did then punish false
Prophets, Blasphemers etc. was because the Jews to whom these laws were given,
in all difficult cases about matters of Religion had the opportunity of
immediate consultation with God, who did infallibly declare his mind to them;
in which answer many questions are discussed and cleared, several texts
opened, as whether God gave answers by Vrim and Thummim in difficulties arising
about moral transgression^ against the first Table, or rather whether those
answers were not concerning the events of future things, as about the success
of war etc. as whether Infallibility or Fallibility be the proper grounds and
reasons of punishing or not punishing in matters of faith and moral
transgressions; as whether there be not, and how far, and by what means an
infallibility and certainty in matters of Religion now as well as under the
Law? as whether that Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. be any proof for God giving
answers by Vrim and Thummim, or only a ground in difficult cases to go from
lower Courts to higher, and the highest of all, who by reason of their number
and abilities were more able from the law of God to resolve difficult cases
then the inferior Courts? with diverse other particulars useful to be known in
these times, from p. 95, to 165 A full answer to that Evasion brought by
Hagiomastix and other Patrons of Toleration, that the punishments under the Law
were more bodily and afflictive to the outward man then under the Gospel, and
consequently were typical, Cutting off, of Casting out, now; and typical of
eternal damnation, and therefore by the coming of Christ ceased. p. 165, 166,
167, 168, 169, 170 A full answer to that objection, That supposing all those
laws in Deuteronomy. 13. etc. were moral and in force, yet they could not reach to
Heretics and false Teachers among us, as not being those false Prophets,
Idolaters, Blasphemers spoken of in those laws, from p. 171, to 190 An answer
to that objection, That the Sadduces, Herodians, Pharisees were tolerated by the
Jews, and that Christ did never charge that Church and State with sin for not
punishing them, p. 29, 30, compared with 190, 191, 192, 193, 194 Several
Reasons laid down to prove, that if there were no commands nor examples in the
New Testament to prove the Magistrates power of punishing Heretics, false
Teachers, yet the proofs of the Old Testament were binding, p. 199, to 211
Besides all the Old Testament proofs, some places of Scripture speaking of the
days under the New Testament brought for Magistrates power in Religion and
punishing false Teachers, p. 212, 213, 214, 215 Seven grounds from places of
Scripture recorded in the New Testament, proving Magistrates coercive power
against false Teachers annd Heretics, laid down and cleared, p 215, 216, 217,
218.
Published by Authority.

A TREATISE against the Magistrates Toleration And Permission of a Promiscuous
use and Profession of all Religions, Sects and Heresies, and a partial limited
Toleration of some few Sects, or of any one Sect, way of Worship, Church
Government different from the true Religion established and settled.
HAving in my Preface and Prolegomena both stated the question of Toleration
and Liberty of Conscience, and laid down many, Particulars useful and
necessary to be known, as giving understanding and light into the nature of
this Controversy: I now come as to the proving of a Toleration in it self, of
Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, Schisms unlawful; so of showing the Christian
Magistrates Power and Warrant, yea necessity that is laid upon him of hindering
and suppressing all false ways and worships, and of promoting and commanding
by his Authority with all his subjects the true Religion and Faith; and this I
shall do by laying down diverse Theses and Positions one following upon another,
and each going further and rising higher then the other; and the method I
propound to follow in this Tractate shall be that of the Title page of this
Book: First, by Scripture: Secondly, by sound Reasons: Thirdly, by Fathers:
Fourthly, Councels; and so as it there follows, setting down upon all those
Heads by way of Theses, the proofs of the points in hand, though upon some
more, some fewer, as the nature of the things may require, and I shall judge
needful and convenient.

CHAP. I.
The Theses grounded on express Scriptures, proving the sinfulness and
wickedness of Tolerations, and the Magistrates duty with^^ his Territories to
suppress Blasphemies, Errors, Heresies, Schisms.
1. THESIS.
AS there is but one God, one Lord Christ, one Spirit, one Heaven, so there is
but one Faith, and that once delivered to the Saints, one Truth, one Gospel,
and one Way; the Scripture every where speaking of these in the ^ingular number
as of one, not as of many, never calling them Faiths, Truths, Gospels, Ways,
but the Faith, she Gospel, the Truth, the way of Truth, the good old way, one
way, the right way, the way of righteousness, and such like; whereas falsehood
and error is manifold, the Scripture speaking of false ways (...), of
Antichrists as many; Falsum est multiplex, verum autem (...) and sibi per (...)
conform est.

2. THESIS.
The Scriptures of the Old and New Testament in many places old forth and
command to ask for, follow after, walk in that one good way, to strive and
contend earnestly for that one Faith, to hold fast the truth, to serve God
only; and on the contrary reproves, prohibits, condemns turning afide to the
right hand or to the left, or halting between two or more Religions and
Worships; hence those complaints, 1 Kin. 18. 21. of the people halting between
two opinions, between God and Baal, of fearing the Lord, and serving their own
Gods after the manner of the Nations, 2 King. 17. verse. 33. 41. of worshipping
and swearing by the Lord and by Malcham, Zeph. 1. 5. and those prohibitions of
not letting cattle gender with a diverse kind, of not sowing fields with
mingled seed, of not wearing garments mingled of linned and woollen, of not
sowing of Vineyards of diverse seeds, and of not ploughing with an Ox and an
Ass together. Levit. 19. 19. Deuteronomy. 22. 9, 10.

3. THESIS.
God both foretells and promises in his word, and that more particularly of the
days of the Gospel, to give one heart and one way to his people; and as there
shall be one Lord, so his name shall be one, and that they shall all call upon
the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent, Jer. 32. 39. Ezekiel. 11. 19.
Zeph. 3. 9. Zach. 14. 9. Christ prays earnestly to his Father for believers
that they all may be one and that they may be perfect in one, John 17: 21, 22,
23. and there are many exhortations to Christians to be of one mind, and of the
same mind in the Lord, to be of one accord, of one mind, all to speak the same
thing, that there be no Schisms among them, but that they be perfectly joined
together in the same mind and in the same judgment, and that they keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Philip. 2. 2. Philip.
4. 2. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Ephesians. 4. 3. Now what God has promised and foretold, what
Christ has prayed for in a special manner, what the Apostles in their
Epistles have so pathetically entreated and exhorted to, that Christians should
especially labor after, and all the mean tending thereunto; which the
desiring and granting of a Toleration of all ways, or many ways, must needs
be contrary unto.

4. THESIS.
A Toleration and sufferance but of any one or two false ways and worships
fights directly against these and many such like places of Scripture, For we
can do nothing against the truth but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. Buy the truth
and sell it not, Prove. 23. 23. be valiant for the truth, strive for the faith
of the Gospel, Be zealous, beware of false Prophets, beware of dogs beware of
evil workers, beware of the Coucision, A man that is an Heretic after the
first and second admonition reject. They that keep the Law contend with the
wicked, Paul's not giving place to false brethren, no not for an hour that the
truth of the Gospel might continue. Paul and Barnabas having no small
dissension and disputation with those who taught Circumcision, If there come
any unto you and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house,
neither bid him God speed, the Angel of Ephesus his commendation for that he
could not bear them which are evil, and which say they are Apostles, and are
not, and for hating the deeds of the Nicolaitans, the Angels of the Churches of
Pergamus and Thyatira being threatened by Christ for suffering them that held
the Doctrine of Balaam, the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans, and that woman Jez
abel which called her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce his servants.

5. THESIS.
Whereas a particular partial Toleration offends against many particular
places of Scripture, a Universal Toleration is against all Scripture, goes
against the whole current, scope and sense of Scripture both in the Old and New
Testament, both in matters of Faith and Manners, both in the general rules and
commands, and the particular, and that both in personal actions, and in all
Relations to others: The sum of the Scriptures is Faith and good life, and the
end of the several states appointed by God, both Political, Ecclesiastical
and Oeconomicall, are to maintain and continue these: Now a general Toleration
of all Religions and consciences is diametically opposite to all these, against
the whole will of God overthrowing all that God in the Scripture expresses of
sins, duties and relations. I would have any thing in the Scripture named in
point of faith, holiness, in the relations of Magistrates, Ministers,
Governors of Families, which this Toleration some way or other does not make
void. Other Errors and Heresies, as Arrianisme, Anabaptisme, etc. do not offend
against all Scripture, but against such and such places; but this general
Toleration throws down all at once, it overthrows the Scriptures, in that it
allows a Liberty of denying the Scriptures to be the Word of God, in that it
sets up the conscience above the Scriptures,
making every man's conscience, even the polluted defiled seared consciences the
rule of faith and holiness, before the pure and unerring Word of God, crying
out that men must do according to their consciences, but never speaking of
going according to the Word of God; yea setting up men's fancies, humors,
factions, lusts, under the name of conscience, above the Word of God, which is
to set up the creature, yea the corrupted defiled creature above God, and to
make man's conscience greater then God, whereas God is greater then men's
consciences, 1 John 3. 20.

6. THESIS.
The complaints, prohibitions, comminations, with the commands, directions,
cautions against giving way unto, tolerating of and following many ways in
religion, and for contending for the Faith, buying the truth, etc. though
delivered, and run in general, they bind (as other Scriptures do) all the
several sorts of men, every one pro cujusque officii ratione,
the Minister in his way according to his office, and the Magistrate in his
way, and the Master of a family in his place, and every private Christian in
his way to suppress Error, and promote the Truth; yea the commands and
precepts which in the letter and primarily belong to men of such a particular
relation, the Father, Master, Minister as being directed by name to them, do
also concern Magistrates, by the common rules of Interpretation of Scripture,
given by Divi^es, of a Synecdoche, of Analogy and proportion, of common
equity, and by the way of the Scripture it self in applying what is spoken at
first hand to particular persons in such a special relation to all Christians,
Joshua 1. 5. compared with Heb. 13. 5. what to Magistrates, to Church
Governors, Deu. 13. 11. Deuteronomy. 17. 6. compared with 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20. with many
other such instances that might be given, the commands of God being exceeding
broad, as David speaks, Psalm. 119. The fifth Commandment which in the letter
mentions the natural parents, as is evident by many other Scriptures,
particularly that of Ephesians. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4. commands the duties of Magistrates
to their subjects, of Ministers to their people, as all Divines upon that
commandment grant. The fourth Commandment that in the letter is directed to the
Father of the family, for his family to keep the Sabbath, comprehends also the
Magistrate: The Father of the family is a Synecdoche including the Magistrate;
and therein the holy Ghost lays down not only what lies upon the Master of
every family, but also what is the Magistrates duty, as Zanch. in quartum
praceptum. Chemnitii loci Commun. De lege Dei in quartum praecept.
Zanchius, Chemnitius, and many other learned Divines show in their Expositions
upon this fourth Commandment, all of them upon this Commandment writing of
the public worship of God, and the Magistrates duty to see it preserved, and
the profanation of it punished, and all under the name of the Father of the
family.

7. THESIS.
What God in his Word commands or forbids private single persons for themselves
and their own practice as considered personally, viz. to learn to know God,
fear the Lord, follow him only, and not follow not serve any strange God, to
have no fellowship with Idols, not the unfruitful works of darkness, and such
like, unto all persons whom he has set over others, and in any Relation given
them power and authority over them, as Ministers, Parents, Masters, Husbands,
be commands and forbids the same not only for themselves in their own persons
(that's not all, that will not discharge them) but to them for all under their
command, they must see to it and use their interest, power and authority to
cause all under them to do so likewise, and not suffer them to go on in false
ways, as these Scriptures among many other prove, (...). 18. verse 19. Ezadus
20. verse 28. Deuteronomy, 6. 45. 6, 7. Ephesians. 6. 4. Every private servant of God must
keep the ways of God; but Abraham who is set over others must command his
children and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord, every
Israelite must keep the Sabbath day holy, but the Governor of the family must
besides his own keeping it, see to it that all in his family sanctify the
Sabbath, it is the duty of all the Israel of God to love the Lord their God with
all their heart, and to fear the Lord only, but parents must besides their
personal loving and fearing God, whet upon their children diligently and talk
to them of the commands of God, and bring them up in the (...) and fear of the
Lord; each person should work out his own salvation, but a Minister must save
others besides himself, and watch for other men's souls, use authority for
edification; hence in many places we shall find it written in Scripture of
persons in relations of authority to others, that they both undertake for their
families, and that their families walked as they walked; so Joshu^, I and my
household will serve the Lord; thus David, Psalm. 101. verse 4, 6, 7. So the
Centurion, a devout man and one that feared God with all his house; and in
Timothy there was unfeigned faith which dwelt first in his Grandmother Loit, and
in his mother E^^ice, and then in him.

8. THESIS.
There can be no reason in the world given, that all other persons in relations
who have authority over others, as Masters, Fathers, Mothers, Tutors, Husbands,
Ministers, should be bound to have a care in matters of Religion over their
children, servants, etc. and a power of commanding and making them outwardly to
worship God and keep his way (So it is said of Abraham, he will command his
children, Vide Master Cheynels sermon before the House of Commons on that text
of Abraham's commanding his children page 11.
make his children and servants know that he is their Father and their Master;
so speaks the fourth Commandment to the Father of the family, Thou, nor thy
son, nor thy daughter, thy m^n-servant, etc. It Is not said, do thou remember
that thou keep holy the Sabbath day, but thou shall admonish thy son and thy
daughter that they also sanctify it; God does not say so, but thus, remember
that thou sanctify it, and that all others that are thine, sanctify it) and
that Princes and Magistrates who are the highest pow-powers, and have the
greatest authority on earth (who externally and politically have a power over
Ministers, Parents, Masters, to rectify their male administration (as is
evident by many instances in Scripture) who can also help and remedy evils in
cases where Parents, Masters, Ministers cannot, and have many advantages to
bring men to good above others) should not have a power over their subjects to
command them to the worship of God and restrain them from Idolatry and
Heresy. Hence it is a good saying of Zanchie on the fourth Commandment Zanch.
in quartum praecept. page 659, 660. Non enim ait tu mementout sanctifices,
monebis autem filium filiamve tuam, ut and ipsi sanctificent; non sic ait, sed
memento ut sanctifices, and ut alii etiam tui sanctificent. Adigere quisque
Pater familias potest and debet suos domesticos ad externum cultum; cur non
etiam Mag^stratus suos subditos?
Every Father of a family can and ought to force his family to the outward
worship of God; why should not the Magistrate also his subjects? I desire some
reason may be shown why the talents of Authority and Power in all other hands
must be made use of for God in reference to the souls of men, and not in the
hands of the Magistrate; and why Parents, Masters offend in not caring for
their families in matters of Religion, and the Magistrate not.

9. THESIS.
The holy Patriarchs, good Judges, godly Kings, and other pious Magistrates
spoken of in Scripture, did de facto make use of their power and authority over
others to suppress false Doctrine, false Worship, false Prophets, Seducers,
and to bring those under them to the true fear and Worship of God; they
thought it their duty not only in their own persons to keep to the Word of God
and to serve him, and to bring their children to it, but to command all under
their Government to the true worship of God, forbidding and suppressing all
other. It would fill a Book to relate and open all the particulars concerning
Religion, in commanding the true, destroying the false, and punishing false
Prophets, Idolaters, Apostates, recorded in the Scriptures of Abraham, Jacob,
Moses, Joshua, Gedeon, Jehosaphat, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, Manasseh after his
conversion, Nehemiah, with many others. I shall set down some particulars of
some of them.

Abraham the Patriarch was a Magistrate, a great Prince, that had three hundred
and eighteen servants armed trained men borne in his house, he had not only
the Covenant in his own flesh, but he made all that were borne in his house,
and all that were bought with his money to be circumcised Genes. 17. he cast
also out of his Family, Hagar the bondwoman, and scoffing persecuting Ismael,
born after the flesh, Genes. 21. compared with Galath. 4. 29, 30. and Genes.
18. God says of him, I know that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord; upon which place Master A
Sermon before the house of Commons called A Plot for the good of Posterity.
Cheynel a learned Divine of the Assembly writes thus: Abraham did not leave
his children and servauts to their own genius, their own Councels, their own
lusts, though it is certain that diverse of them would have thancked him for
such a Liberty; for they had been nursed up in Superstition and Idolatry as
Abraham was, and might have pretended that they were not satisfied in point of
Conscience;
but Abraham knew how to distinguish between Liberty of Conscience and liberty
of lust, and therefore would not allow them such a Liberty as would have
enticed them into the worst kind of bondage. * Pareus also, Pareus in Genesis 18.
19.
God uses the word command, that Parents and Superiors may understand that
they are not overly and slightly, but diligently, and with authority to do
their duty to bring their inferiors to the fear and obedience of God. Jacob
the Patriarch, Genes. 35. 2, 3, 4. said to his household, and to all that were
with him (all under his power protection) put away the strange Gods that are
among you, and be clean, and change your garments. And they gave unto Jacob
all the strange gods which were in their Land, and all their earrings which
were in their ears, and Jacob hid them under the Oak which was by Shechem.
Pareus upon the place shows that they that were with Jacob made distinct from
his household, were those Sichemits that were taken captive by the sons and
servants of Jacob who had brought their Idols with them, and observes that as
it is the office of a good Master of a family in his house, so of a Magistrate
in the Commonwealth to take away Idols and instruments of Idolatry, and other
lets of true conversion to God.

Jehosaphat, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, those excellent Princes made use of their
power and the authority of their places in their Kingdoms and Territories, to
put down and suppress false worships and ways, to punish false Prophets,
Idolatrous Priests, and the people who went after them, to establish the true
faith and worship of God, and to command and cause all their people by Laws
and their Authority to stand to their Reformations; yea Manasseh who had been
so wicked, presently upon his conversion, 2 Chronicles. 33. 15, 16. rested not in
his own repentance that he knew that the Lord was God, but he took away the
strange Gods, all the Altars, and cast them out of the City, and repaired the
Altar of the Lord, and commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel: as
before he had made them to err by his place, and power, verse 9. so now he
made them to serve the Lord God of Israel. Asa that good King, 2 Chronicles. 14. and
15. chap. by his kingly power took away all Idolatry and false worship, and
that not only out of the Land of Judah and Benjamin, but out of the Cities
which he had taken from Mount Ephraim, the strangers of Ephraim, Manasseh, and
out of Simeon, all under his power and jurisdiction, though of the ten Tribe^,
and accounted strangers after the revoult; yea, he destroyed the Idol of his
Queen Mother. Secondly, he settled and renewed the true worship of God
renewing the Altar of the Lord, and entering into a Covenant to seek the Lord
God. Thirdly, he commanded Judah to seek the Lord God, and to do the Law and
the commandment, and to enter into a Covenant to bind themselves more to the
right seeking of God. Fourthly, he punished those under his government who went
contrary, viz. they should be put to death who would not enter into this
Covenant, or having entered into it, should fall from it, and his Queen Mother
he removed from being Queen, because she had made an Idol in a Grove, that is,
he deprived his mother of all dignity and authority which she had by custom.
Jehosophat used his Authority when he came to be King to take away the high
places and Groves out of Judah, and from Vide Junium in 2 Chronicles. 19 4. and the
late Annotations of the English Divines on that place.
Beersheba to Mount Ephraim from South to North, from one end of his Kingdom
to another he brought his people unto God from whom they had fallen, (for the
Kingdom of Judah from the days of Asa was extended to Mount Ephraim.)
Hezekiah when he came to the Kingdom removed the high places and Images, cut
down the Groves, broke in pieces the brazen Serpent; he and his Princes gave
out a commandment, and established a Decree for the keeping of the Passover,
and for the turning of the people unto God, and he restored the true worship of
God, and commanded the Priests and the people to do their duties in their
several places. Josiah that godly Prince, First, he removed and destroyed the
high places, Groves, carved Images, molten Images, the Altars of Baalim and all
the Idols out of all the Land, he took away the horses given to the Sun, he
defiled Topheth, brake down the houses of the Sodomites, and purged the Land of
all the abominations. Secondly, he put down all the idolatrous Priests, and all
other Priests that had burnt Incense upon the high places, and slew all the
Priests of the high places upon the Altars. Thirdly, he restored the true
worship of God, made a Covenant with God to that end, and commanded the people
to keep the Passover, and to perform the Covenant. Fourthly, he caused all
that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to the Covenant, and made
all that were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the Lord their God, 2 Chronicles. 34. 32, 33. Vide late Annot. on 2 Cron. 34. 32, 33. Regia sua
auctoritate obstrinxit and qua^vis propensos Judaeoru^ animos compescuit ne
ipso vivo ab externo Dei cultu deficerent; tantam adhibuit severitatem
disciplinae. Tremellius and Junius in locum.
that is all that were under his jurisdiction he kept them in such awe by his
regal authority and penal laws, as they durst not but stand to the Covenant.

10. THESIS.
As de facto it is evident in the examples related (besides diverse others
recorded in Scripture) that good Magistrates did always meddle for God and his
truth, against false worship and seducers, so that they did it de jure, and
ought to do so is as clear from the approbations, special testimonies,
promises, rewards and blessings given by God of them, made to them, and
bestowed by God on them for so doing. There Is hardly any place mentioning what
the Patriarchs, Judges, Kings, Magistrates did in this kind, but there is some
commendation, some blessing, some special testimony from God for so doing
recorded in those places, 2 Chronicles. 14. 2, 3, 4. Asa did that which was good and
right in the eyes of the Lord his God, For he took away the Altars of the
strange gods and the high places, etc. So it is said of Jehosophat, Hezekiah,
Josiah, they did that which was right in the fight of the Lord, are highly
commended, have many blessings upon themselves and their Kingdoms, and all for
commanding by their Princely power their subjects to good, and removing all
false worship and the means of it. God will not hide from Abraham the thing
that he was doing concerning Sodom, and the reason is given, because he will
command his children and his household after him to keep the way of the Lord.
Jacob took away the strange Gods from his household and all that were with him,
and God manifests his approbation of it, the terror of God was upon the Cities
round about Jacob, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob; yea God
gives such testimony to Princes and Magistrates suppressing false Prophets and
false worships, that he has rewarded with temporal blessings wicked Kings for
so doing, as is evident in Iehu, who for destroying Baal out of Israel, though
he departed not from the finnes of Jeroboam, yet his children of the fourth
generation should sit on the throne of Israel, 2 Kings 10. 28, 29, 30.

11. THESIS.
Those Magistrates, Judges and Princes, even the dear servants of God, who
being in place of authority and power, that out of carnal respects to wives,
children and other interests, have suffered and tolerated Idolatry and other
evils (though they in their own persons never practiced, much less commanded
any such things, nay dissuaded from them) and not used their power to restrain
and hinder them, have been both sharply reproved and severely punished by God
for it: King Solomon having power to hinder his wives from Idolatry, and not
doing it, but suffering them, God is provoked to bring wrath upon him and his
family, 1 King. 11. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 10, 11, 12. to rend the Kingdom from
him, to stir up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite. It Is the opinion
of many good Meisnerus Sect. 2. Contro. quaest. Politic. de Magist. page 841.
Vituperatur autem Solomon idololatrica sacra permittens. Ames. Animad. in
Remonstrat* Synod Script. super 5. Artic. de Perseverant. cap. 7. de Solomone.
Certum est Solomonem non introduxisse aut admississe idola in domum Dei, neque
adegisse populum ut vel Dei verum cultum desererent vel colerent Idola; neque
probari potest eum in sua propria persona coluisse idola. Hoc tantum certum est
de ejus idololatria quod infatuatus a mulieribus idololatricis permiserit eas
construere, aut ipsemet jussit cons^rui fana and erigi altaria.
Divines, and that upon the first of Kings, chapter 11. and in answer to the
Arminians upon that Article of falling from Grace, that Solomon did not bring
or admit Idols into the house of God, neither did he command the people, that
either they should forsake the true worship of God, or worship Idols, neither
can it be proved that he did in his own person worship Idols. This is only
certain that being bewitched by his Idolatrous wives, he suffered them to
build Altars and high places, or at most commanded them to be built, and this
the word in the Hebrew verse. 11. with thee, not of thee, implies as much, for
as much as this is done with thee, implying done in his Kingdom, and near
Jerusalem, though not by Solomon himself. Eli being a Judge, because when his
sons made themselves vile, ht restrained them not, redressed not their
corruptions and abuses about the Sacrifices, though he reproved and dissuaded
them from their ways by many strong arguments, therefore God brought fearful
ruin upon him and his house, cutting off his arm, and the arm of his fathers
house, etc. as in 1 Samuel 2, 3, 4. chap. it is laid down at large.

12. THESIS.
Whereas the Patrons of Toleration except against the instances of the Judges,
Magistrates and Kings of Judah and Israel as no sufficient proof for
Magistrates power in suppressing falsehood, and commanding men to receive the
truth, because they were typical Kings, types of Christ as King of his Church,
and the Land of Canaan a typical Land, which no other Magistrates or Land
beside ever were or are; I desire that it may be remembered that other
Magistrates, Judges, and Princes who were before the common wealth of Israel
was erected and the judicial laws given, and of other Commonwealths and
Kingdoms did take away and punish Idolatry, Blasphemy, and command men under
their power to worship God, and some such examples are not only barely related
in the Scripture, but approved of. Abraham, Jacob and Job were before the time
of Moses and Aaron, before the judicial Laws or the Leviticall Priesthood for
the Government and worship of the Jewish Church and Commonwealth were given.
For Abraham and Jacob that's evident by the Book of Genesis, and for Job, that
he lived in the time between Abraham and Moses is the judgment of many good
Divines and Interpreters upon Job, and that upon several reasons given by
them, of which the Reader may read more in Bucolcerus, Pineda, Junius and
Tremellius, Mercer Praefat. in Job: sane diligentius omnia consideranti mihi,
videtur Job antiquissimus fuisse ac sub Patriarcharum tempus vixisse.
Mercerus, Master Carylls Expositions on Job, and diverse others. Now of Abraham
and Jacobs commanding their children, servants, and all that were with them to
keep the way of the Lord, I have spoken of in the tenth Thesis. And that in
Jobs time, and that out of the Land of Canam in the Land of Vz (no typical
Land) Idolatry and false worship were to be punished by the Magistrates, is
apparent by Job 31 26, 27, 28. where Job speaks of himself, If I beheld the
Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, And my heart has been
secretly intised or my mouth has kissed my band: This also were an iniquity to
be punished by the Judge: for I should have denied the God that is above, the
meaning of which place according to the judgment of the best Interpreters,
Mercer, Merlinus, Iunius, Pineda and others is that Idolatry and worshipping the
creatures, as Sun, Moon, and the Heavens (a worship much in use in the East
where Job lived) was an iniquity worthy to be taken notice of and punished by
the Judges: so Mercer reads it, digna est, it deserves and ought to be punished
by the Judges; and then observe the reason, for I should have denied the Lord
that is above: So that all false worship and false doctrine that denies God
that is above, is worthy to be punished by the Judges; and this is further
proved and illustrated that Idolatry is to be punished by Judges corporally, by
the 9, 10, 11. verses of this chapter, where he speaks the same of adultery,
that it is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges, so that the spirit of God
here in Job makes Adultery and Idolatry of the same cognizance, and as Adultery
is to be punished by the Civil Magistrate, so Idolatry and all false ways
whereby men deny the God that is above, are by this Scripture to be punished
also. And that it may further appear the Kings of Judah and Israel did not qua
Kings of Judah and qua dwelling in such a Land, as Kings over such a typical
people, bearing visibly, and executing typically the kingly office of Christ in
his Church, meddle in matters of Religion, but as Kings in places of authority
and power, I shall show that other Kings, not of the Tribe of Judah, ruling
over other Kingdoms and Countries, when by any of the great works of God done
before them, or upon any instinct of the Spirit of God upon them by any message
from God by his Prophets and servants, they came to be touched in heart and
sensible of themselves, they used their power in making Laws and Edicts for
the worship of God against Blasphemy and Idolatry, and for punishing of those
who were Idolaters and Blasphemers. Thus Artaxerxes the King of Persia, Ezra 7.
makes a Decree that whosoever will not do the Law of God, judgment shoule be
executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death, or unto banishment, or to
confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment; and Ezra blesses God for it, which
shows it was well done of Art^xerxes. Now whereas Hagio mastix. page 55. sect.
43.
Master Goodwin would evade this by saying Ezra blesses God for Artaxerzes
beautifying the house of God only, not for the Decree of punishing those that
would not do the Law of God, I answer, that is a part indeed of that he blesses
God for, but not all, as is evident by the 28. verse, his blessing God having
relation to that also as may appear by that copulative and has extended mercy
unto me before the King, and I was strengthened as the hand of the Lord my God
was upon me: and I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me;
now let the 23. verse that speaks of Artaxerxes Decree to Ezra to set
Magistrates and Judges to judge all the people, and thereupon who will not do
the Law of God to have judgment executed upon them whether it be unto death,
etc. be laid to the 28. verse, wherein he blesses God for his hand upon him to
gather chief men out of Israel to go up with him (which was to make
Magistrates and Judges) and it is evident the Decree for punishing is included;
besides, if this Decree of Artaxerx^s had been according to Master Goodwine,
the Bloody Tenet, and other Libertines opinion such a wicked and bloody
doctrine, Ezra the Priest the Scribe of the Law of the God of heaven had been
bound to have instructed Artaxerxes better, and humbly entreated him to have
reversed that part of the Decree in the 26. verse, and certainly would never
have built up Artaxerxes in such a great sin by blessing God for his Decree,
and by taking care to set up Magistrates and Judges to execute it, but would
have dealt clearly with the King, blessing God for the Decree of the building
of the Temple, and showing him his mistake in the other part about punishing;
and to put it past question, Ezra 10. verse 7, 8. relates, this Decree of the
King was accordingly put in execution by Ezra and the Princes and Elders,
Proclamations being made throughout Judah and Jerusalem, unto all the Children
of the captivity that they should gather themselves together unto Jerusalem;
And that whosoever would not come within three days according to the Council
of the Princes and the Elders, all his substance should be forfeited, which was
one of the penalties of Artaxerxes Decree, viz. confiscation of goods.
Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 3. 28, 29, 30. as soon as he knew God upon that great work
of Gods power in delivering the three children out of the fiery furnace, made a
Decree that whosoever should speak any thing amiss against him, should be cut
in pieces and their houses made a dunghill. Darius, Dan. 6. 25, 26. upon Gods
great work in delivering Daniel out of the Lions den, made a Decree that in
every Dominion of his Kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel.
Lastly, the King of Niniveh upon Ienabs preaching, yet forty days and Niniveh
shall be destroyed, did not only in his own person arise from his Throne and
cover himself with sackcloth, and sit in ashes, but caused it to be proclaimed
and published by his Decree that all his subjects should do the like, cry
mightily unto God, and turn from their evil ways; and this turning of
Niniveh upon the command and edict of the King is blessed by Gods repenting of
the evil that he said he would do unto them, and so Gods own seal of
approbation set to the King of Ninivebs Edict for commanding in matters of
Religion. Augus^ine in his Aug. 50. Epist. ad Bonifac. Sicut servivit Rex
Ninivitarum vniversam civitatem ad placandum Dominum compellendo; sicut
servivit Nabuchadonazar omnes in Regno suo positos, a blasphemando Deo lege
terribili revocande.
50. Epistle ad Bonifacium, makes use of the examples of the King of Niniveh,
Darius and Nebuchadonezar to show how a King must serve God as a King by
commanding good things, and forbidding the contrary, as the King of Niniveh
served God by compelling the whole City to please God, as Nebuchadnezar served
him by recalling all in his Kingdom from blaspheming God by a severe Law.

13. THESIS.
As for that which is commonly said by the Patrons of Tol^ration, that what the
Judges, Magistrates, Kings of Israel and Judah, did in a coer^ive way in
matters of Religion in Israel and Judah, they did it not by virtue of their
office as ordinary Kings and Magistrates toward their subjects, but as Kings
in a peculiar and extraordinary notion, as typical Kings, types of Christ the
King of the Church, executing typically his kingly office, the people also and
the very Land over which they ruled, being typical, which no Kings not people
under heaven at this day are, and that therefore their practices cannot be
drawn into example by any Christian Magistrates now. I desire the Reader well
to observe these following answers, and the rather because the maine strength
of the Sectaries discourse upon this subject hangs by this string, and this
thread runs all along throughout their works. M. S. the Bloody Tenet, The
Ancient bounds or Liberty of Conscience stated, The Storming of Antichrist with
many others place all their confidence here, and this is their Shield and
buckler, making much use of this typicalnesse under the Old Testament to evade
all the instances of Kings and Magistrates brought from thence.

First, to make this good, there are some things supposed or asserted for proof
very uncertain, doubtful, other things absurd and untrue; As first, that to be
a Type of Christ is a sufficient ground of a Political Civil power over the
Church, and that typicalnesse, qua, typicalnesse gives those persons a power,
who otherwise have none; Secondly, because it ha^^ no influence upon civil
authority; of which see a^or^ there.
the contrary unto which is in several Reasons proved by Doctor First then the
Priests and some Prophets as Jonah should have had this power: yea Adam, Isaac,
etc. for they were all types of Christ.
Stewart in the second part of his Duply to M. S. page 22. and never yet
answered by M. S. or any other, though M. S. and many of his Brethren have
written upon that argument since.

Secondly, The (...) b^unds or Liberty of consti^^ stated. p. ^^
that he who was Head of the State was Head also of the Church in a typical
way, whereas many great Divines are of another judgment, and show that the
Kings of Judah and the civil judicatures were formally distinct from the
Ecclesiastical, and that he who was chief in the State over civil matters,
was not chief Judge and Officer in the Church in an Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual notion, of which point Master R^^herford and Master Gil^espie having
written so fully lately, I shall spare to speak any thing, and refer the
Reader to their learned Books enti^uled There ^e^e ^^^o Suprea^^, two Highest
powers, both suprea^e in their own kind and sphere, one Civil, another
Ecclesiastical^: Moses above ^Aaron^ as the sup^e^m Judge in the power of the
sword, (...) above Moses In sacrificing, in burning (...), in judging between
the clean and unclean. Mr. Rutherf^ cap^ ^34. (...) ^quaest. (...). 38^ 387,
388, 389, 390 cap. 15 quaest. 11. cap. 16. quaest. 12. p. 418. Mr. Gillespies:
Book cap. 3. that the Jews had an Ecclesiastical Government distinct from the
Civil.
The Divine Right of Church Government, Aarons Rod Blossoming.

Thirdly, that the people of the Jews were interchangably a Church and a
Nation, so that whoever was a member of the Church was a member of the
Commonwealth, and vice versa, of which see the Book entitled The Ancient
Bounds or Liberty of Conscience seated, page 60. Now Master Gillespie in his
Aarons Rod blossoming, Book 1. chap. 2. proves strongly that the Jewish Church
was formally distinct from the Jewish State, and that in seven particulars, as
in respect of distinct Laws, distinct Acts, distinct Officers, so in respect
of distinct Members, there being Members of the Church among them, who had the
name of* Proselyti Iustitiae, and were initiated into the Jewish Religion by
Circumcision, Sacrifice, etc. that nevertheless were restrained and secluded
from Dignities, Government and Preferment in the Jewish Commonwealth, and from
diverse matriages which were free to the Israelites. Master SELDOM also in that
learned. Book of his, De Jure Nature. and Gentium, lib. 2. cap. 4. lib. 5. cap.
20. speaks as much of those Proselytes. Proselytus justitiae utcunque novato
patriae nomine Iudaeu^ diceretur, non tam quidem, ci^ is Iudaicus simpliciter
censendus esset quam peregrinus sempe^, cui jura quamplurima inter cives.
Secondly, how do they prove that Iehu, Ioash, Manasseh, Asa, Hezekiah,
Iebosophat, Josiah, were Types of Christ, and did execu^e typically the kingly
office of Christ in his Church, were Kings in an Ecclesiastical notion an,
extraordinary way, not ruling only for the Church, but in the Church, and over
it, as The Ancient Bounds or Liberty of Conscience stated. page 59, 60.
they say. Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, were in their persons, places and
actions, express types of Jesus Christ (as it is evident in the New Testament)
Penmen also of Scripture, besides Prophets as well as Magistrates, and so were
extraordinary men, that every thing they did in Religion is not a binding
example to Magistrates now as many Trigland. de potest. Civil. and Eccles. page
233, 234. Walaei T^actat. de manner Ministr. Eccles. and Inspectione
Ma^istratus circa illud. from p. 21. to p. 35. Apollon. Ius Majestat. circa
sacra part. pri. 67, 68.
Reformed Divines have showen against the Arminians and Erastians, but that
Asa, Josiah, Hezekiah, Iehosaphat were, is gratis dictum, not yet proved,
neither were these Penmen of holy* Scripture, or Prophets extraordinarily
inspired, but these four great Reformers as Kings were stirred up, enquiring
after, and directed by Prophets, as the Reader may find clearly in the stories
of them in the Chronicles and Kings. Besides I find not among See Dr. Tailors
Treatisse of the Types and shadows of Christ contained in the Scriptures.
Divines who have written of the Types of Christ, or Triglandus de potestat.
Civil. and Ecclesiastica Jehosaphat, Hiskia, Josiah, and similes nil nisi reges
fuere non Proph^tae. p. 237. A great difference is made by learned Divines for
Types and Prophets between Moses, David, Solomon Joshua, and Josiah, Hezekiah,
etc.
who grant Moses, David, Solomon to be express Types that they make Asa,
Josiah, etc. to be Types. Again of Types of Christ (as Divines distinguish)
there are particular persons types of him as Adam, Noah, Isaac, Joseph, Moses,
Joshua, Samson, David, Solomon, Jonah, and there are such rancks and orders of
men, as the Firstborn, Kings, Prophets, etc. Now though all of the first sort
are special particular Types of him, so that the special things done by them
do typifie and set forth Christ in many particulars of his person, actions and
sufferings: yet the rancks and orders of men as the Firstborn, Kings,
Prophets, may not be typical in all the particular persons of those ranks and
orders, at least to the particular acts they do in those ranks and orders: but
it is enough for many in those orders to agree in common, as in being Kings and
Prophets, as Christ was, there being some in all those orders and ranks
appointed of God especially and peculiarly to be the Types, which others are
not, and for whose sakes in those orders and ranks, such orders of men were
instituted by God to be Types, of which many instances might be given with the
Reasons thereof in some of the Firstborn, Kings, etc. but I shall reserve the
further handling of that to a second part upon this Subject. Lastly, supposing
Asa, Josiah, and those godly Kings to be Types of Christ, may it not be doubted
whether Jehu, Ieboash, Ammon, Jeroboam, etc. were Types of Christ, and did
execute his kingly office, who yet were commended, viz. the two first, for
destroying false worship, and reproved for not doing it constantly; besides
could those Kings of Israel and Judah (who yet were lawful Kings) that
apostatised from all the whole worship of God, the Ceremonial Law that
ordained the Types, that destroyed Gods service and the Priesthood, made
Priests of the lowest of the people, be Types of Christ? and I desire to be
resolved or M. S. the Author of the Ancient bounds of Liberty of Conscience
stated, whether any wicked men were special Types of Christ, and whether all
persons who were Types of Christ were not saved. Thirdly suppose these Kings of
Judah were Types of Christ in setting on the Thron of David, and ruling over
Judah, in Christ the King of his Church coming out of their loins, yet they
were temporal Kings, had Civil authority: Now how does it appear that what
they did in punishing idolatrous Priests, comm^nding their subjects to the true
worship of God, they did only as. Types by virtue of that Notion, and not as
they were temporal Kings, which must be proved before their examples can be
made null; and I am sure the Scripture no where faith that the Kings of Judah
and Israel in what they commanded in matters of Religion, they did as Types of
Christ, and not as Civil Magistrates: It Is one thing to be a Type, and another
thing to do such things merely qua Types; and what if Christian Magistrates
leaning upon this broken staff, suffering all Herefies, Blasphemies and
Idolatries in their Kingdoms, Christ at the last day when they stand before
the judgment feat, they objecting for themselves the Kings of Israel and Judah
were Types of Christ and all they did was by virtue of their typical notion,
shall tell them no, but as Magistrates entrusted by God with a power and
authority, how will they be then confounded? will this distinction and notion
found out by Libertines deliver from the wrath to come? had not Princes need be
on better grounds then Apocryphal notions, such distinctions of which God in
his. Word never gave any foundation? but besides the Apocryphalnesse of this
notion, that these Kings reformed Religion not merely quae Types, but as Kings
and Princes over subjects, may be proved thus.

First, because Magistrates before them, and Magistrates of other
Commonwealths did so, as is largely shown in the twelfth Th^sis.

Secondly, Types were not ordained by the Political or Moral Law, as
Magistrates and their authority, but by the Ceremonial Law.

Thirdly, for that which they say the Kings of Israel, the Jews and their Land
were Types of, and that which by their Kings punishing Idolaters and Seducers
was typified, The Blo^dy Tenet. page 179
namely spiritual censures under the Gospel of Excomm^nication and casting out
of the wicked from the Churches of the Gospel, it is denied they were Types of
the Christian Church in respect of the Civil State, but of the Spiritual and
Ecclesiastical Government by Church Officers; so the Land of Canaan was a Type
of heaven, not as it contained the Civil State, but the Church; it being a
Type of Heaven before they had possession of it, or their Civil State and
Government set up, and yet no Type of Heaven till the people of God had a
promise of it, (...) is evident by laying the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament together. And as for those punishments inflicted by Kings typifying
the censures under the Gospel, we must know that all the Spiritual Censures of
Admonition, Suspension, Excommunication, were under the Old Testament in the
time of the Kings of Judah, and that not only for Ceremonial uncleanness,
but for moral and scandalous fin^, all which is fully proved by Master
Gillaspie at large in his A^rous Rod blossoming, 2 Book 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
12. chapters.

Fourthly, granting what these Libertines say that the Kings of Judah were
Types of Christ, and in what they did they aypified Christ's kingly Office, yet
this cannot enervate the examples of these Kings, unless doing things as a
Type, and as a Moral example, could not stand in one and the same person,
which is not so: Some particular persons may be intended by God Types of Christ
(the highest kind of Type) and their action intended to typifie special works
of Christ,
and yet those very action^ may be Moral and binding all in such relations
whose persons nor actions can in no kind be judged typical, and the reason of
it is, because God may serve himself of a person or office doing things
commanded in the Moral law to make a type of, and though God intends such a man
by such and such actions to make him a Type, yet the man may not know so much,
nor intend any such thing in such actions, but do all by virtue of a Moral
command; and for the better understanding of this, let the Reader consider that
in some persons the same actions may be both Typical and Moral,
extraordinary in regard of the ma^^er and some circumstances, and ordinary in
regard of the matter and substance, typical as typifying Christ and what he
should do, and yet Mo^all duties which he ought to do, and all others also in
such relations: so that though some persons be Types, and the things they do
typical, yet they may be Moral too, and so binding, which though as they were
typical they may be taken away, yet as they were Moral may be in full force;
As for example, Christ was figured in Joseph, Joseph was an eminent Type of
Christ See Dr. Tailors Treatise of Types, c. 6. p. 33 34, 35, 36.
in the first ^ank of Types as a singular person typifying him, not as a rank
or order of men by office only as those kings of Judah spoken of, and among
other things he was a Type in feeding his Father and his Brethren, that when
advanced in the kingdom he provided for, and nourished his Fathers house,
which typified Jesus Christ feeding the Family of God, and preserving the
Church alive. Now though Joseph in this action was a Type of Christ, and did it
typically, yet not only typically, but did this morally and naturally too by
virtue of the fifth Commandment, and sixth Commandment, of childrens duty to
their Parents, and of preserving life; and by virtue of this example of Joseph
every man in high place and rich, is bound to send for and provide for Father
and Brethren in a necessitous condition;
and suppose now a man in Joseph's condition should have Father and Brethren in
want, whom he should neglect, and being pressed by Joseph's example to provide
for them, he should answer Joseph's practice was nothing to him, for he was a
Type of Christ, and typified Christ's feeding of his Church not with temporal
food only, but with the Manna from Heaven, the word and Sacraments, I ask of
those who plead this Argument of typicalnesse, whether this were a good Answer?
and if not, neither is theirs against the practice of the kings of Judah from
being Types of Christ; and I wish the Pleaders for Toleration would serious
consider of, and resolve this Question, though Joseph was a special Type of
Christ, and in this action of preserving his Father and Brethren a Type of
Christ's preserving his Church, yet whether this action of his to his Father,
Brethren and their children, do not bind now in the days of the Gospel
children to their Fathers etc. or whether the typicalnesse of it has caused it
to cease? and in the resolution of this case, the ingenuous Reader may see what
to judge of the typicalnesse of the kings of Judah, and that typicalnesse of
persons and actions does not presently make all such persons and actions that
they cannot be examples or rules to others who are not typical.
The Prophets and Prophetical office were Types of Christ as well as the kings
of Judah; and yet actions they did that were some way typical and
extraordinary, bind Christians under the Gospel for the substance and matter,
and are set before them for example, as Eli^^ a Type, and in his Prayer a Type,
yea somewhat in it extraordinary, is by James propounded in prayer as a
pattern and a proof of effectual servent prayer to righteous men under the
Gospel, James 5. 16, 17, 18. In Hebrews 11. many are named who in their persons
were undoubted Types of Christ, as Noah, Isaac, Joseph, Moses, Samson, David,
and others, who if not Types in their persons, yet were in an extraordinary
way, as Abraham, Jacob, Gideon, Iephtah, etc. Now in the point of faith and
patience (though Types or extraordinary persons) are set down for examples and
patterns to Christians under the New Testament, Hebrews 12. verse 1, 2. I could
give many more instances of Types and extraordinary persons, whom in Moral
practical things, matters of faith, holiness, righteousness (though they did
such things extraordinarily, and as Types of Christ either personally or
officially) Christians in an ordinary way are commanded to follow, and
therefore in the present case the vindicating of and promoting of the glory of
God, the punishing of evil doers (which Blasphemers, Heretics, and
Scismaticks are) the commanding good, being Morall-practicall things of
perpetual reason and equity bind all those in authority and government
according to their places, though they be no Types nor extraordinary persons.

Fifthly, if this evasion of the kings of Israel and Judah about Typicalnesse
be good, by the same reason it may hold against. Magistrates punishing under
the Gospel for matters of the second Table, murder, adultery, etc. for may not
the Socinians and Anabaptists, who deny Christian Magistrates may punish
capitally for murder, treason, etc. say the same thing against all the
examples of Magistrates and kings under the old Law punishing with death for
such offenses, that they were Types, and that people and Land typical, which
no Magistrate nor people are now, and what ever can be said upon this ground
against Princes meddling in matters of Religion, may as well be said against
their punishing in Civil matters, and Anabaptists, and Socinians may as well
say those Kings were Types of Christ in respect of their power over the State
as over the Church; and if they should affirm it, how would it be disproved?
And the Bloody ^Tene^* page 209. grants that in the Land of Israel all things,
their civils, morals and naturals, were carried on in Types as well as their
Spirituals and Ecclesiasticals; yea by this ground what ever shall be brought
out of the Old Testament to show the duty of Magistrates, or the qualifications
of them, as that they that rule over men must be just, fearing God, hating
covetousness, courageous, etc. it may be answered, that was required of those
who were typical, and their people typical, but it concerns not Magistrates
now; and yet higher, by this evasion men may reason against all instances out
of the Old Testament brought from Fathers, Masters, to bring up their children
in the fear of God, etc. because the firstborn, such Fathers and Masters of
families were typical,
and their children typical, which Fathers are not under the Gospel.

Sixthly, if this answer of typicalnesse may hold, all those Kings and Princes
actions and practices in other things of Moral particular duties, as prayer,
mourning for sin, giving God thanks for deliverances, etc. are taken away
from binding now, as well as their acts of power and authority; and when
Ministers bring these examples of David, Josiah, Hezekiah, etc. in such things,
it may be said they were Types of Christ, and did them as Types of something to
come: the Antinomian may upon this ground answer the example of David's praying
so often and constantly, and of mourning for his sins, by saying David was a
Type of Christ.

Seventhly, by this Answer all the Scriptures of the Old Testament, Moses,
Psalms, Prophets, with whatever of any duty commanded, or sin spoken against in
any of these, are at once made void: for it may be said the Penmen were Types,
and given to a typical people, written in a typical Land: It may be said of
the whole Moral Law, that as Moses in his person was a Type of Christ in many
particulars, so in delivering the Law he shadowed Christ the Mediator, Moses
being a mediator between God and his people in giving the Law, Galat. 3. 19.
the Law was delivered in the hand of a Mediator, that is Moses, Acts 7. 38. and
therefore not binding to Christians. And so it may be pretended of all things
written in the Psalms, Prophets, and the other Books that they were ( viz. the
Oracles of God) committed to the Jews and the Circumcision, Romans 3. 2. Romans 9.
4. which people and Nation of Israel were typical of the true Israel, the
Israel of God, Galat. 6. 16. So the Land of Canaan was typical of rest from
(...), and of true rest, and the heavenly inheritance, Hebr. 4. 1, 2, 3, 8* 9,
10, 11. verse. And indeed what was not typical some way or other in the Jewish
Church and State, as the firstborn, the Priests, Kings, Prophets, the Land,
the people, their worships, with many more particulars, so that if this Answer
stand good, all the Scriptures of the Old Testament are overthrown, and all
Heretics whatsoever, Socinians, Antinomians, Familists, etc. may evade any
Scripture brought from thence, as well as the pleaders for Toleration the
examples of the Kings of Israel and Judah.

8ly. All the actions and practices done by persons and things typical are so
far from nothing concerning them who live under the Gospel, that the
Scriptures of the New Testament tell us, that many things under the Old
Testament were made Figures and Type^ for the admonitions and example of those
in like cases under the New, and did teach to the uttermost, as the 1 Cor. 10.
from the sixth verse to the twelfth, and that clause of promise in the fifth
Commandment, That thy days may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God
gives thee, is meant of the Land of Canaan a typical Land, which yet did
teach Christians under the New Testament, that obedience to their Parents would
bring a being well with them, and living long upon the earth (though they had
not the Land of Canaan) as Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. 3. fully shows. Saint Paul also
tells us, Romans 15. 4. that whatsoever things were written (...), were written
for our learning, and so those Magistrates and Princes of Israel and Judah (how
ever they might typifie Christ's Kingdom) they were such Types spoken of in 1
Cor. 10. viz. examples to Christian Magistrates to teach them to do so
likewise, as Fathers then were to teach Fathers now to instruct their children,
and therefore though such an order of men as Kings in Israel might be intended
to typifie Christ's Kingdom, yet that no way hinders, but what they did as Kings
in ruling and ordering of their subjects, they performed as the proper works of
their places common to them with other Princes, without any reference to their
being Types, or doing them as Types, God in Scripture recording all along what
they did, as going upon common moral grounds, and speaking nothing of them in
their Reformations as in a figurative typical notion. And in the close of my
Answer to this evasion of the instances of the Kings of Judah, I shall hint to
the Reader to consider some notes of distinction between actions merely
typical and fulfilled in the Antitype, done only to represent and shadow forth
what Christ was to do,
and mixed actions, moral and typical too, or at least the actions of one who
by person or order is a Type; and upon search it will be found that all the
notes of actions moral, not merely typical, will be found in the practices of
those Ks of Judah and Israel before named, As first, when their practices and
ways are not barely related, but commended and praised by God, whereas actions
merely typical are only related and set down, as in Samson, and diverse others*
Secondly, when done upon moral grounds and reasons, motives drawn from
mercies, blessings, evils, and judgments, commands and messages from God
experiences of God, upon Gods convincing and converting men. Thirdly, when they
of such an Order and office are reproved and punished for not doing such
things, or for not thoroughly doing them, whereas I suppose persons typical,
and whose actions are intended to be merely typical, will and shall do such
things though they may not know the meaning of them, of which many instances
might be given in some actions of Samson, Jonas and others. Fourthly, when as
their actions are suitable to those qualifications, titles and descriptions
given in Scripture of Magistrates and that office in general. Fifthly, when
what they do is agreeable and suitable to the commands and directions given by
God to all of that order and rank, and they do in the matter of Religion in
commanding to good and suppressing evil, what all other Magistrates have done
in all times and ages, who have cared for any Religion at all, as Heathen
Princes before they knew the true God, and others after they have known him,
however through ignorance or superstition they might mistake about the true way
and worship: Now let the Reader but consider of all these notes of distinction,
and others of the like nature that might be given, and he will find them agree
to those Kings Jo^ia^, Hezekiah, Manasseh, Asa, etc. for the substance of all
they did in commanding their people to the right way* and suppressing the
false, and so much for answering of this evasion of the practice of the Kings
of Israel and Judah, which I have been the larger in, because so great a weight
of this controversy on all the Sectaries part lies on this typicalnesse both
of the Jewish Magistrates and people.

14. THESIS.
As for that which is said by M. S. page 51. that Idolatry and Idolaters were
the adaequate object of the coercive power of the Kings of Judah in matters of
Religion, and that Idolatry meant not of those who worshipped the true God
though in a false manner with the violation of the second Commandment, but of
such who Apostatized from the God of Israel to serve strange gods, the gods of
other Nations and those neither simply as such, but as drawing others away unto
the same Idolatries with them, but we never read of any coercive power or
punishment inflicted upon Heretics or Sismaticks which abounded in great
variety and numbers amongst them, as the Pharisees, Herodians, etc. I answer,
First, Idolatry and Idolaters were not the adaequate object of the Kings and
Magistrates coercive power under the Old Testament, but generally the matter of
the Covenant, the whole worship and truth of God, as is apparent by the
examples of Josiah, Hezekiah, Asa, and Jehosaphat, in putting down and
suppressing other evils besides Idolatry, as will worship, things abused to
Idolatry, profanation of the Sabbaths, marrying of strange wives, abuses in
Discipline and Church Government, profaning chambers in the Courts of the
house of God, in commanding to keep the Passover, which though their subjects
had not kept, they might not have been Idolaters, in punishing those who were
guilty only of wilworship, not of Idolatry, as also those who married strange
wives, who did common works on the Sabbath day, who dealt with familiar spirits
and Wizards, of al which the Reader may find proofs at large in these following
Script^ 2 Cro. 34. 31, 32, 33. There Is a Covenant made to keep all the
Testimonies and Statutes of God, and the people are made to stand to it, From 2
Kings 23. verse 8, 9. compared with 2 Chronicles. 14. 3. 5. 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. 2 Chronicles. 33. 17. it is evident there were in Judah two sorts of high places some
on which* was God worshipped; others on which Idols were worshipped, the one
sort was the high places of Idolatry, the other the high places of
will worship; yet the Priests of the latter as well as of the former were
punished by Josiah, though not with the punishment of death as they were* for
he caused them to go out of all the Cities of Judah, and to cease from the
Priests office, so that they durst not come up to the Altar of the Lord at
Jerusalem. So Nehem. 13. 7, 8. 15, 16, 17. 25. 28. 30. Ezra 10. 3. 5. 2 Kings
23, 24, 25.

Secondly, the Idolatry removed and punished by the Jewish Kings and
Magistrates, was as well of worshipping the true God in a false manner, as of
those who worshipped false gods, the gods of the Nations, and were Apostates
from the true God to other gods, as is evident by the instances of worshipping
the golden Calfe made by Aaron, and worshipping of the golden Calves at Dan and
Bet^el set up by J^ro^oam, (called Idolatry, as in several places of
Scripture) by Moses and some of the good Kings as Josiah removed, and the
Worshippers punished, and yet the people of Israel in worshipping these did not
go serve the gods of the Nations, but served the God of Israel as appears by
those speeches of theirs, Exodus 32. 4, 5, 6. To morrow is a Feast to the Lord,
not to the golden Calfe. 1 Kings 12. 27, 28. It is too much for you to go ^p to
Jerusalem, behold thy gods O Israel which brought thee up out of the Land of
Egypt; and our most learned Protestants in their writings against the Papists,
do prove the Papists to be formal Idolaters from their adoration of God and
Christ in Images (though they do not worship false gods, the gods of the
Heathen) by these two examples of Aarons golden calfe, and Ier^^oams golden
Calves, showing the people of the Jews were not so mad as to believe those
Calves to be their God, or that brought them out of the ^and of Egypt, being
brought up hundreds of years before, but only outward representations and
remembrancers of God to them, in which they worshipped the true God, their
worship being terminative related to God, and not to the Image. Joshua 22. 11,
12. All the children of Israel gathered themselves together to go up to war
against the children of Ruben, the children of Gad and the half Tribe of
Manasse^ upon supposition of their building an Altar, not to strange Gods, but
for burnt offerings, or for sacrifices besides the Altar of the Lord God that
was before his Tacernacle, verse 21. 26. 28, 29. which they were diverted from
upon being satisfied it was not an Altar for burnt Offerings, etc. but for a
witness between them and the rest of the Tribes that the Lord is God, verse
17. 34.

Thirdly, the Scripture is contrary also to that, that the grosest Idolaters
were not to be punished if not Sed^cers drawing others away from the true God
to strange gods, for we read that Moses was so angry with the people that were
seduced unto a lower kind of Idolatry, viz. worshipping the true God by a
Calfe, that besides the three thousand men that were put to the sword the
Seducers and the Ringleaders, he burned the Calfe, ground it to powder, strowed
it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it, causing the
Idol to pass from them among their excrements. So 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. They that
would not seek the Lord God of Israel whether small or great, the little ones
(who could not be in^i^ers of Idolatry) were to be punished. Deuteronomy. 13. When one
of the Cities of Israel was withdrawn to serve other gods, then the inhabitants
of the City, the children as well as the grown men (who could not withdraw from
God) were to be smitten. And we shall find it all along in the Book of the
Kings and Chronicles among the Idolaters and false worshippers, that there is no
such distinction made, but some of whom no such thing expressed, are removed
and punished, as those who may be supposed were inticers to Idolatry.

Fourthly, As for that the Kings of Judah Asa, Iosia, etc. never punished
Pharisees, Herodians, or any other Sect in the profession of the Jewish
Religion, the reason is manifest, because there was none such till many hundred
of years after these Kings, for these Sects of Pharisees* etc. began very
late, not long before the coming of Christ, and as for Herodian^ they sprung up
after Herod was King (which shows the great ignorance of M. S.
speaking as if there had been Herodians in the days of Asa, H^z^kiah, etc.)
but by the way if M. S. ^lias Cretinsis can prove there were such in the days
of those good Kings I will undertake to prove that they used their co^rcive
power toward them as well as toward Idola^ers, and ^ndeed it is evident by
many passages that all kind of corruption and declination from the way of God
was the object of Josiah^ and other Magistrates Reformation, and had there
been Sadduces, Herodians, etc. viz. men that had held those Errors and ways
in those Kings times, they could not have escaped their hands, and this is thus
proved, because the high places not of Idolatry, but of will worship, where
they sacrificed to the Lord only, as it is 2 Chronicles 33. 17. were put down and the
worshippers and Priests suppressed, and those good Kings who did not, are upon
record blamed (which kind of worshipping was not so bad as the Herodians and
Sadduces, who held Herod for the Messiah, and denied Angels and Spirits) and
that I may come up yet more close to M. S. objection, who says nothing was
done against Sectaries or Scismaticks, I conceive they were to the Church of
the Jews, as Sectaries and Scismaticks are now, and their worship a Scisme,
worshipping the true God in a separated way apart from the public place and
Assemblies of Gods people, as our Sectaries do now.

Fifthly, the true reasons why, when the Herodians, Sadduces, etc. sprung up
among the Jews, they were not suppressed not punished. First in regard
Religion was then mightily corrupted, all things were out of order, the Church
of the Jews did then hasten to their destruction, and so no wonder if Heresies
and false Doctrines were suffered in such a State as well as other things.
Secondly, the Jews were not then a free people, neither had they the Civil
power absolutely in their hands, they had no truly Bellarm. De laicis lib. 3.
cap. 19.
Jewish King who cared for those things, but Herod the Idumean, and the High
Priest then could do nothing. Thirdly, Gabriel Powell Refutat. of an Apologet.
Epistle ^e^ Toleration page 40.
God permitted Jury to abound with diversity of Sects in the days of Herod, as
the Sadduces, Essenes, the Pharisees, the Herodians, because he had a purpose
to destroy the Jewish Commonwealth, and to bring all into subjection to
Christ, and the Toleration of diverse Religions among them was the forerunner,
and preparer of the way for the ruin of the Jewish State, as it has been of
many States.

6ly. supposing the Kings of Iuda^ and Israel de facto, had never exercised any
coercive power on any other objects but Idolaters and Idolatry, and that all
the commands in the Old Testament given to the Jewish Magistrates had been in
the letter of the text only against Idolaters and Idolatry, (which is not
true) yet by virtue of those very commands and examples Magistrates might
exercise a coercive power against evils of the like kind, though not in the
letter specified; and the reason is this, because the commands of God and the
examples of good men accordingly recorded in Scripture might in the letter (at
least for the generality) be expressed only against those evils, and that kind
and sort of them which were most in use in that age and time when they were
given, and yet other kinds of those sins, or other sins as bad, or worse
which should arise afterward were by just Analogy, common equity, by a
Synecdoche usual in such commands forbidden also. As for example the second
Commandment forbids only in the letter and by name graven Image, and the
likeness of any thing, and yet in that command all mediums of worships
invented by men (though not graven Images nor likeness) are forbidden under
the title of graven Images and likeness, and that by a Synecdoche common in
the Decalogue, which because in those times of Moses they were the chief
inventions of m^n corrupting the worship of God, they are fitly put in the
place of all humane inventions brought into the worship of God, of which the
Reader may find more in Doctor Ames Medul. Theolog. 2. Book 13. chap. De
Cultu Instituto. So because Idolatry, and Idolatry with Apostafie to serve
strange Gods, the Gods of those Nations, whom God had cast out of the Land of
Canaan (there being many Cananites, etc. among them) were the corruptions the
Israelites were most in danger of, the Idolatries most in use in those times,
and by the Nations round about them when they should come to Canaan (as is
evident by many places of Deutr.) and the false Prophets and Seducers then went
most about to seduce men in that way, therefore God in the letter (as it was
most needful) spoke by name against such Prophets and such Idolatry as were
most stirring in those times, under which commands are forbidden by a
Synecdoche and by Analogy other depravations of Gods worship and name that
might arise in after ages, for by the rules of Interpretation of Scripture
given by Divines, where a thing is forbid, there all of that nature and sort
are forbidden also; as for example, greater sins of that kind, then those
expressed in the letter must needs be forbidden, and so lesser also. Now
certainly where God has given a command to Magistrates in the letter to punish
such offenses, if his subjects commit greater and higher against God and his
worship by the equity of this command he is to punish them (if none in the
letter for those) as if there had been no command but against Idolatry of such
Nations, yet worshipping the Devil, offering up children to Moloch,
blaspheming God and his worship, with other such, ought to be restrained, and
if they commit Idolatry or other corruptions, not so great or so gross, yet by
way of proportion and equity such ought to be, though in a lower kind and way.
And it is evident by many instances that the Jewish Magistrates Kings and
others, as Josiah Nehemiah, etc. did punish in a proportion (though not with
death) those who violated the worship of God, and the first Table, though they
were not guilty of Idolatry and Apostafie to worship other gods, nor of
worshipping the true God by Idols, as by the golden Calves of Jeroboam. And if
that be good Divinity which M. S. the Father of that Evafion of Idolatry and
Idolaters being the adaequate object of the coercive power of the Kings of
Judah in matters of Religion, has page 89. of the same Book, That God
prohibiting all manner of violence, oppression and hard measure among his
people one toward another, though such Laws as those in the letter of them
respected only Civil transfactions and dealings between men, yet the equity
and spirit of them extends to spirituals also, men being every whit as liable
to violence, oppression^ and hard measure from men for their conscience sake as
in any other respects, or upon any other grounds whatsoever, then from that
command, Deuteronomy. 13. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and from those examples of Asa, Josiah, to
infer an equity of punishing other offenses in the same kind, though not
named in the letter, must needs be better Divinity,
because every one cannot but conceive that the equity and spirit of a Law may
upon better grounds extend to things in the same kind and of the same nature,
from one spiritual thing to another, from Idolatry to Will Worship or Heresy,
then from civil things to religious, which differ tot^ genere. But setting
aside M. S. Concession, is there not all the equity and reason in the world
from those commands forementioned (though granting according to the letter of
those Laws no man should be put to death for any thing less then that kind of
Idolatry with Apostasy, worshipping false gods) that those who worship the
true God by graven Images by making likenesses of him, and that corrupt the
doctrine of Faith and Religion, should also by the Magistrates be punished as
well by suppressing their Conventicles, putting them out of places of power,
etc. though not so much as the others. Or is there any equity and proportion in
this, that God should command punishing with death (the highest kind the
Magistrate can inflict) for Idolatry in worshipping strange gods, and should
forbid any punishment or restraint at all of Idolatry, and corruption of his
worship in the next degree to that? According to degrees of faults to have
degrees of punishments is of the light of nature and right reason; but to have
a higher degree of an offense to be punished with death, and all others not to
be punished at all, is against the light of nature and all reason: Lets but
look into the Scriptures for the violation of other commands of God, as in the
6, 7 and 8th. Commandments: and we shall find that where the higher degrees
and violations had greater punishments, the others went not scorfree. For
example, when adultery was punished with death, fornication was punished with
fifty shekels of silver, and wit^^ paying of money according to the dowry of
virgins, Exodus 22. 16. 17. compared with Deuteronomy. 22. 22. 28, 29. So, when
stealing of men was death, stealing of oxen and sheep was restoring five and
fourfold, Exodus 21. 16. Exodus 22. 1.

Seventhly, there is a great agreement between the false Prophets under the old
Testament, and the false teachers under the New, between Idolatry under the old
Testament, and Heresies now (many Heresies being gross Idolatries) as is
evident by many Scriptures of the New Testament, which lively parallels and
resembles these to each other, so that it cannot be upon any good ground
conceived that the first sort should be punished with death, and the latter
not punished at all; but I refer the fuller clearing of this to the 17.
Thesis, where upon occasion of opening that 13. of Deutero^omi^ I shall speak
more.

15. THESIS.
Besides the full concurrent testimony and judgment of the most learned
Protestant Divines, Calvin, Philip Melancton, Beza, Peter Martyr, Zanchius,
Bullinger, Musculus, Chemnitius, Gerardus, Bucanus, Bilson, Cartwright,
Professores Leydenses, Voetius, Triglandus, that the care of Religion and Gods
worship belongs to the Magistrate, that God has given him a power and
authority objective and external in Ecclesiastical causes to look to Religion
as to Civil Justice, so as he is bound to see the true Religion and service of
God set up and maintained in his Dominions, being thereupon generally by all
Divines called Custos and Curator utriusque Tabulae. God himself in the
Scriptures shows at much, annexing the care of Religion and keeping the Law,
the first Table as well as the second to the Magistrate, Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. God
there appoints that the King over his people when he comes to the Throne of his
kingdom, should have a Copy of the Law written out of that which was before,
the Priests the Levites to be always with him. Now the Law there spoken of is
meant the whole Law of God, the first Table as well as the second, that which
concerned God as well as man, because it was a Copy of that Original which
was kept in the Tabernacle for the Priests and Levites, whose office was
principally about matters of the first Table; and then the end expressed in the
19. verse, that the King might learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep all
the words of this Law, shows as much that by the name of the Law must be
understood the whole Systeme of the Divine Law, so that by this place of
Scripture it is evident that not only the second Table of the Moral Law that
contains justice and righteousness is committed to the Magistrate, but the
first also concerning the worship of God is given to his custody. And as it is
understood of the whole Law, so the custody of the Law of God is not here a
Custodia legum personalis and privata, meant only of a personal private
keeping, as the Pleaders for Toleration evade, saying, that the King in his
person as well as others was to keep the Law, but also and chiefly of a
Meisnerus Sect. 2. Controvers. quaest. Politic. De Magistr. page
Custodia Officialis and publica quod Rex curare debeat ut Lex Domini pure
doceatur, ut cultus instituatur, a public keeping out of office, it being the
Kings office to care that the Law of God should be purely taught, and his
worship set up; and that it must be so understood, consider these following
Reasons.

First, this King, verse 15. was to be one from among themselves, a Brother,
not a stranger, who was to know the Law of God, and to keep it personally as
well before he was a King, as after, the Law of God being committed to private
persons equally as to Kings for their particular personal observation, and
therefore sure in this solemn injunction there is something new and more
required of Kings then was of them before, or is of persons merely private.

Bilsons difference between Christian subjection and unchristian Rebellion.
part 2. page 178.
Secondly, this was not done till just he was placed in the throne, so says
the text, verse 18. The Law was committed to the King as a King at his
Coronation, which shows it had not reference to the Kings private conversation
as a mere man, but to his Princely function as a Magistrate, which stood in
commanding others, not in guiding himself. For no man is a King in respect of
himself, but in ruling his Subjects. So August. Epist. 50.
Augustine says of Kings, As a man he serves God one way, as a King another
way; As a man by faithful living, as a King in setting forth Laws to command
that which is good, and remove the contrary. So that Kings as Kings serve God
in doing that for his service which none but Kings can do. This is also proved
from 2 Kings 11. 12. compared with 2 Chronicles. 23. 11. where to King Jehoash in
his solemn inauguration as soon as the Crown is put upon him, the Book of the
Testimony was given him from the high Priest, that he might know the care and
public custody of the Law was committed to him in his being made a King; and
in that the command of God with the practice accordingly, together with putting
the Crown on the head was to give the Law in the Kings hand, it shows it was
to command it to others, and make others keep it. And that this was the meaning
of it in Jehoash, and so in other Princes, it may further appear in that the
people at that time being much corrupted in Religion, and Jehoaida the high
priest desiring much their Reformation, and the Restoration of Religion, as a
means to effect it made a covenant between the Lord and the people: and as the
medium and means that that people should be the Lords people, he brings in
the King between them that he should interpose with his authority to make them
the Lords people, verse 17. And Iehoiada made a Covenant between the Lord and
the King, and the people, that they should be the Lords people, Vide Late
Annotations of English Divines on the place.
that he should set up and maintain the true worship of God, and be for God
to bring in the people.

Thirdly, Vide Pet. Mart. in locum.
the ends expressed in Deuteronomy. 17. Of the Kings prolonging his days in his
Kingdom, he and his children in the midst of Israel, of his not turning aside
from the commandment to the right or to the left, of his learning to fear the
Lord God, and keeping all the words of the Law, show, it is understood of a
public official keeping the Law; for the Kings of Israel and Judah could not
prolong their days in their Kingdoms, nor their children enjoy good days
after them if they suffered Idolatry, Apostasy, etc. in their land, though
themselves practiced it not, as may be seen in Solomon, and the stories of the
Kings of Israel and Judah, neither could they keep all the commands of God,
there being many commands given to the Jewish Magistrates (as is confessed, but
pleaded to be Judicial and peculiar to them) to see their people serve God
only, and to punish Idolaters and false Prophets.

Fourthly, the practice of the good Kings among the Jews not only keeping the
Law themselves, but causing others also, as Josiah, Hezekiah, Asae, etc. and
that from this Text, and such like, shows it was meant of a public keeping
the Law; the diligent execution of their office serves for an evident
exposition what God required at their hands.

And as I have proved that of Deuteronomy. 17. speaks of a keeping the Law ex officio
as a public custos, so for the taking of another evasion brought by Mr.
Goodwin in his Hagiomastix, page 132. I desire the Reader to observe that God
having given power and authority to the Magistrate to see the first Table kept,
the duties commanded to be performed by all under his jurisdiction, and to be
guarded against all disobedience and contempt from men, it must be understood
in the use of such means and ways God has allowed the Magistrate as distinct
from private persons or ministers, viz. such as are proper to him, and which
God has given him by virtue of his place to use. Now those means qua
Magistrate are in the exercise of his coercive power by Laws and Edicts, and
by the use of the temporal sword given him of God to restrain and hinder such
evils, and to promote and further such good. Phil. Mela^c. de Magistrate.
Civilibus and dignitate Rerum Politic.
So Melancton when as the Magistrate is the keeper of the Laws he himself
obeys them, and compells others to obey them, and defends strongly their
authority: Therefore he is armed of God with the sword. The Minister he
restraines and punishes only with the word of God, with preaching and
excommunication without bodily force. But the Magistrate being armed with the
sword, punishes those who are con^umaicous with punishments of the body.
Triglandu^ de potest. Civili. and Eccles. c. 13. p. 258. 259
Triglandus shows how Ministers, Fathers of families, Magistrates and all
people are commanded to keep the Law, and are keepers of the Law, and then
lays down the difference between all these in keeping the Law. The Minister
he teaches whole Assemblies the true rule of holiness, admonishes, and
exhorts al to subject to the command of Christ, and by the power of the keys
casts out from the communion of the faithful impenitent and refractorie
persons. The father of a family teaches in his family the exercise of true
piety, goes before them in example, and by his authority restrains his that
they shall not turn out of the good way. Now he who is Magistrate, does not
teach but as a believer out of the Law of love as other believers do, and as a
Father of a Family his own household: But as a Magistrate with his coercive
power he commands and forces all within his Territories that they shall not
outwardly offend against the true Religion and worship of God. Amesius Medul.
lib. 2. cap. 17. page 551. Magistratuum est politicis medi^^, and potestate
coerciva procurare bonum commun^, tam spirituale quam corporale omnium little,
quo^ habent suae jurisdictioni commissos.
And so all our Divines who have written of the differences between Civil and
Ecclesiastical power, as (...), Z^^chiu^, Amesi^^, Apollo^^^, (...), do show
the lawfulness of the Magistrates using outward force by p^nall Laws and
bodily punishments toward those persons and things whereof God has given them
power. I will quote one passage out of Amesi^^. Between the Magistrates and the
Ministers of the Church, there is this difference. It Is the duty of Magistrates
by Civil means, and coercive power to procure the common good as well
spiritual as bodily of all those committed to their jurisdiction, 1. Tim. 2.
2. but of Ministere by Ecclesiastical means to procure the spiritual good of
those committed to them. Bilsons difference between Christian subjection and
unchristian Rebellion, part 3. page 308.
And another out of Bilson, Ministers may teach but not command, persuasion is
their part, compulsion is the Princes. By all which it appears the Magistrate
having power in matters of Religion, as the Scriptures quoted, with that
received maxim Magistratus est Custos utriusque Tabulae prove, the exercising
of it by coercive means is no unrighteous way, but most suitable to the nature
of that Ordinance of Magistracy appointed by God to be the keeper of the first
Table quoad externam Disciplinam, the due consideration whereof fully answers
Hagiomastixs rich sense of the Magistrates being Custos utriusque Tabulae, laid
down by him, page 131, 132. and shows both his Senses to be but mere
Evasions. The fourth Commandment contains the sum of all Religion and the
public worship of God; the Commandment is Synechdochicall as the others are,
containing more things then are experssed in words: In this Commandment not
only the time to be allowed for public worship, but what ever belongs to this
worship are breifely comprehended under the sanctification of the Sabbath. It Is
commanded that the Church setting aside all other businesses of this life
should meet to worship God to hear his word, pray, etc. For as these things
cannot be done without time, so not without place, Ministers, etc. Therefore in
this Synecdoche are contained the commands of the public Ecclesiastical
meetings to worship God, of places chosen fit for meeting, of the Ministers and
their office. In a word, this command of the sanctification of the Sabbath
contains all those things which belong to the worship of God, and are judged to
be necessary. Zanchi^ upon the fourth Commandment, page 652. shows this at
large. Chemnitius also in his Common Places De lege Dei on the forth
Commandment, with Rivetus in his Explication of the Decalogue, page 111. are
of the same mind that the worship of God is required under keeping the Sabbath
day holy, the public worship, and the private serving in reference to the
public being there commanded. And it is the observation of Zanchie on the
fourth Commandment, page 651. that there is in the manner of delivering the
fourth Commandment, and the other three before it, a threefold difference. 1.
All the other are plainly negative, Thou shall not, but this of the Sabbath is
expressly affirmative and negative too. 2. In the others he sets not his own
example, but in this he does. 3. In them he speaks simply, Thou shall not, but
here not contended with a simple Commanding, he adds a word Remember, by all
which God would reach that it is much in his heart that this Commandment should
be kept and that it is a command of great moment. Now this Moral Commandment
containing the sum of Religion and Gods public worship, is given in the
first place to the Father of the Family, directed immediately to him, Thou and
thy son and thy daughter, etc. therefore given to the Governors of the
Family, that they should see it be observed of their whole Family, God having
so expressed it as Zanchius * speaks to decla^e he would Zanch. in qua^.
praecept. 659.
have Governors of the Family to be the Authors and leaders to the whole
Family to bring them to the public Assemblies to sanctify the Sabbath. Now
this Pronowne thou being a Synecdoche comprehending more then is expressed by
name, viz as all Governors of Families, Masters, etc. besides natural
Fathers, so Magistrates the Fathers and Governors of their people, (as many
learned Divines upon the place expound it) teaches us that this command
comprehending the sum of all Religion and public worship, is given to the
Magistrates in the first place for their subjects, and by this command we are
instructed not only what lies upon the Master of the Family, but what is the
Magistrates duty in Religion, viz. that he should do the will of God himself,
and care that it be done also of others, and see Gods Sabbaths be sanctified.
So that here we have in this fourth command the duty of Magistrates in
Religion, and how that the care of Gods public worship and Religion is
committed to them, that they should look to it. Zanchius in quart. praecept.
659, 660 Quia vero Synecdoche est sub Patresamilias, complectens and
Magistratum, ideo tacit etiam docet, non solum quid inc^^bat cuique
Patrifamilias, sed etia^ quodnam sit Magistratus officium in religione: nempe
ut primo intelligat ex lege Dei quae sit ejus voluntas; deinde eam faciet ipse,
and curet ab aliis etiam fieri, Sabbatumque ex ejus voluntat^ sanctific^^i,
vide ibi plura.
Zanchie upon this fourth command speaks much how under the Father by a
Synecdoche is meant also the Magistrate, and that here the holy Ghost teaches
what the office of a Magistrate is in matters of Religion, how that he is to
command his subjects to the outward worship, and to use his endeavor that his
subjects may come to the public assemblies, and together with others sanctify
the Sabbath. Chemnitius loc. com. de lege Dei in quart. praecept. p. 144.
Manifestum est a Parentibus, Patribus familias and Magistra tibus exigi non
tantum ut ipsi Sabbatum sanctificent, sed ipsorum officii esse ut curent a
reliquis etiam sanctificari, prohibeant and puniant prophanationem. Et oftendit
Deus Magistratum debere curare ut peregrini habitantes in portis conforment se
religioni verae, ne inde oriantur scandala.
Chemnitius upon the same command writes thus, It Is manifest, in this
Commandment it is required of Parents, Masters of families, and Magistrates,
not only that themselves sanctify the Sabbath, but that it is their place and
duty that they care it be sanctified of others, and prohibit and punish its
profanation. And God does show that the Magistrates ought to care, that
strangers inhabiting within their gates should conform to the true Religion,
lest otherwise scandals should arise. And that by [ thou] the Magistrate is
understood, and so by this command, the care of the public worship and Sabbath
to see it sanctified, is given to the Magistrate, is further proved from those
words, nor the stranger that is within thy gates. By gates, in that place, are
understood not only a particular family or city, but the whole country of any
people, as Genesis 22. v. 27. He shall possess the gates of his enemies, and Genesis
24. 60. Deuteronomy. 24. 24. So learned Rivet upon the 4. Commandment, by strangers
within thy gates are meant, First strangers who commonly inhabited and lived in
the common wealth of Israel, Secondly strangers who came from other countries
for a time, not to remain, but either to see the country, or to traffic, etc.
both which are to keep the Sabbath, the latter sort so far, as not to violate
it with any external servile work, as is evident by Nehem. 13. v. 19, 20, 21.
Now the meaning of gates and strangers fully shows the Magistrate is meant in
the command; for many strangers in the first sense dwelt in houses of their
own, and in the 2d sense the Father of a family had nothing to do out of his
house, or with travelers and merchants who were of no family, but the
restraining of them belonged properly to the Magistrate. Upon which
interpretation Rivetus in Decal. page 112. Zanch. in quar. pr^cept. p. 600.
Rivet and Zanchius do show how it is the part of a Magistrate to provide that
strangers may not give scandals in a commonwealth, but that at least they be
made to keep outward discipline with others. The strangers among the Jews were
compelled not only to stand to their Political laws, but to some of the outward
precepts of Religion, and that partly lest the good manners of the Jews should
be corrupted and disturbed with the Gentiles evil manners, and that the
strangers among them might be in some sort instructed in the knowledge of the
Divine law.

And whosoever would be fully satisfied in this point that the public exercise
of piety and Religion is commanded in the fourth Commandment, and that this
Commandment belongs and is given to the Magistrates, not only as particular
persons, but as they are Magistrates, so that it is their part to care by their
authority that the Sabbath be sanctified, that is, that Religion be preserved,
and the exercises of piety take place in their Countries and Territories; and
further know what the office of a Magistrate is in matters of Religion both in
respect of persons and things, and that in the several particulars, let him
read learned Zanchius on the fourth Commandment, particularly in these pages
651, 652. 659, 660. and especia^ly 788, 789, etc. the fifth Common Place De
Offici^ Principum in Religione, of the office of Princes in Religion. And
therefore seeing Magistrates have the care of Religion and Gods worship
committed to them, being by God appointed to be keepers of the first Table as
well as the second, among other particulars laid down in the word, and branched
out by Divines, wherein the Magistrates power in matters of Religion stands,
this must needs be one, a power of suppressing false Religions and Heresies,
and punishing those who by all ways and means go about to destroy the true.
If the Magistrate be Custos prim^ Tabula, he is also Vindex primae Tabulae. If
the Magistrate have a power of commanding the true, and using co^rcive means
to bring his people to it, then sure he has of hindering the false,
as he that by Law has the power of keeping the peace, has a power also of
suppressing tumults, riots, r^u^s, and the reason is manifest, because the one
cannot be kept without the other: the Physician who has a power given him over
bodies for their health, has a power over sicknesses, corrupt meats, poison,
and all that would destroy the health and life. He who has the power of
keeping a Garden and the precious flowers and fruits in it, has a power of
plucking up weeds, taking Mouls, Snails and such like that would spoil all. He
who may justly command, may justly punish;
and he that may lawfully punish, may certainly command. All learning will tell
us that contraries be consequent to contraries. If Magistrates may lawfully
command and establish that which is good, then they may forbid and abolish the
contrary evil, of which see more in Bilsons Difference between Christian
subjection and unchristian Rebellion, part. 2. p. 278, 279. And therefore we
see Josiah and other Princes who established the true Religion, and by their
kingly authority caused the people to stand to it, removed and punished also
all persons and ways contrary thereunto: Hence I conceive it is, that maxim is
generally received among Divines, Magistratus est Custos ac vindex utriusque
Tabulae, the Magistrate is the Revenger of both Tables as well as the Keeper.

16. THESIS.
Magistrates* qua Magistrates, by virtue of their office, as Magistrates
simply, every of them, though Turks, Heathen and wicked, as well as Christian
and Orthodox, have an authority, right, power from God Jure divino in matters
of Religion to command for God, and his Honor, and to forbid and suppress the
contrary. The Magistrate in general being by his proper place the Minister of
God, Romans 13. Gods vicegerent governing men in the room of God, even so far as
his power and jurisdiction extends, is bound to care in matters of Religion. As
now Parents qua Parents have by the moral law of God a power and a duty lying
upon them to command their children to good, and to forbid evil, and have a
rod given into their hands to those ends, although being Heathens or wicked,
for the present they know not, or will not exercise it in teaching and bringing
them up in the Christian Religion and fear of God: So is with Magistrates, the
Authority and right every of them has by being a Magistrate, who by his place
is for the punishment of evil doers and the praise of them that do well,
however to the due and right exercise of this, a good will and true knowledge
out of the word of God may be required. Magistratus omnis ta^. Christianus quam
non Christianus potest and debet. Vide plura.
Zanehius in his M^scellaniet de Magistratu 167. 169. and De Ecclesi^
militantis Gubernatione, cap. 26. page 553, 554. shows that every Magistrate
as well; wicked as godly, not Christian as Christian, has this power and so
does Spalatensis in his sixth Book, fifth chapter De Republica Ecclesiastica,
but for the better understanding of it I shall lay down this twofold
distinction.

First, that Heathen Princes so far as the light of nature teaches them and
right Reason, are to make Laws in matters of Religion and whereas the * light
of nature leads on straight to the knowledge of one God and Supreme Deity, Romans
1. 19, 20, 21.
and dictates this God to be just, holy, good, perfect, etc. and to be
worshipped with reverence, they should command so far, remove Idolatry, the
worship of birds, four-footed beasts, and creeping things, promote the worship
of the true God, punish blasphemies and wicked opinions contrary to the nature
of God, and that out of their proper office of being Princes, as the immediate
Ministers and Vicegerents of God on earth: Hence we read in many Writers, as
Vit. Number. Pompil. De Reverent. Dei hoe age. Numa also forbad the Romans to
believe that God has either form or likeness of beast or man, so that in
Rome there was no Image of God neither painted nor graven. Vide ibi plura.
Plutarch, Aristotle, Plato and others, that Heathen Princes have made Laws
for God and his worship, and have punished Atheists, Epicures Blasphemers, and
Sacrilegious persons; and as any of them have come to more knowledge of God and
Religion by any extraordinary work of Gods providence, or by living among them
of the true Religion as the Jews before Christ's time, and Christians since,
though not fully converted, yet still according to their knowledge and means,
they were bound, and many of them have gone on in promoting the true Religion,
and forbidding the contrary, as the King of Niniveh, Darius, Nebuchadonezor,
and Aurelianus at the request of the Church punishing Paulus Samosetenus the
Heretic. But now if beside the light of nature and dictamen of natural
reason, Princes have the light of faith, the knowledge of Christ and the
Scriptures, of Heathens come to be Christians, or being borne in Christian
Commonwealths, have from their child hood been brought up in the faith of
Christ, then also out of their kingly office they should throw down all things
contrary to faith and the true worship of Christ, and positively by outward
acts promote and command the outward worship of God, have a care of the
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and of all the parts of Religion that they may be
preserved: Of which the Reader may be further satisfied in the writings of that
learned man De Republ. Eccles. cap. ^. 579, 580. Quod si praeter nudum lumen
naturae, and naeturalis solius rationis dictamen, adsit in Rege terreno, ex Dei
beneficio etiam lumen fidei, adeoque dictamen hoc rationis supernaturalibus
etiam virtutibus infusis dirigatur, tunc similiter ex ^odem regis officio
religionis queque Custes ita suam debet ordinare Politiam, primum negative ut
illa cum fide moribusque fideli homini digni^ no^s pugnet; deinde positive per
actus externos (qui soli ad ipsius spectant potestatem) externam divinum cultum
foveat, promoveat, etc. Vide ibi plura. Zanch. de Magistr. 553, 554.
Marcus Antonius de Dominis Archbish. of Spalato.

Secondly, though the care of Religion belongs to al Princes, yet in a special
manner upon special obligations the Christian ^aith belongs to Christian
Magistrates and Princes, whom God has given to be nursing Fathers and nursing
Mothers: these have not only a remote power, but the next power which they may
bring into act by reason of the knowledge of Christ, and many helps; and this
many Reformed Divines affert of the Christian Magistrate in the handling of
this question of the Magistrates power, as Zanchius and others. But if the
Magistrate be also Christian, we do believe it specially belongs to him to
take a peculiar care of the Christian Religion. And I have set down this
Thesis thus distinctl^ by it self, because diverse of the Patrons of
Toler^tion, especially Cretensis in his M. S. page 48, 49. and in his
Hagiom^stix. 99, 100. 125. do on purpose snarle and make intricate the
question about the Magistrates power in matters of Religion, trouble the
waters, by falling upon that phrase often expressed by Divines in this
Controversy the Christian Magistrate, which how it is to be taken I have showed,
and should have here more fully opened it, and taken off some cavils I foresee
likely to be made against it, but that I have spoken of it in the Prolegomen^,
and intend in the second or third part of Toleration to treat more fully of it.

17. THESIS.
Besides all the proofs in the Old Testament of Magistrates power de facto in
matters of Religion, with commands given to them to look to see the true
Religion settled in their Countries (which I have given in former Theses) there
are many express commands given by God to the Magistrates to punish persons in
their Territories for matters against the first Table viz. Idolaters,
Blasphemers, false Prophets, Seducers, Witches and Wizards, Prophaners of the
Sabbath, as in Exodus 22. verse 20. He that sacrifices unto any God save unto
the Lord only, he shall be utterly destroyed. Deuteronomy. 13. verse 1, 2, 5, If there
arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, saying, let us go after
other Gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them: Thou shall not
harken unto the words of that Prophet, etc. And that Prophet, or that dreamer
of dreams shall be put to death, because he has spoken to turn you away from
the Lord your God, which brought you out of the Land of Egypt, and redeemed you
out of the house of bondage, to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy
God commanded thee to walk in: So shall thou put away the evil from the midst
of thee. Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 3, 4, 5. If there be found among you within any of thy
gates which the Lord thy God gives thee, man or woman that has wrought
wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God, in transgressing, his Covenant,
and has gone and served other gods and worshipped them, either the Sun or
Moon, or any of the host of Heaven, which I have not commanded; and it be told
thee and thou have beard of it, and inquired diligently, and behold it be true,
and the thing certain that such abomination is wrought in Israel: then shall
thou bring forth that man or that moman (which have committed that wicked
thing) unto the gates, even that man or that woman and shall stone them with
stones until they die. verse 12, 13. And the man that will do presumptuously,
and will not hearken unto the Priest (that stands to minister there before
the Lord thy God) or unto the Judge, even that man shall die, and thou shall
put away evil from Israel. And all the people shall hear and fear, and do
no more presumptuously. Levit. 24. 16. And he that blasphemeth the name of the
Lord, he shall surely he put to death, and all the Congregation shall certainly
stone him: As well the stranger, as he that is borne in the Land, when he
blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall be put to death. verse 23. And Moses
spoke to the children of Israel, that they should bring forth him that had
cursed out of the Camp, and stone him with stones: and the children of Israel
did as the Lord commanded Moses. Levit. 20. 2, 3, 4. And the Lord spoke unto
Moses saying, Again thou shall say to the children of Israel, whosoever he be
of the children of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourne in Israel that
gives any of his seed to Molech, he shall surely be put to death. Exodus 22.
18. Levit. 20. 27. Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live. A man also or woman
that has a familiar spirit, or that is a Wizard, shall surely be put to death;
they shall stone them with stones: their blood shall be upon them. Ye shall
keep the Sabbath therefore, for it is holy unto you: every one that defiles
it, shall surely be put to death: for whosoever does any work therein, that
saul shall he cut off from among his people.

Deuteronomy. 18. 20. 22. But the Prophet which shall presume to speak ^ word in my
name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or that shall speak in the name
of other gods, even that Prophet shall die. When a Prophet speaks in the name
of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing
which the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously:
thou shall not be afraid of him, that is, afraid to put him to death, either
for his threatening words, or for his signs, or for his shows of holiness, or
because he has the name of a Prophet of the Lord, and speaks in the name of
the Lord, or is indeed a Prophet, as that old Prophet was 1 Kings 13. 11, 18,
20, 21, 30. Ainsw. upon this place, says, the Hebrews, explain it, saying
Whosoever withdraws himself from killing a false Prophet, because of his
dignity, for that he walks in the ways of Prophecy, behold he transgresses
against this prohibition, thou shall not be afraid of him. And so he that with
draws himself from teaching concerning him what he is guilty of; or that
dreadeth and fears for his words, etc. Now in all these commands, as their
subject matter consists of things forbidden in the ten Commandments, as
Blasphemy, Apostasy, Witchcraft, Profanation of the Sabbath, etc. So that
the commands for punishing such (for the substance of them) are moral too of
common reason and equity given to all Nations, and for all ages, as to the
Jews and their times, I shall prove by these following Reasons; and for the
most material things brought of old or of late by the grand Patrons of
Toleration Minus Celsus Senensis, Acontius, Bloody Tenet, M. S. Hagiomastix to
make void these places of Scripture, (as that these commands either are
abrogated by Christ, the things commanded in those laws belonging to the Jews
only, but not the Gentiles nor Christians, or if they be any way moral, yet
they extend not to Heretics and false-teachers, but concern only Apostates,
Blasphemers, such false Prophets who endeavored to persuade men to the worship
of a false God; and that by affirming that they spoke by the inspiration of
some deity) to them also I shall return asatisfying Answer.

For the first, let the Reader lay together these particulars. 1. that it is
evident some of these commands, as against offering their children to Molech,
as against dealing and contracting with a familiar Spirit deserve punishing
among Christians and under the Gospel now, as well as under the Law, and if
these, why not the other of Blasphemy, Idolatry, false-prophecie, etc? these
latter are of moral things as well as the other; the first and these are
delivered both by Moses in the samebooks, time, propounded after the same tenor
and way, upon the same grounds and reasons. No difference at all, unless that
these latter concerning Apostasy, Idolatry, false prophecy, be more strictly
commanded and further enlarged, which the Reader by comparing the texts shall
observe. But if it be said those commands against offering their seed to Molech
and of witches, are therefore punished by the Magistrate, because they offend
against lives and estates of mankind, in killing the children, in cattle being
killed, and men's bodies being hurt by Witches and Wisards, which is not in the
other of Apostasy, Blasphemy, etc. I reply, it is to be observed that in all
those places where the commands are given by God to the Magistrate about these,
there is not one jota or tittle expressed about offending against the second
Table in life or goods, but all the reason formally declared, is, because
against God immediately, and the commands of the first Table: For giving the
seed to Molech, Levit. 18. 21. this is the reason alleged by God against it,
Thou shall not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to Molech, neither
shall thou profane the name of thy God: I am the Lord, Levit. 20. 3. the
reason given against it, is the defiling of Gods Sanctuary, and profaning his
holy name, both which spoke in reference to the worship of God only and matters
of Religion, as Ainsworth in his Notes upon both these Texts, fully and
excellently shows, as also the late Annotations of our English Divines. It is
further proved by those two Texts Jerem. 7. 31. Jerem. 19. 5, 6. where God
speaking against the Jews offering up their children to Molech, lays open
their sins in these expressions, which I commanded them not, neither came it
into my heart, which I commanded not, nor spoke it, neither came it into my
mind, in which words God answers to what was in their heart, viz. that they did
it as a worship to God, a thing commanded by him, and so out of conscience, but
God tells them, and that in these reiterated expressions it was never commanded
by him among all the duties of his worship he never spoke a word of any such
matter. and among all the places in Moses Books, Prophets, the Books of Kings,
Chronicles, where it is spoken of, we shall never find this condemned as
murder, but still spoken against as Idolatry, a corruption of Gods worship,
and so recorded among such transgressions: besides according to Gods own rule
and way of acquitting some men of murder, by providing Cities of refuge, Deuteronomy.
19. in some cases for men that had slain their brethren, upon that ground,
because they hated them not in time past, twice expressed verse 4. 6. the
givers of their children to Molech will be found to be adjudged to death for
their Idolatry rather then the killing their children: for it cannot be
supposed that the worshippers of Molech hated their children in time past, or
at present, and out of that hatred offered them up in sacrifice, but out of
their blind zeal and strong delusion, thinking therein they should do a high
and extraordinary service; Rabbi Bechai says, that the Parents were persuaded
that by this sacrifice the rest of their children should be delivered from
death, and that they themselves should prosper for it all the days of their
life. For there is no question but these Idolaters loved their children and had
affections to them as might be proved by several reasons, among others by the
great noise made by beating upon Drums in the time of sacrificing to drown the
cries of the children, left their cries working on their Fathers natural
affections should make the Fathers spare them; whereupon the place of
sacrificing was called Tophet of Toph, which is a Taber or Drum. For the
commands given to Magistrates against Witches, they are set down either without
any reasons at all of them, or else in those places where any reasons are
assigned they relate wholly to God as a breach of the first Table, nothing at
all as to men, as these Scriptures show, Levit. 20. 6, 7. 26, 27. Deuteronomy. 18. 10,
11, 12, 13. and our English Divines in their late Annotations upon Exodus 22.
1^. write thus, Witchcraft in forbidden, and that upon pain of death. Some
have thought Witches should not die unless they had taken away the life of
mankind; but they are mistaken, (the proof of which the Reader may find set
down there) But why then must the Witch be put to death? Answer, Because of
the league and confederacy with the Devil, which is high treason against God,
because he is Gods chiefest enemy, and therefore though no (...) ensue this
contract at all, the Witch deserver present and certain death for the contract
it self. Secondly, these commands to the Magistrate concerning Idolaters,
Blasphemers, etc. were not for the punishing of Israelites, the Jewish people
only, but of all strangers in their Land, both of Proselytes that dwelt among
them, and of others that only traveled thorough, or were there a while upon
trading or such like occasions, as these Scriptures show Levit. 20. verse 2.
Whosoever he be of the children of Israel, or of the stranger that sojourne in
Israel, that gives any of his seed to Molech, he shall surely be put to death,
Levit. 24. verse 16. He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord shall surely be
put to death, as well the stranger, as he that is borne in the Land. Upon which
places of Scripture and others, as the fourth Commandment, etc. besides many
reasons that might be given why stranger is to be taken in the largest sense,
even for all strangers coming among them though not Pro^elytes, it is the
judgment of many learned men as Rabbis who were best skilled in the Customs
of the Jews, Maimonides with others, as modern write^s Zanchius, Rivetus, our
English Divines in their late Annotations on Levit, 20. verse 1. and above all
Master Seldom in that learned Book De Jure Naturali and Gentium lib. 2. cap. 3.
clearly shows, it is understood of all Gentiles coming among them by accident,
as those workmen of other Countries, Tyrians, Phaenitians, etc. sent by Kings
to King Solomon for the building of the Temple, or those who passed from place
to place for traffic sake, or any who passed through the Country. Master
Lib. 2. cap. 3. 154. 155, 156. De Jure Nature. and Gent. Lib. 1. cap. 10.
Gentilis quilibet qui non in se receperat septem praecepta Noachidis imperata
ultimo supplicio assiciendus erat si inditione nostra commoraretur.
Seldom in that Book of his also shows, that when the Israelites were Sui
Juris in their own Country, had power over the Nations, and were in a
flourishing estate under David, Solomon and other such Kings, they denied all
dwelling and habitation to the Idolatrous Heathen, or so much as to lodge them
by way of Travelers or Guests, till they had given their names to the seven
Precepts Juris Noachidarum seu Naturalis (as they are called) among which
Idolatry and Blasphemy De Cultu extraneo, De maledictione Nominis sanctissimi
seu Numinis, were the first. Nay further he proves that every Gentile which
had not received those seven Precepts was to be punished with death if he
stayed in the Jews Territories, and particularly in diverse places of that Book
shows that Idolatry and Blasphemy were punished by death upon all that lived
in the Jewish Commonwealth, though they were not Proselyti Justiciae; and on
those words Levit 24. And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he shall
surely be put to death, writes thus, Id est sive fuerit Proselytus sen
peregrinus, sive indigena aut civis, ex eo quod blasphemaverit nomen Domini
morte plectendus est, yea Mr. Seldom De Jure Naturali and Gentium. l. 2. c. 3.
156 lib. 2. c. 12. 162. lib. 3. cap. 1. 274. 275. De jure Gentium lib. 2. cap.
12 263. Ceterum quoniam hac in re gravioribus coerceri volebant panis Gentiles
seu Proselytas Domicilii quam cives Ebraicos, ideo ex Iure Gentium
interv^niente seu Proselytis ejusmodi ipsisque superinducto, tam cogneminis
alicujus Blasphemiam aut maledictionem quam nominis propri^, in Proselyto
domicilii seu Noachide ultimo plectebant supplicia. Maimonides, Noachides qui
maledixerit Nomini, five id fecerit Nomine Proprio seu tetragrammato, sive
cognomine aliquo quocunque modo, reus est mortis, quod non ita obtinet in
Israelita.
he says that the Gentiles or Proselytes Domicilii, were punished more
severely then the Jews in this case of Blasphemy, not only for blaspheming the
proper name of God, but the Cognomen. All which shows clearly these
punishments were not inflicted upon the Jews qua Jews, and qua a typical
people in a typical Land, etc. but upon them as the nature of such crimes
calling for such punishments, and that it is the Magistrates duty to restrain
in Jews or Gentiles in all under their jurisdiction, Idolatry, blasphemy, etc.

Thirdly, the reasons and grounds of these Laws and commands with the use and
end of them upon which they are enforced, are of common reason and equity that
concern us under the New Testament as well as the Jews. I do not find one
Ceremonial or properly Judicial reason given of any one, but all of them are
laid down either absolutely and simply without any reasons at all, or else
upon such reasons as are moral and perpetual; and I judge that in all
commands which are not typical and ceremonial, and so some other thing
apppointed to come in upon the abolishment to make good their perpetual end
and use assigned, that rule of Divines holds universally true, Ratio
immutabilis facit praeceptum immutabile, which by the way may serve to answer
the Evasions of Minus Gelsus Senensis, and of Hagiomastix bringing instances in
Circumcision and such like, which the Scriptures declare expressly to be
abolished, having substituted Baptism and other ordinances in their room, but
have not said one word in the like kind of the commands in question; besides
that Christ the substance of those shadows is come, and so they are of no
further use at all. And indeed Acontius though a great Libertine does confess
that Law in the 13th of Deuterenomy of the stoning of the false Prophet and
Seducer is not confined only to the time before Christ having no place at all
under the Gospel, and to the ground and conjecture (as Acontius calls it) of
that opinion, he says that the reason set down in the same is against it,
viz. All Israel shall bear and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this is among you, Acontius De stratagem. Satanae page 150. 151.
Est enim in lege ut omnis Israel audiens timeat etc: Quae certe ratio perpetuo
viget, ut quanquam lex ipsa exspiraverit, tam sit tamen jus magistratui similem
aliam condendi quam (...) jus est in homicidas, adulteros aliosquae facinorosos
homines leges condere.
which reason certainly abides always, so that although this Law had exspired,
yet notwithstanding by virtue of it the Magistrate has a right and power of
making another like it, as he has of making Laws against Murderers,
Adulterers and other flagitious persons.

Fourthly, Before these Laws in Deuteronomy. 13. and Deuteronomy, 17. for punishing
Idolaters were given by Moses, yea before Moses time, or any Commonwealth
among the Jews was erected, in other Countries remote from the Land of Canaan,
Idolatry in worshipping creatures deserved punishing by the Magistrate as I
have showed already fully in page 13, 14. of this Book; yea the particular kind
of Idolatry instanced in Deuteronomy. 17. 3. of worshipping the Sun, or Moon, which
among the Israelites was to be punished by death, if it had been found in Job
in the Land of Vz he had been worthy of punishment from the Judges for it Job
31. 26, 27. 28. And other Princes not Jews, as Artaxerxes, Nebuchadonezar,
etc. made Laws and Edicts for punishing those that blasphemed the God of
heaven, and transgressed his Laws as the Scriptures testify. Now the Laws
properly judicial that were the Jews civil Laws simply belonging to them as
such a people in such a Country, were in use only among themselves, and not
practiced by other Nations and Countries; but such Laws and Customs used
among them that were observed universally among all Nations, or by diverse
Nations (though not of all) strictly speaking were not Judicial Laws, but the
Laws of Nature and Nations though according to the Discipline of the Jews,
that is, what was received in the Church and Commonwealth of the Jews, and
accordingly accounted by them as the Law of the world of all men and ages, or
the Law of many Nations common to them with those Nations, of all which the
Reader may be further satisfied in that learned Piece of Mr. SELDEN'S, De jure
Naturali, and Gentium juxta disciplinam Ebraeorum; and particularly in the
Preface of that Book, (where he shows the reason of that Title, and gives the
sum of his work and undertaking) and in his first Book. And among the Jaws
of Natural right, as distinguished from the civil laws of the Jews, or simply
Israeliticall, those commands of punishing for strange worship, and Blasphemy,
are reckoned by the Jews themselves, as the Reader may find in the Nam
ubicunque ultimo supplicio punitur in foro Israelitico ^ultus extraneus, ibi
Noachides ob similem cultum plectendus erat. Et ubicunque in foro Israelitico
morte non punitur ejusmodi cultus, neque ob similem gladio plectitur Noachides.
page 132. Praeter Idololatriam at maledictionem Numinis, nihil omnino ex jure
naturali seu hominum omnium communi pro crimine seu delicto circa sacra,
quatenus scilicet Noachidas solum ea respitiebant, in foro, quoties sistebatur
Proselytus Domicilii, seu Gentilis ejusmodi ipsis est habitum* Page 275.
first book de Jure Naturali and Gentium, cap. 10. 2 book, cap. 1. 12. 3 book,
cap. 1.

Fifthly, The Spirit of God under the New Testament, Hebr. 10. 28, 29. speaking
according to the common equity and justice of the matter, and not according to
a Political law peculiar to one Nation, says of the despisers of Moses law
that died without mercy under two or three witnesses, that they were worthy of
it; as appears by the comparative, Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye,
shall he be thought warthy? Every comparative implying a positive: The sorer
punishment that he is worthy of, who has trodden under foot the Son of God,
supposes the other worthy of the sore punishment inflicted upon them by Moses
law for despising it. Now by Moses law in this place, the breach whereof
deserved capital punishment, must needs be meant sins against the first Table
rather then against the second; and that because the scope of the Apostle is to
warn the Hebrews against Apostasy and falling off from the Christian
religion, for which end he brings these words among others; and therefore would
speak ad idem. Beza upon (...) place, says, that the Apostle speaks not of the
transgression of any one command, but of the apostasy and total defection
from the true Religion, of which Moses in Deuteronomy. 17. 2. had spoken. So Calvin
upon this text. The law under Moses did not punish with death all sins or
transgressions committed, but Apostasy. The Apostle had an eye to that of
Deuteronomy. 17. 2. of stoning him that served strange gods. And Pareus upon Heb. 10.
28, 29. shows, that temporal death from the Magistrate,
(for of that he speaks, not of Gods judgments) was justly inflicted by Moses
law upon capital transgressions, as Blasphemy, Apostasy; and thereupon infers
from the less, that much greater punishment must abide Apostates who despise
the Gospel. Infert a minori, tanto gravius supplicium manner defectores illos.
Si legis contemptoribus supplicium mortis, quo nihil est in hoc mundo acerhius,
just irrogabitur, utique supplicium quovis morte atrocius Apostatae Evangelii
contemptores incurrent? And 2 Heb. 2. in those words For if the word spoken by
Angels was firm, and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward the Apostle shows that the law of Moses given by Angels,
Gal. 3. 19. Act. 7. 30. had the breach and transgression of it justly punished
mediately by the Vide Pareu^^ in locum.
Magistrates, to whom the execution of the laws was committed by God, which
just punishment is there chiefly understood of transgressions against the first
Table.

Sixthly, Granting that 13. of Deuteronomy. with the other Texts of Scripture named,
to be judicial political laws of the Jews, yet they may bind the Christian
Magistrate under the Gospel. Indeed the Ceremonial law being given for certain
uses, and for a certain time, till the coming of Christ, upon the arising of
this Sun, all these shadows vanished away, as being but of one time. But now
the Judicial laws, however delivered to one Nation, yet were not of one time,
never tied to one time only: so that had the commonwealth of the Jews
continued until this day, excepting a few things belonging to the vindication
of the ceremonies (which would have ceased with the ceremonies) they would have
used their Political laws still, in regard the Gospel neither changed nor took
away any of them, as Beza observes in his Tractate de Haereticis a Magistratu
puniendis, p. 154. And for the better understanding and proving that the
Judicial laws under the Old Testament are still in force, I shall lay down two
or three distinctions. 1. The judicial law may be considered, so far as
concerns the distinction of the Jews from the Gentiles, and the typical
signification of the kingdom of Christ; or only so much as belongs to the
form of Civil government. Now the judicial law, according to the first
acception, is absolutely and simply abrogated; but, secundum quid, in part and
some kind only, in the latter: that is, Whatever was in the judicial law of
particular proper right peculiarly concerning the Jews, as of inheritances not
to be transferred from one Tribe to another; of the Tribe of Levi having no
inheritance among the other Tribes, Numb. 18. 20, 24. of the emancipation of an
Hebrew servant or handmaid in the seventh year; a man's marrying his brothers
wife, and raising up seed to his brother; the forgiving of debts at the Jubilee;
marrying with one of the same tribe, with other such like, all of this kind is
ceased: But what was of common right, common to other Nations with them,
according to the common law of nature; of which sort are laws concerning the
punishment of Moral transgressions, and other such; that all remains, and is in
force. Of which distinction the Reader may find more in Piscator's Appendix to
his Observations upon the 21, 22, 23, chap. of Exodus; Bulling. lib. 4. adu.
Anabapt. cap. 4. Aliae praeterea pars legis est politica quae versatur in
judiciis, haeredetatibus, contractibus poenis and suppliciis and in
administratione Rei publicae Quoniam vero non habitamus Cha^anaeam regionem, ad
qua^ multae leges accomodatae sunt abrogata quoque est lex quoad hanc partem:
interim pax and judicia and alia bonae non to^luntur.
Bullinger; and in Altingius his common places, par. 1. loc. 7. de lege Dei, p.
112. Lex judicialis simpliciter abrogata est quoad distinctionem Judaeorum a
Gentibus, and typicam regni Christi significationem; secundum quid vero,
quantum attinet formae gubernationis civilis. Nam quod juris in ea fuit
particularis, Judaeos peculiariter concernans, qualis fuit lex de officio
Levitarum, item alia de haereditatibus de tribu in tribum non transferendis, id
omne cessavit. Quod autem juris suit communis, secundum legem naturae omnibus
communem sancitum, cujusmodi sunt leges de paenis scelerum, aliaeque id totum
manet. 2. The Judicial laws may be considered according to their substance and
equity, or according to many accessories, circumstances, forms, and manner of
them. Now though the Magistrate under the Gospel is not bound unto these laws
simply, that is, to every circumstance and particular of them for form, manner,
time and place; as for example, not to the same kinds and formality of
punishments set down in those laws; for those forms are accessions of the law;
and therefore out of the nature of persons, times, places, and constitution of
commonwealths, mutable: Yet he is bound to the substance and equity of them,
so as not to derogate from the right of those laws. Of this distinction the
Reader may find much said by Cartwright, in his 2. Reply to Dr. Whitgift, p.
98, 99. Beza de Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis, p. 154, 155. Tremellius and
Junius, in their Preface before the five Books of Moses. Thirdly, these Laws
may be looked upon as containing doctrine from God of punishment, i. e. that
those who seduce, blaspheme God, etc. be restrained, yea and by death in
several cases, or else as in their latter according to the great rigor and
severity expressed in them, as in Deuteronomy. 13. etc. by smiting the inhabitants of
the City with the sword, destroying it utterly and all that is therein, and the
cattle thereof with the edge of the sword, and by gathering all the spoil of
it into the midst of the street thereof, and burning with fire the City, and
all the spoil of it every whit; in not sparing them though they should have
truly repented, in enjoining the son, the wife of a man's bosom, to bring
forth the father, husband, and to stone them with stones. Now though to the
degrees and measures of punishment, the severity and utmost rigor the
Magistrate is not now tied, yet to the thing in cases of Idolatry, seduction,
false prophesying, speaking lies in the name of the Lord he is bound, and in
some cases of gross and high Idolatry and Blasphemy committed presumptuously,
to inflict capital punishment: of this distinction also let the Reader consult
these Synops. Puri. Theolog. cap. 50 Ames. Cas. Conscient. l. 4. c. 4. lib. 51
cap. 26. quaest. tertia.
Authors. And of this question that the Judicial Laws of Moses in the sense
now given, do yet last and are in force, besides the Resolution of many great
Divines in the case, Beza, Calvin, Cartwright, Tremellius and Junius,
Bullinger, Zinchius, Peter Martyr, Henricus Altingius, and more especially
Appendix ad, Exodum,
Piscator, who by eight Arguments proves the Question in controversy, besides
answering two and twenty Arguments brought against it; I shall desire the
Reader to observe these few Reasons. 1. The Judicial Law differs from the
Decalogue, the Law of the ten Commandments, in this, that whereas the Beza de
Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis pasia 54.
Decalogue comprehends in a few words all righteousness and equity, in all
kind of duties to God and man, the Judicial explains only that part of
righteousness and equity which stands in those things of which judgments are
appointed; and therefore seeing the judicialls prescribe the equity of
judgments which is a part of the Decalogue we must be bound to that as we are
to the rest of the Decalogue, viz. so far as they contain a general equity
though we are not tied to the forms of the Mosaicall polity; Now Christ
says, Matthew. 5. 17. he came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; which
words are comprehensive of the Judicial Law as for the substance a part of the
Moral Law, (the Judicial being indeed an Appendix and a more particular
explication of that part of the Moral Law concerning matters of Justice and
judgment) and therefore must be understood by Christ to be established. 2.
Though there be many pregnant proofs in the New Testament for abolishing the
Ceremonial Law, yet we nowhere read in the New Testament of making void the
Judicial Law concerning the punishing of sins against the Moral Law, in the
number of which are Idolatry, Heresy, Blasphemy. Now these See Cartwr-second
Reply to Dr. Whitgift page 98. 99.
Judicial Laws being the Laws of God and by his revealed will once settled,
they must needs so far forth remain as they appear not by his will to be
repealed. They who hold the Magistrate under the Gospel is not bound to punish
for such sins, must prove from the Scripture those Laws of God revoked and
canceled, which none of the Patrons of Toleration have ever yet done. 3. The
substance and equity of the Judicial Law remains in that Christ and his
Apostles make use of, transfer and prove by some Judicial laws diverse things
under the New Testament. Christ makes use of a Judicial Law concerning
punishment, Matthew. 5. 38, 39. An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, viz.
that of poena talionis, Exodus 21. 24. and frees it from the false gloss and
interpretation of the Pharisees, in which he teaches the Judicial Laws of
Moses understood in their right sense are to be observed in the New Testament:
For if Christ in that Sermon, of which this is a part would teach the Decalogue
belonged to Christians, by his vindicating it from the false interpretations of
the Scribes and Pharisees; then it follows he meant to teach the Judicial
Laws of Moses concerning the punishment of Moral transgressions belonged to
them also, because he vindicated also one of them, of which particular with the
proof of the consequence the Reader may find more in Piscators Appendix to
Exodus. The Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 9. 9. 1 Timothy 5. 18. among other proofs brought
by him from fimilitudes fetched from the common use of men, that the Minister
of the Gospel ought to be maintained of the Churches charge, whereas they might
object those were but humane reasons, he alleges as the eternal Law of God
one of the Judicial Laws of Moses, which was, that a man should not muzle the
mouth of the Ox which treads out the corn: where it is manifest he doubts
not to bind the conscience of the Churches unto the equity of that Law which
was judicial, likewise from the 13. verse, of those that minister about holy
things, and wait at the Altar, living of the things of the Temple, and being
partakers of the Altar he concludes that they which preach the Gospel should
live of it: Now this maintenance of the Priests albeit in the manner of
provision it be held by many ceremonial, yet as it was a reward of their
service due by men (as the punishments also if they failed in their duties) was
merely judicial. So the equity of that judicial Law, Exodus 22. 2. Ames. ^Cas.
lib 5 cap. 52. quaest. 6.
Of the smiting of a theife in the night that he dye,) is approved by Christ,
Matthew. 24. 43. So Christ and Paul both transfer that judicial Law of having
two or three witnesses in judgment, Deuteronomy. 19. verse 15. to bind Christians in
their Ecclesiastical censures and judgments, Matthew 18. verse 16. 2 Cor. 13.
verse 1. 1 Timothy 5. verse 19. By which instances and some other particulars that
might be given it is evident that in those judicialls to all the circumstances
whereof we are not bound, we are notwithstanding bound to the equity, of which
the Reader may read more in Cartwrights second Reply to Doctor Whitgifts second
Answer, page 98, 99, 100. 4. That God appointed under the Law, Blasphemy,
Apostasy, Idolatry, Prophesying lies in thename of the Lord to be punished by
the Magistrate, proceeded from Gods holiness, justice, infinite hatred of such
sins, and from their nature, being so contrary to his nature, so derogatory
to his honor and glory, high treason against the Supreme Majesty, so
destructive to the precious souls of men, so dangerous to Commonwealths and
Kingdoms, as the Scriptures in diverse places where these Laws of punishing
are set down, assigns these causes and reasons: Now I would know of the
Patrons of Toleration whether under the Gospel these finnes of Blasphemy,
Apostasy, etc. be not as much against Gods holiness, justice, glory, as
pernicious and damnable as they were under the Law? yea and in some respects
more, as being against the Declarations of the Son of God Hebr. 2. 2, 3. and
a treading under foot the Son of God, and counting the blood of the Covenant
an unboly thing, which being granted, punishment by the Magistrate must needs
continue. The rule of just and unjust in God and in his Law is always the same
and immutable: It is as equally just to punish evil things as to forbid evil
things, and therefore the right and Law of punishments is also immutable: Where
and of what things the causes are perpetual,
there also the right is eternal and immutable, but the grounds and causes why
such offenses were punished, as Gods justice, holiness, glory, etc. are
perpetual and eternal: God is always like to himself, the moral
transgressions of men do alike at all times displease him, no good reason can
be given why the Majesty of God should be of less account with us then
heretofore among the Jews, and therefore by the like reason to be punished now
as well as then: But the further proof of this the Reader may find in some
learned Divines, Beza de Haereticis a Magistratu punie^^^ 155. and in
Tremellius and Juni^^ Preface before the Books of Moses. 5. The Judicial Law
concerning the punishments of ^i^kednesse, for the substance, viz. that it
should be punished remains under the Gospel, because it comes within the nature
of the Moral Law, and was prescribed to the Jews, not quae Jews or a people
peculiarly taken into Covenant, but qua men subject to the Law of nature as
other Nations were: For the proof of which besides the judgment of diverse
learned Divines, Philip Melancto^, Peter Martyr, Zanchius, A^tingius, the
reason of common right, from the proper peculiar right of the Jews is known
and distinguished by these following particulars. 1. Henr. Alting. loc. commun.
per 1. loc. 7. de leges Dei. Cognos^itur autem Juris communis ratio, si idem ab
aliis: quoque legiflatoribus ex luce naturae c^nr^su m, ac sanatum fuisse; vel
ad tuenda^ Preceptorum Decalogi obedientiam facere corriperiatur.
If the same things have been also found to be concluded, and by civil
sanction established by other Lawgivers from the light of nature. 2. If found
to make for the defense and preservation of the obedience of the Decalogue. 3.
If appear as useful and necessary now for the glory of God, the salvation of
men's souls, the peace and safety of the Church and State as then. Now all
these do most clearly appear in punishments of sins immediately against God, as
Apostasy, Idolatry, Blasphemy, etc. For first, these commands are of the light
of nature, tha^ he who is in place and power should forbid and punish the
speaking evil of God. This sentence (as Phil. Mela. De Magistr. Civil. and
Dign. Rerum Politic. Haec sententia omnibus hominibus, imo omnibus creaturis
intelligentibus concionatur. Suo quisqu^ loco prohibere manifestas Dei
comumelias debet. Quare and Magistratus prohibere and puni^e debent Epicureos
sermones, Idolorum honores, faedera Daemonum, professionem impior^^ dogmatum.
Vt omnes politiae sanxerunt paenas adversus perjuros, mult^^ etia^ apud
Ethnicos sanxerunt paenas adversus perj^ros multae etiam apud Ethnicos
sanxerunt paenas adversus Epicuraeos seu Atheos qui palam dixerunt nihil esse
Deum, aut nullam esse providentiam Dei.
Melancton writes) is preached to all men, yea to all reasonable creatures,
every one in his place ought to forbid and hinder the manifest reproaches and
dishonours of God. And therefore Magistrates ought to forbid and punish
Epicurean speeches, worships of Idols, profession of wicked doctrines. Many
Commonwealths among the Heathens have made Laws against Epicures and
Atheist^, who have openly held there was no God, or that there was no
providence of God. Peter Martyr loc. commun. Class. 4. cap. 13.
Peter Martyr in his Common Place^, that Heathen Princes used to care for
Religion, and have punished men even to death for the matters of Religion. Thus
Socrates was condemned at Athens for no other cause but for teaching of new
gods, I and for with drawing the youth from their old worship of the gods.
Zanchius in quarr. praecept. loc. 5. De officio principium in Religione, page
790. Hoc liquet primum a lege naturae: omnes enim principe inter Gentes
judicarunt ad se pertinere curam Religionis.
Zanchius on the fourth Commandment writes, that by the Law of nature all
Princes among the Heathen judged that the care of Religion belonged to them.
The Athenians judged so, the Romans also, and thereupon made Laws and punished
for violation of religion. Beza de Hereticis a Magistrate. puniendis.
Beza gives three instances of punishments inflicted by heathen Magistrates
upon three chief Philosophers for matters of Religion, Socrates, Theodorus,
Protagoras, the last of which was by the Athenians banished out of their
Territories, and his books burnt for writing contemptuously of the gods in
these words, De diis neque ut sint, neque ut non sint habeo dicere Musculus De
Magistrate. 627. Agnoverunt hoc Ethnicorum quoque sapientes qui primum locum in
Republicae Institutione Religioni dederunt. Fuerunt quidem illi homines
Ethnici, viam Dei ignorantes, and ab Ecclesia illius alieni: in eo tamen haud
quaquam errarunt, quod sine pietatis ac Religionis observantia, nullam
cujuscunque Reipublicae politiam feliciter institui regique posse senserunt:
cum ergo sententiae hujus veritas tam sit manifesta ut ne Ethnicos quidem
latere potuerit: an non magis agnoscenda nobis and amplectenda qui cognitione
Dei non gentes modo sed and populum legis long ant^cellimus.
Musculus in his Common Places speaking of Magistrates having the care of
Religion, says, the wise men among the Heathen acknowledged it, and that the
truth of this opinion was so manifest as that it could not lie hid from the
Heathen, it was jus gentium, dictated by the light of nature, and therefore
ought to be much more acknowledged and embraced by us, who in the knowledge of
God go far beyond, not only the Gentiles, but the Jews. Mr. Seldom De Jure
Naturali and Gentium, lib. 1. cap. 8. cap. 10. lib. 2. cap. 1. cap. 2. cap. 3.
cap. 12. cap. 13. l. 3. c. 1. Praeter Idololatriam ac maledictione^ numinis,
Nihil omnino ex Jure Naturali, seu hominum omnium communi p^o Criminc seu
Dilecto circa sacra, qua^enus scilicet Noachidas solum ea respiciebant, in
foro, quoties sistebatur Proselytus domicilii, seu Gentilis ejusmodi ipsis est
habitum. Caeterum ex alia lege sacra obtinuit apud aliquos opinio (quae hic non
praetermittenda) Gentilium nemini licuisse, Numini patrio, seu quod ipse velut
patrium coluerit, maledixisse. Hac locutioris formula, Levit. 24. 15. volunt
nonnulli non solum cunctis mortalium Numinis sanctissimi, ac Vnici
maledictionem interdici; verum etiam Gentilibus apud Ebraeos, maledictionem
Deorum quos sibi adsciverant.
Master Seldom in diverse places of that learned Book De Jure Naturali and
Gentium proves that those commands De Cultu Extraneo and De Maledictione
Nominis sanctissimi seu Numinis, were Jus Naturalis, common to all men, were
indeed the chief and first Heads of the Law of Nature, and that in those
precepts, viz. for the negative part, all the Gentiles who lived or but passed
through the Land of Judea were punished by the Magistrate for Idolatry and
blasphemy as well as the Jews, and that from Laws common to the Jews with
the Gentiles, though the kinds of the punishments, viz. this or that, as
whether stoning, etc. were not of the same nature, but more proper to the
Jews; yea, he shows it was an opinion held by some learned men, that it was
not lawful for any Gentile to speak evil of and blaspheme his God which he
worshipped as the God of his Country; and says it was founded upon those
words. Levit. 24. 15. Whosoever curses his god shall hear his sin, (the
blaspheming the name of the Lord being spoken of after in the 16. verse, as if
it were distinct from that in the 15. verse) In which form of speech diverse
learned men both Rabbis, Fathers and others would have forbidden to all the
sons of men not only speaking evil evil of the most holy and only God, but
also the speaking of those gods which they had chosen to themselves: So as none
of the Gentiles might blaspheme their false God, which yet they had not
renounced, without the violation of that Law, Whosoever curses his god shall
bear his sin.

Master Buroughs in his Irenicum, though he be for a Toleration in a great
measure, as in things controversall and doubtful amongst godly and peaceable
men, and that with a liberty of declaration of difference of judgment, and
some different practice, page 55. yea brings such Arguments for that
Toleration, that if they prove any thing, they prove a general Toleration, yet
confesses page 23. of that Book, It Is the dictate of nature, that Magistrates
should have some power in matters of Religion. The generality of all people
have ever thought it equal. It has ever been challenged of all Nations and
Commonwealths. The Heathens would never suffer their gods to be blasphemed,
but punished such as were guilty thereof by the power of the Magistrate.
Socrates was put to death for blaspheming their multiplicity of gods. And
Master Buroughs in page 19. of the same book affirms, that Principle, That
Magistrates have nothing to do with matters of Religion is abhorring to
nature. Is it not an abhorring thing to any man's heart in the world,
that men suffer that God to be blasphemed whom they honor? and that nothing
should be done for the restraining any, but to ask them why they do so, and
persuade them to do otherwise? There has ever been as great a contestation
amongst people about Religion, as about any thing. Exodus 8. 25, 26. Pharaoh
hade Moses sacrifice in the Land: But Moses said it is not meet so to do, for
we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians: Lo, shall we sacrifice the
abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us?
Though they had leave of the King, yet the people would not endure it. By which
place of Scripture it is evident that the Egyptians who were heathens, by the
light of nature would not endure the dishonor of their gods to see those
creatures they worshipped for Vide Ainsworrh. late Annotat. of our English.
Divines. Piscat. in Exodus 8. 26. Quod abominationi est Egyptiis. Hoc est
animalia a quorum caede abhorrent Egyptis, quippe quae ipsi adorant: ut bones
ant vitulos*
gods to be killed, as Oxen and Sheep the principal sacrifices of the
Hebrews, but they would kill the Israelites for so doing. And lastly, Master
Prynne in that late Book of his, The sword of Christian Magistrates supported,
does largely and excellently show that by the light of nature in all ages
Heathen Magistrates have made Laws against, and punished such whom they
esteemed Atheists, Heretics, Blasphemers of their Gods, or oppugners of their
established Religion, and that with no less then Capital punishments, unto
which Book from page 14. to 19. I refer the Reader, where he shall find many
examples of Heathen Kings and Nations recited, and shall conclude this with
that saying of Seneca, De Benefic. lib. 3. cap. 6. Violatarum Religionum aliubi
atque aliubi diversa p^na est; Sed vbique Aliqua; as well as of homicide,
paricide, poisoning Secondly, the Magistrates sword in matters of Religion in
punishing Blasphemies, Idolatries, Heresies, has been found by good experience
in all ages to make greatly for the defense and preservation of the first
Table, to stir men up to obedience and deter them from the contempt and
violation thereof, whereas on the contrary, for the want of this, all
Blasphemies, Heresies and Errors have abounded, of which I could give many
instances, but shall refer them to the more proper place of handling, viz. to
the Reasons for Magistrates punishing men for Idolatries, Blasphemies,
Heresies, Schisms; only for the present shall hint, that God himself says
twice, once in Deuteronomy. 13. 11. the other Deuteronomy. 17. 13. the Magistrates punishing
in such a case shall cause all the people to hear, fear, and to do no more
presumptuously: the Lord gives this blessing unto the punishment of such
offenders, that others not only which see, but hear of them, have the bridle
of fear put upon them whereby kept from the like. Thirdly and lastly, this
coercive power of the Magistrate will be found every whit as useful and
necessary now for the glory of God, salvation of men's souls, peace of Church
and State as it was then, yea and in some respect^ more necessary, there being
in our days not only the same reasons and causes for that power of the
Magistrate, but others also: Were there under the Law many incorrigible
presumptuous offenders against God and his worship, that could not be otherwise
reclaimed, and are there not such now? were there then many gross ways of
false worship and Religion destroying foundations, broacht among the people?
were they then infectious drawing away and seducing many souls? were they then
provoking the wrath of God causing it to wax hot against his people? Ought the
glory and Name of God to be then dear to Magistrates? Why, behold under the
Gospel there are as incorrigible desperate persons broaching all kind of
damnable Heresies, making it their work to lay wast all Religion, whom no
Admonitions, Church Censures can do any good upon: Heresies and Errors now are
as infectious, spreading, subverting whole houses, eating as a Ga^grene, and so
in the rest. Master Buroughs in his Irenicum page 23. confesses there is a
necessity of the Magistrates power in matters of Religion (...) truth now, as
there was then, and shows though we cannot argue the being of spiritual
Ordinances from our need of them, but from their institution, yet in natural
and civil things this way of arguing is strong enough; there is need of such a
help, and therefore we should seek to have it. And the necessity of the
Magistrates coercive power under the Gospel he sets down as follows. Now sure
the need we have of such a power is exceeding great, we were in a most
miserable condition if we had no external civil power to restrain from any
kind of Blasphemies and Seducements. The condition of the Jews, O how happy
was it in comparison of ours, if this were denied us! for if any of theirs did
blaspheme God, or seek to seduce any from him, they knew what to do with him
besides persuading of him to the contrary; but if any should seek to seduce
the wives of our bosoms, children of our bodies, friends as dear to us as our
own lives into those ways that we think in our consciences will und^e their
souls to all eternity, yet we must only desire them they would not do so, we
must only admonish or seek to convince them or remove them, but restrain them
we cannet: If the deliverance of us from the Pedagogy of the Law has brought
us into this condition,
our burden is greater in this thing then any that the Law laid upon our
forefathers; Has Christ delivered us from one burden to lay a greater upon us?
Must we now see those who are dearest to us drawn into the way of eternal
destruction, and stand and looks on, but no way left to help them or our
selves, unless we can persuade to the contrary? Surely our condition is very
sad: Have we not cause to say, Lord let any burden of the Ceremonial Law be
laid upon our necks, rather then this; If there were a company of mad men
running up and down the streets with knives and swords in their hands,
endeavoring to mischief and kill all they meet with, and we must do nothing
to restrain them; if we could persuade them to do otherwise well and good:
but that is all we can do for help; what a dangerous thing were this? The
case is the same, when those who are mad with damnable Heresies, run from
place, to place, seeking to draw all they can from the truth: If we have no
means of help but (...), it is ill with us; Surely God has not put his
people ^^to such a sad condition or this is, be has provided better for his
people then thus. And I appeal to the consciences and experience of men,
whether this power of the Magistrate of punishing Blasphemies and Heresies be
not found to be useful and necessary both for the honor of God, the safety of
other men's souls, the peace of Church and State? and whether all other men's
without this (when this might have been had) have made good these ends? or
whether this coming upon other means, as Admonitions, Instructions, Synods,
Church Censures, has not suppressed Heresies,
Schisms, vindicated the honor and truth of God, recovered many souls, settled
the peace of Churches and States, as among the Donatists of old, and the
Arminians in Holland of late. Any man's reason, yea sense may tell him, that in
this sinful corrupted condition of man there is in coercive power a
naturalnesse and sutablenesse to work upon the outward man for the furtherance
of spiritual good, and that when no other means can, this power removes
outward things that hindered, keeps from outward evils, applies outward means.
And yet further, besides the same reasons and grounds now of the necessity of
the Magistrates coercive power, as well as under the Old Testament, there
seems to be new reasons under the Gospel over and above that plead for the
necessity of this power. As that under the Gospel so many outward visible
judgement^ are not inflicted by God upon offenders as were under the Law,
whereupon Master Cartwrights second Reply to Dr. Whitgifts second Answ. page 98,
99.
Cartwright speaks, Certainly if ever there had been any time wherein the
Magistrates sword might have rested in the sheath, the time of the Law had of
all been fittest when the Lord did so visibly sit in his judgment seat, and
himself in proper person held the Assise and Gaile delivery. For as the Lord
does not now by outward blessings give so plentiful testimony to the obedience
of the Gospel as the Law, so does he not with so many and so severe punishments
revenge the breach of it as in the time of the Law, for in these outward
punishments the dispensation of God under the Law is diverse from that under the
Gospel, in that be did more terribly revenge disobedience, and therefore God
not striking now so often immediately Blasphemers, Seducers, false Prophets,
Schismatics as under the Law, the Magistrates have the more need not to bear
the sword in vain, lest Heretics and false Teachers go on the more
desperately, corrupting and destroying all, but of these Reasons I intend to
speak more in the next Thesis.

Seventhly, supposing all these commands simply Judicial, given to the Jews
only (which yet I have proved not to be so) there are other commands and
examples recorded in the Old Testament distinct from the Judicial, which
cannor be counted Judicial, but are Moral and perpetual, as the fourth
Commandment (one of the ten Commandments) given to the Magistrate, that by
his authority true Religion be preserved, take place, and all false Religion
suppressed (the proof of which is laid down in the 15. Thesis) as that command
Psalm. 2. 10, 11. given to Kings and Judges, which cannot be Judicial nor
Ceremonial for several reasons, neither have the Patrons of Toleration ever
said so of it (of which place I shall speak fully in the 19. Thesis) as those
examples of Abraham and Jacob, not suffering those under their power and
command to commit Idolatry, which were long before those commands in the 13.
and 17. chap. of Dut. said to be judicial, and that these examples were not
judicial, besides what the Reader shall find in the ninth and 12. Theses,
Musculus in his Common Places De Abrogatione Mosaicae Legis, even in that
Common Place where his Authority is most urged by the Minus Cessus Senensis
Sect. tert. p. 183.
Patrons of Toleration for the abrogation of all Mosaicall Laws, Abraham
utique non fuit sub Paedagogi^ Mosis. Muscul. loc. Commun. De Abrogat. Mosaic.
leg. p. 142.
affirms that as a Christian is not under the Mastership of Moses; so likewise
Abraham was not under the Pedagogie of Moses. And so much for the first
particular, that the commands for punishing Idolaters, Blasphemers, false
Prophets, etc. were of common reason and equity given for the times of the
Gospel.

Secondly, as to the grounds brought by the Patrons of Toleration, Minus Celsus
Senensis, Hagiomastix, etc. that these commands doe^ not bind now because they
were See Hagiomastix from Sect 34. to Sect 41. and Minus Celsus Senensis from
p. 183. to 192. and compare them together.
Moses Laws, Jewish and abrogated by Christ, that we may by these commands as
well prove the man Moses is now alive, because he was alive under the Old
Testament, that if the commands be in force for inflicting of death, they be in
force in all other particulars commanded by the same Authority with this, as
that the offenders must be put to death with stones only, as that the whole
City must be put to death, as the cattle must be slain as well as the
inhabitants, as that the City must be a heap for ever and never built again,
that there is clear particular reasons why the Old Testament Law for putting
false Prophets, Blasphemer^ and Seducers to Idolatry to death should not now be
in force because the Jews to whom this Law was given in all difficult cases
about matters of Religion had the opportunity of immediate consultation with
God himself, who could and did from time to time infallibly declare what his
own mind and pleasure was in them, because that corporal punishment was a Type
and pre significative of spiritual punishments, cutting off then, of casting
out now, as also of eternal damnation: to these with diverse such like I give
these following answers, which I desire the Reader to observe. First, besides
the Reasons already given that Mos^ Laws (in the sense expressed) for the
punishment of Apostates, Blasphemers, etc. are not abrogated by Christ, lets
con^ider that Christ by his coming has not abolished that Law which contains
the love of God, his glory and honor, and the love of our neighbor, and
therefore neither those things which do necessarily belong unto and make for
the love of God and our neighbor; nor secondly those Laws in the Old
Testament, which the New Testament for the times of it approves of; not lastly,
those commands which are of the light of nature and the Law of nature dictates,
all which because they are so clear and generally confessed, I shall forbear
adding the proofs, and refer the Reader for further satisfaction to Zanchius De
Magistra^^ Quest. secunda. An Magistratui Christian^ liceat capitales (...) de
haereticis sumere, page 170. Bullingers Histor. advers. Anabaptist. live. 5.
cap. 5. page 176. Musculus Common Places de Magistratibus, page 627. Mr.
Borough Irenicum page 23. But now the Magistrates restraining and punishing
false Prophets, Apostate^, Blasphemers, etc. is an act of the love of God and
his glory, of love to their brethrens souls, of safety and good to
Commonwealths, is very useful and necessary for vindicating the glory of God,
and good of the Church (the glory of God, and the salvation of our neighbor
being by that means preserved) is ^^proved of also in the New Testament for
the times of the Gospel, and is the dictate of nature. For the proof of this
Assumption I shall make it evident in all the three parts of it. For the first
that it is an act of the love of God and his glory and of love to our neighbor,
besides the assertion of many great Divines, as Zanchius (...) magistrat^ p.
170.
Zanchius, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, A^es^u^, etc. it is apparent thus, Because
in the commands given by God, Deu^. 13. Deuteronomy. 17. for the Magistrates punishing
false Prophets, Idolaters, and those who would not hearken unto the Priest, the
reasons of his so doing and the ends of those punishments imply as much, and
have reference all along to the honor of God, the vindicating his name, and
keeping others from doing the like, as these phrases show, That Prophet, or
that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, because he has spoken to turn
you away from the Lord your God to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord
thy God commanded the^ to walk in. And thou shall stone him with stones that
he di^: because he has sought to thrust thee away from the Lord thy God, And
all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do n^ more any such wickedness as
this is among you. If there be found among you man or woman that has wrought
wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God, in transgressing his Covenant,
and has gone and served other gods, then shall thou bring that man or that
woman (which have comm^tted that wicked thing) unto thy gate^, and shall stone
them with stones till they die: So thou shall put away the evil from among
you. And the man that will d^e presumptuously, and will not hearken unto the
Priest, etc. even that man shall die, and thou shall put away evil from
Israel. And all the people shall hear and fear and do no more presumptuously,
which passages fully hold out the Magistrates punishing Blasphemers, Idolaters,
etc. to be an act of love to God: and the people, yea of zeal to his glory and
the salvation of the people: that sentence, so thou shall put the evil away
from among you, says In lege Moses punitionu^ sons illa vox au^ fer^s malum de
media (...) Pet. Martyr loc. common. p 647.
Peter Martyr, is in the Law of Moses the fountain of all punishments of
wickednesses against the second Table, as of transgressions against the first;
And therefore if the Magistrates punishing of Murder, Theft, Adultry, etc. for
the taking away of the evil from amongst the people, be an act of love to God
and man, a vindication of the glory of God, then the punishing of Blasphemy,
Idolatry, and such like for the taking away of the evil is an act of love to
God and our neighbor: The punishing of menbers of the Church under the Gospel
by excommunication is held an act of zeal to the glory of God, and love to the
Church: the Reasons why such a censure ought to be in the Church, are referred
to, those heads by Zanchius Dedisciplina. Synops. purior. Theolog De Discipl.
Eccles.
Divines, yea by the Separatists and Independents themselves, as Robins
Justifi. cat. of Separat. Catechism.
Mr. Robinson and others, and those very reasons and ends spoken of in Deuteronomy. of
putting away the evil from among you, as the people shall hear and fear and
do no more presumptuously, are in the new Testament by Paul given as the
reasons of Excommunication, 1 Cor. 5. 2. 13. 1 Timothy 5. 20. 1 Timothy 1. 20. (Those
very phrases there used by Paul being alluded unto, and taken from those in
Deut^ronomie) and therefore if love to God and men stands in these sentences
under the Gospel borrowed from the Law, of putting away the evil, of others
fearing and doing no more so, then certainly love to God and men is contained
in those reasons and ends under the Law, the original and fountain from
whence the Gospel took them; nay, yet further, excommunication (which I have
showed is founded on the reasons expressed in Deuteronomy. 13. 17.) is made by Christ
an act of brotherly love Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. compared with Levit. 19. 17.
Secondly, because those Kings Magistrates and Persons recorded in Scripture
above others for loving God and the people, for being most zealous of Gods
honor and glory used most this coercive power against Idolaters, Seducers,
Blasphemers, etc. of all others, and more especially at such times when they
were at best for grace and goodness and commended by the spirit of God for
their zeal and forwardness, as Moses in the business of the golden Calf, as
the children of Israel in the case of the two Tribes and a half building an
Altar, as Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, then spoken of especially for
zeal, courage, perfect hearts, when they most exercised the power of the sword
against Idolatry, Apostasy and all Will Worship: When Jehu and Jehoash were at
best, had most zeal, they destroyed Baal and his worshippers; Manasses upon
his conversion in his first love and zeal commanded Judah to serve the Lord
God of Israel, and took away the strange gods and all the Altars, and cast them
out of the City: Nebuchadnezar, Darius, upon their hearts affected by the sight
of the great works of God make Laws for Gods honor against Blasphemy, etc.
Christ out of his zeal of his Fathers. House and love to his glory, used
coercive power upon those who made his Fathers House a house of Merchandise
(though he never used it in matters of the second Table but declined it) John
2. 15, 16, 17. compared with Psalm. 69. 9. of which I shall speak more in the
20. Thesis. Paul out of love and zeal to the glory of God, and the salvation
of the Galathians prays for corporal capital punishment upon false Teachers,
Gal. 5. 12. which place that it is so ^o be understood, I shall prove it in the
20. Thesis. And I desire the Patrons of Teleration to answer this question,
whether in their consciences they think not those godly Magistrates under the
Old Testament,
as Moses, Josiah, etc. punished Idolaters, etc. out of love to God and their
Brethren, whether love and zeal set them not awork? which if they did,
certainly they were to continue under the Gospel: For I would willingly know
Baz^ de Haeret. a Magistr. puniendis. Nullae idone^ ratio afferri potest cur
Dei majestas minoris apud nos ponderis esse debeat quam olim apud Judaeos
fuerit; imo vero Christiani si veram religionem minore studio tueant^r quam
olim Judaei, imo minus excusari possint quo clari^s sese Dominus per filiu^^
suum qua^ per prophetas patefecit.
what good reason can be given that Magistrates under the Gospel should not
have as much zeal and love to God and the public, as they had under the Law,
and if under the Law it made them restrain Blasphemers, Idolaters, etc. if
their zeal and love workt so, why not now also when the glory of God and the
safety of the Church requires it, the Magistrate after other remedies used in
vain, should draw the sword against Heretics, Apostates and Blasphemers.
Ames. Casus Consc. lib. 4. cap. 4. do Haeresi.

Thirdly, the Magistrates punishing with the sword Traitors, murderers,
thieves, adulterers, that so God may not be dishonored by those sins, nor
the Commonwealth and our neighbors hurt, is an act of love to God and men as
is evident by the Office, Romans 13. verse 3, 4. compared with 8, 9, 10. verses
and by other reasons that might be given if it were needful. Bullinger in his
fifth Book, chapter 6. page 177. against the Anabaptists, shows that the
punishing of offenders is according to Christian love, that the Magistrates
punishing is not only profitable for one man, but for the whole Commonwealth,
the punishment of one guilty person preserving many alive, and that just
punishment is not against love, neither does true love abrogate punishments.
Zanchi^ in his. Tractate De Magistrat^ Quaest. secunda, writes to this effect,
that to punish offenders who are injurious to God and our neighbor, is a work
of charity, which requires that we should defend the glory of God and the
safety of our neighbor by all means that may be; As when thieves, robbers,
murderers, are by the Magistrate taken away, lest the City and our neighbor
should be hurt, this certainly is a work of charity: So doubtless those
obstinate Heretics who go on to blaspheme the name of God, who overthrow
religion and piety, who corrupt the true and sound Doctrine, who disturb the
peace of the Churches, who steak from their neighbors the members of the
Church not their estates neither kill their bodies, but endeavor to destroy
their souls, do most of all wrong God and their neighbor, therefore to
punish them is the greatest work of love to God and their neighbor.
Now if the restraining of those who spoil men of their goods, temporal
lives, outward dignities, that corrupt and embase coin be a work of love to
God and man, then to hinder Blasphemies, Treasons immediately against the
Supreme Majesty of God and his Kingdom, the ruining of immortal souls and
the eternal lives of men, the adulterating the truth of God and the Faith once
delivered to the Saints is an act of higher love to Gods glory and our
Brethren, in as much as such offenses immediately against God transcend any
Treason against earthly Kings, and the killing of souls is a greater evil
then the killing of bodies, and the corrupting the truth more dangerous then
counterfeiting or mixing baser metals with Gold or Silver. Wolphius in Deuteronomy.
13. Si quis human at Tabulas depravatet magnum est: quid de Divinis. In a City
if any one seek to draw away persons from the Prince and government, and to
draw men to their side, they are punished, and should they escape unpunished
for drawing men away from the King of Kings? As also because those reasons and
ends appointed for punishments of the second Table, as to take away the evil,
as that others shall bears and fear, etc. (which shows punishments are acts
of love) are given for a ground of punishing Idolatry, false Prophesying, etc.
yea set down more expressly in those commands then in the others, with other
reasons too, as of turning that away from the Lord thy God, which implies also
love to God and our Brethren. What follows hence then? Therefore those preceps
which God has given Magistrates of punishing Offenders, Heretics, subverters
of Religion are not abrogated by the coming of Christ, because by that means
the glory of God and the safety of our neighbor are preserved. Commands to
Magistrates for punishing in matters of Religion, being no more against
Christian charity then punishment of Traitors, seditious persons, thieves, etc.
and therefore as they are not abrogated by the coming of Christ, so neither are
these. The old Anabaptists (as Bulling. ad verses Anabapt. lib. 5. cap. 5. 175.
176. cap. 6. 177. 178. cap. 8. 184.
Bullinger shows at large in that excellent book of his) who were against
Magistrates punishing in matters of Religion, and that al those commands in
Deuteronomy. 13. etc. were merely Mosaical and abrogated, held as well those commands
for punishing murderers, thieves, etc. to be abrogated, and that among
Christians no offenses should be punished with prisons, mulcts, death, but only
Excommunication, and among other reasons they gave this, because it was against
brotherly love, which they urged equally against bodily punishments for
transgressions against the second Table as they did for punishments against the
first; and indeed Osiand. Enchi^id De Magistratu Polit. quaest. 4.
Lucas Osiander with others who write against Anabaptists for denying that
Christians may be punished with outward punishments for any offenses, show they
bring the same Arguments, as that in Matthew 13. of the Tares, etc. which the
Patrons of Tolaration do now against the Magistrates coercive power in matters
of Religion, but Bullinger shows very well at large, that those commands given
in Exodus Deuter. Levit. of punishing capitally in some transgressions against
the first and second Table, were according to the Law of love, and that by the
same reason by which the punishing by the Magistrate in matters of Religion, is
against Christian charity, the punishing of thieves, seditious and flagitious
persons will be so to. And Bullinger asks the question whether it had not
been more agreeable to love, if in the beginning of the tumult of Mu^ster in
West-phalia, a few seditious kn^ves had been put into prison, and according to
their demerit punished, then that whilst no man is punished for his conscience,
such a horrible slaughter of many should follow, and the Anabaptists should
far and (...) destroy all with fire and sword. Secondly, that the Magistrates
punishing of Apostates and false Prophets is approved of for the times of the
Gospel, I shall speak to it fully in the 19. and 20. Thees, and therefore will
not anticipate my self, only say this, that in Zac. 13. v. 2, 3. a Prophecy
of the times of the Gospel we find the same thing, almost the same words which
are in Deuteronomy. 13. 6.

Thirdly, it is the dictate of nature, it is of the law of nature and of all
Nations to punish^men for violations in Religion as well as for matters of life
and goods: I will not here enter into a large discussion of that question
what is requisite, and how many ingredients go to make a thing of the Law of
nature, and how Jus Natural and Jus positivum differ. I shall refer the
Reader in this question to many learned Tractates and Discourses of it by the
Alexander Alensis paar 3. quaest. 26. Thomas Aqinas 1, 2. quaest. 94 Estius in
lib. S^ntent. lib. 3. Distinct. 36. Suarez. de legib. lib. 1. cap. 3. lib. 2 c.
6. Molina Tractat. 1. De Jure and Justitia, Alphonsus a Castro de lege paenali
lib. 2. cap. 14. Azor. Institut. Moral. Muscul. loc. commun. de lege naturae.
Schoolmen and Casuists, to Popish and Protestant Divines, particularly to
Amisius Cases of Conscience, Book 5. first Chapter De Jure, Voetius Theses De
vecat. Gentium part. secund. De Jure and Justitia Dei. Master SELDENS De Jure
Naturali and Gentium first book throughout, especially the third and eight
chapters. Master Burges Vindiciae Legis 6. 7. and 8. Lectures. Master Cawd.
Master Palm. Sabbatum Redivivum cap. 1. page 11, 12, etc. I will build only
upon that which all learned men who have written of the Law of nature grant,
viz. that to hold there is a God, and that that God is to be adored and
worshipped is of the Law of nature, yea it is principium juris naturalis.
Musculus in his Common Places, de lege nature, p. 36. and de legib. page 139.
shows it is of the Law of nature to have a sense of a Deity, and that this Deity
is to be worshipped and feared: So that from the beginning among all men some
Religion has always been received. So Purchase Pilhrimage chap. 6. p. 26, 27.
Among all the lessons which nature has taught, this is deepliest indented
Religion: The falsehoods and variety of Religions are evidences of this truth,
seeing men will rather worship a Beast, stock or basest creature, then profess
no Religion at all. It is manifest then that the Image of God was by the fall
depraved, but not uttrerly extinct; among other sparks this also being raked up
in the ruins of our decayed nature, some science of the Godhead, some
conscience of Religion.

Now all those Nations whom the Law of nature instructed to believe and worship
a Deity, it instructed also not to suffer their God and the Religion they
embraced to be openly blasphemed and spoken against; and I do not believe any
instance can be given of any Nation or body of people among the Heathen formed
into a Commonwealth who punished not A theists and Blasphemers of their Gods.
The best Writers and Historians among Heathens, and of Heathens, as Cicero,
Seneca, Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, Livie, Justin, Diogenes Laertius, Caelius
Rhodiginus, Diodorus Siculus, Herodotus, Xenophon, assure us of Laws and
punishments enacted by Princes and States in matters of Religion; And other
Historians who write Histories of the World, of all ages and times, as Sir
Walter Rawleigh, Purchase, etc. give us many instances in this kind among all
sorts of Religions and people. Whence it is that so many learned men, Zanchius,
Musculus, Peter Martyr, Beza, with diverse others finding laws and punishments
of this nature so common and general among Commonwealths and Kingdoms, and
that in so many examples recorded in the old and new Testament and in other
Authors, make punishments by Magistrates for violation of religion to be of
the light of nature as they do the knowledge of a God, and that he is to be
feared and worshipped. Bullinger in his fifth book against the Anabaptists
fifth chapter, in answer to the Anabaptists affirming the commands of punishing
in matters of religion belong to Moses sword, are mosaicall from which
Christians are now freed, says that this coercive power was not by Moses then
instituted as being never before, and as a ceremonial law which should cease
in the time of Christ, but from the beginning this law as natural and necessary
was appointed by God. For all the old Magistrates before Moses, from this
command of God used this sword. And this law therefore God inserted in the
Israelitical laws, which is not now taken away by Christ's coming as a mosaicall
coaction, because Christ abrogated not the policy and law of nature. Musculu^
in his common places De Magistratibus showing the Magistrates coercive power in
matters of religion to be so manifest a truth as that the heathen could nor be
ignorant of it, concluds it is to be much more acknowledged by Christians, Nec
est ut dicat quisquam non est nobis Christianis ^ttendendum in religione quid
dictitet lumen naturae, sed quid nobis sanctae Scripturae praescribant quae ad
hoc sunt datae, ut ad omne bonum opus instructi red daemur. licet (...) in iis
quae fidei nostra mysteria concernu^^ non sit c^asulendu lex naturae, sed magis
sacrae Scriptura: simul tamen conte^^i (...) debent, quae divi^oconsilio (...)
^estric naturaliter ^sure^ inscripta qualis est lex illa, quam naturae vocamus;
cuj^^ nobis directionem and Prophetae, and Christus and Apostoli commendant.
neither is it that any man should say its not for us Christians to harken in
points of religion what the light of our nature dictates unto us, but what the
Scripture speaks to us of which are given for that end, that we may be
instructed to every good work. For although in those things which concern the
mysteries of our Faith, the Law of nature is not to be consulted with, but
rather the Scriptures, yet also-those things ought not to be contemned which by
God are written in our ^earts by nature, as is that law of nature whose
direction both the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, commend to us. Is not
that power which fathers have over their children of the law of nature which
the Scripture also confirms. And who will deny that it specially belongs to
Parents to bring up their children in true religion and the fear of God? In
Abraham this was praised Genesis 18. Now if we consider the Magistrate, what is
he otherwise to be accounted of, then the supreme Father of all his subjects,
whose power is much greater, then of a Father over children, and therefore it
belongs more to him then to a Father, that be should take upon him the care of
Religion and among ^is subjects set it up. As for Musculus Authority which is
so much urged by Minus Celsus Senenfis Sect tertia page 183. that all the
judicial laws are by the Gospel wholly antiquated, and therefore those of
Deuteronomy. 13. Deuteronomy. 17. etc. concerning the killing of false Prophet^, Blasphemers:
I answer, it is evident that is not Musculus meaning that under the Gospel
Magistrates may not make laws or punish for points of Religion: for in many of
his writings he pleads for this coercive power, as in the second Psalm. verse
11. Serve the Lord with fear. Let them note this place who deny kingly and
saecular power that the Magistrate b^th to do in the cause of religion. The
spirit of God admonishes Kings and Judges of the earth to serve the Lord. But
he understands it of that service which is due to the Son of God. Let them
answer here in what thing, Princes ought to serve Christ if in religion there
be nothing at all which ought to be done by them. When therefore Princes by
their power do care that the Doctrine of Gods word be kept in the Church,
Idolatry and false worships taken away, Ministers conveniently provided for,
and adversaries suppressed, forbidding also that the name of God be blasphemed,
and ^aring that those who live godly may be safe, but the wicked and turbulent
may be punished, do they not serve Christ then?

So in his commentaries on the O Vtinam and body amputentur omnes illi falsi
Doctores ac Pastores qui ^^^pus Ecclesiarum Christi sic occupant, ut inde
avelli non posse videantur nisi quemadmod^m ves^es ferro exciduntur and
abjiciuntur, i^a ipsi quoque forti ^anu p^r Christianos, Magistratus
^mputentur, qu^ salus fidelium quae peri^litatur recuper^tur.
fifth of the Gal. 12. verse he is for cutting off false Teachers by the
Christian Magistrate, which Mr. Goodwi^^ page 74. of his H^giomastix confesses
of him. So in his Common Places De Magistratibus and De Haeresi he pleads for
at large the coercive power of the Magistrates in matters of Religion, and De
Haeresi. p. 611, 612. De illis here^icis loquer, qui et si graviter errent haud
tame^ blasphemi sunt adversus Deum. Blasphemum lex Dei vivere non patitur.
particularly of restraining and imprisoning Heretics, yea, in case they be
blasphemous against God of cutting them off by death. For says he, the law of
God does not suffer a Blasphemer to live. By which testimonies of Musoulus and
diverse others that might be taken out of his writings it is apparent whatever his
meaning was of the Abrogation of the whole judicial law, it could not be that
all the commands concerning the Magistrates coercive power against Heretics,
false Prophets, Blasphemers, were by the coming of Christ wholly taken away:
For whereas Musoulus his express judgment is (though against the Magistrates
cutting off by death a simple Heretic) for putting to death blasphemous
Heretics, his proof is, the law of God does not suffer a blasphemer to live,
which law was given by Moses as well as those in the 13. and 17. chapter of
Deuteronomy. and I find no law spoken of, or example recorded in the new Testament for
putting Blasphemers to death, but what has immediate reference to that law in
L^vit. 24. 16. or was founded on the law of nature common to all Nations. Now
for that abrogation of the mosaicall law in Mus^ulus common places de legibus
spoken of by Minus Celsus Senensis, it is not of the abrogation of the judicial
law only but of the moral also, which is equally pleaded by Musculus in that
chapter; and yet it is well known that Musculus was no Antinomian, So that
however, he differed in the way of his expressions from other great Divines
about the manner how the moral law in the ten commandments binds us
Christians, viz. not as delivered by Moses legally to the Israelites, but as
agreeing with the law of nature, justice and equity, commanding good just, and
holy things, so far tying all men to observance. Musculus in qu^tum praecept.
page 81, 82. non dico simpliciter ad solos Israelitas pertinere Decalogi hujus
observantiam, sed quate^us pertinet ad legem Mosaicam and tabulas ^abet
foederis a Deo cum Israele initi Hacte^us utique neque Gentes neque Christian^s
constringit sed solos Israelitas, quos legis hujus dispensatio peculiariter and
nominatim concernit. Interea tamen sciendu^ est, quae in hoc Decalogo (...)
nentur, quatenus in sesunt bona, justa aequa and pia, and ad legem naturae
pertinent, hactenus illorum observantiam pertinere ad omnes. Quatenus
Israelitis per Mosem legaliter est traditus, solos Israelitas legaliter
constringit: quatenus vero cum lege naturae justitia and equitate consentit,
non solos Israelitas, sed omnes homines ad sui observantiam habet obnoxios.
Muscul. de legibus 141, 142.
Musculus explains his own meaning, that the observation of the Decalogue did
not belong simply to the Israelites alone, but secundum quid in some respects
as given by Moses upon Mount Sinai, and as it contained the Tables of a
Covenant made by God with Israel. So far it binds not Heathens nor Christiens
but only Israelites. But the things containe^ in the Decalogue, the matter of
it concerns all. The Decalogue so far as to be under Moses, and his
Paedagogie does not bind Christians, but as it contains things agreeable, or
contrary to righteousness and the law of Christ it is in force to, and therefore
commands the one and forbids the other. Musculus says he is so far from
condemning the use of the ten Commandments in the Church of God, that he
greatly praises their study and diligence, who first brought that in for a part
of the Catechism of the Church. So that notwithstanding any thing Musculus
has of the abrogation of the mosaical law, Moses Laws for punishing Idolaters,
false Prophets Blasphemers, are in force now for the general equity and reason
of them as containing matter agreeable to the rules of reason and justice as
well as the Decalogue; and indeed confidering what Musculus in his Tractate de
legibus writes of the judicial laws that they are Appendixes of the moral
commands, inserted here and there in Moses writings and added for exposition of
the Decalogue, as also what he says De Magistratibus that the Magistrates
power in matters of Religion is of the light of nature, nature dictates it, and
that the law is still in force against Blasphemers, then we cannot understand
the abrogation of these laws of Moses of punishing in matters of the first
Table, to be any otherwise meant by Musculus then in his sense of the
abrogation of the Decalogue formerly expressed.

2. The reasons of those commands expressed in the 13. and 17. chapters of
Deuteronomy. concerning putting to death false Prophets, Apostates, etc. whether taken
from the nature of the things themselves to which drawn, or the nature of the
persons guilty, Seducers, or the common condition of the sons of men, shall
fear and do no more so, etc. or the end of punishments, putting away evil, to
which of them soever we look, they have been, were, and are still the same,
always of a like nature and force both before the commands were given by Moses,
in Moses time, and now under the Gospel, and therefore the reasons of those
laws being perpetual and universal not abrogated by Christ, neither are the
laws themselves (of which though I gave a touch of it in page 50.) yet I shall
here further clear it. It Is a rule given by many Divines in such sentences as
these, Tale praceptum qualis ratio praecepti. Ratio immutabilis facit praceptum
immutabile. Episcop. Winton. opusc. page 145. Ames. lib. 5. cas. consc. cap. 1.
Mepul. lib. 2. cap. 13.
Vbi ratio legis redditur moralis, ibi ^ex ipsa est moralis. Officia illa omnia
sunt moralia et immutabilia, quae rations morales and immutabiles habent sibi
annexas. Now though this rule is liable to Exceptions and holds not universally
as in Levit. 11. 44. Some special determination may be confirmed by a general
reason; and the immutable nature of the lawgiver has its place and virtue in
appointing mutable commands. Yet where the reasons of a law ex natura rei and
not merely ex instituto are perpetual and universal, and the duties following
from those reasons founded thereon, the special inward and proper reason of
such a command being moral and perpetual; there always it follows that law
is moral and perpetual, of which the Reader may be further satisfied in Ames
Cases Consc. lib. 5. cap. 1. Quaest. 9. and his Medulla l. 2. c. 12.

Now the special inward and proper reason of that command Deuteronomy. 13. so shall
thou put the evil away from the midst of thee, is juris moralis and naturalis,
and therefore so is the command itself. For a conclusion of this that these
laws of punishing Idolaters, false Prophets, etc. were not properly judicial
laws, nor abrogated by Christ's coming, lets take notice that that distinction
of the judicial law from the moral, viz. the moral law was given of God
publikly declared by his voice twice writ in tables of stone, but the judicial
was afterward delivered to Moses, and by Moses to the people without any such
solemnity, is no exact nor perfect one. For many of the laws not expressed in
the Decalogue, but delivered afterward among the judicial, as about restoring
the pledge, of weights and just measures, of giving the hire to the laborour,
and many other such like, are no more judicial or less moral then thou shall
not steal, Yea such commands are transferred to the times of the Gospel, as
that of Levit, 19. 17. to Matthew. 18. 15. and Luke 17. 3. and therefore though
these commands of punishing Blasphemers, Apostates, false Prophets, etc. be
not expressed in the Decalogue, but added after, yet they may be no more
judicial then the third and fourth Commandment. And therefore the most
accurate distinction that is given by Divines between judicial laws properly
so called, and those laws numbered among the judicial, is this, those were
properly judicial laws which had a singular respect to the people of the
Jews, so as the reason cause and foundation of them was placed in some
peculiar condition of that people: But those laws which were wont to be
reckoned among the judicials, and yet in their reason had no singular respect
or relation to the condition of the Jews more then to other people, all those
are of moral natural right common to all people, of which distinction with
some other particulars about the nature of the judicial law, and how far it
binds Christians under the Gospel I refer the Reader to Judi^iales le^es
proprie illae fuerunt quae cum non fuerunt, caremoniales, singularem populum
Judaicum respectum habuere, ita ut ratio causa and fundamentum earu^ positu^
fuerit in illius populi peculiari aliqua condition. Leges igitur illae quae
judicialibus annumerari solent and tamen in ratione sua nullu^ singularem
respectum habuerunt ad conditionem Judaeo^um, magis qua^ aliorum populorum,
illae omnes sunt juris moralis ac naturalis, omnium populorum communes.
Ames. Cases of conscience the fifth Book, chapt. 1. De Jure and to Zepperus
explanation of the mosaicall laws, chap. 5. who shows two extremes of men in
that point, one in the excess holding all the judicial laws promiscuously in
force, others in the defect holding them all and wholly abolished, but holds
the middle way between both, viz. what ever in the mosaicall laws has an
immutable and perpetual reason and nature by common right, immu^ably and
always as by an adamantine chain binds all men in all times and places: But
whatsoever has an implied reason and condition of change, does no longer bind
the consciences of Christians. Zepperus also in his first Book chapt. 12. of
the mosaicall laws, answers at large the places brought by Minus Celsus
Senens. and others, out of Musculus, Luther, Calvin. Zanchius and others, for
the abrogation of these laws, showing they are understood only of those things
that peculiarly belonged to the commonwealth of the Jews, and as given by
Moses to the Israelites, and not of such judicialls which either in the law of
nature or Decalogue have their reason founded. Now of this latter sort, are all
those commands for the substance of them, for punishing the false Prophet,
Apostate, etc. as appears in the nature of those laws and the reasons of them:
for what singular respect or relation to the condition of the Jews, has taking
the evil away, fearing and doing no more so, turning away from the Lord their
God, more, then to the condition of Christians.

Thirdly, As to Hagiomastixs affirmation page 43 that to prove by the law of
God in the old Testament, Deuteronomy. 13. etc. that false Prophets Blasphemers, etc.
may be bodily punished under the New Testament is all one as if a man should go
about to prove that the man Moses is now alive, by this argument viz. because
he was alive under the old Testament, I answer, 1. Moses is alive under the
new Testament, as God said in the bush to Moses, I am the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, so God is the God of Moses as well as
of Abraham, etc. Now God is not the God of the dead but of the living. Matthew.
22. 32. compared with Mark 12. 26, 27. 2. Though Moses body be dead and buried
by God in a Sepulcher that no man knows of, yet his Doctrine may be alive, it is
a gross non sequitur, that their Doctrine must be dead and buried whose bodies
are dead, for then David's Doctrine in the Psalms, the Prophets Doctrine, yea
the Evangelists and Apostles Doctrine should be dead, they being now all dead
as well as Moses, and so all proofs brought for any Doctrine, from David's
Psalms, the Prophets, the new Testament may be thus evaded, by saying, we may
go about to prove David, the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles are now alive
by this arguments, because they were alive some of them thousands, and others
of them many hundred years ago. Thirdly besides this false consequence, it is
evident upon many grounds that Doctrines are alive, do bind when the
Publishers and writers of them are dead, yea they are written for that end,
that they may teach and be a rule when the men who writ them are dead, that
being dead, by these they may yet speak as the Apostle ^om. 15. 4. tells us;
yea many things are spoken and written to be a rule of direction to the Church,
intended to take place rather after their death then in their life time, as the
Prophecies of the Prophets, and some Prophecies also of the Apostles, so that
it may be said as Z^ch. chapter 1. verse 6. Your Fathers, where are they, and
the Prophets, do they live for ever? But my words and my Statu^^ which I
commanded my servants the Prophets; did they no^ take hold of your Fathers?
though Penmen and writers of Scripture die, yet their words and Doctrine take
hold and place when they are dead. Fourthly by this reason of holding Moses is
now alive, if the law of God in the old Testament binds, it will follow that
all Moses Doctrine, the ten commandments and all he writ in the Pentatench,
Genesis, etc. are void as well as these commands about punishing false
Prophets, etc. for they were made known and written by Moses when he was
alive, and to be found in his Books together with these laws termed
judicial: So that the Antinomian may as well say the same against the moral
law under the Gospel, when the ten Commandments are pressed, and the Socinian
and Anabaptist against those commands to put to death murderers, which now
Master John Goodwin does against these laws in Deuteronomy. 13. etc. that men may as
well prove the man Moses is now alive, by these commands, because he was alive
under the old Testament, as bring those places of Scripture written by Moses to
prove the moral law in force, and those commands who so sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed. Fifthly whatever Hagiomastix by way of scoff
has spoken thus of proving as well Moses may be now alive, it is evident,
besides the new Testaments Confirmation in many places of the Evangelists and
Epistles, of the old Testament being in force in the days of the Gospel (of
which I shall speak in the 18. THESIS and so will pare the Reader here) it by
name particularly ratifies the Doctrine and Authority of Moses writings, and
proves and urges several things upon men under the Gospel from texts taken
out of the five Books of Moses, as these places in the new Testament
unanswerably show, Matthew. 23. 2, 3. Matthew. 28, 29, 31, 32. Mark 12. 26. Luke
16. 29, 30, 31. Luke 24. 27. John 1. 45. Acts 3. 22. Act. 26. 22. Acts 28. 23.
Romans 9. 7, 9, 15, 16, 17. Romans 10. 6, 8. Romans 13. 8. 9. Ephesians. 6. 2. 3. yea
several particulars of the judicial laws, are brought to prove duties
required in the new Testament as page 56, 57, 60. of this Book shows; and
lastly Moses Authority and writings are of such sacred account under the new
Testament, that in the P^^lation the Book that concludes and shuts up the Canon
of the new Testament, the Book that speaks of things that shall be in the
Church of the new Testament till the end of the world, Moses his name and
writing are joined with the Lamb, and that to be made use of by the most
eminent and faithful servants of God, that have gotten the victory ever the
beast, and over his Image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name,
these standing on the sea of glass having the harp of God, sing the song of
Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, great and
mavelous are thy works Lord God almighty, etc. So that all these things being
laid together, I suppose by this time every ingenuous Reader must needs see,
that by this Answer to Deuteronomy. 13. etc. Hagiomastix intended rather to spread a
table of mirth for himself and his Church to feast on, then to give any
satisfaction to the Reverend Author of the Vindication of the printed Paper
entitled an Ordinance for the preventing of Heresies, etc. and the rest of the
Presbyterians.

Fourthly, as to that answer of Hagiomastix p. 48. 49. they that will have the
ancient law for putting Blasphemers and Idolaters to death to be now in force,
must consequently hold it is in force not simply only as to the inflicting of
death upon the offenders, but in all other particulars commanded by the same
Authority, as not be killed after any manner, nor with any kind of death, but
with stones, not only the seducer but the seduced themselves, though whole
cites, not only the inhabitants, but the cattle also, with diverse other
particulars named in that of Deuteronomy. 13. For if men will urge this law as being
still in force, they make themselves debtors to urge the execution of the whole
in all the particularities and circumstances thereunto belonging. For who has
any power to make an Election or Reprobation amongst the Commandments of God,
where God himself has made none. I reply, it follows not: it is no good
consequence that all circumstances, accessories, particularities must bind
because the substance of a command binds; or that the substance and sum of a
command must be taken away, because some circumstances, forms and
particularities are not in force.

To argue a thing it self abolished, because the modus of it binds not
always, or that the substance and essentials must cease, because diverse
accessories, circumstantials and forms wherewith it was clothed most suitable
to such a time, Country condition of such a people, are ceased, is a fallacy
a dicto sec^ndum quid ad dictum simpliciter, which all Logitians know is no
good reasoning: If I, or any other Presbyterian had argued thus, such a man's
bond binds not now, or this is not such a man, he is dead, because his
apparel, hair, place of abode, with some other such accessories are changed
antiquite altered, we should certainly have spread a table of mirth for the
Independents, and therefore I judge, for Hagiomastix thus to reason shows no
great strength, and I do desire Mr. John Goodwin, but to rub up his old
Kekerman lib. 1. cap. 7. D^ praedicam. Substantiae and lib. 1. cap. 21.
Burgerdis. Institut. Logic. l. 1. c. 13. c. 4. Seton. Log. De Substantia.
Substantia qua substantia non variatur gradibus seu non recipit magis and
minus. Substantia eadem numero permanens, potest contraria accidentia in se
suscipere. Accid. communia recipient gradus. Accidens est quod adest and abest
sine subjecti interitu. Accidentia sunt seperabilia a subjecto.
Logic of the nature and difference of Substance, and Accidents, and then I
know he will confess (though for him to confess any thing as manifest as the
light wherein he is mistaken in writing, is as rare as a black Swan) that
Accidents may be varied and taken away salva substantia. And that I may show
the weakness of this reasoning, that this 13. of Deuteronomy. is therefore not in force
because then the manner of punishing with stones, and the person tempted to
Idolatry, though never so dear, stoning him, with diverse other particulars
must still bind, I shall give instances in the old and new Testament of moral
and Evangelicall commands, and examples, that the things themselves are in
force, and yet many accessories, acccidentals, circumstantials accompanying
them at such a time in such places, and such a condition of the Church, not
binding; And certainly if commands and rules confessed to be moral and
Evangelicall had such accessories, accidentals, circumstantials, forms and
manner of expressions accompanying them, to which we are not now tied though
we are to the commands and duties themselves, then the commands called judicial
in Deuteronomy. 13. 17. because consisting in judgments and matters of punishing
offenses, may easily be conceived upon several reasons, to have for the
manner and form of proceeding with the kinds and extent of punishments, many
accessories and accidentals to which the Church of the new Testam. is no ways
bound* although not free from the substance of the commands, or those Jaws as
containing such a Doctrine that in their general nature and proportion of
equity give us the best determination naturalis juris, as Cas. Cons. lib. 5.
cap. 1. De Jure.
Amesius speaks. The Decalogue is in force and binding for the matter and
substance of the commands of all Christians under the N. Testament as is
confessed even by them that hold the judicial laws totally abrogated, and yet
many of them plead that in diverse respects, and in several particular things,
viz. accessories and appendixes attending that time and that people, the Jews,
as under such considerations, that law binds not us: Now though the judgment
of the generality of Orthodox Divines goes not along with them all their
expressions about the manner of the abrogation, yet al confess that even in
the Decalogue there are some things, accessories accommodated to that time and
condition of that people the Jews, which have the nature of ceremonials and
judicials, as that clause in the preface which brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the house of Bondage, upon which the ten commandments are
enforced to the Jews, as that clause in the Zepperi Mosaic. Leg. Forens.
explanat. l. 1. c. 6 de varia legum mosaicaru^ composit. page 36. 37. Decalogus
sane ut nt mere moralis, immutabilis, and perpetuus videri queat, aliquid tamen
and cereminiale and forense admixtu^ habet. Quintum praeceptu^ morale est
quatenus parentibus a liberis honorem exhiberi vult; judiciale and politicum
quatenus terrae Chanaan and benedictionis in illa promissionem continet.
Ceremoniale in super aliquid, quatenus Chananaea terra typus erat caelestis
illius patriae. vid. ibi plura. Rivet. explicat. Decal. p. 12. promissio enim
addi^a praecepto quinto express loquitur de terra-quam Deus erat daturus
populo quae hoc tempore nos non respieit.
fifth command that thy days may be long upon the Land which the Lord thy God
gives thee, was specially meant and had particular relation to the Land of
Canaan, though in the general equity it was meant of a good and long life upon
earth, as is evident by Ephesians. 6. 3. where the Apostle changes it from days
being long in the land which the Lord thy God gives, to this, that it may be
well with thee and thou may live long on the earth, as something in the
fourth commandment, which that Colos, 2. 16, 17. shows, and so some other
phrases might be instanced in, which bind not; and yet from hence to reason
against the Decalogues binding Christians under the new Testament, as
Hagiomastix in page 48, 49. against that command in Deuteronomy. 13. and to say as he
does were frivilous and absurd: Now if it be so in the matter of the Decalogue,
then the same reason holds more in Deuteronomy. 13.

The Government, Discipline, and order of the visible Church laid down in the
new Testament for the essentials and substantials binds all Churches to the end
of the world, as the Reformed Churches hold, and diverse Ministers of that way
as Gersom Bucerus, Parker, Danaeus, Cartwright, etc have written, and yet they
do not hold all accessories, circumstantials, occasionals, etc of Discipline
spoken of in the new Testament to bind, but distinguish of things, showing
what is immutable and perpetual, and what not, of which the Reader may consult
Parker, De Politia Ecclesiastica, Danaus in Tim. 2. Epistol. Dedicat. in cap.
3. v. 15. cap. 5. v. 14.
Danaeus on the first of Timothy, who shows in diverse places of that Book
that the fundamentals, essentials and substantials of Ecclesiastical
Discipline cannot be increased nor diminished by any new constitutions of men:
but for accessories and accidentals they may be diminished, increased and
moderated according to the various circumstances of places, things, persons and
times. For Discipline being as a comely garment fitted to things, persons and
times, as these may be changed viz times, etc so Discipline also in accessories
and lighter things may be altered, and if out of a folish zeal of observing all
things practiced in the Apostles times men will imitate all things then done
without considering a difference of times, places and state of things, they
must needs do that which will be to the great evil of the Church and
detriment of consciences. Apologet Narration. Mere circumstances we except, or
what rules the Law of nature does in common dictate.
Independents themselves though they hold the substantials of Church Government
and order ought to be the same in our times, that they were in the Apostles,
yet they do not in all circumstantials nor accidentals judge Discipline now
binds; and I suppose if Hagiomastix had thus reasoned against their Independent
Government and order, that if that tied us in these days, then we are bound
to all circumstances and accessories, as to the number of seven Deacons, etc as
to widows just of such an age, etc or else the office of Deacons and widows
are ceased in the Church, they would have laughed at him for his folly, and yet
this is the way of the man's reasoning against the command of God, Deuteronomy. 13. 17.
the command it self must be wholly abrogated, or else all accessories and
formalities accompanying it Christians are tied unto. Baptism, the Lords
Supper, Preaching of the word to speak properly are not points of Government
and order, but the worship of God: Love, Humility, Hospitality, are graces and
moral duties commanded under the Gospel, and yet all these with many others
of the like kind that I could instance in, had in the Apostles days those
Primitive times, some accessories and appendixes, ways of manifestations of
them which are now ceased, as the feasts of Love, the Kiss of love, washing
the Saints feet, etc. in which humility, brotherly love, kindness to strangers
were expressed, as proper and peculiar to that condition the Church was then
in, and the customs of those Countries, etc. Now if any Seeker should reason
with Hagiomastix that these Ordinances were all antiquated, or any Antinomian
that these graces were not to be exercised by us now, because these accessories
and appendixes were laid aside, or would enforce from the Practice of them a
necessity of washing feet, the Kiss of love, and all other things proper and
peculiar to the state of the Apostles, I suppose he would laugh at them, and in
his answer jear them to purpose. Now therefore if in Evangelicall Ordinances and
Commands, in points of worship and graces under the time of the new Testament,
where there is still one and the same manner of administration of the Coveenant
of grace, there may be such a non obligation in respect of accessories and
accidentals, though yet the Ordinances and graces themselves remain in full
force and vigor, we may then easily conceive in commands concerning punishments
of sin against the first Table, how under the new Testament being a diverse
manner of administration from the old (though the same in substance) there may
well be a great change of accessories, accidentals, forms, and manner of
proceeding, which nevertheless give no ground for the taking away things and
commands themselves, but only clearly show there may be a cessation of all
such forms, accessories, manner of proceeding, which were peculiar to that time
and people. And if we do but observe and consider the composition of most of
the mosaicall laws, how they are mixed of moral,
judicial, and ceremonial, how laws judicial have something moral, and
something ceremonial in them, and ceremonials have something judicial and
moral in them, and how that those things which in their nature are moral and
perpetual, have yet somewhat judicial and ceremonial annexed to them, of all
which we may be further satisfied in Zepperus his explanation of the mosaicall
laws, we may easily conceive how in these mosaicall laws, a command the thing
it self may be binding for the substance, and yet several particulars
accompanying as being properly judicial and ceremonial may cease, among which
now the form and kinds of punishments, the extent with rigor and severity of
punishing to the cattle, the making the city a heap for ever, etc may be
reckoned; And that these are but accessories and appendixes of these laws for
punishing Idolaters, false Prophets, which therefore may not bind, though the
commands for the substance be still in force, may appear thus, because
inflicting death simply upon Apostates, false Prophets, etc is commanded
without any of these accessories of destroying the cattle, and making the city
an heap, etc as these places Exodus 23. 20. Deuteronomy. 17. 2, 5, 6. and Deuteronomy. 18. 20.
snow, which is worthy to be taken notice of; besides in the commands to punish
those who offer up their children to Molech, and that Blaspheme God, Levit. 20.
2. Leuit. 24. 16. the inflicting of death upon them is required, but none of
those particulars mentioned Deuteronomy. 13, 15, 16, 17. In the new Testament also,
though the punishing by death according to Moses law of Apostates be approved
of, as in page 52, 53. of this Book I have showen, and several judicial Laws
for the substance ratified page 56, 57. yet the formalities, accessories, with
all particularities of such Laws never are spoken of; and lastly, though
severe punishment by the Magistrate the substance of that command in Deuteronomy. 13.
be both before Moses Laws as in Jobs time, and after Moses times by
Artaxerxes, Nebuchadnezzar, Darius in cases of Apostasy, Idolatry, Blasphemy,
approved of; yet there is not a word spoken of destroying Cattle, the whole
Cities, etc. And to stop Hagiomast. mouth for ever, I wish him to consider
this, that by virtue of commands under the old Testament, Apostates, false
Prophets, Idolaters, may be now put to death, and yet the Magistrates under the
Gospel not bound to destroy whole Cities, cattle, nor fulfill the rest of his
inferences: For it will appear by many instances in the old Testament, even in
that time of Administration of the Covenant, wherein the 13. of Deuteronomy. was
written, that the Magistrates held not themselves bound to all those
particulars of destroying all the inhabitants, cattle, etc. though they
inflicted punishments, yea death upon some Idolaters, and Apostates, as these
instances fully show, viz. in Moses Exodus 32. commanding in the worship of the
Golden Calfe three thousand to be slain, not all the people, nor the cattle,
Numb. 25. 2, 3, 4, 5. commanding for the bowing down to the gods of Moab, the
heads of the people to be hanged up, not all the people, neither the cattle to
be killed, in Eliah killing the Prophets of Baal only, 1 Kings c. 18. not the
people; in Asa, entering into Covenant that whosoever would not serve the Lord
the God of Israel should be put to death, and in deposing Machah, his Mother
for making an Idol in a Grove 2 Chronicles. c. 15. but not entering into Covenant to
destroy all the Cattle and the Cities where such persons lived; in Josiah
sacrificing all the Priest of the high places in Samaria that were there upon
the Altars 2 Kings. chapt. 23. but not sacrificing the people nor the cattle;
and so in others which might be given. And therefore if Magistrates under the
old Testament, though all thought it their duty to punish^ Idolaters and
Apostates, were not tied to all the particulars in Deuteronomy. 13. then certainly the
Magistrates under the new are less tied to those accessories and formalities
of that Law, by all which it is apparent those things laid down in The stoning to
death with stones Idolaters, false Prophets, was not essential as Zach. 13. 3.
shows who there prophecies they shall be thrust through, not stoned.
Deuteronomy. 13. 15, 16, 17. are only accessories and accidentals of that command of
punishing with death those that go after other Gods, and not of the nature and
essence of it; yea holding only in some particular cases, time, but not
general to the Jews themselves, which in what cases and how, I shall
forbearespeaking of now for fear of enlarging this part beyond its proportion
intended.

And for a conclusion of this; the consideration of this mixture and
composition of the Laws of God under the old Testament is exceeding useful
for this purpose, viz. that thereby we may judge more easily of the
mutabilitie or immutabilitie of them, whether they be temporary or perpetual,
and so whether they bind all men, or only some. In commands alleged out of the
old Testament, this is to be carefully looked into whether they be merely and
purely moral or ceremonial or judicial;
or whether mixed and compounded, and how, of what laws mixed. If the command
be pure and simple the thing is evident, where moral is binds, where
ceremonial or judicial it binds not. But if it be mixed of judicial,
ceremonial and moral, or of ceremonial and moral, the moral remains and is
in force: by all which we may see the weakness of Hagiomastixs inference, that
if that command in Deuteronomy. 13. does at all bind Christians, it must bind in
every particular there spoken of: for what is moral in Deuteronomy. 13. abides, and yet
what is properly judicial and ceremonial is taken away: look as that were no
good argument against the fifth commandment being in force under the new
Testament, because then what was judicial and ceremonial in it as containing
the promise of the Land of Canaan, and a blessing in it etc. must remain under
the Gospel, so neither is this of Hagiomast. For as a command moral may have
somewhat judicial mixed with it, so may a command judicial have much of
moral in it; but now what judicial laws and how mixed are temporary and
changeable, and upon what rules and grounds, and what judicial laws are
immutable and perpetual, and how to be known, I refer the Reader for
satisfaction to Zepperus explanation of the Mosaicall Laws, 1. Book chapt. 7,
8, 9, 12. And as for those commands in question of Magistrates punishing in
cases of Apostasy, Idolatry, Blasphemy, they are upon all occasions reckoned
by learned Divines among the immutable and perpetual, as by Zanchius De
Magistratu Quaest. Secunda p. 170, 171. Beza De Haereti^is a Magistratu^
puniendi^, p. 152. 154, 155. and by Zepperus in his explanation of the
mosaicall judicial laws, first Book c. 10. page 72. and 4. Book chapt. 2. p.
243. where he makes the laws against the false Prophet teaching publicly,
the private Seducer, the public defection of the whole City, etc to be
appendixes of the first command and of common right, and particularly in the
third chapter of that fourth Book proves by several Reasons the punishing of
false Teachers, Heretics, Blasphemers, ought to be perpetual, which learned
Authors notwithstanding, grant the kinds of punishments, the particular forms
of those laws, and as they were given of Moses to be constitutive of the
Jews policy, to be changeable and not binding: The kinds of punishments are
taken away, Christ would not have the Gentile Magistrate to be bound to those
laws for the kind of punishments which were given to the Jewish Magistrates,
but notwithstanding punishments in general are not taken away, but commanded.
In the constituting the kind of punishment, there seems a peculiar reason to
have been had of that Nation. There were certain peculiar things in those
laws that do not now belong to us which particulars being taken away, there
are two things by virtue of those laws remain. First, that defection from the
true Religion, and seducing to tha defection should be punished by the
Magistrate no^. Secondly, that Capital punishment should be inflicted
according to the greatness of the Blasphemy and wickedness upon factious and
seditions Apostates. For of such account ought the Majesty of God to be among
all men in all ages of the world, that whosoever shall despise and mock at
that, be who speaks evil of the Author of life, is most worthy to have his
life taken away. So Zanchius De Magistratu Quaest, secunda page. 170. 171, 172,
and Beza De Haereticis a Magistrat^ p^niendis page 154, 155. speak and
therefore according to that threefold distinction laid down page 53, 54, 55. of
this Treatise, this law in Deuteronomy. 13. may be in force, 1. according to the
substance and equity of it, according as there is a common right in it, Beza De
Haeret. a Magistr. Page 154. Judicialis autem L^xeam duntaxat justitiae and
aequitatis parte^ sigillatim explicat, quae in iis rebus versatur de quibus
judicia constituta sunt.
common to other Nations with the Jew^, and secondly, as it contains a Doctrine
made known by God for punishing such offenses (though we Christians are not
tied to the particular forms of that command according to the Mosaicall law or
polity, nor as it was given by Moses to one people, nor to the utmost vigor
and severity of it expressed in every particular) which being in force under
the Gospel but in this sense and thus far, fully makes good that which it is
brought for the Magistrates coercive power under the new Testament to punish
false Prophets, Apostates, etc: neither does the abating somewhat of the rigor
of the Law suitable to the Mosaical Paedagogie, or the relesiang of the
particular forms of that Law the kind and manner of punishing, abrogate all
punishment and restraint: For we may easily conceive and we often see it in
experience, the rigor and utmost severity of a Law in regard of some
circumstances abated, and yet not all punishment, neither the substance of it
taken away; and indeed if we consider what the judicial Law concerning
punishing in criminal matters is, as it is laid down by diverse learned men,
Ames. lib. 5. Cas. Consc. cap. 1. de jure ista Lex judicialis quae per Mosen
traditae fuit Israelitis ut eorum propria, fuit ipsis accuratissima
determinatio and accommodatio juris naturalis secundum illius populi singula^em
determinationem. Ista Lex ad Christianos pertinet tantum sub ratione doctrinae
quatenus vel generali sua natura, vel proportionis aquitate, exhibet semper
nobis optimam naturalis juris determinationem.
Beza. Zepperus, Amesius, viz. that law which does peculiarly explicate that
part of righteousness and equity concerning executing justice and judgment,
or the most accurate determination and fit application of the natural right
according to the special and singular condition of that people, it must needs
follow that though those circumstances which were proper to that special
estate of the Jews are ceased, as of necessity they must, the State of the
Jews being changed, yet the things themselves as abstracted from their
relation to the Jewish Church and state, cannot be abolished, as being
naturalis juris, which still do hold forth to us the best determination of
natural right as Amesius speaks, as the changing of the fashion form and
proportion of a man's clothing and apparel cannot alter a man's substance and
person, so neither can the forms and manner of the judicial Law by which it
was fitted for the Jews condition as a garment is to a man's body, take away
the Law it self; so that judicias being nothing else but naturals and morals
clothed for a time after such a manner to fit the nature and manners of such a
people, that time and people being passed away,
the substance, viz. what is natural and moral must needs remain.

Fifthly, as to those other inferences added by Hagiomastix page 50. 51, 52. to
the former, that if the obligation of the Mosaicall Law for putting
Blasphemers, Idolaters, etc to death, was intended by God to continue under the
new Testament, why was the Apostle Paul so far from enjoining a believing
brother to detect, or to put to death his Idolatrous wife, that he does not
permit him so much as to put her away from him? if the Law in question was to
continue in force under the Gospel, then was every person in an Idolatrous
state and kingdom whilst it remained Idolatrous, bound to seek the death one
of another, yea to destroy one another with their own hands. Yea the civil
Magistrate was bound to sentence all his subjects that practiced Idolatry to
death without exception, and to make a bloody desolation throughout all his
dominions: then were believers in Idolatrous states and kingdoms upon their
respective Conversions to the Christian faith, bound to accuse their
neighbors, being Idolaters and Blasphemers, round about them before the
Magistrate, especially if he were a Christian, and to require the execution of
this Law of God upon them to have them put to death. I answer M. Goodwins If^
and Thens proceed either out of the gross ignorance of the state of the
question of Toleration, and scope of Deuteronomy. 13. or elsefrom a design to delude
and abuse the people with a show of some reason, which though he knows in his
conscience very well has no weight at all, yet he thinks will serve to mislead
his followers who takes shadows for men. For whereas the question about
punishing men with death, or other severe punishments in cases of Idolatry and
false Doctrine is understood by all Divines who write of the Controversy, in
case of Apostasy and defection, meant of those who have once known and
received the Christian faith, and not of Jews, Turks, and Pagans; of
Magistrates also in their own jurisdiction and Territories, not others; and
when it may be with the safety, and for the good of a Nation and Kingdom, and
not to the manifest destruction and ruin of a Kingdom, as he may find in the
writings of many learned men who have writ upon the Question Calvin, Beza,
Zanchius, Bullinger, Danaeus, Musculus, Gerardus, Baldwins cases of conscience,
Zepperus, Videlius, Voetius, Master Rutherfurd, etc and is evident by the state
of the question laid down in the Prolegomena, as also Deuteronomy. 13. is understood
of Apostates who having professed the Law are fallen from it, and of persons in
the territories and power of the Jews, not that they should do so to all
neighboring Nations round about them, as these phrases imply, If there arise
among you a Prophet, If thy brother, or thy Son, or thy Daughter, entice thee
secretly, saying, lets go serve other Gods. If thou shall hear say in one of
thy Cities, which the Lord thy God has given thee to dwell there, saying,
certain men, the children of Belial are gone out from among you, and have
withdrawn the inhabitants of their city. Deu^. 17. 2. If there be found among
you within any of thy gates which the Lord thy God gives thee, man or woman
that has wrought wickedness in the fight of the Lord thy God, in
transgressing his Covenant; If it be true that such abomination is wrought in
Israel, then shall thou bring forth that man or that woman unto thy gates, and
stone them with stones till they die: On which place * Calvin observes in his
handling that question whether it be lawful for Christian Judges to punish
Heretics, Calvin. Refut^t errorum Serveti, in Quaest. an Christianis Judicibus
H^reticos punire liceat. p. 59^
that the punishment of stoning in Deuteronomy. 13. was not commanded to be inflicted
upon foreign Nations, but upon Apostates from the Jewish Religion who had
perfidiously fallen from it: by which says he is answered that objection made
by some, who ask whether Jews, Turks, and the like are by the sword to be
forced to the Faith of Christ? Neither does God command the sword to be drawn
promiscuously against all, but Apostates who have wickedly with drawn
themselves from the true worship and have endeavored to draw others to the
like defection, he has subjected to just punishment: Yet for all this
Hagiomastix makes Ifs and Ands, brings instances of Suppositions in Heathens,
and of States wholly Idolatrous, nothing at all to the question in hand; for
the Apostle speaks in 1 Corinthians and the seventh chapter, of a Heathen and
infidel that never received the faith of Christ, but being borne and brought
up in Heathenisme continues so, however one of the married persons, husband or
wife was converted to the Christian faith, besides that question put by
Hagiomastix, why was the Apostle Paul so far from enjoining a believing
brother to detect, or to put to death his infidel or Idolatrous wife that he
does not permit him so much as to put her away from him, is absurd and
ridiculous, and a man would wonder that such a great champion as Cretensis p.
11.
Cretensis would be taken for, that dares challenge all Presbyterians in
England, Scotland, and France, assembled and not assembled, and so cried up and
deified by the Sectaries in diverse A letter by way of Answer to a letter of Mr.
Vicars. A candle to see the Sun. Apolog. for some passages in Hagiomastix by
diverse Independents.
Pamphlets, should bring such weak poor stuff; for the Corinthian State and
Magistracy being then heathenish, and infidels, (as the Apostle in the chapter
going before 1 Cor. 6. 2. shows, only many particular private persons living in
Corinth being converted who were not the civil Government) it had been to no
end for Paul to direct the believing husband to complain to the Magistrate of
his Idolatrous wife, that had been the way for himself to have been punished,
that had been all one as to have complained to the civil Magistrates of
themselves; and certainly the Apostle that blamed the believing Corinthians for
going to law one with another before their Magistrates who were unbeleevers,
though he would not, if they had been Christian Magistrates, had no reason to
stir up Christians to complain unto unbeleevers in matters of Religion and
Christianity. Master Goodwin might with as much reason have ask^ why the
Apostle Paul did not enjoine the unbeleeving wife or husband to complain of
the believing wife and husband, as why he did not enjoine the believing wife
to detect her Idolatrous husband; and might as well, nay better* reason it
unlawful for Christians to go to law now under Christian Judges, because they
might not under Heathens, as to argue against Christians complaining and
detecting of Christians that turn Apostates, Heretics, Idolaters, etc because
Christians did not complain in Paul's time to Heathen Magistrates of Heathens;
yea this is so unreasonable a question to build an argument upon against an
express Viz. that of Deuteronomy. 13. 5. 9
command of God, and that with a triumph in the close of it, saying Certainly
this Doctrine of the Apostle ^olds no tolerable correspondency with the opinion
of our severe Inquisitors, about the non a brogation of the Law for putting
Idolaters to death, that though I read in Ecclesiastical Histories of
Christians complaining to some Heathen Emperors favorers of Christian Religion,
of Christians when they turned Herrticks, as to Eusebii Eccles. Histor. lib. 7.
cap. 29.
Aurelianus of Paulus Samosetenus the Heretic, and of Rivet explicat Decal. p.
209.
Heathens seeking to Heathen Princes, against Priests that were very wicked
under the show of Religion, being guilty of sacrilege and corrupting the
chastity of Matrons; Yet I never read of any complaining of and desiring
Princes to punish Heathens of the same Religion with themselves; so that by all
this the Reader may easily perceive besides the dissimilitude in the instance
of 1 Cor. 7. from that of Deuteronomy. 13. the one speaking of an Heathen Idolater,
the other of a Jewish Apostate, there was very great reason why the Apostle
enjoined not the believing wife to seek to take away the life of her
unbeleeving husband; for in so doing she might have hazarded her own, but
could have done no good to the hindering of his Idol worship: But however Paul
enjoins nothing to the believing husband and wife about detecting their
unbeleeving Yoke-fellowes upon the grounds already given, yet I make no
question had Paul lived in a time wherein the Corinthian Magistrates had
received the faith, he would have given both them and believing husbands in
their places, injunctions to have demolished Idol Temples and their worships,
not to suffer Blasphemies against Christ, but on the contrary to have sent
preachers among them, and to countenance and honor those who received the
faith; of which in the practices of Constantine, Theodosius and other Emperors,
I might give many instances De inhibitis pagan^rum sacrificiis, and of the
shutting up, yea Theod. Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 20.
pulling down the Temples of the Heathen Gods, of their removing from Offices
and Places those who were not Christians. There is no question but Paul who
dehorted so earnestly the believing Corinthians from going to the Idols Feasts
in the Idols temples, and from eating of the sacrifices in their Temples, 1
Cor. 10. 2 Cor. 6. would if the State of Corinth had been Christian have
exhorted them to put down the Idol Temples, to forbid those Idolatrous
sacrifices, to suppress their Priests; as also Christian husbands in case
their wifes would have gone after Idolatrous Priests, worshipped Images brought
to them, they would have desired their Magistrates help against such Seducers
and Corrupters. And for conclusion of my answer to this fifth Head, if I would
give liberty to my pen to writefully against every particular passage in the
39. and 40. Section of Hagiomastix, as I have done of some of them, I should
make his folly and weakness manifest to all, but having hinted already his
mistakes, and the utter dissimilitude between that command in Deuteronomy. 13. and
all his instances of an Idolatrous state, and a Magistrate bound to make a
bloody desolation throughout al his Dominions, etc. I say no more but here is a
great cry and a little wool, and so come to the fixed head to give Answer to
something that seems more material.

Sixthly, to that Hagiomastix says page 46. There is this clear reason why
that old Testament law for putting of false Prophets, Blasphemers and Seducers
to Idolatry to death, should not now be in force upon any such terms as it was
when and where it was given; because in all difficult cases that happened about
matters of Religion, the Jews to whom this Law was given, had the opportunity
of immediate consultation with the mouth of God himself, who could and did
from time to time, infallibly declare what his own mind and pleasure was in
them. So that except those that were to give sentence in cases of Religion had
been desperately wicked, and set upon blood and despised that glorious
Ordinance of the Oracle of God amongst them, they could not do injustice, God
being always at hand to declare unto them, what kind of Blasphemer and what
kind of Idolater it was that he by this Law intended should be put to death.
Whereas now the best Oracles that Magistrates and Judges have to direct them in
doubtful cases about matters of Religion are men of very fallible judgeme^ts,
and every way obnoxious to error and mistake. Yea confident I am, that the
wisest and most learned of them are not able clearly or demonstratively to
inform the Magistrate what Blasphemy or what Idolatry it was which was by God
sentenced to death under the Law: Therefore the going about to prove that the
Law for putting Blasphemers and Seducers to Idolatry to death, is now, or
amongst us in force, because it was once given to the Jews, is as I should
prove that a man may safely without danger walk among bogs praecipices and
ditches, at midnight because he may well do it at noon day. I answer in the
general, this Section is full of many unsound and dangerous passages, very
prejudicial to the perspicuity, perfection and certainty of the Scriptures,
very derogatorie to the state of the Church under the new Testament, preferring
the old before it for cleernesse and light as much as noon day before midnight
(which is contrary to many Prophecies in Scripture of the times under the
Gospel and to diverse texts in the new Testament 2 Cor. 3. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
18. 2 Cor. 4. 4, 6.) and tending to bring in with a high hand, Scepticisme and
Pyrronian uncertainty in all points of Religion into the Church of God,
passages becoming a Jesuit and an Atheist, but altogether unbeseeming a
Protestant Minister and Appendix to Hagiomastix Apolog. of some of Mr. Goodwins
Church, for Hagiomastix A Candle to light the Sun.
one who would be accounted to have labored more abundantly in vindicating
the Authority of the Scriptures and building men on a rock then all other men:
Whoever does but compare the Jesuits and Papists writings, Stapleton, Bellar.
Turnebull, Fisher, etc with learned Whittaker, Chamier, Rivet, Cameron, Doctor
White, Whitak. disput. de sacra Script. contra Bellarm. and Staplet. De
Scripturae authoritate, perspicuitate, interpretatione, and perfectione. John
Whites way to the true Church. Rob. Baron. Apodixis Catholica sive Apologia pro
Disput. d^ Firmali objecto Fidei. Rivet. Cathol. Orth^dox. Tractat. Prim. de
Scriptura.
Baron, Willet and other Protestant Divines who have written of the Authority,
perspicuity perfection, etc of the Scriptures against the Papists, and then
look but upon this Section, he must needs say Higiomastix writes as one
brought up in the Schools of the Jesuits, and had sucked their breasts; as also
he that reads but Minus Celsus Senenses, and the Socinians with the Netherland
Arminians will confess these lines are the very breathings and actings of that
Spirit which dwells in that generation of men: I could out of the writings of
our Orthodox Divines written against Papists, Socinians, Arminians, upon those
heads of the authority, perfection, perspiculty, certainty of the Scriptures
and points of Christian faith at large confute him, but these belong not
properly to this Controversy about Toleration, and therefore I shall not
insist on them: and further I desire the Reader to observe what follows, that
this clear reason (as Hag^omastix terms it) may be resolved in that common
evasion of Socinians and Arm^nians and all our Sectaries of Infallibility and
Fallibility: Whoever well weigh^ that 36. Section of Hagiomastix with that part
of the 107. Section page 130. fifth Answer, will find the Sum and substance
of all that discourse to be nothing else but the usual Plea of the Patrons of
Toleration, in their late Libertine Pamphlets, as Bloody Tenet, Storming of
Antichrist, Compassionate Samaritane, Justification of Toleration, With diverse
Pamphlets of Saltmarsh and walwyn for liberty of Conscience.
Quaeres upon the Ordinance for preventing of Heresies, etc. that there is no
infallible Judge now, all men are fallible, subject to error or mistake, and
therefore the proper place of speaking to this, will be in answering their
Grounds for Toleration and pretended liberty of conscience, where I hope by the
grace of God to speak so fully to that particular of Infallibility and
Fallibility, that I doubt not to promise the Reader such ample satisfaction to
that grand Argument, as by the blessing of God all men who have not sold
themselves to Libertinisme will never again after that object it: yet however
for the present I shall hint these things by way of Reply.

1. This very point of Infallibility and Fallibilitie was the main rise and
cause of setting the Pope in his chair, of making one that must be an
infallible judge in the Church, and so is the ground work of the Popes
Authority and Tyranny over the Church,
which all who understand the Controversies between the Papists and the
Reformed Churches De Papa do well know: And on the other hand it is made the
foundation of bringing in all Anarchie and Libertinisme into the Church to
overthrow all power of Magistrates, and of Synods and Councels in matters of
Religion: so that at on the one hand it has exalted the Pope and given him an
unjust Domination and usurpation, so on the other it casts down the use of all
civil and Ecclesiastical power for the good of the Church, so that the same
thing that set up the Pope and made Antichrist, sets up a Toleration and
universal liberty of conscience, which is a new and worse Pop^. But as the
want of infallibility was no good ground for ^etting up the Pope (as I suppose
Hagiomast. and all the Sectaries will grant) so will it be found no good
argument for a general Toleration of all Religions, a far greater evil then
a Pope.

Secondly, I deny that which Hagiomastix takes for granted, the reason it self
upon which he founds why the old Testament law for the putting of false
Prophets, Blasphemers, and Seducers to Idolatry to death, should not now be in
force; I desire him to prove the Vrim and Thummim of the Lords holy One, the
glorious Ordinance of the Oracle of God among the Jews by which they inquired
and consulted immediately and received Sentences and Answers immediately and
infallibly from the mouth of God, to be appointed of God, or ever made use of
by the Priest upon the desire of the Magistrates and Elders in cases of
resolving doubts whether this or that was Blasphemy, Idolatry, false
prophesying, and thereupon putting to death Blasphemers, false Prophets,
Seducers to Idolatry: Hagiomastix gives no place of Scripture at all for proof,
and upon serious perusal of all places of this kind both of commands and
examples for punishing false Prophets, Idolaters, etc I do never find the
Magistrates were commanded in those cases to enquire by Vrim or ever practiced
it. Let Deuteronomy. 13. Deuteronomy. 17. Levit. 20. 2. 3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 18. 20, 21, 22. Levit.
24. 16. with the examples of Asa, Josiah and others be looked into, and we
shall not find a word spoken of concering the deciding who were or who were
not or killing false Prophets, and Idolaters upon receiving an Answer from God
by Vrim and Thummim, but still the grounds expressed of proceeding against them
are upon the Law of God, the nature of the sins, and other reasons of a common
nature, and among the signs and marks by which false Prophets are to be known,
this discovery by the glorious Oracle is none of them, but the thing following
not, nor coming to pass which was spoken in the name of the Lord, their
prophesying in Baal and causing the people to err, their strengthening the
hands of evil doers that none returns from wickedness, their saying unto them
that despise God, Ye shall have peace, and unto every one that walks after
the imagination of his own heart, no evil shall come upon you, with diverse
such like as is evident by Deuteronomy. 18. 22. Jerem. 23. 13. 14, 17. and many places
out of Moses and the Prophets. In Joshua 22. when the children of Israel heard
of the two tribes and a half building an Altar, they did not before they
gathered themselves to go up to war, enquire by Vrim and Thummim whether it
was Idolatry or not; and when an Answer was given to Phinebas and the ten
Princes that they had not built an Altar to turn from following the Lord, but
only for a witness between them and the rest of the Tribes, that it might not
besaid to their children in time to come, ye have no part in the Lord, Phinehas
the Priest, and the Princes of the congregation did not consult the Oracle
spoken of to be resolved in this Controversy: Thus Asas and the Peoples
entering into Covenant to put to death men or women for matters of religion, was
not founded on an Answer by Vrim and Thummim, but upon whosoever would not seek
the Lord God of Israel, and for Asa's putting down Maachah his Mother from
being Queen, because she made an Idol in a grove, there is not the least hint
expressed of his consultation beforehand with that glorious Ordinance of the
Oracle of God, whether she was such a kind of Idolater and her Idolatry of such
a nature, as she was to be punished with that punishment of being removed from
being Queen. Josiah in all the exercise of his coercive Power upon the
Violators of the first Table, 2 King. chapt, 23. in sacrificing some of them
upon Altars and burning their bones, in putting down others, etc never enquired
by Vrim whether those he killed were such kind of Idolaters as God by the Law
intended should be put to death, and whether the others were not such. So the
Priests, Prophets, and People in taking Jeremiah and saying he shall surely
die, and that he is worthy to die, they pretend not to pass sentence upon
enquiring by Vri^, but upon his prophesying in the name of the Lord, This house
shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate without an inhabitant,
Jerem. 26. 8, 9, 11. which they judged a Prophesying falsely upon mis-underst
anding some Scriptures, as appears plainly by those words, why have thou
prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying, This House shall be like Shiloh,
and this City shall be desolate without an inhabitant. For because of Gods
promise concerning the Temple, that he would abide ever there Psalm. 132. 14,
They presumed that it could never perish, and accounted all preaching that
looked that way, blasphemous, Matthew. 26. 61. Acts 6. 13. of which see more in
the late Annotations of our English Divines upon the 9. verse. And Jeremiah in
his Juuius in locu^ Narratio de litis contestatione, qua accusatur Jeremia v.
11. and seipsum defendit, Defensio Jeremiae juridicialis absoluta (ut vocant
Rhetores) incipiens and concludens a vocatione dei and jure ab ipso factu^
afferens.
judicial defense to the Sea in Mr. Gillesp. Aarons rod blossoming, p. 18, 19,
20.
Court and Council (for so it appears it was a Court, by verse 10. 16, 17.
speaking of certain Elders of the Land rising up and speaking to the Assembly
of the People) pleading his immediate call from God to prophecy against the
City as his Answer against their accusation and in all the contestation and
Controversy that was between the Princes and certain of the Elders and the
Priests, Prophets, and People concerning Jeremiah's being worthy to die,
neither Jeremiah, nor the Priests, Elders, and People that were for his being
put to death, or against it, once offer for deciding this difficult case and
doubtful matter to propound the enquiring by Vrim and Thummim, but both sides
plead the case upon Scripture Grounds and examples, as he who reads the
chapter may easily see; and certainly if enquiring by Vrim and Thummim had been
appointed of God, and practiced by the Church as the Oracle to which in all
difficult cases about matters of religion the Jews were to repair, by which
to judge whether such things were Blasphemy, Idolatry, Prophesying falsely,
yea or no, and whether the persons were such kind of Blasphemers, false
Prophets, Idolaters, as the Law intended should be put to death, it is strange
that in all this sharp contest and great Controversy about accusing Jeremi^h
for prophesying falsely and arraigning him upon his life, neither himself, nor
his enemies, none of the Priests, Princes, Elders, People, nor Jeremiah should
once move to enquire immediately from the mouth of God by Vrim and Thummim the
infallible Resolution of this question whether Jeremiah prophesied falsely in
the name of the Lord, and deserved to die. And therefore from this and all the
Premises, yea upon serious searching into all places of Scripture that speak of
Vrim and Thummim and of those who enquired of the Lord in that way, and
comparing them together with the help of many judicious and learned
Interpreters, besides consulting Divines who have written of Vrim and Thummim,
I cannot find the least Ground that the Jews either were commanded, or ever
made use of enquiring by Vrim to be satisfied in judicial Proceedings,
whether this or that was Idolatry, or Blasphemy, or this man an Idolater, or
false Prophet, or no, but they proceeded in those things by the Law of God
given to them, and in difficult cases too hard they were enjoined to go to the
Priests by way of consultation to be informed of the true sense and meaning of
Gods law; and the Priests, as the great Lawyers among the People, practiced in
the meaning of Gods Law according to which judgment was to be given, gave them
Resolutions out of the Law, and never in those cases upon consulting by Vrim,
as many Scriptures-show. The resolution of the Priests upon enquiring of them
in hard matters was to eaccording to the sentence of the Law Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9,
10, 11. Ier. 18. 18. the Law shall not perish from the Priest, the meaning is
(though falsely applied against Jeremiah) that the Priests keeping to the Law
are the Oracles of truth, and therefore Jeremiah is a false Prophet, seeing they
who have Authority in the Church, and understanding of the Law contradict him.
Mal. 2. 7. For the Priests Lip. should keep knowledge, and they should seek
the Law at his mouth; he Priests lips keeping knowledge, and seeking the Law at
hi^ mouth, not new immediate Revelations from the mouth of God, are here set
down to be looked after. In questions about moral things, sins and duties,
the Priests are to give answer from the Law. As for that ju^gement of Vrim
spoken of in Numb. 27. 21. which was by way of Oracle, the high Priest having
Vrim and Thumim about him giving answers in Gods name, which were of infallible
truth, and made a supreme determination, that was for the resolution of
doubtful and difficult businesses and enterprises in matters of events and
successes of things, for direction and counsel from God what course to take in
distresses and such and such cases as about going to war, etc. for discovery
and revelation of hidden and secret causes of judgments; but never was upon
occasion of questions of things forbidden in the Moral Law, and for
determination of who or what was an Idolater or Idolatry, a false Prophet, or
prophesying falsely, a Blasphemer, or Blasphemy; and if we consult the
Scriptures where the judgment of Vrim is spoken of, w^ shall find as much,
which I desire the Reader well to observe. All the places I have taken notice
of that speak of enquiring of God by Vrim are th^se following, Exodus 28. 15.
30. Numb. 27. 21. Josh. 9. 14. Judge. 1. 1. and 20, 18, and 20. 1 Samuel 23. 9, 10,
11, 12. 28. 6. 30. 7, 8. 2 Samuel 21. 1. all which speak only of enquiring of God
in the cases forementioned, and not in the least of controversies arising upon
Moral transgressions against the first Table, and of what punishments shall be
inflicted upon men for them: unto which considering the judgment of diverse
learned men in their Aainsworth Annot. on Exodus 28. 30. Numb. 27. 21. Eleazar
shall ask council of God for Joshua in all doubtful cases in all their war,
etc. Diodates Annot. on Numb. 27. 21. 2 Samuel 21. 1. Annor. of our English
Divines on Exodus 28. 30. Iuni^ Annot. in Number. 27. 21. 1 Samuel 28. 6.
Commentaries upon most of these places of Scripture concerning the enquiring
by Vrim, and Petr. Mart. loc. commun. Class. 1. cap. 7. Weems Christian
Synagogue. chap. 4. Theodoret. Quaest. in Exodus quaest. 60. Suara pectus erat:
Indumenti genus quod Rationale vecabatur, tegens cor partem ration alem. Quo
quidem vestimento cognoscebatur, victoria ne an clades bello immuneret: ut
perspicuum est ex Historiam Regnorum.
others in their writings going this way, of enquiring in cases of of war,
distresses and for public persons enquiring not hereby for a common man, but
either for the King, or for him on whom the affairs of the Congregation lay,
but not giving any one instance in matters of Idolatry, Blasphemy, Prophesying
falsely, or any other corruption in Religion, I confess I am much confirmed
that the judgment of Vrim was not appointed for that use to resolve what
violations of Religion were, and what were not punishable by death. Now that
the judgment of Vrim was of any such use to enquire of God by the Priest in
points of Idolatry, Blasphemy, etc I see not the leastcolor for it, unless
in these places of Scripture Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 12. (which place is urged by
Hagiom. p. 130. the sentence of the Priest against which he that should do
presumptuously in not hearkening to it was to be put to death, was only such a
sentence, with the Priest did upon inquiry by Vrim and Thummim receive
immediately from the mouth of God himself) Deuteronomy. 21. 5. Deuteronomy. 19. 16, 17, 18.
and in those examples of him that blasphemed the name of the Lord, being put in
ward that the mind of the Lord might be showed ^h^m Levit. 24. 11. 12. and of
him that gathered sticks, put i^ward till the Lord should declare what shall be
done to him. But for Answer, in none of these places or examples is there any
thing spoken, of consulting by Vrim; For the first place, only urged by Master
Goodwin, to say nothing that these verses are quite another thing from that
command in the beginning of the chapter about putting to death for serving
other gods, and worshipping the Sun and Moon, there being in that case not a
word tending that way (which yet is the point in question) of going to the
Priest and enquiring of him, and upon this judgment putting to death, besides
this command being of things of another nature as ^erse 8 shows, here is no
direction in this place to enquire by Vrim, but the matters here spokenof being
difficult, council is given to go to the Priests skilled in the meaning of
the Law, and in answering of doubts arising, to be informed by them of the
meaning of the Law, many passages in those verses show as much (and whereas in
the case of enquiring by Vrim in all places) expressions are used of enquiring
of the Lord, the Lords answering and such like, here still all is put upon the
Priest or Judge, and upon the sentence and judgment that they shall show, and
they shall tell; and that this place cannot be meant of the judgment of Vrim
it is evident thus, because that Vrim and Thummim belonged only to the Priesthood
Deuteronomy, 33. 8. and particularly to the high Priest Numb. 27. 21. Exodus 28. 30.
Now he who would have God to be inquired of concerning some great business,
did come to the Priest and the Priest putting on the Ephod to which the breast
Plate of Vrim and Thummim was fastened verse 28. stood before the Ark of God,
and so God gave answers which were of infallible truth, (of which, with a more
particular relation of the manner of inquiry, and the way of Answer by Vrim and
Thummim, the Reader may see more in Ainsworth Annotat. on Exodus 28. 30. and
Numb. 27. 21. Diodate Annotat. on Exodus 28. 15, 30. Numb. 27. 21. 1 Samuel 23. 6,
28, 6. the Annotations of our English Divines on Exodus 28. 15. 30. 1 Samuel 23.
6. Petr Mart loc. commun Class. 1. cap. 7. Hic ut inquit Chambi mos erat
interrogandi Deum. Qui volebat de publico, vel alioqui de gravi negotio
percontari, veniebat ad sacerdotem: Is indutus Ephod, stabat coram arca Domini.
In Ephoa sine in pectorali, erant inclusi duo decim lapides pretiosi, in quib
us nomina duodecim tribuum erant inscripta. Interrogantem oportuit faciem ob
vertere ad sacerdotem and interrogare non quidem tam aperte ut vox audiretur,
nec ita etiam obscure, ut tantum in anima cogitaret, quae petebat. Deinde
sacerdoti hoc pacto reddebatur oraculum. Spiritus sanctivi literae quaedam in
pectorali eminebant idque vel loco vel fulgore, in quibus sacerdos oraculum and
voluntatem Dei legebat. Haec Chimb^ Cui quantum fidei fit tribuendum nescio.
Potuit enim fieri ut spiritus Dei absque literis oracula ediderit per vocem
summi sacerdotis, cujus animum vaticinio afflasse^. Weems Christian Synagogue
Prolegomena cap. 4. The Revelation by Vrim and Thummim is not expressly set
down: Josephus thinks when they were to go to battle, the Priest putting his
Ephod upon him, if they were to march, then the stones did shine, but if the
stones did not shine, then they were to stay: but this seems not to have been a
sufficient way to have directed them in other cases. Wherefore it is most
probable that the Priest having these stones upon his breast, that the Lord
inspired him by his Spirit what answer to make to every question asked him.
Peter Martyrs common places and Weems Christian Synagogue) but never was the
judgment of Vrim by a Judge and Magistrate who was a Person distinct from the
Priest: Now it is evident Deuteronomy. 17. 9. 12. that the Priest and the Judge are
Junius in Deuteronomy. 17 9, 12. Conjunctionem disjuctivam esse apparet ex verse 12. ut
reipsa munera esse disparata constat ad quae haec officiorum nomina recipient.
Mr. Gillespies Aarons rod blossoming c. 3. 11. Here are two Judicatories
distinguished by the disjunctive Or v. 12. which we have both in the Hebrew,
Chaldee, Greek, and in our English translation.
distinct and diverse persons there, and the man that will not hearken unto the
Judge, even that man shall die, as well as he that will not hearken unto the
Priest, which fully shows that what Hagiomastix writes page 46. 47. and 130.
of death inflicted only upon such who would not hearken to the Priest enquiring
by Vrim, to be an untruth. Secondly the sense and meaning of this place from
verse. Vide Mr. Gil lesp. Aaronsrod blossoming, Book 3. c. 11, 12. showing fully
in this Scripture a transmitting difficult cases from inferior courts to those
at Jerusalem, and to the supreme court there. Vid Luther and Piscat. in locu^.
In judiciis conveniens ordo observandus est, ut sc. judices inferiores quu^ iis
oblata est causa difficil^c ex qua expedire se non possunt causam illam
deserant ad judices superiorestanqua^ juris peritiores.
3. to the 13. is that inferior Courts and Assemblies in cases too hard and
difficult for them, are commanded to go higher to some superior Court and
Assembly, as those words clearly show, thou shall arise, and get thee up into
the place which the Lord thy God shall choose. This place afterward was
Jerusalem as it is said Psalm. 122. 5. there were set thrones of judgment, and in
Jerusalem did Iehoshaphat set of the Levites and of the Priests, and the chief
of the Fathers of Israel, for the judgment of the Lord and for Controversies,
2 Chronicles. 19. 8. 9. 10. Ainsworth upon the place writes, that by the Judge that
shall be in those days, is understood the high Council and Senate of Judges
which were of the chief of the Fathers of Israel, as they who are called
Priests verse 9. are called verse 12. Priest, so many Judges are called Judge;
only as among the Priests one was chief, so among the Judges one was Prince. 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. The Hebrew records say, when any doubt a^ose in any case to any
one of Israel, he asked of the judgment H^ll that was in his City; if they
knew they told it him: if not, then he that enquired, together with the
Synedrion or with the messengers thereof went up to Jerusalem, and inquired of
the Synedrion that was in the Mountain of the Temple; if they knew they told
it them; if not, then they all come to the Synedrion that was at the door of
the Court yard of the Temple: if the^ knew they told it them; and if not, they
all came to the chamber of hewn stone to the great Synedrion and enquired;
Nicol. lyra in Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10. Surge and ascend i. e. in his casibus and
consimilibus recurrendum est ad superiores judices s^. ad summum sacerdetem and
Judicem populi.
and Interpreters generally understand these verses of Iudicatures and Courts
in Israel, and of the lower Courts going to the highest the great and high
Synedrion: Now I find no command no^ example recorded in Scripture of any of
the Jewish Courts Ecclesiast. or Civil enquiring by Vrim of moral
transgressions of what sort they were, and what punishments the Committers of
such sins should have, but still they determined according to the Law and
Judgments. Ezekiel. 44. 24. I never read of the high Synedrion either in
Scripture or any other writers of it, that they were wont to give their Answer
by Vrim and Thummim. If we observe those instances in Scripture of enquiring by
Vrim, we shall see they are inquiries made of particular persons, by the
Priest, not by a Court, and of the high Priest not as sitting in Court, nor as
always at Jerusalem, nor of Criminal cases, but of going in and out to war
and such like, and whoever does but consult with the Annotations of Ainsworth,
Diodate, and Luther English Divines, the Commentaries of Lyra, Piscator, and
others on this place, will confess it is quite another thing is here spoken of
then the judgment of Vrim. 3. Amesius in his Cases of Conscience in his Answer
to that question, whether that Law, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. of putting him to death who
would not hearken to the Judge and the Priest was just, resolves it was, and
faith the equity of that Law will easily appear; and among other reasons gives
this because that Cas. Consc. lib. 4. cap. 4. page 122. Si igitur haeretici
sint maniesti, and public noxii, debent a Magistrrtu publica potestate
coerceri. Si vero ^tiam manifest blasphemi sunt and in illis blasphemiis
pertinaces praefracti, possint etiam affici supplicio capitali.
place speaks of disobedience in those things which out of the Law of God are
clearly and manifestly determined. verse 11. so that we see Ames judgment in
the resolution of that case, is, that the Answer of the Judge, or Priest was
made out of the Law of God, and not by Vrim, and it seems that learned men
never dreamt of any such thing in this Deuteronomy. 17. for among all his reasons he
mentions no such thing; and certainly if that were the meaning of the place
which Hagiomastix puts upon it, that had been such a strong reason for the
equity of putting those to death who would not hearken to the Priest, giving
them council immediately and infallibly from God as that Dr. Ames could not
have omitted it: For if Mr. Goodwin who is so kind and charitable to all
Atheists, Antiscripturists, Blasphemers, Idolaters, etc in his Queries upon the
printed Paper entitled an Ordinance against Heresies, and his Hagiomastix, as
that he would have no coercive power made use of against them, does yet grant
there was an equity in that Law, that sentence of death should pass on such
that would not hearken to the Priest speaking immediately and infallibly from
God, and De in obedientia in illis rebus quae ex lege Dei manifesto and clare
determinantur.
says that for his part if the Inquisitors now can give any satisfying account
of any sentence awarded against Blasphemers, Heretics that comes by infallible
Revelation from God, he shall think it equal and meet that he that shall
do presumptuously and not hearken unto it should be put to death, then
Hagiomastix page 130.
Dr. Ames who was fully for the Magistrates coercive power in matters of
Religion, and for putting Blasphemous Heretics to death, could not have
forgotten this reason. Fourthly, on Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. is founded by
the judgment of many great Divines, that which is called the Council, the
great Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, the Seventy: Spanhemius in his third part Ad hoc
tribunal referebantur quaecunque non poterant definiri ab aliis vel ambigua
erant, and varia judicia inferiorum judicum experiebantur ex praescripto legis
Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9.
Dubiorum Evangelicorum page 800. 801. shows, that by the command of the Law
this very place Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9. to this supreme Tribunal of the Synedrion
were referred all things whatsoever that could not be determined of the
inferior Courts, or were doubtful, and had tried the several judgments of
the inferior judges. Gersom Bucerus in his Dissertat. de Gubernat. Ecclesiae
page 62. quotes this Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9. for the general Convention at Jerusalem
to which the hardest things were brought, which could not be determined in the
lower judicatories. Walaeus in his Tractate de Discrimine muneris politici and
Ecclesiastici brings this place to prove the Synedrion or College at
Jerusalem, that if among the Judges or Priests in the lesser Cities and Towns
there fell out some things of greater moment; or if any one would not rest in
their sentence, the cause was devolved to higher Judges, who after David's time
had their Synedrion at Jerusalem as the chief Metrapolis of Iud^^. Mr:
Gillespie in his Aarons rod blossoming 1. Book 3. chapt. written thus. It Is
agreed upon both by Jewish and Christian Expositors, that this place holds
forth a supreme civil Court of Judges, and the Authority of the civil
Sanhedrim is mainly grounded on this very text. And as the high civil Synedria
is founded here, so many Divines show a supreme Ecclesiast. Sanhedrim, distinct
from the Civil, is held forth in this very place, to which the People of God
weere bound as to the supreme Ecclesiastical Court to bring all the difficult
Ecclesiastical causes, which could not be determined in the lower Assemblies,
in which Court they were determined without any other appeal, of which the
Reader may find more in Walaeus, Gerson Bucerus, Apollonii, jus Magistratus
circa sacra, first part, page 374. and second part second chapter, page 48. and
above all others in Mr. Gillespie his Aarons Rod blossoming Book 1. chapt. 3.
who at large handles this point, that the Jews had an Ecclesiastical
Sanhedrin distinct from the Civil, and among other grounds from this of Deuteronomy.
17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. But none of these learned men not any (but Papists) that
ever I met with, give the least hint of any judgment by Vrim to be meant in
this place, neither do I find in all the Authors that I have read concerning
the way of passing sentence in the highest Synedrion at Jerusalem, and
determining the difficulties about the Law brought to them, whether the
Ecclesiastical of which the high Priest was president, or the Civil, that
ever for the satisfaction of the parties, and giving the true sense of the Law
thus controverted, and so putting an end to all controversies, they were wont
in that Court to enquire by Vrim; nay there are several things written in the
Scriptures, and by learned men who write of the customs of the Jews and
proceedings in that Court, which show the contrary, as those words imply as
much Deuteronomy. 17. the Priest and the Judge that shall be in those days: from
whence the Hebrews gather, that if the high Synedrion had judged and determined
of a matter, as seemed right in their eyes, and after them another Synedrion
rose up, which upon reasons seeming good unto them, disannulled the former
sentence, then it was disanulled, and judgment passed according as it seemed
good unto these latter; thou art not bound to walk save after the Synedrion,
Ainsworth Annot. on the place.
that are in thy generation. Now if it were a sentence by Vrim immediate and
infallible from God, no following Synedrion might have disannulled it. So those
words according to the sentence which they shall teach thee, shows the
sentence was to be according to the Law, the word written, and not by a voice
from heaven; as also that instance of Ierem. being condemned to die by the
supreme Court at Ierusal. the Court of the Priests doing their part judging him
a false Prophet and worthy to die, the Court of the Princes acquitting him as a
true Prophet, of which see more in Aarons Rod blossom. p. 18. 19. both of them
going upon Scripture Grounds, as I have shown, p. 99. but in this great
Controversy, never appealing to the judgment of Vrim; and so in their way of
trying false Prophets, they went not by the Priests putting on the Ephod to
enquire of the Lord, but therein, all (say the Jews) was this If he had
threatened a judgment to come, although it came not, yet he was not a false
Prophet for that: God (say they) is gracious, as he was to the Ninivites, and
to Hezekiah. But if he promised a good thing, and it came not to pass, Weems
Christian Synagogue page 171.
then he was a liar. For every good thing which God promises, he performs,
so Jeremiah tried Ananias to be a false Prophet, because he promised a good
thing to Zedekiah, and it came not to pass.

Fifthly, the current of the Scripture both in the Law and Prophets still
speaks of going to the Law and according to that, making that the last
resolution of Practice and Controversies in all moral things, both of duties
and sins, and that for private and public persons, Esaiah 8. 20. To the Law,
and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them, Deuteronomy. 30. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. the Jews must hearken
to the commandment written in the Book of the Law, it is not hidden neither is
it far of, it is not dark that it cannot be attained to, It is not in heaven,
that it should be said, who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto
us, that we may hear it and do it? But the word is very nigh, etc Deuteronomy. 17.
18. v. the Law of God is to be for the direction of the King and of the
Priests, and Levites. The Book of the Law of the Lord given by Moses 2 Cron.
34. 15, 19, 30, 31. compared with 2 Kings chapter 22. 8, 11. v. chapter 23. 2,
3. was that by which Josiah made his Reformation both in the removing of
persons and things, not once enquiring by Vrim whether he should slay
Idolatrous Priests, put down others, keep such a solemn passover, etc and
it is observable that the King commanded Hilkiah the high Priest and Shaphan the
Scribe, etc to go and enquire of the Lord for him and for the People
concerning the words of this Book, what Vide Diodate and English Diviues
Annotations on the place.
judgment hanged over their heads and when it was like to fall, and whether
there were any means, or whether it was not too late to appease his wrath, and
accordingly they went unto Huldah the Prophetess, yet he commanded not Hilkiah
to enquire by Vrim, neither did Hilkiah the high Priest put on the Ephod, but
went to the Prophetess; which is to me a great argument, that the judgment of
Vrim was only in some particular set cases, as going in and out to war, and
such like, but not for inquiry in cases of the Law, what Reformation to be
made, or what transgressions of the Law to be punished by death. As for those
other two places Deuteronomy. 19. 17, 18. 21, and 5. I shall not spend many lines in
clearing them, as being not brought to prove the glorious Ordinance of the
Oracle, least I should be charged by Hagiomastix to show my valor in fighting
with men of clouts of my own setting up; For the first, it is understood of a
single witness accusing one for seducing to Apostasy and revolt, so Junius
reads it ad testificandum in ^um Apostasiam, and Ainsworth to testify revolt
against him, not civil wrong, as the English translation seems to carry it,
and the meaning is this Junius in locum. Et si in omnibus aliis causis ad
minimum duo testes ex lege requiruntur: tamen in religionis negotio unus testis
ad Questionem habendam sufficit. adeo vult Deus Magistratibus conservationem
doctrinae commendatam esse. Est autem appendix legis quae habetur supr. 17.
although in all other causes two witnesses atleast are required by the Law,
yet in the business of religion one witness is sufficient to make a question
of the party; by which God shows be would have the preservation of Doctrine
commended to the Magistrate, for this is an appendix of that Law which is
spoken of Deuteronomy. 17. 2. So Iunius, Diodate also on the place writes thus, in
case of a secret Seducement from Gods true service; he that had been
solicited, though he were alone, ought to detect the Seducer. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. 8.
and the Judges ought to proceed therein, as upon an advice and denunciation;
not as upon a formal accusation which had required two witnesses. And if the
calumny was made to appear unto them they were to observe this Law, if it were
truth, that of Deuteronomy. 13. 9. So then this place holds forth no more then what
Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9. does, which has nothing to do with the judgment of V^im, as
I have already showen at large; and yet if this place had any thing in it more
for enquiring by Vrim then the former, it could do Hagiomastix no good, nor is
to the point at all brought by him, because this enquiring by Vrim is not to
know from the Lord what kind of Idolatry and Idolater this is, whether that
for which death is to be inflicted, but whether this be a false or a true
witness, as the words clearly show; the question is not about matter of Law,
whether such a thing be Idolatry, or not, what kind of Idolatry, but of matter
of fact, whether the party did commit such a thing or no, of which he is
accused. And the Judges shall make diligent inquisition: and behold if the
witness be a false witness and testifies falsely against his brother: then
shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done to his brother: so shall
thou put the evil away from amongst you. As for that place Deuteronomy. 21. 5. the
coherence and scope of the place shows it cannot be meant of the judgment by
Vrim, but those verses from the second to the tenth, contain a direction from
God, of what course is to be taken for the expiation of an unknown murder,
and among other things that are to be done for the putting away the guilt of
innocent blood from the Land, as the Elders and Judges must do according to
the verse 2. 3, 4. so the * fifth verse shows what the Priests are to do for
the freeing the people of Israel from innocent blood being laid to their
charge, namely in the audience of the people to pray for atonement and
expiation, that prayer in verse 8. The Elders were to wash their hands and say;
Our hands have not shed this blood, and the Priests said, Be merciful O Lord,
and lay not innocent blood unto thy People Isreal's charge, and if any thing
else were to be decided about that business, by the words of the Priests, as
expounders of Gods Law, it should be determined; not that they had any absolute
or arbitrary power of themselves, but by their word, meaning the word of God
which they should show, as Deuteronomy. 17. 11. The subject matter of this Scripture,
is not to enquire of the Priests whether this were a casual or a wilful
Murder, and for them to tell who were the murderers that had slain this man
(the resolution of which questions by the Priests might indeed imply some
color for the Priests by enquiring by Vrim) these things are not once named,
but all the matter is, what is to be done to expiate the blood of a man slain in
the Land, it being not known who has slain him; that's supposed, and is the
case upon which all the direction both for Elders, Priests and People is built.
Lastly as to those examples in Levit, 24. 11, 12, 13. and that of Numb. 15. 33,
34, 35, of the Blasphemer and Sabbath-breaker put into ward that Moses might
receive an Answer immediately from God what to do with them, and accordingly
the Lord spoke unto Moses that they should be stoned, I answer, First, the
Theodoret Quaest. in Levit. Quaest. 33. Deprthensus est quidam qui Deum omnium
blasphemauerat. nondum autem Lex erat scripta De Blaspemia propterea legislator
hanc legem servari jussit.
Law concerning blasphemy was not yet given publicly to the Jews, the mind of
God declared what should be done to them that blasphemed the name of the Lord,
and therefore no wonder the Blasphemer was put in ward, that the Lord might be
consulted with, what kind of punishment should be inflicted upon him; by the
light of nature and the Law of the Decalogue, the people of the Jews knew he
was to be punished for it, though the particular kind and form was not yet
made known by God; and therefore bring him to the supreme Magistrate Moses,
and make him fast, till the mind of God for the particular kind of punishment
should be made known, upon which Vide Nicol. Lyram, Babingt. in locum, Lev. 24.
15, 16.
occasion God does not only declare what shall be done to that particular man,
but gives them a Law concerning all Blasphemers in the 16. verse, taking an
occasion from this as he did from other transgressions committed, and his
peoples ill manners, to publish judicial laws, the appendixes of the moral
Law in matters of justice and judgment: But though God was immediately
consulted with before there was a law (for that is the case here) of which
there was all the reason in the world, how does it follow that after an
express Law is given, and ordinary means and ways appointed by God, for the
full knowing and executing of that Law, now Persons must immediately upon all
occasions have immediate Answers from God whether and how they may punish upon
that Law? and indeed to what end were express laws written and made known, and
knowing able men in those laws deputed by God to judge according to them, if
immediate and infallible Answers were to be sought from God upon all occasions,
and persons not to be judged by those Laws? And for the Sabbath Breaker in
Numb. 15, however the Vid. Lyram in Number. 15. Nesciebant tamen qua morte dehebat
mori, quoniam modus mortis non fuit determinatus Exodus 13. 14. Ergo recluserunt
eum quo usque scirent hoc per revelationem Domini.
Law had said the Breaker of the Sabbath should die Exodus 31. 14. yet it was
not declared by what kind of death he should die, as Ainsworth, Diodate, and
our English Divines in their Annotations upon the place observe, saying, though
there were a Law to put to death a Sabbath breaker, yet it was not declared
what manner of death he should die; and of that the question being proposed,
the Answer is made by declaring the kind of death he must suffer which is set
down in the next ver. Solo. Jarchi says it was not declared what manner of
death the Sabbath Breaker should die; but they knew he that profaned the
Sabbath was to die: Now the Israelites were to receive directions from God, as
well for the manner and kind of their Laws and punishments as for the
punishments themselves, and some of them being not declared, no wonder that
Moses stayed till he enquired of God; but what is all this to make good
Hagiomastix^ assertion that because Moses who was to receive Laws from God
both for matter and form for that people, did wait upon God by special
immediate inquiring in cases of some transgressions that accordingly all things
might be done, therefore after God had given all Laws both for matter and
form in cases of Idolatry, Blasphemy, prophesying falsely, as in Deuteronomy. 13.
Deuteronomy. 17. 2. Levit. 24. 16. the Judges and Magistrates following must do so
too.

Secondly, in both these instances alleged, the men were put into ward, not
to enquire of God, concerning their sins committed whether they were
Blasphemy, and Sabbath-breaking, there was no question in that kind, both the
people and Moses were satisfied in that, as appears by the stories and by
putting them in ward, but only in what manner they should be proceeded against,
God not having before declared his mind particularly in those cases, so that
these instances help Hagiomastix nothing at all, as not speaking to the matter
in hand: For whereas Hagiomastix makes this ground of the Jews putting to death
Blasphemers, Idolaters, their enquiring and Gods declaring by Vrim what kind of
Blasphemer, and so what kind of Idolater particularly it was, that be by his
Law intended should be put to death, Moses and the people neither inquired any
such thing, what kind of Blasphemy it was, nor did God speak to Moses in that
kind; but, bring forth him that has cursed in the camp, and let all that
heard him lay their hands on his head, and let all the Congregation stone him.

Thirdly, the declaration of the mind of the Lord in these two examples, was no
Answer by Vrim; for besides that there is no mention in the text of the high
Priest being spoken to put on the Ephod to enquire by Vrim, neither do any
Interpreters, understand it so, both the texts are against it in those words,
And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, bring forth him that has cursed; And
the Lord said unto Moses, The man shall surely be put to death, the
declaration of Gods mind being to Moses immediately; whereas in the judgment
of Vrim, it was to the Priest immediately, so that these Answers of God were
the Answers of a Lawgiver, giving Laws and Penalties by the hand of Moses,
but not any new Interpretations and declarations of the meaning of the Law upon
controversies and doubts arising; and besides Gods way of answering Moses, and
answering by Vrim were different things, as the Rabbis and other learned men
who write of those things show, Gods answering Moses and giving him Laws and
Commandments being by voice, but answering by Vrim being in an other way by
beholding the Breast Plate, and seeing therein by the Vision or Inspiration, as
these Scriptures Exodus 25. 22. Numb. 7. 89. Exodus 28. 30. with Ainsworths
Annotations express. As for the immediatenesse of these Answers from God to
Moses, though not by the judgment of Vrim, there were special reasons
thereof, God in an immediate way, communicating to Moses all his Laws moral
and judicial Exodus 25. 22. and Moses being such a Prophet whom the Lord knew
face to face, and such an extraordinary man in several respects as there was
none like unto him. Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8. Exodus 33. 11. Deuteronomy. 34. 10, 11. But for
the Magistrates and Judges that came after Moses, to whom the moral Law and
the Appendix of it the judicial Law was given and delivered, they were to
proceed according to the written Law, and there were in hard matters higher
Courts, consisting of a greater number and more able to go to to determine what
the lower could not; and then the highest of all the Synedrion at Jerusalem who
were in all their judgments above moral transgressions, to go according to
the Law of Moses, as many Scriptures testify Deuteronomy. 17. 11. etc But no such
Grounds after the whole Law, moral, ceremonial and judicial, was published,
of immediatenesse of Answers from God to any of their Courts, no not to the
high Synedrion as to Moses who was to receive all for the first constituting of
their policy, according unto which all Courts and Iudicatures higher and lower
were bound to go.

Fourthly, In these great and weighty cases of the Blasphemer and
Sabbath-Breaker, Moses did not presently pass sentence, but made delays, put
them in Prison, till he knew the mind of the Lord, and as for other reasons
before alleged, so for these following, 1 to teach Judges in matters of great
weight of life and death not to be too sudden and hasty, 2 in causes that are
very hard to ask council and to use all means to be well satisfied before
they do any thing. In Ainsworths Annotations upon Numb. 15. 34. the Reader may
find the Chaldee paraphrazing thus; This judgment was one of the four
judgments that came before Moses the Prophet, which he judged according to the
word of God: Some of them were judgments of lesser moment and some of them
judgments of life and death. In the judgments of lesser moment (of pecuniary
matters) Moses was ready; but in judgments of life and death be made
delays. And both in the one and in the other, Moses said, I have not heard,
[viz what God would have done] For to teach the Heads (or chief) of the
Syn^drions (or Assizes) that should rise up after him, that they should be
ready to dispatch inferior causes (or money matters) but not hasty in matters
of life and death. And that they should not be ashamed to inquire, in causes
that are too hard for them; seeing Moses who was the Master of Israel, had need
to say I have not heard, Therefore he imprisoned him, because as yet it was
not declared what sentence should pass upon him. Babington in his comfort:
Notes on Levit. 24. writes, Moses although such a man, yet will do nothing
hastily in judgment, and especially touching life, but he will be advised by
God, who then spoke from betwixt the Cherubims Exodus 25. and Numb. 7. But it
follows not because Judges and Courts of Justice were to learn to be cautious
and careful in matters of religion for what they punish especially with death,
that therefore they may punish no violations in religion, though expressly and
directly against the word of God, unless God do immediately from heaven
declare them Blasphemies, etc, and such kind of Blasphemies, which the Law
intends death to: And for a conclusion of my Answer to this Evasion of Master
Goodwin of the judgment by Vrim in the cases of Blasphemy, Idolatry,
Prophesying falsely, the clear reason why then they were punished with death
but may not be so now that being ceased under the new Testament: I shall say no
more but this, I challeng him among all the examples recorded in Scripture of
punishing men with death, imprisonment or banishment, etc for Blasphemy,
Idolatry, Prophesying falsely, profaning of the Sabbath, marrying Idolatrous
wives and other transgressions of Gods worship, to produce any one Instance
that by the Judges, or by the high Sanhedrin God was enquired by Vrim, whether
such and such facts were Blasphemy, Idolatry, etc, and of that kind and
nature intended by the Law as punishable with death, or among all Classical
Authors, Rabbis and others who have written of the customs of the Jews, of
Vrim and Thummim, of the Sanhedrin at Jerusalem, to cite me out of them any
passages that affirm the Judges, or the high Council of Seventie at Jerusalem,
or the high Priest for them were wont in cases of Apostasy, Blasphemy, etc.
to enquire by Vrim, and to pass sentence upon persons according to that
Answer,
and not according to the law; which if he cannot do as I am confident upon
serious search, he cannot, then the Reader may easily see what poor shifts this
great Champion of the Sectaries is put unto, to uphold his damned cursed cause
of Toleration of all Religions, and to elude the commands of God forenamed for
punishing Blasphemers, Apostates, Idolaters and false Prophets.

Now among all who have written of the high Priest, and of Deuteronomy. 17. 11, 12. I
find only some Papists going Hagiomastixs way, as Tostatus, Lorinus, who from
all places of Scripture of the high Priest drawing matter to the Pope for
establishing his Authority, do from this place also that they may establish
his Authority above the Scriptures, and appeals to him in cases of
Controversy as the sole infallible Judge, speak of the high Priest in matters
of moral transgressions giving Answers by Vrim, and not by the sentence of the
Law. So Lorinus upon the 11. verse according to the sentence of the Law which
they shall teach thee, says, that by the name of the Law in this place is
neither necessarily understood the Mosaicall Law, nor the holy Scripture, but
the sentence it self of the Judge as the pronoun^ infinuates: the Heretics
would have it to be a conditional command of hear^^ning to the Priests
according to the Law, that they might take away the Authority of Traditions,
and appeal to the Scripture alone. Lutherus in Deu. 17. 8, 9, 10 11. Et h^nc
locum miro conatu Papistae ad suum Idolu^ ^raxerunt, ut Papatum statu^rent.
Luther long since writing upon this place observed as much of the Papists, And
the Papists with a great deal of endeavor have drawn this place to their
Idol, that they might set up the Papacy: So that by this it seems the Papists
and Sectaries are agreed upon the same Mediums to set up the Pope, and his
Infallibility, and a Toleration and Dispensation to believe and profess
whatsoever men please.

Thirdly, this clear reason of Master Goodwin in his 36. Section of
Hagiomastix against the old Testament Law being now in force for putting of
false Prophets, Blasphemers and Seducers to Idolatris to death, upon which he
vapors and triumphs so exceedingly over the One of the Members of the Assembly
was the sole Author of the Vindication of the printed paper, entitled An
Ordinance for the preventing of the growth of Heresies, and not 3. or 4. which
worthy Member could he get any time from his often preaching and constant
attendance on the Assembly, would (I doubt not) make Hagiomastix not only a
stripling, but a very child.
Anti Quaerists, certain striplings of the Assembly (as he by way of scorn
terms them) is so far from fighting against the Magistrates punishing (even
by virtue of that old law) for matters of Religion, where he is sure and
certain the things he punishes for, are Apostasies, Idolatries, Heresies,
Blasphemies and that he is not mistaken, as that in all such cases of
certainty and infallibility, it establishes the Magistrates coercive power in
matters of the first Table, and is indeed a strong reason for it: For if that
were the formal cause and reason why Magistrates might then punish Idolatry,
false Prophesying, etc. because they might infallibly know, such a thing was
Idolatry, etc. and so be out of danger of fighting against God, then what
things may be as certainly known under the Gospel to be Idolatry, false
Prophesying, Apostasy, etc, the Magistrate may as well restrain: I shall not
need to prove the consequence, because, besides its own evidence that it
necessarily follows, Master Goodwin in express terms grant and confesses page
130. that for his part he shall think it equal nd meet, he that shall do
presumptuously, and not hearken unto what is by infallible Revelation from God
should be put to death, and the only ground brought by him in this 36. Section
of denying this power to Magistrates now, is their uncertaintie in matters of
Religion, the best Oracles that Magistrates and Judges have to direct them in
doubtful cases about matters of Religion being men of very fallible
judgments, and every way obnoxious unto error and mistake, and therefore to
go about to prove that the old Law is now in force, because it was once given
to the Jews, is as if one should prove that a man may safely and without
danger walk among bogges and praecipices at midnight, because he may well do
it at noone day. So that by Hagiomastixs own confession, what is certainly and
infallibly known to be Error, Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy, may and ought to
be punished by the Magistrate under the new Testament, which is indeed a
yielding the question that Magistrates may punish under the Gospel in matters
of Religion, for that's not the question what is truth and what is Error, what
is Heresy, and what is Idolatry, and whether any thing can be known
certainly under the Gospel to be truth or no? and how the Magistrates come to
know it, and who shall tell them which is truth, that is quite another
question, but the question in hand about Toleration and the Magistrates
coercive Power in points of Religion, is, supposing and granting there are many
things certain in Religion, which he certainly knows and believes, whether
then the Magistrate may punish? which upon this very question, whether Princes
have full Power to command for truth, was well observed Bilsons true difference
between Christian subjection and unchristian Rebellion part 2. p. 277.
by Bishop Bilson long since in his answer to a Jesuit, making this objection,
Yea, But who shall tell Magistrates which is truth? That is not this question:
When we reason whether Princes may command for truth, and punish error, you
must not cavil about the means to know truth from error, but suppose that
truth were confessed and agreed on, and in that case what may Princes do for
truth. If I should ask you whether Princes may revenge Murders and punish
thefts, were this an Answer to say, but how shall they know what Murder is,
and who be thieves? No more when we demand what duty Princes owe to God and his
truth, should you stand quarrelling what truth is or how truth may be known?
The Princes duty to God is one question which we now handle; the way to
discern truth from error is another, which anon shall ensue when once this is
ended; But first let us have your direct Answer whether Princes may command for
truth or no? And then the Jesuit answering, for truth they may: but if they
take quid pro quo they both hazard themselves and their whole realms, Bilson
replies, you slide to the second question again before the first be finished,
stay for that till this be tried. Now then to bring this point to ahead and
issue, Hagiomastixs clear reason grants that in cases about matters of Religion
sure and certain, the Magistrate may punish in the times of the Gospel, which
directly overthrowes that universal Toleration so much pleaded for in diverse
of his Books: so that Master Goodwin by his own clear reason is forced upon
this Dilemma, either to hold no points in matters of Religion and Doctrine of
faith can be certainly and infallibly known under the Gospel,
or if they can, then the violations of such may by the Magistrate be lawfully
censured. And here in this matter I do appeal from Master Goodwins wanton
wit, great applause among his Seduced Members, and from all others his
engagements to the Sectarian party, to his conscience (if so be in this point
of pretended liberty of conscience, he has any conscience at all left) to
resolve me this question, whether Christian Magistrates under the Gospel may
not by the Scriptures and other means that God has given and appointed in his
Church infallibly and certainly know that there is a God, that this God is but
one, that the Scriptures are the word and mind of this God, that this God is
holy, just, good, wise, eternal, omniscient, omnipotent, merciful, perfect,
that this one God though but one in essence, is three in persons the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost, that the Son was manifested in the flesh became
man, that he died for our sins according to the Scriptures, that he rose
again from the dead, ascended into heaven, sits at the right hand of God,
shall come to judge the world, that there is a Hell and eternal Death for all
wicked impen^tent persons, and a Heaven, and eternal life for the Elect and
true believers, that for a Christian to worship and serve the Sun, Moon, and
stars, or foure-footed Beasts and creeping things is Apostasy and Idolatry,
that to revile, scoff at and speak reproachfully of God is to blaspheme God,
that for a man to say God revealed to him the day of judgment should be on
such a day, or such and such things should come to pass at such a time, when
the contrary is manifested to all, be not to prophecy falsely, and so I might
instance in many more: Unto which question, if Master Goodwin answers
affirmatively that Magistrates may in these and some other points of Religion
infalliblity and certainly know the truth, then the universal Toleration
pleaded for by him in M. S. Some modest and humble Quaeries concerning a
printed Paper entitled an ordinance for the preventing of the growing and,
spreading of Heresies, etc Hagiomastix, Appendix (...) Hagiomastix and other
his Pamphlets falls to the ground, and the Ordinance presented to the Honorable
House of Commons for preventing Heresies and Blasphemies, may take place, and
the Inflicters of heavy censures upon such who broach Doctrines contrary to
these, viz. that there is a God, that he is perfectly holy, ^ternal, that he
is one in three persons, etc may infallibly know such Opinions are not the
sacred Truths of God and the c^eer reason of Hagiomastix in this 36. Section
against the old Testament Law for putting false Prophets, etc to death now, is
of no force at all; for in these Principles of religion named, and diverse
others, as the resurrection of the dead, that Christ is God, that Christ
according to his humane nature was borne without sin, etc Christian Magistrates
walk no more at midnight, but at noon day, then the Jewish Magistrates in
cases of Blasphemy, Apostasy, Idolatry, Prophesying falsely, etc. are as
certain and sure as they who received Answers under the old Law in matters of
Religion of Idolatry, Blasphemy (supposing there had been any such) from the
Priests by the judgment of Vrim; But now if Master Goodwin dare answer
negatively, that there is no infallible certain knowledge in any point of
Religion under the new Testament, no man infallibly and certainly knows that
there is a God, or that this God is holy, perfect, eternal, that there is a
Jesus Christ who died for our sins and rose again from the dead, that there is
a resurrection of men's bodies, and a day of judgment, etc, it is all opinion and
probability, the Master Goodwins Modest and humble Queres about the Ordinance,
Quere 2.
contrary may be the Sacred Truths of God, and therefore there may be no
punishing by death or other bodily punishment for holding any Doctrines or
Opinions in Religion, suppose contrary to admonition, which for ought the said
inflicters know, except they make themselves infallible, may be the sacred
Truths of God, I say, and am ready to prove it against him, that he overthrowes
the Scriptures, all Christian Religion, all Faith, yea all the comfort and
salvation of Christians, he is a Sceptick, an Antiscripturist, a Newtrall in
Religion and an Atheist: He justifies the worst of the Papists in all they
have written against the Scriptures, calling it a nose of wax, a dumb judge,
inkie Divinity, etc. for to hold nothing can be known certainly and infallibly
by the Scriptures, is to make them a nose of wax, an imperfect weak rule, a
doubtful Oracle, like that of Apollo's; For if the Trumpet give an uncertain
Sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? so likewise, except the
Spirit of God have by the holy penmen uttered words that may be understood,
how shall it be known what is written? for this would make the Scriptures be as
a speaking into the air; but as concerning that point of the Church under the
new Testament knowing infallibly and certainly the Christian Religion, and
matters necessary to salvation both in faith and worship, as the Church under
the old by Vrim, I shall speak fully to it in the seventh answer to this Reason;
only for a conclusion of this third Answer, I add, I much wonder seeing under
the new Testament according to Hagiomastix Doctrine, no Magistrates nor Synods
can be certain in doubtful cases about matters of Religion, but the best
Oracles Magistrates have to consult with, are every way obnoxious unto error
and mistake, and that the wisest and most learned of them are not able clearly
or demonstratively to inform the Magistrate what blasphemy, or what idolatry
it was which was by God sentenced to death under the Law (though by the way I
must check Master Goodwins confidence, for I who am the least of all the
Ministers of Christ and not to be named with the wisest and most learned of
them, am able clearly and demonstratively out of Deuteronomy. 17. 2. 3. 4. 5. to
inform the Magistrate and Master Goodwin too, if he will be informed, what
Idolatry it was which was by God sentenced to death under the Law, viz for a
Jew to go serve and worship the Sun or Moon) how Master Goodwin and diverse
Members of his Church come to be in many controverted points, doubtful cases
about matters of Religion, so confident and certain as they make themselves,
certain that Presbyteriall Government is not Jure Divino, certain that
Christian Magistrates may not exercise their coercive Power in any matters of
Religion, no, not to the restraining of Blasphemy, Idolatry, Heresy, Scisme,
most certain that (...) credere faith in a proper sense is imputed to
justification, and not Christ's Righteousness, certain that the way of the
Congregation is the truth, and so I might instance in diverse other points: To
be confident, as confidence it self can make a man, to be as sure as twice
two makes four, to have abundant satisfaction from God for what a man holds in
pregnant, strong, clear and rational demonstrations on the one hand, and
distinct clear and home Answers to all objections to the contrary on the other
hand, that if light be light, reason reason, sense sense, Scriptures
Scriptures, then such a Doctrine is truth, that though the whole world should
rise up as one man to oppose, yet that should not shake nor unsettle a man in
it, is to attain to a high measure of certainty and infallib^litie; Now
whoever has but read with due consideration Mr. Goodwins writings cannot but
take notice in them of many high strains and professed solemn Anapologesiates
Antapologias, The Preface to the Reader. But for those opinions wherein I
dissent from Mr. Edwards, and the generality of those whom he calls his godly
Orthodox Presbyterian Ministers, I have bestowed so much labor and travel of
soul several ways to satisfy my self in the truth of them, and withal have
received such abundant satisfaction from God for what I hold in them, in
pregnant, strong, clear and rational demonstrations on the one hand, in
distinct, clear and home Answer to all objections to the contrary that ever I
met withal on the other hand, that if light be light, reason reason, sense
sense, Scriptures Scriptures, I suppose I shall never be unsettled or shaken in
them, though the whole world should rise up as one man to oppose me. And
therefore being fully persuaded, resolved, and possessed in my judgment soul
and conscience that the way of the Congregation is the Truth.

A Quere concerning the Church Covenant, page 1. First, confident we are (as
confidence it self (an make us) that there is no commandment given to the
Churches for exact^ng any such Covenant to those that are to be admitted into
Church Fellowship with them. A Letter of Master John Goodwins sent to Master
Thomas Goodwin, page 12, 13. Confident I am that there is a light beyond your
light in these matters, and which you are very capable of if your eyes by your
long slumber be not over heavy to open. I profess in the sight of God, and in
as great singleness and simplicity of heart as ever n^ an in this world spoke
word unto you, that I do as clearly apprehend Error and mistake throughout the
greatest part of your way, as I do in this conclusion that twice two makes
four. The necessity of your Covenant, Prolix confession of faith, putting men
to deliver their judgments in points of doubtful disputations upon and before
their admission into your Churches, the power of the Keys and of Ordination of
Pastors to be the right and inheritance of the whole body of the Congregation,
and of every member indifferently, and promiscuously the divine institution or
peremptory necessity of your Ruling Elders, the necessity of Widows as
Officers in the Church, the absolute necessity of one and the same governmant
or Discipline in all particulars whatsoever for all Churches in all times and
places, a full and peremptory determination of all things whatsoever
appertaining to the worship of God, with diverse such like positions (which are
the very life, soul, and substance of your way) I am at perfect peace in my
thoughts, that you will never be able to demonstrate or prove from the
Scriptures to any sober minded or confidering man. Master Goodwins Appendix in
his Preface to the Reader, If the souls and consciences of men have any cause
at all to bless me, it is because I have clothed them with strength and
confidence of the royal parentage and descent of the Scriptures, and subdued
their fears and jealousies of any subornation (in that kind) under their feet.
(Nay did I not verily believe the Scriptures to be the word of God, I would not
for their sakes expose my self as now I do: But that belief I speak of, which
has reigned in me, and over me hitherto, and has blessed me with such an
abundance of peace of comfort in sufferings for it will not, etc. An
Apologeticall Account of some Brethren of the Church whereof Master Goodwin is
Pastor, page 5. 6. The Doctrines of the Father and of the Son, the involving
whereof in the clouds of uncertainty, the said Vindication most falsely and
mal^tiously charges upon him, has he brought into so clear and open view,
that we have seen the peace and everlasting salvation of our souls in them.
Every one of those fundan entail Principe^ of Christian Religion, which this
gangrened pen would persuade the world he denies or doubts of, has he not only
asserted in our hearing again and again, but proved them with such evidence
and demonstration of the spirit, that our consciences were forced to fall flat
before them, and to confess that of a truth God was in them.


Declarations of his absolute certainty, and full demonstrative knowledge of
many Points of Religion, yea of some more doubtful controverted, as of
Church-Governement and the way of the Congregation, and yet I suppose he has
no better Oracles to consult with, then Christian Magistrates have; There is no
Priest with Vrim for him to enquire by, unless the Sectaries have set him up
as their Oracle to consult with in stead of the Scriptures; and I think he will
not yet plead Revelations and visions for fear of his fate, who said it was
revealed to him the day of judgment should be on such a day in April last,
now long since past.

Fourthly, upon the same clear reason and ground why the old Testament Law for
punishing false Prophets etc, should not now be in force, because the Jews in
all difficult cases about Religion might have immediate and infallible Answers
from God, it follows necessarily that all Scriptures brought out of the new
Testament for Magistrates punishing in cases of Heresy, Idolatry, Blasphemy,
or for Church Officers censuring by Deposition, Excommunication in points of
Error, should not bind now, and so whatever is brought out of the Scriptures
for punishing Errors, and Heresies, whether by Civil Punishments or
Eccle^iasticall censures shall be all evaded, for the same thing may be said,
and is said against the places of the new Testament, that in the time when the
Gospels, Acts of the Apostles, and Epistles were written, the Churches had
Apostles and Prophets who were immediately inspired and infallible, and could
in all difficult cases that happened about matters of Religion declare
infallibly from God, what was Heresy and Scisme, and what was not; and
therefore a Heretic after the first and second admonition might be rejected,
and Hymeneus and Alexander delivered unto Satan, and Iezabel for seducing
censured, because Christ was always at hand by Apostles or Prophets to declare
unto them infallibly who were Heretics and seducers, whereas now since the
Apostles and Prophets are ceased, and all extraordinary ways, the best Oracles
Ministers and People have to direct them in doubtful cases about matters of
Religion, are men of very fallible judgments, and every way obnoxious unto
error and mistake, the best Synods and Councels being not infallible. And so
whatsoever Hagiomastix speaks of the old Law, another may say the same of the
new, as to this effect; I am confident that the wisest and most learned of the
Ministers are not able clearly or demonstratively to inform the Magistrate
what Heresy or what Scisme it was, or what kind of holding the resurrection
past already it was for which the Apostles censured Hymeneus, and commanded to
reject and avoid Heretics and Scismaticks; and therefore to go about to prove
those commands in the new Testament against false Prophets, Heretics,
Scismaticks, Troublers of the Church, to be in our days in force, because they
were given in the Apostles days and practiced by them, is as if one should
prove that a man may safely and without danger walk among bogs, Precipices and
ditches at midnight, because he may well do it at noon day. The Socinians upon
this very ground plead against Excommunication, and al Church censures in
matters of Doctrine, now however in use in the Primitive Churches, and answer
to the commands and examples alleged out of the new Testament after this
manner, Anonymi Dissertatio De pace and Concordia Ecclesi^e. page 91, 92.
Apologia pro Socinianis. Fallunt and falluntur qui ad florentis istius aetatis
exemplum nostra tempora exiguut. Non iisdem remediis nunc afflicta Ecclesiae
valetudo restitui potest, quibus olim poter^^ aegritudo submoveri. Cum sanam
esset ac robusta Ecclesia in primo illo aetatis store and Apostoloru^ choro
superstite etiam violentis utiremediis ob vigorem suum par erat. Nunc morbis ac
senio confecta and debilis superanti jam aegritudini pene succumbit ^ec magis
unquam periclitatur quam cum in crudeles medicos incidit. Vide ibi plura.
For there is much difference between Heretics now, and those Heretics in the
Apostles days. For grant them who now err in matters of faith, were set
before that venerable company of Apostles and their equals; suppose them to be
admonished and convinced; and yet nevertheless to persist obstinately though
but in a light error, who would not detest their malice? In this case a light
error is turned into the nature of a great wickedness; wherefore you will say?
because they dare to resist the Spirit speaking by the Apostles, and when they
have no cause of doubting of the Doctrine and faith of that Council, yet they
would not believe nor obey. But now although we are ve^emently persuaded of
the certainty of our faith, who can in such aname assure us, or certify that
we cannot err? What Council can we now persuade our selves so incorrupt, as
that of the Apostles or Primitive Church? Those who deny Excommunication of
Heretics, say, bring not arguments and reasons out of the new Testament, but
that power of the Spirit with which the Apostles being endowed, delivered up to
Satan and killed Hypocrites with a word: If you want this Powerful efficacy of
the Spirit, acknowledge your rashness and iniquity in condemning those, to whom
you cannot demonstrate your Interpretation of Scripture: Neither is the Spirit
now so weak, but that be is able to give Testimonies of the divine Authority,
and his presence in his Ministers now against his enemies. It follows not
because many things were not tolerated in the infancy of the Church in the
Primitive times, therefore they ought not to be tolerated now in the old age
of the Church: They deceive and are deceived who would bring our times to the
example of that flourishing age. When the Church was healthful and strong in
that first flower of its age, and whilst the company of the Apostles were
living, the using of violent remedies in respect of the Churches vigor was meet
and agreeable. Now the Church with diseases and old age being weakened and
spent, it now almost falls down under its prevailing sickness: neither is it
any time more in danger, then when it falls into the bands of cruel Physicians.
In time past its first vigor admitted of opening of veins and loss of blood;
now if after strength exhausted by so many evils there remain any vital Juice
and moisture, it cannot but by letting blood be poured out with the life and
Spirit, and therefore this remedy of the punishment of Heretics for the
Preservation of the Church ought to be omitted now, when it will bring more
hurt and danger, then profit to the Church. So some of our Sectaries in a late
Pamphlet, put forth upon occasion of their Indig^ation at the late solemn Fast
of the tenth of March against Heresies, plead that the Scisme spoken against in
the new Testament is only of separating from those Primitive Apostolical
Churches, planted immediately by the Apostles and by infallible direction, but
has no reference at all to the Churches of these times; Nay further upon this
clear reason why that old Testament Law about false Prophets, etc should not
now bind, all the Laws and commands written in the old Testament, yea and in
the new concerning the whole will of God may be as well not in force; and men
may say for any thing pressed upon them out of the Scriptures of the old or new
Testament, that they concern them not, because in all difficult cases that
happened about matters of Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Government, etc, the
Jews to whom those commands were given, and the Churches in the Apostles days
to whom the Epistles were written had the opportunity of immediate and
infallible direction from God himself by the high Priest, Prophets and
Apostles, who could and did in all doubts from time to time infallibly declare
and resolve what was Gods mind and Pleasure, what was Scisme, what was Heresy,
what use the Law was of, how often Christians should pray, hear Gods word etc,
whereas now the best Oracles Christians have to direct them about matters of
Religion, are men of very fallible judgments, and every way obnoxious unto
error and mistake; Yea the wisest and most learned of them are not able clearly
or demonstratively to inform now what the Government of the Church was in the
Apostles days, what the duties of a Minister are to the People, as how often he
must preach, etc; so that upon Hagiomastixs clear reason in his 36. Section
against the old Testament Law for Magistrates punishing Blasphemers, Idolaters,
etc whatsoever can be brought out of the old or new Testament in matters of
duty, may be evaded, and it may be said this or that was commanded or
forbidden, because then they had the high Priests, Prophets, and Apostles, who
were infallible and could determine all difficulties.

In a word if some dissimilitude that may be shown either under the old
Testament or the new, in the times, or state of things there, when those
Commands and Rules were given, from the times and state of things now, may be a
sufficient reason of the Rules and Commands themselves being now not in force,
then it will follow that all moral duties laid down both in the Law and the
Gospel bind not us, because the same dissimilitude, or as great may be shown in
whatsoever duty upon any Ordinance of Christ or relation among men is
propounded. Upon this ground the Sacrament of Baptism shall not be perpetual
not universal in the Church, because of some differences between that time
when Christ instituted it, and the times now, as Gerard. Joh. Vossii Theses
Theolog. De necessi. Baptismi These. 4. contra F^ust^^ Socinu^. Praeterea etsi
concederetur Christum de Baptismo de. disse praeceptu^, censet illud tantum
pertinuisse ad initia, quibus exrudi populo, and ceremoniis assueto, Ecclesia
Christo colligebatur: Denique eo etiam concesso, ut perpetuo debeat in Ecclesia
obtinere, negat tamen universale esse: nam cum aquae Baptismus nihil aliud sit
quam publica^ and solennis quaedam professio nominis Christi, minime hunc iis
necessarium esse ait qui ex Christianis, id est Christum profitentibus,
nascuntur: aut qui in Christiana fide sunt educati.
Socinus thereupon held Baptism an indifferent thing belonging only to the
infancy of the Church, in which out of a rude people and accustomed to
ceremonies, a Church was gathered to Christ: So neither an outward calling and
Ordination of Ministers shall be perpetual, because then there were Apostles
and other extraordinary men, who in ordaining them could conferr the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, and had the gift of discerning of spirits: So all the commands
given by Paul and Peter of servants obeying their Masters, and being subject to
their Masters with all fear, may be evaded, and they may say they concern not
us, because the servants in those times were their slaves, bought with their
money, at their dispose, but we are borne free as well as our Masters; and
then those servants in any commands doubtful had Apostles or other infallible
men, to go to to be resolved, which we have not, they being long since ceased,
and so I might go over all examples and commands both in the old or new
Testament. But some commands that in regard of their manner, some degrees and
adjuncts may not bind, yet in respect of their substance and the things
themselves are perpetual, of which I have spoken before p. 81, 82, 83, 84. and
whoever does but consider the difference between the essence of a thing and the
adjunct of a thing, how the essence is one thing and the adjunct another, and
how some change may be in an adjunct, when not in the essence at all, will be
satisfied.


Fifthly, This clear reason of Hagiomastix in his 36. Section and 130. page
why Magistrates under the old Law might exercise coercive Power, upon false
Prophets, Blasphemers, etc because in all difficult cases of Religion the Jews
to whom this Law was given, had the opportunity of enquiring by Vrim and
Thummim, of immediate consultation with the mouth of God himself by the high
Priest, seems not to be any reason upon these grounds. First, that reason is
never expressed in those commands or examples for putting to death false
Prophets, Blasphemers, Idolaters, etc. but other reasons are alleged, viz.
from the nature of the sins, drawing away from God, the putting away of the
evil, and that others may fear and do no more so, with other such like, all,
reasons of a common nature to the times now as well as then. Secondly, before
there was a high Priest, and holy garments made for him, particularly the breast
plate of judgment, the Vrim and Thummim, Exodus 28. 15. 30. the Law was given
for putting to death Idolaters, Exodus 22. 20. and in Jobs time long before the
high Priest, and in a Land where the high Priest was not enquired by, Idolatry
was an iniquity worthy to be punished by the Judges. 3. Those who were Heathens
strangers in the Land of Judea, that believed not in the God of Israel, nor
understood not what the judgment of Vrim was, and the sentence thereof, yet
the Jewish Magistrates would not suffer such whilst staid among them, to
blaspheme God, to worship strange Gods, or to offer their children to Molech,
as appears in Levit, 20. 2. and in page 49. 50. of this Treatise. Fourthly, the
Magistrates exercised their coercive Power in matters of Religion, as freely
after Vrim and Thummim were lost, and that judgment ceased, as they did
before, which clearly shows the enquiring by Vrim under the old Law, was not
the cause of those Laws concerning punishing Idolaters, and false Prophets,
being in force: It is the judgment of most of the learned writers both Robbins
and others, that the oraculous consultation with the Breastplate continued no
longer then to the captivity of Babylon, Vrim and Thummim being lost at the
captivity of Babylon, and wanting at the Peoples return, as these Scriptures
show Ezra. 2* 63. Nehem. 7. 65, neither do we find that ever God gave Answer by
them any more diverse learned men who write of the Jewish Church and State, and
of the first and second Temple, of Hag gai 1. 8. Haggai 2. 9. The glory of this
latter House shall be greater then of the former, show the want of five things
in the second Temple which had been in the first 1. The A^ke with the mercy
seat and Cherubims. Secondly, the fire from Heaven. Thirdly, the Majesty, or
divine presence. Fourthly, the holy Ghost, Fifthly And the Vrim and Thummim, of
which the Reader may see fully in Ainsworths Annot. on Exodus 28. 30. Now that
after the Captivity of Babylon, Princes and Magistrates used a coercive Power
for offenses against the first Table, is plain by those instances Ezra. 10. 7,
8. of making Proclamation that all who had taken strange wives of the People of
the Land, should come unto Jerusalem for the putting them away, and such as
were borne of them, and that whosoever would not come within three days
according to the Council of the Princes and the Elders, all his substance
should be forfeited, etc Nehem. 9. 38. Nehem. 10. and 13. chapters, Nehemiab
and other Rulers entering into Covenant for Reformation in the matter of the
Sabbath, strange wives, maintenance for the service of the House of God, and
Nehemiah commanding and contending to have matters reformed in the worship and
house of God, yea restraining and hindering the Profanation of the Sabba^h, and
smiting some for marrying wives of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moah; Yea the want
of a Priest standing up with Vrim and Thummim, by whom the Magistrates might
enquire, was so far from hindering Magistrates in punishing about matters of
Religion, that the quite contrary is expressed both in Ezra and Nehemiah. Ezra
2. 63. Nehem. 7. 65. some Priests being put from the Priesthood and forbidden
by the Governor to eat of the most holy things till their stood up a Priest
with Vrim and with Thummim, that is for want of Vid. Jun. Annot. in Ezr. 1. 65.
and Eng. Annet.
Vrim and Thummim by which God might be consulted with and his mind known
herein; Zerubbabel (the Tirshatha is commonly said to be Zerubbabel) would not
let the Priests that knew not their genealogies eat of the most holy things, so
that some Privileges are denied for want of Vrim and Thummim, in a case of
Geneologie, and birth after a confusion and mixture of marriages for the space
of about 70. years, being a matter of fact, of what genealogy verse 62. not a
matter of Law, but no restraints of punishments upon Prophaners of the Sabbath,
and those who married strange wives etc for want of Vrim and Thummim. And long
after the loss of Vrim and Thummim we find Artaxerxes, Darius, the King of
Niniveh and Nebuchadnezzar making Laws for punishing men in cases of
Blasphemy, and other matters of the first Table, and the places of Scripture
relating such Edicts and Laws, speak of them by way of approbation, as I have
shown before in the 15. and 16. pages of this Treatise, whereunto I refer the
Reader, and shall only add one passage out of Calvin Refut. E^^orum Serveti p.
598. Hujus rei illustre nobis exemplum spiritus Dei proponit in Nebuchad. Nam
ejus edictum celebrat Daniel, quo capitalem paenam denunciat siquis in Deum
Israel blasphemus fuerit. Honor profecto non vulgaris crudeli tyranno habetur,
quum Prophetam suum Dominus ad publicandas quaet tulit leges qua si praeconem
assignat, and leges ipsas in acta sua refert, sacrisque suis oraculis
annumerat. Quid? an spiritus sa^cti and Prophetae elogio laudatur
Nebuchadnezer, qui very Dei gloriam pro imperio tutandam suscepit, ut ad impiam
ejus prophanationem conniv^ant sancti Magistratus? an non potius his dominus
sub profani regis persona quid agere ipsos deceat praescribit? Et c^rte quid
magis praeposterum quam in Ecclesiae sinu impune foveri fcelestas in Deum
c^nt^elias, quae in Babylone paena capitali sanitae fuerunt?
Calvin upon that Edict of Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 3. 29. For this Edict Daniel
celebrates and sets forth, in which, capital punishment is denounced against
any man that shall speak amiss of the God of Israel. Truly it is no common
honor that is given to a cruel Tyrant when God assigns his Prophet as the
Preacher to publish the Laws he made, and puts those Laws among his acts, and
numbers them among his holy Oracles. What? whether is Nebuchadnezzar praised by
the Testimonial of the Holy Spirit, and of the Prophet for taking upon him
according to his Power and Authority the defense of the glory of the true God,
that holy Magistrates should bear with the wicked profanation of his glory,
and does not the Lord rather under the Person of a Profane King show what
becomes them to do? And certainly what is more preposterous then in the bosom
of the Church to foster unpunished wicked contumelies against God, which was in
Babylon enacted to be punished with capital punishment? Fifthly, this clear
Reason of Gods immediate and infallible declaring his own mind and pleasure
under the old Testament, even according to Hagiomastix Principles, is so far
from being any reason why Magistrates might then punish Blasphemers, Idolaters,
false Prophets, etc but not now, as that the contrary seems more reasonable:
for in cases of immediate and infallible Answers from Heaven, God declaring who
was an Idolater, and what was Idolatry, etc convincing men so powerfully as
leaving them without all subterfugies, one would think there should need the
Magistrates Power a great deal less, then in a time when there are no such
immediate Answers from God, nor discoveries of men from heaven; For it cannot
be thought but that very bad men, when they certainly knew, that if they
prophesied falsely, entised persons to Idolatry, etc could not upon any
Pretenses whatsoever escape from being convicted, but should by God himself
from heaven be judged Idolaters, false Prophets, and thereupon be but to
death, they would either wholly forbear the outward acts, or if committed any
such, they would confess them, repent, and do no more so; whereas when men
know there is no such way of finding them out, of God from heaven naming
persons and things, this is the man, and this is Idolatry, Blasphemy, etc
they would be encouraged both to do such things and to maintain them when
they have done, to bring Scripture against Scripture, and Reason against
Reason, as knowing all immediate Answers and Discoveries to be ceased: Unto
which if that be added, that under the old Testament God himself inflicted
more outward bodily punishments upon persons for Idolatry, will worship,
Scisme, etc, then he does now under the new (the judgments under the Gospel
being more spiritual as many examples in the old Testament show, being a more
Immediate Judge, and Inflicted of bodily punishments on the Jews, as he was to
them a more Immediate Legislator of which I have spoken before in page 64. of
this Book) there appears less reason for those coercive commands being in
force under the old Testament, then now, there being in both these respects now
named without the Magistrates coercive Power, greater means for awing and
restraining Violators of the first Table, viz. Gods immediate discovering, and
inflicting of punishment, then in our times; And for illustrating this we may
observe that in the Primitive times when there were extraordinary gifts in the
Church, of Miracles, etc, and immediate Answers and Revelations by Apostles and
Prophets, then the Church needed not so much the help of the Magistrates and
the civil sword,
God giving no Christian Magistrate all that time, but the Magistrates that
were in those days were Persecutors and enemies of the Christians, but after
the Planting of the Gospel and watering it, and the extraordinary Gifts and
Offices in the Church ceasing, then God gave Kings and Princes to be nursing
Fathers, to defend the Church and the truth by their Laws and Power, and has
continued such ever since, as a great help to the Church, as a wall to the
weak Vine: So when under the old Testament there was according to this Reason
of Master Goodwin, such immediate and infallible Answers from the Mouth of God
himself in all difficult cases of Religion, and such immediate visible
judgments by the immediate hand of God upon Idolaters, false Prophets,
especially upon Despisers of the glorious Ordinance of the Oracle of God
amongst them, except men had been desperately and outragiously wicked, and had
with a high hand despised God himself speaking and presently striking dead in
case of disobedience, they could not have been obstinate Seducers to Idolatry,
false Prophets, Blasphemers, should neither so much have needed Magistrates
armed with commission from God to execute those commands of the 13. and 17.
chapters of Deuteronomy. etc, as in these days we do, wherein both these are wanting
according to Hagiomastixs own confession, and so much for the fifth Answer.
Sixthly, If this be a clear Reason why that old Testament Law for the putting
of false Prophets, Blasphemers, etc to death should not be now in force,
because in all difficult cases that happened about matters of Religion, the
Jews to whom this Law was given, had the opportunity of immediate
consultation with the mouth of God himself, who could and did from time to
time infallibly declare what his own mind and pleasure was in them. So that
except those that were to give sentence in cases of Religion, had been
desparately wicked and set upon blood, and had despised that glorious Ordinance
of the Oracle of God among them, they could not do injustice, because God
himself was always at hand to declare unto them what was meet to be done;
whereas now the best Oracles that Magistrates and Judges have to direct them in
doubtful cases about matters of Religion, are men of very fallible judgments,
and every way obnoxious unto error and mistake: then it is as clear a Reason why
the old Testament Law, for punishing Murderers and other Malefactors for
offenses against the second Table, should not be in force now; and whatever is
said by Hagiomastix in this reason against all bodily and civil punishment for
transgressions of the first Table, holds in all respects as strongly against
the Magistrates punishing for killing, stealing, etc, and the Anabaptists,
Socinians and other Heretics, who wholly deny the Christian Magistrates sword,
or at least the use of it in point of death under the N. Testament against any
transgression, viz. Treason, Murder, adultery, etc, as well as Blasphemy,
Idolatry, may say the same for themselves, and among all other Bulling,
adversus Anabaptistas l. 4. c. 5. c. 6. Osiandri Enchiridion c. 2. Qust. 41. De
Magistratu. Politico.
Arguments brought by them against the Christian Magistrates killing, or
punishing Murder, Theft, Adultery, etc they may add this new one of Master
Goodwins, There is this clear Reason why the old Testament Law for punishing
of Murderers, Thieves, Adulterers, etc should not now be in force upon any
such terms as it was, when, and where it was given; because in all difficult
cases that happened about matters of the Second Table, the Jews to whom this
Law was given, had the opportunity of immediate consultation with the mouth of
God himself, who could and did from time to time infallibly declare what his
own mind and pleasure was in them: So that except those that were to give
sentence in cases of blood, theft, etc had been desperately wicked, and set
upon blood, and had despised that glorious Ordinance of the Oracle amongst
them, they could not do injustice, because God himself was always at hand, to
declare unto them what was meet to be done; and what kind of manslayer was to
be put to death, and whether the person killed the man casually or wilfully,
etc, whereas now, the best Oracles that Magistrates and Judges have to direct
them in doubtful cases about matters of life, estate, etc, are men of very
fallible judgments, and the Laws they are to proceed by, of doubtful
Interpretation in many cases; and therefore to go about to prove that the Law
for punishing Murderers, Thieves, etc is now, or amongst us in force, because
it was once given unto the Jews, is, as if men should prove that a man may
safely and without danger walk among ^ogs, Praecipices, and ditches at
midnight, because he may well do it at noon day. I will undertake to make it
good against Master Goodwin, that whatsover he says in this his clear Reason
for the Magistrates punishing in matters of Religion under the old Testament,
but against it now, to show it was the same in matters of Justice and Right
among men, then, and is as strong against Magistrates coercive Power now in
those things, as in matters of Religion; yea upon that head of difficult and
doubtful cases, and danger of Magistrates erring and mistaking in judgment
thereupon, to give several Reasons of the danger of Magistrates mistaking
rather in difficult cases of the second, then of the first Table: Whoever has
but read and observed the Scriptures, yea but the five Books of Moses, must
acknowledge there were many difficult and doubtful cases under the old Law,
upon the commandments of the second Table as well as of the first, and
therefore superior and higher Courts, diverse one above another were appointed
by God under the Law to which in hard matters concerning the second Table, as
of the first, they might resort for advice and resolution: Whoever does but
consider the many Questions and cases handled, and written upon, by the
Schoolmen, Casui^ls, Canonists, Civilians upon matters of the second Table, as
well as of the first, together with the errrors The Errors and Controversies in
matters of the second Table upon the 5, 6, 7 8 and 9. Commandments are the
most exactly summed up by Danaeus in his Book De Haeresibus, of any Author in
that kind that ever I met with. Index^ Tertius de Decalog. Legis. De quinto
Praecepto, Magistratum damnant and tollunt Manichai, Anabaptistae. Magistratus
^utoritatem in negotiis religionis negant D^n^tistae. Judicia capitalia a
Christian^ homine exer^^i posse negant Tertullianiss^. De sexto precepto,
seipsos occiacre putant licere hominibus Patriciani, Circumcelliones. De
septimo Praecepto, Vxores communes and promiscuas ess debere d^cent Simoniani,
Nicolaitae, Carpocratiani. Incestus admittunt and probant Catap^^yges. De
octavo praecepto, Propria quaedam a Christianis poss^deri posse negant
Apostolici, Jesuitae, Anabaptistae, De nono praecepto, mentiri homini
Christiano licere putant Messaliani, Priscillianistae.
and diversity of Opinions that have been in the Church from the Apostles
days down to this time upon every one of the commandments of the second
Table, as about Magistracy, Polygam^e, Community of Wives, and Community of
Goods, about Christians being Magistrates, the Lawfulness of Christians going
to war, about the Lawfulness of Lying, dissimulation, and aequivocation in
diverse cases etc, must confess there are many Controversies and doubts about
the Contents of the second Table.

That place in Deuteronomy 17. from the eigth verse to the twelfth, brought by
Master Goodwin for the judgment of Vrim in difficult cases about matters of
Religion, and so made the ground of Magistrates punishing for Religion then,
but not now, speaks, as well of hard matters in civil things between man and
man, as in the things of God: There are some Divines who understand the Place
wholly or Principally of hard matters and Controversies about the second Table,
so Luther upon the place laboring to free it from the corrupt Interpretation
and sense put upon it by the Papists, says, Moses does here deal not
concerning^ the word or Doctrine, or, as they speak, of the questions of faith
which they would have referd to the Pope, but of the sentence of Public and
Profane Crimes, So A^^sworth and our English Divines on the Place, by blood
and blood understand Murder, of which the Judges may be doubtful and unable to
find out whether it were wilful which deserved death, or unwilling for which
exile into the Cities of Refuge was appointede by Plea and Plea, pleading for,
and against in the same cause, some accusing, some denying, as in 1 Kings 3.
16. 17. 18. by stroke and stroke, may be also meant strokes and Wounds that
one man gave unto another whether of Malignitie or Casualtie; and Hagiomastix
in Section 107. in Answer to the Vindication of the Ordinance against Heresies,
which brought Deuteronomy. 17. 12. for a proof of God making controverted points in
Religion a matter of death or imprisonment, carries his first and second
Answers so, as if that place were understood wholly or Principally of
Controversies about the second Table, between blood and blood, between stroke
and stroke, Plea and Plea; and if he meant not so, those Answers are nothing
to the Position of the Vindicator, affirming that God in the old Testament gave
Authority to make a controverted point in Religion, (for of Religion he speaks)
a matter of death or imprisonment. But all Divines generally who write upon the
place by way of exposition, or who have written of the Judicatories among the
Jews, and of Appeals from lower Courts to higher, and of the distinction
between Civil and Ecclesiastical Courts, do understand the hard matters in
judgment, and the matters of Controversy within the gates, to be meant of
criminal matters in Civil things, belonging to the second Table as sixth and
eight Commandment, as well as of Ecclesiastical things: the matter too hard
between blood and blood, between Plea and Plea, is interpreted by learned
J^nius in his Analysis upon Deuterononie, of shughter and killing, and of
contention in Civil causes about such things as belong to the accommodations
of life, as between stroke and stroke is of diseases as of the plague of
Leprofie, which was in an Ecclesiastical and ceremonial way according to the
Law to be distinguished, and therefore in this place the argument that is
handled is Political or Ecclesiastical: The Political is Criminal or
Civil, but the Ecclesiastical is Ceremonial: So Lyra understands between
blood and blood, when one part of the Judges say that this shedding of blood is
to be punished with death as being voluntary murder, the other part says no,
it is but casual. Master Gillespie in his Aarous rod blossoming Book. 1.
chapt. 3. shows it is agreed upon both by Jewish and Christian Expositors that
this place holds forth a supreme Civil Court of Judges, and that this text
holds forth two sorts of causes, some foren^icall, between blood and blood;
some ceremonial between stroke and stroke. Now this Scripture speaking how
that man shall die that will do presumptuously and will not hearken unto the
Judge, as well as he that will not hearken unto the Priest, and speaking of
matters of the second Table as well as of the first,
and the sentence of death here spoken of, if immediate and infallible by Vrim,
extending equally to difficult cases in Civil matters as in matters of
Religion, or rather more, there being diverse particular instances in Scripture
of Answers in Civil matters, as of war and foretelling of some events in
Civil affairs, but none in matters of Religion; if then the Magistrate because
of his immediatenesse of consultation with God, might punish in matters of
Religion, but not now, that immediatenesse being ceased, it will also follow he
might then punish for blood, etc, because by Vrim he might certainly know
whether it was wilful or voluntary, but now he may not, because it is possible
and probable in doubtful and difficult cases about man's life, meum and tuum,
he may run into errors and mistake.

Sixthly, this clear Reason of Hagiomastixs making infallibility the ground of
coercive Power, and Fallibility a being subject to error and mistake, the
ground of the denial of such a power, is a fundamental falsity, and a grand
mistake, overthrowing equally all spiritual censures and punishments in cases
of false Doctrines and Heretics, and all bodily outward punishments in
Criminal Civil matters, and so at once making void all the Civil Power of
the Magistrate, and all the Ecclesiastical power of the Church: For the
Magistrate is not infallible, absolutely free from all possibility of error and
mistake in his judgment in matters of the second Table: many Magistrates in
those matters have and do daily grossly mistake, many innocent persons have
suffered, and do daily, and many guilty persons have and do escape; who does
not see in Civil matters what mistakes there are, and may be both in point of
law and matter of fact, how Lawyers and Judges are divided in their Opinions,
what controversies and difficulties arise upon cases, what doubts and Scruples
grow upon witnesses testifying quite contrary, and other circumstances, so that
what Judge can say he is infallible and certain that he is not mistaken,
that he saw such a fact committed, that the accusers and witnesses have
deposed nothing but truth. I could Instance in a hundred particulars both in
regard of the Lawmakers, the Laws, the Jewry, Witnesses, the accused party,
the Judges themselves, etc wherein Magistrates are as fallible and as obnoxious
unto error in matters of the second Table as in the first, yea, and in diverse
respects more* but I must refer this to the second part of this subject, where
the Grounds for Toleration, particularly that of no man being infallible in our
days, is to be answered, Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. shows us there are
difficultcases and Controversies in matters of the second Table, between blood
and blood, etc and that among the Judges themselves, so that higher Courts are
appointed to go unto, and the highest of all the Council of Seventie at
Jerusalem. Who sees not in Kingdoms about their Laws and Civil Rights as
high and great Controversies and Contestations as in matters of Religion, each
party having great Lawyers and able men on their side. So the Church with the
best Councels and Synods are not infallible, but may mistake and err and in in
some things have mistaken, as Whites way to the Church page 81. 83, 84, 85.
Neither can the Jesuit assign any Company or State of men, whereby the Church
may be supposed to manifest her teaching but the same may be subject to error,
and in experience has erred; as we see in Councels, Doctors and all other
means which she has used in teaching us, except that of the Scriptures only.
Willets second General Controversy concerning the Church, second question
whether the Church may err. page 69* 70, 71. Amesii. Bellarm. Enervat. Tom.
sec^nd. cap. 2. De Eccles. visibilit. quaest. 4. An Ecclesia^ possit errare.
Rivet. Catholic. Orthodox. Tractat. 2. Quaest. 3. An Ecclesia possit errare.
Cameron. Praelect. de Eccles. De Eccles. Infallibilit. 281, 282, etc.
many learned Protestants have shown against the Papists upon that question
whether the Church may err. And therefore by this clear reason of Master
Goodwin it should not be only unlawful for the Magistrates to punish for
Idolatry, Blasphemy, Heresy, Scisme, but for Murder, Theft, Polygamie,
Adultery, etc yea as unlawful for the Church to admonish and excommunicate
for Idolatry, Heresy, Blasphemy, etc as for the Magistrates to punish
corporally: But now M. S. Hagiomastix, Ancient Bounds or Liberty of Conscieuce
stated, with diverse of our Sectaries who write of this question yield the
Magistrates power in matters of the second Table, answering that of Romans 13. 4.
to be understood in things concerning the second Table, and the Churches power
in censuring for Heresies, evading that of Revel. 2. 20. to be meant of
Ministers, not Magistrates, and of spiritual censures not Civil, who yet are
alike fallible and subject to error and mistake, the Magistrates in Civil
judgments, and Ministers in spiritual, as they are in punishing corporally in
matters of Idolatry, Heresy, etc; and indeed considering the state of the
question of Magistrates coercive Power in matters of Religion, as I have laid
it down in the Prolegomena, and so is to be understood viz. that the
Magistrate is to do it upon advice and after advice in all difficult doubtful
cases with the ablest Godliest Ministers in the Church, by the advice of
Synods, with Solemn Prayers, after meant of instruction and conviction used to
the parties, which means and helps being not in Civil causes nor in the
censures of particular Churches, are more liable to error and mistake then
Magistrates: So that if Magistrates and Churches may punish, the one corporally
in matters of the second Table, the other spiritually in cases of both (as is
confessed by our grand Patrons of Toleration) notwithstanding their
fallibilitie and possibility of mistake,
then in difficult doubtful cases Magistrates may punish in matters of the
first Table, notwithstanding they are men of very fallible judgments; or in
case the want of the Magistrates infallibility puts a supersedeas to his
coercive Power in matters of Religion, the same want deprives him of Power in
Civil things, and Ministers in Ecclesiastical, because of their Possibility
of erring in both: By all which the Reader may see it is a very rotten foundation
both to build upon, or to take away the Power of censuring evil and erroneous
persons upon the infallibility or fallibilitie of those who have Authority
from God; no, certainly, this Power and duty of those who are in place both in
Church and State, are founded on the Ordinance and Institution of God, in
appointing such Offices, and in the nature of the Crimes and offenses, and on
the ends of vindicating Gods Glory and Name, and preserving others from being
ruined, etc, but never on that, that the persons who should exercise it were
infallible and not subject to error, which that it is so, may be demonstrated by
these following reasons. First, In the Churches of the new Testament in the
Apostles days when they had men amongst them immediately inspired, who could
dictate the mind of Christ infallibly, and tell them the certain meaning of
any Scripture, notwithstanding all that Infallibility and Immediatenesse of
Inspiration, such Persons Tenets and Practices (though erroneous and mistakes)
as by the rules of faith and love could and might be tolerated and suffered,
were tolerated, and the Apostles in those things so far from giving any
directions to the Churches for withdrawing or excommunicating, that they give
commands to the contrary, namely to receive, bear with, please such, and not
our selves, follow after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith
one may edify another, and whereto we have already attained to walk by the
same Rule, as these Scriptures Romans 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 13, 19. Romans 15, 1, 2, 3.
Phil. 3. 15, 16. with diverse of the like kind show: The holding the day of
Christ to be at hand, was an error, and Paul writes pathetically to dissuade
the Thessalonians from it 2 These. 2. 1, 2, 3. yet for all that he accounts
them brethren, and so I might instance in other such particulars; whereas on
the contrary in damnable Heresies, Scismes, and such like, as denying the
resurrection of the dead, holding Circumcision necessary to Justification, in
denying Jesus Christ to be come in the flesh, in teaching the Doctrines of
Balaam and of the Nicolaitans, in separating themselves and going out from the
Church, the Apostles are against all suffering, bearing with, receiving of, and
for rejecting, delivering up to Satan and cutting of all such, as these
Scriptures testify 1 Timothy 1. 20. Tit. 3. 10. Gal. 1. 8, 9. Gal. 5. 12. the
second Epistle of John. 7. 9, 10. Jude 19, 23 v. Revel. 2. 14, 15, 20. with
many more. Now in the Tenets, Opinions and Practices of the first sort, the
Apostles could have resolved the Romans, Philippians as infallibly, who held
the truth, and who in the error in those particulars, as in the latter of
Heresies: This is acknowledged by Master Buroughs himself in page 59* 60, 61.
of his Heart divisions, even where he pleads for a Toleration in all points
doubtful and controverted among godly men, who writes thus, all these people
spoken of in Romans 14 were not in the right, for a man not to eat flesh out of
conscience when the thing was not forbidden, certainly was a sin, or to make
conscience of a Holy Day which God required not, was a sin: Now the Apostle did
not come with his Authority, and say, I will make you leave of keeping such
days, or you shall eat, or to abstain thus as you do is evil, and it must
not be suffered in you. No, the Apostle lays no Apostlicall Authority upon
them, but tells them, That every man must be ful^y persuaded in his own mind
in what he does; and who art thou that judge another man's servant? the Lord
has received him. And yet the Governors of the Church in the Primitive times
might upon much stronger grounds have stood upon such a Principle, then any
Governors of the Church now can; there was less Reason why they should suffer
any difference in Opinion or Practice amongst them, then why we should suffer
differences amongst us; for they had men amongst them immediately inspired, who
could dictate the mind of Christ infallibly, they could tell them the certain
meaning of any Scripture; And yet we see plainly, the Apostle applies himself
both in the Romans and Philippians rather to press mutual forbearance, and
keeping the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace, using all arguments of
that kind, as God has received him, be that regards a day regards it to
the Lord; and he that regards not the day to the Lord, he does not regard
it, he that cateth eats to the Lord, etc. Nevertheless whereunto we have
attained let us walk by the same Rule; and if in any thing you be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you, then from God immediately and
infallibly to declare who were in the right and truth in those particulars
wherein they differed, and thereupon to command the others to be of their mind
and Practice in all the particulars, or else upon such an infallible resolution
to declare they ought to be cast out of the Church, and no communion hold with
them: By all which it is evident, that Infallibility and opportunity of
immediatenesse of consultation with God is not the formal Ground of censure,
but the nature of the things themselves, being destructive to faith,
Godliness, and edifying: for if the power of punishing had been founded on
infallibility, seeing the Apostles were as able and infallible to give
certain resolutions in the matter of days, meat, and drinks and such like,
as in matters of faith, they would have given other manner of Rules then they
did in Romans 14. Phil. 3. etc; And indeed if Hagiomastize infallibility were
good, what reason can be given why the Apostles did not proceed with all errors
and all persons, as with Hymene^s, Alexander, and the woman Iesable, which
clearly shows the lawfulness of censures lay not in the infallible knowledge
of the Governors of the Church but the Apostles in persons and things
themselves, the one sort weak peaceable Christians holding the head, and
communion with the body, the other turbulent, wilful, holding Doctrins
subverting in the foundation, the precious souls of men and godliness: And
certainly if infallibility were not the just ground and formal reason of
censuring, but some other thing, then fallibility a possibility of mistaking in
some things cannot be a just cause of taking away all power of punishing from
Governors, and that in all points though never so destructive to Gods glory and
the souls of men. Secondly in the new Testament there are many commands given,
and many ^^^les laid down both for those times wherein they were written, and
for all times till the coming of Christ, unto persons, who were not infallible
nor immediately inspired, concerning Heresies and Heretics, Scismes and
Scismaticks, to beware of folk Prophets, and false Teachers, to avoid, reject,
and turn away from them, not to believe every Spirit, but to try the Spirits
whether they are of God, not to receive into house, neither to bid God speed
those that trasgresse and abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, not to suffer
those who teach false Doctrine, and sed^ce the servants to God, to countend
^arnestly the faith, to hold fast the truth and sound Doctrine show was these
Scriptures to whole Churches and particular Persons, both private Christians,
and Pastors, and Teachers, not Apostles and Prophets, the extraordinary
Officers Romans 1. 16, 17, 18. Phil. 3. 2. 1. Tim. 6. 5. 2 Pet. 3. 17. 1 John 4.
3. 2. Epist. John 9. 10. Jud^ 3. Revel. 2. 14, 20. Revel. 3. Now however the
Apostles and Prophets in those Primitive times were infallible and immediately
inspired (of whose immediate infallibility how far, and in what way, whether
only in penning the holy Scriptures, or how else, whether Chamier Panstrat.
Cathol. De Canon. and summa Regula Fidei. Apostoli fuerunt infallibiles ex
particulari assistentia spiritus, habuerunt particularem non habitualem
assistentiam spiritus Lutherus, spirtus Sanctus non semper tangit corda
Propheta^um.
ex hubituali asse^^entia Spiritus or only de particulere assistantia Spiritus
I shall speak at large in the second part of my Anti-Toleration, in answering
that Objection, we have now no external infallible Judge) yet all those they
w^^t unto in their Epistles, every particular believer, man and woman were not,
neither are infallible, not the Elect Lady and her children, not all the
believing Romans, nor all those Christians to whom the Epistle general of John
and Jude were written, nor those Angels of the Churches of Pergamus and
Thyatira, nor Christians in our times to whom those commands and Rules are
written and given by the Apostles, as well as those who then lived, (for the
Epistles did not concern the times and the particular Churches and persons
only to whom they were written as some wickedly affirm) and yet these are
commanded to stand fast in the Faith, to avoid those who cause divisions
contrary to the Doctrine which they have learned, to prove al things, are
reproved and found fault with by the Spirit of God for not censuring of
Heresy, false Doctrine, etc. which fully proves true Doctrine may be known
from false, false Teachers may be discovered and censured by persons not
infallible, and so the judging of what is Heresy, Scism, and who is a Heretic
or a Scismatick, and the punishing, or not punishing of them depends not upon
infallibility or fallibilitie of Spirit, infallibility is not the ground of
censure, nor fallibilitie of non censure. Thirdly, The Apostles who were
infallibly and immediately inspired, yet in cases of Controversy arising in
the Church, and in censures and determinations thereupon, did not act from
infallibility and immediatenes of Answers from God, but from Scripture grounds
by way of reasoning and disputation deduced, and in a Synodical way by the
joint common resolution of Elders as well as themselves, as is evident by Acts
15. Acts 21. 18, 19, 20, 21. In that dissension that Paul and Barnabas had with
certainemen that came down from Judea about circumcision, Paul and Barnabas
were able to have determined it without their and others going up to Jerusalem
to the Apostles and Elders: Paul by his Apostolical infallible Spirit, could
have determined as in Gal. 5. 2. Behold, I Paul say unto you that if you be
circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing; but the whole business is
debated, decreed, and the decrees sent forth by Synodicall Authority
determined according to the word of God, and not by extraordinary immediate
infallible inspiration of the Spirit, the proof of which seeing the Reader may
find so fully and largely in many learned Whitak. Controv. 3. quaest. 6 An
Assertion of the Government of the Church of Scotland, Second part cap. 8.
Master Rutherfurds Due right of Presbyteries, Acts. 15. A pattern of a
juridicall Synod. Diodat. Annot. in Acts 15. The Divine Right of Church
government, first edit. page 223, 224, 125. Because the manner of proceeding in
this Synod convened was not extraordinary and Apostolical, as when they acted
by an immediate infallible inspiration of the spirit, in penning the holy
Scripture (without all disputing, examining, or judging of the matter that they
writ, so far as we can read) 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. 2 Pet. 1. 20. 21. but ordinary
Presbyteriall and Synodall by ordinary helps and means (as after shall
appear more fully) stating the Question proof and evidence from Scripture what
was the good and acceptable will of God, concerning the present Controversy,
and upon evidence of Scripture, concluding, It seemed good to the holy Ghost,
and to us Act. 15. 28. which words any Assembly, having like clear evidence of
Scripture for their determination, may without presumption use as well as this
Synod did. They proceeded deliberatively by discourses and disputes,
deliberating about the true state of the Question, and the remedy of the
Scandal: They proceeded after all their deliberative inquiries and disputes
decisively to conclude and determine the matter. Master Cotton in his Tractate
of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven (though of the Independent way) page 48,
49 writes thus, of Act^ 25. Neither did the Apostles determine the matter (as
has been said) by the Apostolical authority from immediate revelation, but
they assembled together with the Elders to consider of the matter, verse 6. and
a multitude of brethren together with them, verse 12, 22, 23. and after
searching out the cause by an ordinary means of disputation, verse 7. Peter
cleared it by the witness of the spirit to his Ministry in Cornelius his
family, Paul and Barnabas by the like effect of their Ministry among the
Gentiles: James confirmed the s^meby the Testimony of the Prophets, wherewith
the whole Synod being satisfied, they determined of a judicial sentence, and
of a way to publish it by letters and Messengers, in which they censure the
false Teachers as troublers of their Church, and subverters of their souls,
they reject the Imposition of Circumcision, a Yoke which neither they nor
their Fathers were able to bear, they impose upon the Churches none but some
necessary observations, and them by way of that Authority which the Lord had
given them, verse 28.
Authors I shall spare to write anything of it. So upon Paul's coming to
Jerusalem Acts 21. and the offense that many thousands of the Jews which
believed and were zealous of the Law took at him, Paul went not upon his own
infallibility of Spirit or immediate Revelation, but upon the joint council
and direction of James and all the Elders verse 18. 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26. Now
if the Apostles in judging of false Doctrine and Scisme, censuring the Authors
of these and imposing upon the Churches their Decrees to be kept (all which are
spoken of in A^ts 15.) proceeded not in the way of infallible immediate
Revelation from God, laid it aside as it were, but in an ordinary way, by
Scripture, reason, experience upon and after much debate, as is apparent from
verse 6. to verse 30. then it is evident that immediatnesse of Revelation, with
infallibility of Spirit is not the sole judge of Heresies and Errors, and the
only just reason of inflicting punishments upon Heretics and Scismaticks.

Seventhly, besides the other false Suppositions laid down by Hagiomastix in
his 36. Sect. as the enquiring by Vrim and Thummim in cases of Idolatry,
Blasphemy, as that Inallibilitie is the ground of coercive power, etc, this
also is false that he supposes under the new Testament, there is no
Infallibility nor certainty to be had in difficult, doubtful matters of
Religion, but that in those things we walk at midnight, in comparison of those
under the old Law who walked at noon day, which assertion of the uncertaintie
and darkness of the Church in points of Religion under the new Testament
compared with the old, is contrary to these grounds. First, to many prophecies
of the state of the Church after Christ's coming, which speak that then the
earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the
waters cover the Sea, and the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun shall be seven sold as the light of seven
days, and unto the manner of the Administration of the Covenant of Grace under
the new Testament, which however for substance was but one and the same under
the Law, and the Gospel, yet for manner of Dispensation and Application
differed and is various, as many Ames. medul. Theolog. lib 1. cap. 38. cap. 39
Administrati^. novi Testam. differt ab administratione priori, qualitate and
quantitate. Qualitas differens qua pollet, est vel claritas, vel libertas.
Divines show, and one of the main differences between them in manner of
Administration stands in this, that the Covenant of Grace under the new differs
from the old in Cleernesse and Evidence, in that the Doctrine of grace and
salvation by Christ, and of faith in him together with the Appendixes is more
distinct and express then before it was, not being now under a veil, but
beheld with open face 2 Cor. 3. 12, 13, 17, 18. Secondly, then the Church of
Christ under the new Testament should be in a far worse condition then the
Jews were under the old; for whereas they were sure and certain in their
Religion, and had an infallible way of being resolved in all doubts, Christians
now should be in continual doubts and uncertainties in matters of faith, not
knowing what to do, or whether to turn themselves, which must needs be a most
miserable condition, and the Jews case in the time, before Christ's coming in
the flesh, was to be much preferred before ours; for the burden of being under
the Pedagogy of the Law, with a certainty and infallibility of knowing what
to hold and believe, is a light burden in comparison of being freed from the
Ceremonial Law, and in the mean time to be without all certainty and
assurance in points of faith and worship: Who would not choose rather to
undergo some burden with an infallibility and certainty of Religion,
then to enjoy a Liberty from a Yoke with an uncertaintie and continual
fears Is not the bondage of fear worse; then a bondage of ceremonies and many
outward Legal observations? If the deliverance of us from the Pedagogie of the
Law has brought us into this condition, out burden is greater in this thing
then any that the Law laid upon the Jews. Has Christ delivered us from one
burden to lay a greater upon us? Have we not cause to say, Lord let any
burden of the Ceremonial Law be laid upon our necks rather then this? Thirdly
unto the end of Christian Religion, and the knowledge of it as it is written in
the Scriptures, particularly of the new Testament, which is that Vrsini
Catechis. Quaest. 1. de Consolat. Quae est vnica tua consolatio in vita and in
morte.
Christians may have consolation and hope in life and death Romans 15. 4. 1
Epist. John 1. 4. Now there can be no solid comfort, without certainty and
assurance of the truth of the thing, in it felse at least, which we profess;
but in doubts, fears, uncertainties, the soul must needs be in perplexities,
anxieties, as upon the rack, Fear has torment 1 John. 4. 18. But Secondly the
infallibility and certainty under the old Testament by Vrim and Thummim of
the Priest, so much spoken of and magnified by Hagiomastix, above that under
the new, was as much liable to questioning and doubts by cavilling, and
contentious Spirits as the way under the new, and many exceptions might be made
and Controversies to arise, whether those who were to give sentence in cases of
Religion, upon the Answer by Vrim did according as they received it from God,
or according to their own corrupt affection and interest, which considering
what many of the Priests were under the old Testament, corrupt and partial and
the silent manner of Gods Answer by Vrim, might give occasion of questioning,
yea Hagiomastix himself supposes and implies in some cases a possibility of a
wrong Answer and doing injustice after consultation with the glorious Ordinance
of the Oracle of God, as these words show, So that except those that were to
give sentence in cases of Religion had been desperately wicked, end set upon
blood, and had despised the glorious Ordinance of the Oracle of God amongst
them, they could not do injustice: Now it is evident there were high Priests
among them and such who had power of sentence in cases of Religion that were
desperately wicked, who either might pass sentence without enquiring by Vrim,
or else not go according to Gods Answer by Vrim, but according to the lusts of
their own hearts: Whosoever does but consider these examples following
recorded in Scripture both of the Priests and other men, going flat contrary to
the mind of God, and immediate Answers from him, will not wonder but be
satisfied. The Priests in Ieremiahs time were desperately wicked and set upon
blood, even upon having Ieremiahs blood, pronouncing sentence upon him, This
man is worthy to die, and Thou shall surely die, Jerem. 26. 8, 11. and there
were many complaints by Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and other Prophets, of the Priests,
and chief Priests being out of the way through strong drink, erring in vision,
and stumbling in judgment, saying to a stock, Thou art my Father, and to a
stone, Thou have brought me forth, etc offering violence to the Law and
Profaning of holy things, putting no difference between the holy and profane,
hiding there eyes from the Sabbaths: the chief of the Priests, transgressing
very much and polluting the house of the Lord, which he had hallowed in
Jerusalem Esaias 28. 7. Ierem. 2. 27. Ezekiel. 22. 26. 2 Chronicles. 36. 14. Now if the
Priests would do all this when they degenerated, offer violence to the Law,
say to a stock thou art my Father, pollute the house of the Lord, and much more
that is recorded in the Scripture of them, then there is no question to be
made, but they might pervert the sentence by Vrim and give an Answer quite
contrary to what they received immediately and infallibly from God, thereby
condemning the innocent and clearing the guilty, making that prophesying
falsely as in Ieremiahs case which was Prophesying truly, making that Blasphemy
which was none: Yea, they are particularly taxed for erring in vision, and
stumbling in judgment, which words probably may be meant of their judgment by
Vrim, the Priests Answers in that way being called the judgment of Vrim and
judgment in diverse places of Scripture as Numb. 27. 21. Exodus 28. 15, 29, 30.
So that for all Hagiomastixs clear reason, if the Vriah the Priest made an
idolatrous Altar 2 King. 16. 11, 16. Willets Synops. Contro. of the Scriptures
2. part 6 quaest. etc.
Priests were corrupt and partial under the Law, as some good Priests in some
particular cases might be, and were, as Aaron in the golden calse, Eli in the
matter of his sons Hophni and Phinehas, and wicked ones would certainly be,
the Jews might be in danger in matters of Religion to be punished unjustly then
in those days, notwithstanding their Priests had immediate and infallible
Answers from God, as well as Christians now under the new Testament; besides,
if we consider what the way of Answering by Vrim was and that as distinguished
by Unto all I have said in page 102. and page 112. of the way of answering by
Vrim, I shall add as follows, Dr. Maines Sermon of false Prophets Page 30. 31.
The Priest wore two precious stones in his Breast Plate, called the Vrim and
Thummim, through which according as they did at times cast a bright, or di^^er
luster, God revealed his pleasure or displeasure to the People, and spoke to
them by the sparcle of a Jewel, as he did at other times by the mouth of a
Prophet. Suppose the Priest who wore the Breast Plate should have belied his
Jewels, and when the People came to enquire of him should have interpreted a
Pale for a bright Ray to the People; or suppose he should have taken out the
true and have placed two counterfeit Iewe^ in his Breast Plate, and should have
taught them not to sparcle by the certainty and holiness of their own
impartial fires, but according to the desires and Plots of the Consulters.
Ainsworth on Exodus 28. 15, 30. Breast Plate in Hebrew Choshen, it has
affinity with Chashah, that signifies silence, as implying a silent Oracle to
be seen on the Breast of the high Priest, rather then heard. The manner of
asking council is recorded by the Hebrews to be thus. When they inquired, the
Priest stood with his face before the A^k; and he that enquired stood behind
him with his face to the back of the Priest; and the Inquirer said, shall I go
up? or shall I not; And forthwith the Holy Ghost came upon the Priest, and he
beheld the Breast Pla^e, and saw therein by the vision of Prophecy, Go up, or
not go up in the letters that showed themselves upon the Breast Plate before
his face.
Rabbis and other Divines from some other ways of Gods Answers, not by a loud
voice that all who came to enquire might hear the Answer as well as the
Priest, but in a silent way and manner, revealed only to the Priest either by
inspiration, or by looking into his Breast Plate upon the darkness or
brightness of his Jewels by which he knew, or by some letters in the
Breast Plate in which he read the will of God, and so by the Priest
communicated to the Judges, and standers by, but if the Priests would pretend
other Answers from God then he gave, how should the Jews disprove them, and
what more certainty had those who in difficult doubtful cases came to the
high Priest to enquire by Vrim (seeing they received the Answers not from God
immediately but from the high Priest, and the Priest might possibly deceive
them in cases falling out about their own children or near blood showing
partiality and affection) then may be had by us now in these times; nay going
according to Master Goodwins Principles, that the sentence of the high Priest
was by Vrim and not by the Law, the judgment of Vrim from the Priest was the
supreme and last Judge, in case the Priests would be false, as in some
particular cases they might, the Jews were in a more uncertain and worse
condition, then if to be judged by the Law, or we in these days, who if our
Magistrates and Judges should degenerate might appeal to the Scriptures and
urge them to them whereby to convince them, but so could not the Jews
according to Hagiomastixs Doctrine, the Priest by Vrim being appealed to in
cases where they suppose the Law could not help; and lastly, if we consider
how Prophets under the old Testament, who were as immediately and infallibly
inspired, as the high Priest by Vrim, yet in all their Answers and Dictates
were not without all possibility of mistake, as is evident by Nathans Answer
to David 2 Samuel 7. 4, 5. etc, nor without all danger of deceiving those they
spoke to, as is to be seen in that example of the old Prophet in Bethel 1 Kings
13. 11, 17, 18, 21. and diverse other places of Scripture speaking of Prophets,
we may easily conceive how Magistrates and Judges then might be liable to
error as well as now, especially if they took all the Priests and Prophets
said without comparing and examining those things by the Law: So that by all
this and a great deal more that might be spoken to this effect, as the
Magistrates and Priests combining together, etc. the Jews to whom the Law was
given for putting false Prophets, Blasphemers, to death for all the
opportunity of immediate consultation with the mouth of God himself by Vrim,
and by Prophets might in many cases have been deceived, mistaken, and in as
great uncertaintie every way as Hagiomastix supposes the Church to be in under
the new Testament. Thirdly, supposing and granting there had been such a
certainty and infallibility in the matters of Religion under the old Law as
is contended for by Hagiomastix, and that free of all the exceptions now spoken
of, yet I affirm there is an infallibility and certainty under the new also
in the Doctrines of faith and worship, and Christian Magistrates may infallibly
and certainly know such and such Doctrines to be false, and such true, such
Practices and speeches to be Idolatrous, blasphemous as well as the Jewish
Magistrates did, and supposing that true which Hagiomastix says, that the
Jewish Magistrates had a certainty of knowledge in all difficult cases of
Relgion by the judgment of Vrim which Christian Magistrates have not, yet in
another way and by other means they may have a certainty and infallibility
that these and these Doctrines are of God, and other Doctrines are not of God:
when there are three or four ways to come to the certain knowledge of a
thing, a man may be sure and certain in one or two, though he have not all the
ways, A Judge who has three or four honest witnesses and many circumstances,
with the parties own confession may be certain though he might not see the
fact committed, nor have all ways of knowledge that possible may be, and so
may Magistrates now in this case of Religion though they should want some one
way the Magistrates under the new Testament had; And for the certainty and
infallibility in matters of Religion under the new Testament, it may apeeare
thus, 1. Hagiomastix must confess upon his own Principles, that during the
Apostles times (which was under the new Testament) in all difficult cases that
happened about matters of Religion, Christian Magistrates might have had the
same opportunities of immediate and infallible Answers as under the old,
Apostles, Prophets then having as infallible immediate Revelations from God as
the high Priests, and therefore in case there had been Christian Magistrates in
the Apostles days they might by this reason have exercised coercive power on
Apostates, Heretics, and Blasphemers, as well as the Jewish Magistrates, by
which it is apparent those Laws about false Prophets and Blasphemers were not
only old Testament Laws proper for Moses Paedagogie, but new Testament Laws,
and that for the prime flourishing state of the new Testament, the Apostles
times. Secondly, the Independents and Sectaries in many of their Books, Sermon^
and Discourses tell us of a time at hand wherein there will be a new and
marveilous light, when we shall clearly and certainly know the truth of these
things now so much doubted of and controverted, of the nature of a visible
Church, of the Government of the Church, and such like. Now then upon Master
Goodwins clear reason, the old Testament Law for the putting of false
Prophets, etc to death, should be in force under the new Testament as well as
under the old, because then in all difficult cases in worship, Doctrine, etc,
the Christians that live in those times may infallibly and certainly know the
mind and pleasure of God in them. Master Goodwin in his Postscript or Appendix
to H^giomastix (the scope of which Discourse is to make inval'd that Zach. 13.
3. from being any ground for Civil coercive Power against false Prophets)
among other evasions interprets the A Postscript or Appendix to a Treat.
entitled Hagiomastix page 21. 22, 24, 25.
place to relate to those times of refreshing to the Jewish Church and Nation,
the time when God intends to build up the Jews again into a Church of far more
inward grace and holiness; into a Nation of far more outward beauty strength and
glory, then ever was their portion since they first became a Church or Nation
unto this day, either in the one kind or in the other. Now of that particular
time and day of the new Testament it is especially Prophesied, that outward
coercive Power shall be exercised upon false Prophets, And it shall come to
pass that when any shall yet Prophesit, then his Father and his Mother that
begat him shall say unto him, Thou shall not live: for thou speak lies in
the name of the Lord, and his Father and his Mother that begat him, shall
thrust him through when he Prophecieth. As for Hagiomast. figurative sense put
upon these words against the literal and proper, and other his glosses to
corrupt the text, I shall speak to them in the 19. Thesis, where I shall prove
that Zach. 13. 3. to be a good proof of the Magistrates coercive Power under
the Gospel. Thirdly, for that time and those days under the new Testament,
between the Primitive Apostolical Churches, and the calling of the Jews, into
which we fall and among which our times are to be numbered, there is an
infallibility and certainty to be had in Doctrines of faith and Christian
Religion, and the best Oracles Magistrates have to direct them in matters of
Religion now, are not fallible and every way obnoxious unto error and mistake.
The Scriptures are an infallible and certain rule, the voice and word of God
himself, God speaking by them as by Vrim and Thummim: Learned Si de judici^
divino loquantur, affirmamus extare in Ecclesia firmum and perpetuum judicium
de omnibus fidei dogmatibus nimirum judicium Dei loquentis in Scripturis; non
enim argumentis refellendus, sed interal (...) reputandu^ est, qui neg^t in
Scripturis de rebus fidei esse ab ipso (...) sententiam, eamque intelligibilem,
firmam and i^fallibilam page 104.
Bishop Davenant in his Disputation De judice ac norma fidei and Cultus
Christiani, in answering that objection of the Papists, if general Councels
could err, their should be no firm Judgment in the Church to compose
Controversies, answers, If the Papists speak of a humane judgment we
acknowledge non^ so firm and infallible to which all men may safely and
securely commit their faith without trial. But if they speak of a divine
judgment, we affirm there is a firm and perpetual judgment in the Church
of all the Doctrines of faith, namely the judgment of God speaking in the
Scriptures: for he is not to be confuted with arguments, but to be reckoned
among Atheists who denies in the Scriptures in the things of faith that there
is a sentence pronounced by God himself, and that intelligible, firm and
infallible. Were those Answers by Divine inspiration and immediate Revelation?
So are the Scriptures of divine inspiration and immediate revelation also 2 Timothy 3. 16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2 Pet. 1. 20, 21. No
Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private Interpretation, for the Prophecy
came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost, were those Answers sure and certain the Oracles of
God among them? so are the Scriptures sure and certain, Psalm. 19. 7. The
Testimony of the Lord is sure, Luke 1. 3. 4. that Gospel was written that
Theophilus might know the certainty of those things wherein he had been
instructed, Colos. 2. 2. there is a full assurance of understanding to know the
mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, the Scriptures are called the
Oracles of God Acts 7. 38. Romans 3. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 11, as well as the judgment by
Vrim, to show they are infallible and certain, Master Goodwin in his
Anapologesiates page 103. says of some Doctrines that he holds, For my part I
have the grounds of God, I mean the Scripture: I would fain know of Hagiomastix
what made the Answer by Vrim to be infallible, and to be believed and rested in
by those who came to enquire, but that God who was true and infallible said so,
and revealed it, and is there not the same in the Doctrines contained in the
Scriptures? has not God who is truth, and infallible revealed and declared
them in Scriptures and thereupon propounded them to be believed: The Doctrines
of faith must be laid down certainly and infallibly in Scriptures, both from
the Gerson in compend. Theolo. Fidei nec falsum, nec dubium subesse potest.
Davenant. de judice ac norma fidei page 6. Omnia fidei dogmata ex part
materiae credendae debent habere certam, infallibilem and indubitabilem
veritatem.
nature of faith which in respect of the matter to be believed must have
certain, infallible, and undoubted truth, and not that which is false or
doubtful, and from the Principium and norma fidei est veritas and revelatio
divina, Voet. Select. Disput. de Petribus. Davenant. de Judice ac norma fidei,
page 7. toll authoritatem Dei revelantis, cuicunque dogmati, poterit fortasse
opinioni sive scientiae subesse, fidei autem Christianae non poterit. Baron.
Apol. pro Disput. de formali objecto fidei Tractat. 3. de Revel. divina c 3.
and 4.
formal reason and ground of believing which is the Authority of God who is
true and infallible revealing his mind, and not the Testimony of the Church;
as also from the end and use of the Scriptures to be the Canon and Rule of
faith: Now the Canon of a thing, especially the supreme and chief by which all
other are to be tried and judged of, had need be certain and known, and not
doubtful, and unknown. Learned Rivet and other Protestant Divines writing of
that question against the Papists, of the Scriptures being the Canon and Rule
of faith, speak thus, the Canon and Rule of faith must be certain and known.
The Cloppen. Disputat. de Cano. Th^olog. Thesis pri. Certitudinem and
infallibilitatem Canoni^ flagitat ipsa metaphora qua nomen translatum est a
Mensura non privata quavis sed publica and authentica illa ad quam lege and
Edicto Magistratus commensuratae esse debent. Rivet. Catholi Orthodox. Tract.
Prim. Quaest. 17. Bellar. de Verbo Dei l. x. c. 2. Regula catholicae fidei
certa notaque esse debet: nam si nota non sit regula nobis non erit: si certa
non sit nec regula quidem erit. Daven. De Jud. ac nor. fidei c. 11. Regula
fidei firma ac constans esse debet.
best Protestant Divines writing against the Papists of the Canon of the
Srcipture show that is one principal requisite to make a Canon and Rule that
it should be certain and infallible; the Metaphor it self from whence the
name is borrowed viz. not from any private measure, but the public and allowed
according to which by the Law all other are to be measured, demonstrates the
certainty and infallibility of a Canon and Rule: that which in it self is
uncertain and variable cannot be the Canon or rule of any Doctrine much less
of faith: Yea * Bellarmine himself disputing for the Scriptures against
Enthusiasts proves the Rule of the Catholic faith must be certain and known,
for if it be not known it cannot be a rule, and if it be not certain neither
shall it be a rule. Whoever is but versed in the writings of Protestant Divines
upon that head of the Scriptures against Papists on the one hand, and
Anabaptists on the other, or who so will consult them as Whitak. Contro. 1. de
Scripturae Authoritate, Interpretatione Perfectione.
Whitaker, Chamier. Panstrat. Cathol. De Cano. 6 and Summa Regul. Fidei.
Chamier, Rivet. Cathol. Orthod. Tract. Prim. De Scripiurae Perspicu. de judice
Controvers. de Regul Infallib. controvers de Canone Scripturae.
Rivet, Ames. Bellar. encrvat. De confessione Bellar. circa Scripturam sacram
De Scripturae perspicuitate sufficientia de Judice controversiarum
Amesius, Davenant. De Judice ac norma Fidei and Cultus Christiani.
Bishop Davenant, Whites way to the Church from page 31. to 63.
Whites way to the true Church, Gerard. Tom. 1. de Scriptura.
Gerardus, Baron. Apodix. Cathol. Tract. prim. Caput. 1, 2. Tract. 7. cap. 3.
Robertus Baronius, Macc. loc. commun. de Script. Author. Perspicuit. Interpret.
Maccovius, Will. Synops. The first general controv. concerning the Scriptures.
Willets Synopsis, Spanhem. These. de Script. contra Anabaptist.
Spanhemius, Cloppenburg. Disput. de can. Theolog. Cloppen. Gangraen. Anabapt.
de Scriptura sacra, and Verbo Deo interuo.
Cloppenburgius, shall find the infallibility and certainty of the Scriptures
and of the Doctrines of faith contained in them under the new Testament
abundantly cleared and made good, and the cavils about the interpretations of
Scripture, the need of a visible infallible Judge, of every man's private Spirit
being Judge, etc fully answered, and therefore I shall not enlarge further on
it; only I shall briefly add, that God in these times of the new Testament
has left this threefold way, and means of infallible certainty in Doctrines of
Faith and Worship. First, the Scriptures, and more especially since the Canon
has been sealed and completed, contains and holds forth all things necessary
to salvation, and out of them they may be certainly and infallibly known: the
word of God written is an inflexible golden rule (not leaden nor be bent) for
all matters of faith and manners, and there is such a certainty of the
Doctrines of faith laid down in the Scriptures, that 1. all poins of faith
necessary to salvation are plainly therein set forth, so that all men who have
spiritual ears and eyes may understand their meaning, which position besides
that it is held generally by our most learned Whitak. Contro. prim. De Scripturae
perspicuit. quaest. 4. Omniae quae sunt ad salutem necessaria apertis verbis in
Scripturis proponi. Daven. De Judice ac norma page 9. In omni controversia de
doctrina fidei, aut praeceptis morum ad salutis necessariis, spiritum sanctum
tam perspicue judicasse per scripturas, ut omnes intelligant ejus sententiam,
quibus aures and oculi spirituales non desunt. Verbi causa, de vera Christi
incarnatione sententiam de finitivameamque planam and evidentem tulit spiritus
sanctus verbum caro factum John 1. 14. Willets first general controversy,
quaest. 5. Whites way to the true Church, page 31. The Jesuit can name no one
necessary Article of our Faith, but the Word teaches it as plain as himself
can: as that there is one God, three persons, a general refurrection and
judgment, that Jesus is the Savior of mankind, etc. Rivet. Cathol. Orthod.
Tract. Prim. quaest. 6. Cloppenburg. Disput de Scriptura, Macco. Disput. 7. de
Perspicuitate Scripturae, Ames. Bellar. Enervat. Tom. 1. De verbo Dei, cap. 4.
de Scripturae perspicuitate, omnia illa quae sunt intellectu necessaria ad
salutem, apertissime in Scripturis proponi.
Divines against the Papists, may be demonstrated by these places of Scripture
and reasons, as Psalm. 19. 7. 8. enlightening the eyes, making wise the semple,
Psalm. 119, 105. 2 Pet. 1. 20. compared to a candle, and a light to our feet and
paths, to a light shining in a dark place, Deuteronomy. 30. 11. the commandment is
not hidden, all which show the clearenes and plainness of the Scriptures: the
Scripture in evident places calls us to search it and seek to it as John. 5.
39. Esaias 8. 20, etc, which had been to no purpose if they could not be
understood: again, the end of the Scripture is for our learning Romans 15. 4.
but now obscurity and things not to be understood ex diametro oppose learning:
lastly, I might produce a multitude of pregnant quotations out of the Fathers,
Justin Martyr, Chrysostom, Austin, Clemens Alexandrinus, Isidorus Pelusiota,
Gregorius, etc speaking of Gods fitting the Scriptures even to the capacity of
Babes and Sucklins, of the Scriptures being a River wherein the Lamb may walk
and the Elephant may swim, of being a common light that shines to all men, of
being easy to be understood by the Plowman, the Artificer, the widow woman,
and him that is most unlearned, but I remember I am handling the question of
Toleration, and not that of the Perspicuitie of the Scriptures, and do
therefore conclude, affirming things necessary to salvation, to be so clearly
laid down in the Scriptures, that no man who can understand the words need
doubt of the sense. 2. There is not only a certainty and assurance to be had
from the Scriptures of things more plainly laid down therein, the matters of
faith absolutely necessary to salvation, but from the Scriptures, by comparing
Scripture with Scripture, considering of circumstances, by just consequences,
and such like, many hard doubtful points in Religion which to one man alone,
or to weak unlearned men are very uucertaine and doubtful, yet by the help of
many learned men in Synods and Councels going Gods way may from the Scriptures
be made clear and certain: That place of Scripture Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11,
12. shows us that hard matters and matters of Controversy, too hard for a few
Priests the lower Courts, may by the help^ of the higher Courts be so certainly
and clearly resolved from the sentence of the Law, the written word in that
time, that they who will not hearken in that case deserve to die; and so in the
new Testament some things in Paul's Epistles hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned and unstable wrest to their own destruction, learned men
well settled in the faith may understand and believe certainly, and not be led
away with their error to fall from their steadfastness as that place in 2 Pet.
3. 16, 17. implies. That Controversy in Acts 15. about keeping the Law of
Moses and circumcision was hard and difficult considering that time and state
of the Church, as appears by many passages in that chapter; and yet from the
Scriptures by the means of a Synod after much disputation and debate the truth
was certainly resolved on, and so received by the Churches, who when they heard
it rejoiced in it Asts 15. 21.

Secondly, The Spirit of God in and by the Scriptures does infallibly and
certainly assure and persuade the heart of the truth of the Doctrines of faith;
it is a good saying of Spiritus sanctus non est Scepticus, nec dubia aut
opiniones in cordibus nostris scripsit, sed assertiones ipsa vita and omni
experientia certiores ac firmiores. Lutherus.
Luther The holy Spirit is no Sceptick, neither does it write doubts or
opinions in our hearts, but assertions more certain and firm then life it
self and all experience. The illumination, inward Teaching, and Persuasion of
the Spirit certainly assures us of the truth of the Doctrines of faith, John
16. 13. 1 Cor. 2. 10, 11. 1 Ioh. 2. 20, 27. 1 John 5. 6. The Spirit of truth
guides into all truth, It is the Spirit that bears witness because the
Spirit is truth, which Spirit as it seals and confirms in our consciences the
truth of all the Doctrines of faith and salvation, so also it certainly
persuades us those Books to be Canonical, from whence all those Doctrines of
faith are drawn: But concerning these points of the Scriptures being the
infallible inflexible Rule, and the Spirit of God speaking in and by the
Scripture being the supreme infallible Judge in Controversies of Religion, and
of the Plerophorie wrought in the minds of the faithful concerning the
Scriptures and the Doctrines of faith therein contained by the illumination and
inward persuasion of the Spirit, and that every man's private Spirit is not
thereby made the Judge of Controversies, I refer the Reader for full
satisfaction to the learned writings of Whitaker against the Papists upon that
Controversy of the Scriptures, De Scripturae Authoritate, perspicuitate, and
Interpretatione, of Rivet in his Catholicus, Orthodoxus, first Tract. Question
8. 17. and his Isagoge ad sacram Scripturam cap. 19. 20, 21. of Davenant, De
Judice ac norma Fidei, cap. 13. 30, 32, 33. and Cameron de ecclesiae constantia
in retinenda veritate, 291. 292. 3. Besides the certainty and Infallibility
by the Scriptures and the Spirit of God, there is a certainty in points of
Religion, even points controverted, for Christian Magistrates to attain unto,
by means of the Ministry of the word in the preaching of Pastors, and the
Advice and resolutions of Synods and Councels; for next after the absolute
supreme judgment of the Scriptures and the Spirit in questions of faith, God
has appointed a public Davenant De Judice ac norma fidei cap. 3. cap. 14.
Ministerial judgment of Pastors and Synods who have a delegated power from
the supreme Judge, that what the Law has defined in general, they should
according to the rule of the Law apply to particular cases, Controversies and
Persons: Now however, these Ministerial Judges are subject to error and
mistake, Synods and Councels may err, as the most earned Protestants hold
against the Papists, yet for all that they may certainly and infallibly judge
in matters of faith, yea and have: A man may certainly know some things, and
yet not be infallible in all things: A Physician is not infallible in judging
of the nature of all drugs, herbs, etc yet he may certainly know the nature of
some drugs, and that such a thing is rank poison, of which the Reader may find
more in the page 4. 5.
Vindication of the Ordinance against Heresy, Blasphemy etc, to which
Hagiomastix answers never a word in his pretended Answer: It Is one thing to be
subject to error, posse errare, and another thing actually to err, de facto
errare: it follows not because Ministers and Synods may err, that therefore
in all particular Articles of faith propounded by them they do err: It Is a
known Axiom in the Schools, Aposse ad esse non valet consequentia. And
therefore Ministers and Synods in their Interpretations and Decisions going
according to the word of God, which is infallible, judge infallibly, and may be
said to be infallible in their determinations in those points: He that is
directed by an infallible truth in his determinations, he determines
infallibly, although he be a man of a fallible judgment. Thus many Orthodox
The general Council of Nice condemned the Opinion of Arrius, the general
Council of Constantinople condemned the Heresy of Macedonius, the general
Council of Chalcedon the Heresy of Eutyches; a Synod at Ancyra, and others in
Asia condemned the Heretic Montanus.
Councels and Synods in great Controversies and maine points of faith have
determined the truth certainly and infallibly, and so propounded them to the
Churches to be certainly believed, not that they thought their judgment to be
infallible, but that they knew the word of God according to which they judged
to be infallible. Doctor Cap. 18. Aliud est posse errare, aliud de facto
errare. Possunt errare privati quilibet Pastores, particularia etiam quaelibet
concilia: non tamen idcirco intolerabilem errorem admittunt, qu^^ies popul^
sibi subdito aliquid ex verb^ divino deductum tanquam articulum fidei credendam
proponunt.
Davenant in his learned Tractate de judice ac norma Fidei, in answering the
Arguments of the Papists that General Councels cannot err, and among others
this, that if all General Councels can err, then it certainly follows that
all Councels have admitted intolerable error, answers, It Is one thing posse
errare, another thing de facto errare; every particular Pastor mayerre, as also
every particular Council, yet therefore they do not admit intolerable error
as often as they propound to the People that which is drawn from the word of
God, where he Qui autem ab infallibili veritate dirigitur in judicando, is
judicat infallibiliter, illi etiam constat illud esse verum quod ex verb^ did
cit, utcunque non gaudeat judicio ^^fallibili.
further shows how a man may be said to judge infallibly, that yet is
fallible: and for conclusion of this I desire the Reader to observe two things:
First that Synods and Councels however in themselves fallible and subject to
err, yet being Lawful quoad id quod requiritur intrinsecus, and going
according to the Scripture, their results and determinations are from the holy
Ghost, and so infallibly and certainly true, as that of Acts 15. 28.
demonstrates, It seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, which words a Synod
having like clear evidence of Scripture, may without presumption use as well
as that Council at Jerusalem did; for proof of which kind of infallibility,
besides what I have already said p. 140, 141, of this Book, I shall add the
judgment of learned Posse alia legitima Conci^^ semiliter asser^re decreta sua
esse d^^rata Spiritus sancti, si huic Concilio similia fuerint, and si eandem
re^ulam servaverint, quam in hoc Concilio servarunt and secuti sunt Apostoli.
Si enim nihil nisi ex Scriptur is statuerint and definierint quod in hoc
Concilio factum est, and si omnes Quaestiones ad Scripturas examinaverint, and
Scripturae vocom la omnibus fuis decretis secuti fuerint, tum possunt asserere,
Spiritum sanctum sit decrevisse. Contro. 3 Quaest. 6.
Whittaker upon the words: Other Lawful Councels may in like manner lassert
their Decrees to be the Decrees of the holy Ghost, if they shall be like to
this Council, and shall keep the same rule, which in this Council the Apostles
did keep and follow: For if they shall decree and determine nothing but from
Scripture (which was done in this Council) and if they shall examine all
Questions by the Scriptures, and shall follow the voice of the Scriptures in
all their Decrees, then they may assert that the holy Ghost so decreed; of
learned Nos vero facile concedimus Concilia legitima quoad id quod requiritur
intrinsecus, id est concilia vere fine fuco and fallacia congregata in nomine
Christi, non posse errare in iis quae sunt alicujus momenti. Nam nos quidem
fatemur ultro multa concilia non errasse imo fatemur concilia legitima (quomodo
illud a nobis supra explicatum est) hoc est vere congregata in Deinomine non
errarei^ rebus necessarii^. Came Praelect. De Eccles. p. 289 293
Cameron in his Tractate De Infallibilitate Ecclesiae, We do easily grant
Lawful Councels, Lawful, in respect of what is inwardly required in them,
that is Councels truly gathered together without all fallacy and deceit in
the name of Christ cannot err in those things which are of any great moment:
For we truly willingly confess many Councels not to have erred, yea we
confess Lawful Churches (as in the sense above is explained by us) that are
truly gathered in the name of Christ, not to err in necessary things; and of
Baron. Apodix. Cathol. Tractat. 5. De Authoritat. Eccles. cap. 17. Non (...)
simpliciter and absolute id quod Parisienses de Conciliorum infallibilitate
docent. Pie enim. and probabiliter credi potest Concilia vera generalia and
legitima, hoc est legitime convocata and procedentia, ita gubernari and dirigi
a Spiritu S. ut non errent in dogmatibus fundamentalib^^. Dico hoc credi posse,
quia certo constat talia concilia nunquam hactenus errasse in dogmatibus
fundamentalibus. Vide ibi plura.
Baron, in that acute and learned Reply of his to Turnebull the Jesuit, we
do not simply and absolutely condemn that which the Doctors of Paris do
teach of the infallibility of Councels. For it may be piously and probably
believed that Councels truly general and Lawful, that is Lawfully gathered,
and proceeding, to be so governed and directed by the holy Spirit, that they
may not err in fundament all points. I say this may be believed, because it is
certain such Councels have never hitherto erred in Doctrines fundamental.
Secondly, although the Authority and Power of Synods and Councels is not of it
self infallible, neither appointed of God that it should be the supreme and
principal Rule of our Faith; and therefore cannot by it self and of its own
Authority bind the faithful to believe whatever is determined in a Synod or
Council, yet there is in them the supreme Ecclesiastical Power of judging and
determining Controversies of Faith; and that appointed by God to avoid
confusion and rents in the Church: Hence the Authority of Lawful Councels
has a special force and singular efficacy before many other motives of
faith, to beget a peswasion in the minds of men of the truth of the Doctrine,
agreed on in the Council. And because in our times the best Synods and
Councels are rejected and flighted, and every private person takes upon them a
boundless Liberty of contradicting all Synodicall Decrees, I shall therefore
lay down briefly out of diverse learned Authors, what preeminencie there is in
Synods and Co^ncels toward the compounding of Controversies and doubts in
Religion, above what is in private Christians or single particular Ministers. 1
There is an Authorite given them by God, they are an Ordinance of Jesus Christ
to judge of, and determine Controversies of faith, which no man of a sound mind
affirms of private Christians or particular Ministers. Secondly, they have a
power of subjecting those to excommunication and other Ecclesiastical
censures, who openly contradict their Decrees. Thirdly, they have a more
peculiar assistance of the Spirit, and so greater then that which particular
Ministers judgeing apart have. Fourthly, They have surer means of finding out
the truth, viz. The Prayers, Fastings, Disputations, etc. of the chiefest
Pastors of the whole Church: For as Praelect. de Ecclesia page 292, 293. Deinde
in concilio si adsint viri pii and docti, aperiunt quae fuerunt clausa mutua^
(...). id quod non aeque facile possit prae stari a singulia seorsim. Id
expectamus ut. i^ Concilo, in Conventu doctorum and piorum virorum proferantur
argumenta veritatis quae antea ignota fuere. Praelect* de Eccles. Tract. de
Infa^^^b. Eccl. Quoties aliquid decretum est a caetu quodam hominum, qui in
aliqua authoritateconstituti sunt in Ecclesia, facit hoc ut ne temere, and non
adhibita accuratat and gravi observatione in rejiciatur.
Cameron speaks, In a Council, if there be present piou^ and learned men, they
open things, which before were shut, by their mutual disquisition, which cannot
be so easily done of particular men apart. Fifthly, A better ground of knowing
what is the judgment of the whole Church, concerning any Question in
Controversy, and what the Churches have observed in such cases. Sixthly, A
more easy way of reducing the Decrees and Determinations of the Church to
practice. Seventhly, greater Reverence, Respect and Obedience is owing to the
Determinations and Decrees of Synods and Councels, then of particular Persons
or Churches: the Authority of Synods in their place and degree is so to be
looked upon, that particular Ministers or private Christians should not lightly
or easily for every probable Reason, or conjecture reject their determinations:
Hence Cameron speaking of Councels well observes, So often as any thing is
decreed by an Assembly of men, who are put into Anthoritie in the Church, that
should be a ground that such a thing should not rashly nor without a great
deal of accurate and serious observation be rejected. For first of all, we owe
Reverence to a Synod, even then, when we judge it decrees false things. A Pius
Ecclesiae filius non perperam ei insilit, sed ab ea reverentiali quodam pudore
percussus abscedit. Walensis Tom. 5. lib. 2. cap. 27.
pious son of the Church does not vainly insult over her, but with a kind of
Reverentiall shamefastness departs from her. Secondly, we owe outward
obedience unless we do evidently perceive the Synod to prescribe and
determine false and wicked things; for it is not Lawful upon light and probable
Reasons to oppose the judgment of the Pastors of the Church; the certain
manifest Authority of God commands us to obey the decrees of the Church; and
when we have only uncertain conjectures and probable Reasons, then that
common rule is to be followed, Tene certum relinque incertum.
Hold that which is certain, leave the uncertain. And therefore they who
doubt of the truth of the Decrees of a Synod, or upon light and probable
Reasons think their Opinion false, but do not cert^inly know it to be such,
are bound by the Synodicall decrees to perform such an obedience as is
agreeable to order, comeliness and peace, which obedience is nothing else but
the observance of Christian humility and modesty, by which the faithful in
such cases abstain both from a public open profession of their Opinion, and a
condemning and confuting of the Synods Opinion, and in the mean time by
diligent searching of the Scripture do enquire out the truth and pray to God to
manifest his truth to men, and to discover the errors of the Synod, that so
they being known, contrary Doctrine may be established in another Council: Of
which seven particulars, and diverse others of Synods, whoever would see more,
let them read Baron against Turnebull, Tract. 5. De Authorit. Ecclesiae cap.
17. Camerons Praelect. De Eccles. Infallibilitate 292. 293. Apollon. Jus
Magist. circ. sacra first part cap. 4. 247. 248, 249. Fourthly, there is a
greater degree of infallibility and certainty in matters of faith and
religion to be attained by means of the Scriptures, then was by the high
Priests answers by Vrim, or then is to be had by miracles, by one arising from
the dead and coming to us, then by an Apostle or an Angel from heaven, yea or
from a voice coming from heaven, of each of which I will speak something
briefly. 1. There was more certainty even under the old Testament in the word
written in the Law, then in the high Priests Answer, which appears thus,
because the Law was made by God himself the chief rule and measure of the
high Priests Answer, and in difficult cases wherein the Jews were commanded to
come to the high Priest for resolution, the last reference is made to the Law:
That very place Deuteronomy. 17. 9. 10, 11, 12. brought by Hagiomastix page 130. to
prove the sentence there spoken of, only such a sentence which the Priest did
upon enquiry by Vrim and Thummim receive immediately, or however infallibly
from the mouth of God himself, and by the Jesuits Bellarmine, Lorinus,
Bailius, etc brought to prove the Pope the supreme infallible Judge of
Controversies, and not the Scriptures, shows clearly whatever answers the high
Priest gave in matters of judgment, they are limited expressly to the word of
God, and that is made the supreme Judge: The Jews were not simply to rest in
the judgment of the high Priests whatever they pronounced, but as it was
according to the Law: There is an express limitation in the text, in verses
10. 11. thou shall do according to the sentence of the Law which they shall
teach thee; In the Hebrew text it is twice written juxta os legis, according to
the mouth of the Law, and the ordinary Gloss upon that place, notes, that it is
not said unto them thou shall obey, unless they teach according to the Law;
these words according to the sentence of the Law do signify a condition, not
a promise, as if God did promise the Priests they should never depart from the
Law, which our Willets Synops. First General Contro. of the Script. Quest. 6.
2. part of the question. Rivet. Cathol. Orthod. Tract. 1. quaest. 8.
Divines observe against Bellarmine and other Papists; yea Master Goodwin
himself Sect. 107. of his Hagiomastix speaking of this place to be meant only
of such a sentence which the Priest did upon enquiry by Vrim receive
immediately or however infallibly, from the mouth of God himself, grants it
and puts in the same Section this sentence of the high Priest under the Law,
and says the command in that Scripture is with that Caution and limitation of
going according to the sentence of the Law; for proof of which I shall quote
his own words verbatim, Thirdly, nor does God in this passage of Scripture
(speaking of Deuteronomy. 17. 12.) expressly command without caution and limitation
that even in this Controversy it self, he that would not stand to the
sentence of the Judge, or high Priest, should be put to death; but only then,
when the Priests, the Levites, and the Judge, should give sentence or inform
them according to the sentence of the Law. And for the Readers further
Satisfaction of the Scope and meaning of Deuteronomy. 17. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. to free it
from Master Goodwins sense of only such a sentence which the Priest did upon
enquiry by Vrim receive immediately, by which he would evade all punishment
from the Magistrate in matters of Religion (though I have said much upon the
place already) I refer him to the first Tractate, eight Question page 127. 128,
129. of Rivets Catholious Orthodoxus, 2. Then by miracles, it is a saying of Hom.
3. de Laz Maldonate in Mat. 7. 22, 23.
Chrysostom, God has left us the Scriptures, more firm then any miracle:
where the word of God is for such a thing, that thing is most true and certain,
the word of God stands and ahideth for ever; It is easier for heaven and
earth to pass, then one title of the Law to fail: it is impossible for God to
lie: miracles accompanying Doctrines are not always infallible proofs of the
truth of them; for false Prophets, teaching false Doctrines may do miracles,
and come with signs and wonders: Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. shows that false Prophets
who say, let us go after other Gods, may give signs and wonders, and the sign
or wonder may come to pass, Matthew. 7. 22, 23. Christ tells us that many who
prophesied in his Name, plead they have cast out Devils, and done many
wonderful works; were workers of iniquity, upon which place * Maldonate
(though a Jesuit) confesses those false Prophets of which Christ speaks
wrought true miracles, truly Prophesied, truly Prophesied, truly cast out
Devils; neither does Christ answer them that they lied, but that he knew them
not although they had done such miracles; and thereupon he grants there can be
no necessary argument taken from true miracles to prove the truth of Doctrine.
So Matthew. 24. 24. 2 These. 2. 9. Revel. 13. 13, 14. fully set forth how false
Prophets and Antichrist shall do great miracles, by means of which they shall
deceive many. In Augustines time the Donatists would allege miracles done by
them to prove the truth of their Church and Doctrine, and so do the Papists
now against the Protestants, making the glory of miracles a note of their
Church; but Augustine against the Donatists of his time, and learned
Protestants against the Papists upon that Question of the notes of the Church,
do prove the word of God a surer note and Argument of the true Church and
Faith, then miracles, as whoever consults the writings of * August. de Vnitat.
Eccles. cap. 16. Tract. 3. in John Evang. say not these things are so, because
such a one did such and such miracles, but let the^ prove their Church by the
Canonical books of the Scripture, and by nothing else these are the
demonstration of our cause, these are our foundation, these are our grounds
upon which we build
Augustine, Whitak. Contro. 2. quaest. 5. c. 12.
Whitaker, Camer. praelect. de Eccl. p. 255, 256.
Cameron, Rivet. Cath. Orthod. Tract. 2. quaest. 7. p. 372, 373.
Rivet, Ames. Bellar. enervat. De notis Ecclesiae.
Ames, Willets Synops. 2. Gener. Controv. concerning the Church. quaest (...).
Of the power of working miracles.
Willet, Whites way to the (...) Church page 62, 63.
Whites way to the Church, and especially of learned G^rad de Eccles. Sect. 11.
from p. 448 to 467.
Gerard shall find. 3. The proof of Doctrine by the Scripture, is more
infallible then the testimony of one coming from the dead Luke 16. 29, 30, 31.
Mases and the Prophets for persuading to believe are preferred before one
arising from the dead: They who elude and wrest the Scriptures, interpreting
them according to their own just, if one should arise from the dead, they would
not believe him in what he said against their Opinions, but would put off all
one way or other: Experience has taught that as Maldon. comment in luc. 16. v.
30.
Maldon^ie observes: Christ raised up Lazarus from the grave, who (as it is to be
thought) told the Scribes and Priests many things agreeable to those which
Christ taught them, and yet they were so far from believing him that they
would have killed him, John 12. 9, 10, So the Scribes and Pharisees after
Christ's resurrection from the dead believed him never a whit more then before.
4. Then an Apostle, for the Apostles notwithstanding the prerogative of
infallibility, their certain and infallible knowledge of the Gospel by the
immediate inspiration of the holy Ghost, being infallible in their writings to
the Churches, and in those Doctrines of faith they preached to those to whom
they were sent, were in some things at some times subject to mistakes or
errors. Peter that great Apostle of the circumcision, after the holy Ghost was
given Acts 2. erred and mistook in accounting the Gentiles at that time common
and unclean, as Acts 10. 13. 14, 15, 18, 24, compared together fully shows,
and in the Doctrine of Christian Liberty, compelling the Gentiles to live at
the Jews, and not walking uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel, for
which Paul withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed, Gal. 2. 11,
12, 13, 14. But the Scriptures err not at all are all fine gold without any
dross, cannot deceive, be perfect and glorious: the Apostles themselves in
their preachings and writings appealed to the Scriptures, made them the chief
rules of their Doctrines, Acts 3. 21. Acts 4. 25, 26. Acts 17, 2, 3. Acts 26.
22, 23. Acts 28. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. Romans 1. 2. Romans 3. 4. with many other
places to the same purpose: The (...) are commended for that when Paul the
Apostle preached to them, they searched the Scriptures whether those things
were so; John the Baptist was sent from God 1 John. 6. immediately inspired by
the holy Ghost as well as the Apostles, and yet Christ prefers the witness of
the Scriptures before the Testimony of John, John 5. 34, 36. 39. The
Testimony of the Scriptures is greater then the record of John, of which see
Willets Synops. first general Controvers. concerning the Scriptures, quest.
fourth 5. Then an Angel, Gal. 1. 8. But though we or an Angel from heaven,
etc. Paul prefers the Scriptures before Apostles, yea Angels, and anathematizes
them, if they bring any other Gospel then what the Apostles had preached, which
in many places he declares was according to the Scriptures. Chrysostom says
that the Scripture is to be preferred before the Angels in the matters of faith:
The word of God is the chief and highest rule of faith, for as learned Chamier
writes, The word of God is God speaking, therefore look what is the authority
of God speaking, the same is of the word of God, and therefore above Angels:
And by the way I desire the Reader to observe against Hagiomastix who makes
such a do of infallibility, that not whatsoever is infallible is the supreme
rule of faith, for that is a grand mistake to make every thing that is
infallible the ground of believing, or the chief rule of it; but this is the
ground of being the supreme Rule of faith, that it be summae suaeque
authoritatis of supreme authority, of it self, and not from another, which is
apparent, because Angels are infallible, the Apostles also were ex particulari
assistutia Spiritus, and yet neither of them are, nor have been the supreme
Rule of the Church. This Paul has taught us in Gal. 1. 8. how Apostles and
Angels are to be anathematized if they bring any other Gospel: But these things
are unworthy to be affirmed of the Rule of faith, and especially of the supreme
Rule, which ought not to be so resembled to any thing that by that it should be
corrected and ordered, for then it ceases to be a Rule, but rather that by the
Rule, especially the highest, all things else are to be judged: wherefore,
besides infallibility there is something else necessary to a thing that it
should become a Rule; namely (...), that is, that it be of chief, and of its
own Authority, not of a subordinate and borrowed Authority from another; but
whoever would be further satisfied in this point, let him read learned
Pa^strat. Cathel. de Canon. and summa Regul. Fid. Neque enim quicquid est
infallibile, estregula summa fidei, quiae Angeli sunt infallibiles, Apostoli
etiam fuerunt infallibiles ex particulari assistentiae Spiritus. and tamen
neutri sunt, aut fuerunt Ecclesiae summa regula: Hoc nor Paulus docuit. Gal. 1.
8. A^ haec indignae sunt quae dicantur de regula fidei and praesertim summa
regula; quae nulli rei itae comparari debet, ut ind^ coerceatur, alias desinit
esse regula: Sed potius ut inde sint omniae judicanda. Quare praeter
infallibilitatem aliud quid dam necessarium est ut fiat regula, nimirum (...),
hoc autem est ut summae sit suaeque authoritatis; non autem subalternae
aliundeque emendicate. Summo quid praeferri potest? At Chrysostomus Angelis
ipsis in negotio fidei preferandam dixit Scriptur^m: Si non summi, ergo nec
fumma regula, and tamen infallibiles, non igitur quicquid est infallibile,
summa est regula fidei.
Chamier. 6. Then Gods own voice from heaven, the Apostle Peter tells us 2 Pet.
1. 17, 18, 19. of that voice of God from heaven which came to Jesus Christ;
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, which Peter, James, Iob^,
heard when they were with Christ in the holy mount Matthew. 17. 5, 6. and yet
Peter speaking of the Scriptures and comparing them with this voice from the
excellent glory writes thus, We have also a more sure word of prophecy,
whereunto you do well that you take heed, as unto a light that shines in a
dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts, upon
which words Oecumenius in locum. Quoniam autem rebus ipsis and experientiae
cognovimus quae fuerunt a Prophetis pronunciata, firmiorem, inquit, per haec
judicamus Prophetiam ipsorum: nam resipsae consequntae sunt sermones ac
oracula. Aquinas in locum, vel dicit firmiorem quia visioni contraadicere
poterant, quae facta fuit in secreto, sed Prophetiae nullus contradicere
audebat. vid. Annot. of our Engl. Divines on the Place.
Interpreters on the Place, and other Vid. Whitak. Contro. 1. De Script,
Author. quest. 3. Illud verbum (...) ad rem spectat, significat enim Scripturam
firmissima maxima que authoritate esse praeditam.
learned men show however that voice from heaven being from God as the written
Prophecies were, was in it self as sure, yet the word (...) is taken either
for a most lure, or very sure word, a comparative for a superlative, so used in
other places of Scripture, and so setting forth to us the Scriptures being
founded on the firmest and greaest authority; or more sure, or more firm. (So
the word in the Greek properly signifies) to the Christian Jews to whom the
Epistle was written, which by long use and experience were more settled in their
hearts, and so sooner believed, then the voice from heaven, although that were
sure also. Christ in Joh. 5. from verse 31. to the 40. speaking of the many
Testimonies concerning him, as his own, Johus testimony, the Testimony of his
works, instances in the voice from heaven, witnessing to him Matthew. 3. 17. 17.
Matthew. 5. and then Christ goes to the Scriptures as the highest and chiefest,
Search the Scriptures, for in them you think you have eternal life, and they
are they which testify of me: we may observe the gradation of the witnesses,
Christ's works greater then the Testimony of John, the Fathers witnessing from
heaven above that of his works, and the Scriptures testifying of him the last
and greatest of all; and for a conclusion of this, Gods speaking to his Church
under the new Testament, especially since the Canon was sealed and confirmed,
(as Divines speak) that is by his Son making known the whole Evangelical
Doctrine and Will of God concerning man's salvation, is by the holy Ghost
preferred far before the diverse manners and ways of Gods making known his will
before, as that of dreams, visions, Vrim and Thummim, voice from heaven,
Angels, etc, as is evident by Heb. 1. 1, 2, 3. compared with the second of Heb.
1. 2, 3, 4. In a word they who are so wicked to wrest and pervert manifest
plain places of Scripture, would not (if they had lived in those days,) have
rested satisfied in the Sentences of the high Priest by Vrim, in one coming
from the dead, in the Doctrine of an Apostle or Angel, or in a voice from
heaven, but would have made cavils, and sound pretenses to have eluded and
evaded all, or any of those as well as the Scriptures, in all which I might
give particular instances, but for present I shall instance only in the voice
from heaven, of which voice from heaven John 12. 28, 29, 30. though it was so
plain and distinct, testifying Christ to be sent of God and the Messiah, yet
it is perverted and misinterpreted as much as the Scriptures, of which voice from
heaven how perverted, I refer the Reader to learned Rollock in 12 Joh. 28.
29, 30. Vary sentit tubra de audita voce illa alii pejus alii melius sentiunt,
utrique tamen a vero aberrant. Data fuit haec vox Coelo ut ait Dominus postea
illorum causa, ut hoc quasi mi raculo and pertento admoniti, crederent eum esse
missum a Deo and Messiam sed adeo excaecati sunt and indurati ut tamen de
Messia^ nihil cogitaverant. Vid. Calvin. and Maldon. in locum.
Rollock. Calvin, and other Interpreters on that place of Scripture, and so
much for this seventh Answer.

Eighthly, Supposing all Hagiomastix says in page. 46. 47. and 130, to be true
that that sentence of the Priest or Judge against which he that would do
presumptuously was to be put to death, was only a sentence upon enquiry by Vrim
and Thummim, and that the Jews opportunity of immediatenesse of consultation
with the mouth of God himself, was a clear reason why that old Testament Law
for putting of false Prophets, etc to death was given to them, yet it follows
not these Laws cannot be in force now, unless that can be made appearance to
have been the only reason and ground of the Magistrates punishing, for if there
were other reasons as well under the old Testament of those Laws, and that by
God formally and particularly declared and expressed (as it is evident there
were, and I have proved page 70. 76. and diverse other pages of this Treatise)
then they being in force still, the Laws bind though one particular reason, or
more proper to that time be ceased: I might instance in many moral things
commanded under the old Testament that unquestionably (I suppose in Master
Goodwins judgment) are in force under the new, of which among other reasons
given, there was some one particular reason proper to the Jews, that holds not
now, but for this I refer the Reader to page 83. of this Book: and to put an
end to these eight Answers to the sixth evasion of Hagiomastix page 46. 47,
130, I shall only mind him of that known axiom A particulari ad universale
non valet consequentia, and therefore though that particular reason be ceased
(although I have fully shown that never was any reason of those Laws under the
old Testament for punishing of false Prophets, but a mere device, and a fancy)
it is no good consequence, all the other reasons, yea, and the commands
themselves should cease also.

Seventhly to that page 45. 46.
Hagiomastix says, that the punishments enjoined by God then under the Law to
be inflicted in his Church upon delinquents, were more bodily and afflictive to
the outward man, then the punishments enjoined under the Gospel, and
consequently were not only carnal or bodily, but typical also, and
prefignificative of those greater and more spiritual under the Gospel, cutting
off from his people then, as of casting out from his people now, cutting off
under the Gospel being no where found to be used but in a metaphorical and
allusive sense, also to what Min. Cel. Senens. Sect. Tert. page 189.
Minus Celsus Senensis writes that that corporal punishment in Deuteronomy. 13. was a
Type of eternal damnation, and therefore that Law with all the rest given for
the future signification of things by the coming of Christ ceased, I answer as
follows. First, I deny the punishments enjoined by God under the Law to be
inflicted in his Church upon delinquents to be bodily or afflictive at all to
the outward man, as by donfiscation of goods, or by death, but they were
spiritual and inflicted upon the souls by suspension, excommunication, and
such like spiritual censures, as well as now under the Gospel: It Is true, there
were bodily outward punishments in the Civil Iudicatories inflicted then on
the bodies of false Prophets, Idolaters, etc, but by the Magistrates, the Civil
Governors, and not by the Priests, the Ecclesiastical Governors in the Church
of the Jews: For under the Law the Jewish Church and Commonwealth, the Civil
Government and Ecclesiastical, the censures and punishments of Church and State
were formally distinct, as Master Gillespie has fully and excellently proved
in his Aarons rod blossoming in many places, particularly 1. Book cap. 2. 3, 4,
5, and the Church of the Jews proceeded then against false Prophets, only with
the sword of the Spirit, and spiritual weapons, and the State with the
material Sword, and bodily punishments: Which truth is fully acknowledged also
by Master Cotton (however differing from Presbyterians about a National Church)
in his Answer to Master Williams Bloody Tenet, saying, I should think mine eye
not only obscured, but the fight of it utterly put out, if I should conceave as
he does, that the National Church State of the Jews did necessarily call for
such weapons (a speaking of a Sword of Iron or Steel) to punish Heretics more
then the Congregetional State of particular Churches does call for the same now
in the days of the new Testament. For was not the National Church of the Jews
as completely furnished with spiritual Armor to defend it self, and to offend
men and Devils as the particular Churches of the new Testament be? Had they not
power to convince false Prophets as Eliah did the Prophets of Baal? Had they
not power to separate all evil doers from the fellowship of the Congregation?
what power have our particular Churches now, which their National Church
wanted? or what efficacy is there found in the exercise of our power which was
wanting to them. It is therefore a Sophistical imagination of man's Brain to
make a man's self, or the world believe that the National Church State of the
Jews required a Civil Sword, whereas the particular State of the Gospel needs
no such help. And was not the National Church of Israel as powerfully able by
the same spirit to do the same? surely it was both spoken and meant of the
National Church of the Jews, not by might nor by Power, but my Spirit says
the Lord of Hosts Zach. 4. 6. So that by what I have already said Hagiomastix
must either (I suppose) recall what he has written of carnal bodily
punishments enjoined by God then to be inflicted, in his Church upon
delinquents, or else must join with the Erastians in holding the Jewish Church
and Commonwealth, their Government and Censures all one and the same.
Secondly, The foundation upon which Hagiomastix rears this building of outward
punishments under the old Testament being typical of spiritual under the new,
(viz the Land of Canaan with the external happiness and peace there being
typical, and therefore reasons a compara^is and from the Analogy) is sandy
and unsound: for the Land of Canaan with the external happiness and long life
in it, whatsoever it was typical of, was from what God had put into the Land,
being a Land healthful, pleasant, flowing with milk and honey, abounding in
excellent precious fruits, the immediate blessings of God upon it, and not from
what came to it by the Magistrates Laws and their good Government, for further
satisfaction of which I wish Master Goodwin to resolve me this question,
whether the Land of Canaan were not typical as well in times of wars and
troubles and under bad Princes, as in days of peace, and under good Princes
and so to reason a comparatis (to use his own Phrase and adidem,) if temporal
threatenings and bodily punishments inflicted upon delinquents under the old
Testament, were typical and Praesignificative of greater under the Gospel,
they must be threatenings and bodily punishments inflicted from God upon false
Prophets, etc, not thoe executed by the Magistrates on them. Thirdly, Granting
both Hagiomastixs foundation and the building reared upon it to be good, yet
they no whit prove bodily and outward punishments to be wholly taken away under
the new Testament; for suppose the temporal happiness and the temporal
punishments had typified more spiritual happiness, and less of the earth,
more spiritual judgments, and less of outward or bodily sufferings under the
Gospel, yet it follows not, they take away all outward happiness and
blessings, and all outward bodily punishments: there may be greater or lesser
degrees of things under the old and new Testament suitable to some difference
in the manner of Administration between the old and the new, and yet not the
substance of the things taken away: These are known axioms, Gradus non tollunt
substantiam, Magis and Minus non variant speciem: It Is apparent by sense and
experience that how much soever spiritual blessings, and spiritual judgments
in the days of the Gospel abound above the times under the Law, yet they take
not away all temporal outward blessings, nor all temporal outward judgments,
but God for all that gives many outward blessings, and sends many temporal
judgments on the earth, So supposing God should inflict more spiritual
judgments on the souls of men under the new Testament, and the Church greater
spiritual censures then under the old, it no way follows the Magistrates may
inflict none at all, especially when all spiritual judgments on the soul are
slited, and with a high hand contemned. Fourthly, Whereas punishment by the
Magistrate and cutting off by death under the old Testament, in cases of
Apostasy, Blasphemy, etc, is made a Ceremony and type of excommunication
under the new Testament, cutting off of casting out, and of eternal damnation,
I may truly Answer this is gratis dictum, said, but not proved, and therefore
might deny it without giving any reason, and bid the Patrons of Toleration
prove it, but that the Civil Magistrates punishing delinquents under the old
Testament, was no Ceremony nor Type, I shall give these reasons. 1.
Ceremonies, shadows Zepper, Mosai. Leg. Explanas. lib. 1. cap. 7. ceremonialia
Typica rerum fuerunt aut praeteritarum recordationes ent futurarum
praefignificationes, Rerum praeteritarum ut anima Paschatis celebratio, manna
in arca foederis asservata, aneus Scrpens. Futurarum ut Sacrificia, etc.
Typical things under the old Law, were either of things past, or things to
come, the remembrances of things already done, or the Praesignifications of
future things, but Ceremonies and Types were not the signification of things
present and existent: Now excommunication and eternal damnation were at that
time under the old Law when those commands of punishing with death the
Apostate, faise Prophet, etc, were given and in use. That excommunication and
cutting off from the Church were in the Church of the Iewe^ in the times of the
good Kings and Magistrates punishing Idolaters, etc with the Civil sword, let
the Reader Consult Aarons Rod blossoming 1 Book 4. 5, 6, 7. chapt. That there
was Hell and eternal damnation under the old Law, as well as the new, both
before those commands in Deuteronomy. 13. 17. were given, and all along after, many
places of Scripture show, as Isaiah. 30. 33. 2 Pet. 4. Jude 5. 6, 7, that
mention Hell for the evil Angels, Sodomites, the unbeleeving Israelites that
came out of Egypt, and the wicked Kings of Israel and Judah; and therefore that
which Hagiomastix says, that cutting off from his People under the Law, it
exchanged for casting out from his people under the Gospel, is very false, for
there was casting out from the Church as well then as now, yea cutting off
spoken of in the old Testament in many places, means nothing else but casting
out of the Church by excommunication, for full proof of which I refer the
Reader to Aarens rod blossoming 1. Book cap. 5. page 55. 56, 57, 58, 59; As
also that passage is not true, that the expression of cutting off, where ever
it is found in the Gospel, is m^tephorical and allusive only, for cutting off is
used in the new Testament for cutting of by bodily death, as in Gal. 5. 12. and
else where: the proof of which I refer to the 20. Thesis where I shall handle
it fully. Secondly, The same things may be said with as much reason against
bodily outward punishments for breaches of the second Table, Adultery, Murder
Theft, as against outward punishing for Apostasy, etc, and if they hold not
good against the second Table, neither do they against the first. Thirdly, The
Civil Magistrates punishing for moral transgressions is no Ceremony nor Type,
acts of moral justice, though they may sometimes be extraordinary, yet they
never were accounted Typical or Figurative, but by such as would transform all
the Scriptures into an Allegory, and Master Bloody Tenet washed and made white
in the blood of the Lamb, p. 177. 179.
Cotton answering such a like evasion in the Bloody Tenet, says, Did ever any
Apostle or Evangelist make the judicial Laws of Moses concerning life and
death, ceremonial and Typical Time was when humane inventions in Gods worship
were accounted superstition; But now humane inventions in Doctrine may pass
for current Evangelical Divinity. And in another A Reply to Mr. Williams his
Examin^^. (...) 43.
place, To make a judicial Law a figure without some light from some Scripture,
is to make a man's self wise above that which is written. Fifthly, the making
these express commands of God concerning punishing Idolaters, false Prophets,
Blasphemers, types and figures of spiritual and eternal punishments, of
excommunication, damnation, etc is, by turning the Scriptures into an Allegory,
and forsaking their literal sense against the rules of interpretation given by
the most Orthodox Walaeus De sacr. Script. Per spy. page 145. Synops. purior.
Theol. page 62. Weems Christian Synagogue, p 225. It is a dangerous thing when
the words are properly to be taken, for to take them figuratively.
Divines as Augustine and others, a making them utterly void, and as opening a
wide door to all errors and foolish conceits, that as often as men know not
how to answer the Scriptures that cross their Opinions and lusts, and yet have
a mind to keep their Opinions, they may still fly to this, and say, This
Scripture is not to be taken literally, but mystically and Allegorically: Beza
in that judicious Tractate of his De Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis, in
Answer to Montfortius a grand Patron of Toleration in those times, who in many
places of his writings, made use of this Invention, that corporal punishment
under the old Law, as stoning, was no figure of any bodily punishment to be now
inflicted, but of eternal, to which we ought to leave Heretics, or else of
that punishment which is inflicted not by a corporal sword, but a spiritual,
the lively word of God, writes thus, Fuit enim haec elim Satanae infignis
versutia, quam tamen nemo prorsus ex veteribus, quod eorum pace dix erim, satis
animadvertit, ut, quumnon posset Scripturam ex Ecclesia prorsus ^^^cere, vanis
tamen allegoriis totam redderet inutilem and mythologicam, adeo ut ne unus
quidem sit in Scripturia apex qui non sit istis allegor^^ contaminatus: quod
etiamnum iter body Libertin: and Anabaptistae ingrediuntur. Sed hoc velim isti
nobis often dant, ex quo tandem Scripturae loco commentum istud de Iudicialium
legum umbris and figuris didicerint. Nam in ceremoniis, atque adeo in quibusdam
etiam bistoriis. ex Scripturae auctoritate hac agn^sco.
For this was the special subtlety of Satan of old, which yet not one almost
of the ancient Fathers observed, that when he could not cast the Scripture out
of the Church wholly, yet by vain Allegories, he made the whole Scripture
unprofitable and fabulous, so as truly there was not one piece of Scripture
left free of being contaminated with these Allegories, which very course also
the Anabaptists, and Libertines take at this day. But this I would that they
should at length show us, out of what place of Scripture they have learned that
invention and device of the shadows and figures of the judicial Laws. Per in
Ceremonies and so in some Histories from the Authority of Scripture I
acknowledge these things: But of judicial Laws, or corporal Idolatry, which
might shadow out spiritual, I remember not that I have ever read any thing:
But for further satisfaction in this particular, I refer the Reader to the
Tractate of Beza page 156. 167. Sixthly, supposing all Hagiomastix says were
true, that those bodily punishments commanded by God under the old Law to be
inflicted upon false Prophets, Idolaters, Seducers, Blasphemers, had been in
some sense typical and Praesignificative of those greater and more spiritual
under the Gospel, yet it follows not that they are ceased now, and may not be
lawfully practiced, for they may remain and be made use of, though the other
sense intended be fulfilled too: there is a compound sense of some Places of
Scripture litteral and historical, figurative and spiritual, as Weems in his
Christian Synagogue second Book page 223. 224, 225, 226, 227, 228 shows, in
which cases when the spiritual is fulfilled eminently, the literal is not
abolished, of which I might give many instances, but shall only name one, viz.
that of Deuteronomy. 25. 4. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox which treads
out the Corn. Now though the spiritual sense of that place, be the not muzling
the mouth of the Ministers who labor in the Gospel 1 Cor. 9. 9. yet the
litteral sense holds still that a man should forbear to muzzle the mouth of the
Ox which treads out the Cor^^, or at least it is not unlawful to forbear;
besides by the same reason, the Decalogue the whole ten commandments are
overthrown too, for both in Moses his giving the moral Law, and in the commands
themselves with the preface from the second verse of the 20. of Exodus to verse
18. there are diverse particulars typical and figurative of things under the
Gospel, temporal corporal things of spiritual and heavenly, of which I having
spoken before in this Book page 24. 25, 83, 85. and many learned Divines giving
instances in this kind * as Zepper. Mosaic. leg. Forens. explaxat. lib. 1. cap.
6.
Zepperus Rivet. Explic. Decalog* page 10. 11, 12.
Rivitus Burgess vindic. legis page 158, 164, 165.
Master Burgess, I shall enlarge no further, but refer the Reader to those
Books.

Having laid down diverse reasons to prove the commands under the old Law for
Magistrates punishing false Prophets, Apostates, Blasphemers, to be of common
reason and equity given to all Nations, and for all Ages, and having answered
the most material grounds brought by the Patrons of Toleration to make void
those commands, as not binding under the new Testament, I come in the third
place to answer those evasions and shifts brought by Stratagem. Satan lib. 3.
page 158, 159. 160.
Iacobus Acontius, Minus Celsus Senensis, and Hagiomastix, `that if it should
be granted that all and every the Laws contested about, Min. Cells. Disput. De
Haeretic. coercend. Sect. 3. 171, 172, 173, 174. Hagiom page 52, 53.
as well that for putting to death the false Prophet, as those for inflicting
punishment upon the Idolater and Blasphemer were moral, and still in force
under the Gospel, yet these could not reach unto Heretics, and false Teachers
among us, at not being those false Prophets, Idolaters, Blasphemers, spoken of
in the old Law. If it can be proved that Heretics are those Blasphemers, false
Prophets, Apostates, which Moses commands to be killed, then it shall be
acknowledged Heretics are to be killed; but there is a large difference
between a Heretic and such a false Prophet or Apostate, as the Presbyterians
in their own definition of Heretics make. A Heretic does not deny God the
Creator of heaven and earth, neither does he teach that other gods are to be
worshipped; a Heretic does not deny the name of Christ; a Heretic does not
deny the word of God which an Apostate does: So that the word of God may be
used as a weapon against Heretics, which against an Apostate, cannot. A
Heretic therefore is not mentioned nor touched in any one word of these Laws:
But if any will go about to draw these Laws unto an Heretic, that cannot be
done by the proper force of the words, but (as the Lawyers speak) per
extensionem latamque interpretationem, by stretching of them and far fetched
interpreation. And it would first be well considered of, whether every Law does
admit of such extensions, and if not every one, which of them then does admit,
and wherefore? and whether in this Law there are those things for which an
extension is to be made. By the false Prophet who was commanded to be put to
death Deuteronomy. 13. 5. was not meant every Heretic or erroneous person, nor yet
those who taught or published any false Doctrine though of dangerous
consequence; but only those who endeavored to persuade men to the worship of a
false god; and that by affirming that they spoke by the inspiration of some
deity, and that their sayings were to be esteemed Oracles. What Doctrine it
was which made the Prophet or Teacher of it guilty of death, is expressly
determined in the Law it self, and asserted to be this; Let us go after other
gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them. And that the Law of God
made against false Prophets and worshippers of false Gods, was not intended
against those who otherwise held that the Law of God was to be kept, but were
infected with some other error, is sufficiently evident from hence, because in
former times among the Jews, who were affected with a vehement love and zeal
toward their law, Heretics notwithstanding were tolerated, and particularly
the Sadduces. These although the greatest part of the people, and the Rulers
believed them to err exceedingly, nevertheless they were not expelled the
City, neither exempted from being Magistrates, or bearing any other Civil
office: yea they were not hindered from coming to the Temple or the Synagogues.
The Scribes and Pharisees also both held and taught many most dangerous and
erroneous Doctrines; yet were they also in great honor and esteem in this
Church and state. And though our Savior upon occasion reasoned against; yea
and reproved them all for holding and teaching these errors, and gave warning
to take heed of them; yet did he never charge this Church or State, or those
that bare office in either, with sin, or unfaithfulness in their places for
not proceeding against them in regard of their errors, either by imprisonment
or death. And yet we know that the Zeal of his Fathers House, did eat him up,
and that he attempted a reformation amongst them; yea Christ did teach and
press upon men, all, and all manner of duties from judgment, mercy, and
faith, even to the paying tithe of Mint, Annise, and Cummin.

Now unto these and other such like, besides some hints I have already given
upon the 14. Thesis, which may serve in part for satisfaction to some of these
evasions, I desire the Reader to mind these following Answers.

First, there are other places of Scripture both of commands, or else examples
approved by God, concerning the punishing with death or restraining by Civil
power, (the last of which makes good the point in hand against Hagiomastix and
other Libertines, as well as that of death) for other faults in matters of
Religion, besides Blasphemy, Apostasy, and false Prophesying in the sense now
alleged by Hagiomastix and his Compeers, which these following instances prove
First in Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, that very chapter verse 5. brought by
Hagiomastix to prove only those were to be put to death, who endeavored to
persuade men to the worship of a false God; and that by affirming, that they
spoke by the inspiration of some deity, and that their sayings were to be
esteemed by Oracles, the Holy Ghost lays down the contrary, giving a distinct
Precept and command from that of the false Prophet, or dreamer of dreams, who
publicly and openly sollicites to Apostasy, concerning the killing of such
who in a hidden and clancular way seduce: It Is observed by learned Junius in his
Analytical explication on Deuteronomy. 13. that there are two sorts of Seducers to
Apostasy commanded to be put to death, the one of such who publicly and
boldly solicit, who are spoken of in the 5 first verses, the other of such
who secretly entice in verse 6. and the five following: Now however the false
Prophet or dreamer of dreams might pretend to speak by the inspiration of some
deity, for which the 5 verse of the 13. is quoted by Hagiomastix, yet the
private enticers to Apostasy, as the daughter, the wife of the bosom, the
Son, besides that they are made a different sort from the Prophet and dreamer
of dreams, and those six verses from the sixth to the twelfth contain a
distinct command from the five first verses about false Prophets, neither do
they give out signs or wonders to confirm their calling, the parties instanced
in the text, being of daughters to Fathers, Wifes to Husbands, etc, were not
likely so much as to pretend to them the name of Prophets speaking by
inspiration of some deity, but rather drawing by their neernesse of relation,
intimatenesse of affection, opportunities of private and constant converse
(which many phrases in those verses, the wife of the bosom, thy friend which
is as thy own soul, entise thee secretly, thou shall not censent unto him,
neither shall thine eye pity, and such like imply) and yet these are commanded
to be put to death, as well as those Prophets who openly and bodily gave out
signs and wonders to confirm their being Prophets, of which the Reader may be
further satisfied, by reading Junius his Analytical explication on Deuteronomy. 13.
And as Moses in that former part of the chapter shows plainly, contrary to the
affirmation of Hagiomastix and other Libertines, that others who persuade men
to the worship of a false god besides those who pretend themselves Prophets,
are to be killed, so in the latter part of this chapter from v. 13. he lays
down how they are to be put to death also that are guilty of Apostasy, that
have suffered themselves to be drawn away from the true worship of God to other
gods, who are so far from coming under the notion of false Prophets,
endeavoring to persuade men to the worship of a false God, and that by
affirming they spoke by the inspiration of some deity, as that they fall not
under the Title of Seducers at all, but the seduced; and therefore Francis.
Jun. Analys. cap. 13. Duo argumenta ad Apostasiam pertinentia in hoc capite
exponuntur. Prius est de auctoribus sollicitantibus ad Apostasiam v. 11.
Posterius est de reis Apostasiae, qui se abducia vero Dei cultu perpessi
fuerint reliquo capite.
Iunius writing upon this Deuteronomy. 13. analyzes the whole chap. concerning
Apostasies into two, First, the Authors entising to Apostasy in the first 11.
verses. Secondly those who are guilty of Apostasy, who suffer themselves to be
withdrawn from the worship of God, in the latter part of the chapter, and he
shows this is another part of the chap. in which Moses speaks not of those
seducing false Prophets, nor the clandestine Seducers, but of those who yielded
to their Seducements, particularly of those who publicly to the view of all
are Seduced, and being in public Order as a City, rest in that Apostasy, by
the public authority of men falling from God, and openly defending that
impiety. So Deuteronomy. 17. from verse 2. to verse 8. sets down a Law for putting
to death those who are Idolaters and Apostates simply, though they never went
about to entice others: Jun. Analyt. Expl. in Deuteronomy. 17. Differt. autem haec lex
ab ea quam supra cap. 13. exposuimus, quod illic agitur de Apostatis (ut vulgo
loquuntur) dogmatizantibus, and ad Apostasiam sollicitantibus; hic vero de
Idololatris simpliciter.
Iunius upon this 17. c. observes that this Law differs from that in the 13
chapt. the eleven first verses, because there Moses speaks of Apostates who are
Dogmatists and enticers to Apostasy; but here of Idolaters simply. In Deuteronomy.
17. from verse 8. to verse 13. there is a Law that in ecclesiastical cases in
matters of Religion, as well as Civil, upon going from the lower Iudicatories
to the supreme to the high Priest with the College of Priests, the man that
would do presumptuously and would not hearken unto the Priest, even that man
should die, which was in other cases then Blasphemy, Apostasy, Prophesying
falsely: for it appears by the scope of that place and the stream of all
interpreters, that in too hard matters for inferior Courts, they should go to
the High Ecclesiastical Synedrion, and whoever presumptuously disobeyed their
sentence according to the Law, though in other things then the forenamed
Blasphemy, etc as appears by this place verse 11. 12. speaking of the Law
indefinitely with that Walaei Oper. fol. de Script. Interpret. page 164.
2 Chr. 19. 8, 9, 10, 11. compared together, mentioning what cause soever shall
come to you of your brethren that dwell in their Cities between Law and
commandment, statutes and judgments, should be put to death, the ground of
which putting to death here commanded, was not only from the nature of these
sins against the first Table of the highest form as Apostasy Blasphemy and
such like, but for other sins in points of Religion, though lesser, when the
sentence and resolution of the high Priest with his Colleges was
presumptuously disobeyed, so that the punishing of wilful scorneful contempt of
supreme Ecclesiastical Government, determining doubts and Controversies
according to the word of God, though in other cases, then Apostasy,
Blasphemy, Prophesying falsely, is here commanded: But having spoken so much of
this Deuteronomy. 17. already in p. 101. 102, 103, 104, 105, 135, 159, 160. I shall not
enlarge further, only I shall take my leave of this Scripture by adding a
passage out of Master Cottons late Book against Mr. Williams in way of answer
to an evasion of his, that the capital punishment prescribed against the
presumptuous rejection of the sentence of the highest Court in Israel, was a
figure of excommunication in the Church of Christ: Unto which Master Reply to
Mr. Williams Examination. p. 43.
Cotton replies, That Law is of moral equity in all Nations and in all Ages:
He that shall presumptuously appeal from, or rise up against the chiefest or
highest Court in a free state, is guilty, laesae Majestatis publicae, and
therefore as a capital offender to be censured in any free commonwealth; And
certainly if that part of the Law in Deuteronomy. 17. of presumptuously appealing
from, or rising against the sentence of the chiefest and highest Court in a
free State being punished with death, be of universal and perpetual equity,
then punishing so far at least, as to restrain those who presumptuously rise
up and contemn the sentence of the highest Ecclesiastical Judicature in a
Church going according to the word of God, is of universal and perpetual
equity too, and the command of God in that text for punishing, is against the
man that will not hearken unto the Priest, as well as he that will not hearken
unto the Judge. Deuteronomy. 18. 20. sets down a Law, that the * Prophet which shall
presume to speak a word in Gods name, which he commanded him not to speak,
shall die, as well as he that shall speak in the name of other gods: which
place of Scripture proves expressly against Hagiomastix that other Prophets,
besides those that came in the name of false gods, and with other false
Doctrine then that, let us go after other gods which thou have not known and
let us serve them, were to be put to death. The command is indefinite
concerning speaking any word in Gods name which he commanded not to speak,
which must needs extend further then a Prophet prophesying only of turning to
another God: for there were many false Doctrines and false worships against the
Jewish Religion, besides that of Apostasy to other gods: Again the scope of
the words and several phrases, as if the thing follow not nor come to pass,
thou shall not be afraid of him, show it is meant of other Doctrine then saying,
let us go after other gods, namely of Doctrine foretelling of some things to
come; whereas enticing to go and serve other gods is de praesenti. Learned *
Iunius writing on this place, shows that the Prophecies here spoken of are
different from those in Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. they being of faith, but these
of facts and events, which are not foretold particularly from the Canon of the
Scripture, but only from the special revelation of God. Ainsworth in his
Annotations upon the Place shows v. 22. the Prophet there speaking of things,
is meant of praedictions foretelling things to come, as also he reckons up
several sorts of false Prophets, others then the false Prophet spoken of Deuteronomy.
13. 1, 5. The false Prophet is to be strangled to death, although he Prophecy
in the name of the Lord, and neither adds nor diminishes, whether he
Prophecieth that which he has not heard by prophetical vision, or who so has
heard the words of his fellow Prophet and says that his word was said unto
him, and he prophecieth thereby; he is a false Prophet, and is to be strangled
to death. And it is evident by Jerem. 26. 8, 9, 11, 12, 15, 16. in the Priests
and Prophets proceeding against Jeremiah pretending him to be a false Prophet,
and therefore to be put to death, for saying this house shall be like Shiloh,
and this City shall be desolate without an inhabitant; Whereas Jeremiah still
makes his defense, The Lord sent me to prophecy against this house, and
against this City all the words that ye have heard, that other false Prophets
were to be put to death, then those who taught men to worship other gods, upon
which law they would have put Jeremiah to death, against whom they never so
much as suggested that he caught revolt from the Lord, and worshipping strange
Gods. Deuteronomy. 19. 16, 17, 18, 19. gives a ground in case of private seducing to
revolt, upon proof, to punish with death, or in case of perjurie, testifying
falsely upon oath against one for seducing, a sin against the first Table too,
to do the like, both which shows other persons for matters of Religion may be
punished, then the false Prophet spoken of in Deuteronomy. 13. 1^5. viz. private
Seducers to Apostasy and perjured persons, of which place of Scripture, let
the Reader see what I have said before in this Tractate, page 108. and further
consult Junius in his Analytical explication of Deuteronomy. 19. where we shall find
that both ways the matter here spoken of, is belonging to the first Table and
Religion: If the accusation be true, it is enticing secretly to Apostasy; if
false it is matter of Religion because the oath of God is set to it, especially
in the cause of Apostasy, and therefore the Priests in that an oath is a point
of Religion, are commanded to be present, and to take cognizance of it. And by
the way least this place may be thought to favor the Priests enquiring by Vrim,
for the resolving of the controversy, because it is said, Then both the men
between whom the controversy is, shall stand before the Lord, before the
Priests and the Judges, I shall to what I have already answered to this place
page 108. add a passage out of Jun. Analyt. expl. Deuteronomy. 19. 17. Consistent due
illi viri quibus est controversia, coram Jehova, id est, non coram templo.
Domini, sed coram Judicibus a Domino datis, coram quibus quum homines comparent
dicuntur sistere sese coram Domino, and quos c^nsulentes dicuntur Dominum
consulere, Exodus 18. Deuteronomy. 1.
Junius to show the contrary, The parties between whom the controversy is, are
commanded in these words to stand before Jehovah, that is not before the Temple
of the Lord, but before Judges given of the Lord, before whom when men appear
they are said to stand before the Lord, and whom consulting with they are said
to consult the Lord, Exodus 18. Dent. 1. The verse also next following shows it
cannot be meant of the judgment of Vrim, for the resolution of it depends upon
the Judges making diligent inquision verse 18. that is their questioning and
searching into the parties and all circumstances, whereas if it had been by
Vrim, it would have been attributed to the Priests, rather then the Judges, and
it would have come from God, without that diligent inquisition and exact
enquiring of men, as the words imply. So Junius on the place says. But the
knowledge and judgment of this thing properly belongs to the Judges, and
therefore to the Judges only the diligent enquiring, and thorough searching,
out is principally commanded. Lastly, Zach. 13. 2, 3. God by the Prophet shows
that in the days of the Gospel prophesying falsely as distinct from Idolatry
(for so it is made and also I will cause the Prophets) is to be punished bodily
(which text that it is both meant of the time under the Gospel, and to be
understood literally of civil outward punishment by those in Power and
Authority, and not figuratively and spiritually, that I may not anticipate my
self, nor create trouble to the Reader to read the same thing twice, I shall
by the grace of God prove in the 19. Thesis, where I shall at large speak of
that Scripture and take of Hagiomastix's evasions, and whither I refer the
Reader) Now by Prophets there and those who prophecy and speak lies in the
name of the Lord are not meant only Prophets whose doctrine is to go and
worship false gods, but al sorts of false phets. 1. Illiterate mechanic men,
who run but are not sent and that whether they preach true or false, which that
they are included the fifth verse shows, because when the false Prophets spoken
of shall repent and be ashamed, among the rest one is brought in, saying, I am
no Prophet: I am an Husbandman, for man taught me to keep cattle from my
youth. 2. Prophets who take upon them in the name of the Lord, as by revelation
from God to foretell things to come, such Prophets as are spoken of in Deuteronomy.
18. 20. Ezekiel. 13. 6, 7. Jerem. 14. 14. 15. 3. Such who preach false Doctrines
and Heresies wresting the Scriptures to maintain them, though they do not
formally teach another God and Christ, neither pretend to speak by the
inspiration of some deity, but only by perverting the Scriptures, which is a
speaking lies in the name of the Lord: Now that Heretieks and false Teachers
are understood in this place of Scripture as well as Apostates, besides the
judgment of many learned and Orthodox Interpreters, as Calv. in Zach. 13. 3.
Jam satis clare ostendit Propheta de falsis doctoribus hoc locum debere
intelligi, quia mendacium locu tus es in nomine Jehovae.
Galvin Arias Mont in Zach. 13. Nomen Nebiim non vates modo, sed stulte
loguaces garrulosque significat; eos nimiru^ quid vanae orationis cui nulla
virtutis ratio reipsa subest, artifices sunt, atque sermonis and verborum
praestigiis populu^ capiunt.
Ari^s Montanus, Gualt. in locum At de falsis Doctoribus locum debere in
telligi ex sequen tibus patebit.
Gualther Fabrit. in Zach. 13. 2, 3.
Fabritius, Diod. The Prophets, namely the false Prophets, by which are meant
all Seducers and teachers of lies
Diodate, English Annot. The Prophets, namely the false Prophets, by which are
meant all Seduces and teachers of lies
Annotations of English Divines, there are these Reasons. 1. all such are meant
who speak lies in the name of the Lord, and that is made formalis ratio why not
live, and to be thrust through, for thou speak lies in the name of the Lord.
Now false Doctrines and Heresies are speaking lies, called lies in many places of
Scriptures 1 Timothy 4. 2. 2 These. 2. 11. Revel. 2. 2. and fables 2 Timothy 4. 4. and
when men pretend God has revealed them unto them by inspiration, or urge the
Scriptures to make them good, this is to speak lies in the name of the Lord:
hence Calvin upon this place gives this reason that it is clear the Prophet
Zachary speaks altogether of false Teachers, because of those words, for thou
speak lies in the name of the Lord. 2. The word in this text used viz.
Nebum, and translated Prophets, does not only signify Prophets as Arias
Montanus observes upon that place, but foolish speakers and vain talkers; such
namely who are the cunning devisers of vain discourses, and by the subtle
illusious of words do catch the people; such as Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 2.
false Teachers among the people who with fained words deceive, and among others
such especially who when they are confuted by learned men by plain places of
Scripture being destitute of all ability and means by which to defend them
errors, that they may delude weak people, insolently host they have the
Spirit, all their discourses being full of the boasting of the Spirit, their
prayers, disputations, speeches to the People all full of that, for which they
think they should be more believed then for all reason, testimonies, imitating
therein Mahomet that Prince of Heretics, who when be could not prove the
things he taught, then he fled to the authority of the Spirit, saying the
Spirit revealed those things to him. Now all sorts of Heretics and false
Teachers besides those Prophets who say let us go after other Gods, are vain
talkers and deceivers as they of the circumcision and others Tit. 1. 10. 3, In
this place is understood Heretics and false Teachers, as well as false
Prophets who teach the following after other Gods, from the effects that follow
upon the thrusting through in the 4. 5. 6. verses: so Gualther upon the place
says, that it ought to be understood of false Teachers, out of what follows
it shall be manifest, as from saying, I am no Prophet, I am an but bandman, for
man taught me to keep cattle from my youth, etc. That is they shall
ingenuously confess their ignorance that they ought to be sent to the
Plaw-taile, and to keep cattle rather then to continue any longer in the
Ministry of the Church: And this is fulfilled in our age in many Papists, who
have left many fat Livings, and preferments to embrace the pure Doctrine of the
Gospel, and ^^bet in the Church of Christ by the labor of their hands to get
their living, then in the tents of Antichrist to enjoy the greatest means. Now
Papists and such others however they are false Teachers and ven^ corrupt
unsound Doctrine, yet they are not of those who deny the true God and Christ,
and persuade to serve strange Gods: So that by all these places of Scripture
opened, we may see fully proved, against Hagiomastixs assertion, by warrant of
Scripture, many corruptions in matters of Religion, besides false Prophets
publicly teaching Apostasy to false Gods, outwardly and bodily punished, as
private Seducers (though they pretend not to be Prophets) as persons seduced
not seducing, as those who would not hearken to, but contemn the sentence of
the supreme Ecclesiastical Assembly, as Heretics and false Teachers; and
whoever would see more of these instances of Magistrates punishing for
corruptions of religion in points of will worship, Sabbath breaking, etc, let
them look back to page 27. 28, 29 of this present Tractate.

Secondly, Supposing there had been no other commands nor examples for
Magistrates under the old Testament putting to death for matters of Religion,
then those named by Hagiomast. of false Prophets, Apostates, Blasphemers, which
is not true (as I have now shown in this first Answer and page 28. of this
present Book) yet these were sufficient grounds to justify the Magistrates
punishing in like cases, and that upon these Reasons. 1. In all Laws and
commands for the better knowing their nature what they require and would have,
it is good looking into the causes and reasons of them, why such Laws were given
by God: from the cause of making the Law, the mind of the Lawgiver is to be
understood: It Is a known maxim Ratio legis est men's legis, the reason of the
Law, is the mind of the Law; Now the reasons and causes of both those commands,
both against false Prophets as also private Seducers in Jun. Analyt. Explic. in
Deuteronomy. 13. p. 541. Causae hujus legis and (...) gravissimae expenunter di^^:
quaru^ prior atque poten^ior est respe^^ (...) of respect^^ (...).
Deuteronomy. 13. from 1. to the 12 are. 1. the seeking to turn men away from the
Lord their God, and thrusting them out of the way which the Lord commanded them
to walk in 2. The putting away the evil from the midst of them, that others
may hear and fear and do no more any such wickedness among them; these are the
Spirit and substance of these commands, that those are to be punished who when
they fall from God themselves, tempt others to the like defection, and therefore
are to be made examples, that others may not do the like; And therefore
whoever seeks to turn men away from the Lord God, and thrust them out of the
way which the Lord has commanded them to walk in, they come within the
compass of these commandments although they do not tempt to go after the
false Gods of that time, and those Countries, which the false Prophets then
enticed them to; for the reason of the Law is expressed in a universal form
against those who seek to turn men away from the Lord their God, and to thrust
them out of the way which the Lord commanded them to walk in, as Bez. de
Haeret. a magist. puniend. p. 156.
Beza observes, and therefore to be in force against those in general who do
fall from the true Religion, and enticers also, which is done other ways then
by falling to the strange Gods in those times that Moses writ in; yea the
command it self verse 5. in the letter, mentions as speaking to turn men away
from the Lord their God, so to thrust out of the way, which the Lord their God
commanded them to walk in, which certainly in the Scripture sense and
acception includes other Apostafie and Idolatry, then of other Gods; and I
ask whether Isreal's worshipping the golden calfe, and the ten Tribes
worshipping the golden calfe at Dan and Bethel, though they worshipped Jehovah
in and by them,
were not a going out of their way which the Lord their God commanded them to
walk in. Secondly, It is common and usual, that in the commands concerning the
worship of God and in other places of Scripture where the worship of God is
spoken of, there are Synecdochicall speeches, intending and containing many
other things of like kind and nature although not formally and literally
expressed. Eliah when he complained of the whole Covenant of God violated by the
Israelites, expresses it by a part, 1 King. 19 10
thrown down thine Altars and slain thy Prophets. The Prophet Isaiah
prophesying of Egypts embracing the true religion, says, Egypt shall swear to
the Lord of hosts, under that expressing the whole worship of God. The commands
of God are exceeding large and broad, comprehending many things under one:
River. in Decal. p. 6. In omnibus, praeceptis decalogi Synecdocben esse
agnoscendam; qua specie una proposita intelliguntur omnes sub eodem genere.
Vide plur.
Rivet in his explication of the Decalogue among other Rules he gives for
understanding of the commandments, has this, that in all the Precepts of the
Decalogue we must acknowledge a Synecdec^e, in which one kind being propounded,
all under the same genus are understood. But that that Synecdoche may be
rightly explained, before all things the Scope of the Lawgiver in every
Precept is to be enquired after: namely, what he signifies pleases and
displeases him: for then we shall aim rightly and refer all things to their
true end; Now in these commands Deuteronomy. 13. from v. 1. to the 12. if we do but
well observe the scope and end of the Lawgiver, viz how teaching defection from
the Lord God highly displeases him we shall plainly see the Synecdoche in these
commands, under that turning away by those false Gods, other turning away by
false Gods of another sort, and false worships of the true God by Images and
Idols, highly provoking him. Of Bez. de Haeret. a magistr. puniend. 156. Sunt
autem hujus defectionis varia testimonia publica, que rum etsi praecipua
tantum, and quae (...) accidunt in legihus commemorantur, ipsa tamen legis
ratio unversali formula concepta est: itaque in genere valere debet adversus
eos qui a vera religione deficiunt, and alies ad defectionem solicitant.
defection from God there are many dangerous and damnable ways, diverse public
testimonies of it, of which though one or two Principal of the times and
places then may be only particularly named in the Laws, yet such that are
worse, and other as bad must needs be meant too, especially when the reason of
the Law speaking of defection is delivered in a general way, as it is in this
instance of Deuteronomy. 13. But of this the Reader may see more in page 31. 32. of
this Treatise.

Thirdly, under the old Testament Laws, commanding Magistretes to punish false
Prophets, Idolaters Blasphemers, are contained false Teachers and Heretics,
who preach Doctrines destroying the foundation, and blasphemers against the
glory of Christ, although they be not such false Prophets and Apostates as
wholly deny God and Christ, and fall to the gods of the Heathens, which besides
the judgment of many learned Divines, as Calvin, Beza, Zanchius, Bullinger,
Peter Martyr, Philip Melancton, Iunius, Zepperus, with diverse others upon that
question, still quotiug those texts to prove that Heretics and false Teachers
ought to be punished by the Civil Magistrate, appears further thus. 1. Among
the Haebreis, Pseudo-propheta quemvis falsum doctorem significare solet, Bergii
Dissert. Octae de Haeres. esusque Jud.
Jews a false Prophet used to signify every false Teacher as Fabrit. in Zach.
13. 2, 3.
Bergius shows, and I have already shown out of Calvin, Arias Monianus and
others that by the false Prophets in Zachary are meant false Teachers, and
that the word in the Hebrew Nebiim signifies foolish and vain talkers, that
with fained words make merchandise of People, as well as Prophets; and some
Divines show that the name of Prophet in the general signification was taken
not only for them that foresold things to come, but for such who professed
themselves Interpreters of the Law and word of God, though falsely. 2. There is
a great agreement and analogy made by the Holy Ghost, between the false
Prophets under the old Testament, and the false Teachers and Heretics under
the new; between the Heathenish Apostasy and Idoaltrie of strange Gods under
the old, and Christian Idolatry, the worshipping of the true God, by Images,
Saints, and the believing of false Doctrines destructive to the faith, as these
places of Scripture show 2 Pet. 1. 1. But there were false Prophets also among
the people, even (...) there shall be false Teachers among you, where Peter
resembles them together, making the false Teachers under the new such men as
the false Prophets under the old; hence in many places of the new Testament,
ride^ igitur qui haeretici, etiam Pseudo-Prophetae saepe appellantur, de quibus
Math. 7. 15. Math. 24. 24. Bergii Dissertat. Octa. de Haeres. 1060.
Heretics and false Teachers who broached strange Doctrines in Christian
religion, still professing to hold Christ, are called by the name of false
Prophets, and Popish Teachers who hold Christ, the Scriptures, etc, called false
Prophets, as Matthew. 7. 15. the false Prophets there, must needs be meant false
Teachers, who do not deny God and Christ, and not Master Goodwins false
Prophets, as their sheeps clothing spoken of in the text shows. So Matthew. 24.
11. 24. the false Prophets were such men in pretenses, in so much that if it
were possible they would deceive the very elect. So 1 John 4. 1. Christians are
called upon to try Doctrines, because many false Prophets are gone out into the
world, that is, false Teachers broaching strange Doctrines, and thus the
Antichristian faction is called the false Prophets in diverse places of the
Revelation of Saint John, hence called dreamers Jude 8. as those in Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
compared to Janues and Iambres, to Balaam that false Prophet and such like, 2 Timothy 3. 8. 2 Pet. 2. 15. Jude 11. and thus Rome after turned Christian, but
worshipping the true God after a false manner, being corrupt in the faith of
Christ, is called by the same name and the same things affirmed of it for
worshipping Divils and for Plagues, as of Heathenish Babylon that worshipped
false gods, as many places in the Revelation of Saint John show. 3. Heretics
and false Teachers who yet profess to believe in God Creator of heaven and
earth, and in Jesus Christ, to hold also the Scriptures the word of God, may
yet ^each such Doctrins that they may be justly styled false Prophets,
Apostates, Idolaters, Blasphemers, as diverse of the ancient Heretics,
Mevandrians, Gnostics, Manichees, with others, and sundry of the later sort,
Papists, the Libertines against whom Calvin writes, Socinians, Familists. The
Apostles in many places of their writings speaking of Heretics and false
Teachers in their times, and Prophesying of those in after times, both the
Popish faction and the Sectarian, speak of them as Apostates, Antichrists,
false Prophets, Seducers, Deceivers, Idolaters, Blasphemers, and their
Doctrines and ways as Apostafie, Idolatry, Blasphemy, worshipping of Devils,
Seducing and such like, as these and many other such like places of Scripture
show, 2 These. 2. 3. 1 Timothy 4. 1. 2 Timothy 2. 17. 18. 1 Timothy 1. 19. 20. 2 Pet. 2.
1. 1 John. 2. 18, 19, 22, 23, 26. 1 John. 4. 1, 2, 3. 2 Epist. of John 7. 9,
10. Jude verse 4. Revel. 2. 20. Revel. 9. 20. Revel. 13. 5, 6. Revel. 16. 13,
14. Revel. 13. 3, 5. Revel. 18. 4, 9. Revel. 19. 20. It were easy for me to
show how many of the Heretics in the three first Centuries that professed the
name of Christ, and therefore not called infidels, might justly be termed
Apostates, false Prophets, Idolaters, Blasphemers: Junius observes upon
Deuteronomy 13. that Heretics are distinguished diverse ways, Heresy is
either total as that of the Menandrians, Gnostics, etc, or partial departing
only in part from the Doctrine of faith: Now I suppose total Heresy, will
easily be acknowledged Apostafie; but I will only instance in some Heretics
and false Teachers of the latter times, Papists, Socinians, Antitrinitarians,
Anabaptistis. Are not Papists gross Idolaters in several particulars, as our
Divines have unanswerably showen in their writings against them? Are not
Socinians also Apostates, gross Idolaters, who make the Christian faith in the
object of faith and worship not to be distinguished from the faith and worship
of Heathens, Jews, and Mahumetans, and besides one God Maker of all things,
worship Christ with divine worship whom yet they hold to be but a mere man:
out of the Apostasy, Impiety, and base Idolatry of the Sociaians, in what
respects Apostates overthrowing all fundamentals of faith, and agreeing with
Jews, Turks, and the old Heretics Pault^ni and others, by Epiphanius called
(...); worse then Papists and their Idolatry more evid^nt and gr^sse then the
Papists, I refer the Reader to the Theses of learned Voer. pars prim. alte a,
De necessit^ Tranitat. Sequeretur fidem Christia na^ objecto fidei and caltus
sai non distingui, a Gentili, Judaica, Mahumedistica. Sienim necessario non
credat in Vnitate Trinitatem, in Trinitate Vnitatem, jam redigitur ad
Theologiam naturalem, and Symbolizat cum pseude-religionibus modo memoratis.
Addimus nunc tantu^ de Mahumedica, eam ex vagis and incertis Neo-scepticorum
^ypothesibus vix posse convinci apostasiae absolute exitialis; ca enim praeter
pietatem and probitatem, statuit fidem unius Dei and Christi tanquam magni
Prophetae and legati Dei ex virgin nati, immo tanquam Messiae: ita ut in his
fundamentalibus non admodum dissentire videantur ab Anti-Trinitariis Francisci
Davidis sectatoribus. Et Socinianos esse Idololatras, and quidem turpissimos,
quippe qui ex formula religionis suae praeter unum illum solum natura Deum
conditorem omnium, divine cultu adorant Christum natura (...), contra Gal. 4.
2. coll. cum Jer. 10. 11. Libertas exercitii seu caetuum ecclesiasticorum
celebratio publica aut privato publica non est concedenda Socinianis, quia est
idololatria multo evidentior, and magis theoret^ca ac crassa quam ex grataest
invocatio Mariae and Sanctorum in Papatu. Voet. Disputat, de Gentilismo.
Videlii Tractat. de Deo Synagog.
Voetius De necessitate and utilitate Dogmatis de sa^st^ Trinitate, who fully
and excellently proves all these particulars. In the ancient Constitutions of
Gratian, Valentinian, Theodosius, Martian, Justinian, Antitrinitarians, are
said Iewishly and Apostatically to contradict the Trinity and the name of
Christians is denied them; Are not Antitrinitatians as Paul Best that has
belched out so many reproachful speeches against Christ and the Holy Ghost,
Blasphemers in a high measure? Are not they who do not only speak evil of the
Trinity, but teach others so to do greater Blasphemers then those spoken of
in Levit. 24. 16? Are not diverse Anabaptists who have broached false Doctrines,
and foretold diverse things to come as the day of judgment to be on such a day,
such a City or Country to be destroyed on such a day, such a City or Kingdom
to be given them of God, and that by affirming they spoke by Revelation and
immediate inspiration of God, false Prophets as well as those in Deuteronomy. 13. 2.
Deuteronomy. 18. 20, 22? In a word I shall conclude this with a passage out of * Beza
De Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis, brought by way of Answer to a like
objection against Deuteronomy. 13. etc, Those Laws are not now in force, because
there is no man now a false Prophet, according to Moses definition, that is,
who foretells any thing to come and teaches to worship other gods: I answer that
the mind of the Lawgiver is to be understood from the cause of making the Law,
Because he has spoken to turn away from the Lord your God: Now there are
diverse public Declarations of this defection, of which although the Principal
only, and those which most commonly fall out be named in the Laws, yet the very
reason of the Law is expressed in a universal form, and therefore in the
general ought to be in force against those who do fall from the true religion
and solicit others to defection, whom in a general word we call now
Heretics, not false Prophets or dreamers of dreams, or Sacrificers to other
gods: because that those out ward ceremonies and those gifts of Prophecy are
ceased. But though they be ceased, notwithstanding neither defection, nor the
punishment of it is ceased. Moreover I say, those who interpret the holy
Scripture wrongfully, withdraw men from the true worship of God, and so
persuade them to the worship of other gods. For it is necessary that all Doctrine
which speaks of the worship of God, if it be not of God it proceeds from the
Devil; Therefore he that receives it intertains the Devil, and he that
persuades the receiving it draws away from God; For Paul calls the Doctrines of
forbidding meats and marriage the Doctrines of Devils.

Fourthly, In the commands given by God either against such and such sins, or
for punishing in such and such sins, without any stretching of the commands at
all, or interpretations at large, many things not named must necessarily be
contained, as under generals the particulars, as under one kind other kinds of
a higher nature, or of the like nature, as under the male, the female also, and
other such, or else many common received Rules given by Divines for
interpretation of the Decalogue and Scripture are to be rejected; Yea many
things that are evil and abominable are not forbidden in the Law of God: There
are many things may be instan^ed in out of the new Testament of which God
shows his dislike, which yet in the letter and particularly by name are not
forbidden in any of the commands of the old Testament, as Romans 1. 26. with
diverse others that might be named; and there are many abominations that have
been, are, and may be committed even of things against the light of nature that
are neither in the old Testament, nor new forbidden particularly; and yet
certainly these things are forbidden directly and properly in the
commandments, and the commandments are not stretched, nor wyre-drawn by those
who allege such commands against such Practices: If the Scriptures must set
down particularly by name all the kinds and degrees of evils, with the
particular manner and way of doing them, which the corrupt nature of man is
capable of committing, and al particulars of all kinds and manner of duties,
with all particular cases about punishments, and all kinds and degrees of
punishment belonging to all kind of offenses that may fall out, and that both
in Civil and Ecclesiastical censures, with the particular way and manner of
proceeding in them all, I suppose some hundreds of great volumes would not
contain them all, but that it might be said in this case as it is John 21. the
last verse of the things which Jesus did, that if they should be written every
one the world it self could not contain the Books that should be written. And
if there must not be an extension and interpretation of commands, so as to hold
such commands and places of Scripture, forbid or enjoyne some things not
particularly named, how will Hagiom. prove many things practiced by Papists and
Prelaticall men to be against the second command or against any command, as the
making Crosses for Religion, Holy Water, Saints, Relics, bowing at the name
of Jesus, Holy Days, Surplices, Altar-Clothes, with a hundred other Ceremouies
and Inventions of men in the worship of God, are these literally and by name
forbidden in the second command or any other? and may not the Papists and
Prelates in all the texts of Scripture brought against their Will Worship, and
Inventions of men, say the very same to Hagiomastix and his fellows, that
Crosses, Holy Days, bowing at the name of Jesus, etc, are not mentioned nor
touched in any one word of those Laws under the old Testament given against
Idolatry: But if any one will go about to draw these words unto their
Crosses, etc, that cannot be done by the proper force of the words, but as
Law^ers speak per extensionem latamque interpretationem. And it would be first
well considered of, whether every Law does admit of such extensions, and if not
every one, which of them then does admit, and wherefore, and whether in the
second commandment there are those things for which an extension is to be
made? Again, I desire Hagiomastix and his compeers to resolve me these
questions, seeing there must be no extension of that command in Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 5.
nothing else commanded but what is in the letter of the Law, Whether a false
Prophetess that should arise and endeavor to persuade to the worship of a
false God; and that by affirming she spoke by the inspiration of some deity,
and that her saying's were to be esteemed Oracles, were not to be put to death
by virtue of this command, as well as the false Prophet? and yet a Prophe^esse
is not in the text. Whether that command Exodus 21. 33, 34. of the owner of the
pit into which his neighbors Ox or Ass fell, making good the Ox or Ass and
giving money to the Owner of them, did not bind as much if a Horse or a Sheep
fell, into it? and yet the words of the Law are only the Ox or the Ass, and
not a Horse or Sheep. Whether that command concerning the putting to death
those children that did curse or strike their Parents, though it expressed not
in the letter death for killing of them, did not include much more death upon
those who killed their Parents? and so I might instance in many more
particulars; But for a conclusion of this fourth Answer, I shall end with a
passage out of Macco. Disputt 14. De lege Jud. These. 15 Perfectio legum
Judicialum requirit ut statuamus nullum casum accidere posse, qui non posset ex
illius analogia (nam de similibus idem est judicium) de finiri. Exempli gra^ia
Exodus 21. 33 34. habetur haec lex: Quum retexerit quis foveam, autquum foderit
quis foveam, deinde non operuerit ^am, itaque ceciderit illuc bos aut asinus.
Dominus ille foveae rependito, pecuniam restituito domino illius, quod autem
mortuum fuerit ejus est^. Hactenus verba legis, sed quid si in soveam talem
indicerit ^vis aut equas, fecile est intelligere ex ipsa analogia and
similitudine rerum, idem juris hic observandum.
Maccovius in a Disputation of his De Lege judiciali, that the perfection of
the judicial Laws require, that we should hold no case can fall out, which
cannot from the analogy of the Law (for of like there is the same judgment)
be determined. From the analogy and similitude of things it is easy to
understand, that the same Law and Right is to be observed, referring the Reader
for more satisfaction to page 31. 32, 33. of this present Tractate.

Fifthly, as to that brought by Hagiomastix and the rest, that the Law of God
made against false Prophets and worshippers of false Gods was not intended
against those who otherwise held the Law of God was to be kept, but were
infected with some error, because in former times among the Jews who were
affected with a vebement love and zeal toward their Law, Heretics
notwithstanding were tolerated, and particularly the Sadduces, these were not
exempted from being Magistrates: The Scribes and Pharisees also that taught
many dangerous errors, yet were in great honor in this Church and State, I
answer, 1. Hagiomastixs foundation upon which he raises this argument is
unfound, for the Scribes Pheri^ees and others in place, in the time of
tolerating the Sadduces, Herodians and other Heretics (which was in Christ's
time) were not zealous of the Law of God, as is evident by many of Christ's
Sermons reproving them for want of love and zeal to the Law, and the true
worship of God, Matthew. 5. from the 19. verse to the end of the chapter, Matthew.
15. from verse 3. to the 10. Matthew. 23. from verse 3. to the 29. verse. They
were zealous indeed of the traditions of the Elders, and of their own
Superstitions and Devices, but not of the Law of God, they corrupted and
transgressed the Laws of God by their traditions and hypocrisies, but had no
true love nor zeal to the Law nor the Jewish Religion, and therefore no wonder
they tolerated Sadduces, Herodians, etc, but of this point how religion was
then mightily corrupted and all things out of order, I have spoken before in p.
30. of this Treatise, and so will not tautologize. 2. Can Hagiomastix upon
second thoughts think the Practice of the Rulers of the Jews and the people
that followed them in a time so desparately corrupt as that was, when Church
and State hastened to destruction, and all things were amiss, a safe Ground
for Christian. Magistrates to walk by, and not rather judge they did amiss in
that as well as in other things, and that their Practice is not a probable Rule
to be followed: I shall mind him of one particular instanced in by himself
viz, their not hindering the Sadduces and other Heretics, from coming to the
Temple or the Synagogues, which if it were well done it is by this argument as
unlawful for the Church to censure her members with Ecclesiastical censures
for any Heretical Tenets, as for the Civil Magistrate to punish, and so all
Church Censures for Heresies and false Doctrines are overthrown as well as
civil; whereas I took it for granted, Church censures in matters of Religion
had been Lawful, viz. A spiritual weapon suitable, by their own confession,
for a spiritual evil Heresy, and M. S. a good Friend of Hagiomastixs in
answer to that Argument against Toleration, Revel. 2. 20. yields it, saying,
that is meant of Church censures, but not of bodily outward punishment by the
Magistrate; and therefore I think the practice of the People and their Rulers
suffering Sadduces and all other Heretics to be no better argument for
Justification of a Toleration, then their practice of crucifying Christ a
Justification of that. 3. Besides that all may see what you and your party aim
at in speaking of the Pharisees and Saduces being in honor in the Jewish State
Magistrates and bearing civil offices, not a bare Toleration of your
consciences, but that you may be in places of honor, government and profit:
This gives us a clear reason of the Toleration of Errors in those times,
namely that Scribes, Pharisees and Saduces were in places of power and
government, had a great interest in Church and State, and therefore no wonder
if they would tolerate themselves and their own Opinions: can you think it a
good argument that Adulterers and thieves ought to be tolerated, because
Adulterers and Thieves having power, suffer such to go unpunished: Or can you
think it reason to say many Papists, Anabaptists, being in places of
Government suffered Papists, Anabaptints, therefore it is the duty of the godly
Magistrate to suffer them and all other Heretics: Pray Master Hagiomastix
resolve me this question, seeing Scribes, Pharisees, and such like were
Magistrates and in places of power and honor, who should punish Pharisees and
Saduces for their Errors and dangerous Opinions?

Sixthly, as to that last clause that Christ did never charge this Church or
State, or those that bore office in either with ^in or unfaithfulness for not
proceeding against the Sadduces, Pharisees, etc. in regard of their Errors,
either by imprisonment or death, and yet Christ did teach and press upon men
all and all manner of duties. I answer, First, how is that proved he never did:
Can the Patrons of Toleration Minus Celsus Senensis, Hagiomastix, etc make it
follow by saying it is no where written in the Gospels, and therefore he never
reproved them, can they reason from the Scriptures negatively in matters of
fact, such things never were, because the^ are not spoken of? what think^ they
of that Axiom, Anon dicto ad non fact^^ no^ valet consequentia, were not there
many things that Christ did which were not written, John 21. the last verse?
But if they will reply, yes in some things, but not in matters of judgment,
righteou^nesse such a weighty matter as this is made to be; I rejoyne that in
many weighty matters of the Law and justice, Christ either spoke not
particularly of them, or if he did, they are not written, neither can be found
in the Gospels more then this of punishing Sadduces and other Heretics in
matter of Religion: I might instance in many things unquestionably forbidden or
commanded by God in the Moral Law, that are not particularly spoken of in the
Gospels, which yet from hence to reason against them weary vere bad Divinity.
What instances can be given of Christ's giving any commands to those in place to
punish for Murder, Adulterery, Theft, more then for Idolatry, Blasphemy,
Here^ie? 2. Hagiomastix brings in the Church again, as well as the State,
surely he is for a Toleration of all Heresies, Blasphemies, etc, in the Church
as well as the State, to have no man punished for his religion with any censure
of Admonition, Excommunication, or Non-Communion: In his M. S. he was for
spiritual censures, but in these 3. years last past the man is well improved
(belike) to reason against any Church censure as well as State Punishment: And
by the way I desire the Reader to observe whatever reason in the wisdom of
God there might be, that nothing is set down in the Gospels of Christ's charging
the State with sin for not proceeding against the Sadduces, etc, that cannot be
the reason to show the unlawfulnes of Magistrates punishing Heretics, because
Hagiom. confesses the same of the Church, that Christ charged not the Church
nor the Officers with sin, for not proceeding against the Sadduces, and yet I
suppose Hagiomastix will not openly profess it is a good Argument that no Church
censures may be used against any Heretic; however I am sure many of his
Compeers in handling the question distinguish of a Toleration and censures,
granting Ecclesiastical censures though denying Civil, And I am sure if Christ's
never charging the church nor those that bore office in her with sin, for not
proceeding against the Sadduces, be no good argument to take away all Church
censures, neither is it to lay wast all Magistrates punishing in such cases. 3.
Christ did to the Scribes, Pharisees and Sadduces speak and reason against
their errors, yea reproved and threatened them for those errors, which also is
granted by Hagiomastix, in doing of which he did equivalently and really press
upon them the suppressing and punishing of Heresies in persons under their
power, whilst he spoke to men in Authority and denounced the judgments of God
because of them: He that preaches to a Prince against Idolatry and shows the
evils that will come upon a King and his Kingdom for it, preaches to him to
restrain Idolatry, though he do not particularly in express words call upon
him not to suffer any man to practice Idolatry; and therefore Christ speaking
to the Scribes and Pharisees, the Rulers and Elders, that knew the Laws of God,
how Magistrates in Israel were to punish false Teachers, in speaking so against
false Prophets, Heretics and Sectaries, as Sadduces, etc, that was a charging
them (such a thing being spoken to such men) to do their duties against them,
which by the Law was more then if private persons, and being spoken to qua
such, as Scribes, etc, was a commanding them according to their places to
proceed against them: For it is a rule among Divines that in many things recorded
in Scriptures, which are delivered only in common and in general, they are to
be taken by every one according to their relations and places, by the
Magistrates according to their relation, the Ministers according to theirs, and
the People according to their Sphere, of which many instances may be given in
the new Testament. 4. Supposing it could be proved, Christ never reproved the
Jewish Church and State for suffering the Sadduces, etc, yet it follows not
Magistrates therefore should tolerate Heretics, and Sectaries, and that both,
because Gods declaration of his mind in other parts of Scripture, though not in
the Gospel is a sufficient, as also because there might be some particular
reasons proper to the Jewish State, as that Christ saw the Jewish State and
Magistracy it self that then was to be leavened and corrupted with those
errors and opinions, to be either Sadduces, Pharisees, Scribes, Herodians, and
such like, so that to have spoken against Toleration, and for punishing
Sadduces, etc had been to have spoken to the State, not to have suffered it
self, as if one should preach to the Parliament now, not to tolerate but to
punish themselves: So was it for Christ to have urged those commands in Deuteronomy.
13. etc, and those examples of Josiah, Nehemiah, etc upon the Jewish State
then. 2. That in the times of Christ's preaching, the Civil Power of the
Commonwealth of the Jews, was much weakened, if not wholly taken away from
them by the Romans, of which I have spoken something before page 30. and do
now add, that the Jews had no power at all of capital punishments then, and
therefore to what end should Christ charge them with those Laws of putting
false Prophets etc, to death, for full proo^e of which I refer the Reader to
Master Gillespies Aarons rod blossoming, Book 1. chapt. 3. page 29. 30, 31, 32,
33, 34, 35. who learnedly proves that point both from Scripture and the
Testimonies of many learned writers, who have written of the Jewish Antiquities
and Customs, and Answers the contrary objections. 3. Christ knew that Church
and Commonwealth were to be certainly shortly dissolved, the Christian Church
to be set up, and though he warned the People of those errors and ways, and
denounced the judgments of God against them, yet because he knew the purpose
of God was to destroy the Jewish Commonwealth, he might not speak for that
and the other Reasons forenamed to the Magistrates, as otherwise he would, of
which the Reader may read more in page 30. of this present Book.

And now for putting a Period to this 17. Thesis, and to all the Answers given
by me to those evasions brought against those old Testament Laws, of Deuteronomy. 13.
Deuteronomy. 17. and the rest, I shall briefly add 3 things. First, To clear a
little further some passages of Deuteronomy. 13. Secondly, show the slightness and
weakness of Hagiomast. exceptions against those old Testament Laws. Thirdly,
Show the excessive pride and folly of the man in boasting and glorying in such
poor and weak things as he brings against the Vindicator of the Ordinance for
preventing the groth and spreading of Heresies, in Sect. 34. 35, 36, 37, 38,
39, 40, 41.

First, As I shall add two places more out of Moses Law before omitted in the
beginning of the 17. Thesis, to prove the Magistrates power of punishing in
matters of the first Table, viz Deuteronomy. 19. 16, 17, 18, 19. and Numb. 15. 30, 31.
the former in case of Aposta^ie, the latter in case of Vid. Jun. A^alyt. Expl.
Numer in cap. 15.
blaspheming God, so to all I have said of Deuteronomy. 13. I desire the Reader to
observe that God having in the former chapter commanded the worshipping of the
ture God, and forbidden that of Idols, (which unquestionably is moral,) this
13. chap. is fitly added to it as an appendix, in which God gives direction for
removing the impediments opposite to his worship commanded, particularly he
commands the Authors of Apostasy, not to be hearkened unto nor tolerated, but
to be punished with death; and for that end that such who are obstina^e and
will not be amended, nor regard their own salvation, may be hindered at least
from being an impediment to the salvation of others, and the common grace of
God, which removal of impediments with the end laid down, cannot but be moral
also. Junius in his Analysis upon this chapter shows it is an Appendix to the
worship of God, and Zepperus in his Tractate of the mosaical Laws, says, that
this of defection by false Prophets is an Appendix of the first commandment.
Now as the chapter it self cleers it, and diverse learned Jun. Analy^. Expli.
Deutero. cap. 13. Nam de docentibus agit Moses priore part cap. sive palam,
sive clam: de^is vero qui auctoritate publica tantam impietatem defendunt
posteriore capite. Zepper. Leg. Mosaic. Explan. lib. 4. cap 2. Leges de
Apostasia a Deo and vera religione su^t aut de pseudo propheta public d^cente;
aut de claudestino seductore vel privata solicitations ad apostasia^ aut de
publica defectione totius Civitatis.
Divines writing upon the chapter shows this 13. chap. is not all one
commandment but there are three distinct commands in this chapter, the first
of the false Prophet publicly teaching Apostasy in the five first verses, the
second of the Clandestine Seducer, in the six verses following, the third of a
public defection of a whole City: which being observed and well considered,
besides what I have said already to Hagiomastixs answer that the command in
Deuteronomy. 13. concerning the putting of false Prophets and Seducers to death,
cannot bind, because then whole Cities must be destroyed, Cattle, etc, fully
answers all he speaks in this kind, because that latter part of the chapter
upon which he vapors so, is a distinct command quite another thing, from that
in the first verse to the 5. as also from that of the 6. to the 12. So that it is
a mere fallacy to confound Laws which are distinct, to speak all along of
that 13. chapt. as one Law and command (for so he does page 48. 47. make them
all one) fallacia compositionis is easily discovered by dividing and
distinguishing the commands which God has made distinct; and therefore the one
command may be in force, and we neither add, nor diminish ought from it,
although the other which is no part of it may not, but be more proper to the
Jews, and only in some particular cases (of which I shall speak more
presently) and among many differences that might be observed between the two
former commands in the first 11. verses and this about a City, this is plainly
one, whereas these are commands founded expressly upon general reasons common
to all because he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, etc,
this is not spoken of at all in the case of the City, but it is grounded upon a
reason peculiar to the Jews, as some learned men observe from v. 12. If thou
shall hear say in one of thy Cities which the Lord thy God has given thee to
dwell there, the foundation of that command being ceremonial, because it has
a particular respect, to tha^ Land the Lord gave them to dwell in, God being in
a certain singular kind of manner the Lord of that Land: upon which place of
Scripture Junius writing, shows the destroying of the City utterly, with the
devoting of all things therein to destruction, to be ceremonial and so not to
take place now, yea it was not of force among the Jews themselves, but only in
one particular case, when a City openly by public Authority defended and
maintained Apostasy from God;
and therefore though in a City there had been hundreds of Apostates whether
public or private Seducers, which all were to have suffered by virtue of the
former Laws of the first 11. verses of this chapter, yet so long as openly by
public Authority of that City these were not defended nor maintained,
although these particular Apostates were commanded to be put to death, all the
inhabitants among whom they lived were not commanded to be put to death,
muchlesse the Cattle and all things within it to be burnt with fire; and the
Reader for his further satisfaction herein, besides what I have written of this
in page 85. 86, 87. may consult with Junius in his Analyt. explication on Deuteronomy.
13. 543. 544. who resolves the question and case thus, That in this chapter
there are three things concur, the moral right, the ceremonial, and the
Political: That which is of moral right that according to the substance
remains, and therefore it follows that who foe is guilty of so great
wickedness and obstinacy as Moses describes in this chapter ought to receive
the reward and punishment of his (...), and that by the Law of God and nature,
whose Minister and Helper the judicial and political Law is, Jun. Analy^. Expl.
in Deuteronomy. 13. 544. In hoc legis capite tria concurrere, jus moraie, ceremoniale
atque politic^m. Quod juris moralis est illum secundu^ substantiam per manet ac
pro inde sequitur tu^, qui reus est tantae impietatis and contumaciae ac de
scribit Moses impium esse and paenas dare impictatis oportere, ex divino and
naturali jure: Quod autem ceremoniale est, id in postrema ^ujus capitis part
non habet locu^, ubi civitatem deleri and omnia devoveri anathemati p^^e cepit
Dominus etc.
but that which is ceremonial and is in the last part of this chapter, where
God commands to destroy the City, and devote all things in it to a curse, has
no place now, because the foundation of this command is ceremonial. For the
Political and judicial Law, which has its foundation partly in the divine and
natural Law and partly in the ceremonial, it follows from thence whatsoever
in the judicial Law, simply belongs to the preservation of the natural and
moral Law ought according to the substance to be observed: but whatsoever
things are of ceremonial right, to them the Magistrate is not bound, but the
public safety and prevention of so great evils, laying aside ceremonies,
according to natural and moral right ought to be procured and sought for by him.

Secondly, I might manifest the flightnesse and weakness of Hagiomastixs
evasions of those old Testament Laws, by drawing them briefly into one, and
showing the several fallacies and paralogismes one after another, as arguing
Falsa Suppositione, Adicto secundum quid, A particulari ad universal, Fallacia
compositionis et divisionis, etc, As also had I wanted matter, I could have run
out in flourishing words, and at the end of every Reply to his evasions have
stood triumphing over him, as he does over the Authors of the Vindica^ion,
saying, O Independents and Sectaries, if your Teachers, yea your great Rabbi
and Oracle bring such poor and weak Stuff for their Tenets and way, you had
need to take heed and beware of them, least the blind lead the blind, and both
full into the ditch; But I consider I am handling a great Controversy in
Divinity a point about Conscience, and that it is not comely to speak of it in a
light and scossing way, and therefore shall not offer to contend with Master
John Goodwin in that way, contenting my self to have aimed at hard Arguments
and fore words.

Thirdly, I might take occasion to set out the ^olly and horrible pride of the
man in boasting and glorying in such poor weak Stuff, and that stolen out of
Minus C^^su^ S^^^^sis, behaving himself like a gloriosus miles, I might annex
and fasten each of his vapouring insolent insultations over his three supposed
Adversaries unto each Answer, by which his folly and vanity would be made
manifest to all in excessive boasting when he has performed so little, but I
will forbear to deal with him in that way, and shall conclude this 17. Thesis,
and all my Answers to his evasions in speaking sadly to his Conscience, (though
I much fear in this Argument of Liberty of Conscience, he has little
Conscience left, or is capable of any Conviction, this being his Sanctuary and
Protection to safeguard him from the trouble and danger of al his other wicked
Opinions) M. Goodwin what Answer will you make to God for these pretenses
brought against Scripture, can you think against such express texts, such poor
shifts will serve? or will hold water in the day of judgment? what if these then
prove but Adams fig leaves, mere shifts and tricks of wit to put off the word,
and be not real? what will you then do for all the dishonor of God, ruin of
precious souls occasioned by your means? will not Gods wrath sweep away these
Cobwebs? I say no more, think upon it Master Goodwin and be not deceived, God
is not mocked.

18. THESIS
Whereas the Patrons of Toleration commonly plead, that all places of Scripture
both of examples and commands for Magistrates punishing in matters of Religion
are only from the old Testament; and it is confessed by them that under the Law
before Christ's coming good Magistrates both did and might exercise coercive
power on false Prophets, Apostates, Blasphemers, but now since the new
Testament it is otherwise, Preface of the Bloody Tenet of Persecution for cause
of Conscience.
It being the Will and Command of God that since the coming of his Son the Lord
Jesus, a Permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish, or Antichristian
Consciences and Worships be granted to all men in all Nations and Countries:
and they only to be fought against with that sword, which is only (in soul
matters) able to conquer, to ^it the sword of Gods Spirit, the word of God; I
lay down this Thesis, That all things concerning Religion and piety
constantly practiced by the godly, and by God commanded under the old
Testament, and by him never declared to be repealed, bind as firmly under the
new Testament, although there be no particular command nor example a new
approving them, as they did under the old, and that in such cases the coming
of Christ into the world, and his death are so far from giving any dispensation
or Liberty, that quite contrary, some things before permitted to the Jews are
by Christ now taken away, and all matters in reference to Religion and
Holiness upon the coming of Christ into the world are spoken of by the
Scriptures as to be kept and done with greater exactness and strictness. For
proof of which I lay down these following grounds.

First, That the Scripture of the old Testament is the Canon and Rule of faith
and Practice, as well as the Scripture of the New, and that it equally belongs
to Christians as the Books of the New: which point besides that it has been
held by the Orthodox in the Church of God, in all times since Christ, and
denied only by Heretics as the Irene. lib. 2. advers. Haeres. Valent. cap. 20.
Simoniani, the Epiphan. Panar. Haer. 66.
Maniches, Socin. Tract. de authorit. Script. Ostorod. Institut. p. 3. cap. 28.
Socinians, Schlussell. Catal. Haereti^. De Antinomis.
Antinomians, Bulling. advers. Anabapt. lib. 4. cap. 4. Spanhem. Disput. 2.
Anti-Anabapt. De usu Scriptur^^ v. Testam. in Eccles. Christ* These. 50.
Anabaptists, I shall give these reasons, 1. That Christ and the Apostles all
along in the new Testament prove their Doctrine by the Scriptures of the old
Testament Moses and the Prophets, still referring the People in all
Controversies of Faith and Practice to the Scriptures of the old Testament, as
is evident by these places, Luke 16. 29. John 5. 39. Romans 15. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 15,
16, 17. 2 Pet. 1. 19. cum multis aliis which are all understood of the
Scriptures of the old Testament, as besides many things in those texts showing
as much, no Scriptures of the new Testament, being then extant, when Christ
gave those exhortations to search the Scriptures, and when Timothy was a child,
of which Scripture the Apostle speaks, which Timothy learned of a child, as
Chrysostom well expounds: Now that was the Scripture of the old Testament,
because the new was not as yet committed to writing, then when Timothy was a
child: Nay further all the texts by way of Scripture proo^e brought in the new
Testament to prove any thing in matter of faith and manners are all quoted out
of the old Testament, and not the new, whereupon we see how frequently Moses,
the Psalms, and Prophets are cited by Christ and his Apostles; but to my best
remembrance, I do not find in all the new Testament any place of Scripture
brought to prove any thing from the new Testament, but that one passage out of
Paul's Epistles 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16. 2. The Apostle Paul 2 Timothy 3. 16. says All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
Reproof, for Correction, for instruction in righteousness: Now if all
Scripture be (...), then the Scripture of the old Testament is so to, and as
given by inspiration is with all reverence to be acknowledged and received by
Christians: Again if all Scripture be profitable for Doctrine, for reproof,
for Correction, for instruction of righteousness, therefore Doctrines of faith
and Practices of life may be profitably fetched from thence, and when things
are laid down in the old Testament, they are commanded in the Scriptures,
(they being the Scriptures too) although not mentioned in the new: But who so
desires to be further satisfied in this question of the Scripture of the old
Testament being of the same Authority with Christians as that of the new, let
him consult Bullingers Books against the Anabaptists lib. 4. cap. 4. 5, 6* and
Spanhemius his Disputations against the Anabaptists, De usu Script. V.
Testaments in Ecclesia Christiana.

Secondly, every command of God made known in the old Testament, and never
afterward repealed nor revoked by him; nor expiring in the nature of it, is
perpetual and in force: whatever God once commands til he declares either
particularly that it is not his will such a Law should any longer bind, or at
least generally in equivalencie, obliges: So that it is no good argument, to say
against a Practice, as long as it is commanded in the old, this cannot be proved
out of the new Testament, and therefore may not be done, but rather on the
contrary we may infer, that the silence of the new Testament concerning a
Law expressly and clearly delivered in the old Testament, is a confirmation
rather then an abrogation of it or an intimation that it is expired. There are
many particulars might be instanced in, some expressly commanded, and others
forbidden in the old Testament, which are not spoken of at all in the new
Testament (unless in general) that yet are held by Orthodox Divines, and I
suppose by Hagi^mastix too, binding under the new, as many degrees of Marriages
forbidden, usury, as Magistrates putting to death murderers, and some other
Malefactors, with diverse others that might be named: Upon which occasion M.
Cottons Bloody Tenet washed, p. 177.
Master Cotton answers Master Williams, If it be true that Christ g^ve no
express Ordinance, Praecept, or President of killing men by material Swords
for Religion sake: It is as true that neither did he for any Breach of Civil
Justice, no not for murder, nor Adultery. And so supposing there were no new
Testament proofs for the Magistrates punishing Apostates, Blasphemers, etc.
yet the old Testament affording such a cloud of witnesses is testimony
abundant, especially remembering what I have at large proved in diverse pages of
the last Thesis, concerning the nature of those commands and examples recorded
in the old Testament, and indeed considering how clearly, largely, and
importunately the Magistrates power and duty in punishing in matters of
Religion is set down and pressed by the Holy Ghost in the old Testament, it had
been no wonder if nothing had been said of the new, the abundant urging in the
old serving for a reason of silence in the new. But because this rule is so
fully and judiciously handled in a late Book, called M. Caudrey, Mr Palmer,
chapt. 2. page 17 18, 19, 20, 21. 22, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.
Sabbatum Redivi^^um viz. A Law instituted in the old Testament, not abrogated
in the new, is of perpetual obligation though it have not express
^atification in the Gospel. I shall refer the Reader thither where he shall
find many grounds brought to prove it, extracting only one passge out of the
Book. Whatsoever Law in once delivered to the Church, and accordingly recorded
in the Law Book the holy Scriptures even of the old Testament, whosoever would
claim exemption from it whether particular Person or Church, must produce some
what to prove that that Law is now (under the Gospel) repealed, or at least
expired, more then bare saying that it is no longer in force. It is so in the
statute Law of our Kingdom (and of all Kingdoms) if a man can allege for
himself in point of Right or Privilege (or the Kings Council for the Kings
Rights and P^erogatives) any statute that was once made, it stands good for all
purposes, unless they who would gainsay it, can allege and prove that such a
Statute is out of date by expiration or repeal: So that the proof lies
originally upon the refuser of the Law, and they that would maintain it and
urge it, need plead nothing more then the enacting of it once, till the
abrogation of it can be verified; and if it be so in the Statutes of men, and
the positive Laws of Kingdoms, much more in those of God, whose Authority in
unquestionably more absolute, and whose wisdom, Holiness, Justice and
Goodness, is infinitely beyond that of all Princes and States in the world.

3. It Is granted Princes and Magistrates under the old Law before Christ's
coming, had a coercive power in matters of Religion, and did punish
Blasphemers, etc Now 1. seeing they long had it, can any proof be brought how
and upon what occasion it was taken from them? can any man show any text out of
the new Testament where Christ and his Apostles took away this power from
Princes, or declared that however under the old, Seducers and false Prophets
were to be dealt with by the Civil powers, yet not under the new, but only with
the word of God? Bullinger in his fifth Book against the Anabaptists chapter 3.
page 169. pleading for Magistrates power in matters of Religion, speaks thus to
them. Are Princes and Magistrates of the new Testament endorred with less
Spirit and power then those of the old? Or in what place have Christ and his
Apostles removed Christians Princes from this power of Magistrates? Whatever
reasons or grounds any way or in any kind there were under the old for this
power of Magistrates, the very same remain now, were errors and Heresies then
deadly and damnable, so they are now? were they then spreading as a Gangrene
and corrupting many so they do now? were they then hateful to God? so they are
still: were false Teachers in those times unreasonable, perverse obstinate not
to be convinced by words? behold they are as froward and desparate in these;
were Princes and Magistrates then to be zealous of Gods honor, and to serve the
Lord not only as private persons, but as Magistrates? so they ought to be now,
and it is by the Spirit of God foretold they should: Now where there is the self
same reason,
there is ever the self same Law and Equity both under the Law and Gospel, for
the further proof of which the Reader may consult Master Prynn^ Sword of
Christian Magistracy supported page 21. 22, 23 2. It cannot seem reasonable
that all other relations, Parents, Masters, Husbands, should have the same
authority over their children, servants, wives, under the Gospel, as they had
under the Law, and that in spiritual things, and the Christian Magistrate
should not: nay that the Power of Parents, Masters, Husbands, should be
confirmed, strengthened and more largely set forth, Ephesians. 5. 22, 23, 33. Ephesians.
6. from verse 1. to 10. Col. 3. from verse 18. to 23. 1 Pet. 2. 18, 19. and the
Power of Magistrates only taken away, Muscul. loc. Commun. De Magistr. 627.
628. Ergone tantae authoritaeti ac potestati non licebit, quod cuique
Patrifamilias in do^^ sua licet?
Musculus in his common places De Magistratibus speaking of the power that
Fathers have over their children in matters of Religion, reasons from thence
that to the Magistrate the supreme Father of all his subjects, (whose Power is
far greater then that of a Father) the care of religion more belongs then to
Fathers. In Magistrates there is an Authority of supereminencie excelling all,
then which there cannot be a greater on earth: Therefore shall not that be
lawful for such an Authority and Power, which is lawful for every Father in
his own House? yea by that divine command is it not required that that should
belong to the greater which belongs to the less, that to the public Father of
the people which belongs to the private? 3. God under the new Testament allows
and approves of the calling of Princes and Magistrates, giving many express
commands to Christians of subjection and obedience to them, Romans 13. from verse
1. to 6. Tit. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 17. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. the Sea M. Pryns
Sword of Christian Magistracy supported. page 3.
ends and uses also for which Magistrates were instituted are the same under
the new Testament and old, besides there is not any one text in the new
Testament limiting or restraining the Power given them by God in the old, and
therefore their calling and Power must needs be the same. Learned Bilsons
second part, page 178, 179, 180. third part 309.
Bilson in his true Difference between Christian subjection and unchristian
Rebellion, proving the Princes power and charge by Gods Law of Deuteronomy. 17. 18,
19. and by the example of the godly Kings of Israel and Judah, reaching as well
unto matters of Religion as other things, that the sword is given them to
provide that as well true Religion be maintained in their Realms, as civil
justice ministered, that they forbid, prevent, and punish in all their subjects
not only murders, thefts and such like breaches of the second Table; but also
Schisms, Here^ies, Idolatries and other offenses against the first Table
pertaining only to the service of God and matters of Religion, answers thus the
Jesuits objection (the very same evasion the Sectaries have now,) Object.
This charge concerned none but the Kings of Israel and Judah: Answ.
That refuge does rather manifest your folly then satisfy my reason. Did, I
pray you Sir the coming of Christ abolish the Vocation of Princes? I trow not;
Then their office remaining as before, per consequens, both the same precept of
God to them still dureth, and also the like power to force their subjects to
serve God and Christ his Son stands in as full strength under the Gospel,
as ever it did under the Law. For Princes in the new Testament be Gods
Ministers to revenge Malefactors as they were in the old, and the greater the
wickedness, the rather to be punished, ergo the greatest (as Heresies,
Idolatries, Blasphemies,) are soonest of all other vices to be repressed by
Christian Magistrates, whose zeal for Christ's glory must not decrease,
Christ's care for their Scepters being increased, and those monuments of former
Kings left written for their instruction: were not this sufficient, as in truth
it is to refute your evasion, yet King David foreseeing in Spirit, that Heathen
Kings would ^and themselves and assemble together against the Lord and his
Christ, extends the same charge to the Gentiles; which the Kings of Jurie
received before, and warned them all at once, Be wise ye Kings, understand ye^
Judges of the world: Serve the Lord. And so in another place of this Book, the
Jesuits saying these were Kings of the old Testament: and they had the Law of
God to guide them, he answers, Then since Christian Princes have the same
Scriptures which they had, and also the Gospel of Christ and Apostolic
writings to guide them, which they had not, why should they not in their
Kingdoms retain the same power, which ye see the Kings of Judah ^ad and used
to their immortal praise and joy. Again Christ came not to abolish or
diminish the power of Kings and States,
but to save their souls; they are no way loosers but gainers by Christ's
coming: Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, it alters not the Power and
Preeminence God once gave to them as Kings and Magistrates. Lastly, If
Magistrates under the new Testament, should have this power taken from them,
the Church of God should be in a far worse condition and more uncomfortable
then it was under the old Law,
the Church should lose a great help it sometimes enjoined: neither can that
help the matter to say that we have now Excommunication and other spiritual
weapons to supply that loss: For the Church of the Jews had excommunication
and the word of God, yea, extraordinary Prophets, many miracles, answers by
Vrim and Thummim in all difficult cases about religion (as Hagiomastix faith)
which we have not, and yet they had need of Magistrates coercive power in
matters of religion for all that: To conclude there can be no reason in the
world showen or given why Magistrates under the new Testament should not have
power to restrain and punish Aposta^ies, Blasphemies, etc as well as under the
old, but many might be given why their power rather should be continued and
enlarged under the new, and in this we have Master Buroughs himself a
witness what a sad condition the Church of Christ would be in, if we had no
external power, to restrain from any kind of Blasphemy and Seducements,
which passage having quoted before, and having spoken something on that
occasion, page 63. of this Treatise of Toleration, I refer the Reader
thither, and to Master Buroughs Irenicum page 23. 24.

Fourthly God is unchangeable, the Covenant of life under the old and new
Testament is one and the same for the essence and substance, as our Divines
show against the Socinians, Antinomians, Anabaptists; and the rule of
righteousness and holiness is the same under the new, that it was under the
old, and therefore God hating corruptions of Religion so as to command his
Vicegerents to punish them then, and to prevent their spreading, he being
unchangeable, and the punishing of violations of Religion and impieties being
acts of holiness and righteousness, must needs stand firm^, and bind
Magistrates under the new Testament. And if the Magistrates restraining and
suppressing the dishonors of God, ruin of souls by his sword be altered and
changed by God in the times of the Gospel, then that power of punishment was
either truly Ceremonial or else judicial, belonging properly to the Poli^ie
and Paedagogie of the Jews, but it was neither; First, Not Ceremonial, it was
no type of any thing which was to come, as I have showen before page 168. 169.
of this Treatise. Secondly, Not properly judicial in the sense laid down page
53. 54. of this Treatise, but moral of common right, used by other Nations,
and that both before the judicial Law was given, and after, of which having
spoken so much in diverse pages and places of this Book, I shall only add
this viz. that Zepper. De leg. Mosai. lib. 4. cap. 1. cap. 3. De Pseudo
Prophetis and Haereticis. Ratio ido^ea and sufficiens nulla afferri potest, cur
Dei majestas and Ecclesiae authoritas minoris apud Christiaanos momenti and
pondeis esse debeat, quamapud Judaeos olim fuerit. Imo quo illustrius Deus se
per filium suum quam per Prophetas olim patefecit, eo minus frigiditas illa and
tepedita^ excusari potest, si minori religionis nostrae studio teneamur
minusque eam tu^am^r.
Zepp^rus in his fourth Book de Legibus mosaicis excellently shows these
Laws to be Appendixes of the Decalogue, and in stead of a just Commentary
upon them, particularly of the first commandment, whereupon he handles that
question of punishing false Prophets and Heretics, and shows how many Errors
and Opinions be Blasphemies, as Servetus Opinion against the Holy Trinity, and
Opinions against the Attributes of God, etc, which abominations whosoever
denies ought to be punished capitally, he overthrowes all piety and shows
himself to be a stranger to all Religion and faith, where among other reasons
brought by him why false Teachers and Heretics should be punished by the Civil
Magistrates, as the express Laws of God given by Moses, and not antiquated,
he gives this, No substantial sufficient reason can be brought why the Majesty
of God, and the Authority of the Church ought to be of less moment and weight
among Christians, then in times past it has been amongst the Jews. Yea by how
much God has more clearly manifested himself by his Son, then in times
past by his Prophets, by so much the less can that coldness and
luke-warmenesse be excused, if we be carried with a less study of our
Religion, and do less defend it then they.

Fifthly, It cannot upon any reasonable ground be presumed, that Idolatries,
Heresies, Blasphemies, etc commanded by God to be punished by the Civil
Magistrate under the old Testament, should by Christ's coming be set at
liberty and absolutely freed from punishment: For 1. Besides that the old
Testament prophesying of Christ's coming speaks of those days as times of
greater holiness and strictness, and that in reference to the commands of the
first Table, as these Scriptures show, Isaiah. 35. 8, 9. there shall be a way
and it shall be called the way of holiness, the unclean shall not pass over
it: no Lion shall be there; nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon, that is
no enemy of God, hurtful to the Church, among which false Teachers are chief,
called by Christ and Paul Ravenous beasts called by the Prophet, and ravening
Wolves by Christ.
ravening Wolves and grievous Wolfes not sparing the flock, Matthew. 7. 15. Acts
20. 29. Zach. 13. 2, 3. prophecies that in the day in which the Messiah shall
come into the world, he shall overthrow Idolatry, false Doctrine, and
whatsoever is contrary to the word of God and true Religion: The Prophet
comprehends all under three Heads, 1. I will out off the names of the Idols out
of the Land; and they shall no more be remembered: It Is a frequent thing in the
Prophets, when they prophecy of Christ's Kingdom, to proclaim War to Idols
and Images, as in Micah. 2, I will cause the Prophets to pass out of the Land,
he denounces destruction to the Prophets which is to be understood of false
Teachers. 3. I will cause the unclean Spirit to pass out of the Land, that is
all the works of the Devil (the unclean Spirit often so called, by which he
withdrawes men from the true worship of God.) Upon which words Porro ne qui
hinc carnalis licentiae and impunitatis spem conciperent, ulterius ad* hac*
progressurum dicit istum gratiae* in Christo exhibitae effectum, and per hunc
simul (...) medio auferendum fore quicquid Dei verbo and verae religioni
adversatur.
Gualther writes, The Prophet having spoken in the 1. v. of a full and absolute
washing by Christ's blood both from original sin and the corruption of our
nature, under the name of uncleanness, and all actual sins, thoughts, words
and deeds under the name of sin, least any from hence should conceive a hope
of carnal liberty and impunity, he shows this effect of the grace of Christ
is yet to proceed further, that by him also shall be taken out of the way, and
from the midst of the Church whatsoever is against the true Religion and Word
of God. Zach. 14, 20, 21. In that day shall there be upon the bridles of the
horses Holiness unto the Lord, and the pots in the Lords house shall be like
the bowls before the Altar, etc. On which verses Gualter writes the summary
meaning of all to be this. That in those days of the Gospel all things shall be
turned to the worship of God, even those things which before have been
employed to profane uses, and against him; Now then there shall not be
Holiness unto the Lord written only on the forehead of the Priests, but it
shall appear eminently on the bridles of the horses: And Horses are
particularly instanced in, (Horses being in a special manner serviceable for
War, the horse is prepared for the battle says Solomon) to show that the Wars
under the Gospel should not be profane and wicked, such as are made by
ambitious and covetous persons, but such by which the worship and Church of
God, may be defended against wicked enemies, by those whom God has appointed
nursing Fathers of his Church. And such Wars in times past Constantine made
against Maxentius and Licinius, and Theodosius against Eugenius and Arbogastus.
And for those words, in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the
House of the Lord of Hosts, he show^s Chananaei vocabulum merca torem
significat and ita illud in praesenti, vetus interpres reddit, and been quidem.
Ergo de mercatoribus seu Nundinatoribus sacrorum Propheta loquitur qui vel
externum cultumsibi quaestu^ faciunt Vel ex Spiritus Sancti donis nundinationem
instituunt. Sunt hiprecul ab Ecclesia arcendi, quia and Dei cultum corrumpunt,
and fidem simpliciu mevertunt, and Christi meritu^ evacuant. vide plura.
Canaanite signifies Merchant, and that the Prophet speaks of those who sell
and make merchandise of holy things, as the false Teachers in Peter, who made
merchandise of the people; These are to be driven away far from the Church,
because they both corrupt the worship of God, subvert the faith of the simple,
and make void the merit of Christ, these Christ sets not upon only with words,
or with denouncing woes, but with a whip made of small cords, as impudent
greedy dogs he c^sts out of the Temple with public disgrace: By the Vid.
Annotat. of Engl. Divines on the place.
Canaanite or Merchant in this place, the Prophet seems to have a special
relation to the abuse of merchandising and selling which was used in the Temple
Matthew. 21. 12. 2. John 15. Malach. 3. 2, 3, 4, 5, the Prophet in this chapter
prophesying of Christ's coming into the world, least men in his coming should
p^^^^ise to themselves an earthly Kingdom, and a lawless Liberty of doing
any thing without punishment, he tells them what a one Christ is, and for what
end he comes, and what kind of persons they ought to be who desire to be be
saved by him, Who may abide the day of his coming? for he is like a refiners
fire, and like fullers soap, and he shall fit as a refiner and purifier of
silver, and he shall purify the sons of Levi and purge them as gold and
silver, etc, that is as those who deal in metals, do not cease to melt and
purge their metals til they see all the dross taken away, nor fullers leave
to wash and rub the garments till all the spots and dirt be washed out: So
Christ does not cease using his fire and fullers soap, till we be sanctified
and cleansed throughout. The use of this Doctrine to us ought to be, least we
abuse our pretense of believing in Christ to a Liberty of sinning, but rather
we should give our selves to him to be purged, that we may be made such, as he
would have us to be. But of the scope of the Prophet in these verses, and how
severe Christ under the Gospel will be against transgressors of the first
Table as Sorcerers, false Swearers, under the last of which are contained all
those who abuse the name of God, that they may deceive others, not only those
who in Civil matters and bargains falsely pretend the name of God, but also
such who in teaching abuse it, and vent the fictions of their own brains for
divine Oracle^, the Reader may find more in Gualther upon the place. So 2. The
new Testament speaks of Christ's coming to destroy the works of the Devil 1
John 38. among which false Doctrins, Antichristianisme, and seducing are spoken
of by the Apostle in that Epistle and the foregoing chapter as chief, and
Christ is brought in Revel. 2. 18, 20. described in a most terrible manner
speaking against Toleration of Heresies; Th^se things faith the Son of God, who
has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass, I have
a few things against thee, because thou suffirest that woman Iesabel, which
calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants, as also
Christ and his Apostles in the new Testament in several respects, speak more
against false Doctrines, Herefies, false Teachers, Seducer^, then against
corrupt manners: Neither can it be put off by saying that under the new
Testament Christ has brought Liberty, a part whereof is the Toleration of
Heresies, etc for the Apostle in Gal. 5. 1. where he exhorts Christians to
stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made them free expressly
declares verse 13. this Liberty is not to be used for an occasion to the
flesh, which it must needs be if this Liberty were a Liberty of Heresies,
heresies being named in the same chapter a work of the flesh verse 19. 20.
Master Cartwright writing of certain judicial Laws that cannot be changed,
as of putting to death a contemptuous Blasphemer, and stubborn Idolater,
speaks thus of this pretended Ground of Christ's coming. As for that they
allege the cause of this Liberty now, they are not to be put to death, by
reason of the coming of our Savior Christ and his passion, it is a weak one and
injurious unto the coming and death of Christ, for he appeared that he might
destroy the works of the Devil; this makes our Savior Christ to build again
that Kingdom of sin which he has destroyed. For when in common reason and by
the manifest word of God the Lord gives this blessing unto the punishment of
such grievous offenders by death, that others not only which see, but which
hear of them, have the bridle of fear put upon them, whereby they are kept
from the like, that must needs follow that whosoever makes our Savior Christ
Author of this looseness in punishing such offenders, makes him forthwith to
loose the bridle whereby others are afraid from running into wickedness, and
what is this but to make Christ a Troubler of Commonwealths: Besides if Christ
by his coming loosed these civil punishments and purchased this grace of his
Father for Blasphemers, Idolaters, Heretics, that they should escape civil
punishments which the Law of God adjudged them to, how comes it to pass that
the Apostles to whom Christ committed the publishing of all the pardon he
obtained for us, did never make mention of the releasing of these punishments:
If Christ had obtained this liberty it was worth the Preaching, and therefore
unless they can show out of the writings of the Apostles to warrant this
Sanctuary, which they would build to the support of Blasphemers, Heretics,
that follows that the Apostles have not answered the trust committed to them,
but in that the Apostle puts a sword in the hand of the Magistrates, and in the
use of it makes him a Minister of the justice of the Lord against sin, he
confutes this opinion. 3. And Lastly we see clearly that some things that were
permitted under the old Testament to the Jews, are not to Christians under the
new but expressly and formally declared against by Christ, as Polygamie, men's
putting away their wives giving bills of divorce and marrying others, Mat. 5.
31, 32. Mat. 19. from v. 3. to the 10. and usury, Matthew. 5. 42. Luke 6. 34, 35.
Learned Cameron in his lectures of divorce upon Matthew. 19. 3. puts this
question why the bill of divorce takes not place in the times of the new
Testament and why does not God permit the same thing in the new, which he
suffered in the old, unto which he answers, That although there is the same
reason of man's nature in the times of the old and new Testament, yet there is
not the same reason of grace, Cancer. Praelect. De Repudio page 206.
which is much more plentifully and clearly laid open and explained in these
last times, then before; Therefore our lives ought to be ordered in these
times, Chemnit. loc. Com. De Paupert. 433, 434, 435. Deus in veteri Testamento
fuit and Theologus and Legislator. Alibi enim tradit, quomodo servi endum est
Deo in justitia and sanctitate coram ipso. Alibi vero pro externa societate
vitae civilis in Republi Israelit. certan quasdam politicas constitutiones
praescribit isti popul^.
much more strictly and holily. Those Elders under the old Testment were bound
truly to follow the same holiness of life, but we much more; for by how much
any one has received more then nnother, by so much he owes more. Chemnitius in
his common places de paupertate cap. 6. de vsura shows though there were two
permissions chiefly in the old Testament, of Divorce and Usurie, yet Christ
under the new, opposes to either of these permissions, the perpetual rule of
righteousness in God, Matthew. 5. 32. and 42. also cap. 19. verse 8. Luke 6.
verse 34. 35. In which place he discourses of this, how God under the old
Testament may be considered as a Divine, and as a Legislator, in some places of
the old Testament laying down how we must serve him in holiness and
righteousness; in others prescribing certain political constitutions to that
people for the external society of Civil life in the Jewish Commonwealth.
Now in those political Laws which God gave the People of Israel, Holiness and
Righteousness of the conscience before God was not always prescribed, but
they were fitted to the preservation of outward and civil society in that
Commonwealth according to the condition and dispositions and manners of that
people, to whom God himself gives the Epithet of a stiff neck. So the Bil of
Divorce in the Commonwealth of Israel, was permitted; but now in the new
Testament though Moses suffered it for the hardness of their hearts, yet Christ
declares against it it is not lawful to be permitted, though there were the same
manners of men, there being now under the Gospel more powerful remedies of
such an evil, and a fuller declaration and communication of the grace of God:
This Distinction may not be allowed now under the new Testament of Theologus
and Legislator, of jus fori and jus poli; for all Laws given by God, in the
new Testament, prescribe the purity of conscience before God, and do not look
particularly to the outward preservation of the Civil society of one
Commonwealth of people pe^uliarly. And so much for the 18. Thesis.

THESIS 19.
Besides all the old Testament proofs both of commands and approved examples
before the Law, and under the Law, before the Captivity of Babylon and after,
for the Magistrates coercive power in the matters of the first Table, laid down
in this Treatise, together with Answers to all the evasions brought against
such commands and examples, as also to that of proofs out of the old Testament,
I desire the Reader to consider this Thesis, that place of Scripture speaking
of the days of the new Testament and what should be then done, approves of and
commends this power of the Magistrate, as among other these three places of
Scripture Psalm. 2. 10, 11, 12. Esaias 49. 23. Zach. 13. 2, 3. That the second
Psalm is a Prophecy of the days of the Gospel, after Christ's coming into
the world is clearly demonstrated by Act. 4. 24, 25, 26, 27. where by Peter
and John it is applied to those times, In which Psalm King David, foreseeing in
Spirit that Heathen Kings would hand themselves and assemble together against
the Lord and his Christ, extends the same charge to the Gentiles which the
Kings of Jurie received before, and warned them all at once, Be wise ye Kings,
understand ye Judges of the world: Serve the Lord; and it is to be observed in
that second Psalm that Kings and Judges quatomes tales are to serve the Lord
and kiss the Son, Upon which words Austin writes thus, All men ought to serve
God: in one sort by common condition as men; in another sort by several gifts
and offices, by the which some do this some do that; no private persons could
command Idols to be punished clean from among mert, which was so long before
prophesied, Therefore Kings (Besides their duty to serve God common with all
other men, have in that they be Kings how to serve the Lord in such sort as
none can do which are not Kings. For in this Kings (in respect they be Kings)
serve the Lord (as God by David warns them) if in their Kingdoms they
command that which is good, and prohibit that which is evil, not in Civil
affairs only, but in matters also concerning divine Religion. That Esaias 49. 23.
is a Prophecy to the Gentiles under the new Testament, as is evident by verse
22. Behold I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, etc now they could not be called the nurses of the Church if
they had no care of Religion; but those of whom this prophecy was meant, and
in whom fulfilled, did care for Religion did care for the Faith, as
Constantine, Gratian, Theodosius, and others, who by public Edicts did
prohibit false Doctrines and did command all throughout the whole Empire, to
embrace the true Faith; it is confessed by Master Vid. Bulling. aduers. Anabapt.
5. Book 3. chapt.
Buroughs himself, The protection of their Civil peace is not sufficient to
give them such a denomination of nursing Fathers and Mothers. Upon which place
Barroughs Heart-Divisions. page 25.
B^lson writes thus with this endeavor of Christian Princes God comfort his
Church by the mouth of Esaias, Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, etc what Esaias
says Princes shall do, that I conclude Princes must do, because God would not
promise they should usurp another man's office but discharge their own. If you
take the milk of Princes for temporal honors, Lands, and goods, the ^ery
Children will laugh you to scorn. The Church of Christ is no wanton Church,
She lusts for no worldly wealth, which is rather harmful poison then
wholesome food, Gods provision for her is spiritual, not carnal, her delights
are not outward in flesh, but inward in grace: The Prophet good man had no
leisure to think on yo^ farms, demeans and Revenues; no remedy, you must needs
yield us that Christian Princes, in respect of their office, not of their
riches, have received an express commandment from God to show themselves
Nurses to his Church. Now Nurses by nature must provide for their infants and
defend them from danger, ergo Kings and Queens in the new Testament, are bound
to tender the Church of Christ, and by their princely power and public Laws to
defend the same from infection of Heresies, invasions of Scismes, and all other
apparent corruptions of faith and good manners. Zach. 13. 2, 3. is a prophecy
of the times and days of the Gospel, as the context is clear and is confessed
by some Patrons of Toleration, though put off and evaded that it is allegorical
and figurative, and meant of some one particular time only under the Gospel,
with other such like, as the Posteript to Hagiomastix writes page 21. 22. all
which evasions I had thought at this time to have fully taken of, and to have
cleared this text by many passages and Phrases in the context, besides several
reasons that it must needs be understood literally, and of all times under the
Gospel, but the troubles of the times call me of from my intended thoughts and
preparations in this kind, and shall reserve them (if God will) for a second
part, only I shall add that diverse learned Interpreters ancient and modern as
Theodoret, Calvin, and others hold the Prophet here alludes to Deuteronomy. 13. where
God required such strictness in maintaining pure Doctrine, that the Father
should rise up against the Son whom he begat. God would have all the godly to
burn with such a zeal of defending the true worship of God and Piety, that no
affinity nor consanguinitie, nor any other carnal respect should prevail to
hinder the requiring of punishment upon their nearest friends in cases of
violating the worship of God and corrupting sound Doctrine. This was the
Prescript of the Law: But whereas for a time, Religion had been neglected, yea
trodden under foot, Zachary says that when the faithful should repent, they
should be endowed with such a desire of true Piety, as neither Father nor
Mother should suffer wicked errors in their Sons. And here it is to be observed
that this zeal is approved of under the Kingdom of Christ; for Zachary does
not here restrain this Doctrine to the time of the Law, but shows what shall
be when Christ is come, namely that then again that zeal shall burn in the
hearts of all the godly which was almost extinct. It follows therefore this
Law was not given only to the Jews, as many fanatical men imagine, who would
have a leave of disturbing the world, but that this Law extends to us also.
Muscul. de legibus Ad classem hanc moraralium pra^ceptorium pertinentia multa
quidem in literis Prophetam quoque leguntur. Fuerunt enim illi in plenisque
Mosaicae legis interpretes
Musculus speaking of things appertaining to the Classis of moral commands,
shows that many things in the Prophets writings belong thereunto, and he gives
this reason; That in most things they were Interpreters of the Mosaicall Law;
And therefore Zachary does here inter ^^t that Law in Deuteronomy. 13. concerning
false Prophets and Seducers, to be in force under the Gospel, The Prophets in
their writings do interpret and explain Moses writings, as the Books of Moses
do the Decalogue, written by God in two Tables of stone and delivered unto
Moses, Deuteronomy. 5. 22. That in Deuteronomy. 13. is to be compared with this Zach. 13. 3.
where we find the same things, almost the same words used in a Prophecy of the
times of the Gospel, the meaning of which is not that his Father or Mother
should presently run a Knife into him, but that though they begat him, yet they
should be the means to bring him unto condign punishment, even the taking away
of his life, and so Master Cartwright speaking of this prophecy writes thus.
No power is given to one private man to kill another, nor for the Private man
to kill his children, but this manner of speech is grounded on Deuteronomy, 17. 7.
where it is proved the Witness who accused should throw the first stone against
the convicted persons, ergo they ascribe the killing of the guilty person, as
belonging to the duty of the Accuser.

THESIS 20.
In the Scriptures of the new Test, there are clear grounds and full proofs,
that Heretics and false Teachers, corrupters of Religion, deserve to be
punished corporally, as well as spiritualy by excommunication, and that
Magistrates ought to punish in cases of Idolatry, Heresy and such like, as
well as for transgressions against the second Table; Now among many I shall lay
down these following, 1. That Christ and his Apostles being accused before
Magistrates about matters of Religion, as blasphemy, being against the Law of
Moses, and such like, they never pleaded for themselves that it was not lawful
to punish any man for matters of Religion, but they defended their causes, that
they had not taught any thing against the word of God and the Law of Moses,
were not guilty of Blasphemy or Heresy, so that they granted the major
proposition, namely that is was lawful for the Magistrate to punish Heretics
who taught against the Word of God, but they denied the minor that they were
Heretics: For out of the word of God they showed they were not Heretics, in
that they taught nothing against the Word of God, yea nothing but what had a
proof in the Word of God. But of this the Reader may see more in Zanchits
Miscellanies De Magistratu, page 173. 2. Christ in John 2. 14* 15, 16. made a
scourge, and drove out of the Temple those that made his Fathers house a house
of merchandise, which now false Teachers are said to do, 2 Pet. 2. 3. and it is
the more observable that Christ who let the woman taken in adultery go away and
did not punish her; that would not divide an inheritance because his Kingdom
was not of this world; yet in the matter of his Fathers house did exercise
coercive power with a high hand, scourging and driving out of the Temple those
that sold Oxen, etc. and this he is said to do out of zeal, the zeal of
thine House has eaten me up: and though this be not recorded for Ministers to
use a material whip, yet certainly this was an act of righteousness that
should have been done by the Magistrates of that time, and it had been a
glorious action if they had done it, and however there might be something
heroical in it, yet doubtless it is an act of righteousness and zeal that ought
to be done by some in their ordinary calling, viz. by Magistrates. 3. Romans 13.
4. Magistrates bear not the sword in vaiue for them that do evil, and they
are revengers to execute wrath upon them that do evil: Now Blasphemers,
Heretics, false Teachers do evil and are evil workers, Phil. 3. 2. 2
Epistle of John v. 11. Revel. 2. 2. and non distinguendum est ubi Scriptura non
distinguit: upon which place Master Bilson writes thus, Princes in the new
Testament be Gods Ministers to revenge malefactors, as they were in the old,
and the greater the wickedness, the rather to be punished, ergo, the greatest
(as Heresies Idolatries and Blasphemies) are soonest of all other vices to be
repressed by Christian Magistrates, whose zeal for Christ's glory must not
decrease, Christ's care for their Scepters being increased. 4. 1 Cor. 12. 10.
29. (...) the Apostle shows us that when Christian Magistrates were wanting,
besides miracles, gifts of healing, etc. Christ gave a special gift to the
Church of restraining Seducers and obstinate Heretics by corporal punishment;
There were some that had a special gift of coercing ungodly men; this Paul
exercised upon Elym^n the false Prophet and Seducer, Acts 13. 11. upon which
place Peter Martyr writes fully, The Church then had not the Sword of the
Magistrate by which offenses might be restrained, therefore a power was given
of punishing them corporally. The best Interpreters Ancient and Modern, as
Chrysostom, Oecumenius, Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, Pareus, and diverse others
do understand by Powers, those who had such a Gift, upon which place I
intended to have insisted largely by comparing other Scriptures with it, and to
have demonstrated from it, the necessity and lawfulness of a power of
punishing corporally obstinate Heretics and Seducers, but I must take off. 5.
Gal. 5. 12. Paul wishes that false Teachers and troublers of the Church were
cut off: which place I intended to have enlarged upon to prove it meant of
bodily cutting off, but cannot now. 6. 1 Timothy 2. 2. Paul shows Kings and those
that are in Authority are to be prayed for, that we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, in all godliness, as well as
honesty: This is the end of prayers to be made for Magistrates, Now that which
is the end of Prayers poured out for Magistrates ought to be the end propounded
by the Magistrate in his duty, but the Apostle commands prayers to be made for
Magistrates for that end, ergo it lies upon the Magistrate to see to it, of
which the Reader may see more in Meisner. Polit. de Magistratu; and it is
confessed by Master Cap. 2. p. 35, 36. The prayers of the Church for 300.
years in the Primitive times, that Kings might come to the knowledge of the
truth, and they lead peaceable and quiet lives in all godliness and honesty
(which Saint Paul in Nero^ time exhorted unto 1 Timothy 2. 2) were not answered
nor accomplished til Constantines time, when the Church brought forth a
manchild.
Thomas Goodwin in his Return of Prayers, this was a command to pray, that God
would give Christian Magistrates to the Church, the Answer of which was in
giving Constantine a Christian Emperor, who as the Ecclesiastical Socrat.
Schol. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Histories show, did by Laws and Edicts command the Christian Religion, as
also establish the ^icen^ Creed touching the Faith of one Substance, banishing
by his Edict Arius and his adherent^, 7. Revel. 17* 16. John prophecies, and
speaks of it as an acceptable work to God, for Christian Kings and States by
their Civil temporal power to destroy the Romish Religion: Now if the Romish
Seducers and corrupters of Religion (upon that ground called the Whore) may be
punished by Civil Magistrates, and dealt with by other weapons then preaching,
admonition, excommunication, then such as are certinly worse then they, as
Anti^rinitaria^s, Soc^nians. Libertins, may be also by Magistrates restrained.
Master Robinson writing against the Anabaptists, one Helwisse who interprets
this place of Spiritual weapons, answers him this is a prophecy of Kings and
Magistrates whose weapons and power are other besides that of prayers which is
common to all Christians, it is spoken what they shall do as Kings: Besides it is
contrary to the clear meaning of the Holy Ghost, Robins. against Helwisse of
Magistracy, p. 129, 130.
which is, that Kings should first use their Civil power for the Beast and
Whore, and after against them to their destruction, they shall give their power
to the Lamb, as they before gave it against the Lamb: Now we know they used
their Civil power under Popery, as a means by which to suppress the true
Religion, and therefore Princes and States shall establish the true by that
means and destroy the false, of which I had thought to have enlarged further,
as also upon the other New Testament quotations, to have answered the evasions
brought against them, especially of Hagiomastix against Romans 13. 4. and to have
proved it cannot be restrained only against evils of the Second Table, but is
to be understood of evil against the First, but I must reserve these things,
and diverse more to another opportunity, and for a Second Part. If God will. To
God only wise, be glory through Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
GOod Reader, among many other Errata of the Press, upon running over the Book
in have since printed (not having time to read and weigh every page, much less
sentence or line) I find these following,

ERRATA.

PAge 32 line 12, after ought to be r. also punished. p. 30. l. 13 for they r.
these, p. 33 l. 28 r. four and five fold, p. 55 l. 4. for latter r. letter, The
figures of the pages which should be 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64. are
misprinted, p. 64. l. 6. for men's r. means, p. 78. l. 23. for others r. other
Divines, p. 167. l. 12. after put r. upon and.

Margin. Notes, p. 14. for diga r. digna. p. 61. for Egyptis r. Egyptii, bones
r. boves, p. 130. r. c. 9 quae. 4. p. 189. for equas r. equus, p. 214. r.
praceptorum, for Prophetam r. Prophetarum, for pl^nisqu^ r. plerisque, p. 216.
r. after peccata r. coercerentur.


