THE RULES AND DIRECTIONS of the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT:
Concerning the Examination of all such as shall be admitted to the Sacrament of
the LORDS SUPPER, Within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales:
Contained In an Ordinance of the twentieth of October, 1645. with Questions and
Answers concerning the same.

Printed at London for M. Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1659.

Rules and Directions concerning suspension from the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, in case of Ignorance.
1. ALl such persons who shall be admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, ought to know that there is a God, that there is but one ever living
and true God, maker of Heaven and Earth, and Governor of all things; That this
only true God, is the God whom we worship; that this God is but one, yet three
distinct Persons, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, all equal God. 2. That God
created man ofter his own Image, in knowledge, righteousness, and true
holiness; That by one man u^n entied into the world, and death by sin, and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned; That thereby they are all
dead in trespasses and sins, and are by nature the Children of wrath, and so
liable to eternal death, the wages of every sin. 3. That there is but one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who is also overall, God
blessed for ever, neither is there salvation in any other; That he was
conceived by the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary; that he dyed upon the
cross to save his people from their sins; That he role again the third day
from the dead, ascended into Heaven, sits at the right hand of God, and makes
continual intercession for us, of whose fullness we receive all grace necessary
to salvation. 4. That Christ and his benefits are applied only by faith; That
faith is the gift of God, and that we have it not of our selves, but it is
wrought in us by the Word and Spirit of God.
That faith is that grace, whereby we believe and trust in Christ for remission
of sins, and life everlasting according to the promise of the Gospel, that
whosoever believes not on the Son of God shall not see life, but shall perish
eternally.

That they who truly repent of their sins, do see them, forrow for them, and
turn from them to the Lord, and that except men repent they shall surely perish.

That a godly life is conscionably ordered according to the Word of God, in
Holiness and Righteousness, without which no man shall see God.

That the Sacraments are Seals of the Covenant of Grace in the Blood of Christ:
That the Sacraments of the new Testament, are Baptism and the Lords Supper;
that the outward Elements in the Lords Supper are Bread and Wine, and do
signify the Body and Blood of Christ Crucified, which the worthy Receiver by
faith does partake of in this Sacrament, which Christ has like wise ordained
for the remembrance of this death; that whosoever eats and drinks unworthily,
is guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; and therefore that every one is to
examine himself, left he eat and drink judgment to himself, not discerning
the Lords Body.

That the souls of the faithful after death, do immediately live with Christ
in blessedness; and that the souls of the wicked, do immediately go into
Hell torments.

That there shall be a Resurrection of the Bodies, both of the just and unjust
at the last Day, at which time all shall appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, to receive according to what they have done in the body, whether it be
good or evil: And that the righteous shall go into life eternal, and the
wicked into everlasting punishment.

And it is further ordained by the Lords and Commons, that those who have a
competent measure of understanding concerning the matters contained in these
Articles shall not be kept back from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper for
Ignorance. And that the Examination and judgment of such persons as shall for
their ignorance of the aforesaid points of Religion not be admited to the
Sacrament of the Lods Supper, is to be in the power of the Eldership of every
congregation.

SHORT Questions and Answers.
Q WHat is God?

A. A most holy Spirit, Infinite in all perfections, Ioh. 4.24. 1 Timothy 6.16.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. One only, 1 Cor. 8.

Q. Into how many Persons is this one God distinguished?

A. Into three, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. 1 John 5.7.

Q. In what estate was man made by God at first?

A. In a very happy estate, being made after the Image of God, Genesis 1.27.

Q. In what respect is man said to be made after the Image of God?

A. In that he was endued with perfect knowledge, and with true holiness and
righteousness, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.

Q. Did man always continue in that happy estate wherein he was at first made?

A. No, he became miserable by sin, Genesis 3.17.

Q. What was the sin which Adam did commit?

A. Disobedience against God, in eating the forbidden fruit, Genesis 3.3, 6.

Q. Did all Mankind sin in Adam?

A. Yes: Adam was a public person, and we were all in his loins, Romans 5.19.

Q. What is sin in general?

A. A transgression of Gods Commandments, 1 John 3.4.

Q. What be the kinds of sin:

A. 1. Original, which is the corruption of nature, wherein we are conceived
and born, Gal. 5.19. 2. Actual, which is the fruit of that corruption in evil
thoughts, words and deeds, Psalm. 51.5.


Q. What is the punishment due to sin?

A. All curses and plagues in this life, at the end death, and after that
eternal torment in Hell, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17. Romans 9.23 2 These. 1.8, 9.

Q. Seeing we are all sinners, by what means may we escape those miseries which
we have deserved, and recover happiness?

A. Only by Jesus Christ, Acts 41.2.

Q. What is Jesus Christ?

A. Jesus Christ is the only begotten Son of God, who also became man for our
salvation, Luke 1.35. John 1.14.

Q What has Christ done and suffered for our redemption?

A. He fulfilled the Law for us, Mat. 3.15. 2. He has endured the curse of the
Law due to our sins, Esaias 53.5.


Q. How are men made partakers of the benefits of those things which Christ did
and suffered?

A. By Faith, John 1.12.

Q. What is Faith?

A. A grace whereby we receive Christ as our perfect Savior, and rest upon him
alone for salvation, Joh. 1.12. Acts 16.31.

Q. How is Faith wrought in us?

A. 1. Inwardly by the Spirit of God, Acts 16.14. 2. Outwardly, by the
preaching of the Word, Romans 10.14.


Q. What means has God appointed to strengthen our faith?

A. All his holy Ordinances, especially his Sacraments, Act. 2.38.

Q. What is chiefly to be considered in a Sacrament?

A. 1. The outward signs and rites. 2. The inward things signified thereby


Q. How many Sacraments are there?

A. Two, Baptisine and the Lords Supper, Mat. 28.19. Mat. 26.26. etc.

Q. What is the special use of Baptism?

To ingraft us into Christ, Mat. 28.19. Gal. 4.27.

Q. What is the outward sign in Baptism?

A. Water, Act. 10 47.

Q. What does that set forth?

A. Christ's Blood, Rev. 1.5.

Q. What does the sprinkling of it upon the party baptized set out.

A. Our spiritual cleansing from sin by the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.2.

Q. What is the special use of the Lords Supper?

A. 1 To make us remember Christ's death, 1 Cor. 11.25. 2 To make us grow in
grace.


Q. What are the outward signs thereof?

A. Bread and Wine, Mat. 26.26, 27.

Q. What does the Bread set forth?

A. The Body of Christ, Mat. 26.26.

Q. What does the Wine set forth?

A. The Blood of Christ, Mat. 26.27.

Q. In whose room stands the Minister?

A. In the room of God himself, 2 Cor. 5.20.

Q. What is set forth by the Ministers blessing Bread and Wine?

A. Gods setting of his Son apart for our Redemption, Ioh. 10.36.

Q. What is signified by breaking the bread?

A. The sufferings which Christ endured in his body, 1 Cor. 11.24.

What is signified by pouring out of wine?

A. Shedding Christ's blood, Luke 22.20.

Q. What is signified by the Ministers giving Bread and Wine to the
Communicants?

A. Gods giving of his Son unto them, Mat. 26.26.

Q. What does peoples taking Bread and Wine set out?

A. Their applying Christ's body and blood unto themselves by faith, Ioh. 6.35.

Q. What is required of every one before he comes to the Lords Table?

A. He must examine himself, 1 Cor. 11.28.

Q. Of what must he examine himself?

A. 1. Of his sins. 2. Of his graces.


Q. Of what graces must a man, before his coming to the Lords Table, examine
himself?

Ans. 1. Of his Knowledge. 2. Of his Faith. 3. Of his Repentance. 4. Of his
Love.


Q. How ought every one to behave himself at the Lords Table?

A. With all holy reverence, thankfully remembering Christ's death, and seriously
considering the things that are signified by the outward signs and rites,
Eccles. 5.11. Cor. 11.25.

Q. What is the danger of unworthy receiving?

A. Unworthy receivers are guilty or the body and blood of Christ, and so do
eat and drink their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.27.29.

Quest. What is to be done after our receiving?

A. We must give hearty thanks unto God, as for all his benefits, so
especially for giving unto us Christ, to perfect the work of our salvation. 2.
We must examine how we have profited by our receiving. 3. We must carefully
perform our vows and promises made unto God, of leading a new life, and
bringing forth fruits meet for repentance.


Q. What is repentance?

A. It is a sighing and sorrowing for sins, and turning from them to God, Acts
3.9.

Q. Is this repentance necessary to salvation?

A. Yes, for except men repent, they shall surely perish, Luke 13.3.

Q. What is a godly life?

A. A life conscionably ordered according to the Word of God, in holiness and
righteousness, Psalm. 119.19. Luke 1.75.

Q. Is a godly life also necessary to salvation?

A. Yes, for without holiness and righteousness no man shall see the Lord, Heb.
12.14.

Q. Seeing the soul of man is immortal and cannot dye, what shall become
there ^f when it shall be separated from the body?

A. The souls of the faithful shall immediately live with Christ in
blessedness, and the souls of the wicked shall immediately go into hell
torments, Luke 16.22, 23. and Chap. 23. ver. 43. Phil. 1.23.

Q. But shall not the body also be quickened and raised again?

A. Yes, there shall be a Resurrection of the bodies both of the just and
unjust at the last day, at which time the soul and body shall be united, and
shall all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to
what they have done in their life times, whether good or evil; then shall the
righteous inherit life eternal, but the wicked shall go into everlasting
torment, John. 5.28, 29. Matthew. 25.32. 2 Cor. 5.10. Matthew. 25.46.

FINIS.

