THE PROPOSITIONS OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament.

For a safe and well grounded Peace.

Sent to his Majesty at Newcastle, by the Right Honorable The Earl of
Pembroke and Montgomery. The Earl of Suffolk.

Members of the House of Peers. AND Knights
Sir Walter Earl Sir John Hipisly Robert Goodwyn Luke Robinson
Esquire
Members of the House of Commons.

Die Mercurii 15. Julii 1646.
IT is this day Ordered by the LORDS in Parliament, That the Printer belonging
to this House shall forthwith print the Propositions sent to his Majesty at
Newcastle for a safe and well grounded Peace. And that no other person shall
presume to print or reprint the same, or any part thereof, at their perils.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 17 July
1646.

Die Sabbatbi 11. Julii 1646.
The Propositions of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for a safe
and well grounded Peace.
May it please your Majesty;
WE the Lords and Commons Assembled in the Parliament of England, in the name,
and on the behalf of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Commissioners
of the Parliament of Scotland, in the name, and on the behalf of the Kingdom
of Scotland, Do humbly present unto your Majesty the humble desires and
Propositions for a safe and well grounded Peace, agreed upon by the Parliaments
of both Kingdoms respectively: Unto which we do pray your Majesty's Assent:
And that they and all such Bills as shall be tendered to Your Majesty in
pursuance of them; or any of them, may be Establisbed and Enacted for Statutes
and Acts of Parliament, by your Majesty's Royal Assent in the Parliaments of
both Kingdoms respectively.

I WHereas both Houses of the Parliament of England, have been necessitated to
undertake a War in their just and lawful defense: And afterward both
Kingdoms of England and Scotland joined in solemn League and Covenant, were
engaged to prosecute the same. That by Act of Parliament in each Kingdom
respectively, all Oaths, Declarations, and Proclamations heretofore had, or
hereafter to be had against both or either of the Houses of the Parliament of
England, the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, and the late Convention of
Estates in Scotland, or Committees flowing from the Parliament or Convention in
Scotland, or their Ordinances and proceedings; or against any for adhering unto
them; or for doing or executing any Office, Place, or Charge, by any Authority
derived from them. And all Judgments, Indictments, Outlawries, Attainders, and
Inquisitions, in any the said Causes; And all Graunts thereupon made or had, or
to be made or had, be declared Null, suppressed and forbidden. And that this be
publicly intimated in all Parish Churches within His Majesty's Dominions, and
all other places needful.

II. That His Majesty, according to the laudabie example of His Royal Father
of happy memory, may be pleased to swear and sign the late Solemn League and
Covenant; And that an Act of Parliament be passed in both Kingdoms
respectively, for enjoining the taking thereof by all the Subjects of the three
Kingdoms; And the Ordinances concerning the manner of taking the same in both
Kingdoms, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament respectively, with such
penalties, as by mutual advice of both Kingdoms shall be agreed upon.

III. That a Bill be passed for the utter abolishing and taking away of all
Archbishops, Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deanes, and
Sub-Deanes, Deanes and Chapters, Archdeacons, Cannons, and Prebendaries; And
all Chaunters, Chancellors, Treasurers, Sub-Treasurers, Succentors, and
Sacrists; and all Vicars Chorill, and Choresters, old Vicars, and new Vicars of
any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, and all other their Underofficers, out of
the Church of England, and Dominion of Wales; And out of the Church of Ireland,
with such Alterations concerning the Estates of Prelates, as shall agree with
the Articles of the late Treaty of the Date at Edinburgh, 29 November 1643. and
joint Declaration of both Kingdoms.

IIII. That the Ordinances concerning the Calling and sitting of the Assembly
of Divines, be confirmed by Act of Parliament.

V. That Reformation of Religion, according to the Govenant, be settled by Act
of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses have agreed, or shall agree upon,
after Consultation had with the Assembly of Divines.

VI. For as much as both Kingdoms are mutually obliged by the same Covenant,
to endeavor the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in matters of Religion,
That such Unity and Uniformity in Religion according to the Covenant, as after
Consultation had with the Divines of both Kingdoms now Assembled, is or shall
be jointly agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament of England, and by the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland, be confirmed by Acts of Parliament of both
Kingdoms respectively.

VII. That for the more effectual disabling Jesuits, Priests, Papists, and
Popish Recusants from disturbing the State, and deluding the Laws; and for the
better discovering, and speedy Conviction of Recusants, an Oath be established
by Act of Parliament to be Administered to them, wherein they shall abjure and
renounce the Popes Supremacy, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Worshipping of the Consecreted Host, Crucifixes and Images, and all other
Popish Superstitions, and Errors, and refusing the said Oath, being tendered in
such manner as shall be appointed by the said Act, to be a sufficient
Conviction of Recusancy.

VIII. An Act of Parliament for Education of the Children of Papists by
Protestants, in the Protestant Religion.

IX. An Act for the true Leavie of the Penalties against them, which Penalties
to be Leavied and disposed in such manner as both Houses shall agree on,
wherein to be provided that His Majesty shall have no loss.

X. That an Act be passed in Parliament, whereby the practices of Papists
against the State may be prevented, and the Laws against them duly executed,
and a stricter course taken to prevent the Saying, or Hearing of Mass in the
Court, or any other part of this Kingdom.

XI. The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the four last preceding
Propositions, in such manner as the Estates of the Parliament there shall
think fit.

XII. That the King do give his Royal assent to an Act for the due
observation of the Lords Day.

And to the Bill for the suppression of Innovations in Churches, and Chapels
in and about the Worship of God, etc.

And for the better advancement of the Preaching of Gods holy Word in all parts
of this Kingdom.

And to the Bill against the enjoying of Pluralities of Benefices by Spiritual
Persons and Non-Residency.

And to an Act to be framed and agreed upon by both Houses of Parliament for
the reforming and regulating of both Universities, of the Colleges of
Westminster, Winchester, and Eaton.

And to such Act or Acts for raising of Moneys for the payment and satisfying
of the Public Debts and Damages of the Kingdom, and other Public uses, as
shall hereafter be agreed on by both Houses of Parliament; and that if the King
do not give his Assent thereunto, then it being done by both Houses of
Parliament, the same shall be as valid to all Intents and Purposes, as if the
Royal Assent had been given thereunto.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland.

And that his Majesty give assurance of his consenting in the Parliament of
Scotland, to an Act, acknowledging and ratifying the Acts of the Convention of
Estates of Scotland, called by the Counsel and Conservers of the peace, and
the Commissioners of the Common Burdens, and Assembled the two and twentieth
day of June, 1643. and several times continued since; and of the Parliament of
that Kingdom since Convened.

XIII. That the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England Assembled, shall
during the space of twenty years; from the first of July, 1646. Arm, Train,
and Discipline, or cause to be Armed, Trained, and Disciplined, all the Forces
of the Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of
Gerusey, and Iersey, and the Town of Barwick upon Tweed, already raised both
for Sea and Land Service; and shall from time to time during the said space of
twenty years, Raise, Leavie, Arm, Train, and Discipline, or cause to be
raised, Leavied, Armed, Trained, and Disciplined, any other Forces for Land and
Sea service in the Kingdoms, Dominions, and places aforesaid, as in their
judgments they shall from time to time during the said space of twenty years
think fit, and appoint; and that neither the King, His Heirs, or Successors,
nor any other but such as shall Act by the Authority or approbation of the said
Lords and Commons, shall during the said space of twenty years, exercise any
of the Powers aforesaid.

And the like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of the Parliament
there shall think fit.

That moneys be raised and levied for the maintenance and use of the said
Forces for land service, and of the Navy and forces for Sea service, in such
sort and by such ways and means as the said Lords and Commons shall from time
to time during the said space of twenty years think fit and appoint, and not
otherwise. That all the said Forces both for Land and Sea service, so raised or
leavied or to be raised or leavied, and also the Admiralty and Navy, shall from
time to time during the said space of twenty years, be employed managed,
ordered and disposed by the said Lords and Commons in such sort, and by such
ways and means as they shall think fit, and appoint, and not otherwise. And
the said Lords and Commons during the said space of twenty years, shall have
power.

1. To suppress all forces raised or to be raised, without authority and
consent of the said Lords and Commons, to the disturbance of the public peace
of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and Dominion of Wales, the Isles of
Guernsey and Iersey, and the Town of Barwicke upon Tweede, or any of them.

2. To suppress any foreign Forces who shall invade, or endeavor to invade
the Kingdoms of England, and Ireland, Dominion of Wales, the Isles of Guernsey
and Iersey, and the Town of Barwicke upon Tweede, or any of them.

3. To conjoyne such Forces of the Kingdom of England, with the Forces of the
Kingdom of Scotland, as the said Lords and Commons shall from time to time
during the said space of twenty years, judge fit and necessary: To resist all
foreign invasions, and to suppress any Forces, raised or to be raised
against, or within either of the said Kingdoms; To the disturbance of the
public peace of the said Kingdoms, or any of them by any authority under the
great Seal, or other warrant whatsoever, without consent of the said Lords and
Commons of the Parliament of England, and the Parliament or the Estates of the
Parliament of Scotland respectively; And that no Forces of either Kingdom,
shall go into nor continue in the other Kingdom without the advice and desire
of the said Lords and Commons of the Parliament of England, and the Parliament
of the Kingdom of Scotland, or such as shall be by them appointed for that
purpose; And that after the expiration of the said twenty years, neither the
King, his Heirs or Successors, nor any person or persons by color or pretense
of any Commission, Power, Deputation, or authority to be derived from the King
his Heirs or Successors, or any of them, shall raise, arm, train,
discipline, employ, order, manage, disband, or dispose any of the Forces by
Sea, or Land, of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, the Dommion of Wales,
Isles of Gernsey and Iersey, and the Town of Barwicke upon Tweed; Nor exercise
any of the said powers or authorities in the precedent Articles mentioned and
expressed to be during the said space of twenty years in the said Lords and
Commons; Nor do any Act or thing concerning the execution of the said powers,
or authorities, or any of them, without the consent of the said Lords and
Commons first had, and obtained. That after the expiration of the said twenty
years in all cases wherein the Lords and Commons shall declare the safety of
the Kingdom to be concerned, and shall thereupon pass any Bill or Bills for
the raising, arming, training, disciplining, employing, mannaging, ordering or
disposing of the Forces by Sea or Land, of the Kingdoms of England and
Ireland, the Dominions of Wales, the Isles of Gernsey and Iersey, and the Town
of Barwicke upon Tweede, or of any part of the said Forces or concerning the
Admiralty and Navy, or concerning the leavyng of moneys for the raising,
maintenance or use of the said Forces for Land service, or of the Navy, and
Forces for Sea service, or of any part of them; And ^f that the Royal Assent
to such Bill or Bills shall not be given in the House of Peers within such
time after the passing thereof by both Houses of Parliament, as the said Houses
shall judge fit and convenient; That then such Bill or Bills so passed by the
said Lords and Commons as aforesaid, and to which the Royal Assent shall not
be given as is herein before expressed, shall nevertheless after declaration
of the said Lords and Commons made in that behalf, have the force and strength
of an Act or Acts of Parliament; And shall be as valid to all intents and
purposes, as if the Royal Assent had been given thereunto.

Provided, that nothing herein before contained shall extend to the taking away
of the ordinary legal power of Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Mayors, Baliffs,
Coroners, Constables, Headboroughs, or other Officers of Justice not being
millitary Officers, concerning the administration of Justice so as neither the
said Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs, Coroners, Constables,
Headboroughs and other Officers, nor any of them, do leavy, conduct, employ,
or command any forces whatsoever, by color or pretense of any Commission of
Array, or extraordinary command from his Majesty his Heirs or Successors,
without the consent of the said Lords and Commons.

And if any person shall he gathered and assembled together in warlike manner,
or otherwise to the number of thirty persons, and shall not forthwith disband
themselves being required thereto by the said Lords and Commons, or command
from them, or any by them, especially authorized for that purpose, then such
person and persons not so disbanding themselves, shall be guilty and incur
the pains of high Treason, being first declared guilty of such offense by the
said Lords and Commons; Any Commission under the great Seal or other warrant
to the contrary notwithstanding.

And he, or they that shall offend herein, to be incapable of any pardon from
his Majesty his Heirs or Successors, and their Estates shall be disposed as
the said Lords and Commons shall think fit, and not otherwise.

Provided that the City of London, shall have and enjoy all their Rights,
Liberties and Franchises Customs, and usages in the raising, and employing the
Forces of that City, for the defense thereof, in as full and ample manner, to
all intents and purposes, as they have or might have used or enjoyed the same
at any time, before the making of the said Act or Proposition; To the end that
City may be fully assured, it is not the intention of the Parliament, to take
from them any privileges, or immunities in raising or disposing of their
Forces, which they have or might have used or enjoyed heretofore.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of the Parliament there
shall think fit.

14 That by Act of Parliament, all Peers made since the day, that Edward Lord
Littleton, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal deserted the Parliament; and
that the said Great Seal, was serruptitiously conveyed away from the
Parliament; being the one and twentieth day of May, 1642. And who shall be
hereafter made, shall not sit or Vote in the Parliament of England, without
consent of both Houses of Parliament: And that all honor, and Title conferred
on any without consent of both Houses of Parliament, since the twentieth of
May, 1642. being the day that both Houses declared. That the King seduced by
evil Council, intended to raise war against the Parliament, be declared
Null and Void.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, those being excepted. whose Patents
were passed the Great Seal before the 4th. of June, 1644.

15 That an Act be passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively,
for confirmation of the Treaties passed betwixt the two Kingdoms (viz.) the
large Treaty, the late Treaty for the coming of the Scots Army into England,
and the settling of the Garrison of Barwick of the 29. of November 1643. and the
Treaty, concerning Ireland of the 6. of August, 1642. for the bringing of ten
thousand Scots into the Province of Ulster in Ireland, with all other
Ordinances and proceedings passed betwixt the two Kingdoms, and whereunto they
are obliged by the aforesaid Treaties.

And that Algernon Earl of Northumberland, John Earl of Rutland, Philip Earl
of Pembrook and Mountgomery, Robert Earl of Essex, Theophilus Earl of
Lincoln, James Earl of Suffolk, Robert Earl of Warwick, Edward Earl of
Manchester, Henry Earl of Stanford, Francis Lord Dacres, Philip Lord Wharton,
Francis Lord Willoughby, Dudly Lord North, John Lord Hunsdon, William Lord
Gray, Edward Lord Howard of Estrick, Thomas Lord Bruce. Ferdinando Lord
Fairefax, Master Nathaniel Fienes, Sir William Armine, Sir Philip Stapilton,
Sir Henry Vane senior, Master William Pierpoint, Sir Edward Aiscough, Sir
William Strickland, Sir Arthur Hasilrig, Sir John Fenwick, Sir William
Brereton, Sir Thomas Middrington, Master John Iell, Master Gilbert Willington,
Sir William Constable, Sir John Wray, Sir Henry Vane junior, Master Henry
Darley, Oliver Saint John Esquire, His Majesty's solicitor General, Master
Denzell Hollis, Master Alexander Rigby, Master Cornelius Holland, Master Samuel
Vassell, Master Peregrin Pelham, John Glyn Esquire, Recorder of London, Master
Henry Marten, Master Alderman Hoyle, Master John Blakiston, Master Sergeant
Wild, Master Richard Barwis, Sir Anthony Ieby, Master Ashurst, Master
Bellingham, and Master Tolson, Members of both Houses of the Parliament of
England, shall be the Commissioners for the Kingdom of England, for
conservation of the Peace between the two Kingdoms to Act according to the
Powers in that behalf expressed in the Articles of the large Treaty, and not
otherwise.

That His Majesty give His assent to what the two Kingdoms shall agree upon in
prosecution of the Articles of the large Treaty, which are not yet finished.

16 That an Act be passed in the Parliaments of both Kingdoms respectively,
for establishing the joint Declaration of both Kingdoms bearing date the 30.
day of January 1643. in England, and 1644. in Scotland with the qualifications
ensuing.

1. Qualification.
That the Persons who shall expect no pardon be only these following.

Rupert, and Maurice. Count Palatines of Rhine.

James Earl of Darby, John Earl of Bristoll, William Earl of Newcastle,
Francis Lord Cottington, George Lord Digby, Matthew Wren Bishop of Ely, Sir
Robert Heath Knight, Doctor Bramhall Bishop of Derry, Sir William Widdrington,
Colonel George Goring, Henry Jermin Esquire, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir John Biron,
Sir Francis Doddington, Sir John Strangwayes, Master Endymion Porter, Sir
George Radcliffe, Sir Marmaduke Langdale.

Henry Vaughan, Esquire, now called Sir Henry Vaughan. Sir Francis Windebanke.
Sir Richard Greenvill Mr. Edward Hide, now called Sir Edward Hide. Sir John
Marley Sir Nicholas Cole Sir Thomas Riddell, Junior. Sir John Colepepper Mr.
Richard Lloyd, now called Sir Richard Lloyd. Master David Ienkins Sir George
Strode George Carteret, Esquire, now called Sir George Carteret. Sir Charles
Dallison, Knight. Richard Lane, Esquire, now called Sir Richard Lane. Sir
Edward Nicholas John Ashburnham, Esquire Sir Edward Harbert, Knight, His
Majesty's Attorney General. Earl of Traquaire Lord Harris Lord Rae George
Gourdon, sometime Marquess of Humley James Graham, sometime Earl of
Montrosse. Robert Maxwell, late Earl of Nithsdale. Robert Dalyell, sometime
Earl of Carne^ath. James Gerdon, sometime Viscount of Aboyne. Lodowick Linsey,
sometime Earl of Crawford. James Ogley, sometime Earl of Airby. James Ogley,
sometime Lord Ogley. Patrick Ruthen, sometime Earl of Forth. James King,
sometime Lord Itham. Alester Madonald. Iewing, Younger of Deumin. Gordan
Younger of Gight. Lesley of Auchentoule. Colonel John Cockram. Graham of
Gorthie. Mr. John Maxwell, sometime pretended Bishop of Rosse.
And all such others as being Processed by the Estates for Treason, shall be
condemned before the Act of Oblivion be passed.

2. Qualification.
ALL Papists and Popish Recusants, who have been, now are, or shall be actually
in Arms, or voluntarily assisting against the Parliament, or Estates of either
Kingdom; and by name, The Marquess of Winton. Earl of Worcester. Edward Lord
Harbert of Ragland, son to the Earl of Worcester. Lord (...). Carell
Mollin^^x, Esquire Lord Arundell of Warder. Sir Francis Howard. Sir (...). Sir
Charles Smith. Sir John Preston. Sir Bazill Brook. Lord Audley, Earl of
Castlehaven in the Kingdom of Ireland. William Sheldon of Beely, Esquire. Sir
Henry Beddingfield.


3. Qualification.
ALL persons who have had any hand in the plotting, designing, or assisting the
Rebellion of Ireland, except such persons who having only assisted the said
Rebellion, have rendered themselves, or come into the Parliament of England.

4. Qualification.
That Humfrey Bennet, Esquire. Sir Edward Ford. Sir John Penruddock. Sir George
Vaughan. Sir John Weld. Sir Robert Lee. Sir John Pate. John Ackland. Edmond
Windham, Esquire. Sir John Fitzharbert. Sir Edward Lawrence. Sir Ralph Dutton.
Henry Lingen, Esquire. Sir William Russell of Worceflershire. Thomas Lee of
Adlington, Esquire. Sir John Girlington Sir Paul Neale. Sir William Thorold.
Sir Edward Hussy. Sir Thomas Liddell, Sen. Sir Philip Musgrave. Sir John Digby
of Nottinghamshire. Sir Henry Fletcher. Sir Richard Mynshall. Lawrence
Halstead. John Denham, Esquire. Sir Edmond Fortescue. Peter Sainthill, Esquire.
Sir Thomas Tildesley. Sir Henry Griffith. Michael Wharton,Esquire. Sir Henry
Spiller. Mr. George Benyon, now called Sir George Benyon. Sir Edward Walgrave.
Sir Edward Bishop. Sir Robert Owseley. Sir John Man^. Lord Cholmley. Sir Thomas
Aston. Sir Lewis Dives. Sir Peter Osbourne. Samuel Thornton, Esquire Sir John
Lucas. John Blaney, Esquire. Sir Thomas Chedle. Sir Nicholas Kemish. Hugh
Lloyd, Esquire. Sir Nicholas Crispe. Sir Peter Ricaut.
And all such of the Scottish Nation, as have concurred in the Votes at Oxford,
against the Kingdom of Scotland and their proceedings, or have sworn or
subscribed the Declaration against the convention and Covenant; And all such as
have assisted the Rebellion in the North, or the Invasion in the South of the
said Kingdom of Scotland, or the late Invasion made there by the Irish and
their Adherents, be removed from His Majesty's Counsels, and be restrained
from coming within the Verge of the Court, and that they may not without the
advice and consent of both Houses of the Parliament of England, or the Estates
in the Parliament of Scotland respectively, bear any Office, or have any
employment concerning the State or Common Wealth; And in case any of them shall
offend therein, to be guilty of high Treason, and incapable of any pardon from
His Majesty, and their estates to be disposed as both Houses of the Parliament
of England, or the Estates of the Parliament in Scotland respectively shall
think fit: And that one full third part upon full value of the estates of the
persons aforesaid, made incapable of employment as aforesaid, be employed for
the payment of the Public Debts, and Damages, according to the Declaration.

1 Branch.
That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves late Members of either
House of Parliament, who have not only deserted the Parliament, but have also
sat in the unlawful assembly at Oxford, called or pretended by some to be a
Parliament, and Voted both Kingdoms Traitors, and have not voluntarily rendered
themselves before the last of October, 1644. be removed from His Majesty's
Counsels, and be restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court. And
that they may not without advice and consent of both Kingdoms bear any
Office, or have any employment concerning the State or Common Wealth: And in
case any of them shall offend therein, to be guilty of high Treason, and
incapable of any pardon by His Majesty, and their estates to be disposed as
both Houses of Parliament in England, or the Estates of the Parliament of
Scotland respectively, shall think fit.

2 Branch.
That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves Members of either House
of Parliament, who have sat in the unlawful assembly at Oxford, called or
pretended by some to be a Parliament, and have not voluntarily rendered
themselves before the last of October, 1644. be removed from His Majesty's
Counsels, and restrained from coming within the Verge of the Court; And that
they may not without the advice and consent of both Houses of Parliament, bear
any Office, or have any employment concerning the State and Common Wealth: And
in case any of them shall offend therein, to be guilty of high Treason, and
incapable of any pardon from His Majesty, and their estates to be disposed as
both Houses of the Parliament of England shall think fit.

3 Branch.
That the late Members, or any who pretended themselves Members of either House
of Parliament, who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the Enemies
thereof, and have not rendered themselves before the last of October, 1644. be
removed from His Majesty's Counsels, and be restrained from coming within the
Verge of the Court, And that they may not without the advice and consent of
both Houses of Parliament bear any Office, or have any employment concerning
the State Common Wealth: And in case any of them shall offend therein, to be
guilty of high Treason, and incapable of any pardon from His Majesty, and
their estates to be disposed as both Houses of Parliament in England shall
think fit.

5. Qualification.
THat all Judges, and Officers, toward the Law, Common, or Civil, who have
deferted the Parliament, and adhered to the Enemies thereof, be incapable of
any place of Judicature or Office toward the Law, Common, or Civil: And that
all Sergeants, Councillors, and Atturneys, Doctors, Advocates, and Proctors of
the Law, Common, or Civil, who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to
the Enemies thereof, be incapable of any practice in the Law, Common, or
Civil, either in public or private, and shall not be capable of any
preferment or employment in the Common Wealth, without the advice and consent
of both Houses of Parliament; And that no Bishop, or Clergyman, no Master or
Fellow of any College, or Hall, in either of the Universities, or elsewhere,
or any Master of Scoole, or Hospital, or any Ecclesiastical person, who has
deserted the Parliament, and adheered to the Enemies thereof, shall hold or
enjoy, or be capable of any preferment or employment in Church or Common
Wealth; But all their said several preferments, places, and promotions, shall
be utterly void, as if they were naturally dead; Nor shall they otherwise use
their Function of the Ministry without advice and consert of both Houses of
Parliament; Provided, that no Laps shall incur by such vacancy until six
months past, after notice thereof.

6. Qualification.
THat all persons, who have been actually in Arms against the Parliament, or
have counseled, or voluntarily assisted the Enemies thereof, are disabled to
be Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Majors, or other head Officers of any City
or Corporation, Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or to fit or serve as
Members, or assistants in either of the Houses of Parliament, or to have any
Military employment in this Kingdom without the consent of both Houses of
Parliament.

7. Qualification.
THe persons of all others to be free of all personal censure, notwithstanding
any Act, or thing done in, or concerning this War, they taking the Covenant.

8. Qualification.
THe estates of those persons excepted in the first three precedent
Qualifications; And the estates of Edward Lord Littleton, and of William Laud
late Archbishop of Canterbury, to pay public Debts and Damages.

9. Qualification.
1. Branch.
That two full parts in three, to be divided of all the Estates of the Members
of either House of Parliament who have not only deserted the Parliament, but
have also Voted both Kingdoms Traitors, and have not rendered themselves before
the first of December, 1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the
public debts and damages of the Kingdom.

2. Branch.
That two full parts in three, to be divided of the Estates of such late
Members of either House of Parliament, as sat in the unlawful Assembly at
Oxford, and shall not have rendered themselves before the first of December,
1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the Public debts and
damages of the Kingdom.

3. Branch.
That one full Moitie of the Estates of such Persons late Members of either of
the Houses of Parl. who have deserted the Parliament, and adhered to the
Enemies thereof, and shall not have rendered themselves before the first of
December. 1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the public debts
and damages of the Kingdom.

10. Qualification.
That a full third part of the value of the Estates of all Judges and Officers
toward the Law, Common or Civil, and of all the Sergeants, Councillors, and
Aturneyes, Doctors, Advocates, and Proctors of the Law, Common or Civil; And
of Bishops, Clergymen, Masters and Fellows of any College or Hall in either
of the Universities, or else where; And of all Masters of Schools, or
Hospitalls, and of Ecclesiastical Persons who have deserted the Parliament,
and adhered to the enemies thereof, and have not rendered themselves before the
first of December, 1645. shall be taken and employed for the payment of the
Public debts and damages of the Kingdom.

That a full sixth part on the full Value of the Estates of the Persons
excepted in the sixth Qualification concerning such as have been actually in
Arms against the Parliament, or have Councelled or voluntarily assisted the
Enemies thereof, and are disabled according to the said Qualification, to be
taken and employed for the payment of the public debts and damages of the
Kingdom.

11. Qualification.
That the Persons and Estates of all Common Soldiers, and others of the
Kingdom of England, who in Lands or Goods be not worth two hundred pounds
Sterlin: And the Persons and Estates of all Common Soldiers and others of the
Kingdom of Scotland, who in Lands or Goods be not worth one hundred Pounds
Sterlin, beat liberty and discharged.

Branch 1.
This Proposition to stand as to the English, and as to the Scots likewise; If
the Parliament of Scotland or their Commissioners shall so think fit.

Branch 2.
That the first of May last, is now the day limited for the persons to come in
that are comprised within the former Qualification.

That an Act be passed, whereby the Debts of the Kingdom, and the Persons of
Delinquents, and the value of their Estates may be known: And which Act shall
appoint in what manner the Confiscations and Proportions before mentioned may
be leavied, and applied to the discharge of the said Engagements.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, if the Estates of Parliament, or such
as shall have power from them shall think fit.

17. That an Act of Parliament be passed, to declare and make void the
Cessation of Ireland, and all Treaties and Conclusions of Peace, or any
Articles thereupon with the Rebels, without consent of both Houses of
Parliament. And to settle the Prosecution of the War of Ireland in both
Houses of the Parliament of England; to be managed by them: And the King to
assist, and to do no Act to discountenance or molest them therein.

That Reformation of Religion according to the Covenant be settled in the
Kingdom of Ireland by Act of Parliament, in such manner as both Houses of the
Parliament of England have agreed, or shall agree upon, after Consultation had
with the Assembly of Divines here.

That the Deputy, or chief Governor, or other Governors of Ireland, and the
Presidents of the several Provinces of that Kingdom be nominated by both the
Houses of the Parliament of England, or in the Intervalls of Parliament: by
such Committees of both Houses of Parliament, as both Houses of the Parliament
of England shall nominate and appoint for that purpose. And that the
Chauncellor, or Lord Keeper, Lord Treasurer, Commissioners of the great Seal
or Treasury, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Chancellor of Exchequer and
Duchy; Secretaries of State, Master of the Rolls, Judges of both Benches, and
Barons of the Exchequer of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Vice
Treasurer, and Treasurers at Wars of the Kingdom of Ireland be nominated by
both Houses of the Parliament of England, to continue Quam diu se been
gesserint, and in the Intervalls of Parliament by the aforementioned
Committees; to be approved, or disallowed by both Houses at their next sitting.

The like for the Kingdom of Scotland, concerning the nomination of the Lords
of the Privy Council, Lords of Session, and Exchequer, Officers of State, and
Justice General, in such manner as the Estates of Parliament there shall think
fit.

18. That the Militia of the City of London, and liberties thereof, may be in
the ordering and government of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common
Council assembled, or such as they shall from time to time appoint, (whereof
the Lord Major and Sheriffs for the time being to be three:) To be employed
and directed from time to time in such manner as shall be agreed on, and
appointed by both Houses of Parliament.

That no Citizen of the City of London, nor any of the Forces of the said City,
shall be drawn forth or compelled to go out of the said City, or Liberties
thereof for Military service, without their own free consent.

That an Act be passed for the granting and confirming of the Charters,
Customs, Liberties, and Franchises of the City of London, notwithstanding any
Nonuser, Misuser, or Abuser.

That the Tower of LONDON may be in the Government of the City of LONDON. And
the chief Officer and Governor thereof from time to time be nominated and
removeable by the Common Council: And for prevention of inconveniences which
may happen by the long intermission of Common Counsels, it is desired, that
there may be an Act, that all by Laws and Ordinances already made, or
hereafter to be made by the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council
Assembled, touching the Calling, continuing, directing, and regulating the same
Common Councels, shall be as effectual in Law to all Intents and Purposes as
if the same were particularly Enacted by the Authority of Parliament: And that
the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons in Common Council, may add to, or
Repeal the said Ordinances from time to time as they shall see cause.

That such other Propositions as shall be made for the City, for their further
safety, welfare, and Government, and shall be approved of by both Houses of
Parliament may be granted and confirmed by Act of Parliament.

19. That all Grants, Commissions, Presentations, Writs, Process, proceedings,
and other things passed under the Great Seal of England in the custody of the
Lords and other Commissioners appointed by both Houses of Parliament for the
custody thereof, be, and by Act of Parliament with the Royal assent, shall be
declared and Enacted to be of like full force, and effect to all Intents and
purposes, as the same or like grants, Commissions, Presentations, Writs,
Process, Procedings, and other things under any great Seal of England, in any
time heretofore were, or have been; And that for time to come the said great
Seal now remaining in Custody of the said Commissioners, continue, and be used
for the great Seal of England; And that all Grants, Commissions,
Presentations, Writs, Process, Proceedings and other things whatsoever passed
under or by authority of any other great Seal, since the 22th. of May, Anno
Dom. 1642. or hereafter to be passed, be Invalid, and of no effect, to all
Intents and purposes: Except such Writs, Process, and Commissions, as being
passed under any other great Seal, then the said great Seal in the Custody of
the Commissioners aforesaid, on or after the said 22th. day of May, and before
the 28. day of November, Anno Dom. 1643. were afterward proceeded upon,
returned into, or put in ure in any the Kings Courts at Westminster: And except
the Grant to Mr. Justice Bacon, to be one of the Justices of the Kings Bench.
And except all Acts and proceedings by virtue of any such Commissions of Goal
Delivery, Assize, and Nisi prius, or Oyer and Terminer, passed under any other
great Seal then the Seal aforesaid in custody of the said Commissioners
before the first of October, 1642.

And that all Grants of Offices, Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments made, or
passed under the great Seal of Ireland unto any Person or Persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, since the Cessation made in Ireland, the fifteenth day
of September, 1643. shall be null, and void. And that all Honors and Titles
conferred upon any Person or Persons in the said Kingdom of Ireland, since the
said Cessation, shall be null, and void.

FINIS.

