THE SUBSTANCE Of a Conference at a COMMITTEE of both HOUSES, in the PAINTED
CHAMBER, October 27. 1641.

Managed by JOHN PIM Esquier, And OLIVER SAINT-IOHN His Majesty's Solicitor
General, on the behalf, and by the Command of the House of COMMONS.

Concerning the Excluding the thirteen BISHOPS, Impeached by the COMMONS of
ENGLAND (for making and Execution of the New CANONS) from all VOTES in
PARLIAMENT, and for the excluding of all the rest of the BISHOPS, from their
VOTE in the Bill lately sent up to the LORDS to take away the Bishops Votes in
Parliament.

Printed in the Year 1641.

Master PIM spoke to this Effect following.
THat Parliament the fountain of Justice, ought to be preserved pure. From
Corruption and be preserved free from partiality. Which will add not only
Luster, Reputation, and Honor, but Authority, to what is done in Parliament.
All men's estates and liberties are preserved under the safe Custody of
Parliament; This moves us to be careful of any thing that may prejudice the
Parliament. In point of Freedom, and Integrity.

That therefore the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons
had commanded him with his Colleague, to represent unto their Lordships Two
Propositions, which they hold of very great Importance, and Necessity to be
put in Execution at this time.

First that those thirteen Bishops which stand accused before your Lordships
for making the late Book of Canons, and putting them in Execution that they
may be excluded from their Votes in Parliament.

Secondly, That all the Bishops may be excluded from having any Vote in that
Act. Come from the House of Commons, to your Lords. Lord-ships Entitled an Act
to take away the Bishops Vote in Parliament, etc.

That, that which concerns the thirteen Bishops, falls to his charge to
open; That he is commanded to tell their Lords ships that it stands with
Honor and with justice, that these Bishops standing thus charged with the
breach of Trust, and of the Highest Trust, against the Prerogative of the King,
against the Privilege of Parliament, against the property of the Subject, and
against the peace of the Kingdom. These are the Jewels that are deposed under
the Trust and safe-gard of Parliaments; And all these have been broken, and
this appears by the making of the new Canons Voted by You^ Lordships to be
against all these Trusts.

That these Persons have been parties to the breach of this Trust, that will
appear by the Iournalls of the Convocation, which is now in the Country, and
may be sent for; The Entry of the Book is, that all the thirteen Bishops were
Parties and did confirm and subcribe these Canons; Therefore it is hoped by
these Canons, that these that have assumed to themselves a Legislative power
whereby they have as much as in them lie rooted out the foundation of
Parliament; That they should have no Interest in the Legislative power at all
in Parliament.

Next that those that have deprived the Subjects of those good Laws that are
already made for them, that they should have no interest or part of making
future Laws for the Subject. This they conceive stands with a great deal of
equity and justice, which is one reason to desire they should be excluded
from their Votes in Parliament.

Next is the haynousnesse of their offense, It is very fit they should be
Innocent men, and faithful men, that should have the exercise of so great a
thing (as that is) much less Delinquents, of so high a Nature, Actors in the
subverting of the Laws of the Realm, that they should continue their Votes
and places in Parliament. And that their delinquency may the better appear,
desired Here the Votes were read by Mr. Good-Wyn.
to read the Votes passed in the House of Commons (nullo contradicente) and
with which the LORDS have concurred and agreed.

Then Mr. Solicitor spoke to this Effect following.
THat he was in the next place to present some reasons Mr. Saint-Iohn.
and presidents concerning the Bishops not having their Votes in the Bill
entitled, An Act to take away the Bishops Votes in Parliament, etc.

First, because they have no such Inherent right, and liberty of being there,
as the Lords Temporal, and the Peers of the Realm have. For they are not
there representative of any body else, not of the Clergy; If so, then the
Clergy were twice represented by them, in the Lords House and in the
Convocation, for their Writ of Election is to send two Clerks Ad
consentiendum, etc. Besides none are there representative of others, but those
that have their suffrage from others. And therefore only the Clerks in the
Convocation do represent them.

Next, they have not the Inherent right of Peerage as the Lords have, because
in some things they cannot do that there, which the Lords may do. In case of
Treason and matter of blood, upon trial of any Peer, they have no Liberty of
Vote, which could not be taken away by any Canon if their Right of Voting there
were inherent; But this in the general.

Next that they ought to be excluded from their Votes, If they were
Representative of the Clergy as a third estate and degree, which is this; No
Act of Parliament could be good if they did wholly dissassent, and yet they
have disassented and the law good and in force, as in the Book of Common
Prayer, in Queen Elizabeth's time they did dissassent from the confirming of
that Law, which could not have been good if they had bin a third estate and
disassented.

Next that the King may hold his Parliament without calling the Bishops at all
to it which has been adjudged by all the ^^^ges of England, 7. H. 8.
occasioned by the Convocations, Cyting of one Doctor Standish for speaking of
words against their power and privilege as they conceived: All the Judges of
England in the presence of the King declared that the King might hold his
Parliament without calling them at all, Therefore to desire their Votes to be
excluded in this Bill.

25. E. 1. In respect the Prelacie would not agree with the rest of the
Kingdom in granting a reasonable and necessary aid and supply, they were
excluded 35. E. 1. In the Parliament at Carlisle, for it will be brought to
this, that when themselves were conconcerned, they were excluded their Votes;
And before that Parliament an Act passed of several oppressions of the Abbots,
Pri^rs and Bishops, upon the inferior Clergy of the Kingdom, by purveyance
and setting of high prises, etc. to be Collected, and si^e or seven Acts more
all to this purpose; Concerning the carriage of the Prelates to the Inferior
Clergy, this Act was long in debate but in 25. E. 1. at Carlisle it was thus.
That the King Habito tractatu, etc. with the Earls, the Barons, and other the
Nobles, etc. have agreed to this Act of Parliament: Now the Bishops did not
consent to this; For if they had, they should have been named before the
Earls and Barons: For the degree of Nobility in all ancient Records, is
Prelates, Earls, and Barons.

The next Record was in Ed. 1. time something in Treaty concerning the
Cardinal and the Clergy, and those Acts are expressed to be with the
consent of the Earls, and Barons and others of the Laity, and that does
exclude them.

Here the three Records themselves were read, which three Records do all
concern the Clergy, partly for provision of livings and other expenses, to
Rome and beyond the Seas, and to all these three Acts the assent is in these
words: By the Earls, Barons, and other Lay people; And in the several Orders
and degrees of naming them they are omitted, being always in the first order,
for if they had Voted, then the Rule should have bin entered that it was agreed
by the Prelates, Earls and Barons.

30. R. 2. Ca. There being provision the Pope should not make presentation and
that other men should not present alone to their own livings, then the
Petition of the Commons was assented to by the King and the Lords Temporal.

Then afterward 7. R. 2. a printed case there the same question comes again
concerning the Clergy. And it is recited, It was assented unto by the King
and Lay-Lords.

FINIS.

