SEVERAL ORDERS AND VOTES of both Houses OF PARLIAMENT: MADE On Friday and
Saturday last, for the bringing of THE KINGS MAJESTY To some of his Houses near
London, to receive Propositions from both Kingdoms, for PEACE.

And for the safety and security of the King, Parliament, City, and Kingdom.

WITH The Copies of the Letters from Sir Tho. Fairfax, to the Parliament, and
the City.

And a List of the names of the Committee of Safety.

Aug: 2d Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson. 1647.

Die Veneris July 30. 1647.
REsolved upon the Question by the Lords in Parliament. That the right
Honorable the Lord Will^ughby of Palham be Speaker of this house, pro tempore.

Die Veneris July 30. 1647.
1. Resolved by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Mr. Pelham, a Member
of this House be Speaker thereof.

2. Mr. Pelham being presented by the Commons to the House the Peers, he made
a speech to their Lordships* declaring that the House of Commons had made
choice of him (calling himself the most unworthy of them) to be their Speaker;
whereupon the Lords voted, that they do approve of the said choice, and
accordingly Mr. Pelham was established, and returning to the House Commons, the
Members, cried to the Chair.

Die Veneris is July 30. 1647
Resolved upon the Question by the Commons in Parliament assembled, that
Denzill Holles Esquire, Sir Philip Stapleton; Sir Williaim Lewis, Sir John
Clotworthy, Sir William Waller, Sir John Maynard, Major General Massy, John
Glynne, Esquire, Recorder of London, Walter Long, Equire, Col. Edward Harley,
and Antony Nicoll, Esquire, be received into this House, to sit and vote as
members thereof.

Die Veneris July 30. 1647.
Papers were delivered by the Sheriffs and others from the Common Council of
the City of London, assuring the Houses that care should be taken by the City
for sufficient guards to secure their sitting in safety. Whereupon it was
Resolved upon the Question, By the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
that thanks be returned to the City of London for their offers and
engagements to take care for the Parliaments sitting in safety.

Die Veneris 30 July, 1647.
Resolved upon the question by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
that the care of the Kings children be committed to the Lord Mayor of the City
of London.

Die Veneris 30 July 1647.
Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled
that the Committee for safety of the Kingdom, be revived, and Sir William
Waller, and Major General Massey to be added to the said Committee. And that
they repair to the Militia of the City of London, to consult for the safety of
the King, Parliament, City and Kingdoms

The Names of the said Committee
The Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Rudland, Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Suffolk,
Earl of Warwick, Earl of Middlesex, Earl of Manchester, Earl of Stamford,
Lord Willoughby, Lord Hunsdon, Lord Gray, Lord Maynard, Mr. Hollis, Mr. Lisle,
Mr. Allen, Mr. Recorder, Coll. Rich. Sir Henry Mildmay, Sir Philip Stapleton,
Sir Henry Vane, sen. Sir John Maynard, Mr. Swynfen, Mr. Long, Mr. Ashhurst,
Coll. Tompson, Sir John Evelyn, Col. Norton, Mr. Bunkley, Sir Gil: Gerhard, Mr.
Nicholas, Mr. John Ash, Sir Richard Anslow, Col. Ven, Sir John Clotworthy, Mr.
Whitlock.
FOR The Commissioners of Parliament Residing with the ARMY.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving resolved upon this enclosed dispatch from the City of London, I thought
it my part to give you an account of it, and to give you all assurance that my
heart is deeply affected with the late carriages toward the Parliament. And
how-ever others have neglected their duty toward them for their security and
defense; yet as God shall enable me, it shall be my great business, to improve
all that is in my hand for the preserving of them, and in them the interest of
this Nation, and what construction soever, some formerly may have put upon the
proceedings of this Army: I trust the Lord will by his good hand lead us into
such good actions as shall witness our end answerable to all our profession,
to wit, for the good of the Kingdom, and thereinto be an effectual saving to
great authority of the kingdom in the Parliament.

Bedford July 29. 1647, I rest, Your most assured friend Tho. Fairefax.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the
City of London.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
YOu may please to remember the forward compliance of this Army with your
desires, to remove to this distance, and that upon the assurance you gave them
of your concurrence with their declared desires, for the settling the liberty
and peace of this kingdom, (against which you never yet offered us one
exception or any ground of dissent) as also of your great tenderness and
resolution to secure the Parliament and their Privileges, from any violence or
attempt, the chief reason given us of your late listing of new forces, and
wherein we did most acquiesse.

That upon this confidence we had disposed the Army into several parts of the
Kingdom; for the ease of the whole, to above 100 miles distance: we had given
up our selves, to the effecting of such proposals as might tend to the
comfortable settlement of this poor Kingdom, and we were in a hopeful way
for the speedy releife of Ireland.

We cannot then but be deeply sensible of the unparalled violation acted upon
the Parliament, upon Monday last, by a rude multitude from your City, because
therein (the guards sent from the City did not only neglect their duty for the
security of the Parliament from such violence, and the whole City to yield any
relief to the houses in that extremity, but I am assured from eye and ear
witnesses, that diverse of the Common Council gave great encouragement to it,
which does not only gainsay your former professions, but does violence to
those many obligations that (by your Charter, Protestation, and sundry other
ways) lie upon you to protect the Parliament.

For my part I cannot but look on your selves (who are in Authority) as
accountable to the Kingdom, for your present interruptions of that hopeful
way of Peace and settlement, things were in for this Nation, and of releiving
Ireland, occasioned by the late Treasonable, and Dostructive Engagement:
Especially by the latter Prodigious and horrid force done upon the Parliament,
tending to dissolve all Government upon which score we and the whole Kingdom
shall have cause to put every thing of the like nature that may happen to the
Parliament, or to any who are friends to them and this Army except by your
Wisdom care and industry the chief Acters in the premises, may be Detected,
secured and given up to the procuring of justice for the same, and the best
indevours used to prevent the like for the future. And so I rest.

Bedford 29 July. 1647. Your most assured friend to serve you, Tho. Fairefax.

Guild Hall London.
Die Veneris, 30 July 1647.
By the Committee of Lords and Commons for Safety.
Ordered, that the Reformadoes, Officers and Soulders be hereby desired to
Rendezvous in Saint James Fields to morrow in the afternoon; And there, upon
the view of their Numbers and Qualities, consider, and agree of Field-officers,
and others, as may put them in a condition fit for present service in a
Regiamental-way: And that this Committee may be certified thereof, and how they
are mounted and armed.

Tho. Partington, Clerk to the said Committee

Die Saturni 31 July 1647.
Resolved upon the question, by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled,
a letter to be sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Die Saturni 31 July 1647.
Resolved upon the question, that the Kings Majesty come to one of his Houses
nearer London that propositions may be sent, and address made to his Majesty
(from both Houses of the Parliament of England, and the Kingdom of Scotland)
for Peace.

Die Saturni 30 July 1647.
1. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assemblled, that the
Committee at Trinity House take care to secure the Block-houses at Graves end,
and the Fort at Tilbury.

FINIS,

