SPEECHES AND PASSAGES Of This GREAT and HAPPY Parliament:

From the third of November, 1640, to this instant June, 1641.

Collected into One Volume, and according to the most perfect Originalls,
exactly published.

LONDON, Printed for William Cook, and are to be sold at his shop, at
Furnifalls-Inne-gate, in Holbourne, 1641.

The Contents.
HIS Majesty's first speech, Novem. 3. 1640. His Majesty's second speech,
Novem. 5. 1640. His Majesty's third speech to both houses, Jan. 25. 1640. His
Majesty's speech, at the passing of the Bill for a Trieniall Parliament. His
Majesty's Letter sent by the Prince, in the behalf of the Earl of Strafford to
the Lords. The Lords Answer. That Bishops ought not to have voice in
Parliament. Lord Keepers speech in the upper house of Parliament, Novem. 3.
1640. Master Speakers speech. Fol. 1. Lord Digbyes speech, Novem. 9. 1640.
concerning grievances and the trieniall Parliament. Lord Digbyes second speech
for trieniall Parliament, Fol. 12. The Honorable Nathaniels Fynes his speech,
Fol. 22 Master Rous his speech before the Lords against Doctor Cousins, Doctor
Mannering, and Doctor Beale Fol. 45 The second speech of the Honorable
Nathaniel Fynes Fol. 49 Lord D^gbyes speech, concerning Bishops London
petition, Feb. 9. Fol. 65 Lord Finch his accusation Fol. 76 Lord Falklands
speech after the reading the Articles of the Lord Finch, Fol. 83 Sir Edward
Deering first speech, Fol. 88 His second speech, Fol. 90 His third speech, Fol.
93 His fo th speech, Fol. 97 M^ster Bagshawes speech concerning Bishops and the
London petition, Fol. 99 Sir Benjamin Ruddyers first speech, Fol. 103 His
second speech, Fol. 110 His third speech, Fol. 113 Master Pyms Message, for the
commitment of my Lord Strafford, Fol. 116 Articles against the Lord Strafford,
Fol. 117 Further impeachment of Thomas Earl of Strafford, Fol. 120 Earl of
Bristows speech, D^cember 7, Fol. 143 Master Mynards speech in reply to the
Lord Strafford, Fol. 145 The Earl of Bristows speech upon the delivering of, by
him the Scottish Remonstrance, Fol. 150 His Majesty's speech to both Houses,
Feb. 3. 1640. Fol. 159 Londoners first petition, Fol. 161 Their grievances by
the Prelates, Fol. 162 Resolution of the sixth demand by the Commons, Fol. 171
The Scots Answer to the resolution, Ibid. The Pears demand upon the foresaid
Answer, Fol. 172 The Scots Commissioners Answer, Ibid. Articles against
Secretary Windibanck, Fol. 174 A speech made by the Lord Finch in the Commons
House, N^vem. 21. 1640. Fol. 169 Master Grimstons second speech, Fol. 179 A
message sent by the Queen to the House of Commons, by Master Comproller, Fol.
185 The report of the Kings message by the Lords, to the House of Commons,
Jan. 29. 1640. Fol. 184 Sir Thomas Rows speech, Fol. 185 Lord Falklands speech,
Fol. 188 Master Pyms speech after the Articles of Sir George Ratcliff, Fol. 198
His second speech after the reading of the Articles, Fol. 202 Master Speakers
speech presenting these Bills for shortning of Michaelmas term, pressing of
Maryners for the remainder of six Subsidies, Fol. 204 Master Pleadwels speech,
Fol. 206 Sir Thomas Rows reports to the Commit, Fol. 209 M^ster Rigbyes
answer to the Lord ^ineb his last speech, Fol. 221 Master Wallers speech, Fol.
224 Master Hollis his speech delivered with the Protestation, Fol. 232 Orders
for the taking of the Protest^tion, Fol. 236 Master Grimstons third speech,
Fol. 205 Lord Digbyes speech upon the Bill of attainder of the Lord Strafford,
Fol. 213 Lord Straffords speech on the Scaffold, Sixteen queres, Fol. 233
Captain Audleyes Mervirs speech, Fol. 237 His speech at the peachment of Sir
Richard Boulton Knight, and others, Fol. 249 Articles against Sir Richard
Boulton, 256 Sir Thomas Wentworths first speech, March 22, 1637, His second
speech, April 21, 1628. Fol. 259 A petition to the Lord Deputy, Fol. 262 A
speech against the Judges, Fol. 267 A discourse concerning the power of Pears
in Parliament, Fol. 275 Sir John Hollands speech, Fol. 281 Sir Edward Hales
speech, Fol. 284 Sir John's Wrayes speech concerning the Commons, Fol. 288 Sir
John Wrayes second speech, Fol. 290 Preamble with the Protestation, Fol. 300
Bill of Attainder against the Earl of Strafford, Fol. 303 Vicount Newarks first
speech, for the right of Bishops, Fol. 305 His second speech for their
Temporal affairs, Master Peards against the oath Exofficio, Fol. 313 Master
Speakers letter to Sir Jacob Ashley, Fol. 315 Articles against the Bishop of
Bath and Wells, Fol. 318 Sir B. Ruddyers speech, Fol. 3^6 His Speech concerning
the Queens Jointure. Fol. 317.321 Lord Andevers speech concerning the
Star Chamber, An order May 10, 1641. that no English shall frequent the
Ambassadors to hear Mass. Lord Finch his Lletter to the Lord Chamberlain, Fol.
324 Lord Keepers speech to his Majesty, in the name of both the Houses. Fol.
325 Declaration of the Scots, touching the maintenance of their Army. Fol. 326
The humble Remonstrance delivered by the Lord Keeper, Fol. 528 The Earl of
Straffords Letters to his Majesty. Fol. 332 E^^l of Straffords Petition before
be died to both Houses. Fol. 225 The Lord Falklands first speech in Parliament.
Fol. 336 Sir Jo. Culpeppers speech Fol. 342 Mr. Bagshawes speech, 7 No. 1640.
Fol. 545 Petition of the Earl of Straf for examination of witnesses. Fol. 343
Order concerning the prices of Wine. Fol. 350 Sir Tho. Rows speech concerning
B^asse money. Remonstrance of the Parliament in Ireland. Fol. 321 A Message from
the House of Commons to his Majesty; His Majesty's answer. Fol. 328 Vote
concerning the Cannons. Ibidem. Order concerning Monopolies. Fol. 329 Order
against Monopolies. Ibidem. The Scottish Commissioners thanks to his Majesty.
Fol. 330 The humble Remonstrance of the Mr. Wardens of Vintners. Ibidem.
Petition of Oxford. Fol. 383 Sergeant Glanvils speecd. Fol. 388 Secretary
Windebancks Letter to the Lord Chamberlain. Fol. 393 Lord Andevers speech
concerning pacification. Fol. 327 An Order against drinking on the Sabbath day.
Fol. 401 Sir John Wrayes occasional speeches. 1 Concerning Religion. Fol. 401
2. Upon the Scottssh treaty. Fol. 403 3. Impeachment of the Lord Strafford.
Fol. 404 4. Upon the Strafford (...) knot. Fol. 406 5. Upon the same (...). 6.
A seas^nable (...) or a loyal Covenant. Fol. 408 Mr. Hid^^ Argument. Fol. 409
Mr. White c^^cerning Episcopacy. Fol. 417 Cities second ^^tition. The Kentish
Petition Sir John Wrayes ninth speech. Lord Digbies speech. Fol. 455 Mr. Pyms
speech. Fol. 458 Sir Thomas Barringtons speech. Accusation of Sir George
Ratcliffe. Fol. 504 The charge of the Scottish Commissioners against
Canterbury. Fol. 505 Sir Henry Vanes speech against Bishops. The Charge of the
Scotch Commissioners against the Lieutenant of Ireland Fol. 519 The Scotch
Commissioners demand concerning the six^h Article. Fol. 525 The English Peers
demand concerning the preceding Articles. Fol. 531 The Scotch Commissioners
answer to the demand. Ibid. Captain Audley Mervins speech concerning the
Judicature of the Parliament. The Speakers speech at the presenting of the bill
of Tunnage and Poundage. His Majesty's speech concerning it. Mr. Pyms Relation
of the whole matter of my Lord of Stafford. Mr. St. John's Argument.
The KINGS Majesty's First Speech in Parliament the third of November, 1640.
My Lords,
THe knowledge I had of the desires of my Scottish Subjects, was the cause of
my calling the last Assembly of Parliament, wherein had I been believed; I
sincerely think, that things had not fallen out as now we see: But it is no
wonder that men are so slow to believe that so great a sedition should be
raised on so little ground. But now my Lords, and Gentlemen, the honor and
safety of this Kingdom lying so nearly at the stake; I am resolved to put my
self freely and clearly on the love and affections of my English Subjects, as
these of my Lords that did wait on me at York, very well remember I there
declared. Therefore my Lords, I shall not mention mine own interest, or that
support I might justly expect from you, till the common safety be secured;
though I must tell you I am not ashamed to say, those charges I have been at,
have been merely for the securing and good of this Kingdom, though the
success has not been answerable to my desires. Therefore I shall only desire
you to consider the best way both for the safety and security of this Kingdom,
wherein their are two parts chiefly considerable. First, the chastifing out of
the Rebels. And secondly, that other, in satisfying your just grievances,
wherein I shall promise you to concur so heartily and clearly with you, that
all the World may see my int^ntions have ever been and shall be, to make this
a glorious and flourishing Kingdom. There are only two things that I shall
mention to you; First, the one is to tell you that the Loan of money which I
lately had from the City of London, wherein the Lords that waited on me at
York assisted me, will only maintain my Army for two mone^hs from the
beginning of that time it was granted. Now my Lords, and Gentlemen, I leave it
to your considerations, what dishonor and mischief it might be, in case for
want of money my Army be disbanded, before the Rebels be put out of this
Kingdom. Secondly, the securing the calamities the Northern people endure at
this time, and so long as the treaty is on foot. And in this I may say not only
they, but all this Kingdom will suffer the harm; therefore I leave this also
to your consideration, for the ordering of these great affairs whereof you are
to treat at this time. I am so confident of your love to me, and that your care
is for the honor and safety of the Kingdom, that I shall freely and willingly
leave to you where to begin: only this, that you may the better know the state
of all the Affairs. I have commanded my Lord Keeper to give you a short and
free account of these things that have happened in this interim, wi^h this
Protestation, tha^ if this account be not satisfactory as it ought to be. I
shall whenever you desire, give you a full and perfect account of every
particular. One thing more I desire of you, as one of the greatest means to
make this a happy Parliament; That you on your parts, as I on Mine, lay aside
all suspicion one of another, as I promised my Lords at York; It shall not be
my fault if this be not a happy and good Parliament.

The Kings speech in Parliament the fifth of November, 1640.
My Lords,
I do expect that you will hastily make relation to the House of Commons, of
those great affairs for which I have called you hither at this time, and for
the trust I have reposed in them, and how freely I put my self on their love
and affections at that time; and that you may know the better how to do so, I
shall explain my self concerning one thing I spoke the last day. I told you
the Rebels must be put out of this Kingdom; it is true, I must needs call them
so, so long as they have an Army that do invade us; and although I am under
treaty with them, and I under my great Seal do call them Subjects, and so they
are too, but the state of my Affairs in short is this. It Is true, I did expect
when I did will my Lords and great ones at York, to have given a gracious
answer to all your grievances; for I was in good hope by their wisdoms and
assistances to have made an end of that business, but I must tell you that my
Subjects of Scotland did so delay them, that it was not possible to end there:
Therefore I can no ways blame my Lords that were at Rippon, that the treaty
was not ended, but must thank them for their pains and industry, and certainly
had they as much power as affections, I should by that time have brought these
distempers to a happy period; so that now the treaty is transported from Rippon
to London, where I shall conclude nothing without your knowledge, and I doubt
not but by your approbation; for I do not desire to have this great work done
in a corner, for I shall lay open all the steps of this misunderstanding, and
causes of the great differences between Me and my Subjects of Scotland. And I
doubt not but by your assistance to make them know their duty, and also by your
assistance to make them return whether they will or no.

The Kings Speech to both the Houses, January 25. 1640.
My Lords,
THe Knights, Citizens, Burgesses; The principal cause of my coming here at
this time, is by reason of the slow proceedings in Parliament, touching which
is a great deal of inconvenience.

Therefore I think it very necessary to lay before you the state of my affairs
as now they stand, thereby to hasten (not interrupt) your proceedings.

First, I must remember you that there are two Armies in the Kingdom, in a
manner maintained by you, the very naming of which, does more clearly show the
inconvenience thereof, then a better tongue then mine can express.

Therefore in the first place, I shall recommend unto you the quick dispatch of
that business, assuring you that it cannot rest upon me.

In the next place I must recommend unto you the State of my Navy and Forts;
the condition of both which is so well known unto you, that I need not tell you
the particulars, only thus much; they are the Walls and defense of this
Kingdom, which if out of order, all men may easily judge what encouragement it
will be to Our enemies, and what disheartning to our friends.

Last of all, (and not of the least to be considered) I must lay before you the
distractions that are at this present occasioned through the cause of
Parliament; for there are some men that more maliciously than ignorantly, will
put no difference between Reformation, and alteration of government.

Hence it commech that divine Service is irreverently interrupted, and
Petitions in an ill way given in, neither disputed nor denied. But I will enter
into no more particulars, but show you a way of remedy, by showing you my
clear intentions, and some mark that may hinder this good work.

I shall willingly and cheerfully concur with you for the Reformation of all
Innovations both in Church, and Commonwealth, and consequently that all Courts
of Justice may be reformed according to Law. For my intentions is clearly to
reduce all things to the best and purest times as they were in the time of
Queen Elizabeth.

Moreover, whatsoever part of my Revenue shall be found illegal or heavy to my
Subjects, I shall be willing to lay down, trusting in their affections. Having
thus clearly and shortly set down my intentions, I will show you some rubs, and
must needs take notice of some very strange (I know not what term to give
them) Petitions given in the name of diverse Counties, against the established
government of the Church, and of the great threatenings against the Bishops,
that they will make them to be but a Cipher, or at least taken away.

If some of them have incroached too much upon the Temporaltie (if it be so) I
shall not be unwilling these things should be redressed and reformed, as all
other abuses according to the wisdom of former times; so far I shall go with
you, no farther.

If upon serious debate you shall show that Bishops have some Temporal
Authority, not so necessary for the government of the Church, and upholding
Episcopal Jurisdiction; I shall not be unwilling to desire them to lay it
down, but this must not be understood, that I shall any way consent that their
voice in Parliament should be taken away; for in all the times of my
Predecessors since the Conquest, and before, they have enjoyed it; I am bound
to maintain them in i, as one of the fundamental Institutions of this Kingdom.

There is one other Rock you are on, not in substance, but in service; and the
form is so essential, that unless it be reformed, will split you on that
Rock.

There is a Bill lately put in concerning Parliaments. The thing I like well to
have frequent Parliaments, but for Sheriffs and Constables to use my
Authority, I can no ways consent unto.

But to show that I desire to give you content in substance as well as in show,
that you shall have a Bill for doing thereof, so that it do not trench neither
against my Honor, neither against the ancient Prerogatives of the Crowns
concerning Parliaments, Ingeniously confess, often Parliaments is the fittest
means to keep correspondencie between Me and my People, that I do so much
desire.

To conclude, now all that I have shown you, the state of my Affairs, My own
clear intentions, and the Rocks I would have you shun.

To give you all contentment, you shall likewise find by these Ministers, I
have, or shall have, about me for the effecting of these my good intentions,
which shall redouble the peace of the Kingdom, and content you all. Concerning
the conference, you shall have a direct answer on Monday, which shall give you
satisfaction.

The Kings speech to both Houses of Parliament in the Lords House, at the
passing of the Bill for a Trieniall Parliament, the 16th of November, 1640.
MY Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons; you may remember when both Houses were with Me at the Banqueting
House at Whitehall, I did declare unto you two Rocks I wished you to eschew,
this is the one of them, and of that consequence, that I think never Bill
passed here in this House of more favor to the Subjects then this is, and if
the other Rock be as happily passed over as this shall be at this time, I do
not know what you can ask for ought I can see at this time, that I can make
any question to yield unto: Therefore I mention this to show unto you the sense
that I have of this Bill, and obligation as I may say that you have to me for
it, for hitherto, to speak freely, I have had no great encouragement to do
it; if I should look to the outward face of your actions or proceedings, and
not look to the inward intentions of your hearts, I might make question of
doing it.

Hitherto you have gone on in that which concerns your selves to amend, and
yet those things that merely concerns the strength of this Kingdom, neither
for the State, nor my own particular.

This I mention, not to reproach you, but to show you the state of things as
they are, you have taken the Government almost in pieces, and I may say, it is
almost off the hinges.

A skillful Watchmaker to make clean his Watch, he will take it a sunder, and
when it is put together, it will go the better, so that he leave not forth then
one pin in it.

Now as I have done all this on my part, you know what to do on your parts, and
I hope you shall see clearly that I have performed really what I expressed to
you at the beginning of this Parliament, of the great trust I have of your
affections to me, and this is the great expression of trust, that before you do
any thing for me, that I do put such a confidence in you.

HIS MAJESTY'S Letter to the Lords on the behalf of the Earl of Strafford,
sent by the PRINCE.
My Lords,
I Did yesterday satisfy the Justice of the Kingdom by passing of the Bill of
Attainder against the Earl of Strafford; but mercy being as inherent, and
inseparable to a King as Justice. I desire at this time in some measure to
show, that likewise by suffering that unfortunate man to fulfill the natural
course of his life in a close imprisonment; yet so, that if ever he make the
least offer to escape, or offer directly, or indirectly to meddle in any sort
of Public business; especially with me, either by Message, or Letter, it
shall cost him his life without further Process. This, if it may be done
without the coffeehouse of my People, will be an unspeakable contentment to
me.

To which end, as in the first place, I by this Letter do earnestly desire your
approbation, and to endeare it the more, have chosen him to carry it, that of
all your House is most dear to me. So I desire that by a conference, you will
endeavor to give the House of Commons contentment: Likewise assuring you, that
the excuse of mercy is no more pleasing to me, then to see both Houses of
Parliament consent for my sake, that I should moderate the severity of the Law,
in so important a case.

I will not say that your complying with me, in this my intended mercy, shall
make me more willing, but certainly it will make me more cheerful in granting
your just grievances. But if no less than his life can satisfy my People, I
must say fiat justitia. Thus again recommending the consideration of my
intentions to you, I rest.

Whitehall the 11th of May, 1641. Your unalterable and affetionate Friend,
CHARLES, R.
If he must dye, it were charity to Reprieve him till Satterday.



May 11th 1641.
THis Letter all written with the Kings own hand, the Peers this day received
in Parliament, delivered by the hand of the Prince. It was twice read in the
House, and after serious and sad consideration, the House resolved presently to
send 12. of the Peers Messengers to the King; humbly to signify, that neither
of the two intentions expressed in the Letter, could with duty in them, or
without danger to himself, his dearest Consort the Queen, and all the young
Princes their Children, possibly be advised: With all which being done
accordingly, and the reasons showed to his Majesty, He suffered no more words
to come from them, but out of the fullness of his heart to the observance of
Justice, and for the contentment of his people, told them, that what he
intended by his Letter was with an (if) if it may be done without
coffeehouse of his People; if that cannot be, I say again the same that I
writ, fiat justitia. My other intention proceeding out of charity for a few
days respite, was upon certain information that his Estate was so distracted,
that it necessarily required some few days for setlement thereof.

Whereunto the Lords answered, their purpose was to be Suitors to his Majesty
for favor to be showed to his innocent Children; and if himself had made any
provision for them, that the same might hold.

This was well liking to his Majesty, who thereupon departed from the Lords; at
his Majesty's parting they offered up into his hands the Letter it self which
he had sent; but He was pleased to say, my Lords, what I have written to you, I
shall content it be Registered by you in your House. In it you see my mind, I
hope you will use it to my honor.

This, upon return of the Lords from the King, was presently reported to the
House by the Lord Privy Seal, and ordered, that these Lines should go out with
the Kings Letter, if any copy of the Letter were dispersed.

THAT BISHOPS ought not to have Votes in PARLIAMENT.
1 BEcause it is a very great hinderance to the exercise of their Ministerial
Function.

2 Because they do vow and undertake at their Ordination when they enter into
holy Orders, that they will give themselves wholly to that Vocation.

3. 4 Because Counsels and Canons in several Ages, do forbid them to meddle
with secular affairs, because 24 Bishops have dependancie on the two
Archbishops, and because of their Canonical obedience to them.

5 Because they are but for their lives, and therefore are not fit to have
legislative power over the honors, inheritance, persons, and liberties of
others.

6 Because of Bishops dependancie, and expecting translations to places of
great profit.

7 That several Bishops have of late much incroached upon the conscie^nces and
liberties of the Subjects; and they, and their Successors will be much
encouraged still to incroach, and the Subjects will be much discouraged from
complaining against such encouragements if 26 of that Order, be to be Judges of
those complaints, the same reason extends to their legislative power in any
Bill to pass for the regulation of their power, upon any emergent
inconveniencie by it.

8 Because the whole number of them is interessed to maintain the jurisdiction
of Bishops, which has been found so grievous to the three Kingdoms, that
Scotland has utterly abolished it, and multitudes in England, and Ireland have
petitioned against it.

9 Because Bishops being Lords of Parliament, it sets too great a distance
between them, and the rest of their Brethren in the Ministry, which
occasioneth pride in them, discontent in others, and disquiet in the Church.

To their having Votes a long time.
Answ. If inconvenient Time and usage are not to be considered with Lawmakers;
some Abbots voted as anciently in Parliament as Bishops, yet are taken away.
Therefore the Bishops Certificate to plenary of Benefice and loyalty of
Marriage, the Bill extends not to them.

For the secular Jurisdictions of the Deane of Westminster, the Bishops of
Durbam, and Ely, and the Archbishop of York, which they are to execute in
their own persons, the former reasons show the inconveniences therein.

For their Temporal Courts and Jurisdictions which are executed by their
Temporal Officers, the Bill does not concern them.

The Lord Keepers Speech in the Upper House of Parliament. November. 3. 1640.
My Lords,
ANd you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, you
have been summoned by His Majesty's Gracious Writ, under the great Seal of
England, and you are here this day assembled for the holding of a Parliament.
The Writ tells you it is to treat, and consult of the High, Great, and weighty
affairs, that concern the estate and safety of the Kingdom. It tells you true,
that since the Conquest, never was there a time that did more require, and pray
for the best advice and affection of the English people. It is ill viewing of
objects, by viewing them in multiplying Glass, and it is almost as mischievous
in the speech of such a broken Glass, which represents but to the half. The
only and the perfect way is to look in a true Mirror. I will not take upon me
to be a good looker in it, I will only hold it to you to make use of it.

The Kingdom of England is this multiplying Glass, you may there see a State
which has flourished for diverse hundred years, famous for time of peace and
war, glorious at home, and ever considerable abroad. A Nation to whom never
yet any Conqueror gave new Laws, nor abolished the old, nor would this Nation
ever suffer a Conqueror to meddle with their Laws, no not the Romans, who yet
when as they subdued all the people, made it part of the Conquest, to leave
their Laws in triumph with them. For the Saxons, Danes, and the Normans, if
this were a time to travel into such particulars, it were an easy task to
make it appear, that it never changed the old established Laws of England, nor
ever brought in any new, so as you have the frame and constitution of a
Commonwealth, made glorious by antiquity. And it is with States, as with
persons and families, certainly an interrupted pedigree does give luster. It is
glorious in the whole frame, wortth your looking upon, long and your
consideration in every part.

The King is the head of the Commonwealth, the Fountain of Justice, the life
of the Law, He is anima and deliciae legis.

Behold Him in His glorious Ancestors, that have so swayed the Scepter of the
Kingdom.

Behold Him in the high attributes, and the great prerogatives, which so
ancient and unalterable Laws have given, and invested him with.

Behold Him in the happy times, that we have so long lived, under His
Monarchiall government.

For His excellent Majesty, that now is our most Gracious Sovereign; you had
need wipe the Glass, and wipe your eyes, and then you shall truly behold him
a King of exemplary Piety, and Justice, and a King of rare endowments, and
abilities of nature, and what he has got by acquisition, depth of judgment,
quickness of apprehension, unparaleld moderation in great Councels, and great
affairs, such as you my Lords that had the happiness to attend Him at the
Council of the Peers at York, to your great joy and comfort can witness, and
after ages will remember, to His eternal honor and same.

For His just and pious Government, I dare boldly say that if any under Him as
our Instrument, have had the distributing of justice to His people, have not
done as they ought, the fault is their own, and they have done contrary to the
Royal Nature, and express Command of our Gracious Sovereign, from whom I have
often learned this golden Rule, and Maxim, he serves me best, that serves me
with honesty and integrity.

Behold Him in another part of Himself, in His dearest comfort, our Gracious
Queen, the mirror of Virtue, from whom since Her happy arrival here, now above
three lustres of yeetes, never any Subject record other then gracious and
benign Influence; and I dare a vow as She is nearest and dearest to our
Sovereign, so there is none whose affections and endeavors (His Majesty only
excepted) has, or does, or can cooperate more to the happy success of this
Parliament, and the never to be equalled joy, and comfort of a right
understanding between the King, and His people.

Behold Him in His best image, our excellent young Prince, and the rest of the
Royal, and lively Progeny in whom we cannot but promise to our selves, to have
our happiness perpetuated.

From the Throne turn your eyes upon the two supporters of it, on the one side,
the Stemne of honor, the Nobility, and Clergy, on the other side, the Gentry
and Commons.

Where was there, or is there in any part of the world a nobility so numerous,
so magnanimous, and yet with such a temper, that they neither eclipse the
throne, nor overtop the people, but keep in a distance fit for the greatness
of the Throne.

Where was there a Commonwealth so free, and the balance so equally held, as
here? And certainly, so long as the beam is so held, it cannot be otherwise, in
right Anglis, if you turn the line never so little, it grows quickly accute,
or obdure; and so in States, the least deviation makes a great change. But His
Majesty's great wisdom and goodness, and the assistance of the Honorable
Assembly, I do not doubt will be a means to make us stear between the Teophick
of moderation, that there be no declension from the poole of severity.

I am by His Majesty's Command, to relate to you some proceedings since the
last Assembly here.

You may remember the Summer preceding this last, His Majesty went with an Army
into the North, engaged in honor so to do, by reason of the c^urses that were
taken by diverse of the Subjects in Scotland, in the prejudice of Monarchy, and
rendering less glorious this Kingdom. I know not under what pretense, but all
that time they came very near England, with an Army so near that it was
believed, they would have then entered and invaded the Kingdom. They did
profess the contrary, neither did they want remonstrations, and declarations,
to infuse this opinion into the hearts of His Majesty's people, before it would
by the effects. What their intentions from the beginning were, His Majesty by
His goodness and wisdom, settled a Peace, and made a pacification at
Barwick, upon which both Armies were disbanded, which pacification, and every
Article of it, His Majesty for His part has been so far from violating, that
whenever any question shall be made of it, shall plainly and clearly appear,
it was His care to see it in all things performed. On the contrary, those
Subjects of His not contented with that grace, which His Majesty then gave them
in those Articles of pacification, they have strained them beyond the bounds
and limits of the intention, and meaning; but they over and above attempted,
and acted diverse things so prejudicial to Monarchy, and contrary, and
repugnant to the Law, and settled constitution, and usage of that Kingdom,
that His Majesty could not in honor continue at it.

This being made known unto His Majesty, and to His Privy Council, by those
who best knew the State, and affairs of that Kingdom, and that were most
trusted and employed by His Majesty. His Majesty by the unaminous consent of
His Privy Council, resolved to raise an army to reduce them, to their modest
and just condition of true obedience, and subjection, to defend this Kingdom
from all damage and danger, that by their means (how specious soever they
shadow their pretenses) they might fall upon it.

His Majesty then foresaw and foretold, that the raising of an Army at this
time, was but to stand upon their own defense, as they professed, and they had
an intention to enter this Kingdom, and to seize upon some place of
importance, and eminency, and His Majesty in particular named Newcastle.

Had His Majesty then had means and money, as well as he had certain knowledge
of their intentions, I do believe that these calamities, that have fallen upon
that Town, and the Counties adjoining, had been prevented. Perhaps the
misinterpretation of His Majesty's intentions, and the misunderstanding of His
actions, and I am a fraid, the two benign interpretation of the attempts
actions, and professions of the Subjects in Scotland, added some impediment to
that which the most of us, I hope have lived to repent of.

His Majesty howsoever w^nt in Person to the North, to see His Army ordered,
and to take care for the safety, and defense of this Kingdom, as much as he
possible could, He had not long been there, but that which he foresaw, and
foretold, fell out; for the Scots passed with their Army, the Rivers, Tweed and
Tine, and seized upon Newcastle, (which) of what importance it is you all know:
And that they force contribution of the Counties of No^thumberland, and the
Bishopric of Durb^m, besides many other spoils, and distructions, that were
committed.

His Majesty well considering of what weight, and importance this was, and then
having neither time nor place to call this assembly of Parliament. He did
resolve as had been frequently used, to summon a great Council of all the
Peers, that by their advice and assistance, there might be some interruption
given to the calamity, that was likely to spread over the whole Kingdom, And
commanded Writs to issue accordingly.

That was not done to prevent, but to prepare for a Parliament.

It was not to clash, or entor fire with this assembly, by acting or ordering
any thing which belongs to this high and supreme jurisdiction, but only to
give their assistance for the present, to render things more fit for this great
assembly;

That His Majesty's intention was so, it is clear, for before ever any petition
was delivered, or ever any speech of petition for a Parliament, His Majesty had
resolved to call one.

The Lords understood, It so will plainly appear by the proceedings of the
Assembly, of which, if those that were Officers, and Ministers there had been
come to Town, upon whose help I rested, for my particular instruction, I should
have been better able to have given you an account, And His Majesty was pleased
to let you know, that when there was an occasion of any particular, you may be
satisfied in it. According to His Majesty's command 24. of September, all the
Peers were summoned, all except some few did meet where His Majesty was. In
the first place, pleased to declare unto us His resolution to call a
Parliament, and to all our joys and contents, as he has now done it to yours
and ours, declared that there was nothing he did more desire then to be rightly
understood of His people; And whosoever he be that shall go about (effect it, I
am sure he cannot) to attempt or endeavor to alter this gracious declaration,
and resolution of His Majesty, or whosoever shall go about to poison the hearts
of His good Subjects, with an opinion that it can be so, or lesson the
affection of His loving Subjects, for certainly never Subjects of the world
better loved their King then the English, nor ever did ever Englishmen better
love a King then now, if (I say) there be any suc^, may acurse and punishment
fall up (...), But ^et the Royal Throne be for ever.

H^^ Majesty was then pleased to tell us the cause, for which (...) had called
us together.

In the first place, it was touching an answer to a petition that had been
since his coming to York. And before His assembly sent unto him from those His
Subjects of Scotland, that were at Newcastle.

The first thing that His Majesty desired their advice in, was ^^e answer to
that petition.

The next thing His Majesty conceived, And all that were there, were of one
opinion, with one voice, and consent, that it was not fit His Majesty should
disband His Army, so long as the Scotch Army was on foot; And His Majesty
wished them to take into their consideration what way to have maintenance, for
His Army in the mean time.

His Majesty having opened the cause of calling them together, was pleased to
express himself that He would leave to the Lords, their freedom of Debate, and
himself was ready to have been gone from the Council, but at the humble suite
of the Lords he stayed, And I am persuaded that nothing was of that joy to
them, as His Majesty's presence, with such freedom of discourse did every man
deliver himself, with such grace and sweetness did his Majesty hear them, and
such content did they take in His moderating, guiding and directing those
Counsels: My Lords as holding it most necessary, took the latter of those two
considerations propounded by His Majesty, to their thoughts, and that was the
supplying and supporting His Majesty's Army, till this Parliament might take
some course in it: His Majesty, and my Lords, did declare themselves, as before
I have opened unto you, that they could never attempt, nor have the least
thought to make, by any Act or Order, any thing tending to the Subject, but
that it might be left wholly to the supreme Jurisdiction. And therefore not
seeing any other way, they resolved by letter to address themselves to the
City of London, And with their letters they sent half a dozen of my Lords.

My Lord Privy Seal, my Lord of Clare, who was appointed to go, but his urgent
occasions preven^ed him, Viscount Cambden, Lord Coventry, Lord Goring and (...)
And these Lords they did express the joy and content they took in the Kings
grace and confidence they had of His gracious assistance, was such, that they
did freely offer themselves, and as I dare say there is none but is yet ready
to enter into security with His Maie^ty. And the City gave an answer fit for
the Chamber of the King, and part of the money is already lent, and will be
ready, I assure my self to supply the rest.

For the other part, the first thing propounded by His Majesty, was touching
the answer that was to be given to that petition, and to the demands of the
Subjects in Scotland, upon which occasion His Majesty was pleased, by those
great Officers and Ministers of His, that knew best and understood the laws,
and usages of that Kingdom to expound their demands particularly, and to make
appear unto their Lordships upon every one, wherein they had expounded the
Articles of pacification, which His Majesty ever desired might be the Square,
and Rule of the treaty with them.

My Lords took into consideration what was fit to be done, for his Majesty
then professed as he did often, and as he has done it during the time of that
Council; to be wholly ruled, guided, and directed by their advice, f r the
honor of this Nation, and saf^ty of it, he did leave it to their wisdoms and
considerations; against whose advice, and without whose judgments and advice,
he would do nothing.

My Lords, howsoever they had received this information, and explanation upon
every particular of their demands, yet in justice they thought it was fit to
hear what could be said, on the other side, how the objection might be
answered, and what objection might be made by them against that which seemed to
be plain enough.

For this purpose they were all of opinion, and his Majesty was pleased to be
of the same opinion, that some Lords selected and trusted by that great
Council, should Treat with those Subjects of Scotland upon all those
particulars, to the end that they might see what they did clearly intend; to
the end that if a firm peace which was most desired from us might be had, or a
just War to be begun.

My Lords of the great Council that were appointed for that purpose, were the
Earls of Bedford, Hertford, Essex, Salisbury, Warwick, Bristow, Holland, and
Barkeshire, The Barons were the Lords, Wharton, Paget, Rimbolton, Brook,
Pawlet, Howard of Esaich, Savile, and Dunsmore.

After which choice, some general insurrections proceeding from the debate and
discourses in that great Council, a Commission under the great Seal was given
unto them, to enable them to treat and conclude as they in their wisdoms and
Judgments should think fit. The place appointed for this treaty was at
Rippon, where the Lords Commissioners wanted the happiness of that, that they,
and we had at York, of his Majesty's presence. And that might be the occasion
that more time was spent in it, then otherwise would have been; yet my Lords
omitted not their parts, but were desirous to look into the depth, to see the
utmost extent of their demands.

But before those of Scotland could come to the maine treaty, to explain
themselves touching their demands, they made a preparatory demand of
maintenance for their Army, and did go so high, as to demand Forty thousand
Pounds a month. My Lords (that were very unwilling to do any Act, or make any
order whatsoever, as I have opened unto you, for the sustenance, maintenance,
and keeping a foot his Majesty's Army without this great Assembly, which yet
they all held fit should not be disbanded) were much startled at the demand of
maintenance for an Army that was not the Kings, and which they did wish could
not continue.

But my Lords, as under that name they could not hear it, yet they took into
consideration the miserable condition of Northumberland, the Bishopric of
Durbam, and Newcastle; They took into consideration too, the Counties of
Cumberland, and Westmerland, which if the Scottish Army should enter, were
scarce able at this time to defend it self, and it were inconvenient to bring
the Kings Army thither.

Nay, their Lords were satisfied that the County of York was in danger, and
that not to be prevented but by a battle, if the Scots came on with an Army,
and my Lords were loath, where there were such ods, so many twenties to one,
that a battle should be adventured And if the County of York should be in
danger, we might quickly foresee how the danger might run over the whole
Kingdom.

And my Lords, as well as those that remained at York, as those at Rippon,
having received complaints from the Bishop of Durbam ( Northumberland, and
Newcastle) and the Mayor of Newcastle being imprisoned, and some of his
Brethren, as was represented unto them, kept without fire or candle, and of
diverse wastes and spoils done in the Country. My Lords did think fit, that
since the Counties of Northumberland, the Bishopric of Durbam, and Newcastle
had already made a composition and agreement, that they would at last ratify
and confirm the composition and agreement, so as there might be a cessation of
Arms, and acts of hostility; and that they which had fled from their dwellings
in those Counties might return in safety. My Lords for these reasons thought
it fit for the present to give way unto them, rather than to bazard so great
calamity and affliction that would have fallen on those Counties; hereupon
they did conclude for 850. pound by day, and this to continue for two months,
if the treaty before took not effect, the two Months to begin from the 16th
of October; then they took Articles for cessation of Arms. So as now the state
and condition of things as they were acted, I have shortly and summarily
delivered to you. I dare not adventure upon too many particulars, least my
memory should fail; and if I have not done his Majesty's command, I beg his
Majesty's pardon.

And my Lords, of what weight and importance this is to the whole Kingdom,
what deep consideration it requires in our affections; what unsuspected, and
insuspected affections had we need bring with us, is easy to judge.

It is his Majesty's pleasure that you of the House of Commons, repair to your
own House to choose your Speaker, whom his Majesty expects you will present to
him on Thursday next, at two of the clock in the afternoon.

Mr. SPEAKER his Speech to his Majesty, in the High Court of Parliament, the
fifth of November, 1640.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign:
IN all submissive humbleness, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the
house of Commons are here assembled, who taking along with them your gracious
inclination, have according to their ancient liberties designed me their
Speaker. Whereas I cannot but lament to think how great a mist may overcast
the hopes of this sessions, yet a note of favor to me, who cannot but judge
my self unfit for so great employment, which so appears to the whole World.

Many there be of deep judgment, and sad experience, that might have added
luster to this action an expedition to the work, if they had pleased to have
left me in that mean condition they found me.

Non mihitacuisse nocet, Nocet esse locutum.

And then might your Sacred and pious intentions have had their full
advancement.

But is it yet too late? may I not appeal to Caesar?

Yes, I may, and in the lowest posture of humility I humbly beseech your
sacred Majesty to interpose your royal authority to command a review of the
house, for there were never more then now fitted for such employments.

My Lord Keeper approves of him by his Majesty's direction.

Then he goes on,

It pleases not your Sacred Majesty to vouchsafe a change.

Actions of Kings are not to be by me reasoned.

Therefore being imboldened by this gracious approbation, give me leave a
little, Dread Sovereign, to express my own thoughts unto our gracious Lord
the King.

I see before my eyes with admiration the Majesty of great Britain, the
Glory of times, The History of honor, CHARLES the first, in his forefront
placed by d^scent of antiquity (Kings) settled by a long succession, and
continued to us by a pious and peaceful government.

On the one side the Monument of Glory, the Progeny of valiant and puissant
Princes, the Queens most Excellent Majesty.

On the other side, the hopes of posterity, and joy of this Nation, those Oliva
branches set round your tables, Emblems of peace to posterity.

Here shine those Lights and Lamps placed in a Mount, which attend your sacred
Majesty as supreme head, and borrow from you the Splendour of their government.

There the true state of Nobility, figures of prowess and Magnanimity, fitted
by their long contracted honor in their blood, for the Counsel of Princes.

In the midst of those the Reverend Judges, whither both parties (as to the
Oracles of Judgment and Justice) may resort. Cisternes that hold fair waters,
wherein each deviation, each wrinkle is discernable, and from thence (as from
the Center) each crooked line ought to be levelled; The footstool of your
Throne is fixed there, which renders you glorious to all posterity.

Here we the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons house, at your
royal feet, contracted from all parts of your Kingdom, Ensigns of obedience
and humility, all these united by the law equally distributed, which cements
this great body to the obedience of your sacred Majesty;

And compells as well the hearts as the hands to contribute for the preservation
of your Majesty, and the Common interest.

Dissipates the Invaders of the Church and common wealth, and discovers the
Impostures, but (give me leave dread Sovereign) knits the Crown to the Sacred
Temples, and frees Majesty from the Interpretation of misdoing.

Amongst these this great Counsel is most sovereign against the distempers of
this Nation.

Were they infested at Sea, troubled at home, or invaded from abroad, here was
the Sanctuary of refuge, hither was the resort, and no other way found for a
foundation of peace.

It is reported of Constantine the great, that he accounted his Subjects purse
his Exchequer, and so it is.

Subtle inventions may pick the purse, but nothing can open it but a
Parliament; which lets in the eye of Sovereignty upon the public maladies of
the State, and vigilance for the preservation of our ancient Liberties; for
this we need not search into Antiquity; look but a little back, there we
shall see our just liberties graciously confirmed by your most sacred Majesty.

And is our happiness shut up in the remembrance of times past only? No.

Those gracious expressions lately fallen from your sacred lips, as honey from
the comb, make glad the hearts of your people.

So that now we do more than promise to our selves a large and free
consideration of the ways to compose the distempers of these Kingdoms, and
then present them to your royal hand for perfection.

And such shall be our deportment, that as we shall labor the continuance of
our Liberties, so shall we carry a high regard to preserve that Sovereign
power wherewith your Majesty is invested for the preservation of your Kingdom,
and to render your sacred Majesty terrible to the Nations, and glorious at home.

Are these the fruits we have enjoyed by Parliaments? we cannot then but
wonder at that horrid invention in this place projected, Monstrum horrendum,
inform ing^ns, but, the Lord be thanked, Cui lumen ademptum est. Can this
receive a Palliation? Men, Fathers, and Brethren, and all at one blast; no
reverence to sacred bones of Princes? were we not all in a lump by them
intended to be offered up to Moloch?

Let us never forget this days solemnization (But whither?) It is too much
boldness to presume longer on your Majesty's grace and goodness; and
therefore for the better expedition of this service; We humbly desire;

1. That our selves and servants may obtain freedom from arrests of their
persons and goods. 2. That we may have free liberty of speech without
confinement, with a full and free debate. 3. That your Majesty will vouchsafe
our repair to your sacred person upon matters of importance, according to the
ancient privileges of the house.
That with such alacrity we may now proceed to manifest to the world, that our
retirements were to reinforce a greater unity and duty, and to endeavor a
sweet violence which may compel (pardon dread Sovereign the word Compel)
your Majesty to the love of Parliaments.

And thus God will have the honor, your sacred Majesty splendour, the Kingdom
safety, and all our votes shall pass, that your sacred Majesty may long, long,
long reign over us; And let all the people say, Amen,

The Lord DIGBIES Speech the 9. of November. 1640. Concerning Grievances, and the
Trienniall Parliament.
Mr. Speaker,
YOu have received now a solemn account from most of the Shires of England, of
the several grievances and oppressions they sustain, and nothing as yet from
Dorset shire; Sir, I would not have you think that I serve for a Land of
Goshen, that we live there in Sunshine, whilst darkness and plagues
overspread the rest of the Land: As little would I have you think, that being
under the same sharp measure that the rest, we are either insensible and
benumbed, or that, that Shire wants a servant to represent its sufferings
boldly.

It is true Mr. Speaker, the County of Dorset has not digested its complaints
into that formal way of Petition, which others (I see) have done; but have
entrusted them to my Partners and my delivery of them by word of mouth unto
this Honorable House. And there was given unto us in the County Court, the day
of our Election, a short memorial of the heads of them, which was read in the
hearing of the Freeholders there present, who all unanimously with one voice
signified upon each particular, that it was their desire, that we should
represent them to the Parliament, which with your leave I shall do, and these
they are.

1. The great and intolerable burden of Ship Money, touching the legality
whereof they are unsatisfied. 2. The many great abuses in pressing of
Soldiers, and raising moneys concerning the same. 3. The multitude of
Monopolies. 4. The new Canon, and the Oath to be taken by Lawyers, Divines etc.
5. The Oath required to be taken by Church Officers to present according to
Articles new and unusual.
Besides this, there was likewise presented to us by a very considerable part
of the Clergy of that County, a note of remembrance containing these two
particulars.

First, the imposition of a new Oath required to be taken by all Ministers and
others: which they conceive to be illegal, and such as they cannot take with a
good Conscience.

Secondly, the requiring of a pretended Benevolence, but in effect a Subsidy,
under the penalty of suspension, excommunication, and deprivation, all benefit
of appeal excluded.

This is all we had particularly in Charge: But that I may not appear a
remiss servant of my Country, and and of this House; give me leave to add
somewhat of my own sense.

Truly Mr. Speaker, the injurious sufferings of some worthy members of this
House, since the dissolution of the two last Parliaments, are so fresh in my
memory, that I was resolved not to open my mouth in any business, wherein
freedom and plain dealing were requisite, until such time, as the breach of
our privileges were vindicated, and the safety of speech settled.

But since such excellent Members of our House, thought fit the other day to
lay aside that Caution, and to discharge their souls so freely in the way of
zeal to his Majesty's service, and their Countries good: I shall interpret
that confidence of theirs for a lucky Omen to this Parliament, and with your
permission license my thoughts too, a little.

Mr. Speak r, under those heads which I proposed to you, as the grievances of
Dorsetshire, I suppose are comprised the greatest part of the mischiefs which
have of late years laid battery either to our Estates or Consciences.

Sir, I do not conceive this the fit season to search and ventilate
particulars, yet I profess I cannot forbear to add somewhat, to what was said
the last day by a learned Gentleman of the long Robe, concerning the acts of
that reverend new Synod, made of an old convocation. Does not every Parliament
man's heart rise to see the Prelates thus usurp to themselves the Grand
Preeminence of Parliament? The granting of Subsidies, and that under so
preposterous a name as of a Benevolence, for that which is a Malevolence
indeed; A Malevolence I am confident in those that granted it, against
Parliaments: and a Malevolence surely in those that refuse it, against those
that granted it, for how can it incite less? when they see wrested from them
what they are not willing to part with, under no less a penalty then the loss
both of Heaven and Earth: of Heaven, by excommunication; and of the Earth By
Deprivation; and this without Redemption by appeal. What good Christian can
think with patience on such an insnaring Oath, as that which is by the new
Canons enjoined to be taken by all Ministers, Lawyers, Physicians, and
Graduates in the Universities? where, besides the swearing such an
impertinence, as that things necessary to salvation are contained in
Discipline; besides the swearing those to be of Divine right, which amongst the
learned, never pretended to it, as the Arch things in our Hierarchy. Besides,
the swearing not to consent to the change of that, which the State may upon
great reason think fit to alter: Besides the bottomless perjury of an etc.
Besides all this, Mr. Speaker, men must swear that they swear freely and
voluntarily what they are compelled unto: and lastly, that they swear that
Oath in the literal sense, whereof no two of the makers themselves, that I
have heard of, could never agree in the understanding.

In a word, Mr. Speaker, to tell you my opinion of this Oath, it is a Covenant
against the King, for Bishops and the Hierarchy; as the Scottish Covenants is
against them, only so much worse then the Scottish, as they admit not of the
Supremacy in Ecclesiastical affairs, and we are sworn unto it.

Now Mr. Speaker, for those particular heads of grievances whereby our Estates
and Properties are so radically invaded; I suppose (as I said before) that it
is no season now to enter into a strict Discussion of them; only thus much I
shall say of them, with application to the Country for which I serve, that
none can more justly complain, since none can more justly challenge exemption
from such burdens then Dorset shire; whether you consider its a Country
subsisting much by Trade; or as none of the most populous; or as exposed as
much as any to Foreign Invasion.

But alas Mr. Speaker, particular lamentations are hardly distinguishable in
Universal groans.

Mr. Speaker, it has been a Metaphor frequent in Parlamant, and if my memory
fail me not, was made use of in the Lord Keepers Speech at the opening of the
last, that what money Kings raised from their Subjects, they were But as Vapors
drawn up from the Earth by the Sun, to be distilled upon it again in
fructifying showers. The Comparison Mr. Speaker, has held of late years in
this Kingdom too unluckily: what has bin raised from the Subject by those
violent attractions, has been formed, it is true, into Clouds, but how? to
darken the Suns own luster, and has fallen again upon the Land only in
Hailstones and Mildews, to batter and prost rate still more and more our
liberties, to blast and wither our affections; had the latter of these been
still kept alive by our Kings own personal virtues, which will ever preserve
him in spite of all ill Counselors, a sacred object, both of our admiration
and loves.

Mr. Speaker, It has been often said in this House, and I think can never be
too often repeated, That the Kings of England can do no wrong; but though they
could Mr. Speaker, yet Princes have no part in the ill of those actions which
their Judges assure them to be just, their Counselors that they are prudent,
and their Divines that they are conscientious.

This Consideration, M. Speaker, leads me to that which is more necessary
far, at this season, than any farther laying open of our miseries, that is,
the way to the remedy, by seeking to remove from our Sovereign, such unjust
Judges, such pernicious Counselors, and such disconscient Divines, as have of
late years, by their wicked practices, provoked aspersions upon the government
of the graciousest and best of Kings.

Mr. Speaker, let me not be mis-understood, I level at no man with a fore-layd
design, let the faults, and and those well proved, lead us to the men: It is
the only true Parliamentary method, and the only fit one to incline our
Sovereign. For it can no more consist with a gracious and righteous Prince to
expose his servants upon irregular prejudices; then with a wise Prince to with
hold Malefactors, how great soever, from the course of orderly justice.

Let me acquaint you M. Speaker, with an Aphorism in Hippocrates, no less
Authenticke, (I think) in the body Politic, then in the Natural Thus it is
Mr. Speaker, Bodies to be thoroughly and effectually purged, must have their
Humors first made fluid and m^oveable.

The Humors that I understand to have caused all the desperate maladies of
this Nation, are the ill Minister. To purge them away clearly, they must be
first loosened, unsettled, and extenuated, which can no way be effected with a
gracious Master, but by truly representing them unworthy of his protection.
And this leads me to my Motion, which is; that a select Committee may be
appointed to draw out of all that has been here represented, such a
Remonstrance as may be a faithful and lively representation unto his Majesty
of the deplorable estate of this his Kingdom, and such as may happily point
out unto his clear and excellent judgment, the pernicious Authors of it. And
that this Remonstrance being drawn, we may with all speed repair to the
Lords, and desire them to join with with us in it: And this is my humble
motion.

THE LORD DIGBIES SPEECH IN THE HOUSE OF Commons, to the Bill for trienniall
Parliaments. Janu. 19. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
I Rise not now with an intent to speak to the frame and structure of this
Bill, nor much by way of answer to objections that may be made; I hope there
will be no occasion of that, but that we shall concur all unanimously in what
concerns all so Universally.

Only Sir, by way of preparation, to the end that we may not be discouraged in
this great work by difficulties that may appear in the way of it, I shall
deliver unto you my apprehensions in general of the vast importance and
necessity that we should go through with it.

The Result of my sense is in short this: That unless for the frequent
convening of Parliaments there be some such course settled, as may not be
eluded; neither the people can be prosperous and secure, not the King himself
solidly happy. I take this to be the Vnum necessarium: Let us procure this, and
all our other desires will effect themselves: if this bill miscarry, I shall
have left me no public hopes, and once past, I shall be freed of all public
fears.

The essentialnesse Sir of frequent Parliaments to the happiness of this
Kingdom, might be inferred unto you by the reason of contraries, from the
woeful experience which former times have had of the mischievous effects of any
long intermission of them.

But Mr. Speaker, why should we clime higher then the level we are on, or
think further then our own Horizon, or have recourse for examples in this
business, to any other promptuary then our own memories; nay then the
experience almost of the youngest here?

The reflection backward on the distractions of former times upon intermission
of Parliament, and the consideration forward of the mischiefs likely still to
grow from the same cause if not remooved, doubtlesly gave first life and being
to those two dormant Statutes of Edward the third, for the yearly holding of
Parliament: And shall not the fresh and bleeding experience in the present age
of miseries from the same spring, not to be paralleld in any other, obtain a
wakening, a resurrection for them?

The Intestine distempers Sir, of former ages upon the want of Parliaments, may
appear to have had some other cooperative causes, as sometimes, unsuccessefull
Wars abroad; sometimes, the absence of the Prince; sometimes, Competitions of
Titles to the Crown; sometimes, perhaps the vices of the King himself.

But let us but rightly weigh and consider the posture, the aspect of this
state, both toward it self, and the rest of the world, the person of our
Sovereign, and the nature of our suffering since the third of his Reign. And
there can be no cause coulorable inventible, whereunto to attribute them but the
intermission, or which is worse, the undue frustration of Parliament, by the
unluckly use if not abuse of Prerogative in the dissolving them.

Take in your view Gentlemen, a State in a state of the greatest quiet and
security that can be fancied, not only in joining the calmest peace it self,
but to improve and secure its happy condition, all the rest of the world at the
same time in Tempest, in Combustions, in uncomposable Wars.

Take into your view Sir, a King Sovereign to three Kingdoms, by a
Concentring of all the Royal lines in his Person, as undisputably as any
Mathematical ones in Euclide. A King firm and knowing in his Religion, eminent
in virtue; A King that had in his own time given all the Rights and Liberties
of his Subjects a more clear and ample confirmation freely and graciously,
then any of his Predecessors (when the people had them at advantage)
extortedly, I mean in the Petition of Right.

This is one Map of England, Mr. Speaker, A man Sir, that should present unto
you now, a Kingdom, groaning under that supreme Law, which Salus populi
periclitata would enact. The liberty, the property of the Subject fundamentally
subverted, ravished away by the violence of a pretended necessity; a triple
Crown shaking with distempers; men of the best conscience ready to fly into the
wilderness for Religion. Would not one swear that this were the Antipodes to
the other; and yet let me tell you Mr. Speaker, this is a Map of England too,
and both at the same time true.

As it cannot be denied, Mr. Speaker, that since the Conquest there has not
been in this Kingdom a fuller concurrance of all circumstances in the former
Caracter, to have made a Kingdom happy, then for these 12. years last past; so
it is most certain, that there has not been in all that deduction of ages,
such a Conspiracy, if one may so say of all the Elements of mischief thein
second Character, to bring a flourishing Kingdom, if it were possible, to swift
ruin and desolation.

I will be bold to say, Mr. Speaker, and I thank God, we have so good a King,
under whom we may speak boldly of the abuse by ill Ministers, without
reflection upon his person.

That an Accumulation of all the public Grievances since Magna Carta, one upon
another, unto that hour in which the Petition of Right past into an act of
Parliament, would not amount to so oppressive; I am sure not to so destructive
a height and magnitude to the rights and property of the Subject, as one branch
of our beslaving since the Petition of Right.

The branch I mean, is the judgment concerning ship money. This being a true
representation of England in both aspects.

Let him, Mr. Speaker, that for the unmatcht oppression and enthralling of free
Subjects in a time of the best Kings reign, and in memory of the best laws
enacted in favor of Subjects liberty, can find a truer Cause then the ruptures
and intermission of Parliaments. Let him and him alone be against the settling
of this inevitable way for the frequent holding of them.

It Is true Sir, wicked Ministers have been the proximate causes of our
miseries, but the want of Parliaments the primary, the efficient Cause.

Ill Ministers have made ill times, but that Sir, has made ill Ministers.

I have read among the Laws of the Athenians, a form of recourse in their
Oaths and vows of greatest and most public concernment of a threefold Deity,
Supplicium Exauditori, Purgatori, Malorum depulsori.

I doubt not but we here assembled for the Commonwealth in this Parliament,
shall meet with all these Attributes in our Sovereign.

I make no question but he will graciously hear our Supplications, purge away
our Grievances, and expel Malefactors, that is, remove ill Ministers, and put
good in their places.

No less can be expected from his wisdom and goodness.

But let me tell you Mr. Speaker, if we partake not of one Attribute more in
him; if we address not our selves unto that, I mean Bonorum Conservatori; we
can have no solid, no durable Comfort in all the rest.

Let his Majesty hear our Complaint never so Compassionately.

Let him purge away our Grievances never so efficaciously.

Let him punish and dispell ill Ministers never so exemplarily.

Let him make choice of good ones never so exactly.

If there be not a way settled to preserve and keep them good; the mischiefs
and they will all grow again like Sampsons Locks, and pull down the House upon
our heads. Believe it M. Speaker, they will.

It has been a Maxim amongst the wisest Legislators, that whosoever means to
settle good Laws, must proceed in them, with a sinister opinion of all
Mankind; and suppose that whosoever is not wicked, it is for want only of the
opportunity. It is that opportunity of being ill Mr. Speaker, that we must
take away, if ever we mean to be happy, which can never be done, but by the
frequencie of Parliaments.

No state can wisely be confident of any public Ministers continuing good,
longer then the rod is over him.

Let me appeal to all those that were present in this House at the agitation
of the Petition of Right. And let them tell themselves truly, of whose
promotion to the management of affairs do they think the generality would at
that time have had better hopes then of Mr. Noy, and Sir Thomas Wentworth, both
having been at that time, and in that business as I have heard, most keen and
active Patriots, and the latter of them to the eternal aggravation of his
Infamous treachery to the Commonwealth be it spoken, the first mover, and
insister to have this clause added to the Petition of Right, that for the
comfort and safety of his Subjects, his Majesty would be pleased to declare his
will and pleasure, that all his Ministers should serve him according to the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

And yet Mr. Speaker, to whom now can all the inundations upon our liberties
under pretense of Law, and the late shipwreck at once of all our property, be
attributed more then to Noy, and those and all other mischiefs whereby this
Monarchy has been brought almost to the brinke of destruction, so much to
any as to that Grand Apostate to the Commonwealth, the now Lieutenant of
Ireland?

The first I hope God has forgiven in the other world; and the latter must not
hope to be pardoned in this, till he be dispatched to the other.

Let every man but consider those men as once they were.

The excellent Law for the security of the Subject enacted immediately before
their coming to employment, in the contriving whereof themselves were
principal Actors.

The goodness and virtue of the King they served, and yet the high and
public oppressions that in his time they have wrought! And surely there is no
man but will conclude with me, that as the deficience of Parliaments has bin
the Causa Causarum of all the mischiefs and distempers of the present times;
so the frequency of them is the sole Catholic Antidote that can preserve and
secure the future from the like danger.

Mr. Speaker, let me yet draw my Discourse a little nearer to his Majesty
himself, and tell you, that the frequency of Parliament is most essentially
necessary to the power, the security, the glory of the King.

There are two ways, Mr. Speaker, of powerful Rule, either by Fear, or Love,
but one of happy and safe Rule, that is, by Love, that Firmissinum Imperium quo
obedientes ga^dent.

To which Camillus advised the Romans. Let a Prince consider what it is that
mooves a people principally to affection, and dearnesse, toward their
Sovereign. He shall see that there needs no other Artifice in it, then to let
them enjoy unmolested, what belongs unto them of right: If that have been
invaded and violated in any kind, whereby affections are alienated: the next
consideration for a wise Prince that would be happy, is how to regaine them: To
which three things are equally necessary.

1. Re-instating them in their former Liberty. 2. Revenging them of the
Authors of those violations. 3. And securing them from Apprehensions of the
like again.
The first, (God be thanked,) we are in a good way of.

The second in warm pursuit of.

But the third, as essential as all the rest, till we be certain of a
Trienniall Parliament, at the least, I profess I can have but cold hopes of.

I beseech you then Gentlemen, since that security for the future is so
necessary to that blessed union of affections, and this Bill so necessary to
that security:

Let us not be so wanting to our selves; let us not be so wanting to our
Sovereign, as to forbear to offer unto him, this powerful, this everlasting
Philter, to Charm unto him the hearts of his people, whose virtue can never
evaporate.

There is no man, M. Speaker, so secure of another friendship, but will think
frequent intercourse and access very requisite to the support, to the
confirmation of it: Especially, if ill offices have been done between them;
if the raising of jealousies has been attempted. There is no Friend but would
be impatient to be debarred from giving his friend succor and relief in his
necessities.

Mr. Speaker, permit me the comparison of great things with little: what
friendship, what union can there be so comfortable, so happy, as between a
gracious Sovereign and his people? and what greater misfortune can there be
to both, then for them to be kept from intercourse, from the means of
clearing mis understandings, from interchange of mutual benefits?

The people of England, Sir, cannot open their Ears, their Hearts, their
Mouths, nor their Purses, to his Majesty, but in Parliament.

We can neither hear Him, nor Complain, nor acknowledge, nor give, but there.

This Bill, Sir, is the sole Key that can open the way to a frequency of those
reciprocal indearments, which must make and perpetuate the happiness of the
King and Kingdom.

Let no man object any derogation from the Kings Prerogative by it. We do but
present the Bill, it is to be made a Law by him, his Honor, his Power, will be
as conspicuous, in commanding at once that Parliament shall assemble every
third year, as in commanding a Parliament to be called this or that year:
there is more of his Majesty in ordayning primary and Universal Causes, then
in the actua^ing particularly of subordinate effects.

I doubt not, but that glorious King Edward the Third, when he made those Laws
for the yearly Calling of Parliament, did it with a right sense of his dignity
and honor.

The truth is, Sir, the Kings of England are never in their Glory, in their
Splendor, in their Majesticke Sovereignty, but in Parliaments.

Where is the power of imposing Taxes? Where is the power of restoring from
incapacities? Where is the legislative Authority? Marry in the King, Mr.
Speaker. But how? In the King circled in, fortified and evirtuated by his
Parliament.

The King out of Parliament has a limited, a circumscribed jurisdiction. But
waited on by his Parliament, no Monarch of the East is so absolute in
dispelling Grievances.

Mr. Speaker, in chasing ill Ministers, we do but dissipate Clouds that may
gather again, but in voting this Bill, we shall contribute, as much as in us
lies, to the perpetuating our Sun, our Sovereign, in his vertical, in his
Noone day luster.

A Speech of the Honorable NATHANAEL FIENNES, In the House of Commons the 9.
of Febr. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
TWO things have fallen into debate this day.

The first, concerning the Londoners Petition, whether it should be committed
or no.

The other, concerning the government of the Church, by Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. whether it should be countenanced or no.

For the first, I do not understand by any thing that I have yet heard, why
the Londoners Petition should not be committed, or countenanced.

The exceptions that are taken against it, are from the irregularities of the
delivery of it, and from the Subject matter contained in it.

For the first, it is alleged that the long tail of this blazing star, is
ominous, and that such a number of Petitioners, and such a number that brought
the Petition to the House, was irregular. Hereunto I answer, that the fault was
either in the multitude of the Petitioners, or in their carriages, and
demeanours: if a multitude find themselves agrieved, why it should be a fault
in them to express their grievances more than in one, or a few, I cannot see;
nay, to me it seems rather a reason that their Petitions should be committed,
and taken into serious consideration, for thereby they may receive
satisfaction, though all be not granted that they desire. But if we shall
throw their Petition behind the door, and refuse to consider it, that it may
seem an act of will in us. And whether an act of will in us, may not produce
an act of will in the people, I leave it to your consideration. Sure I am, acts
of will are more dangerous there than here, because usually they are more
tumultuous. All Laws are made, principally for the quiet and peace of a
Kingdom; and a Law may be of such indifferent nature many times, that it is a
good reason to alter it, only, because a great number desires it, if there
were nothing else in it, and therefore I do not see that the number of
Petitioners is any good reason, why it should not be committed, but rather the
contrary.

Now for their carriage, there came indeed, three or four hundred of the
15000, some of the better sort of them, and there might be good reason for it.
I have heard that there was brought a Petition to some privy Counselors,
with a thousand hands to it, and being brought only with six men, they were
answered, that they six might write those thousand hands; if there were a
thousand that joined in the Petition, why did they not come too? And we heard
it objected but the other day, in this house against the Ministers Petition,
that there were indeed seven or eight hundred names to it, but two hands only.
Therefore it was not without cause, that a considerable number should come with
a Petition signed by so many; but for any disorder in their carriage, I saw
none; for upon an intimation in one word from this house, they forthwith
retired to their dwellings. As for the subject matter of the Petition, three
exceptions are taken against it.

First, that diverse things are contemptible in it, as that about Ovid de Amore,
set forth in English, and other such things.

Secondly, that in many things their discourse was altogether irrational, for
that they argue from personal faults of Bishops against the office it self of
Bishops, and in other things argue from effects that proceed from it by
accident, as if they did fly out of it.

And in the last place, that their prayer and conclusion is bold and
presumptuous, desiring so boldly an abolition of standing Laws.

To the first I answer, that some things may seem contemptible in themselves,
which are not so in their causes, nor in their effects, as the suffering of
such lascivious pamphlets to be printed and published, when other profitable
writings are suppressed, does discover a principle, that looseness and
profaneness (which will help to bring in superstition) is more suitable to
their hierarchy than the contrary, which makes them connive at such things as
are apt to produce looseness and lewdness, and this is no contemptible
effect, nor does it proceed from a contemptible cause.

In the next place, for that which seems irrational in the way of their
discovery, diverse things may seem to be personal faults, which indeed are
derived unto the persons from the office, or from the circumstances thereof, I
mean their revenues, and dignities on the one side, and the ceremonies on the
other side. For most of the things complained of, as silencing, and thrusting
out of godly and painful Preachers, bringing in Innovations in Doctrine, and
worship, and the like; although they may seem personal and accidental
faults, yet if we follow them to their last resort, we shall find that their
worldly wealth and dignities stir them up to do this, that their sole and
arbitrary power over the Clergy, and in matter Ecclesiastical, enable them to
effect it, and the ceremonies both new and old serve as instruments, and
means, whereby they effect it.

In the last place, that their Prayer in the conclusion of their Petition, is
bold or presumptuous, I do not see there is any reason so to esteem of it:
for if they had taken upon them to have altered any thing upon their own
authority, or had imperiously required the Parliament to do it, then it might
deserve such a style: but when they come as humble suppliants, by way of
Petition, desiring the altering of Laws, that have been found burdensome unto
them, and that of the Parliament, where, and wherein only old laws may be
repealed, and new Laws may be made, they come in the right manner, to their
right and proper place, and therefore have done nothing boldly, or
presumptuously, but orderly, and regularly, and therefore ought not to receive
any check or discouragement in the way that they have taken.

Now Sir, concerning the government of the Church, by Archbishops, Bishops,
etc. which also has been spoken unto; whereas it is desired, that the evils,
and inconveniences should be showed which arise not from the persons, but from
the office it self of Bishops, I shall apply my discourse particularly to that
point. But first, I shall crave leave to say a word or two, in answer to what
has been alleged for the credit of the Government by Bishops. First, that it
is as ancient as Christian Religion, and that it has continued ever since the
time of Christ and his Apostles; as for this, I do not pretend to have so much
knowledge in antiquity, as to confute this out of the Fathers and
Ecclesiastical Histories; (although there are that undertake that) only one
sentence I have often heard cited out of Saint Jerome, that in the Primitive
times, Omnia communi Clericorum Concilio regebantur: and truly so far as the
Acts of the Apostles, and the New Testament goes, which was the ancientest,
and most primitive time of Christianity, I could never find there any
distinction between a Bishop and a Presbyter, but that they were one and the
very same thing. In the next place, that which is alleged for the credit of
Episcopacy, is, that our Reformers and Martyrs were many of them Bishops, and
practiced many of those things now complai^ed of; and that in other Reformed
Churches wh^re Bishops are not, they are desired. For the Martyrs and Reformers
of the Church that were Bishops, I do not understand that that was any part of
their Reformation, nor of their Martyrdom; I have read, that whereas Ridley
and Hooper had some difference between them in their life time about these
things, when they came both to their martyrdom, he that had formerly been the
Patron of this Hierarchy, and Ceremonies, told his brother, that therein his
foolishness had contended with his wisdom. As for that which is said, that
other Reformed Churches where they have not Bishops, yet they are desired, I
will not deny but some among them may desire Bishoprics, I mean the Dignities
and Revenues of Bishops, but that they desire Bishops as thinking it the
fittest and best Government of the Church, I cannot believe, for if they would
have Bishops, why do they not make themselves Bishops? I know not what
hinders, why they might not have Bishops when they would. In the last place,
for that which is alleged in relation to the government of this Kingdom, that
Bishops are so necessary, as that the King cannot well let them go with the
safety of Monarchy, and that if Bishops be taken away, Assemblies, or
something must come in the room thereof. And if Kings should be subject
thereunto, and should happen to be excommunicated thereby, that after they
would be little esteemed, or obeyed as Kings: for this, if it shall be
cleared, as it is affirmed, or if any thing therein do strike at Monarchy, I
shall never give my vote, nor consent thereunto as long as I live. But to
clear that this is not so, I offer to your consideration, that by the Law of
this Land not only all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but also all superiority,
and pre-eminence over the Ecclesiastical state, is annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm, and may be granted by Commission under the great seal,
to such persons as his Majesty shall think meet: now, if the King should
grant it to a certain number of Commissioners, equal in authority, as he may
do, this were an abolition of Episcopacy, and yet not diminution of Monarchy;
But the truth is, Episcopacy is a kind of Monarchy under a Monarchy, and is
therein altogether unlike the Civil Government under his Majesty: for the
King being a common head over the Ecclesiastical state and the Civil, we
shall find that in the exercise of Civil Jurisdiction, in all Courts under
his Majesty, it is Aristocraticall, and placed in many, and not in one, as
appears in this high Court of Parliament, in the inferior Courts of
Westminster Hall, and in the Sizes, and Sessions in the Country, which are
held by many Commissioners, and not only by one, or his Deputies, and
Commissaries, as it is in the exercise of Ecclesiastical government. As to the
point of Excommunication, supposing that it did dissolve natural and civil
bonds of duty, as it does not, it might indeed be as terrible to Princes, as it
is represented. But I reason thus, either Princes are subject to
Excommunication, or they are not: if they be not, then they need as little to
fear a Presbytery or an assembly, as a Bishop in that respect; if they be,
they have as much to fear from Bishops, at leastwise from Bishops in their
Convocations, as from Presbyters in their Assemblies; and so much the more,
because they have formerly felt the thunderbolts of those of that stamp, but
never from this latter sort. And now Sir, I proceed to represent unto you the
evils, and inconveniences that do proceed from the government and Ceremonies
of the Church, and truly in my opinion, the chief and principal cause of all
the evils which we have suffered, since the Reformation in this Church and
State, has proceeded from that division which so unhappily has sprung up
amongst us, about Church government, and the Ceremonies of the Church, and from
which part in that division, I believe, it will appear in the particulars. I
know well there is a great division, and that upon great matters, between us
and the Papists, and I am not ignorant that there have been great and sore
breaches made upon our Civil Liberties, and the right of our proprieties.

But yet still I return to my former position, that the chief and most active
cause has proceeded from the Government and Ceremonies of the Church, and that
those other causes have either fallen into it, and so acted by it, or issued
out of it, and so acted from it. As for Popery, I conceive that to have been a
cause that has fallen into this, and acted by it; for at the Reformation it
received such a deadly wound by so many sharp Laws enacted against it, that
had it not been enlivened by this division amongst us, it could never have had
influence upon our Church and State to have troubled them, as this day we
feel; but finding that in this division amongst us, one party had need of some
of their principalls to maintain their Hierarchy, together with their worldly
pomp and Ceremonies, which are appurtenances thereunto; from hence they first
conceived a ground of hope, and afterward found means of success, toward
the introducing again of their superstition and Idolatry into this Realm; and
they wrought so diligently upon this foundation, that they have advanced their
building very far, and how near they were to set up the Roof, I leave it to
your consideration. As for the evils which we have suffered in our civil
liberty, and the right of our proprieties, J conceive they have proceeded out
of this, and so acted from it; for if there had been no breaches of
Parliaments, there would have bin no need to have had recourse unto those
broken Cisternes, that can hold no water; but there being a stoppage of
Parlamentary supplies, that was an occasion of letting in upon us such an
inundation of Monopolies, and other illegal taxes, and impositions,
accompanied with many other heavy and sore breaches of our Liberties. Now there
needed not to have been any breaches of Parliaments, had there not been
something disliked in them, and what was that? it could not be any of these
civil matters that bred the first difference, for they have proceeded out of
it, therefore I conceive it was this: The Prelates with their adherents (the
Papists also concurring with them for their interest) did always look upon
Parliaments with an evil eye, as no friends to their offices and functions, at
leastwise to their Benefices and Dignities, and therefore (some of them having
always had the grace to be too near to the Princes eats) they have always
endeavored to breed a dis-affection in Kings from Parliaments, as the Press
and Pulpit do abundantly witness, and Ballads too, made by some of them upon
the breaches of Parliaments. But we have a fresh and bleeding instance of this
in the confirmation in his Majesty's name, which they procured to be prefixed
before their new Book of Canons, wherein they have endeavored to make this
impression upon his Majesty's Royal mind, that the Authors and Fomenters of
the jealousy in respect of the new Rites and Ceremonies lately introduced into
the Church, which we call innovations, did strike at his Royal person, as if
he were perverted in his Religion, and did worship God in a superstitious way,
and intended to bring in some Innovation in matter of Religion. Now Sir, who
are the authors of those jealousies? did they not come as complaints in the
Petitions from the bodies of several Counties the last Parliament, and from
more this present Parliament? and who were the fomenters of those jealousies?
did not the general sense of the last Parliament concur in it, that they
were Innovations, and that they were suspicions, as introductory to
superstition? Nay, I appeal to all those that hear me, which are drawn from al
parts of the Kingdom, whether this be not the general sense of the greatest
and most considerable part of the whole Kingdom? I beseech you then to
consider, what kind Offices these men have done between the King and the
Parliament, between the King and Kingdom, I speak of the greatest and most
considerable par^s, as giving denomination to the whole. And now Sir, as we
have cast our eye backwards, if we will look forwards, how do the clouds
thicken upon us, and what distractions, yea what dangers do they threaten us
withal, proceeding still from the same root of Church Government and
Ceremonies? and truly as things now stand, I see but two ways, the one of
Destruction, the other of Satisfaction; Destruction I mean of the opposite
party to the Bishops, and the Ceremonies, and reducing of all to Canonical
obedience, by fair means or by foul: this way has been already tried, and
what effect it has brought forth in our neighbor kingdom, we well know, and
it is like to produce no very good effect in this Kingdom, if men's scruples
and reasons in that behalf shall be only answered with Prisons, and
Pillories, and hard Censures, that I may speak most softly of them. I hold
therefore, that the other way of satisfaction is the safest, the easiest, and
the only way. And that is to take into consideration, the several heads of
the evils, which are causes of these complaints, and to find out, and apply
the proper remedies thereunto. For the furtherance whereof, I shall make bold
with your patience (which I am very unwilling to tire, but must tire my own
Conscience if I should not discharge it upon this occasion) to represent a
brief Model of the several heads and springs from whence the evils, which
are causes of these complaints, do naturally or occasionally arise. The evils
complained of, do either arise from persons, or from things; those faults that
are personal are besides the point that I intend to speak to, there is one
only remedy for them, that is, by punishment and removal of such persons, and
the putting of better in their room. As for those evils which proceed from
things, they also are remedied by a removal of such things as are evil, and
the putting of better in their room; the evils and inconveniences of this
kind do principally flow, either from the Clergies Offices and functions, or
from their Benefices and Dignities; those that arise from their Offices and
functions, do arise naturally either from the Laws and Constitutions whereby,
and according to which they exercise their Offices and functions, or from the
Government it self, wherein they exercise those functions. The faults that I
note in the Ecclesiastical Laws are, that they hold too much of the Civil
Law, and too much of the Ceremonial Law: Of the Civil Law, in respect of all
those Titles concerning Wills, and Legacies, tithes, marriages, adulteries,
which all belonging to the Civil jurisdiction, and are no more of spiritual
consideration, than rapes, thefts, fellonies, or treasons may be. Sir, it is
good that every bird should have his own feather, and I remember when one came
to our Savior Christ, to desire him that he would cause his Brother to divide
the inheritance with him, he asked him; who made him a Judge of such things:
and may not we ask, who made them that take themselves to be successors of
Christ and his Apostles, Judges of such things? Many inconveniences arise from
hence; First that the minds of Clergy men are inured unto Civil Dominion,
and to meddle with civil matters. Secondly, the manner of their proceedings,
is turned from a Spiritual way into the fashion of Processes in Temporal
Courts. And lastly, which is worst of all, by this means the Spi^i^uall Sword
comes to be unsheathed about such things as do not at all fall under the
stroke thereof. Many are excommunicated for Pigges, Apples, and Nuts, and such
like things. But the other fault which I noted in the Ecclesiastical Laws and
Constitutions, pincheth us more, which is, that they hold too much of the
Ceremonial Law.

And here Mr. Speaker, give me leave to lament the condition of this our Church
of England, beyond that of all other reformed Churches. A certain number of
Ceremonies in the judgment of some men unlawful, and to be rejected of all
Churches, in the judgment of all other reformed Churches to be rejected by
them, and in the judgment of our own Churches, but indifferent Ceremonies:
and yet what difference? yea, what distractions have these indifferent
Ceremonies raised among us? What has deprived us of so many faithful, able,
and godly Ministers since the Reformation, as able and as fit in all other
respects to discharge that function, as any age ever produced in the Christian
Word since the time of the Apostles, I say what has deprived us of them, but
these indifferent Ceremonies? What has deprived us of so many thousand
Christians which desired (and in all other respects deserved) to hold communion
with us; I say, what has deprived us of them, and scattered them into I know
not what places and corners of the World, but these indifferent Ceremonies?
What has caused so many hard censures, and harder executions, but these
indifferent Ceremonies? What has occasioned those calamities and dangers,
which we feel, and which we fear, but those indifferent Ceremonies? I shall
say no more of them, but I pray God that now at length it may please his
Majesty with the his great Council of Parliament, to take a view of them, and
if there be a necessity to retain them, let them be retained; but if not, then
let us remove them, before they ruin us. As to the evils and inconveniences
that arise out of the government it self, I should have noted something
amiss, as well in the legislative part, as in the executive part, but in the
former I am prevented, by what has been already voted concerning the Power of
making Canons: which votes if they be brought to perfection, they will set us
right in great part, in that respect; for surely, before the power was neither
in the hands of such as were representative of that which is truly the Church
of England, nor yet in the hands of those that were truly representative of
the Clergy of England, if they were the whole Church, as indeed they are not.
As to the executive part, which consists in the exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, therein I note also two disorders, Confusion, and Corruption;
Confusion of the Spiritual Sword with the Temporal; Laymen strike with the
Spiritual sword, and Spiritual men with the Temporal sword: nay, out of the
same mouth, and at the same time proceeds an Excommunication, and a fine, or
commitment, or both: I will not say positively, that it is unlawful for
Clergymen to exercise civil jurisdiction, because I know it is a question,
but yet such a question as has bin determined by diverse Canons of general
Councels, and by some that were made in Synods of the Church of England, that
it is unlawful, and that upon grounds which are not contemptible.

As first, that it is contrary to the precept and practice of Christ and his
Apostles. And secondly, That it is not possible for one man to discharge two
Functions, whereof either is sufficient to employ the whole man, especially
that of the Ministry so great, that they ought not to entangle themselves with
the affairs of this world. A third ground not so well observed generally, as
in one part thereof, is this, That Ministers of the Gospel, being sent
especially to gain the Souls of men, they are to gain as great interest as
possible may be, in their minds and affections: Now we know that the nature of
all men is such, that they are apt to think hardly of those that are any
Authors of their pain and punishment, although it be in a way of Justice, and
therefore as it is well known, that Clergy men are not to be present in
judicio sanguinis; so the same reason extends it self to the administration of
all Civil jurisdiction, and therefore we may observe that our Savior Christ,
as he always rejected all Civil judicature, so on the other side, he went up
and down healing men's bodies, and otherwise doing good to their outward
estate, that his Doctrine might have a freer and fairer passage into their
Souls. For the corruption that I spoke of in the exercise of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, I do not mean any personal corruption, but a deviation or
aberration from the prescript of the Divine Rule: And though it be not easy
to find what that is in all particulars, yet it is not hard to say, what it is
not, and that I doubt may prove our case indivors things. Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction we know extendes either to the Clergy only, and consists in the
Ordination, Admission, Suspension, and deprivation of them, or else it
extends to the whole Church, and consists in Excommunication and
Absolution. As to the Ordination, Admission, Suspension, and Deprivation of
Ministers; we see how it is wholly at the pleasure of one man, and that of one
man proceeding in a manner Arbitrarily, and that of one man whose interest is
concerned in it, that the door shall be shut against able and painful
preaching Ministers, and a wide door set open to such as are unable, and unfit
for that function: many and great and dangerous evils arise from hence. As
first, that there is a constant bate and fewd between the Ecclesiastical State
and the Civil, between Prelates and Parliaments, between the Canon Law and
the Common Law, between the Clergy and the Commonwealth, arising from the
Disproportion and Dissimilitude which is between the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government, however it may seem to some to agree well enough,
but the truth is, if we consider his Majesty as the Commonhead over the
Ecclesiastical State, as well as the Civil, we shall find that in the
exercise of all Civil jurisdiction, in all Courts under his Majesty, the power
is not in any one, or his Deputies and Commissaries, as it is in the
Ecclesiastical Government, in the several Diocesses throughout this Kingdom:
If we look first upon the Highest and greatest Court, the High Court of
Parliament, we know that is a Council, and a great Council too. In like
manner, in the inferior Courts of Westminster-Hal, there are many Judges in
the point of Law, and more in matter of Fact, wherein every man is judged by
twelve of equal condition unto him, (I mean the Juries,) which are Judges of
the Fact, both in causes Civil and Criminal. And if we look into the Country,
we shall find the Sessions and Assizes, and other Courts, held not by any one,
but by diverse Commissioners. And in short, in the Civil Government, every man
from the greatest to the least, has some share in the Government according to
the Proportion of his Interest in the Commonwealth: But in the Government of
the Church, all is in the hands of one Man, in the several Diocesses, or of
his Chancellors, or Commissaries, and he exacts Canonical Obedience, to his
Pontifical Commands, with a total Exclusion of those that notwithstanding
have as much share in the Church, and consequently as much Interest in the
Government of it, as they have in that of the Commonwealth. (Sir) until the
Ecclesiastical government be framed something of another twist, and be more
assimilated unto that of the Commonwealth, I fear the Ecclesiastical
government will be no good neighbor unto the Civil, but will be still a
casting in of its leaven into it, to reduce that also to a sole, absolute, and
arbitrary way of proceeding: And herein (Sir) I do not believe, that I utter
Prophesies, but what we have already found and felt.

A second, and that a great evil, and of dangerous consequence, in this sole
and arbitrary power of Bishops over their Clergy, is this, that they have by
that means, a power to place, and displace the whole Clergy of their Diocese
at their pleasure: and this is such a power, as for my part, I had rather they
had the like power over the Estate and persons of all within their Diocese;
for if I hold the one, but at the will and pleasure of one man, (I mean the
Ministry under which I must live) I can have but little, or at least no
certain joy nor comfort in the other. But this is not all, for if they have
such a power to mould the Clergy of their Diocesses, according to their
pleasure, we know what an Influence they may have by them upon the people, and
that in a short time they may bring them to such blindness, and so mould them
also to their own wills, as that they may bring in what Religion they please:
nay, having put out our eyes, as the Philistines did Sampsons, they may
afterward make us grind, and reduce us unto what slavery they please, either
unto themselves, as formerly they have done, or unto others, as some of them
lately have been forward enough to do. Now whether it be safe to walk upon
Stilts on the top of the pinacles of the Temple, upon so high precipices, as
are the matters of Religion and Conscience (which may have also a dangerous
Influence upon our civil liberties) I leave it to your consideration: for my
part I should not think it safe, that such a power should be in any one man,
though you suppose him to be a very good man.

A third evil, and that of dangerous consequence, is that the door is shut
against able and painful Preaching Ministers, and a wide door set open to
those that are unable, and unfit for that function, and the Bishops interest is
concerned in it, that it should be so, Interest of honor, Interest of profit,
and Interest of power, Interest of credit; for they see that those painful
Preachers carry away all the credit from them, and they neither can nor will
do the like themselves: they cannot by reason they are so entangled with the
affairs of this world, and civil jurisdiction; they will not, their great
Dignities and Honors make them so stately, that they think it is not
Episcopal to preach often; and on the other side, they are so fat, and live so
much at their ease, that through idleness they cannot bring their minds unto
it, and so first arises envy against those that do take pains, and thence
after springs persecution. In the next place, their Interest is concerned in
matter of profit: for they suppose, that if the credit of their Diana fall to
the ground, their gain will after cease, and that the people will think much,
that some men should take all the pains, and other go away with all the
profit.

Lastly, their Interest is concerned in it, in point of power, for they find
that neither such preaching Ministers, nor their Auditors, are so pliable to
yield blind Canonical obedience, as others are: and so it concerns them in
point of power to stop their mouths.

And now it must needs follow by the rule of Contraries, that it must be for
their profit, honor, and power, to set open a docre to idle and unfit
Ministers. But there are two particulars which I will note, wherein it
concerns them in their profits, to set the door very wide open, where there
is no suspicion of refractorinesse: First, we know Bishops have many times
Livings in Commendum and Pluralities: but there is hardly any, but they have
impropriations, whereof they are to see the Cure discharged, and therefore it
is for their profit, that there may be good store of cheap Curates, which
cannot be very fit and able men; and with such ordinarily they furnish the
Cures of such places whereof they have the Impropriations. (Sir) In the next
place we know, that orders are not given, but in a manner sold, for not only
the Bishop, and his Register, but also his Usher, his Chamberlain, his Butler,
and Porter, and almost all his meniall servants must have their fees, before
the poor Clerk with his Box full of Orders can pass the Porters Lodge. I
hear much of the legal Simony, which consists in the buying and selling of
Benefices, but whether this does not approach nearer to the Evangelicall
Simony, which consists in the buying and selling of the gifts of the holy
Ghost; I offer it to your consideration. Now (Sir) for Excommunication and
Absolution, all seems to be out of point, for Excommunication is neither in
right hands, nor exercised upon right grounds and matters, nor in a right form
and manner, nor to right ends, and then it is no marvel if it have not right
effects. (Sir) we know our Savior has lodged it in the Church (for so runs
the precept) dic Ecclesiae: now (Sir) that one man should be a Church, sounds
strangely in my ears. In the next place (I boseech you Sir) consider about
what their Spiritual Sword is exercised, about things no way lying under the
stroke thereof; A man shall be excommunicated for a Pig, or for an Apple, and
such like things: I heard once a Gentleman of the Civil Law answer hereunto in
this house, that the Excommunication was not for the thing, but for the
contempt, and the less the thing was, that was commanded, the greater was the
contempt: If this were so, sure the greater is the cruelty, to lay command upon
so small a matter, that draws after it so deep a censure, as to cast a man
down into Hell. Suppose a Magistrate should command some trivial matter, some
ceremony or other, under pain of treason, and should proceed against the
Infringers of his command as Traitors, it were much to be doubted, whether the
command did not partake more of cruelty, than the disobedience of contempt; for
when authority shall so far lose it self, as to lay so great a weight upon
so small a matter, it rend reth it self contemptible, and then it is no
marvel (I had almost said) it is no fault, if it be contemned, having made
it self contemptible. Then Sir, for the form of proceeding, it is no whit
spiritual, there is no fasting and prayer, no seeking to reclaim the sinner,
but rather it is after the fashion of a summary Process in a civil Court,
nay, Sir, it is accompanied sometimes with an intimation that no man shall buy
or sell with the person excommunicated, nor set him a work, nor do any civil
or natural offices unto him. As we had a complaint brought in this
Parliament, of a Son that was excommunicated only for repeating a Sermon to
his father, being an excommunicate person. Now Sir, for the ends for which this
censure is executed, they are ordinarily to fetch in fees, or at the best to
bring men under Canonical obedience, which is the Ordinaries will and
pleasure, and I have sometimes seen a Minister pronounce an Excommunication,
which he held in one hand, and presently after the absolution which he held in
the other, so the end of the excommunication was the absolution, and the end of
that was fees: (Sir) for the honor of God, for the honor of our national
Church, and for the honor of the Christian Religion, let the high and great
censure of the Church no longer lackey after fees, let not Christians any
longer be east to Satan, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the non payment of a
groat. And now Sir, we may imagine what effects are like to follow upon such
premises, the great and dreadful censure of Excommunication is thereby made
contemptible, and were it not for the civil restraints, and penalties that
follow upon it, no man would purchase an absolution, though he may have it for
a halfe-peny. And I have heard of some that have thanked the Ordinaries for
abating or remitting the fees of the Courts: but I never heard of any that
thanked them, for reclaiming their souls to repentance, by their
Excommunications; (Sir) for absolution, it is relative to excommunication, and
so labors of the same diseases: only one thing I shall particularly note
concerning absolution, (Sir) it is called commutation of penance, but indeed it
is a destruction of the Ordinance, making it void, and of none effect, and
surely God never set his Ministers to sell indulgences in his Church. The oath
that is to precede absolution, de parendo juri ecclesia, and stando, etc. has
already been sufficiently spoken unto, in the debate about the Canons, and
therefore there will be no need of speaking more to that. Now Sir, I am come
to my last head, wherein I shall be very brief; and that is concerning the
evils that arise out of the benefices and dignities of the Clergy, the common
cause being from the inequality of the distribution of them, much resembling a
disease very ordinary at this time amongst Children, which they call the
Rickets, wherein the nourishment goes all to the upper parts, which are
overgreat and monstrous, and the lower parts pine away: and so it is in the
Clergy, some are so poor, that they cannot attend their Ministry, but are
feign to keep schools, nay, Alehouses some of them; and some others are so
stately, they will not attend their Ministry, and so between them the flock
starves: but our evils have more especially proceeded from the excessive
worldly wealth, and dignities of one part of the Clergy, I mean such as
either are in possession, or in hopes of Bishoprics, for these great places of
profit and honor, first, have been the baits of ambition, and then they
became the apples of contention, and last of all, the seeds of superstition,
the one being a step and degree unto the other, and all of them leading in the
end to the corruption, (that I may not say subversion) of our Religion. Sir,
they are first the baits of ambition, and I know not by what secret cause, but
experience shows us, that when Clergy men have once tasted the sweet of
worldly wealth and honors, they are more eager and ambitious after them than
any other sort of men; here upon other godly Ministers, that live more
according to the simplicity of the Gospel, and the example of Christ and his
Apostles, cannot but bear witness against their wordly pomp and dignities,
and so the fire of contention breaks forth. And truly (Sir) the state of the
Clergy is very like to fire, which whilst it keeps in the Chimney, it is of
excellent use to warm those that approach unto it, but if it once break out
into the house, and get upon the house top, it sets all on fire: so whilst the
Clergy keep themselves within the pulpit, they are of great use to stir up
the zeal and devotion of Christians, but if they once fly out into the house,
if they begin to meddle with Civil places and jurisdictions, and especially if
they once get up to the Counsell-table, it is seldom seen, but that at length
they set all on fire; and what is it that makes the fire to break out of the
chimney, but too much fuel? if there be but a moderate proportion of fuel,
the fire keeps it self within its bounds, but if you heap faggot upon
faggot, a whole Cart load together, then it breaks out: (So Sir) if there be
a competent maintenance for the Ministry, they will keep themselves within
their bounds, but if Living be heaped upon Living, and Temporalities added to
Spiritualities, the flame will soon break out, and set the house on fire.
(Sir) I do not envy the wealth or greatness of the Clergy, but I am very
confident, if those were less, they would be better, and do more service to
Christ and his Church; and I am very clear in mine own heart, that the livings
of the Clergy being more equally distributed, the service of God would be so
far from receiving any prejudice, that it would be much advanced, and
withal a good proportion of revenue might return again to the Crown, from
whence it was first derived. (Sir) Bishoprics, Deanries, and Chapiters, are
like to great wasters in a Wood, they make no proof themselves, they cumber
the ground whereon they stand, and with their great Arms and Boughs streiched
forth on every side, partly by their shade, and partly by their sour
droppings, they hinder all the young wood under them from growing and thriving.
To speak plain English, these Bishops, Deanes, and Chapiters, do little good
themselves by preaching, or otherwise; and if they were felled, a great deal
of good timber might be cut out of them, for the uses of the Church, and
Kingdom at this time. A fresh stool of three or four able Ministers might
spring up in their stead to very good purpose in these great Towns, which are
Ordinarily the Seats of those Episcopal, and Collegiate Churches, and the
private Congregations of diverse Parochial Churches might thrive and grow
better, which now have the Sun of Gods Word, I mean the clear and
spiritual preaching thereof kept from them, and live in the dangerous shade of
ignorance, by reason that all the means is taken from them, and appropriated
unto Bishops, or to Deanries, and Chaptiers, and other such Collegiate
Churches. Besides, such as do begin to grow and start up through the voluntary
pains of some amongst them, or* by such preaching as they themselves have
procured by their voluntary contributions, should not still be dropped on as
they are from the arms and appendances of those great wasters, and kept down
continually by their bitter persecutions. That which remains now, is to show
how these great Revenues and Dignities, become the seeds of superstition, and
that is this: The Clergy in the maintenance of their greatness, which they are
neither willing to forgo, nor yet well able to maintain upon the principles
of the Reformed Religion, finding that the popish principles, whereon the
Bishop of Rome built his greatness, to suit well unto their ends, that makes
them to side with that party, and that must needs bring in superstition: and as
ambition allureth on the one side, so the principles they go by, draw them on
farther and farther, and happily at length farther than they themselves at
first intended. Whether a reconciliation with Rome, were imagined or no by some
I leave it to every one to judge within himself: But sure I am, if an
accommodation could have been made in some fashion or other, with the Church
of Rome, the Clergy might again be capable of foreign preferments, and
Cardinals Caps, and this is no small temptation. Now Sir, I am at an end, only
I shall draw out three conclusions, which I conceive may clearly be collected
out of what I have said. First, that civil jurisdiction in the persons of
Clergymen, together with their great Revenues, and high places of dignity, is
one great cause of the evils which we suffer in matter of Religion. Secondly,
that the sole and arbitrary power of Bishops in the ordaining and detriving of
Ministers, and in Excommunication, and absolution, is another great cause of
the evils we suffer in matter of Religion. Thirdly, the strict urging of
Subscription, and Conformity to the Ceremonies, and Canons of the Church is
another great cause of evil, which we suffer in matter of Religion.

And now my humble motion is, that we should take a piece only of this subject
into our consideration, but the whole matter, and that not only that part of
the Ministers Remonstrance, which has been read, should be referred to the
Committee which you are about to name, but Londons Petition also, and all other
Petitions of the like nature, so soon as they shall be read in the house, and
that the Committee may collect out of them all such heads as are fit for the
consideration of this house, and surely that is fit to be considered, that
happily will not be thought fit to be altered: consideration is one thing, and
alteration another: where there is a mixture of bad and good together, the
whole must be considered, that we may know how to sever the good from the bad,
and so retain the one, and reject the other, which is all that I desire. And
if any thing have fallen from me more inconsiderate (as in so long a discourse
many things may have done) I humbly crave the pardon of the house, protesting
that I have spoken nothing but with a mind which is ready to sacrifice the
body it dwells in, to the peace and safety of his Majesty's Kingdoms, and
the safety and honor of his Majesty in the Government of them.

A Speech made before the Lords in the Upper House; by Mr. Francis Rous
Esquire; March the 16th. 1640.
Against Dr. Cossens, Dr. Maynwaring, and Dr. Beale.
My LORDS,
I AM commanded by the House of Commons to present to your Lordships a
Declaration and Impeachment against Dr. Cossens, and others, upon the complaint
of Mr. Peter Smart; which Mr. Smart was a Proto-Martyr, or, first Confessor of
note in the late days of persecution. The whole matter is a Tree, whereof the
branches and fruit are manifest in the Articles of this declaration; which
being read, I shall with your Lordships favor discover and lay open the root.

The Declaration was read, and then He proceeded thus:

My Lords,
I AM now to discover the root of Mr. Smarts Persecution.

Your Lordships have heard of a great Design to bring in Popery; you have
heard of Armies of Soldiers, and particularly of the Popish Irish Army, the
burden and Complaint of the Commons. But there is another Army not so much
spoken of, and that is an Army of Priests: for since Altars came in (so they
delight to be called,) it is a saying of Gregory the Great, that when
Antichrist comes, Preparatus est exercitus Sacerdotum: There is an Army of
Priests ready to receive him: this is fulfilled in our time; for certainty this
Army of Priests does many ways advance the design and plot of Popery. A first
is by the subversion of our Laws, and Government: our Laws and Popery cannot
stand together; but either Popery must overthrow our Laws, or our Laws must
over throw Popery: but to overthrow our Laws they must overthrow Parliaments;
and to overthrow Parliaments, they must overthrow property; thy must bring the
Subjects goods to be arbitrarily disposed that so there may be no need of
Parliament; this has bind done by Dr. Maynwaring, (whom we find wanting yet
not in the seats, but in the Bar of the Lords house) and the like by Dr. Beale:
and I think it was the intention of the late Canons.

A second way, by which this Army of Priests advances the Popish Design, is
the way of Treaty. This has bind acted both by writings and conference:
Sancta Clara himself says, Doct^ssimi eorum quibusounque egi; so it seems
they have had conferences together. And Sancta Clara on his part, labors to
bring the Articles of our Church to Popery; and some of our side strive to
meet him in that way: we have a testimony that the great Archpriest himself
has said; It were no hard matter to make a reconciliation, if a wise man had
the handling of it. But I verily believe, that as the state of Papacy stands,
a far wise man than be cannot reconcile Us, without the loss of our
Religion. For the Pope being fastened to his Errors, even by his Chair of
Inerrability, he sits still unmoved, and so we cannot meet, except we come
wholly to him. A man standing in a Boat tied to a Rock, when he draws the
Rope, does not draw the Rock to the Boat, but the Boat to the Rock. And Sancta
Clara does (in this somewhat honestly) confess it: for he says he dealt in
this way of Treaty, not to draw the Church to the Protestants; but the
Protestants to the Church.

A third way is a way of violence, this violence they exercise partly by
Secular Arms, and partly by Priestly Arms, which they call Spiritual: for
Secular Arms we have their own confession, that the late war was Bellum
Episcopale; and we have the Papists confession, that it was Bellum Papale; for
in their motives, they say, That the war concerns them not only as
subjects, but as Catholics, for so they falsely call themselves: and if it be
so, then Bellum Episcopale, is also Bellum Papale: in the Episcopal War, the
Papal cause is advanced: For the Spiritual Arms, thus they come to execution.

When a great Man is coming, his Sumpters, his Furniture, his Provisions go
before: the Popes Furniture, Altars and Copes, Pictures and Images are come
before; (and if we believe Dr. Cossens) the very substance of the Mass; a
certain sign that the Pope was not far off. Now these fore-tunners being
come, if any man resist them, Fire comes out of the Brambles, and devoures the
Cedars of Lebanon; the Army of the Priests falls upon him with their Arms of
Suspension, Sequestration, Excommunication, Degradation, and Deprivation. And
by these Arms has Mr. Smart been oppressed and undone. He falls upon their
Superstitions, and Innovations, and they fall upon him with their Arms, they
beat him down, yea they pull him up by the roots, taking away all his means
of maintenance and living; yet they leave him life to feel his miseries; Ita
feriunt, ut diu se sentiat mori; there is no cruelty to Priesty cruelty; these
are they that did put our very Savior to death: the Calling is Reverend, but
the Corruption of it most pernicious; Corruption optimi pessima: I know no
reason of this change, except it be that of the Apostle: Because when they knew
God, they did not worship him as God, but made a God of the World, placing the
excellency of Priesthood in worldly pomp and greatness, and gave the glory of
the invisible God, to Pictures, Images, and Altars: therefore God gave them up
to vile affections, to be implacable, unmercifull, and without natural
affection. But whatsoever the cause is of their Corruption; certainly their
Arms have fallen heavily upon Mr. Smart, and Priestly cruelty has cast him
into a long misery, from which he could get no release by any Priestly mercy.

And now it is prayed, that as these Delinquents by the cruel oppressions of
Mr. Smart have advanced the Cause of Popery, so they may in such a degree of
Justice be punished, that in them Priestly cruelty, and the very cause of
Popery may appear to be punished and suppressed, and that Mr. Smart suffering
for the Cause of Protestancy may be so repaired, that in him pious Constancy,
and the very Cause of Protestancy may appear to be righted and repaired.

A second Speech of the Honorable NATHANAEL FIENNES (second Son to the right
Honorable the Lord Say) touching the Subjects Liberty against the late Canons
and the new Oath.
Mr. Speaker,
NOW that we are about to brand these Canons in respect of the matter contained
in them, it is the proper time to open the foulness thereof: and though much
of this has been anticipated in the general debate, yet if any thing has
been omitted, or if any thing may be farther cleared in that kind, it is for
the service of the House, that it should now be done.

Sir I conceive these Canons do contain sundry matters, which are not only
contrary to the Laws of this Land, but also destructive of the very principal
and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. I shall begin with the first Canon,
wherein the framers of these Canons have assumed unto themselves a
Parliamentary power, and that too in a very high degree, for they have taken
upon them to define what is the power of the King, what the liberty of the
Subjects, and what propriety he has in his goods. If this be not proper to a
Parliament, I know not what is. Nay it is the highest matter that can fall
under the consideration of a Parliament, and such a point as wherein they would
have walked with more tenderness and circumspection than these bold Divines
have done. And surely, as this was an act of such presumption as no age can
parallel: so is it of such dangerous consequence as nothing can be more. For
they do not only take upon them to determine matters of this nature, but also
under great penalties, forbid all Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Readers in
Divinity, etc. to speak any other ways of them then as they had defined, by
which means having seized upon all the Conduites, whereby knowledge is
convayed to the people, how easy would it be for them in time, to undermine
the Kings Prerogative, and to suppress the subjects liberty, or both.

And now (Sir) I beseech you to consider how they have defined this high and
great point: they have dealt with us in matter of Divinity, as the Judges had
done before in matter of Law: they first took upon them to determine a matter
that belonged not to their Judicature, but only to the Parliament, and after
by their judgment they overthrew our propriety, and just so have these Divines
dealt with us: they tell us that Kings are an Ordinance of God, of Divine
Right, and founded in the prime Laws of Nature, from whence it will follow
that all other forms of government, as Aristocracies, and Democracies, are
wicked forms of government, contrary to the Ordinance of God, and the Prime
Laws of Nature, which is such new Divinity as never read in any Book, but in
this new Book of Canons.

Mr. Speaker, We all know that Kings, and States, and Judges, and all
Magistrates are the Ordinances of God, but (Sir) give me leave to say they
were the Ordinances of men, before they were the Ordinances of God. I know I am
upon a great and high point, but I speak by as great and as high a warrant, if
St. Peter's chair cannot err (as St. Peter's Epistles cannot) thus he teaches
us, Submit your self to-every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it
be to the King as supreme, or to the Governor, as to him that is sent by
him, etc.

(Sir) It is worthy noting, that they are Ordinances of men, but that they are
to be submitted unto for the Lords sake, and truly their power is as just, and
their subjects allegiance as due unto them, though we suppose them to be first
ordinances of men, and then confirmed, and established by Gods Ordinance, as if
we suppose them to be immediate Ordinances of God, and so received by men.
But there was somewhat in it, that these Divines aimed at, I suppose it was
this. If Kings were of Divine Right, as the Office of a Pastor in the Church,
or founded in the prime Laws of Nature, as the power of a Father in a Family;
then it would certainly follow, that they should receive the fashion and manner
of their government, only from the Prescript of Gods Word, or of the Laws of
Nature, and consequently, if there be no Text, neither of the Old nor New
Testament, nor yet any Law of Nature, that Kings may not make Laws without
Parliaments, they may make Laws without Parliaments, and if neither in the
Scripture, nor in the Law of Nature, Kings be forbidden to lay taxes or any
kind of impositions upon their people without consent in Parliament, they may
do it out of Parliament: and that this was their meaning, they express it
after in plain terms, for they say that Subsidies and taxes, and all manner
of ayds are due unto Kings by the Law of God, and of Nature. (Sir) if they be
due by the Law of God and of Nature, they are due, though there be no act of
Parliament for them: nay (Sir) if they be due by such a right, a hundred acts
of Parliaments cannot take them away, or make them undue. And (Sir) that they
meant it of Subsidies and aids taken without consent in Parliament, is clearly
that addition that they subjoyne unto it, that this does not take away from the
Subject the propriety he has in his goods, for had they spoken of Subsidies
and aids given by consent in Parliament, this would have been a very
ridiculous addition, for who ever made any question, whether the giving
Subsidies in Parliament did take away from the Subject the propriety he has
in his goods, when as it does evidently imply they have a propriety in their
goods? for they could not give unless they had something to give: but because
that was alleged as a chief reason against Ship-mens, and other such illegal
payments levied upon the people, without their consent in Parliament, that it
did deprive them of their right of propriety, which they have in their goods,
these Divines would seem to make some answer thereunto, but in truth their
answer is nothing else but the bare assertion of a contradiction, and it is an
easy thing to say a contradiction, but impossible to reconcile it; for
certainly if it be a true rule (as it is most true) quod meum est sine
consensu meo, non potest fieri alienum; to take my goods without my consent
must needs destroy my propriety. Another thing in this first Canon, wherein
they have assumed unto themselves a Parliamentarie power, is in that they take
upon them to define what is Treason, besides what is determined in the statute
of Treasons. They say, to set up any coactive independent power is treasonable
both against God and the King, the question is not whether it be true they say
or no, but whether they have power to say what is Treason, and what not? But
now (Sir) that I am upon this point, I would gladly know what kind of power
that is, which is exercised by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
etc. Coactive certainly it is, all the Kingdom feels the lash thereof, and
it must needs be independent, if it be jure Divine, as they hold it, for they
do not mean by an independent power, such a power as does not depend on GOD.
Besides, if their power be dependant, of whom is it dependant? not of the King,
for the Law acknowledges no way whereby Ecclesiastical jurisdiction can be
derived from his Majesty, but by his Commission under the great-Scale, which
as I am informed, they have not: I speak not of the High Commission, but of
that jurisdiction which they exercise in their Archiepiscopall, Episcopal,
Archidaconall Courts, etc. and therefore if their own sentence be just, we
know what they are, and what they have pronounced against themselves. But (Sir)
it were worth knowing what they aimed at in that independent coactive power,
which they term popular. I will not take upon me to unfold their meaning; but
we know Doctor Beale had a hand in the making of these Canons, and if we
apply his Paraphrase to the Text, it may give us some clearenesse. I remember
amongst other notes of his this was one, that he did acknowledge the Kings
Supremacy, but would join unto him an assistant (viz.) the people, meaning
this House, which being the representative body of the COMMONS of England, and
claiming, as it is so, a share in the Legislative power, Doctor Beale calls
this a joining of an assistant to the King, in whom soly he places the power
of making Laws, and that it is but of grace, that he assumeth either the
Lords, or Commons for the making of Laws with him. Now (Sir) the Legislative
power is the greatest power, and therefore coactive, and it is the highest
power, and therefore independent, and if every Estate for the proportion it
has therein, should not have such a power, it should not have it of right, as
founded in the Fabric and frame of the policy and government, but of Grace,
or by Commission, as Dr. Beale affirms. I have done with the first Canon,
only I shall add this, that considering the principles and positions that are
laid down therein, and comparing them with a clause toward the end of the
Canon, that in no case imaginable it is lawful for subjects to defend
themselves, we may judge how far forth these Canons were to prepare men's
minds for the force that was to follow after; if the accusation against my
Lord of Strafford be laid aright. For the matter it self, I hope there will
never be any need to dispute that question, and I do believe they had as
little need, to have published that position, had it not been upon design. As
for the second Canon, therein also they have assumed to themselves a
Parliamentary power, in taking upon them, to appoint Holidayes, whereas the
statute says in express words, that such days shall be only kept as
Holy Days as are named in the Statute, and no other, and therefore though the
thing may be bonum, yet it was not done been, because not ordained by
Parliament, notwithstanding what has been alleged to the contrary: it
seems to me to be the appoynting of an Holy Day, to set a time a part for
Divine service, and to force menunder penalties to leave their labors, and
business, and to be present at it. And of the same nature is that other
clause, in the same Canon, wherein they take upon them without Parliament, to
lay a charge upon the people, enjoining two Books at least for that day, to be
bought at the charge of the parish, for by the same right, that they may lay a
penny on the Parish without Parliament, they may lay a pound or any greater
sum.

As to the third Canon, I shall pass it over, only the observation that my
neighbor of the long Robe made upon it, seems unto me so good, as that it is
worth the repeating, that whereas in the Canon against Sectaries there is an
especial proviso, that it shall not derogate from any Statute, or Law made
against them (as if their Canons had any power to disanull an act of
Parliament) there is no such proviso in this Canon against Papists, from whence
it may be probably conjectured, that they might have drawn some color of
exemption from the penal Laws established against them from this Canon,
because it might seem hard that they should be doubly punished for the same
thing, as we know in the point of absence from the Church; the Law provideth,
that if any man be first punished by the Ordinary, he shall not be punished
again by the Justices.

For the fourth Canon against Socinianisme, therein also these Canon-makers
have assumed to themselves, a Parliament power, in determining an Heresy not
determined by Law, which is expressly reserved to the determination of a
Parliament. It is true, they say it is a complication of many heresies,
condemned in the four first Counsels, but they do not say what those Heresies
are, and it is not possible that Socinianisme should be formally cond^mned in
these Counsels, for it is sprung up but of late: Therefore they have taken
upon them, to determine and damn a Heresy, and that so generally, as that it
may be of very dangerous consequence, for condemning Socinianisme for an
heresy, and not declaring what is Socinianisme, it is left in their breasts
whom they will judge and call a Socinian. I would not have any thing that I
have said to be interpreted, as if I had spoken it in favor of Socinianisme,
wc (if it be such as I apprehend it to be) is indeed a most vile and damnable
heresy, and therefore the framers of these Canons, are the more to blame in
the next Canon against Sectaries, wherein besides that in the preamble thereof,
they lay it down for a certain ground, which the holy Synod knew full well,
that other Sects (which they extend not only to Brownists and Separatists, but
also to all persons, that for the space of a month, do absent themselves
without a reasonable cause, from their own parish Churches) do equally
endeavor the subversion of the Discipline, and Doctrine of the Church of
England with the Papists, although the worst of them do not bear any
proportion, in that respect to the Papists, I say besides that they make them
equal in crime and punishment to the Papists, notwithstanding the great
disproportion of their Tenants: there is another passage in this Canon relative
to that against Socinianisme, which I shall especially offer to your
consideration, and that is this. If a Gentleman coming from beyond Seas should
happen to bring over with him a Book contrary to the Discipline of the Church
of England, or should give such a Book to his friend, nay if any man should
abett, or maintain an opinion contrary thereunto, though it were but in
Parliament, if he thought it fit to be altered, by this Canon he is
excommunicated ipso facto, and lies under the same consideration, and is
liable to the same punishment; as if he had maintained an opinion against the
Deity of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, and of our Justification by the
satisfaction of Christ.

(Sir) if in things that are in their own Nature indifferent, if in things
disputable it shall be as heinous to abett or maintain an opinion, as in the
most horrible and monstrous herefies, that can be imagined, what liberty is
left to us as Christians? What liberty is left to us as men? I proceed to the
sixth Canon, wherein these Canonists have asumed to then selves a Parliamentary
power, and that in a very high degree, in that they have taken upon them to
impose new Oaths upon the Kings Subjects. (Sir) under favor, of what has
been alleged to the contrary, to impose an Oath, if it be not an higher
power, then to make a Law, it is a power of making a Law of most high Nature,
and of higher and farther consequence then any other Law, and I should much
rather choose that the Convocation should have a power to make Laws, to bind
my person and my estate, then that they should have a power to make Oaths to
bind my Conscience: a Law binds me no longer than till another Law be made
to alter it, but my Oath binds me as long as I live.

Again, a Law binds me either to obedience, or to undergo the penalty
inflicted by the Law, but my Oath binds me absolutely to obedience. And
lastly, a Law binds me no longer than I am in the Land, or at the farthest no
longer than I am a member of the State; wherein and whereby the Law is made,
but my Oath once being taken does bind me in all places, and in all
conditions so long as I live. Thus much I thought good to speak, concerning
the power of imposing new Oaths: as to the matter of this new Oath, it is
wholly illegal. It is against the Law of this Land, it is against the Law and
light of Nature, it is against the Law of God, it is against the Laws of this
Kingdom; and that no obscure Laws, nor concerning any mean or petty matters.
It is against the Law of the Kings Supremacy, in that it makes Archbishops,
Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. to be jure Divino, whereas the Law of this
Land has annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, not only all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, but also all superiority over the
Ecclesiastical State, and it is to be derived from him by C^mmission under
the Great Seal, and consequently it is Jure humano. Again, it is against the
Oath of Supremacy, established by Law point blanke, for therein I am sworn not
only to consent unto, but also to assist, and to the uttermost of my power, to
defend all Jurisdictions, Preheminences, etc. anne^ed to the Imperial Crown
of this Realm, of which this is one, (and that which immediately precedeth
this Oath in the Statute, and whereunto it does especially relate) That his
Majesty may exercise any Jurisdictions, or Ecclesiastical Government by his
Commission under the great Seal directed to such persons, as he shall thin
(...) meet, so that if he shall think other persons more meet, then
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. I am sworn in the Oath of Supremacy not only to
assent thereunto, but to assist, and to the uttermost of my power to defend
such an appointment of his Majesty, and in this new Oath I shall swear never to
consent unto such an alteration.

In the like manner it is against the Law and Light of Nature, that a man
should swear to answer (etc.) to he knows not what. It is against the Law and
light of Nature, that a man should swear never to consent, to alter a thing
that in its own nature is alterable, and may prove inconvenient, and fit to
be altered. Lastly, it is against the Law of God: for whereas there are three
rules prescribed to him that will swear aright, that he swear in Judgment,
in Truth, and righteousness: he that shall take this new Oath, must needs
break all these three Rules. He cannot swear in Judgment, because this Oath
is so full of ambiguities, that he cannot tell what he swears unto; not to
speak of the unextricable ambiguity of the etc. There is scarce one word that
is not ambiguous in the principal parts of the Oath, as first, What is meant
by the Church of England, whether all the Christians in England, or wherher the
Clergy only, or only the Archbishop, Bishops, Deanes, etc. Or whether the
Convocation, or what? In like manner it is as doubtful what is meant by the
Discipline, and what by the Dotirine of the Church of England, for what some
call Superstitions Innovations, if others affirm to be consonant to the
Primitive, and that the purest Reformation in the time of Edward the 6. and in
the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: and so for the Doctrine of the
Church of England; if all the Positions that of later years have been
challenged by some of Divines to be Arminian and Popish, and contrary to the
Articles of our Religion, and which on the other side have been asserted and
maintained as consonant to the Doctrine of our Church, and if the Articles of
Religion were gathered together, they might make a pretty volume: Nay, Sancta
Clara will maintain it in despite of the Puritanes, that the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, is the Doctrine of the Church of England. Truly it were very
fit that we knew, what were the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of
England before we swear to it, and then (Sir) give me leave to say, that I
should be very loath to swear to the Discipline, or to the Doctrine and
Tenants of the purest Church in the World, as they are collected by them,
farther than they agree with the Holy Scriptures.

Lastly, it is as doubtful what is meant, by the Doctrine and Discipline
established, and what by altering and consenting to alter, whether that is
accounted, or established, which is estalished by a Act of Parliament, or
wether that also that is established by Canons, Injunctions* etc. and whether
it shall not extend to that which is published by our Divines with the
allowance of authority and so for consenting to alter whether it be only meant,
that a man shall not be active in altering, or whether it extend to any
consent, and so that a man shall not submit to it, nor accept of it, being
altered by the State.

More ambiguities might be shown, but these are enough to make it clear, that
he that shall t^k this Oath cannot swear in Judgment. Nor can he swear in
Truth, for it is full of untruths. It is not true, that Discipline is necessary
to salvation. It is not true, that Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
etc. are jure Divino, as they must needs be, if the Law-mamakers ought of
right to establish them, as they are established: for the Lawmakers are not
bound as of right, to frame their Laws to any other than the Laws of God
alone. Now whether Bish^ps be jure Divino, we know it is a dispute among the
Papists, and never did any Protestant hold it till of late years, but that
Archbishops, Deanes, Archdeacons, etc. should be jure Divino, I do not know
that ever any Christian held it before, and yet he that takes this Oath must
swear it. Lastly, as he that takes this Oath cannot swear in Judgment nor
in Truth, so neither can he swear in Righteousness, for it is full of
unrighteousn^sse, being indeed, as has been well opened, a Covenant in effect
against the King and Kingdom; for if the whole State should find it necessary
to alter the Government by Archbishops, Bishop, etc, a great part of the
Kingdom, especially of the Gentry (for not only the Clergy, but all that take
Degrees in the Universities are bound to take it) will be preingaged not to
consent to it, or admit of it. Again it is a great wrong to those that shall
be Parliament Men, that their freedom shall be taken away being bound up by
an Oath, not to consent to the altering of a thing, which it may befit and
proper for a Parliament to alter. And suppose that for the present it be no
hinderance to the service of God, nor yet burdensome to the King and Kingdom,
yet if it should prove so hereafter, for a man to be bound by an Oath never to
consent to alter it, may be a great wrong to God in his service, and to the
King and Kingdom in their peace and welfare, and therefore this Oath cannot be
taken in Righteousness. For the other Oath de parendo juri Ecclisiae, and
stando mandatis Ecclesiae, though it make less noise than the other, yet it is
not of less dangerous consequence. If I remember well the Story, this was the
Oath that the Pope made King John to take, and when he had sworn stare
mandatis Ecclesiae, the Pope commandid him to resign his Kingdom to him, and
truly be he Gentle man or Nobleman, or what ever else, when he has once
put his neck into this nouse, his Ghostly Fathers may drag him whither they
will, for they have the quantity and the quality of the penance in their own
breast, and if they shall enjoyne him to give any sum toward the building of
a Church, or the adorning of a Chapel, he must pay it; or if they should
enjoyne him any servile or base action (as there are not wanting examples of
that kind in the time of Popery) they are sworn stare mandatis Ecclesiae, and
so cannot recede, but must perform it. Nay, I dare not warrant any man from
the rods of Henry the second; or of Raymond of Tholouze; what has been done
may be done, I am sure the power is the same. And that other Oath also (though
more usual in practice, and more confirmed by these new Canons) which is
administered to Churchwardens, would be looked into. For it is hardly possible
for them that take it not to be forsworn, being they swear to so many
particulars, that they cannot mind, and to some that they cannot understand,
as how many Churchwardens are there in England, that understand what
Socinianisme is, in case they be sworn, to present the offenders against that
Canon, which concerns that matter. I shall only add a word or two concerning
two Canons more, which seem to be Canons of Reformation.

The first is, concerning Excommunication, to be pronounced only by a Divine,
wherein it is alleged for the framers of these Canons, that if they have not
more Law on their sides, yet they may seem to have more reason. For my part,
as in all other things, I think they have so mended the matter, that they have
made it far worse, for before that which was found fault with was this, that a
Layman did that which the grave Divine should have done, and now the grave
Divine must do what ever the Layman would have done, for the cognizance of
the cause, and the power of Iudic^ture is wholly in the Layman, only the
grave Divine is to be his servant, to execute his sentences, and has such a
kind of managing the spiritual sword allowed only unto him as the Papists in
some cases were wont to afford unto the civil Magistrate, in respect of the
Temporal^ sword, ^or as if the Civil sword by an implicit Faith had been
pinned to the Lawn-sleeves, they condemned men of Heresy, and then delivered
them over to the Secular power: but what to do? Not to have any cognizance of
the cause, nor to exercise any power of judicature, but only to be their
executioners, and to burn the Heretic whom they had condemned, and so they
judged men excommunicate, and then the Civil power was to send out Writs de
excommunicato capiendo against them, but one said well, that the sword without
cognizance of the cause, and judgment, was like Polyphemus without his eye, it
became violence and fury. But being accompanied with the eye of judgment, it
is equity and justice: and surely where the Spiritual or Civil Governor is
called upon to strike, he must be allowed to see and judge whom and wherefore
he strikes, otherwise he will be able to give but an ill account to God, of the
managing of the sword wherewith he is instructed.

The other Canon is the last Canon against vexatious Citations, wherein they
seem to have some sense of the great grievances that poor people lie under;
by occasion of vexatious citations, and molestations in Ecclesiastical Courts,
and I verily believe, that there is not a greater oppression in the whole
Kingdom upon the poorer sort of people, then that which proceeds out of
these Courts. But now (Sir) let us see what provision they have made against it
by this Canon. They say because great grievances may fall upon people by
citations upon pretense only, of the breach of that Law without any
presentment, or any other just ground, that no citations grounded only as
aforesaid, shall issue out, except it be under the hand and Seal of the
Chancellor, Commissarie, Archdeacon, or other competent Judge, so that (if
there be any sense in these words) though there be no presentment at all, nor
any other just ground, yet a citation may issue out, so it be under the hand
and Seal of the Chancellor, Commissary, or other competent Judge, and the
party shall not be discharged without paying his fees, nor have any relief by
this Canon. But suppose the Citation be not under the hand and Seal of any
competent Judge, and that there was neither presentment nor any just ground for
it, shall he then be dismissed without paying any fees? No, unless first
contrary to the Law of Nature, there being no presentment, nor just ground of
accusation against him, he shall by his Oath purge himself of pretended
breaches of Law, and then too he shall only have the fees of the Court
remitted, but shall have no satisfaction for his troublesome and chargeable
journey, and for the loss of his time, and being drawn away from his
affairs* Nay, lest they should seem to have been too liberal of their
favor, they add a proviso in the close of the Canon, that this grace of
theirs shall not extend to any ^rievous crime, as Schism, Incontinency,
misbehavious in the Church, or obstinate inconformity. And what do they call
misbehaviour in the Church? If a man do not kneel at the Confession, or have
his hat on, when the Lessons are reading. In like manner what do they call
obstinate inconformity? If a man will not think what they would have him
think, if a man will not say what they would have him say, if a man will not
swear what they would have him swear, if a man will not read what they would
have him read, if a man will not preach what they would have him preach, if a
man will not pray what they would have him pray; In short, if a man will not
do what ever they would have him do, then he is an inconformist, and after
that they have duly admonished him, primo, secundo, tertio, all in one breath,
then he is contumacious, then he is an obstinate Inconformist.

Now (Sir) my humble motion is, that in consideration of all the premises, and
what besides has been well laid open by others; we should proceed to dam
these Canons, not only as contrary to the Laws of the Land, but also as
containing sundry matters, destructive of the rights of Parliaments, and of the
fundamental and other principal Laws of this Kingdom, and otherwise of very
dangerous consequence.

The Lord Digby's Speech to the House of Commons, concerning Bishops, and the
City petition, the 9. of February. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
I Know it is a tender subject I am to speak of, wherein I believe some within
these Walls are engaged with earnestness in contrary opinions to mine; and
therefore it will be necessary, that in the first place I beseech the patience
of this House, that they will be pleased to hear me without interruption:
though somewhat I say should chance to be displeasing, I hope there will be
somewhat from me ere I conclude, that may be of Service to this House.

Sir, if I thought there were no further design in the desires of some, that
this London Petition should be committed, then merely to make use of it, as an
Index of grievance: I should wink at the faults of it, and not much oppose it.

There is no man within these walls, more sensible of the heavy grievance of
Church government, then my Self; nor whose affections are keen to the
clipping of those wings of the Prelates, whereby they have mounted to such
insolences, nor whose zeal is more ardent to the searing them, as that they
may never spring again.

But having reason to believe that some aim at a total extirpation of
Bishops, which is against my heart, and that the committing of this Petition,
may give countenance to that Design, I cannot restrain my self from
laboring to divert it, or at least to set such notes upon it, as may make it
ineffectuall to that end.

Truly, Sir, when this Petition was first brought into the House, I considered
it in its nature, in the manner of the delivery in the present conjuncture of
aff^^es, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, to be a thing of the highest
Consequence that any Age has presented to a Parliament; and the same thoughts
I have of it still.

I profess, I looked upon it then with terror, as upon a Comet or blazing
star, raised and kindled out of the stench, out of the poisonous exhalation
of a corrupted Hierarchy: Me thought the Commet had a terrible Tail with it,
Sir, and poynted to the North, the same fears dwell with me still concerning
it, (and I beseech God they may not prove Prophetical:) I fear all the
Prudence, all the Forecast, all the Virtue of this House, how unitedly soever
collected, how vigorously applied, will have a hard work of it. Yet to hinder
this Meteor from causing such Distempers and Combustions by its Influence, as
it then portended by its appearance; what ever the Event be, I shall discharge
my Conscience concerning it, freely and uprightly, as unbyast by popularity, as
by any Court respects.

Sir, I could never flatter the sense of this House, which I Reverence so much,
as to suppress a single No, that my heart dictated, though I knew the venting
of it might cast prejudices upon me: had my Fortune plac^d me near a King, I
could not have flattered a King; and I do not intend now to flatter a
multitude.

I shall desire those worthy Aldermen, and the rest here of the City of London,
not to take any thing I shall say, in the least way of disparagement or
reflection on the City; I look not upon this Petition, as a Petition from the
City of London, but from I know not what, 15000. Londoners, all that could be
got to subscribe.

When this Petition was first presented, there might be more reason for the
Commitment of it, as being then the most comprehensive Catalogue we had of
Church grievance, but now that the Ministers by their Remonstrance, have given
us so fair and full an Index of them without those mixtures of things
contemptible, irrational, and presumptuous, wherewith this Petition abounds; I
do not know I profess to what good end it can be committed, being full of
contemptible things, but first let me recall to your mind the manner of its
delivery: And I am confident, there is no man of judgment, that will think it
fit for a Parliament under a Monarchy, to give countenance to irregular and
tumultuous assemblies of people, be it for never so good an end: Besides, there
is no man of the least insight into Nature, or History, but knows the danger,
when either true or pretended stimulation of conscience has once given a
multitude agitation.

Contemptible things (Sir) swarm in the 8.13.14.15, 16.17. Articles of this
Petition. Did ever any body think that the gaites of Ovid, or Tom. Caryes
muse, should by 15000. have been presented to a Parliament, as a motive for
the extirpation of Bishops, the scandal of the Rochet, the Lawne-sleeves, the
four corner Cap, the Cope, the Surplesse, the Tippet, the Hood, the Canonical
Coat, etc. may pass with arguments of the sune weight; only thus much let me
observe upon it (Mr. Speaker) that one would swear the penners of the Article
had the pluming of some Bishops already, they are so acquainted with every
feather of them. In a word, I know not whether be more preposterous, to infer
the extirpation of Bishops from such weak Arguments, or to attribute as they
do to Church government all the civil grievance; not a Patent, not a
Monopoly, not the price of a commodity moditie raised, but these men make
Bishops the cause of it.

For the irrational part (Mr. Speaker) first they Petition us in a Method only
allowable with those, whose Judgment or Justice is suspected, that is Iniquum
petere, ut aequum feras: There is no Logic, no reasoning in their demands: It
were want of Logic in me to expect it from a multitude, but I consider the
multitude in this is led by implicit faith, to that which has been digested,
and contrived but by a few, and in them truly I cannot but wonder at the want
of Reconciliation here.

A Petition, Mr. Speaker, ought in this to be a kind of Syllogism, that the
Conclusion, the Prayer ought to hold proportion with the premises, that is,
with the Allegations, and Complaints, and to beeasonably deduc't from them.

But what have we here? a multitude of Allegations, a multitude of instances,
of abuses, and depravations of Church Government: And what inferred from
thence? let the use be utterly abolisht for the abuses sake: As if they should
say, that because Drunkenness and Adultery are grown so epidemicall, as is
alleged in the Petition; Let there be no more use of Wine nor of Women in the
Land.

Christ's Discipline has been adulterated, it is true, the whole Church
inebriated by the Prelates, therefore infer our Petitioners, let not so much as
the chaste, the sober use of them be suffered.

Give me leave to continue one of the Comparisons a little further; should it
be demonstrated unto us, that Wine could not be made use of without
Drunkenness, and withal some such Liquor presented, as healthy, and as
nourishing, from which no distemper could arise; I should not blame any man for
desiring to pluck up the Vine by the roots. But for the moveable ills-sake, to
take away the solid good of a thing, is just as reasonable in this, as to root
up a good tree, because there is a Canker in the branches.

For the bold part of this Petition, Sir, what can there be of greater
presumption, than for petitioners, not only to prescribe to a Parliament,
what, and how it shall do; but for a multitude to teach a Parliament, what,
and what is not the government according to Gods word.

Besides, what is the Petition against? is it not against the government of the
Church of England, established by Acts of Parliament? Is it not against the
Liturgy, against several forms of Divine service, ratified by the same
Authority?

It Is true, Mr. Speaker, the Parliament may mend, may alter, may repeal Laws,
may make new, and I hope, in due season we shall do so in point of
Church Government: but in the mean time let me tell you, Sir, I cannot but
esteem it an irreverence, an high presumption in any, to petition point blank
against a Law, or Government in force.

Representment of Inconvenience may be made, (as the Ministers have done) such
as may endure the wisdom of a Parliament, to advise Laws, to rectify, to
repeal them; but it imports the very essence of Parliaments, to keep up the
honor of its former Acts, and not to suffer them to be further blasted from
abroad.

Believe me, Mr. Speaker, all the reverence and authority, which we expect from
future times to our own Acts hereafter depends upon our upholding the dignity
of what former Parliaments have done, even in those things which in their due
time we may desire, and intend to reverse.

Mr. Speaker, you see in what plain language I have set forth unto you the
faults of this Petition, notwithstanding as great as they are, so they may not
obtain any seeming countenance from us; I find my self willing to have them
past by, especially when I consider how naturally prone all mankind is, when
it finds it self oppressed beyond patience, to fly unto extremes for ease.
And indeed, I do not think, that any people has been evermore provoked, then
the generality of England, of late years, by the insolences, and exorbitances
of the Prelates.

I protest sincerely, Mr. Speaker, I cannot cast mine eye upon this Peti^ion,
nor my thoughts on the practices of the Churchmen, that have governed it of
late; but they appeared to me as a scourge employed by God upon us for the
sins of the Nation; I cannot think of that passage in the Book of Kings, He
that escapes the Sword of Hazael, shall Jehu slay; and he that escapes Iehu,
shall Elisha slay.

Me thinks the vengeance of the Prelates has bin so laid, as if 'twere
meant, no generation, no degree, no complexion of mankind should escape it.

Was there a man of a nice and tender Conscience? him have they afflicted with
scandal in Adiaphoris, imposing on him those things, as necessary, which he
thinks unlawful, and they themselves knew to be but indifferent.

Was there a man of a legal conscience, that made the establishments by Law,
the measure of his religion? him have they netled with Innovations, with fresh
Introductions to Popery.

Was there a man of a meek and humble spirit? him have they trampled to dirt in
their pride.

Was there a man of a proud and arrogant nature? him have they bereft with
indignation at their superlative insolence about him.

Was there a man peaceably affected, studious of the quiet, and tranquillity of
his Country? their incepdi^^riship has plagued him.

Was there a man faithfully addicted to the right of the Crown, loyally
affected to the Kings Supremacy? how has he been galled by their new Oath? a
direct Covenant against it.

Was there a man tenacious of the liberty, and propriety of the Subject? have
they not set forth Books, or Sermons, or Canons destructive to them all?

Was there a man of a pretty sturdy conscience, that would not blanch for a
little? their pernicious Oath has made him sensible, and wounded, or I fear
prepared him for the Devil.

Was there a man that durst mutter against their Insolences? he may inquire
for his Lugges, they have been within the Bishops visitation; as if they would
not only derive their Brandishment of the spiritual sword from St. Peter, but
of the material one too, and the right to cut off Ears.

Mr. Speaker, as dully, as faintly, as unlively, as in Language, these actions
of the Prelates have been expressed unto you, I am confident, there is no man
hears me but is brim-full of indignation.

For my part, I profess I am so enflamed with the sense of them, that I find
my self ready to cry out with the loudest of the 15000, down with them, down
with them, even to the ground.

But M. Speaker, when I cast mine eye round upon this great and wise Assembly,
and find my self a part too, (though the most unworthy and inconsiderable) of
that Senate, from whose dispassionate and equal Constitutions, present and
future times must expect their happiness or infelicity:

It obliges me to the utmost of my power to divest my self and others of all
those disturbances of Judgment which arise ever from great Provocations, and
to settle my thoughts in that temper, which I think necessary to all those
that would judge clearly of such things as have incenst them.

I beseech you Gentlemen, let us not be led on by passion to popular and
vulgar Errors, it is natural (as I told you before) to the multitude to fly
into extremes; that seems ever the best to them, that is most opposite to the
presentest object of their hate.

Wise Counsels (Mr. Speaker) must square their Resolutions by another measure,
by that is most just, most honorable, most convenient: Believe me, Sir, great
alterations of Government are rarely accompanied with any of these.

Mr. Speaker, we all agree upon this; that a Reformation of Church Government
is most necessary, and our happy unity of opinions herein should be one
argument unto us to stay there; but, Sir, to strike at the Root, to attempt a
total Alteration, before ever I can give my vote unto that, three things must
be made manifest unto me.

First, that the mischiefs which we have felt under Episcopal Government flow
from the nature of the function, not from the abuses of it only, that is, that
no Rules, no Boundaries can be set to Bishops able to restrain them from such
Exorbitances.

Secondly, such a frame of Government must be laid before us, as no time, no
Corruption can make liable to proportionable inconveniences with that which we
abolish.

And thirdly, it must be made to appear that this Vtopia is practicable.

For the first, Sir, that Episcopacy a function deduced through all ages of
Christ's Church, from the Apostles times, and continued by the most venerable
and sacred Order Ecclesiastical; and function dignified by the learning and
Piety of so many Fathers of the Church, glorified by so many Martyrdomes in the
Primitive times, and some since our own blessed Reformation, a government
admired (I speak it knowingly) by the learned of the Reformed Churches
abroad: and lastly, a government under which (till these late years) this
Church has so flourished, so fructified, that such a government, such a
function, should at the fagge end of 1640. years be found to have such a
close Devil in it, as no power can Exercise, no Law Restrain, appears (Sir)
to me a thing very improbable: I profess, I am deceived Sir, if Trienniall
Parliaments will not be a Circle able to keep many a worse Devil in order.

For the second, I know not the strength of other men's fancies, but I will
confess unto you ingenuously the weakness of my faith in the point, that I
do not believe there can any other government be proposed, but will in time
be subject to as great or greater inconveniences than Episcopacy, I mean
Episcopacy so ordered, reduced, and limited, as I suppose it may be by firm
and solid Boundaries.

It Is true Sir, we cannot so well judge beforehand of future inconveniences,
for the knowledge of the faults and mischiefs of Episcopal government,
resulting from fresh and bleeding experience.

And the insight into dangers of any new way that shall be proposed being to
rise only from speculation, the apprehension of the one is likely to be much
more operative than of the other, though perh^ps in just reason it ought to be
the weaker with us, it is hard in such cases for us to preserve an equal and
unpropense judgment; since being in things of this world so much too hard for
faith and contemplation, yet as Divine as our inspection is into things not
experimented, if we hearken to those that would quite extirpate Episcopacy; I
am confident that in stead of every Bishops we put down in a Diocese, we
shall set up a Pope in every Pari^h.

Lastly, Mr. Speaker, whether the subversion of Episcopacy, and the introducing
of another kind of Government be practiceable, I leave it to those to judge
who have considered the Connection and Interweaving of the Church Government
with the Common Law, to those who heard the Kings Speech to us the other day,
or who have looked into reason of state.

For my part (though no Statesman) I will speak my mind freely in this. I do
not think a King can put down Bishops totally with safety to Monarchy; not
that there is any such alliance as men talk of 'twixt the Myter and the Crown,
but from this reason; that upon the putting down of Bishops, the Government of
Assemblies is likely to succeed it, That (to be effectual) must draw to it
self the supremacy of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction that (consequently) the
power of Excommunicating Kings as well as any other brother in Christ, and if a
King chance to be delivered over to Satan, judge whether men are likely to
care much what becomes of him next.

These things considered M. Speaker, let us lay aside all thoughts of such
dangerous, such fundamental, such unaccomplished Alterations: and all thought
of countenancing those thoughts in others; let us all resolve upon that course
wherein (with union) we may probably promise our selves success, happiness,
and security, that is in a through Reformation.

To that, no man's vote shall be given with more zeal, with more heartinesse
than mine. Let us not destroy Bishops, but make Bishops such as they were in
the Primitive times.

Do their large Terriories, their large Revenues offend? let them be
retrencht, the good Bishops of Hippo had but a narrow Diocese.

Do their Courts and subordinates offend? let them be brought to govern as in
the Primitive times, by Assemblies of their Clergy.

Does their intermedling in secular affairs offend? exclude them from the
capacity, it is no more than what Reason, and all Antiquity has interdicted
them.

That all this may be the better effected, M. Speaker my mottion is, that;
First, we may appoint a Committee to collect all grievances springing from the
misgovernment of the Church (to which the Ministers head of Government will be
sufficient without countenancing this Petition by a Commitment) and to
represent it to this house in a Body.

And in the next place that we may (if it stand with the order of Parliaments)
desire that there may be a standing Committee of certain members of both
Houses, who (with a number of such learned Ministers as the Houses shall
nominate for Assistants) may take into consideration all these grievances, and
advise of the best way to settle peace and satisfaction in the Government of
the Church, to the comfort of all good Christians, and all good Commonwealths
Men.

The Accusation and Impeachment of John LORD Finch, Baron of Fordwich, Lord
Keeper of the Great Seal of England, by the House of COMMONS.
IMprimis, That the said John Lord Finch, Baron of Fordwich, Lord Keeper, etc.
has traitorously, and wickedly, endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws,
and established Government of the Realm of England, and in stead thereof to
introduce an arbitrary tyrann^call government against Law, which he has
declared by traiterous and wicked words, counsels, opinions, judgments,
practices, and actions.

II. That in pursuance of those his traiterous and wicked purposes, he did in
the third and fourth year of his Majesty's reign, or one of them, being then
Speaker of the Commons House of Parliament, contrary to the commands of the
House then assembled, and sitting, denied and hindered the reading of some
things which the said House of Commons required to be read for the safety of
the King and Kingdom, and preservation of the Religion of this Realm; and did
forbid all the members of the house to speak, and said, that if any did offer
to speak, he would rise and go away, and said nothing should be then done in
the house, and did offer to rise and go away, and did thereby and otherwise,
in as much as in him lay, endeavor to subvert the ancient and undeubted rights
and course of Parliaments.

III. That he being of his Majesty's Council at the Justice seat held for the
County of Essex, in the month of October, in the tenth year of his now
Majesty's reign, at Strafford Langton in the same County being then of his
Majesty's Council, in that Service did practice by unlawful means, to
enlarge the Forest of that County, many Miles beyond the known bounds
thereof, as they had been enjoyed near 300 years, contrary to the Law. and
to the Charter of the liberties of the Forest; and other Charters, and diverse
Acts of Parliament: and for effecting the same, did unlawfully cause and
procure undue returns to be made of Jurors, and great numbers of other persons
who were unsworne, to be joined to them of the Jury, and threatened and awed the
said Jurors to give a Verdict for the King, and by unlawful means did surprise
the County, that they might not make Defense, and did use several menacing
wicked Speeches and Actions, to the Jury and others, for obtaining his unjust
purpose aforesaid, and after a Verdict obtained for the King in the Month of
April following (at which time the said Justice Seat was called by
adjournment) the said John Lord Finch then Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's
Court of Common Pleas, and was one of the Judges assistants for them; he
continued by further unlawful and unjust practices, to maintain and confirm
the said verdict, and did then and there being assistant to the Justice in
Air, advise the refusal of the traverse offered by the County, and all their
evidences, but only what they should verbally deliver, which was refused
accordingly.

IV. That he, about the Month of November, 1635. he being then Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, and having taken an oath for the due
administration of Justice to his Majesty's Liege people, according to the Laws
and statutes of the Realm, contrived in opinion in haec verba, (when the good
and safety, etc.) and did subscribe his name to that opinion, and by
persuasions, threats, and false suggestions, did solicit, and procure Sir John
Bramstone Knight, then and now Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir Humfrey
Davenport Knight, Lord chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Sir
Richard Hutton Knight, late one of the Justices of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas, Sir John Denham Knight, late one of the Barons of his Majesty's
Court of Exchequer, Sir William lones Knight, late one of the Justices of the
said Court of Kings Bench, Sir George Crock, then and now one of the Judges of
the said Court of Kings Bench, Sir Thomas Trevor Knight, then and now one of
the Barons of the Exchequer, Sir George Vernon Knight, late one of the Justices
of the said Court of Common Pleas: Sir Robert Barkley Knight, then and now one
of the Justices of the said Court of Kings Bench, Sir Francis Crawly Knight,
then and now one of the Justices of the said Court of Common Pleas, Sir Richard
Weston Knight, then and now one of the Barons of the said Court of Exchequer,
some or one of them to subscribe, with their names the said opinion presently,
and enjoined them severally some or one of them secres^ upon their allegiance.

V. That he the fifth day of June, then being Lord Chief Justice of the said
Court of Common Pleas, subscribed an extrajudiciall opinion in answer to
questions in a letter from his Majesty, in haec verba, etc.

And that he contrived the said questions, and procured the said Letter from
his Majesty; and whereas the said Justice Hutton and Justice Crook declared to
him their opinions to the contrary; yet he required and pressed them to
subscribe, upon his promise that he would let his Majesty know the truth of
their opinions; notwithstanding such subscriptions, which nevertheless he did
not make known to his Majesty, but delivered the same to his Majesty, as the
opinion of all the Judges.

VI. That he being Lord Chief Justice of the said Court of Common Pleas,
delivered his opinion in the Chequer Chamber against Master Hampden in the case
of Ship Money; that he the said Master Hampd^n upon the matter and substance
of the case was chargeable with the money then in question: a Copy of which
proceedings the Commons will deliver to your Lordships, and did solicit and
threaten the said sudges some or one of them to deliver their opinions in like
manner against Master Hampden: and after the said Baron Denham had delivered
his opinion for Master Hampden, the said Lord Finch repaired purposely to the
said Baron Denhams Chamber in Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, and after the said
Master Baron Denham had declared and expressed his opinion, urged him to
retract the said opinion, which he refusing, was threatened by the said Lord
Finch, because he refused.

VII. That he then being Lord chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas,
declared and published in the Exchequer Chamber, and western circuit where he
went Judge, that the Kings right to Ship Money, as aforesaid, was so inherent a
right to the Crown, as an Act of Parliament could not take it away; and with
diverse malicious speeches inveighed against, and threatened all such as refused
to pay Ship Money; all which opinions contained in the four, five, and sixth
Articles, are against the Law of the Realm, the Subjects right of property,
and contrary to former resolutions in Parliament, and to the petition of right:
which said resolutions and petition of right, were well known to him, and
resolved and enacted in Parliament, when he was Speaker of the Commons house of
Parliament.

VIII. That he being Lord chief Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, did
take the general practice of that Court to his private Chamber; and that he
sent warrants into all or many shires of England to several men, as to Francis
Giles of the County of Devon, Rebert Renson of the County of York, Attorneys
of that Court, and to diverse others, to release all persons arrested on any
utlawry about 40. shillings fees, whereas none by Law so arrested, can be
bailed or released without Supersedeas under seal or reversall.

IX. That he being Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common pleas, upon a
pretended suit begun in Michaelmas Term, in the 11. year of his Majesty's
Reign, although there was no plaint or Declaration against him, did
notoriously and contrary to all Law and Justice, by threats, menaces, and
imprisonment, compel Thomas Laurence, an Executor, to pay 19 pound 12
shillings, and likewise caused Richard Bernard, being only over-seer of the
last Will of that Testator, to be arrested for the payment of the said Money,
contrary to the advice of the rest of the Judges of that Court, and against the
kn^wne and ordinary course of Justice, and his said Oath and knowledge, and
denied his Majesty's Subjects the common and ordinary Justice of this Realm,
as to Mr. Li^^rick, and others, and for his private benefit endammaged and
ruined the estates of very many of his Majesty's Subjects, contrary to his oath
and knowledge.

X. That he being Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, and sworn one of
his Majesty's Privy Counsel, did by false and malicious slanders labor to
incense his Majesty against Parliaments, and did frame and advise the
publishing the Declaration after the dissolution of the last Parliament.

All which Treasons and misdemeanors above mentioned, were done and committed
by the said John Lord Finch Baron of Fordwich, Lord Keeper of the great Seal
of England, and thereby he the aforesaid Finch has traitorously, and contrary
to his allegiance labored to lay Imputations and Scandalls upon his Majesty's
government, and to alienate the hearts of his Majesty's liege people from his
Majesty, and to set a division between them, and to ruin and destroy his
Majesty's Realm of England, for which they do impeach him the said Lord
Finch, Baron of Fordwich, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, of high
Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity, of the
misdemeanors above mentioned. And the said Commons by Protestation, saving to
themselves the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other
accusation or impeachmens against the said Lord Finch, and also of replying to
the answer, that the said John Lord Finch shall make unto the said Articles or
to any of them, and of affering proof of the premises, or any of their
impeachments or accusations that shall be exhibited by them, as the case shall
according to the course of Parliaments require, do pray, that the said John
Lord Finch, Baron of Ford which, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, may
be put to answer to all and every of the premises, and such proceedings,
examinations, trials, and judgments, as may be upon every of them, bad and
used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

The Lord FAULKLANDS second Speech: Made the 14. of January, after the reading
of the Articles against the Lord FINCH.
THese Articles against my Lord Finch being read, I may be bold to apply that
of the Poet, Nil refert tales versus qua voce legantur; and I doubt not but
your Lordships must be of the same opinion, of which the House of Commons
appears to have been, by the choice they have made of me, that the charge I
have brought is such, as needs no assistance from the bringer, leaving not so
much as the color of a color for any defense, including all possible
evidence, and all possible aggravation (that addition alone excepted) which he
alone could make, and has made; I mean his Confession, Included in his flight.

Here are many and mighty Crimes, Crimes of Supererogation, (So that high
Treason is but a part of his Charge) pursuing him fervently in every several
condition, (being a silent Speaker, an unjust Judge, and an unconscionable
Keeper.) That his life appears a perpetual Warfare, (by Mines, and by
Battery, by Batteil, and by Stratagem) against our fundamental Laws (which by
his own confession) several Conquests had left untoucht, against the excellent
constitution of this Kingdom, which has made it appear unto strangers rather
an Idea, than a real Commonwealth, and produced the honor and happiness of
this to be a wonder of every other Nation, and this wi^h unfortunate success,
that as he always intended to make our Ruins a ground of his advancement; so
his advancement the means of our further ruin.

After that, contrary to the further end of his place, and the end of that
meeting in which he held his place, he had as it were gagged the
Commonwealth, taking away, (to his power) all power of Speech from that body,
of which he ought to have been the Mouth, and which alone can perfectly
represent the condition of the people, whom that only represent, which if he
had not done, in all probability, what so grave and judicious an Assembly might
have offered to the consideration of so gracious and just a Prince, had
occasioned the redress of the grievances they then suffered, and prevented
those which we have since endured, according to the ancient Maxim of Odisse
quos laeferis: he pursued this offense toward the Parliament, by inveighing
against the Members by scandalizing their proceedings by trampling upon their
Acts and Declarations, by usurping and devolving the right by diminishing and
abrogating the power, both of that and other Parliaments and making them (as
much as in him say) both useless and odious to his Majesty, and pursued his
hatred to this fountain of Justice by corrupting the streams of it, the Laws;
and perverting the Conduit Pipes, the Judges:

He practiced the annibilating of Ancient, and Notorious perambulations of
particular Forests, the better to prepare himself to annihilate the Ancient,
and Notorious perambulation of the whole Kingdom, the meeres and bounders
between the liberties of the Subject and Sovereign power; he endeavored to
have all tenures in durante been placito, to bring all Law from his Majesty's
Courts, into his Majesty's breast he gave our goods to the King our lands to the
Dear, our liberties to his Sheriffs; so that there was no way by which we
had not been oppressed, and destroyed, if the power of this person had been
equal with his will: Or that the will of his Majesty had been equal to his
power.

He not only by this means made us liable to all the effect of an Invasion
from within (and by destruction of our Liberties, which included the
destruction of our propriety, which included the destruction of our Industry)
made us liable to the terriblest of all Invasions, that of want and poverty. So
that if what he plotted had taken Root (and he made it, as sure as his
Declaration could make it (what himself was not) Parliament proof) in this
wealthy and happy Kingdom, there could have been left, no abundance but of
grievances, and coffeehouse, no satisfaction but amongst the guilty. It is
generally observed of the plague, that the infection of others, is an earnest,
and constant desire of all that are seized by it: and as this design resembles
that disease, in the ruin, destruction, and desolation, it would have wrought
so it seems no less like it in this effect: he having so labored to make
others share in that guilt, that his solicitation, was not only his action,
but his works, making use both of his Authority, his Interest, and
Importunity, to persuade; and in his Majesty's Name (whose Piety is known to
give that Excellent prerogative to his person, that the Law gives to his place,
not to be able to do wrong) to threaten the rest of the Judges, to sign
opinions contrary to Law, to assign answers contrary to their opinions, to
give Judgment which they ought not to have given, and to recant Judgment,
when they had given as they ought, so that whosoever considers his care of, and
concernment, both in the growth and the immortality of this project, cannot but
by the same way by which the wisest judgment found the true mother of the
Child, discover him not only to have been the Fosterer but the Father of this
most pernicious and envious design.

I shall not need to observe, that this was plotted and pursued by an English
man against England, (which increases the Crime in no less degree than
parricide is beyond Murder) that this was done in the greatest matter joined
to the greatest Bond, being against the general liberty, and public
propriety, by a sworn Judge (and if that salt it self, because unsavory, the
Gospel it self has designed whither it must be cast) that he poisoned our
very Antidotes, and turned our Guard into a destruction, making Law the ground
of illegalitie: that he used this Law not only against us, but against it
self, making it as I may say, Felo de se, making the pretense, (for I can
scarce say, the appearance of it) so to contribute the utter ruin of it self.

I shall not need to say, that either this (or more can be) of the highest
kind, and in the highest degree of Parliamentary Treason, a Treason which need
not a computation of many several actions, which alone were not Treason, to
prove a Treason altogether, and by that demonstration of the intention, to make
that formality Treason which were materially but a misdemeanor, a Treason as
well against the King, as against the Kingdom, for whatsoever is against the
whole, is undoubtedly against the head, which takes from his Majesty the ground
of his Rule, the Laws, (for if foundations be destroyed, the Pinnacles are
most endangered) which takes from his Majesty the principal honor of his Rule,
the Ruling over Freemen, a power as much Nobler then over villains, as that
is that is over beasts) which endeavored to take from his Majesty the principal
support of his Rule, their hearts and affections over whom he rules (a better
and surer strength and wall to the King, than the Sea is to the Kingdom) and
by begetting a mutual distrust, and by that a mutual disaffection between
them, to hazard the danger even of the destruction of both.

My Lords,

I shall the less need to press this, because as it were unreasonable in any
case to suspect your Justice, so here especially, where your interest so nearly
unites you, your great share in possessions, giving you an equal concernment
in propriety, the care and pains used by your Noble Ancestors in the founding
and asserting of our conmon Liberties, rendering the just defense of them, your
most proper and peculiar inheritance, and both exciting to oppose and extirpate
all such designs as did introduce, and would have set led an Arbitrary, that
is, an intolerable form of Government, and have made even your Lordships and
your posterity but Right Honourarable slaves.

My Lords,

I will spend no more words, Luctando cum larva, in accusing the Ghost of a
departed person, whom his Crimes accuse more than I can do; and his absence
accuses no less than his Crime. Neither will I excuse the length of what I
have said, because I cannot add to an Excuse, without adding to the Fault, or
my own imperfections, either in the matter or manner of it, which I know must
appear the greater, by being compared with that learned Gentleman's great
ability, who has precoded me at this time: I will only desire by the
Command, and in the behalf of the House of Commons, that these proceedings
against the Lord Finch, may be put in so speedy away of dispatch, as in such
cases the course of Parliament will allow.

The first Speech made by Sir Edward Deering, in the house of Commons.
Mr. Speaker.
YEsterday, the affairs of this House did borrow all the time allotted to the
great Committee of Religion; I am sorry that (having but half a day in a whole
week) we have lost that.

Mr. Speaker, The sufferings that we have undergone, are reduceable to two
heads: The first concerning the Church: The second belonging to the
Commonwealth. The first of these must have the first fruits of the
Parliament, as being the first in weight and worth, and more immediately to the
honor of God, and his Glory, every dram whereof, is worth the whole weight
of a Kingdom. The Commonwealth (it is true) is full of apparent dangers, the
Sword is come home unto us, and two Twinned Nations, united together under one
regal Head, Brethren together in the Bowels and Bosom of the same Island, and
which is above all, is imbanded together in the same Religion, (I say in the
same Religion) by a divellish Machination, like to be fatally imbrewed in each
others blood, ready to dig each others Graves, Quantillum abfuit.

For other grievances also, the poor dis-hearted Suject sadly grieves, not
able to distinguish between Power and Law, and with a weeping heart (no
question) has long prayed for this hour in hope to be relieved; and to know
hereafter whether any thing he has (besid^s his poor part and portion of the
common Air he breaths) may be truly called his own.

These Mr. Speaker, and many other, do deserve, and must shortly have our
deep regards, but suo gradis. Now in the first place there is a unum
necessarium, above all our worldly sufferings and dangers; Religion, the
immediate Service due unto Almighty God; and herein let us all be confident,
that all our consultations will be unprosperous, if we put any determination
before that of Religion. For my part, let the Sword reach from the North to the
South, and a general perdition of all our remaining rights threaten us in an
open view, it shall be so far from making me to decline the first settling
of Religion, that I shall ever argue, and rather conclude it thus: That the
more great and eminent our perils of this World are, the stronger and quicker
ought our care to be for the glory of God, and the pure Law of our Souls.

If then, Mr. Speaker, it may pass with full allowance, that all our cares may
give way unto the Treaty of Religion, I will reduce that also unto two heads:
First of Ecclesiastical persons; Then of Ecclesiastical Causes: Let no man
start or be affrighted at the imagined length of this Consultation; it will
not, it cannot take up so much Time as it is worth, This is God and the Kings,
God and the Kingdoms, nay this is God and the two Kingdoms cause.

And therefore, Mr. Speaker, my humble motion is, that we may all of us,
seriously, speedily, and heartily enter upon this, the best and the greatest,
and the most important cause we can treat on.

Now, Mr. Speaker, in pursuit of mine own motion, and to make a little
entrance into these great Affairs, I will present unto you the Petition of a
poor distressed Minister in the Cou^ty of Kent, a man conformable in his
practice, Orthodoxe in his Doctrine, laborious in his Ministry, as any we
have or I do know, He is now a sufferer (as all good men are) under the
general obloquy of a Puritan, as with other things was admirably delivered by
that silver Trumpet at the Bar, the Pursevant watched his door, and divides
him and his Cure asunder to both their griefs; for it is not with him as
perhaps with some, that set the Pursevant at work, glad of an excuse to be out
of the Pulpit, it is his delight to Preach. About a week since I went over to
Lambeth to moove that great Bishop (too great indeed) to take this danger from
off this Minister and recall the Pursevant: And withal did undertake for Mr.
Wilson (for so is your Petitioner called) that he should answer his Accusers
in any of the Kings Courts a^ Westminster: The Bishop made me this answer in
His verbis, I am sure that he will not absent from his Cure a Twelve-moneth
together, and then I doubt not but once in a year we shall have him. This was
all that I could obtain, but I hope (by the help of this House) before this
year of threats-be run out, his Grace will either have more Grace, or no
Grace at all. For our griefs are manifold, and do fill a mighty and vast
Circumference, yet so that from every part, our lines of sorrow do lead unto
him, and point at him, as the Center from whence our miseries do grow.

Let the Petition be read, and let us enter upon the work.

The second Speech of Sir Edward Deering.
Mr. Speaker,
YOu have many private particular Petitions, give me leave by word of mouth to
interpose one more general, which thus you may receive: Gods true Religion is
violently invaded by two seeming enemies, but indeed they are like Herod and
Pilate, fast friends for the destruction of truth: I mean the Papists for the
one part, and our Prelating Faction for the other; between these two in their
several progress, I observe the concurrence of some few parallells, fit as I
conceive to be represented to this Honorable House.

First, with the Papists there is a severe Inquisition, and with us (as it is
used) there is a bitter High Commission, both these Contra fas and ins are
Judges in their own case: yet herein their Inquisitors are better than our
High Commistio^ers, they (for ought I ever heard) do not (Savir^ in suos)
punish for delinquents and offenders, such as profess and practice Religion,
according as it is established by the Laws of the Land where they live.

But with us, how many poor distressed Ministers? nay how many scores of them
in a few years past, have been suspended, degraded, and excommunicated? not
guil^y of the breach of any established Laws: The Petitions of many are here
with us, more are coming, all their prayers are in Heaven for redress: Down
therefore with these Money Changers; They do confess Commutation of Penance,
and I may therefore most justly call them so.

Secondly, with the Papists there is a Mysterious Artifice, I mean their Index
Expurgatorius, whereby they clip the tongues of such witnesses whose evidence
they do not like: To these I parallel our late Imprimators, Licensers for the
Press, so handled, that truth is suppressed and popish Pamphlets fly abroad Cum
privilegio, witness the audacious Libells against true Religion, written by
Cossens, D we, Heylin, Pocklington, Mead, Shelford, Swan, Roberts, and many
more, I name no Bishops, but I add, etc.

Nay, they are already grown so bold in this new trade, that the most learned
Laborers of our ancient and best divines, must be new corrected, and defaced
with a Delineatur, by the supercilious pen of my Lords young Chaplain, fit
perhaps for the Technicall Arts, but unfit to hold the Chair for Divinity.

But herein the Roman Index is better than our English Licenses, they thereby
do prove the current of their own established Doctrines, a point of wisdom;
but with us our Innovators by this Artifice do alter our settled Doctrines, nay
they do subinduce points repugnant and contrary: and this I do affirm upon
my self to prove.

One parallel I have more, and that is this: Amongst the Papists there is one
acknowledged Pope, supreme in honor over all, and in power, from whose
judgment there is no appeal: I confess Mr. Speaker, I cannot altogether
match a Pope with a Pope, yet one of the ancient Titles of our English Primate,
was Alterius orbis Papa, but thus far I can go (ex ore suo) it i^ in Print;
he pleads fair for a Patriarchall, and for such a one whose Judgment (he
before hand professes) ought to be final, and then I am sure it ought to be
unerring; put these two together, and you shall find that the final
determination of a Patriarch, will want very little of a Pope, and then we may
say, Munato nomine de te fabula narratur: he pleads Popeship, under the name
of a Patriarch, and I much fear the end and top of his Patriarchall plea, may
be as that of Cardinal Poole, his Predecessor, who would have two heads, one
Caput Regale, the other Caput Sacerdotale, a proud parallel to set up the
Myter above the Crown.

But herein I shall be free and clear, if one there must be, be it a Pope, be
it a Patriarch, this I resolve upon for mine own choice, Procul a love, procul
a fulmine, I had rather serve one as far as Tyber, then to have him come to me
so near as the Thames, a Pope at Rome will do me less hurt, than a
Patriarch may do at Lambeth.

I have done, and for this third parallel, I submit it to the wisdom and
consideration of this grave Committee for Religion: In the mean time I do
ground my Motion upon the former two, and it is this in brief.

That you would be pleased to select a sub-Committee of 4.6.8.9. or 10. at the
most, and to empower them for the discovery of the great numbers of oppressed
Ministers, under the Bishops tyranny for these ten years last past, we have
the complaints of some, but more are silent, some are patient and will not
complain, others are fearful and dare not, many dead, and many beyond the
Seas, and cannot complain.

And in the second place, that the sub-Committee may examine the Printers, what
Books by bad license have been corruptly issued forth. And what good Books
have been (like good Ministers) silenced, clipped, or cropped.

The work I conceive, will not be difficult, but will quickly return into
your hands full of weight.

And this is my Motion.

The third Speech of Sir Edward Deering.
Mr. Speaker,
THis Morning is designed for the consideration of the late Canons, and the
former; and of that which the Clergy have mis-called a benevolence; I shall for
the present, only touch the first of them, and that is the Roman Velites, wht
did use to begin the Battle: so shall I but valitande, and skirmish, whilst
the maine Battle is setting forwards.

The Pope as they say, has a triple Crown, answerable thereunto, and to
support it, he pretends to have a threefold Law.

1. The first that is Ius divinum, Episcopacy by Divine Right: and this he
would have you think to be the Crown next his head, which does circle and
secure his power, our Bishops have in an unlucky time entered their Plea, and
presented their title to this Crown, Episcopacy by Divine Right. 2 The second
is Ius humanum Constantii donativum the gift of Indulgent Princes temporal
power; this Law belongs to his second or middle Crown, this is already pleaded
for, by our Prelates in print. 3. These two Crown being already obtained, The
Pope claims, and makes the third himself, and sets it highest upon the top:
This Crown also has its Law, and that is Ius Canonicum: This Canon Law is of
more use unto his Popeship (if once admitted) than both the other.
Just so our Prelates from the pretended Divinity of their Episcopacy, and from
the temporal power granted them by our Princes, would now obtrude a new Canon
Law upon us: They have charged the Canons to the full, and never fearing they
would requoyle into a Parliament, they have rammed a prodigious and ungodly
Oath into them: the illegality and invalidity of these Canons, is manifested by
one short question, (viz.) what do you call the meeting wherein they were made?

Mr. Speaker, who can frame an argument aright, unless he can tell against
what he is to argue?

Would you confute the Convocation-house? they were a holy Synod; they were
Commissioners? will you dispute their Commission? they will mingle all power
together, and perhaps answer, they were something else, that we neither knew
nor imagined; unless they would unriddle themselves, and own what they were,
we may prosecute non-concludent Arguments.

Mr. Speaker, I have conferred with some of the Founders of those Canons, but I
profess here, that I could never meet with any one of that assembly, who could
well answer to that first question of the Catechism, What is your name? Alas,
they were parted before they knew what they were, when they were together.

The sum of all the several answers that I have received, do all together
amount unto this: They were a Convocationall, Synodicall Assembly of
Commissioners; Indeed a threefold Chaemera, a Monster to our Laws, a Cerberus
to our Religion. A strange Commission, where no Commissioners name is to be
found* A strange Convocation that lived when the Parliament was dead. A strange
holy Synod, when the one part never saw nor conferred with the other.

But indeed, there needed no conference, if it be true of these Cannons which I
read of the former, Quis nescit, Canones Lambethae formari priusquam in Synod
ventilentur?

Well Mr. Speaker, they have Innovated upon us; we may say, it is Lex talionis
to Innovate upon them, and so I hope we shortly shall do.

In the mean time, my humble motion is, that every member of that assembly,
who voted their Cannons, may come severally to the Bar of this House, with a
Book of Cannons in his hand and there unless he can answer that Catechism
question, as I called it, better then I expect he can, conceptis verbis, in
such express terms as this honorable house shall then think fit, he shall
abjure his own Issue, and be commanded to give fire to his own Canons.

And this motion I take to be just.

The fourth Speech of Sir Edward Deering. Concerning the Archbishop, and
diverse other Grievances.
Mr. Speaker,
YEsterday we did regulate the most important business before us: and gave
them motion, so that our great and weighty affairs, are now on their feet in
their progress, journying on toward their several periods, where some I hope
will find their latest home.

Yet among all these I observe one, a very maine one, to sleep sine die: give
me leave to awaken it; it is a business of an immense weight, and worth; such
as deserves our best care, and most severe circumspection. I mean the Grand
Petition long since given in by many thousand Citizens against the domineering
Clergy.

Wherein (for my part) although I cannot approve of all that is presented unto
you, yet I do clearly profess, that a great part of it, nay the greatest part
thereof, is so well grounded, that my heart goes cheerfully along therewith.

It seems that my Country (for which I have the honor to serve) is of the
same mind, and least you should think that all faults are included within the
walls of Troy, they will show you,

Iliacos intra muros peccatur, and extrae.

The same grievances which the City groans under, are provincial unto us, and
I much fear they are National among us all.

The pride, the avarice the ambition, and oppression, by our ruling Clergy is
Epidemicall, it has infected them all. There is not any, or scarce any of
them, who is not practical in their own great cause in hand, which they
impiously do mis call, the Piety of the times, but in truth so wrong a Piety,
that I am bold to say,

In facinus jurasse putes. --

Here in this Petition is the disease represented, here is the cure entreated.

The number of your Petitioners is considerable, being above five and twenty
hundred names, and would have been four times as many, if that were thought
material.

The matter in the Petition is of high import: but your Petitioners themselves
are all of them quiet and silent at their own houses, humbly expecting and
praying the resolution of this great Senate, upon these their earnest and
thrice hearty desires.

Here is no noise, no numbers at your door: they will be neither your trouble
nor your jealousy; for I do not know of any one of them this day in the
town: so much they do affie in the justice of their Petition, and in the
goodness of this house.

If now you want any of them here to make avowance of their Petition, I am
their servant. I do appear for them, and for my self, and am ready to avow
this Petition in their names, and in my own.

Nothing doubting, but fully confident that I may justly say of the present
usage of the Hierarchy in the Church of England, as once the Pope (Pope Adrian
as I remember) said of the Clergy in his time: A vertice capitis ad plantam
pedis, nihil est sanum in toto ordine Ecclesiastico.

I beseech you read the Petition, regard us, and relieve us.

Master BAGSHAWES Speech in Parliament Febr. 9th. 1640. Concerning Episcopacy,
and the London Petition.
Mr. Speaker,
I Was yesterday and the time before, for the retaining of the London Petition
and am in the same mind still; and therefore do now rise up against the
proposal of that question which is now called for; Whether Episcopacy it self
be to be taken into consideration by the Committee: wherein I do distinguish
of a twofold Episcopacy the first, in Statu puro, as it was in the Primitive
times: the second, in Statu corrupto, as it is at this day, and is so intended
and meant in the London Petition. Now I hold that Epistopacy in this latter
sense is to be taken into consideration as a thing that trencheth not only
upon the right and liberties of the Subject; of which I shall have occasion to
speak hereafter. But as it is now, it trencheth upon the Crown of England in
these four particulars, wherein in I know, this House will willingly hear me,

First, it is maintained by the Bishop of Exeter in a Book which he has writ
to this purpose, that Episcopacy it self both in the office and in the
jurisdiction is de Iure Divino, of Divine right; which position is directly
contrary to the Laws of England, of which I will cite but two or three in
stead of many more. The Statute of Carlisle 35. Ed. 1. mentioned in Caudries
case; in the fifth Report, says, that the Church of England is founded in the
state of Prelacie by the Kings of England and their Progenitors. Which likewise
appears by the first Chapter in Magna Charta, in these words, Concessimus Deo
and Ecclesiae Anglicanae omnes libertates, etc. and in the twenty fifth year
of Edward the third, in the French Roll which I have seen, there the
Archbishop and Clergy petition the King for their liberties, in these words,
thus Englished, That for the reverence of God and holy Church, and of his grace
and bounty, he will confirm all those liberties, privileges, and rights,
granted and given by him and his noble Progenitors, to the Church by their
Charters: which plainly shows, that they have their Episcopal Jurisdiction
from the Kings of England, and not Iure divino, by divine right: and this
likewise is acknowledged by themselves in the Statute of 37. H. 8. cap. 17.
that they have their Episcopal jurisdiction, and all other Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction whatsoever solely and only, by, from, and under the King.

The second thing that is trenching upon the Crown, is this, that it is holden
at this day, that Episcopacy is inseparable to the Crown of England; and
therefore it is commonly now said, No Bishop, no King: no Miter, no Scepter:
which I utterly deny; for it is plain and apparent, that the Kings of England
were long before Bishops, and have a subsistence without them, and have done,
and may still depose them.

The third is likewise considerable, as trenching upon the Crown, which is
that was said under the Gallery, that Episcopacy was a third estate in
Parliament, and therefore the King and Parliament could not be without them.
This I utterly deny, for there are three estates without them, as namely, the
King, who is the first estate; the Lords Temporal the second, and the Commons
the third; and I know no fourth estate. Besides, the Kings of England have had
many Parliaments, wherein there have been no Bishops at all: as for example,
Ed. 1.24 of his reign held his Parliament at Edmundbury, excluso Clero; and in
the Parliament 7. R. 2. c. 3. and 7. R. 2. c. 12. it does appear, that they
were enacted by the King, with the assent and agreement of the Lords Temporal,
and Commons, where the estates of Parliamen are mentioned, and not the Clergy.
Diverse other statutes might likewise be named to this purpose, which I omit.

The fourth and last thing is of the Bishops holding of the Ecclesiastical
Courts in their own names, and not in the name of the King, nor by Commission
from him, contrary to the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. cap. 2. and contrary to the
practice of Bishop Ridley, Coverdale, and Ponnet, who took Commissions from
the KING for holding their Ecclesiastical Courts, as may be seen at this day
in the Rolls.

And although it will be objected, that by a late Proclamation, in the year of
our Lord God, 1637. wherein the opinion of the Judges mentioned, it is declared
upon their opinion, that the act of 1 Edw. 6. was repealed, and that Bishops
may now keep Courts in their own names, and send process under their own
Seals; yet it is well known, that the Statute of 1 Q. Mary, which repealed
the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. was it self repealed by the Statute of 1 Iac. cap 25.
Whereupon it was holden upon a full debate of this point in Parliament, 7 Iac.
which I have seen that upon consideration of the Statutes of 1 Iac. and 1.
Eliz. cap 1. and 8 Eliz. cap. 1. that the Statute of 1 Ed. 6. was revived* and
that Bishops ought not to keep Courts in their own names: So that for these
reasons so nearely concerning the right of the Crown of England in the point
of Episcopacy, I am against the proposal of that question, and am for the
retaining of the London Petition, and for a through Reformation of all abuses,
and grievances of Episcopacy mentioned in the Ministers Remonstrance, which
Reformation may perhaps serve the turn without alteration of the Government of
England, into a form of Presbytery, as it is in other Kingdoms of Scotland,
France, Gen^va, and the Low Countries, which for mine own part, had I lived in
these Kingdoms, I should have bin of the opinion of the Protestant party in
point of Presbytery, because those Kingdoms are governed by the Civil Law,
which maintains the jurisdiction of the Pope and Papal Episcopacy, which the
ancient Laws of England condemn, being likewise in themselves opposite to the
Civil and Canon Laws. And if notwithstanding all the Reformation that can be
made by the Laws of this Land, a better form of government may evidently
appear to us, concerning which there is no form now before us; it is to be
taken by us into consideration, according to that imperial Constitution in
these words, In rebus nobis constituendis evidens utilitas esse debet, ut ab eo
jure recedatur quod diu aequum visum est.

And so Mr. Speaker, I shortly conclude, that for these Reasons, omitting
diverse more, the London Petition is to be retained.

The Speeches of Sir Benjamin Rudyer in the High Court of Parliament.
Mr. Speaker,
We are here assembled to do Gods business and the Kings, in which our own
is included, as we are Christians, as we are Subjects. Let us first fear
GOD* then shall we honor the King the more: for I am afraid we have been
the less prosperous in Parliaments, because we have preferred other matters
before Him. Let Religion be our Primum Quarite, for all things else, are but
Etcaetera's to it; yet we may have them too, sooner and surer, if we give God
his precedence.

We well know what disturbance has been brought upon the Church, for vain
petty trifles. How the whole Church, the whole Kingdom has been troubled,
where to place a Metaphor, an Altar. We have seen Ministers, their Wives,
Children, and Families undone, against Law, against Conscience, against all
Bowels of Compassion, about not dancing upon Sundays. What do these sort of
men think will become of themselves, when the Master of the house shall come,
and find them thus beating their fellow servants? These Inventions were but
Sives made of purpose to winnow the best men, and that is the Devils
occupation. They have a mind to worry preaching, for I never yet heard of any,
but diligent preachers that were vexed with these and the like devices. They
despise prophecy, and as one said, They would feign be at something were like
the Mass, that will not bite. A muzzl'd Religion. They would evaporate and
dis-spirit the power and vigor of Religion, by drawing it out into solemn,
specious formalities, into obsolete, antiquated Ceremonies, new furbish'd up.
And this (belike) is the good work in hand, which Dr. Heylin has so often
celebrated in his bold Pamphlets. All their Acts, and actions are so full of
mixtures, involutions and complications, as nothing is clear, nothing sincere
in any of their proceedings: Let them not say, that these are the perverse
suspicious malicious interpretations of some few factious Spirits amongst us,
when a Romanist has bragged, and congratulated in print, That the face of our
Church begins to alter, the Language of our Religion to change. And Sancta
Clara has published, That if a Synod were held, Non intermixtis Puritanis,
setting Puritanes aside, our Articles and their Religion would soon be agreed.
They have so brought it to pass, that under the name of Puritans, all our
Religion is branded, and under a few hard words against Jesuits, all popery is
countenanced.

Whosoever squares his actions by any rule, either Divine or Humane, he is a
Puritan. Whosoever would be governed by the Kings Laws, he is a Puritan. He
that will not do whatsoever other men would have him do, he is a Puritan.
Their great work, their Masterpiece now is, To make all those of the
Religion, to be the suspected party of the Kingdom.

Let us further reflect upon the ill effect these Courts have wrought, what by
a defection from us, on the one side, a separation on the other; Some imagining
whither we are tending, made haste to turn, or declare themselves Papists
before hand, thereby hoping to render themselves the more gracious, the more
acceptable. A great multitude of the Kings Subjects, striving to hold communion
with us; but seeing how far we were gone, and searing how much further we wou^d
go, were forced to fly the Land, some into other inhabited Countries, very
many into Savago wildernesses, because the Land would not bear them. Do not
they that cause these things cast a reproach upon the government?

Mr. Speaker, let it be our principal care that these ways neither continue,
nor return upon us. If we secure our Religion, we shall cut off and defeat
many Plots that are now on foot by Them and Others. Believe it Sir, Religion
has been for a long time, and still is the great design upon this Kingdom.
It is a known and practiced principle, That they who would introduce another
Religion into the Church, must first trouble and disorder the government of the
State, that so they may work their ends, in a confusion which now lies at the
door.

I come next Mr. Speaker, to the Kings business more particularly; which
indeed is the Kingdoms, for one has no existence* no being without the other,
their relation is so near; yet some have strongly and subtly labored a
divorce, which has been the very band both of King and Kingdom.

When foundations are shaken, it is high time to look to the building. He has
no Heart, no Head, no Soul, that is not moved in his whole man, to look upon
the distresses, the miseries of the Commonwealth, that is not forward in all
that he is, and has, to redress them in a right way.

The King likewise is reduced to great straights, wherein it were
undutifulnesse beyond inhumanity, to take advantage for him: let us rather make
it an advantage for him, to do him best service when he has most need. Not to
seek our own good, but in Him, and with Him, else we shall commit the same
crimes our selves, which we must condemn in others.

His Majesty has clearly and freely put himself into the hands of this
Parliament, and I presume, there is not a Man in this House, but feels
himself advanced in this high trust; but if He prosper no better in our hands
than he has done in theirs, who have hitherto had the handling of his
affairs, we shall for ever make our selves unworthy of so gracious a
confidence.

I have often thought and said, that it must be some great extremity, that
would recover and certify this state, and when that extremity did come, It
would be a great hazard whether it might prove a remedy, or ruin. We are now
Mr. Speaker upon that vertical turning point, and therefore it is no time to
palliate, to foment our own undoing.

Let us set upon the remedy, we must first know the Disease: But to discover
the deseases of the State, is (according to some) to traduce the Government;
yet others are of opinion, that this is the half way to the Cure.

His Majesty is wiser than they that have advised him, and therefore he cannot
but see and feel their subverting destructive Counsels, which speak louder
than I can speak of them: for they ring a doleful deadly knell over the whole
Kingdom. His Majesty best knows who they are: for us, let the Matters bolt
out the men; their actions discover them.

They are men that talk largely of the Kings service, have done none but their
own, and that is too evident.

They speak highly of the Kings power, but they have made it a miserable
power, that produces nothing but weakness, both to the King and Kingdom.

They have exhausted the Kings revenew to the bottom, nay through the bottom,
and beyond.

They have spent vast sums of money wastefully, fruitlesly, dangerously: So
that more money without other Counsels will be but a swift undoing.

They have always peremptorily pursued one obstinate pernicious course. First,
they bring things to an extremity, then they make that extremity of their own
making, the reason of their next action, seven times worse than the former, and
there we are at this instant.

They have almost spoiled the best instituted Government in the world, for
Sovereignty in a King, liberty to the Subject; the proportionable temper of
both which, makes the happiest state for power, for riches, for duration.

They have unmannerly and slubbringly cast all their Projects, all their
Machinations upon the King: which no wise or good Minister of State ever did,
but would still take all harsh, distasteful things upon themselves, to clear,
to sweeten their Master.

They have not suffered his Majesty to appear unto his people, in his own
native goodness.

They have eclipsed him by their interposition: although gross condense bodies
may obscure, and hinder the Sun from shining out, yet is he still the same in
his own splendour. And when they are removed, all Creatures under him are
directed by his light, comforted by his beams: But they have framed a
superstitious seeming Maxim of State for their own turn; That if a King will
suffer men to be torn from him, he shall never have any good service done
him. When the plain truth is, that this is the surest way to preserve a King
from having ill servants ab^ut him. And the Divine Truth likewise is, Take away
the wicked from the King, and his Throne shall be established.

Mr. Speaker, Now we see what the sores are in general: and when more
particulars shall appear; let us be very careful to draw out the Cores of
them; not to skin them over with a slight suppurating, f^string Cure, lest they
break out again into a greater m schiefe; consider of it, consult and speak
your min es.

It has heretofore been boasted, That the King should never call a Parliament
till he had no need of his people; These were words of Division, and
malignitie. The King must always according to his occasions, have use of his
peoples Power, Hearts, Hands, Purses. The People will always have need of the
Kings Clemency, Justice, Protection. And this Reciprocation is the strongest,
the sweetest union.

It has bin said too of late; That a Parliament will take away more from the
King, then they will give him. It may well be said, That those things which
will fall away of themselves, will enable the Subject to give him more than can
be taken any way else. Projects and Monopolies are but leaking Conduit-pipes;
The Exchequer it self at the full st, is but a Custom; and now a broken one;
frequent Parliaments only are the Fountain: And I do not doubt but in this
Parliament, as we shall be free in our advises, so shall we be the more free
of our purses, that his Majesty may experimentally find the real difference
of b^tter Counsels, the true solid grounds of raising and establishing his
Greatness, never to be brought again (by Gods blessing^) to such dangerous,
such desperate perplexities.

Mr. Speaker, I confess I have now gone in a way much against my Nature, and
somewhat against my Custom heretof^re used in this place. But the deplorable,
dismal condition both of Church and State have so far wrought upon my
judgment, as it has convinced my disposition, yet am I not Vir Sanguinum; I
love no man's ruin; I thank God, I neither hate any man's person, nor envy any
man's fortune, only I am zealous of a through Reformation in a time that exacts,
that extorts it. Which I humbly bese^ch this House may be done with as much
lenity, as much moderation, as the public safety of the King and Kingdom can
possibly admit.

Another Speech of Sir Benjamin Rudyer, in the High Court of Parliament.
Mr. Speaker,
IT will become us thankfully to acknowledge the prudent and painful
endeavors of my Lords, the Peers, Commissioners entreating with the Scots, in
mediating with the King: whereby (God assisting) we are now probably drawing
near to a blessed peace.

His Majesty in his Wisdom and Goodness, is graciously pleased to give his
royal assent to their Acts of Parliament, wherein the Articles of their
Assembly are likewise included: Insomuch as their Religion, their Laws, their
Liberties are ratified and established: Besides, their Grievances relieved, and
redressed; For which We use to give the King Money, and are still ready to do
it. This (although it be a large) yet it is not received as a full satisfaction.

Besides, when They came into England, they published in a Remonstrance, That
they would take nothing of the English, but what they would pay for, or give
security. We have defrayed them hitherto, and are provided to do it longer.

They did well remember, that we assisted them in the time of their
Reformation: And it is not to be forgotten; that we did bear our own charges.

Concerning mutual Restitution of Ships, and Goods, My Lords the Commissioners
have very fairly and discreetly accommodated that particular already.

As for inferentiall consequentiall damages, such a Representation would but
minister unacceptable matter of Difference and Contestation, which amongst
friends ought to be warily and wisely avoided.

We could allege and truly too, That Northumberland, New Castle, and the
Bishopric, will not recover their former state these twenty years. We have
heard it spoken here in this house, by an understanding knowing member in the
particular, that the Coale-Mines of New Castle will not be set right again
for out hundred thousand pounds; besides the over-price of Co^les which all the
while it has, and will cast this City, and (...) parts of the Kingdom. A
great ^^ale more of this nature might be rehearsed; but I delight not to press
such renter stretched Arguments. Let us on both sides rather thank God, by
proceeding in the way he has ^^^d before us, and not wry his way to ours. Time
and his Blessing will repair all our implicit Damages, with many prosperous
explicit advantages.

They say that they do not make any formal demand; But they do make a sum
to appear; five hundred and fourteen thousand pounds, more than (...) gave
the King at once. Aportentous Apparition! which shows it self in a very dry
time, when the Kings revenue is totally exhausted, his Debts excessively
multiplied, the Kingdom generally impoverished, by grievous burdens, and
disordered Courses: All this supply is to be drawn out of us only, without
the least help from any of his Majesty's other Dominions: which to my seeming
will be an utter draining of the people; unless England be Puteus inexhaustus
as the Popes were wont to call it.

Notwithstanding Sir, now that I have in part opened the state we are in though
nothing so exactly as they have done theirs: I shall most willingly and
heartily afford the Scots whatsoever is just, Equitable and Honorable, even
to a convenient, considerable round sum of Money, toward their losses and
expenses, That we may go off with a friendly and handsome loos. If they reject
it, we shall improve our Cause.

It was never yet thought Mr. Speaker, any great wisdom overmuch to trust a
successeful Sword. A man that walks upon a rising ground, the further he goes,
the larger is his Prospect. Success inlarges men's desires, extends their
ambition, it breeds thoughts in them they never thought before; This is
natural and usual.

But the Scots being truly touched with Religion, according to their
profession, that only is able to make them keep their word: for Religion is
stronger and wiser than Reason, or Reason of State.

Beyond all this, Mr. Speaker, the remarkable Traces of Gods wonderful
Providence in this strange work, are so many, so apparent, as I cannot but
hope almost to belief: That the same all-governing merciful hand, will
conduct and lead us to a happy Conclusion, will contract a close^ firmer union
between the two Nations, than any mere humane Policy could ever have effected:
which inestimable Ben fits to both, in advancing the truth of Religion, in
exalting the greatness of the King, in securing the peace of his Kingdoms,
against all Malicious, Envious, Ambitious opposites, to Religion, to the King,
to his Kingdoms; wherein I presume, all our desires and prayers do meet.

Another Speech of Sir Benjamin Rudyer in the High Court of Parliament.
Mr. Speaker,
J Do verily believe, that there are many of the Clergy in our Church, who
do think the simplicity of the Gospel, too mean a vocation for them to serve
in: They must have a specious, pompous, sumptuous Religion, with additionalls
of Temporal greatness, Authority, Negotiation: Notwithstanding, they all know
better than I, what Fathers, Schoolmen, Counsels are against their mixing
themselves in secular affairs.

This Roman Ambition will at length bring in the Roman Religion, and at last a
haughty insolence even against supreme power it self, if it be not timely
and wisely pre^^nted.

They have amongst them an Apothegm of their own making, which is, No Miter,
no Scepter, when we know by dear experience, that if the Mitre be once in
danger, they care not to throw the Scepter after, to confound the whole
Kingdom for their interest.

And Histories will tell us, that whenever the Clergy went high, Monarchy
still went lower: If they could not make the Monarch the head of their own
Faction, they would be sure to make him less: witness one example for all,
The Popes working the Emperor out of Italy.

Some of ours, as soon as they are Bishops adepto fine, cessant Motus, They
will preach no longer, their office then is to govern. But in my opinion they
govern worse than they Preach, though they preach not at all; for we see to
what pass their government has brought us.

In conformity to themselves, They silence others also, though Hierom in one of
his Epistles says, that even a Bishop, let him be of never so blameless a
life, yet he does more hurt by by his license, then he can do good by his
example.

Mr. Speaker, It now behooves us, to restrain the Bishops to the duties of
their Function, as they may never more hanker after heterogeneous extravagant
employments: Not be so absolute, so single and solitary in actions of Moment,
as Excommunication, Absolution, Ordination, and the like: but to join some of
the Ministry with them, and further to regulate them according to the usage of
Ancient Churches, in the best times, that by a well-tempered Government, they
may not have power hereafter, to corrupt the Church, to undo the Kingdom.

When they are thus circumscribed, and the public secured from their
Eruptions, then shall not I grudge them a liberal plentiful subsistence: else
I am sure they can nev^^ be given to Hospitality.

Although the calling of the Clergy be all glorious within, yet if they have
not a large, considerable, outward support, they cannot be freed from vulgar
Contempt.

It will always be fit, that the flourishing of the Church should hold
proportion with the flourishing of the Commonwealth, wherein it is. If we
dwell in houses of Ceaar, why should they dwell in skins? And I hope, I shall
never see a good Bishop left worse than a Parson without a Gleab.

Certainly Sir, this superintendencie of eminent men, Bishops over diverse
Churches, is the most Primitive, the most spreading, the most lasting
Government of the Church. Wherefore whilst we are earnest to take away
Innovations, let us beware we bring not in the greatest Innovation that ever
was in England.

I do very well know, what very many do very servently desire. But let us
well bethink our selves, whether a popular Democraticall Government of the
Church (though fit for other places) will be either suitable or acceptable to a
Regal, Monarchical Government of the State.

Every man can say, (It is so common and known a Truth) that sudden and
great changes both in natural and Politic bodies have dangerous opperations:
and give me leave to say, that we cannot presently see to the end of such a
consequence, especially in so great a Kingdom as this, and where Episcopacie
is so wrapped and involved in the Laws of it.

Wherefore Mr. Speaker, my humble Motion is, that we may punish the present
offenders, reduce and preserve the Calling for better men hereafter. Let us
remember with fresh thankfulness to God, those glorious Martyr-Bishops who
were burned for our Religion in the times of Popery, who by their learning,
zeal, and constancy, upheld and conveyed it down to us.

We have some good Bishops still, who do Preach every Lords Day, and are
therefore worthy of double honor; they have suffered enough already in the
Disease: I shall be sorry we should make them suffer more in the Remedy.

A message delivered from the Commons to the Lords of the Upper House in
Parliament, by Mr. Pym, November. 11. 1640.
My Lords:
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, now assembled for the Commons in
Parliament, have received information of diverse traitorous designs and
practices of a great Peer of this House; and by virtue of a command from them,
I do here, in the name of the Commons now assembled in Parliament, and in the
name of all the Commons of England, accuse Thomas Earl of Strafford, Lo.
Lieutenant of Ireland, of high Treason: and they have commanded me further, to
desire your Lordships that he may be sequestered from Parliament, and forthwith
committed to prison. They have further commanded me, to let you know that they
will within a very few days resort to your Lordships, with the particular
Articles and grounds of this accusation. And they do further desire, that your
Lordships will think upon some convenient and fit way, that the passage
betwixt England and Ireland, for his Majesty's subjects of both Kingdoms, may
be free, notwithstanding any restraint to the contrary.

The Lord Lieutenant being required to withdraw, and after a debate thereof
called in, kneeled at the Bar, and after standing up, the L. Keeper spoke as
follows.

My Lord of Strafford:

THe House of Commons in their own name, and in the name of the whole Commons
of England, have this day accused your Lordship to the Lords of the Higher
House of Parliament of high treason. The articles they will within a very few
days produce: In the mean time they have desired of my Lords, and may Lords
have accordingly resolved, that your Lordship shall be committed to safe
custody to the Gentleman Usher, and be sequestered from the House, till your
Lordship shall clear your self of the accusations that shall be laid against
you.

Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, against Thomas Earl of
Strafford, in maintenance of his accusation, whereby he stands charged of High
Treason.
1.THat he the said Thomas, Earl of Strafford, has traitorously endeavored to
subvert the fundamental Laws and government of the Realms of England and
Ireland, and in stead thereof to introduce on Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government against Law, which he has declared by traitorous words, counsels,
and actions, and by giving his Majesty advice, by force of Arms to compel
his loyal Subjects to submit thereunto.

2. That he has traitorously assumed to himself Regal power over the lives,
liberties, persons, lands, and goods of his Majesty's Subject^ in England and
Ireland, and has exercised the same tyrannically, to the subversion and
undoing of many, both of Peers and others of his Majesty's Liege people.

3. That the better to enrich and enable himself to go through with his
traitorous designs, he has detained a great part of his Majesty's revenue,
without giving legal account; and has taken great sums out of the
Exchequer, converting them to his own use, when his Majesty was necessitated
for his own urgent occasions, and his Army had been a long time unpaid.

4. That he has traitorously abused the power and authority of his
government, to the increasing, countenancing, and encouraging of Papists, that
so he might settle a mutual dependence and confidence betwixt himself and
that party, and by their help prosecute, and accomplish his malicious and
tyrannical designs.

5. That he has maliciously endeavored to stir up enmity and hostility
between his Majesty's subjects of England, and those of Scotland.

6. That he has traitorously broken the great trust reposed in him by his
Majesty, of Lieutenant General of his Army, by wilfully betraying diverse of
his Majesty's Subjects to death, his Army to a dishonorable defeat by the
Scots at Newborn, and the Town of New Castle into their hands, to the end,
that by the effusion of blood, by dishonor, and so great a loss of
New Castle, his Majesty's Realm of England might be engaged in a National and
irreconciliable quarrel with the Scots.

7. That to preserve himself from being questioned for those and other his
traitorous courses, he labored to subvert the right of Parliaments, and the
ancient course of Parliamentarie proceedings, and by false and malicious
slanders to incense his Majesty against Parliaments. By which words, counsels,
and actions, he has traitorously, and contrary to his allegiance, labored to
alienate the hearts of the Kings Liege people from his Majesty, to set a
division between them, and to ruin and destroy his Majesty's Kingdoms, for
which they impeach him of high Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Crown and dignity.

8. And he the said Earl of Strafford was Lord Deputy of Ireland, and
Lieutenant General of the Army there, viz. His most excellent Majesty, for
his Kingdoms both of England and Ireland, and the L. President of the North,
during the time that all and every the crimes and offenses before set forth
were done and committed, and he the said Earl was Lieutenant General of all
his Majesty's army in the North parts of England, during the time that the
crimes and offenses in the fifth and sixth articles set forth were done and
committed.

9. And the said Commons by protestations, saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time here after any other accusation or impeachment against
the said Earl, and also of replying to the answers that he the said Earl
shall make unto the said articles, or to any of them, and of offering proves
also of the premises, or any of them, or any other impeachment or accusation
that shall be exhibited by them, as the cause shall according to the course of
Parliaments require, do pray that the said Earl may be put to answer for all
and every the premises, that such proceedings, examinations, trials, and
judgments may be upon every of them had and used, as is agreeable to Law and
Justice.

The further impeachment of Thomas Earl of Strafford by the Commons assembled
in Parliament. 1640
WHereas the said Commons have already exhibited Articles against the said
Earl formerly expressed etc. Now the said Commons do further impeach the said
Earl as follows, etc.

1. That he the said Earl of Strafford the 21. day of March, in the 8. year
of his now Majesty's Reign, was president of the Kings Counsel in the
Northern parts of England.

That the said Earl being president of the said Counsel on the 21. day of
March a Commission under the great Seal of England, with certain Schedules of
instructions thereunto annexed, was directed to the said Earl, or others the
Commissioners therein named, whereby amongst other things power and authority is
limited to the said Earl, and others the Commissioners therein named, to hear
and determine all offenses, and misdemeanors, suits, debates, controversies and
demands, causes, things and matters, whatsoever therein contained, and within
certain precincts in the said Northern parts therein specified, and in such
manner as by the said Schedule is limited and appointed.

That amongst other things in the said instructions, it is directed that the
said President and others therein appointed, shall hear and determine
according to the course of proceedings in the Court of Starchamber, diverse
offenses, deceits, and falsities therein mentioned, whether the same be
provided for by the Acts of Parliament, or not, so that the Fines imposed be
not less then by Act or Acts of Parliament provided for by those offenses is
appointed

That also amongst other things in the said instructions, it is di^ected that
the said president and others therein appointed, have power to examine, hear,
and determine, according to the course of proceedings in the Court of Chancery,
al manner of complaints for any matter within the said precincts, as well
concerning lands, tenements, and hereditaments, either freehold, customary, or
coppy-holde, as Leases, and oter things therein mentioned, and to stay
proceedings in the Court of Common Law by Injunction, or otherwise, by all
ways and means, as is used in the Court of Chancery.

And although the former Presidents of the said Counsel had never put in
practice such Instructions, nor ha^ they any such Instructions, yet the said
Earl in the moreth of May in the said 8. year, and diverse years following,
did put in practice, exercise, and use, and caused to be used and put in
practice the said Commission and Instructions, and did direct and exercise an
exorbitant and unlawful power and jurisdiction on the persons and estates of
his Majesty's subjects in those parts, and did disin-herit diverse of his
Majesty's subjects in those parts of their inheritances, sequestered their
possessions, and did fine, ransom punish and imprison them, and caused them to
be fined, ransomed, punished and imprisoned, to their ruin and destruction and
namely. Sir Conier Darcy, Sir John Bourcher and diverse others against the
Laws, and in subversion of the same. And the said Commission and Instructions
were procured and issued by the advice of the said Earl.

And he the said Earl, to the intent that such illegal and unjust power might
be exercised with the greater license and will did advise, Counsel, and
procure further directions, in and by the said instructions to be given, tha n^
prohibition he granted at all, but in cases where the said Counsel shall
exceed the limits of the said instructions: And that if any Writ of Habeas
Corpus be granted, the party be not discharged till the party perform the
Decree and Order of the said Counsel.

And the said Earl in the 13. year of his now Majesty's Reign, did procure a
new Commission to himself and others therein appointed, with the said
Instructions, and other unlawful additions.

That the said Commission and Instructions were procured by the solicitation
and advice of the said Earl of Strafford.

2. That shortly after the obtaining of the said Commission dated the 21 of
March, in the 8 year of his now Majesty's Reign (to wit) the last day of
August then next following, he the said Earl (to bring his Majesty's liege
people into a dislike of his Majesty and of his Government, and to terrify
the Justices of the Peace from executing of the Laws: He the said Earl,
being then President, as aforesaid, and a Justice of Peace) did publicly at
the Assizes held for the County of York, in the City of York, in and upon the
said last day of August, declare and publish before the people there attending
for the administration of Justice according to the Law, and (in the presence of
the Justices sitting; That some of the Justices were all for Law, but they
should find that the Kings little finger should be heavier then the loins of
the Law.

3. That the Realm of Ireland having been time out of mind anne xed to the
Imperial Crown of England, and governed by the same Laws: The said Earl
being Lord Deputy of that Realm, to bring his Majesty's liege people of that
Kingdom likewise into distike of his Majesty's government, and intending the
subversion of the fundamental Laws and settled government of that Realm, and
the distraction of his Majesty's liege people there, did upon the 30. day of
September, in the ninth year of his now Majesty's Reign, in the City of
Dublin (the chief City of that Kingdom, where his Majesty's privy Counsel,
and Courts of Justice do ordinarily reside, and whither the Nobility and
Gentry of that Realm do usually resort for Justice,) in a publik^ Speech
before diverse of the N^bility and Gentry, and before the Major, Aldermen and
Recorder, and many Citizens of Dublin, and other his Majesty's Liege people,
declare and publish* that Ireland was a conquered Nation, and that the King
might do with them what he pleased* and speaking of the Charters of the former
Kings of England made to that City, he further said that their Charters were
nothing worth, and did bind the King no further then he pleased.

4. That Richard Earl of Cork, having sued out process in course of Law for
recovery of his possessions, from which he was put by color of an order made
by the said Earl of Strafford, and the Counsel Table of the said Realm of
Ireland. The said Earl of Strafford, upon a paper petition without legal
proceeding, did the 20 day of February, in the 11. year of his n^w Majesty's
Reign, threaten the said Earl of Cork (being then a Peer of the said
Realm) to imprison him, unless he would surcease his suit, and said, That he
would have neither Law nor Lawyers dispute or question any of his orders. And
the 20. d^y of March in the said 11. year of the said Earl of Strafford,
speaking of an order of the said Counsel Table of that Realm, in the time of
King James, which concerned a Lease which the said Earl of Cork claimed in
certain rectories or tithes which the said Earl of Cork alleged to be of no
force, said, That he would make the said Earl, and all Ireland know, so long
as he had the government there, any Act of State, there made or to be made,
should be as binding to the Subjects of that Kingdom, as an Act of
Parliament; And did question the said Earl of Cork in the Castle Chamber,
upon pretense of the breach of the said order of Counsel Table, and did sundry
other times, and upon sundry other occasions, by his words and speeches
arrogate to himself a power above the fundementall Laws, and established
Government of that Kingdom, and scorned the said Laws and established
government.

5 That according to such his Declarations and Speeches, the said Earls of S r
ffo^d did use and exercise a power above, and against, and to the subversion of
the said fundame tall Laws, and established government of the said Realm of
Ireland, ex^ending such his power, to the goods, free holds, inheritances,
liberties, and lives of his Majesty's Subjects in the said Realm. viz. The
said Earl of Sir^fford the twelfth day of December, Anno Domini 1635. in the
time of full peace, did in the said Realm of Ireland, give and procure to be
given against the Lord Mount Norris (then and yet a Peer of Ireland, and then
Vice-Treasurer and receiver general of the Realm of Ireland, and one of the
principal Secretaries of State, and Keeper of the privy Signet of the said
Kingdom, a sentence of death by a Council of war called together by the
said Earl of Strafford, without any warrant or authority of Law, or offense
deserving any such punishment. And he the said Earl did also at Dublin,
within the said Realm of Ireland, in the Month of March, in the fourteenth
year of his Majesty's Reign without any legal or due proceedings or trial,
give, or cause to be given, a sentence of death against one other of his
Majesty's Subjects, whose name is yet unknown, and caused him to be put to
death in execution of the said sentence.

6 That the said Earl of Strafford, without any legal proceedings, and upon a
paper Petition of Richard Ralstone, did cause the said Lord Mount-Norris to be
disseized and put out of possession of his freehold and inheritance of his
Manor and Tymore in the Country of Armagh, in the Kingdom of Ireland, the
said Lord Mount-Norris having been two years before in quiet possession
thereof.

7 That the said Earl of Strafford, in the Term^ of holy Trinity, in the
thirteenth year of his now Majesty's Reign, did cause a case, commonly called
the case of Tenures upon defective Titles, to be made and drawn up without any
ju^y or trial, or other legal process, and without the consent of parties,
and did then procure the ludges of the said Realm of Ireland to deliver their
opinions and resolutions to that case, and by color of such opinion, did
without any legal proceeding cause Th^mas Lord Dillon, a Pee^e of the said
Realm of Ireland, to be put out of possession of diverse Lands, and Tenements,
being his freehold in the Country of Mago and Rosecomen, in the said
Kingdom, and diverse other of his Majesty's Subjects to be also put out of
possession, and disseized of their free hold by color of the same resolution,
without legal proceedings, whereby many hundreds of his Majesty's subjects
were undone, and their families utterly ruinated.

8 That the said Earl of Strafford upon a Petition of Sir John Gifford Knight,
the first day of February, in the said thirteenth year of his Majesty's
reign, without any regal Process, made a Decree or Order against Adam
Viscount Lofts of Elie, a Peer of the said Realm of Ireland, and L Chancellor
of Ireland, and did cause the said Viscount to be imprisoned and kept close
prisoner, on pretense of disobedience to the said Decree or order.

And the said Earl without any authority, and contrary to his Commission,
required and commanded the said Lord Viscount to yield unto him the great Seal
of the Realm of Ireland, which was then in his custody, by his Majesty's
command, and imprisoned the said Chancellor for not obeying such his command.

And without any legal proceedings, did in the same thirteenth year imprison
George Earl of Kildare, a Peer of Ireland, against Law, thereby to enforce
him to submit his Title to the Manor and Lordship of Castle Leigh in the
Queens County, (being of great yearly value) to the said Earl of Straffords
will and pleasure, and kept him a year prisoner for the said cause, two
months whereof he kept him close prisosoner, and refused to enlarge him,
notwithstanding his Majesty's Letters for his enlargement to the said Earl of
Strafford directed.

And upon a Petition exhibited in October, 1635. by Thomas Hibbots, against
dame Mary Hibbots widow, to him the said Earl of Strafford, the said Earl of
Strafford recommended the said Petition to the Counsel Table of Ireland, where
the most part of the Counsel gave their vote and opinion for the said Lady,
but the said Earl finding fault herewith, caused an order to be entered against
the said Lady and threatened her that if she refused to submit thereunto, he
would imprison her, and fine her five hundred pounds, that if the continued
obstinate, he would continue her imprisonment, and dou^le her fine every
month by month, whereof she was enforced to relinquish her estate in the
land questioned in the said Petition, which shortly was conveyed to Sir Robert
Meredith, to the use of the said Earl of Strafford.

And the said Earl in like manner did imprison diverse others of his Majesty's
Subjects upon pretense of disobedience to his orders and decrees, and other
illegal command by him made for pretended debts, titles of Lands, and other
causes in an arbitrary and extrajudiciall course upon Paper Petitions to him
preferred, and no other cause legally depending.

9 That the said Earl of Strafford the sixteenth day of February, in the
twelfth year of his now Majesty's Reign, assuming to himself a power above
and against Law, took upon him by a general Warrant under his hand, to give
power to the Lord Bishop of Down, and Connor his Chancellor, or Chancellors,
to their several Offices thereto to be appointed, to attach and arrest the
Bodies of all such of the meaner and poorer sort, who after Citation should
either refuse to appear before them, or appearing should omit, or deny to
perform, or undergo all lawful Decrees, Sentences, and orders, issued,
imposed, or given out against them, and them to commit and keep in the next
Goal, until they should either perform such sentences, or put in sufficient
Bail to show some reason before the Counsel Table, of such their contempt and
neglect; and the said Earl, the day and year last mentioned, signed and
issued a Warrant to that effect, and made the like Warrant to send to all other
Bishops and their Chanc^llours in the said Realm of Ireland to the same effect.

10 That the said Earl of Strafford being Lord Lieutenant, or Deputy of
Ireland, procured the Customs of the Merchandise exported out, and imported
into that Realm to be firmed to his own use.

And in the ninth year of his now Majesty's Reign, he having then interest
in the said Customs (to advance his own gain and lucre) did cause and
procure the native commodities of Ireland, to be rated in the book of Rates
for the Customs (according to which the Customs were usually gathered) at
far greater values and prices than in truth they were worth (that is to say)
every Hide at twenty shillings, which in truth was worth but five shillings,
every stone of Wool at thirteen shillings four-pence, though the same
ordinarily were worth but five shillings, at the utmost but nine shillings; by
which means the Custom, which before was but a twentieth part of the true
value of the commodity, was inhansed sometimes to a sift part, and sometimes
to a fourth, and sometimes to a third part of the true value, to the great
oppression of the Subjects, and decay of Merchandise.

11 That the said Earl, in the ninth year of his now Majesty's reign, did by
his own will and pleasure, and for his own lucre restrain the exportation of
the commodities of that Kingdom without his license, as namely Pipe-staves,
and other commodities, and then raised great sums of money for licensing of
exportation of those Common ities, and dispensation of the said restraints
impose on them, by which means the Pipe-staves were raised from four pound
ten shillings; or five pound per thousand to ten poun^, and sometimes eleven
pound per thousand; and other commodities were inhanced in the like proportion,
and by the same means by him the said Earl.

12 That the said Earl being Lord Deputy of Ireland, on the ninth day of
January in the thirteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, ^id then under color
to Regulate the Importation of Tobacco into the said Realm of Ireland issue a
Proclamation in his Majesty's Name, prohi iting the importati^n of Tobacco w^
h^ut license of h m and the Counsel, there from an^ after the first day of
May, Anno Dom. 1638. after which restraint the said Earl, notwithstan ing the
said restraint, caused diverse great q^antitie^ of Tobacco to be imported to
his own use, and fraughted diverse ships with Tobacco, which he ^mported to hi
own use: and that if any ship brought To acco into any Port there, the said
Earl and his Agents used to buy the same to his own use, at their ow^e price.
And ^f that the owners refused to let him have the same at under-values then
they were not permitted to vent the same: by which un ue means, the Earl
having gotten the whole Trade of Tobacco into his own hands, he sold it at
great and excessive prizes, such as he l^st to impose for hi own profit.

And the more to assure the said Monopoly of Tobacco, he the said Earl on the
th ee and twentieth day of February, in the thirteenth year aforesaid, did
issue another Proclamation, commanding that none should put to sale any To acco
by wholesale, from and after the last day of May, then next following, but
what should be made up into Rolls, and the same Sealed with two Seals by
himself appointed, one at each end of the Roll. And such was not sealed to be
seized, appoynting six pence the pound for a reward to such persons as should
seize the same: and the persons in whose custody the unsealed Tobacco should
be found, to be committed to Goal, which last Proclamation was covered by a
pretense for the restraining of the seal of unwholesome Tobacco, but it was
truly to advance the said Monopoly.

Which Proclamation, the said Earl did rigorcusly put in execution, by seizing
the goods, fining, imprisoning, whipping, and putting the offenders against the
same Proclamation on the Pillory, as namely Barnaby Hubbard, Edward Covena,
John Tumen, and diverse others: and made the Officers of State, and Justices of
Peace, and other Officers to serve him in compassing and executing these unjust
and undue courses, by which Cruelties and unjust Monopolies, the said Earl
raised 100000 li. per annum gain to himself. And yet the said Earl though he
inhanced the Customs, where it concerned the Merchants in general, yet drew
down the impost formerly taken on Tobacco from six pence the pound to three
pence the pound, it being for his own profit so to do.

And the said Earl, by the same, and other rigorous and undue means, raised
several other Monopolies and unlawful exactions for his own gain, viz. on
Starch, Iron-pots, Glasses, Tobacco-pipes, and several other commodities.

13 That flax being one of the principal and native Commodities of that
Kingdom of Ireland, the said Earl having gotten great quantities thereof into
his hands, and growing on his own Lands, did issue out several Proclamations,
viz. one dated the one and twentieth day of May, in the eleventh of his
Majesty's reign, and the other dated the one and thirtieth day of January, in
the same year, thereby prescribing and injoyning the working of Flax into
Yearne and Thread, and the ordering of the same in such ways wherein the
Natives of that Kingdom were unpractised and unskilful: which Proclamations
so issued, were by his Commands and Warrants to his Majesty's Justices of
Peace, and other officers, and by other rigorous means put in execution, and
the Flax wrought or ordered in other manner than as the said Proclamation
prescribed, was seized and employed to the use of him and his agents, and
thereby the said Earl endeavored to gain, and did gain in effect the sole
sale of that native commodity.

15 That the said Earl of Strafford, by Proclamation dated the sixteenth of
October, in the fourteenth year of his Majesty's Reign, did impose upon the
Owners, Masters, Pursers, and Boat-swaines of every ship, a new and unlawful
Oath, viz. that they (two or more of them) immediately after the arrival of
any ship within any Port or Creek in the said Kingdom of Ireland, should give
in a true in-voyce of the outward bulk of Wares and Merchandises and number of
goods, and the qualities and condition of the said goods, as far as to them
should be known, the names of the several Merchants proprietours of the said
goods, and the places from whence they were fraughted, and whither they were
bound to discharge: which Proclamation was accordingly put in execution, and
sundry persons enforced to take the said unlawful Oath.

15 That the said Earl of Strafford traitorously and wickedly devised and
contrived by force of Arms in a warlike manner to subdue the subjects of the
said Realm of Ireland, to bring them under his tyrannical power and will, and
in pursuance of his wicked and traiterous purposes aforesaid, the said Earl of
Strafford in the eighth year of his Majesty's reign, did by his own
^uthority, without any warrant or color of Law, tax and impose great sums
of money upon the Towns of Baltemore, Bandenbridge, Talowe, and diverse other
Towns and places in the said Realm of Ireland, and did cause the same to be
leavied upon the inhabitants of those Towns by troops of Soldiers, with
force and arms, in a warlike manner. And on the ninth day of March, in the
twelfth year of his now Majesty's Reign, traitorously did give authority unto
Robert Savile, a Sarjeant at Arms, and to the Captains of the Companies of
soldiers, in several parts of that Realm, to send such numbers of soldiers
to lie on the lands and houses of such as would not conform to his orders
until they should render obedience to his said orders and warrants, and after
such submission (and not before) the said Soldiers to return to their
Garrisons. And did also issue the like Warrants unto diverse others, which
Warrants were in warlike manner, with force and arms put in execution
accordingly, and by such warlike means did force diverse of his Majesty's
Subjects of that Realm, to submit themselves to his unlawful commands.

And in the said twelfth year of his Majesty's reign, the said Earl of
Strafford did traitorously cause certain troops of Horse and Foot, armed in
warlike manner, and in warlike array, with force and Arms to expel Richard
Butler from the possession of Castle Cumber, in the Territory of Idough, in the
said Realm of Jreland, and did likewise and in like warlike manner, expel
diverse of his Majesty's Subjects from their houses, families, and possessions,
as namely Ed. Brenman, Owen Oberman, Patrick Oberman, Sir Cyprian Horsfield,
and diverse others, to the number of about an hundred families, and took and
imprisoned them and their wives, and carried them prisoners to Dublin, and
there detained them until they did yield up, surrender, or release their
respective estates and rights.

And the said Earl in like warlike manner, has during his government of the
said Kingdom of Ireland, subdued diverse others of his Majesty's Subjects
easily to his will, and thereby, and by the means aforesaid, has levied war
within the said Realm against his Majesty, and his liege people of that
Kingdom.

16 That the said Earl of Strafford, the two and twentieth of February, in the
seventh year of his now Majesty's Reign, intending to oppress the said
subjects of Ireland, did make a proposition, and obtained from his Majesty an
allowance, that no complaint of injustice or oppression done in Ireland, should
be received in England against any, unless it first appeared, that the party
made first his address to him the said Earl: and the said Earl having by
such usurped, tyrannical, and ex^rbitant power, expressed in the former
Articles, destroyed the Peers and other Subjects of that Kingdom of Ireland,
in their Lives, Consciences, Land, Liberties, and Estates, the said Earl to
the intent the better to maintain and strengthen his power, and to bring the
people into a disaffection of his Majesty, as aforesaid, did use his Majesty's
name in the execution of his said power.

And to prevent the Subjects of that Realm of all means of complaints to his
Majesty, and of redress against him and his agents, did issue a Proclamation,
bearing date the seventeenth day of Septmber, in the eleventh year of his
Majesty's Reign, thereby commanding all the Nobility, undertakers, and others
who held estates and offices in the said Kingdom, (except such as were
employed in his Majesty's service, or attending in England by his special
command) to make their personal residence in the said Kingdom of Ireland, and
not to depart thence without license of himself.

And the said Earl has since issued other Proclamations to the same purpose,
by means whereof the Subjects of the said Realm are restrained from seeking
relief against the oppressions of the said Earl, without his license: which
Proclamation the said Earl has by several rigorous ways, as by fine,
imprisonment, and otherwise, put in execution on his Majesty's Subjects, as
namely, one -- Parry and others, who came over only to complain of the
exorbitances and oppressions of the said Earl.

17 That the said Earl having by such means as aforesaid, subverted the
Government and Laws of the Kingdom of Ireland, did in March in the sixteenth
year of his Majesty's Reign, in scandal of his Majesty, of all his
Kingdoms, and in further Execution of his wicked purposes aforesaid, speaking
of the Armies in Ireland, declare, that his Majesty was so well pleased with
the Army of Ireland, and the consequence thereof, that his Majesty would
certainly make the same a pattern for all his three Kingdoms.

18 That the said Earl of Strafford, for the better effecting of his
traitorous designs, and wicked purposes, did endeavor to draw dependency upon
himself of the Papists in both Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and to that
end during the time of government in Ireland, he restored diverse Frieries, and
Masse-houses, ( which had been formerly suppressed by precedent Deputies of
that Kingdom, two of which houses were in the City of Dublin, and had been
assigned to the use of the University there) to the pretended owners thereof,
who have since employed the same to the exercise of the Popish Religion.

And in the Month of May and June last, the said Earl did raise an Army in
the said Realm of England consisting of eight thousand foot, all of which,
except one thousand, or thereabouts, were Papists, and the said one thousand
were drawn out of the old Army there, consisting of two thousand foot, and in
their places there were a thousand Papists, or thereabouts put into the said
old Army by the said Earl.

And the more to engage and tie the new Army of Papists to himself, and to
encourage them, and to discourage and wear out the old Army, the said Earl
did so provide; That the said new Army of Papists were du^ly paye^, and had all
necessaries provided for them, and permitted the exercise of their Religion,
but the said old Army were for the space of one whole year and upwards unpaid.

And that the said Earl being appointed a Commissioner with eleven several
Counties in the Northern parts of England, for compounding with Recusants for
their forfeitures due to his Majesty; which Commission bears date the eighth
day of July, in the fifth year of his Majesty's Reign that now is, and being
also Receiver of the Composition Money thereby arising, and of other debts,
Duties, and penalties for his Majesty's use, by Letters Patents dated the 9.
day of the said July: he, to engage the said Recusants to him, did compound
with with them at low and under rates, and provided, that they should be
discharged of all proceedings against them, in all his Majesty's Courts, both
temporal and Ecclesiastical, in manifest breach of, and contrary to the Laws
and Statutes of this Realm, in that behalf established.

19 That the said Earl having taxed and levied the said impositions, and
raised the said Monopolies, and committed the said oppressions in his Majesty's
name, and as by his Majesty's Royal command, he the said Earl in May the 15
year of his Majesty's Reign, did of his own authority contrive and frame a
new and unusual oath, by the purport whereof among many other things, the
party taking the said oath, was to swear that he should not protest against
any of his Majesty's royal commands, but submit themselves in all obedience
thereunto. Which oath he so contrived to enforce the same on the subjects of
the Scottish Nation, inhabiting in Ireland, and out of a hatred to the said
Nation, and to put them to a discontent with his Majesty, and his government
there, and compelled diverse of his Majesty's said subjects there to take the
said oath, some he grievously fined and imprisoned, and others he destroyed and
exiled, and namely the 10 of October, Anno Dom. 1639. He fined Henry Steward
and his wife, who refused to take the said oath, 5000. pounds a piece, and
their 2. daughters and James Gray, 3000. pounds a piece, and imprisoned them
for not paying the said fines. The said Henry Stewards wife and daughters, and
James Gray, being the Kings liege people of the Scottish Nation, and diverse
others he used in like manner, and the said Earl upon that occasion did
declare, that the said oath did not only oblige them in point of allegiance to
his Majesty, and acknowledgement of his Supremacy only, but to the Ceremonies
and government of the Church established; or to be established by his
Majesty's Royal authority; and said, that the refusers to obey, he would
prosecute to the blood.

20 That the said Earl in the 15. and 16. years of his Majesty's Reign, and
diverse years past, labored, and endeavored to beget in his Majesty an ill
opinion of his subjects, namely, those of the Scottish Nation, and diverse and
sundry times, and especially since the Pacification made by his Majesty with
his said Subjects of Scotland in Summer, in the 15 year of his Majesty's
Reign; he, the said Earl did labor and endeavor to persuade, incite, and
provoke his Majesty to an offensive war against his said Subjects of the
Scottish Nation: And the said Earl, by his counsel, actions, and endeavors,
has been and is a principal and chief incend^ary of the war and discord
between his Majesty and his Subjects of England, and the said Subjects of
Scotland, and has declared and advised his Majesty, that the demand made by
the Scots in this Parliament were a sufficient cause of war against them

The said Earl having formerly expressed the height and rancor of his mind
toward his Subjects of the Scottish Nation, viz. the tenth day of October, in
the 15. year of his Majesty's Re^gne, he said that the Nation of the Scots
were ^^b^^s, and traitors, and he being then about to come to England, he
then further said, that if it pleased his Master (meaning his Majesty) to send
him back again, he would root cut of the said Kingdom (meaning the Kingdom
of Ireland) the Scottish Nation both root and branch.

Some Lords and others, who had taken the said oath in the precedent Article
only excepted: and the said Earl has caused diverse of the said ships and
goods of the Scots to be stayed, seized, and molested, to the intent to set on
the said war.

21. That the said Earl of Strafford, shortly after his speeches mentioned in
the last precedent Article, to wit, in the fifteenth year of his Majesty's
Reign, came into this Realm of England, and was made Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, and continued his government of that Kingdom by a Deputy: At his
arrival here, finding that his Majesty with much wisdom and goodness had
composed the troubles in the North, and had made a Pacification with his
Subjects of Scotland; he labored by all means to procure his Majesty to
break that Pacification, incensing his Majesty against his Subjects of that
Kingdom, and the proceedings of the Parliament there.

And having incensed his Majesty to an offensive war against his said Subjects
of Scotland, by Sea and by Land, and by pretext thereof, to raise Forces for
the maintenance of that war, he counseled his Majesty to call a Parliament in
England, yet the said Earl intended, if the said proceedings of that
Parliament should not be such as would stand with the said Earl of Straffords
mischievous designs he would then procure his Majesty to break the same; and
by ways of force and power, to raise moneys upon the said subjects of this
Kingdom.

And for the encouragement of his Majesty to hearken to his advice, he did
before his Majesty and his privy Counsel, then sitting in Counsel, make a
large Declaration, that he would serve his Majesty in any other way, incase the
Parliament should not supply him.

22 That in the month of March, before the beginning of the last Parliament,
the said Earl of Stafford went into Ireland, and procured the Parliament of
that Kingdom to declare their assistance in a war against the Scots. And gave
directions for the raising of an Army consisting of 8000. foot, and 1000.
horse, being for the most part Papists, as aforesaid. And confederating with
one Sir George R^dcliffe, did together with him the said Sir George,
traitorously conspire to employ the said Army for the ruin and destruction of
the Kingdom of England, and of his Majesty's Subjects, and of altering and
subverting of the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom.

And shortly after, the said Earl of Strafford returned into England, and to
sundry persons declared his opinion to be, that his Majesty should first try
the Parliament here, and if that did not supply him according to his occasions,
he might use then his Prerogative as he pleased, to levy what he needed, and
that he should be acquitted both of God and man, he took some other courses
to supply himself, though it were against the will of his Subjects.

23. That upon the thirteenth day of April last, the Parliament of England
met, and the Commons house (then being the representative Body of all the
Commons in the Kingdom) did according to the trust reposed in them, enter into
debate and consideration of the great grievances of of this Kingdom, both in
respect of Religion, and the public liberty of the Kingdom, and his Majesty
referring chiefly to the Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
the ordering and disposing of all matters concerning the Parliament: He the
said Earl of Strafford, with the asistance of the said Archbishop, did procure
his Majesty by sundry speeches and messages, to urge the said Commons house to
enter into some resolution for his Majesty's supply, for maintenance of his
war against his Subjects of Scotland, before any course was taken for the
relief of the great and pressing grievances, wherewith this Kingdom was then
afflicted. Whereupon, a demand was then made from his Majesty, of 12.
Subsidies, for the release of ship money only; and while the said Commons then
assembled (with expressions of great affection to his Majesty and his service)
were in debate and consideration of some supply, before resolution by them
made, he the said Earl of Strafford, with the help and assistance of the said
Archbishop, did procure his Majesty to dissolve the last Parliament, upon the
5. day of May last: and upon the same day the said Earl of Strafford did
treacherously, falsely, and maliciously endeavor to incense his Majesty
against his loving and faithful Subjects, who had been members of the said
house of Commons, by telling his Majesty, they had denied to supply him. And
afterward upon the same, did treacherously and wickedly counsel and advise his
Majesty to this effects, viz. that having tried the affections of his people,
he was loose and absolved from all rules of government, and was to do every
thing that power would admit, and that his Majesty had tried all ways and was
refused, and should be acquitted both of God and man; and that he had an Army
in Ireland (meaning the Army above mentioned, consisting of Papists, his
dependants as is aforesaid) which he might employ to reduce this Kingdom to
obedience.

24 That in the same month of May, he the said Earl of Strafford, falsely,
treacherously, and maliciously, published and declared before others of his
Majesty's Privy Counsel, that the Parliament of England had forsaken the
King, and that in denying to supply the King, they had given him the advantage
to supply himself by other ways: and diverse other times he did maliciously,
wickedly, and falsely publish and declare, that seeing the Parliament had
refused to supply his Majesty in the ordinary and usual way, the King might
provide for the Kingdom in such ways, as he should hold fit, and that he was
not to suffer himself to be mastered by the frowardness of the people.

And having so maliciously slandered the said house of Commons, he did with the
help and advice of the said Archbishop of Canterbury and the Lord Finch, late
Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England: cause to be printed, and published in
his Majesty's name, a false and scandalous book entitled, his Majesty's
Declaration of the causes that moved him to dissolve the last Parliament, full
of bitter and malicious invectives, and false, and scandalous aspersions
against the said house of Commons.

25 That not long after the dissolution of the said last Parliament, (viz. In
the months of May and June) he the Earl of Strafford, did advise the King to
go on rigorously in leavying the Ship Money, and did procure the Sheriffs of
several Countries to be sent for for not leavying the Ship Money, diverse of
which were threatened by him to be sued in the Star Chamber, and afterward by
his advice were sued in the Star Chamber, for not leavying the same, and diverse
of his Majesty's loving Subjects were sent for and imprisoned by his advice,
about that and other illegal payments.

And a great loan of a hundred thousand pounds was demanded of the City of
London, and the Lord Major, and the Aldermen and the Sheriffs of the said
City, were often sent for by his advice to the Council Table, to give an
account of their proceedings in raising of Ship Money, and furthering of that
loan, and were required to certify the names of such Inhabitants of the said
City as were fit to lend, which they with much humility refusing to do, he the
said Earl of Strafford did use these or the like speeches: viz. That they
deserved to be put to Fine and Ransom, and that no good would be done with
them, till an example were made of them, and they were laid by the heels, and
some of the Aldermen hanged up.

26 That the said Earl of Strafford by his wicked Counsel having brought his
Majesty into excessive charges without any just cause, he did in the month of
July last (for the support of the said great charges) counsel and approve two
dangerous and wicked Projects: viz.

To seize upon the Bullion, and the money in the Mint.

And to imbase his Majesty's Coin with the mixtures of Brass.

And accordingly we procured one hundred and thirty thousand pounds which was
then in the Mint, and belonging to diverse Merchants, Strangers, and others, to
be seized on, and stayed to his Majesty's use. And when divert Merchans of
London, owners of the said Bullion, came to his house to let him understand the
great mischief, that course would produce here, and in other parts, what
prejudice it would be to the Kingdom, by discrediting the Mint, and hindering
the importation of Ballion: he the said Earl told them, that the City of
London dealt undutifully and unthankfully with his Majesty; and that they were
more ready to help the Rebel than to help his Majesty: and that if any hurt
came to them, they may thank themselves: and that it was the course of other
Princes to make use of such moneys to serve their occasions.

And when in the same Month of July, the Officers of his Majesty's Mint came
to him and gave him diverse reasons against the imbasing the said money, he
told them that the French King did use to send Commissaries of Horse with
Commission to search into men's estates, and to peruse their accounts, so that
they may know what to levy of them by force, which they did accordingly
leavie: and turning to the Lord Conttington, then present, said; That this was
a point worthy his Lordships consideration.

27 That in or about the Month of August last he was made Lieutenant General
of all his Majesty's Forces in the Northern parts against the Scots, and being
at York, did in the Month of September by his own authority, and without any
lawful warrant, impose a Tax on his Majesty's Subjects in the County of York
of eight pence per^iem, for maintenance of every Soldier of the Trained bands
of that County, which Sums of money he caused to be leavied by force. And
to the end to compel his Majesty's Subjects out of fear and terror to yield
to the payment of the same, He did declare that he would commit them that
refused the payment thereof, and the Soldiers should be satisfied out of their
estates; and they that refused it, were in very little better condition than of
High Treason.

28 That in the Month of September and October last, he the said Earl of
Strafford, being certesild of the Scottish Army coming into the Kingdom, and
he the said Earl of Strafford being Lieutenant General of his Majesty's
Army, did not provide to the defense of the Town of New Castle, as he ought
to have done but suffered the same to be lost, that so he might the more
incence the English against the Scots.

And for the same wicked purpose, and out of a malicious desire to engage the
Kings kingdoms of England and Scotland in a National and bloody War, he did
write to the Lord Conway the General of the Horse, and under the said Earls
command, that he should fight with the Scottish Army at the passage over the
Tyne, whatsoever should follow; notwithstanding that the said Lord Conway had
formerly by Letters informed him the said Earl, that his Majesty's Army then
under his command, was not of force sufficient to encounter the Scots, by which
advice of his, he did contrary to the duty of his place betray his Majesty's
Army then under his command, to apparent danger and loss.

All and every which Words, Counsels and Actions of the said Earl of
Strafford traitorously and contrary to his allegiance to our Sovereign Lord
the King, and with an intention and endeavor to alienate and withdraw the
hearts and affections of the Kings Liege people of all his Realms from his
Majesty, and to set a division between them, and to ruin and destroy his
Majesty's said Kingdoms. For which they do further impeach him the said
Thomas, Earl of Strafford of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Crown and Dignity.

The Earl of Bristowes Speech, the 7th of December. 1640.
MAY this days Resolution be as happy as the Proposition (which now moves me
to rise) seasonable and necessary: for whether we shall look upon the King or
the people, it did never more behoove us, the great Physician the Parliament,
to effect a true consent toward all parts, than now: This debate carries with
it a double aspect, toward the Sovereign, and toward the Subject; though
both innocent, both injured, both to be cured.

In the representation of Injuries, I shall crave your attention: In the Cures,
I shall beseech your equal cares, and better Judgments: surely in the
greatest humility I speak it, their illegal ways are works and punishments
of indignation.

The raising of Leavies, strengthened by Commission, with un-heard of
instructions, the billiting of Soldiers, and by Lieutenants, and their
Deputies, without leave have been as if they would have persuaded Princes (nay
worlds) the right of Empire had been had to take away what they please by
strong hands; and they have endeavored as far as it was possible for them to
do it.

This has not been done by the King under the pleasing shade of whose Crown
I hope we shall ever gather the fruits of Justice, but the Projectors have
extended the Prerogative of the King beyond the limits, which mars that sweet
harmony.

They have rent from us the light of our eyes, enforced Companies of guests
upon us, worse than the Ordinary of France, vitiated of wives and daughters
before our faces, brought the Crown to greater want, than ever it was by
anticipating the Revenue: And can the shepherd be thus smitten, and the sheep
not scattered?

They have introduced a Privy Council, ravishing at once the spheres of all
ancient government, imprisoning without Bail or Bond. They have taken from us:
what shall I say? indeed what have they left us? All means of supplying the
King, and ingratiating our selves with him, taking the roots of all propriety;
which if it be seasonably set into the ground by his own hand, we shall have
instead of beauty baldness.

To the making of them whole, I shall apply my self, and propound a remedy to
all these diseasis by one and the same thing: Has King and People been hurt,
and by one and the same thing must they be cured; to vindicate what? new
things? no our ancient sober vital liberty, by reinforming our ancient Laws,
made by our Ancestors, by setting such a Charter upon them as no licentious
spirits should dare hereafter to enter upon them: And shall we think that a
way to break a Parliament? no, our desires are modest and just; I speak
truly both for the interest of the King and people; if we enjoy not this, it
will be impossible to relieve him: Therefore let us fear they shall not be
accepted by his goodness.

Therefore I shall descend unto my motions, which consists of four parts, two
of which have relation to the persons, two to the properties of goods. For the
persons, the freedom of them from imprisonment and from employment abroad,
contrary to the ancient customs: for our goods, that no leavies be made but in
Parliament.

Secondly, no billiting of Soldiers.

It is most necessary that these be resolved, that the subject be secured in
both: Then the manner in the second place be fit to det-ermine it by a grand
Committee.

Mr. MAINARDS Speech before both Houses in Parliament, on Wednesday 24th. of
March, in reply upon the Earl of Straffords answer to his Articles at the
Bar.
My Lords,
I Shall repeat little of that which has been said, only this; That whereas
my Lord of Strafford did answer to many particulars; yet he did not answer to
that which was particularly objected against him; that is, that you were to
hear the complaints of the whole Kingdom: now the particular of our aim, is
to take off the vizard, which my Lord has put on; wherein the truth and honor
which is due to his Majesty, he would attribute to himself.

My Lords, there is one thing which I desire your Lordships to remember, it
being the maine of our complaints.

The alteration of the face of government, and tradacing of his own Laws; and
this is the burden upon all the Lords and Commons of Ireland. Concerning the
breach of Parliament, he would put it on Sir George Ratcliffe; but i^me sure,
he cannot put off himself: for Sir George Ratcliffe was not the man alone, but
others joined with him in that Assembly, and I am sure my Lord of Strafford
moved it for the breach of Parliament.

I shall address myself to the body of his answer: Now give me leave my
Lords, that I may open the nature of this great offense.

My Lords, it is a charge of Treason, which is a Treason not ended, or expired
by one single Act; but a trade enured by this Lord of Strafford, ever since the
Kings favor has been bestowed upon him.

My Lords, it has two parts: to deprive us that which was good. And secondly,
to bring in a Tyrannical government, it takes away the Laws of the Land, and
it has an arbitrary government, bounded by no law, but what my Lord of
Strafford pleases.

It is the law, my Lords, which we reverence, and cheerfully render to our
gracious Sovereign: The Law as it is the ground of our liberty, so it is the
distribution of Justice.

My Lords, in all this, my Lord of Strafford has endeavored to make them
incapable of any benefit: it is true my Lords; that Treason against the person
of a Prince is high Treason, and the highest Treason that can be to man; but it
falls short of this Treason against the State.

When blessed King James was taken to heaven, he commended the laws to his
son, our gracious Sovereign. But my Lords, if such a design as this should
take effect, that the law of Justice shouldbe taken from the Throne, we are
without hope of ever seeing happy days: power is not so easily laid down,
unless it be by so good and just a Prince as we have.

My Lord of Straffords accusation is conveyed into twenty eight Articles, and I
shall but touch the heads, that we shall insist upon, and I think the best
way to this, is to consider what he did before he went into Ireland, what then,
and what since.

He has encroached jurisdiction where none was, taking upon him a power to
repel the laws, and to make new laws, and in domineering over the lives and
goods, and what ever else was the subjects.

My Lords, this he has not done only upon the meaner sort, but upon the
Peers and ancient Nobility, and what may your Lordships expect, but the same
measure at his hands here, as they have found there when he committed any to
prison: if a Habeas Corpus were granted; the Officers must not obey, and if any
Fine were put upon the Officer, for refusing them, there was a command that he
should be discharged: so that he did not only take power to himself, but the
Scepter of Justice out of the Kings hand.

When he was a member of the house of Commons, it was his own motion, all
Ministers of state should serve the King, according to the laws which he has
broken himself.

He does as much as say, that Fines shall not be paid by Officers, if in this
they fulfill his commands, but those that release a prisoner upon a Habeas
Corpus shall find his displeasure.

My Lords, if this had been a single Act, we should not have accused him of
high Treason, but this has been his common course, and this we present to
your Lordships consideration.

The next thing is, that in the North the people attending for Justice, you
shall see what a dishonor he flung upon the sacred Majesty of the King, that
did advance him: some of the Justices (says he) are all for Law, but they
shall find that the Kings little fingers is heavier then the Loins of the Law.

My Lords, what a sad speech was this, and what sad Accidents happened upon it,
you all know, and he said in a solemn speech; That Ireland was a conquered
Nation, and that the King might do with them what he would, their Charters were
nothing worth, they did bind the King no longer then he pleased. Surely you
may see what he would do if he had power, but we hope never such counsel
shall have acceptance in so gracious an Ear as our Sovereigns, and he does
not stay in words, but proceeds to Actions, when a Peer of the Kingdom was
expelled the Kingdom for suing at Law for recovering of his Right, he says,
he would have Ireland know that neither Law nor Lawyers should question any
thing that he ordered.

My Lords, he goes higher, for when there was an occasion to speak of an Act
of State, he said it should be as binding as an Act of Parliament.

My Lords, he cannot go higher then this, he tells them in Parliament; they
were a Conquered Nation, and they must expect the usage of a Conquered Nation.

The Lord Mountnorris for a few words that fell from his mouth spoken privately
at his Table, had a Counsel of war called against him and was judged to
death.

My Lords, it is no marvel that he say; That the Kings little finger should
be so heavy, when his little too was so heavy to tread down a Peer under
his foot.

My Lords, he makes Laws of himself, and he makes a difference in matters of
Justice between the poor and the rich, but when he has executed his power
upon the poor, he will fall upon the rich.

My Lords, he has made that which was worth but five shillings to the value of
twenty, and my Lords, by this he does in effect take away what ere this
commodity is worth, he says he does it for the Kings gain, but we shall make
it appear, that the Crown has lost, and he has gained.

And for the Commodity of Flax my Lords, it is but a Woman's Commodity, but yet
it is the staple Commodity of Ireland.

Now my Lords, this Commondity he has gotten wholly into his own hands, for
he made such a Proclamation, that it should be used in such ways as the Women
could not do it, and if it were not used in such ways, that it should be
seized upon, no he does not only put impositions upon the Subject, but take
away the goods too, and thus he has levied war against the Kings Subjects,
and this is his course, that if a Decree were made by him and not obeyed, there
issued a warrant to Soldiers, that they should make Garrison, and that they
should go to the houses of those that were pretended to be disobedient.

My Lords they have killed their sheep and their Oxen, and bound their horses
and took them Captives till they have rendered obedience, which is expressly
contrary to Law, for it says; If any man set horse or foot upon the Kings
Subject, in a Military way, it is high Treason.

My Lords, it does not only oppress them in their estates, but provoke and
incite his Majesty to lay down his mercy and goodness, and to fall into an
offensive war against his Subjects, and to say they are Rebels and Traitors.

He tells his Counsel that the Parliament having forsaken the King, and the
King having tried the Parliament, he might use other ways to procure money to
supply his necessities.

My Lords, the same day that the Parliament was broken, he tells the King, he
had 8000, foot and 1000* horse to reduce this Kingdom to obedience.

My Lords, consider in what a sad time this man took to infuse this sad
Counsel into the Kings ear.

My Lords, he does advise the King that he was absolved from all rules of
government, but if no rule of government, what rule of obedience; Surely he
meant to reduce us to a chaos and confusion, etc. would have us without all
rule of government or obedience.

My Lords, those that he would have brought to reduce us were Papists, Enemies
of our Religion. This strikes us near my Lords, and is the grief of our
hearts; that an Irish army should be brought into England to reduce us.

My Lords, I hope we were nere so far gone, as to need an army to reduce us to
obedience.

My Lords, he had raised this Army, and if such Counsel had taken effect in
his Majesty's ear, he, like proud Haman, would have thought to have been
General of the Army.

And thus my Lords, you see this Lord of Strafford falls upon a Counsel, which
might make an irreconcilable difference to subdue us by his power.

The Earl of Bristowes Speech in the High Court of Parliament upon the
delivering of by him the Scottish Remonstrance and Schedule of their charges.
OUr Ancestors were accustomed to hear propositions in an other manner.

We represent unto you a very distressed estate, sad tidings and dishonorable
to our Nation.

That we should suffer our Country to relieve an Army that is come against us.

This may seem to withdraw from the greatness and honor of this Nation, but I
am sorry it should be thought a National dishonor as the case now stands.

But I wish it may light upon those that have been the ill instruments, by
their imprudent Counsels to bring this Kingdom into such an unhappy
business, that has produced miserable effects and Calamities.

But let us labor to build the honor of this Nation, and if ill and wicked
men have brought this great dishonor, great let the honor be when a state is
so distressed, by wisdom and prudence to relieve it.

I do remember when the Commonwealth of Rome was in great distress, after
the great Battle of Cannae, they gave thanks that the Counsel did not
despair of the safety of the Commonwealth, and me thinks there is no cause
to despair, If those ill Counsels and ill ways have brought us to this
Calamity, shall hereafter be turned to wise, prudent and settled ways, if God
may so bless us that we again prove happy, for this Nation, the strength and
Situation of it would hardly be brought to this condition, were it not for
want of Unity, and for discord among our selves.

When a happy Unity among our selves, I doubt not to see the honor of this
Nation set up again by the wisdom of his Majesty and prudent endeavor of
this assembly, this whole Monarchy once reunited, I mean the 3. Kingdoms,
will render us very considerable abroad.

His Majesty has granted our brethren in Scotland their demands in matter of
Religion and liberty, and doubt not but with humility and duty may likewise
obtain what we shall desire concerning religion and liberty graciously from
his Majesty's hands.

And I am most confident his Majesty may expect from us all that duty,
affection and assistance as he has just cause to expect from good people.

If God shall bless us and this whole Monarchy with unity, love and concord,
certainly these great Armies that do now trouble us, and are ready to offend
one an other, may show a capability with united minds and well designed to
effect great matters, and may by unity of Counsel raise us up again in the
world to a good estimation, and as great an honor as ever. I hope God will
bless us with good Counsels, and that the King as a gracious good and prudent
Prince, and all his Subjects joining in this way no doubt but God will bring us
again to a convenient condition of consistancie, yea since our armies are
united under one King and Nation, and in one Island from a state gasping it will
be easy thence to bring us to a condition of prosperity: therefore let us
procure and maintain a good correspondency amongst our selves, and for the
proposition, it much started us at first, but I must say thus much.

That where wars have fallen between Nations, it is not unlawful nor great
dishonor to let men part upon reasonble conditions, though with good
consideration our Kings passed many times into France, and returned with
recompense, but this a friendly demonstration, of one Nation to another there
is great difference in point of honor, if we consider the state wherein we
now are, two Armies in the field, and consider it was not through our default,
nor the fault of the Kingdom, that we are brought into these calamities.

The Instruments will be made an example, and the dishonor will light upon
them, and then certainly we do conceive a wise and prudent Senate, to apply
themselves to some things by necessity is no dishonor.

A State lying gasping and bleeding to restore it is an essential part of
honor*

This is that I had in command to say unto you.

His Majesty's Speech to both the Houses of Parliament, February 3. 1640.
HAving taken into my serious consideration the late Remonstrance made unto me
by the House of Parliament, I give you this answer,

That I take in good part your care of the true Religion established in this
Kingdom, from which I will never depart, as also for the tenderness of my
safety, and security of this State and Government: It is against my mind, that
Popery or Superstition should any way increase within this Kingdom, and will
restrain the same by causing the Laws to be put in execution.

I am resolved to provide against the Jesuits and Papists, by setting forth a
Proclamation with all speed, commanding them to depart the Kingdom within one
Month, which if they fail, or shall return, then they shall be proceeded
against according to the Laws.

Concerning Resettie, I give you to understand, that the Queen has always
assured me, that to her knowledge he has no Commission, but only to
entertain a personal correspondence between her and the Pope, in things
requisite for the Exercise of her Religion, which is warranted to her by the
Articles of Marriage, which give her a full Liberty ^f Conscience; yet I have
persuaded her, that since the misunderstanding of the Persons condition gives
offense, she will within a convenient time remove him.

Moreover, I will take a special care to restrain my Subjects from resorting
to Mass at Denmark house, St, James, and the Chapel of Ambassadors.

Lastly, concerning John Goodman the Priest, I will let you know the reason why
I reprived him, that as I am informed, neither Queen Elizabeth, nor my Father
did ever avow, that any Priest in their times was executed merely for
Religion, which to me seems to be this particular case, yet seeing that I am
pressed by both Houses, to give way to his, because I will avoid the
inconveniencie of giving so great discontent to my people, as I conceive this
Mercy may produce, therefore I do remit this particular Cause to both the
Houses: But I desire them to take into their consideration, the inconveniences
(as I conceive) may upon this occasion fall upon my Subjects and other
Protestants abroad, especially since it may seem to other States to be a
severity, which surprise having thus represented, I think my self discharged
from all ill consequence that may ensue upon the execution of this person.

FINIS.
To the Right Honorable the Commons House of Parliament.
The humble Petition of many of his Majesty's Subjects in and about the City
of London and several Counties of the Kingdom.
THat whereas the government of Archbishops, and Lord-Bishops, Deanes, and
Archdeacons, etc. with their Courts and ministrations in them has proved
prejudicial and very dangerous both to the Church and Commonwealth, they
themselves having formerly held, that they have their jurisdiction or authority
of humane Authority, till of these later times being further perused about the
unlawfulness that they have claymed their calling immediately from the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, which is against the Laws of this Kingdom, and Derogatory to
his Majesty and his State Royal. And whereas the said government is found, by
woeful experience, to be a maine cause and occasion of many foul evils,
pressures, and grievance of a very high nature unto his Majesty's Subjects, in
their own Consciences, liberties, and ^st tes; as in a Shedule of particulars
hereunto annexed may in part appear.

We therefore most humbly pray and beseech this Honorable Assembly, the
premises considered, that the said government with all its depend^nces, roots
and branches may be abolished, and all laws in their behalf made void, and
the government, according to Gods word, may be rightly placed among us, and we
your humble Supplyants, as in duty we are bound, will daily pray for his
Majesty's long and happy reign over us, and for the prosperous success of
this High and Honorable Court of Parliament, etc.

A Particular of the manifold Evils, Pressures, and Grievances, caused,
practiced, and occasioned by the Prelates and their Dependants.
I. FIrst, the subjecting and enclining all Ministers under them and their
Authority, and so by degrees exempting of them from the Temporal power, whence
follows:

II. The faint-heartednesse of Ministers to preach the truth of God, lest they
should displease the Prelates, as namely the Doctrine of Predestination, of
Free Grace, of Perseverance, of Original sin remaining after Baptism, of
the Sabbath, the Doctrine against universal Grace, Election for Faith
foreseen, Free Will, against Antichrist, non-Residents, humane Inventions of
Gods worship, all which are generally withheld from the peoples knowledge,
because not relishing to the Bishops.

III. The encouragement of Ministers to despise the temporal Magistracy, the
Nobles, and Gentry of the Land, to abuse the Subjects, and live contentiously
with their neighbors, knowing that they being the Bishops creatures, they
shall be supported.

IV. The restraint of many godly and able men from the Ministry, and thrusting
out of many Congregations, their faithful, diligent, and powerful Ministers,
who lived peaceably with them and did them good, only because they cannot in
Conscience submit unto, and maintain the Bishops needless devices; nay
sometimes, for no other cause but for their zeal in Preaching, or great
Auditories.

V. The suppressing of that godly Design set on foot by certain Sects, and
sugared with many great gifts by sundry well-affected persons, for the buying of
Impropriations, and placing of able Ministers in them, maintaining of Lectures,
and founding of Free Schools; which the Prelates could not endure, lest it
should darken their glories, and draw the Ministers from their dependence upon
them.

VI. The great increase of idle, lewd and dissolute, ignorant and erroneous men
in the Ministry, which swarm like the Locusts of Egypt over the whole
Kingdom, and will they but wear a Canonical Coat, a Surplisse, a Hood, bow
at the name of JESUS, and be zealous of Superstitious Ceremonies, they may live
as they list, confront whom they please, preach and vent what errors they
will, and neglect preaching at their pleasures, without control.

VII. The discouragement of many from bringing up their Children in learning,
the many Schisms, errors, and strange opinions which are in the Church, great
Corruptions, which are in the Universities; the gross and lamentable ignorance
almost every where among the people; the want of preaching Ministers in very
many places both of England and Wales, the loathing of the Ministry, and the
general defection to all manner of profaneness.

VIII. The swarming of lascivious, idle, and unprofitable Books and Pamphlets,
Play-books, and Ballads, as namely Ovids fits of Love; the Parliament of Women
came out at the dissolving of the last Parliament, Barnes Poems, Parkers
Ballads in disgrace of Religion, to the increase of all vice, and withdrawing
of people from reading, studying, and hearing the word of God, and other good
Books.

IX. The hindering of godly Books to be Printed, the blotting out, or perverting
those which they suffer, all or most of that which strikes either at Popery or
Arminianisme, the adding of what or where pleases them, and the restraints of
reprinting Books formerly lycensed without relycensing.

X. The publishing and venting of Popish, Arminian, and other dangerous Books
and Tenets, as namely; that the Church of Rome is a true Church, and in the
worst times never erred in Fundamentals, that the Subjects have no propriety in
their Estates, but that the King may take from them what he pleases, that all
is the Kings, and that he is bound by no Law, and many other, from the former
whereof has sprang,

XI. The growth of Popery and increase of Papists, Priests and Jesuits in
sundry places* but especially about London since the Reformation, the frequent
venting of Crucifixes and Pop sh Pictures, both engraven and printed, and the
placing of such in Bibles.

XII. The multitude of Monopolies and Pattents, drawing with them innumerable
Perjuries, the large increase of Customs and Impositions upon Commodities, the
Ship-monies, and many other great burdens upon the Commonwealth, under which
all groan.

XIII. Moreover, the Offices and Jurisdictions of Arch-bishop^, Lord-Bishops,
Deanes, Archdeacons, being the same way of Church Government which is in the
Romish Church, and which was in England in the time of Popery, little change
thereof being made (except only the head from whence it was derived) the same
Arguments supporting the Pope, which do uphold the Prelates, and overthrowing
the Prelates, which do pull down the Pope, and other reformed Churches,
having upon their rejection of the Pope, cast the Prelates out also as Members
of the Beast: Hence it is, that the Prelates here in England by themselves or
their Diciples plead and maintain, that the Pope is not Antichrist, and that
the Church of Rome is a true Church, has not erred in Fundamental points, and
that Salvation is attainable in that Religion, and therefore have restrained to
pray for the Conversion of our Sovereign Lady the Queen. Hence also has come,

XIV. The great Conformity and likeness both continued and increased of our
Church to the Church of Rome, in Vestures, Postures, Ceremonies, and
Administrations, namely as the Bishops Rochets, and the Lawne sleeves, the
foure-cornerd Cap, the Cope and Surprisse, the Tippet, the Hood, and the
Canonical Coat, the Pulpits clothed, especially now of late, with the Jesuits
Badge upon them every way.

XV. The standing up at Gloria Patri, and at the reading the Gospel, praying
toward the East, the bowing at the name of JESUS, the bowing to the Altar
toward the East, Cross in Baptism, the Kneeling at the Communion.

XVI. The turning of the Communion Tables Altar-wise, setting Images,
Crucifixes, and Conceits over them, and Tapers and Books upon them, and bowing,
and adoring to or before them, the reading of the second Service at the Altar,
and forcing people to come up thither to receive, or else denying the Sacrament
to them, tearming the Altar to be the mercie-seat, or the place of God Almighty
in the Church, which is a plain device to usher in the Mass.

XVII. The Christning and Consecrating of Churches and Chappells, the
Consecrating Fonts, Pulpits, Tables, Chalices, Churchyards, and many other
things, and putting holiness in them; yea, reconsecrating upon pretended
pollution, as though every thing were unclean without their Consecrating, and
for want of this sundry Churches have been interdicted and kept from use as
polluted.

XVIII. The Liturgy for the most part's framed out of the Romish Breviary
Ritualium Masse-book, also the book of Ordination, for Archbishops and
Ministers, framed out of the Roman Pontifical.

XIX. The multitude of Canons formerly made, wherein among other things,
Excommunication, ipso facto is denounced for speaking of a word against the
devises above said, or subscription thereunto, though no Law enjoined a
restraint from the Ministry without such subscription, and Appeal is den^ed to
any that should refuse subscription or unlawful conformity, though he be never
so much wronged by the inferior Judge: also the Canons made in the late sacred
Synod, as they call it, wherein are many strange and dangerous Devices to
undermine the Gospel, and the Subjects liberties, to propagate Popery, to
spoil Gods people, ensnare Ministers and other Students, and so to draw all
into an absolute subjection and thral dome to them and their government,
spoiling both the King and the Parliament of their power.

XX. The countenancing plurality of Benefices, prohibiting of Marriages without
their License at certain times, almost half the year, and lycensing of
Marriages without Banes asking.

XXI. Profanation of the Lords day, pleading for it, and enjoining Ministers
to read a Declaration, set forth, as it is thought, by their procurement for
tolerating of sports upon that day, suspending and depriving many godly
Ministers, for not reading the same only out of Conscience, it was against the
Law of God so to do, and no Law of the Land to enjoyne it.

XXII. The pressing of the strict observation of Saints Days, whereby great
sums of Moneys are drawn out of Men's purses for working on them, a very
high burden on most people, who getting their living by their daily
employments, must either omit them and be idle, or part with their money,
whereby many poor families are undone, or brought behindhand, yea many
Churchwardens are sued, or threatened to be sued by their troublesome
Ministers, as persured persons, for not presenting their Parishioners, who
say^ed in observing Holy Days.

XXIII. The great increase and frequencie of Whoredoms and Adulteries,
occasioned by the Prelates corrupt administration of Justice, in such Cases,
who taking upon them the punishment of it, do turn all into moneys for the
filling of their purses, and lest their Officers should defraud them of their
gain, they have in their late Canon, in stead of remedying their vices,
decreed that the Commutation of Penance shall not be without the Bishops
privity.

XXIV. The general abuse of that great ordinance of Excommunication, which God
has left in his Church to be used as the last and greatest punishment the
Church can inflict upon obstinate and great Offenders, and that the Prelates
and their Officers, who of right, have nothing to do with it, do daily
excommunicate men either for doing that which is lawful, or for vain, idle,
and trivial matters, as working or opening a shop on a Holiday, for not
appearing at every beck upon their summons, not paying a fee or the like; yea,
they have made it, as they do all other things, a hook or instrument wherewith
to empty men's purses, and to advance their own greatness, and so that sacred
ordinance of God, by their preventing of it, becomes contemptible to all men,
and seldom or never used against notorious offenders, who, for the most part,
are their favorites.

XXV. Yea further, the pride and ambition of the Prelates being boundless,
unwilling to be subject to either man or Laws, they claim their Office and
Jurisdiction to be Iure divino, exercise Ecclesiastical authority in their
own names and Rights, and under their own Seals, and take upon them
Temporal dignities, Places and Offices in the Commonwealth, that they may
sway both swords.

XXVI. Whence follows the taking Commissions in their own Courts and
Consistories, and where else they sit in matters determinable of Right at
Common Law, the putting of Ministers upon Parishes, without the Patrons and
peoples consent.

XXVII. The imposing of Oaths of various and trivial Articles yearly upon
Churchwardens, and Sidemen, which without perjury, unless they fall at
jarres continually with their Ministers and Neighbors, and wholly neglect
their own calling.

XXVIII. The exercising of the Oath Ex Officio, and other proceedings by way of
Inquisition reaching even to men's thoughts, the apprehending, and detaining of
men by Pursivants, the frequent suspending and depriving of Ministers, fining
and imprisoning of all sorts of people, breaking up of men's Houses and Studies,
taking away men's Books, Letters, and other writings, seizing upon their
Estates, removing them from their callings, seperating between them and their
wives against both their wills, the rejecting of prohibitions with threatenings,
and the doing of many other outrages, to the utter infringing the Laws of the
Realm, and the Subjects liberties, and arraigning of them and their Families,
and of latter time, the Judges of the Land are so awed with the power and
greatness of the Prelates, and other ways promoted, that neither prohibition,
Habeas Corpus, or any other lawful remedy can be had, or take place, for the
distressed Subjects in most Cases, only Papists, Jesuits, Priests, and such
others as propagate Popery or Arminianisme, are countenanced, spared, and have
much liberty, and from hence followed amongst others these dangerous
Consequences.

I. FIrst, the general hope and expectation of the Romish part, that their
superstitious Religion will ere long be fully planted in this Kingdom again,
and so they are encouraged to persist therein, and to practice the same openly
in diverse places, to the high dishonor of God, and contrary to the Laws of
the Realm.

II. Secondly, the discouragement and destruction of all good Subjects, of whom
all Multitudes both Ciothiers, Merchants, and others, being deprived of their
Ministers, and overburthen'd with these pressures, have departed the Kingdom
to Holland, and other parts, and have drawn with them a great part of
manufacture of Cloth and Trading out of the Land into other places, where they
reside, whereby Wool, the great staple of the Kingdom, is become of small
value and vends not, Trading is decayed, many poor people want work, Seamen
lose employment, and the whole Land much impoverished, to the great dishonor
of this Kingdom, and blemishment to the government thereof.

III. The present wars and Commotions happened between his Majesty and his
Subjects of Scotland, wherein his Majesty and all his Kingdom are endangered,
and suffer greatly, and are like to become a prey to the common Enemy, in case
the wars go on, which we exceedingly fear, will not only go on, but also
increase to an utter Ruin of all, unless the Prelates with their dependancies
be removed out of England, and also they and their practices, who, as we, under
your Honors favor, do verily believe and conceive, have occasioned the
Quarrel.

All which we humbly refer to the consideration of this Honorable Assembly,
desiring the Lord of Heaven to direct you in the right way to redress all
these evils.

FINIS.
The Resolution of the House of Commons touching the six Demands of the Scots,
for restitution of their Losses and Damages.
THis House thinks fit that a friendly Assistance and relief be given toward
supply of the losses and necessities of the Scots, and in due time this House
will take consideration both of the manner and measure of it.

The Scottish Commissioners Answer to the resolution of the Parliament.
AS we do with all thankfulness receive the friendly and kindly resolution
of the Parliament concerning our Demands, we do therein acknowledge your
Lordships noble dealing, for which we may assure that the whole Kingdom of
Scotland will at all occasions express themselves on all respect and
kindness; so do we entreat your Lordships to present unto the Parliament, our
earnest desire, that they may be pleased, howsoever their conveniencie may
serve to consider of the proportion, wishing still that as we expect from our
friends the testimonies of their kindness and friendly Assistance, so the
Justice of the Parliament may be declared in making the burden more sensible
to the Prelates and Papists our Enemies, and Authors of all our evils, then to
others, who never have wronged us, which will not only give unto us, and the
whole Kingdom of Scotland the greater satisfaction, but will also (as we can
conceive) conduce much to the honor of the Kings Majesty, and Parliament. We
do also expect that your Lordships will be pleased to report unto us the
Answer of the Parliament, that we may in this as in the former Articles give
Account to those who sent us.

The Peers Demands upon the aforesaid Answer.
We desire to understand since (as we conceive) the particulars are like to
require much time, whether we may not from you let the Parliament know, that
whilst they are debating of the proportion, and the ways how they find
assistance may be raised, you will proceed to the agreeing to the Articles of a
firm and durable peace, that thereby both time may be saved, and both sides
proceed mutually with the more cheerfulness and alacrity.

The Scottish Commissioners Answer to the Peers Demands.
AS we desire a firm Peace, so is it our desire that this Peace may be with
all mutual Alacrity speedily concluded; and therefore let us entreat you all to
show the Parliament from us, that how soon they shall be pleased to make the
proportion known to us, that we may satisfy the expectation of those who
have instructed us, which we do conceive may be done in a short time, since
they are already acquainted with all the particulars of our Demands, we shall
stay no longer upon the manner and ways of raising the assistance, which may
require a longer time, and yet we trust it will be with such conveniencie as
may serve for our two months relief, but remitting the manner and ways to
the opportunity of the Parliament, shall most willingly proceed to the
considerations of the following Articles, especially to that which we most of
all desire, a firm and settled Peace.

26. Ian. 1640.
FINIS.
Articles of the House of Commons in Parliament, against Secretary WINDEBANKE.
INprimis, Seventy four Letters of grace to Recusants, within this four
years, signed with Secretary Windebankes own hand.

2 Sixty four Priests in the Gate House, within this four years discharged,
for the most part, by Secretary Windebanke.

3 Twenty nine discharged by a verbal warrant of Secretary Windebanke.

4 A warrant to protect one Muffon, a condemned Priest, and all the houses he
frequented.

5 One committed by the Kings own hand, and discharged by Secretary
Windebanke, without signification of the Kings pleasure therein.

6 A Petition of Saint Giles in the Fields, near London, to the King, of the
increase of Popery in their Parish, wherein twenty one persons were seduced and
turned by two Priests, the which Priests were both discharged by Secretary
Windebanke.

Die Lunae 21. Decembris. 1640.
A Speech made by John Lord Finch, Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England,
in the Commons house of Parliament.
Master Speaker.
I Do first present my most humble thanks to this Honorable Assembly, for this
favor vouchsafed me, in granting me admittance to their presence, and do
humbly beseech them to believe it is no desire to preserve my self or my
fortune, but to deserve the good opinions of those that have drawn me hither.

I do profess in the presence of him that knows all hearts, that I had
rather go from door to door, and crave Da obulum Belizario, etc. with the good
opinion of this Assembly, then live and enjoy all the honors and fortunes I am
capable of.

I do not come hither with an intention to justify my words, my actions, or
my opinions; but to make a plain and clear narration for my self, and then
humbly to submit to the wisdom and justice of this House my self, and all
that concerns me.

I do well understand (Master Speaker) with what disadvantage any man can
speak in his own cause, and if I could have told how to have transmitted my
thoughts and actions by a clearer representation of another (I do so much
defy my own judgment in working, and my ways in expressing) that I should
have been a most humble suitor, another might have done it. But this House will
not take words, but with clear and ingennous dealing, and therefore I shall
beseech them to think I come not hither with a set or studied Speech, I come to
speak my heart, and to speak it clearly and plainly, and then leave it to
your clemency and Justice, and I hope if any thing shall slip from me, to work
contrary to my meaning, or intention, disorderly or ill placed, you will be
pleased to make a favorable construction, and leave me the liberty of
explanation, if there shall be any, but I hope there shall be no cause for it.

I hope for my affection in Religion no man doubts me, what my education,
what and under whom for many years, is well known; I lived near 30 years in
the Society of Grayes Inn: and if one that was a reverend Preacher in my time
(Doctor Sibbs) were now alive, he were able to give testimony to this House,
that when a party ill affected in Religion sought to weary him, and tyer him
out, he had his chiefest encouragement from me.

I have now (Master Speaker) been 15 years of the Kings Council, from the
first hour to this minute, no man is able to say that ever I was Author,
Advisor, or Consentor to any project.

It pleased the King (my gracious Master) after I had served him diverse years
to prefer me to two places; to be chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and
then Keeper of his great Seal, I say it in the presence of God, I was so far
from the thought of the one, and from the ambition of the other, that if my
Master his grace and goodness had not been, I had never enjoyed those Honors.

I cannot tell (Master Speaker) nor I do not know what particulars there are
that may draw me into your disfavour or ill opinion, and therefore I shall come
very weakly armed, yet to those that either in my own knowledge, or by such
knowledge as is given me, and not from any in this House, I shall speak
somewhat, that I hope being truth, and accompanied with clearenesse and
ingenuity, will at last procure some allay of that ill opinion which may
perhaps be conceived of me.

Master Speaker, I had once the Honor to sit in the place that you do: from
the first time I came thither, to the unfortunate time, I do appeal to all
that were here then, if I served you not with candor. Ill office I never did to
any of the House, good offices I have witnesses enough I did many, I was so
happy that upon an occasion which once happened, I received an expression and
testimony of the good affection of this House toward me.

For the last unhappy day I had a great share in the unhappiness and sorrow of
it. I hope there are enough do remember, no man within the walls of this House
did express more symptoms of sorrow, grief, and distraction then I did.

After an adjournment for two or three days, it pleased his Majesty to send
for me, to let me know that he could not so resolve of things as he desired,
and therefore was desirous that there might be an adjournment for some few
days more. I protest I did not then discern in his Majesty, and I believe it
was not in his thoughts to think of the dissolving of this Assembly, but was
pleased in the first place to give me a command to deliver his pleasure to the
House for an adjournment for some few days, till the Monday following, as I
remember, and commanded me withal to deliver his pleasure, that there should
be no further speeches, but forth with upon the delivery of the Message come
and wait upon him: he likewise commanded me if questions were offered to be
put, upon my Allegiance I should not dare to do it, how much I did then in
all humbleness reason with his Majesty, is not for me here to speak; only
thus much let me say, I was no Author of any counsel in it, I was only a
person in receiving commission. I speak not this as any thing I now produce or
do invent, or take up for my own excuse, but that Which is known to diverse,
and some Honorable persons in this house to be most true. All that I will say
for that is humbly to beseech you all to consider, That if it had been any
man's cause as it was mine, between the displeasure of a gracious King, and the
ill opinion of an Honorable Assembly. I beseech you lay all together, lay my
first actions and behavior with the last, I shall submit to your Honorable
and favorable constructions.

For the Shipping business, my opinion of that cause has layne heavy upon me,
I shall clearly and truly present unto you what every thing is, with this
protestation, that if in reckoning up my own opinion what I was of, or what I
delivered, any thing of it be displeasing, or contrary to the opinion of this
House, that I am far from justifying of it, but submit that and all other my
actions to your wisdoms and goodness.

Master Speaker, the first Writs that were sent out about Shipping business, I
had no more knowledge of it, and was as ignorant as any one Member of this
House, or any man in the Kingdom. I was never the Author nor Advisor of it,
and will boldly say from the first to this hour, I did never advise nor
counsel the setting forth of any Ship-writs in my life.

Master Speaker, it is true that I was made chief Justice of the Common Pleas
some four days before the Ship-writs went out to the Ports and Maritine
places, as I do remember the 20 of October 1634. they do bear Test, and I
was sworn Justice the 16 of October, so as they went out in that time, but
without my knowledge or privity, the God of heaven knows this to be true.

Master Speaker, afterward his Majesty was pleased to command my Lord chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, that then was, Sir Thomas Richardson, and chief
Baron of the Exchequer that now is, and my self then chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, to take into consideration the Presidents then brought unto us,
which we did, and after returned to his Majesty what we had found out of those
Presidents.

It is true, that afterward his Majesty did take into consideration, that if
the whole Kingdom were concerned, that it was not reason to lay the whole
burden upon the Cinque Ports and Maritine Towns.

Thereupon, upon what ground his Majesty took that into his consideration, I
do confess I do know nothing of it.

His Majesty did command my Lord chief Justice that now is, my Lord chief
Baron, and my self, to return our opinions; whether, when the whole Kingdom
is in danger, and the Kingdom in general is concerned, it be not according to
Law and reason, that the whole Kingdom, and his Majesty, and all interessed
therein, should join in defending and preserving thereof.

This was in time, about one 1634.

In Michaelmas Term following, his Majesty commanded ^e to go to all the
Judges, and require their opinions in particular.

He commanded me to do it to every one, and to charge them upon their duty
and allegiance, to keepe^t secret.

Master Speaker, it was never intended by his Majesty (so professed by him) at
that time, and so declared to all the Judges, that it was not required by him,
to be such a binding opinion to the Subject, as to hinder him from calling it
in question, nor to be binding to themselves, but that upon better reason, and
advise they may alter it; but desired their opinions, for his own private
reason.

I know very well, that extrajudiciall opinions of Judges ought not to be
binding.

But I did think, and speak my heart and conscience freely; my self, and the
rest of the Judges being sworn, and by our Oaths tied to counsel the King
when he should require advise of us, that we were bound by our oaths and duties
to return our opinions.

I did obey his Majesty's command, and do here before the God of heaven avow
it.

I did never use the least promise of preferment or reward to any, nor did use
the least menacy; I did leave it freely to their own consciences and liberty;
for I was left the liberty of my own by his Majesty, and had reason to leave
them the liberty of their own consciences.

And I beseech you be pleased to have some belief, that I would not say this,
but that I know the God of heaven will make it appear; and I beseech you that
extravagant speeches may not move against that which is a positive and clear
truth.

Master Speaker, in the discourse of this (as is between Judges, some small
discourses sometimes) yet never any cause wherein any Judges conferred, that
were so little conference as between me and them.

Master Speaker, against a Negative, I can say nothing, but I shall affirm
nothing unto you, but by the grace of God, as I affirm it to be true, so I
make no doubt of making it appear to be so.

This opinion was subscribed without Solicitation, there was not any man of us
did make any doubt of subscribing our opinion, but two, Master Justice Hutton,
and Master Justice Crook.

Master Justice Crook made not a scruple of the thing, but of the
introduction, for it was thus:

That whereas the Ports and the Maritine Towns were concerned; there according
to the Presidents in former times, the charge lay on them.

So when the Kingdom was in danger, of which his Majesty was the sole Judge;
whether it was not agreeable to Law and reason, the whole Kingdom to bear the
charge;

I left this case with Judge Crook.

The next Term I spoke with him, he could give me no resolution, because he
had not seen the Writs in former times, but did give his opinion, that when
the whole Kings dome was in danger, they of the defense ought to be borne by
all.

So of that opinion of his, there was no need of a Solicitation.

I speak no more here, than I did openly in my argument in the Chequer Chamber.

This is the naked truth: for Master Justice Hutton, he did never subscribe at
all.

I will only say this, that I was so far from pressing him to give his
opinion, because he did ask time to consider of it, that I will boldly say, and
make it good, that when his Majesty would have had him sometimes sent for, to
give his opinion, I beseeched his Majesty to leave him to himself and his
conscience; and that was the ill office I did.

The Judges did subscribe in November or December, 1635.

I had no conference (nor truly I think) by accident any discourse with any of
the Judges touching their opinions; for till February 1636, there was no speech
of it, for when they had delivered their opinions, I did return according to
my duty to my Master the King, and delivered them to him: in whose custody they
be in.

In February 1636, upon a command that came from his Majesty, by one of the
then Secretaries of State, the Judges all assembled in Grayes-Inn, we did then
fall into a debate of the case then sent unto us, and we did then return our
opinion unto his Majesty; there was then much discourse and great debate about
it.

Mine opinion and conscience at that time was agreeable to that opinion I then
delivered.

I did use the best arguments I could, for the maintenance of my opinion; and
that was all I did.

It is true that then at that time, Master Justice Hutton, and Master Justice
Crook did not differ in the maine point, which was this;

When the Kingdom was in danger, the charge ought to be borne by the whole
Kingdom.

But in this point, whether the King was the sole Judge of the danger? they
differed.

So as there was between the first subscription, and this debate, and
consultation, some 15 months difference.

It is true, that all of them did then subscribe, both Justice Hutton, and
Justice Crook, which was returned to his Majesty, and after published by my
Lord Keeper (my predecessor) in the Star Chamber.

For the manner of publishing it I will say nothing, but leave it to those,
whose memories will call to mind what was then done.

The reason of the subscription of Justice Hutton, and Justice Crook, (though
they differed in opinion) grew from this that was told them, from the rest of
the Judges,

That where the greater number did agree in their vote, the rest were involved
and included.

And now I have faithfully delivered, what I did in that business, till I came
(which was afterward) to my argument in the Exchequer Chamber, for the
question was, A scire facias issued out of the Exchequer, in that case of
Master Hampdens; of which I can say nothing, for it was there begun, and
afterward rejourned, to have advice of all the Judges.

Master Speaker, among the rest (according to my duty) I argued the case.

I shall not trouble you, to tell you what my argument was, I presume there are
Copies enough of it; only I will tell you there are four things, very
briefly, what I then declared.

First, concerning the matter of danger, and necessity of the whole Kingdom.

I profess that there was never a Judge in the Kingdom did deliver an
opinion, but that it must be in a case of apparent danger.

When we came to an argument of the case, it was not upon a matter or issue,
but it was upon a demurrer.

Whether the danger was sufficiently admitted in pleading, and therefore was
not the thing that was in dispute, that was the first degree and step that led
unto it.

I did deliver my self as free and as clear as any man did, that the King
ought to govern by the positive Laws of the Kingdom* that he could not
alter nor change, nor innovate in matters of Law, but by common consent in
Parliament.

I did further deliver, that if this were used to make a further revenue or
benefit to the King, or in any other way but in case of necessity, and for the
preservation of the Kingdom, The judgment did warrant no such thing:

My opinion in this business, I did in my conclusion of my argument submit to
the judgment of this House.

I never delivered my opinion, that money ought to be raised, but Ships provided
for the defense of this Kingdom, and in that the Writ was performed.

And that the charge ought not to be in any case, but where the whole Kingdom
was in danger.

And Master Justice Hutton, and Master Justice Crook, were of the same opinion
with me.

I do humbly submit, having related unto you my whole carriage in this
business, humbly submitting my self to your grave and favorable censures,
beseeching you not to think that I delivered these things with the least
intention to subvert or subject the common Law of the Kingdom, or to bring in,
or to introduce any new way of government, it has bin far from my thoughts,
as any thing under the heavens.

Master Speaker, I have heard too that there has bin some ill opinion
conceived of me about Forest business, which was a thing far out of the way
of my study, as any thing I know toward the Law.

But it pleased his Majesty, in the sickness of Master Noy, to give some short
warning to prepare my self for that employment.

When I came there, I did both the King and Commonwealth acceptable service,
for I did and dare be bold to say, with extreme danger to my self and
fortune, (some do understand my meaning herein) run through that business,
and left the Forest as much as was there.

A thing in my judgment considerable for the advantage of the Commonwealth,
as could be undertaken.

When I went down about that employment, I satisfied my self about the matter
of perambulation.

There were great difficulties of opinions, what perambulation was.

I did arm my self as well as I could, before I did any thing in it,

I did acquaint those that were then Judges, in the presence of the noble
Lords, with such objections as I thought it my duty to offer unto them.

If they thought they were not objections of such weight, as were fit to stir
them, I would not do the King that disservice.

They thought the objections had such answers as might well induce the like
upon a conference with the whole Country, admitting me to come and confer
with them, the Country did unanimously subscribe.

It fell out afterward, that the King commanded me, and all this before I was
chief Justice, to go into Essex, and did then tell me he had been informed,
that the bounds of the Forest were narrower, then in truth they ought to be;
and I did according to his command.

I will here profess that which is known to many, I had no thought or
intention of enlarging the bounds of the Forest, further then H. and that part
about it, for which there was a perambulation about 26 Edward 4.

I desired the Country to confer with me about it, if they were pleased to do
it; and then according to my duty, I did produce those Records which I thought
fit for his Majesty's service, leaving them to discharge themselves as by Law
and Justice they might do.

I did never in the least kind, go about to overthrow the charter of the
Forest.

And did publish and maintain Charta de Foresta, as a sacred thing, and no man
to violate it, and ought to be preserved for the King and Commonwealth.

I do in this humbly submit, and what I have done, to the goodness and
Justice of this House.

FINIS.
Mr. Herbotle Grimstones second Speech in Parliament the 18. of December. 1640.
Master Speaker.
THere has been presented to the house a most faithful and exact report of
the conference we had with the Lords yesterday, together with the opinion of
the Committees that we employed in the service, that they conceaved it fit,
that the Archbishop of Canterbury should be sequestered, and I must second the
motion. And with the favor of this House, I shall be bold to offer my reasons,
why I conceive it more necessary we should proceed a little further then the
desire of a bare sequestration only.

Master Speaker, long Introductions are not suitable to wa^ghty businesses: we
are now fallen upon the great man, the Archbishop of Canterbury, look upon him
as he is in highness, and he is the Stye of all pestilentiall filth that has
infected the State and Government of this Common wealth: Look upon him in his
dependances, and he is the man, the only man that has raised and advanced all
those, that together with himself have been the Authors and Causers of all
our ruins, miseries, and calamities we row groan under. Who is it but he
only that has brought the Earl of Strafford to all his great places and
employments; a fit spirit and instrument to act and execute all his wicked and
bloody Designs in these Kingdoms.

Who is it but he only that brought in Secretary Windibank into this place of
service of trust, the very Broker and Pander to the Whore of Babylon.

Who is it Master Speaker, but he only that has advanced all our Popish
Bishops, I shall name but some of them, Bishop Manering, the Bishop of Bath and
Wells, the Bishop of Oxford, and Bishop Wren, the least of all these birds, but
one of the most unclean ones. These are the men that should have fed Christ's
Flock, but they are the Wolfes that have devoured them; the Sheep should have
fed upon the Mountains, but the Mountains have eaten up the Sheep. It was
the happiness of our Church, when the Zeal of Gods house eat up the Bishops,
glorious and brave Martyrs, that went to the Stake in defense of the Protestant
Religion: but the Zeal of the Bishops has been only to persecute and eat up
the Church.

Who is it Master Speaker but this great Archbishop of Canterbury, that has
sitten at the helm, to steer and to manage all the projects that have been
set on foot in this Kingdom this ten years last past: and rather then he
would stand out, he has most unworthily trucked and chafered in the meanest of
them; as for instance, that of Tobacco, wherein thousands of poor people have
been stripped and turned out of their Trades, for which they have served as
Apprentizes: we all know he was the Compounder and Contracter with them for
the Licenses, putting them to pay Fines, and a fee Farm rent to use their
Trade certainly. Master Speaker, he might have spent his time much better, and
more for his Grace in the Pulpit, then thus sherking and raking in the
Tobacco-shops. Master Speaker, we all know what he has been charged withal
here in this house, crimes of a dangerous, consequence, and of a transcendent
nature, no less then the subversion of the Government of this Kingdom, and
the alteration of the Protestant Religion: and this is not upon bare
information only, but much of it is come before us already upon clear and
minifest proofs, and there is scarce any grievance or complaint come before us
in this Place, wherein we do not find him intermentioned, and as it were
twisted into it, like a busy angry Waspe, his sting is in the tail of every
thing, we have likewise this day heard the report of the conference yesterday,
and in it the accusation which the Scottish Nation has charged him withal,
and we do all know he is guilty of the same, if not more herein this Kingdom.

Master Speaker, he has been the great and common enemy of all goodness,
and good men, and it is not safe that such a Viper should be near his
Majesty's person, to distill his poison into his sacred ears, nor is it safe
for the Commonwealth, that he sit in so eminent a place of government being
thus accused; we know what we did in the Earl of Straffords case: this man is
the corrupt fountain that has infected all the streams, and till the
Fountain be purged, we can never expect or hope to have clear channels, I
shall be therefore bold to offer my opinion, and if Jerre, it is the error of
my judgment, and not my want of zeal and affection to the public good. I
conceive it is most necessary and fit, that we should now take up a resolution
to do somewhat, to strike while the iron is hot, and to go up to the Lords in
the names of the Commons of this House, and in the names of the Commons of
England, and to accuse him of high Treason, and to desire their Lordships his
person may be sequested, and that in convenient time we may bring up his
charge.

FINIS.
A Message sent from the Queens Majesty to the House of Commons by Mr.
Comptroller. 5o. Febr. 1640.
THat her Majesty has been ready to use her best endeavors for the removing
of all misunderstanding between the King and people. That at the request of the
Lords, who petitioned the King for a Parliament, her Majesty at that time writ
effectually to the King, and sent a Gentleman expressly to persuade the King to
the holding of a Parliament.

That she has since been most willing to do all good Offices between the
King and his People, which is not unknown to diverse of the Lords, and so shall
ever continue to do, as judging it the only way of happiness to the King,
her self, and Kingdom,

That all things be justly settled between the King and his people, and all
cause of misunderstanding taken away and removed.

That her Majesty having taken a knowledge, that having one sent to her from
the Pope, is distasteful to this Kingdom, She is desirous to give satisfaction
to the Parliament, which is convenient time she will do, and remove him out
of the Kingdom.

That understanding likewise that Exception had been taken to the great resort
to the Chapel of Denmark House, she will be careful not to exceed that
which is convenient and necessary for the Exercise of her Religion.

She further takes notice, that the Parliament is not satisfied with the
manner of raising money, for the assistance of the King in his Journey to the
North, in the year 1639, at her entreaty from the Catholics. She was moved
thereunto merely out of her dear and tender affection to the King, and of the
Example of other his Majesty's Subjects, She seeing the like forwardness, she
could not but express her forwardness to the assistance of the King.

If any thing be illegal, she was ignorant of the Law, and was carried
therein only out of a great desire to be assisting to the King in so pressing
an occasion, but promises to be more cautious hereafter, not to do any thing,
but may stand with the established Laws of the Kingdom.

Her Majesty being desirous to employ her whole power to unite the King and
people, desires the Parliament to look forwards, and pass by such mistakes
and errors of her Servants, as may be formerly committed. And this your respect
she promises, shall be repayed with all the good Offices she can do to the
House, which you shall find with real effects, as often as there shall be
occasion.

FINIS.
The Report of the Kings Message by the Lords to the House of Commons. January
25. 1640.
THat the occasion of his Majesty's taking knowledge of the Conviction of John
Goodman the Priest lately reprived, was upon the constant order that has been
taken for diverse years, that the Recorder has at the end of every Sessions
attended his Majesty with the names of the persons convicted, with an
expression of their offenses, to the end that his Majesty might be truly
informed of the Natures of their Crimes, and consequently not to be enduced by
information, to reprive such as were fit for grace and mercy: And thereupon
that he was lately Condemned for being in order of a Priest merely, and was
acquitted of the Charge of perverting the Kings people in their belief, and had
never been Condemned or Banished before, His Majesty is tender in matter of
blood in Cases of this nature, In which Queen Elizabeth and King James have
been often merciful: but to secure his people that this man shall do no more
hurt, He is willing that he be imprisoned or banished as their Lordships shall
advise. And if he return into the Kingdom, to be put to Execution without
delay. And He will take such fit course for the expulsion of other Priests and
Jesuits, as He shall be councelled unto by your Lordships, And that He does
not intend by this particular Mercy, to lessen the force of the Laws.

FINIS.
SIR THOMAS ROE his Speech in Parliament, 1640.
IT is a general opinion that the trade of England was never greater; and it
may be true, that if it be so, yet it will not absolutely conclude that the
Kingdom does increase in riches: for the Trade may by very abundant, and yet,
by consumption and importance of more then is expected, the stock may waste.

The Balance would be a true solution of the Question, if it could be rightly
had: but by reason it must be made up by a Medium of the Books of Rates, it
will be very uncertain.

Therefore we must seek another rule that is more sensible, upon which we may
all judge, and that may be by the plenty or scarcity of money; for it is a true
rule, If money increase, the Kingdom does gain by Trade; if it be scarce, it
loses.

Let us therefore consider, first, whether our Gold and Silver be not
decreased, and then by what means it is drayned, and lastly, how it may be
prevented, and what Remedies are appliable to effect it.

It is out of doubt our Gold is gone to travail without License, that is
visible beyond Seas, and every receiver of sums of money must find it
privately: and I fear the same of Silver; for, observing the species of late
Coining, many half Crowns were stamped which are no more to be seen; and by
this measure I conclude the Kingdom grows poor.

The causes of this decay of Money may be many: It may be stolen out for
profit, going much higher beyond Seas, especially in France and Holland.

Much has been drawn away by the Stranger upon fears of our Troubles, of
which I have experience by Exchanges, and Exchanges are the great mystery,
especially such as are used as a Trade, and governed by Bankers, who make many
returns in a year, and gain by every one more then the interest of a year;
and the greatest danger to a State is, when money is made Merchandise, which
should be but the measure thereof.

And here I will propose a Problem, Whether it were profitable to a Kingdom
or not, that the Stranger for many years had a great stock here at interest,
and still has some. I confess it has supplied the necessities of Merchants,
and helped to drive Trade: But my Quaere is this, Suppose the first principal
were truly brought in by the Stranger, yet, doubling every ten years, what
becomes of the increase? Have they not lived by our Trade and the
Merchant-adventurers, and soaked the Kingdom of as many times principal as
they have practiced this Usury many times ten years, and in the end drawn or
carried all away? This is a point to a State very considerable.

Much Coin has been drawn away without doubt by the French, who have
brought in Wares of little bulk, perhaps without custom, but of dear price;
and having turned them into Gold, have returned without investing any part
thereof; and such petty Merchants cannot be reached by the Statute of
employments.

Another cause of scarcity of Coin may be the over strict rule of the
uncurrentnesse of any good Coin, and that it must be sold here as bullion: in
that case what Stranger will bring in money? Whereas, if every good species
were current according to his allay and weight in proportion to our Coin, or
rather a little higher, it would draw (namely) money by degrees into England,
as lower grounds do water from higher, though they see not the Channels. And
we see France, Holland, and Germany, admit all good Coins, though foreign,
for and above their intrinsique value.

But I will end this search by proposing some general Remedies, for I do now
but make Essays and give occasion to more subtle and particular disquisition.

1. To the first leake of steading away Coin, I would make it felony by an
Act: for if a man may justly suffer death for robbing of a private man, I see
no injustice nor cruelty to inflict the same punishment upon him that robs a
Kingdom.

2. That the neighbor Princes and States do cry up our money, and so entice
it from us, This in my judgment ought to be provided for by our Treaties,
which was the old way, especially of Commerce, by agreeing and publishing of
Placarts according to a true Par: For that Prince that will make a treaty of
Commerce, does it for the use of the commodity; which certainly I would deny
any Prince that would not consent to keep moneys even by their true values, at
least, that would set a higher price upon our money then the King has done:
And if our Coin did either keep beyond the Sear the English value, or were
bullion and uncurrent, the stranger should have as little of our money, as we
have of theirs.

How to recover the strangers money, drawn away since our troubles, is a hard
endeavor, and can no ways be brought to pass but by peace and Trade: and the
resolution of this will fall into the general remedy which I shall propose.

The pedling French Trade must be met with by diligent search at the landing
of these Creamers, what they bring in, and by suffering none of them to pass
any goods by private Warrants: but that according as they shall be valued, they
give bond to invest it in English Commodity, natural, or naturalized, and
that with surety: Nay in this Case not to allow them exchange by bills; for it
will not hurt the Commonwealth if by any rigor they were beaten out of their
private toyish traffic.

I shall not doubt to offend any but the Mint, which may be recompensed to his
Majesty in his customs, if money be plentiful; for all goods will follow
money. If I did propose the currentnesse of all goods, and great species of
foreign Coins, for their true intrinsique value, according to the pay with
ours, and if I say a little higher, according to occasions, keeping our own
Coin pure and constant to be cried down as much under according to
occasions, I think it will be a policy both reasonable and profitable, by
experience tried in other States.

But leaving these Empiricall practices, I come now to the great and infallible
Rule and Remedy, which is, in plain English, to settle and assure the ground
of Trade upon staple Commodities; then, like the Lady of Whitsontide to her
Pipe, money will dance after that; for as Merchandise does follow money, so
does money Commodity.

I said at first, it was a general opinion, that Trade never flourished more
then now, and it may be so; but we must consider this be not accidental and
changeable, and depending more upon the iniquity or misery of the times, then
upon our own Foundation and industry; and if that be so, then it is no suit
ground for a state to rely upon; for if the causes change, the effects will
follow.

Now it is true, that our great Trade depends upon the troubles of our
Neighbors, and we enjoy almost the Trade of Christendom; but if a peace
happen betwixt France, Spain, and the united Provinces, all these will share
what we now possess alone, and therefore we must provide for that day; for
nothing stands secure but upon his own foundation.

To make then our own Trade secure, we must consider our own staple
commodities* whereof Wool is the chiefest, and seek the way to both, to keep
up the price at home, and the estimation of all commodity made of that, and to
be vented abroad.

Some other helps we have, as Tynne Lead, and such like; but I dare
confidently affirm, That nothing exported of our own growth has balanced
our Riotous consumption at home, but those foreign commodities, which I call
naturalized, that is, that surplus of our East India Trade, which being brought
home in greater quantity then are spent within the Kingdom, are exported
again, and become in value and use as natural commodities and therefore by the
way, I hold it absolutely necessary to maintain that Trade by a Regulation
with the Dutch; of which more reason shall be given, when that particular shall
be taken into consideration.

We have yet another great help which is our own, and wants only our
industry to gather the harvest, which is ou^ Fishing and erecting of Bustes,
both for the enriching of our Kingdom, and the breeding of Mariners; and this
by private industry (though to private less) is beaten out ready, and shall
be offered to the Commonwealth, if they please to accept of it: and to give
you one only encouragement, I do avow that before the Dutch were lately
interrupted by the Dunkerks, by their industry, and our fish, they made as
great Returns between Dansick and Naples as the value of our Cloth, which is
one million yearly: and this in a due place I desire should have his due
weight and consideration.

We have one help more, if we knew how to use it, that is, by the new drained
Lands in the Fens, most fit for Flax and Hemp, to make all sorts of Linen for
the body, for the house, and sails for ships, that is a Dutch and French
Trade; but in Holland one Acre of Ground is rented at three pounds, which if
the Hollanders may have in the Fens for 10. s. or 12. s. it will be easy to
draw the manufacture into England, which will set infinite people aworke, and
we may be able to serve other Nations with that which we buy dear from them,
and then the state and Kingdom will be happy and rich, when the Kings customs
shall depend upon commodities exported, and those able to return all things
which we want; and then our money must stay within our Kingdom, and all the
trade return in money. To encourage you to this, I give you one Example,

That, if the several sorts of Callicoes, made of Cotton-Woolls in the Moguls
and Dans Dominions, does cloathe from head to foot all Asia, a part of Europe,
Egypt, much of Africa, and the Eastern Islands as far as Sumatra, which
makes that Prince without Mines the richest Prince in the world; by his
Majesty's Grace and Privileges granted to the Dutch, I am confident we may
make an undersell in all Linen cloth in all the Nations in Europe.

But I have now wandered far from my Theme, which was the decay of Trade and of
Woollen commodity.

I must first therefore present to your consideration the causes thereof in my
observations; whereof some are internal, and some external.

The internal have proceeded from her own false making, as stretching, and
such like practices, whereby indeed our Cloth is discredited: I speak by
experience, from Dansick and Holland, Northward, to Constantinople; as I will
instance in due time.

This false Lucre of our own, and the interruption in the dying and dressing
(projected and not overcome) gave the first wound, though, could it have been
compassed, it had doubled the value of our Commodity.

This has caused the Dutch, Silesians and Venetians to attempt the making of
Cloth, and now, by experience (as I am informed) the half is not vented, that
was in the former Age.

Another internal cause has risen from such Impositions, as has made our
cloth too dear abroad, and consequently taught others to provide for
themselves.

Another internal cause has sprung from pressaries upon tender Consciences,
that many of our Clothiers and others have forsaken the Kingdom, and carried
their Arts with them, to the unexpressible detriment of the Commonwealth.

The external causes have been the want of perfection, and countenance to our
Merchants established abroad in Factories by the State and by the Treaties,
whereby the Capitulations have not been kept nor assured unto them, neither in
Prussia, nor in the Sound, nor Hamburgh, nor Holland, nor in the East: And this
I dare say, that Laban never changed Jacobs wages, so often as the Hollanders
have forced our Merchants to change their residences, and the very course of
this Trade by Laws and Tricks for their own advantage; of which the
Merchant-adventurers will more fully inform you.

Another external cause is lamentable, Report, the increase of the Pirates,
and the insecurity of the Mediterranean Seas; whereby Bristow and the Western
Ports, that cannot have so great shipping as London, are beaten out of Trade
and fishing: and if once those Thieves shall find the way to Bank and
newfound Land, they will undo the West parts of England.

I will trouble you with a Consideration very considerable in our Government,
Whether indeed London does not monopolize all Trade. In my opinion it is no
good state of a body to have a fat Head, thin Guts, and lean Members.

But to bring something before you of Remedy, I say thus for my first ground,
That if our Cloth be not vented as in former years, let us embrace some other
way to spend and vent our Wools. Cloth is a heavy and hot wearing, and serves
but one cold corner of the World: But if we embrace the new Draperies, and
encourage the Wallons and others, by Privileges and Naturalizations, we shall
employ all the wool we have, set more people a work then by Cloth, and a
pound of wool in those stuffes true made, will out-sell two pounds in Cloth.
And thus we may supply France, Italy, Spain, Barbary, and some parts of Asia,
by such light and fine stuffes as will fit those warmen Regions, and et have
sufficient for the cold Clymates to be spent and adventured in true made Cloth,
by the reputation both of our Nation and commodity.

But in this course, I must observe, that these strangers so fit to be
nourished, and being Protestants, may have privileges to use their own rights
in Religion, so as they be not scandalous, as the Dutch and French had granted
unto them by Queen Elizabeth. And certainly the settling of Religion secure in
England, the fear whereof made many weak minds to waver and abandon this
Country, is, and will be a great means to resettle both the great and lesser
manufactures of woollen commodities.

For the external causes, we must fly to the Sanctuary of his Majesty's
gracious goodness and protection, who, I am confident, when the whole
business shall be prepared for him, and that we have showed him our duty and
love and settled his customs in such a bountiful way as he may reap his part
of the fruit of Trade; I am confident, I say, that he will vouchsafe you all
favor fit to be conferred upon good Subjects, and not only protect you abroad
by his forces and authority, and by treaties with his neighbors, but by
increasing the privileges of Merchants at home, and confirming all their
Charters; the breach whereof has been a great discouragement unto them, and
without which duly observed, they cannot regulate their Trade.

There are some particulars in the Spanish Trade, perhaps worthy of
animadversion, as under-selling good commodity to make money, or barter for
Tobacco, to the imbasement of our own Staple for Smoke, which in a due place
ought to be taken into Regulation.

Another consideration for a ground for Trade, ought to be the nature of it,
with whom, and for what we trade, and which Trade is more principally to be
nourished, which, out of doubt, are the Northern Trades, which are the root of
all other, because the materials brought from those parts, as from Wx, Muscove,
Norway, Prussia, and Livonia, are fundamental and of absolute necessity; for
from these Trades we get the materials of Shipping, as Pitch, Tar, Cordage,
Masts, and such like, which enable us to all the Southern Trades of
themselves, of less use, being only Wine, Fruit, Oranges and Curiosities for
Sauces or effeminacy; but by these, we sail to the East Indies, and may erect
a Company of the West Indies, for the golden fleece, which shall be prepared
for you, whenever you are ready for so great a Consultation.

The right way to nourish these North^^^e Trades, is by his Majesty's favor to
press the King of Denmark to Justice, not to come as his intolerable. Taxes
newly imposed upon Trade in the passage of the Sound; in Examples whereof, the
Elector of Brandenburgh joining with the King of Poland, has likewise more
then trebled the ancient and capitulated Duties; which if that they shall
continue, I pronounce all the Commerce of the Baltique Sea so over-burthened,
That the East-land Company cannot subsist, nor without them and the Muscovie
Company the Navigation, but that the materials for shipping will be doubled,
which will eat out all Trades. I have given you but Essays, and struck little
sparks of fire before you. My intention is but to provoke the wit and ability
of others; I have drawn you a Map, wherein you cannot see things clearly and
distinctly, only I introduce matter before you: and now I have done, when I
have showed you the way how to enlarge and bring every particular thing into
debate.

To which end, my motion and desire is this, That we may send to every several
Company of Merchants trading in Companies, and under Government and
Privileges, and to ask of them, what is their Grievances in their general
Trade (not to rake into private Complaints, what are the causes of decay or
abuses in their Trades, and of the want of money, which is visible and of the
great losses, both to the Kingdom and to every particular, by the late high
exchanges; and to desire every one of these Companies to set down their
judgment in writing to the Committee by a day appointed; and having from them
all the general state of the complaints severally, we shall make some
judgments of these relations one to another this done I desire to require all
the same several Companies, upon their own papers, to propose to us in
writing the Remedies appliable in their judgment; which materials having all
together, and comparing one with another we shall discover that truth which we
seek; that is, whether Trade and Money decay or not, and how to remedy it.

But I have one request more and so I will ease you of my loss of your time:
That when from all these Merchants we shall have before us so much matter and
without such variety and perhaps not without private and partial ends, that
then you will give me leave to represent to you the names of some general and
others dis-interessed and well experienced in many particulars, who may assist
our judgments in all the premises, particularly in moneys and exchanges, and
give us great light to prepare our result and resolution to be by the whole
House of Commons represented to his Majesty, and for expedition, that a
sub-Committee, may be named to direct this Information from the Merchants.

THE LORD FAUKLAND His SPEECH, Concerning EPISCOPACY.
MASTER SPEAKER, he is a great stranger in Israel who knows not that this
Kingdom has long labored under many and great oppressions, both in religion
and liberty: and his acquaintance here is not great, or his ingenuity less,
who does not both know and acknowledge that a great, if not a principal, cause
of both these have been some Bishops and their adherents.

Master Speaker, a little search will serve to find them to have been the
destruction of unity; under pretense of uniformity, to have brought in
superstition and scandal; under the titles of reverence and decency, to have
defiled our Church; by adorning our Churches, to have slackned the strictness
of that union which was formerly between us and those of our religion beyond
the sea; an action as unpoliticke as ungodly.

Master Speaker, we shall find them to have Tith'd Mint and Anise, and have
left undone the weightier works of the Law; to have been less eager upon those
who damn our Church, then upon those who, upon weak conscience, and perhaps
as weak reasons (the dislike of some commanded garment, or some uncommanded
posture) only abstained from it. Nay, it has been more dangerous for men to
go to some neighbors Parish, when they had no sermon in their own, then to
be obstinate and perpetual Recusants; while Masses have been said in security,
a conventicle has been a crime, and which is yet more, the conforming to
ceremonies has been more exacted then the conforming to Christianity; and
whilst men for scruples have been undone, for attempts upon Sodomie they have
only been admonished.

Master Speaker, we shall find them to have been like the hen in Esop, which
laying every day an egg upon such a proportion of barley, her Mistress
increasing her proportion in hope she would increase her eggs, she grew so
fat upon that addition, that she never laid more: so though at first their
preaching were the occasion of their preferment, they after made their
preferment the occasion of their not preaching.

Master Speaker, we shall find them to have resembled another fable, the dog in
the manger; to have neither preached themselves, nor employed those that
should, nor suffered those that would: to have brought in catechizing only to
thrust out preaching, cried down Lectures by the name of Factions, either
because their industry in that duty appeared a reproof to their neglect of it,
(not unlike to that we read of him, who in Nero's time and Tacitus his story
was accused, because by his virtue he did appear Exprobrare vitia Principis)
or with intention to have brought in darkness, that they might the easier sow
their tares, while it was night; and by that introduction of ignorance,
introduce the better that Religion which accounts it the Mother of devotion.

Master Speaker, in this they have abused his Majesty, as well as his people,
for when they had with great wisdom (since usually the children of darkness
are wiser in their generation then the children of light; I may guess not
without some eye upon the most politic action of the most politic Church)
silenced on both parts those opinions which have often tormented the Church,
and have, and will always trouble the schools, they made use of this
declaration to tie up one side, and let the other loose, whereas they ought
either in discretion to have been equally restrained, or in justice to have
been equally tolerated. And it is observable, that that party to which they
gave this license, was that whose doctrine, though it were not contrary to law,
was contrary to custom, and for a long while in this Kingdom was no oftener
preached then recanted.

The truth is, Master Speaker, that as some ill Ministers in our state first
took away our money from us, and after endeavored to make our money not worth
the taking, by turning it into brass by a kind of Antiphilosophers-stone: so
these men used us in the point of preaching, first depressing it to their
power, and next laboring to make it such, as the harm had not been much, if
it had been depressed, the most frequent subjects even in the most sacred
auditories, being the Jus divinum of Bishops and tithes, the sacredness of the
clergy, the sacrilege of impropriations, the demolishing of puritanisme and
propriety, the building of the prerogative at Paul's, the introduction of such
doctrines, as, admitting them true, the truth would not recompense the
scandal; or of such as were so far false, that, as Sir Thomas Moore says of
the Casuists, their business was not to keep men from sinning, but to inform
them Quam prope* ad peccatum sine peccato liceat accedere: so it seemed their
work was to try how much of a Papist might be brought in without Popery, and
to destroy as much as they could of the Gospel, without bringing themselves
into danger of being destroyed by the Law.

Master Speaker, to go yet further, some of them have so industriously
labored to deduce themselves from Rome, that they have given great suspicion
that in gratitude they desire to return thither, or at least to meet it half
way: Some have evidently labored to bring in an English, though not a Roman
popery: I mean not only the outside and dress of it, but equally absolute; a
blind dependence of the people upon the Clergy, and of the Clergy upon
themselves; and have opposed the papacy beyond the sea, that they might settle
one beyond the water. Nay, common fame is more then ordinarily false, if none
of them have found a way to reconcile the opinions of Rome to the preferments
of England; and be so absolutely directly and cordially Papists, that it is all
that fifteen hundred pounds a year can do to keep them from confessing it.

Master Speaker, I come now to speak of our liberties; and considering the
great interest these men have had in our common Master, and considering how
great a good to us, they might have made that interest in him, if they would
have used it to have informed him of our general sufferings; and considering
how little of their freedom of Speech at Whitehall might have saved us a great
deal of the use we have now of it in the Parliament House, their not doing
this alone were occasion enough for us to accuse them as the betrayers, though
not as the destroyers of our rights and liberties: Though, I confess, if they
had been only silent in this particular, I had been silent too; But, alas,
they whose Ancestors in the darkest times excommunicated the breakers of Magna
charta, did now by themselves, and their adherents, both write, preach, plot,
and act against it, by encouraging Doctor Beale, by preferring Doctor
Mannering, appearing forward for Monopolies and ship-mony: and if any were slow
and backward to comply, blasting both them and their preferment, with utmost
expression of their hatred, the title of Puritans.

Master Speaker, we shall find some of them to have labored to exclude both
all persons, and all causes of the Clergy, from the ordinary jurisdiction of
the temporal Magistrate, and by hindering prohibitions (first by apparent power
against the Judges, and after by secret agreements with them) to have taken
away the only legal bound to their arbitrary power, and made as it were a
conquest upon the common law of the Land, which is our common inheritance; and
after made use of that power to turn their brethren out of their free-holds,
for not doing that which no law of man required of them to do; and which (in
their opinions) the law of God required of them not to do. We shall find
them in general to have encouraged all the Clergy to suites, and to have
brought all suites to the Councell-table, that having all power in
Ecclesiastical matters, they labored for equal power in Temporal, and to
dispose as well of every Office, as of every Benefice; which lost the Clergy
much revenew, and much reverence, (whereof the last is never given when it is
so asked,) by encouraging them indiscreetly to exact more of both then was due;
so that indeed the gain of their greatness extended but to a few of that
order, though the envy extended upon all.

We shall find of them to have both kindled and blown the common fire of both
nations, to have both sent and maintained that book, of which the Author no
doubt has long since wished with Nero, Vtinam nescissem literas! and of which
more then one Kingdom has cause to wish, that when he writ that, he had
rather burnd a Library, though of the value of Ptolomie's. We shall find them
to have been the first and principal cause of the breach, I will not say of,
but since the pacification at Berwike. We shall find them to have been the
almost sole abettors of my Lord of Strafford, whilst he was practicing upon
another Kingdom that manner of government which he intended to settle in
this, where he committed so many, so mighty, and so manifest enormities and
oppressions, as the like have not been committed by any Governor in any
government, since Verres left Sicily. And after they had called him over from
being Deputy of Ireland, to be in a manner Deputy of England, (all things here
being governed by a Juntillo, and that Juntillo governed by him) to have
asisted him in the giving of such Counsels, and the pursuing of such courses,
as it is a hard and measuring cast, whether they were more unwise, more unjust,
or more unfortunate, and which had infallibly been our destruction, if by the
grace of God, their share had not been as small in the subtilty of Serpents,
as in the innocence of Doves.

Master Speaker, I have represented no small quantity, and no mean degree of
guilt; and truly I believe that we shall make no little complement to those,
and no little apology for those to whom this charge belongs, if we shall lay
the faults of the men upon the order of the Bishops, upon the Episcopacy. I
wish we may distinguish between those, who have been carried away with the
stream, and those who have been the stream that carried them; between those
whose proper and natural motion was toward our ruin and destruction, and
those who have been whirled about to it, contrary to their natural motion, by
the force and swinge of superior Orbs: and as I wish we may distinguish
between the more and less guilty; so I yet more wish we may distinguish
between the guilty and the innocent.

Master Speaker, I doubt, if we consider that if not the first Planters, yet
the first Spreaders of Christianity, and the first and chief Defenders of
Christianity against Heresies within, and Paganism without, both with their
ink and with their blood; and the maine conducers to the resurrection of
Christianity, (at least) here in the reformation (and we owe the light of the
Gospel, we now enjoy to the fire they then endured for it,) were all Bishops:
and that even now in the greatest perfection of that order, there are yet some
who have conduced in nothing to our late innovations, but in their silence;
some, who in an unexpected and mighty place and power, have expressed an equal
moderation and humility, being neither ambitious before, nor proud after,
either of the Crosiers staff, or white staff: some who have been learned
opposers of Popery, and zealous opposers of Arminianisme* between whom, and
their inferior Clergy, in frequency of preaching has been no distinction;
whose lives are untouched, not only by guilt, but by malice; scarce to be
equaled by those of any condition, or to be excelled by those in any Calendar.
I doubt not, I say, but if we consider this, this consideration will bring
forth this conclusion, That Bishops may be good men, and let us give but good
men good rules, we shall have both good governors and good times.

Master Speaker, I am content to take away all those things from them which, to
any considerable degree of probability, may again beget the like mischiefs,
if they be not taken away. If their temporal titles, power and employment,
appear likely to distract them from the care of, or make them look down with
contempt upon their Spiritual duty, and that the too great distance between
them and those they govern will hinder the free and fit recourse of their
inferiors to them, and occasion insolence from them to their inferiors; let
that be considered, and cared for; I am sure neither their Lordships, their
judging of tithes, wills and marriages, no nor their voices in Parliaments are
Jure divino; and I am as sure that these titles, and this power are not
necessary to their authority, as appears by the little they have had with us
by them, and the much that others have had without them.

If their revenew shall appear likely to produce the same effects, (for it
has been anciently observed that Religio peperit divitias, and Filia
devoravit matrem;) let so much of that, as was in all probability intended for
an attendant upon their temporal dignities, wait upon them out of the doors:
Let us only take care to leave them such proportions, as may serve in some
good degree to the dignity of learning, and the encouragement of students; and
let us not invert that of Jeroboam, and as he made the meanest of the people
Priests, make the highest of the Priests the meanest of the people.

If it be feared that they will again employ some of our Laws with a severity
beyond the intention of those Laws against some of their weaker Brethren; that
we may be sure to take away that power, let us take away those Laws, and let
no ceremonies which any number counts unlawful, and no man counts necessary
(against the rules of Policy, and Saint Paul) be imposed upon them. Let us
consider, that part of the rule they have hitherto gone by, that is, such
Canons of their own making as are not confirmed by Parliament, have been, or,
no doubt, shortly will be by Parliament taken away: that the other part of the
rule (such Canons as were here received before the reformation, and not
contrary to any law,) is too doubtful to be a fit rule, exacting an exact
knowledge of the Canon Law, of the Common Law, of the Statute Law knowledges,
which those who are thus to govern have not, and it is scarce fit they should
have. Since therefore we are to make new rules, and shall, no doubt, make
those new rules strict rules, and be infallibly certain of a trienniall
Parliament, to see those rules observed as strictly as they are made, and to
increase or change them upon all occasions; we shall have no reason to fear
any innovation from their tyranny, or to doubt any defect in the discharge of
their duty: I am confident, they will not dare, either ordain, suspend,
silence, excommunicate, or deprive otherwise, then we would have them. And if
this be believed, I am as confident, we shall not think it fit to abolish, upon
a few days debate, an Order which has lasted (as appears by story) in most
Churches these sixteen hundred years, and in all from Christ to Calvin; or in
an instant change the whole face of the Church, like the scene of a Mask.

Master Speake^, I do not believe them to be Jure divino, nay, I believe them
not to be Jure divino, but neither do I believe them to be Injuria humaria. I
neither consider them as necessary, nor as unlawful, but as convenient or
inconvenient: but since all great mutations in government are dangerous, (even
where what is introduced by that mutation, is such as would have been very
profitable upon a primary foundation) and since the greatest danger of
mutations is, that all the dangers and inconveniences they may bring are not to
be foreseen; and since no wise man will undergo great danger but for great
necessity; my opinion is, that we should not root up this ancient tree, as dead
as it appears, till we have tried whether by this, or the like lopping of the
branches, the sap which was unable to feed the whole, may not serve to make
what is left, both grow and flourish. And certainly, if we may at once take
away both the inconveniences of Bishops and the inconvenience of no Bishops,
that is of an almost universal mutation; this course can only be opposed by
those who love mutation for mutations sake.

Master Speaker, to be short (as I have reason to be after having bin so long,)
that this trial may be suddenly made, let us commit as much of the Ministers
remonstrance, as we have read, that those heads both of abuses and grievances
which are there fully collected, may be marshaled and ordered for our debate:
if upon that debate it shall appear, that those may be taken away, and yet the
Order stand, we shall not need to commit the London Petition at all: for the
cause of it will be ended; if it shall appear, that the abolition of the one
cannot be but by the destruction of the other, then let us not commit the
London Petition; but let us grant it.

Mr. PYM His SPEECH, After the Articles of the Charge against the Earl of
STRAFFORD were read.
My LORDS,
THese Articles have expressed the Character of a great and dangerous Treason;
such a one as is advanced to the highest degree of malice and of mischief: It
is enlarged beyond the limits of any description or definition: it is so
heinous in it self, as that it is capable of no aggravation: a Treason against
God, betraying his Truth and Worship; against the King, obscuring the glory,
and weakening the foundation of his Throne; against the Commonwealth, by
destroying the principles of Safety and Prosperity. Other Treasons are
against the Rule of the Law; this is against the being of the Law: It is the
Law that u^^es the King and his People; and the Author of this Treason has
endeavored to dissolve that Union, even to break the mutual, irreversall,
indissoluble band of protection and Allegiance, whereby they are, and I hope
ever will be, bound together.

If this Treason had taken effect, our Souls had been inthralled to the
Spiritual Tyranny of Satan, our Consciences to the Ecclesiastical Tyranny of
the Pope; our Lives, our Persons and Estates to the Civil Tyranny of an
arbitrary, unlimited, confused Government.

Treason in the least degree, is an odious and a horrid Crime: other Treasons
are particular; if a Fort be betrayed, or an Army, or any other treasonable
fact committed, the Kingdom may outlive any of these: this Treason would have
dissolved the frame and being of the Commonwealth; it is an Universal, a
Catholic Treason; the venom and malignity of all other Treasons are
abstracted, digested, sublimated into this.

The Law of this Kingdom makes the King to be the fountain of Justice, of
Peace, of Protection; therefore we say, the Kings Courts the Kings Judges, the
Kings Laws. The Royal Power and Majesty shines upon us in every public
blessing and benefit we enjoy: but the Author of this Treason would make him
the fountain of Injustice, of Confusion, of public misery and calamity.

The Gentiles by the light of Nature had some obscure apprehensions of the
Deity, of which they made this expression, that he was Deus optimus maximus,
an infinite goodness, and an infinite greatness. All sovereign Princes have
some Characters of Divinity imprinted on them; they are set up in their
dominions to be Optimi, Maximi, that they should exercise a goodness
proportionable to their greatness.

That Law term, Laesa Majestas, whereby they express that which we call
Treason, was never more thoroughly fulfilled then now: there cannot be a greater
laesion or diminution of Majesty, then to bereave a King of the glory of his
goodness. It is goodness (My Lords) that can produce, not only to his
people, but likewise to himself honor and happiness. There are Principalities,
Thrones and Dominions amongst the Devils, greatness enough; but being incapable
of goodness, they are made incapable both of honor and happiness.

The Laws of this Kingdom have invested the Royal Crown with power
sufficient for the manifestation of his goodness and of his greatness: if more
be required, it is like to have no other effects but poverty, weakness, and
misery, whereof of late we have had very woeful experience. It is far from
the Commons to desire any abridgement of those great Prerogatives which belong
to the King; they know that their own Liberty and Peace are preserved and
secured by his Prerogative, and they will always be ready to support and
supply his Majesty with their lives and fortunes, for the maintenance of his
just and lawful Power.

This (My Mords) is in all our thoughts, in our prayers, and I hope will so be
manifested in our endeavors, that if the proceedings of this Parliament be
not interrupted as others have been, the King may within a few months be put
into a clear way, of as much greatness, plenty and glory, as any of his
Royal Ancestors have enjoyed.

A King and his People make one Body: the inferior parts confer nourishment
and strength, the superior sense and motion: If there be an interruption of
this necessary intercourse of blood and spirits, the whole Body must needs be
subject to decay and distemper; therefore obstructions are first to be
removed, before restoratives can be applied. This (My Lords) is the end of this
Accusation, whereby the Commons seek to remove this person, whom they conceive
to have been a great cause of the obstructions betwixt his Majesty and his
People: for the effecting whereof, they have commanded me to desire your
Lordships, that their proceedings against him may be put into as speedy a way
of dispatch, as the courses of Parliaments will allow.

First, that he may be called to answer, and they may have liberty to reply;
that there may be a quick and secret examination of witnesses, and they may
from time to time be acquainted with the depositions; that so when the cause
shall be ripe for Judgment, they may collect the several Examinations, and
represent to your Lordships in one entire Body the state of the Proofs, as now
by me they have presented to you the state of the Charge.

Mr. PYM his SPEECH, After the Articles of the Charge against Sr. GEORGE
RATCLIFFE were read.
My LORDS,
BY hearing this Charge, your Lordships may perceive what near conjunction
there is between this Cause and the Earl of STRAFFORDS: the materials are
(for the most part) the same in both: the offenses of the Earl moving from an
higher Orb, are more comprehensive, they extend both to England and Ireland;
these (except in one particular of reducing of England by the Irish Army) are
confined within one Kingdom; the Earl is charged as an Author, Sir GEORGE
RATCLIFFE as an Instrument and subordinate Actor.

The influences of superior Planets are often augmented and enforced, but
seldom mitigated by the concurrence of the inferior, where merit does arise
not from well-doing, but from ill; the officiousness of ministers will rather
add to the malignity of their Instructions, then diminish it, that so they may
more fully ingratiate themselves with those upon whom they depend.

In the crimes committed by the Earl there appears more haughtiness and
fierceness, being acted by his own principles; those motions are ever
strongest which are nearest the Primum mobile: But in those of Sir GEORGE
RATCLIFFE there seems to be more baseness and servility, having resigned and
subjected himself to be acted by the corrupt will of onother.

The Earl of STRAFFORD has not been bred in the study and practice of the
Law, and having stronger lusts and passions to incite, and less knowledge to
restrain him, might more easily be transported from the Rule; Sir GEORGE
RATCLIFFE in his natural temper and disposition more moderate, and by his
education and profession better acquainted with the grounds and directions of
the Law, was carried into his offenses by a more immediate Concurrence of will,
and a more corrupt suppression of his own Reason and Judgment.

My Lords, as both these have been partners in offending: so it is the desire
of the Commons, they may be put under such trial and examination, and other
proceedings of justice as may bring them to partake in a deserved punishment,
for the safety and good of both Kingdoms.

Mr SPEAKERS SPEECH, At the presenting of these three BILLS, viz.
An Act For the shortning of Michaelmas Term. For the pressing of Mariners for
the Kings Ships. For the remainder of the six entire Subsidies.

May it please your most excellent Majesty,
THE great security of the Kingdom rests in the happy concurrence of the King
and people in the unity of their hearts.

These joined, safety and plenty attends the Scepter; but divided, distraction
and confusion, as Briars and Thorns, overspreads, and makes the Land barren.

No peace to the King,
No prosperity to the people.
The duties and affections of your subjects are most transparent, most clear,
in the cheerful and most* liberal contributions, given to knit fast this
union with the bond of peace.

The treasures of the privy Purse, are but the supplies of Fancies, warranted
by a common Interest; But the public Tribute given by common assent, supports
Royal Dignity, is sheltred under the wings of Prerogative, and by that power
covered from the eyes, from the touch of deceivers.

In these we render Caesar what is due to Caesar, and tribute to whom tribute
belongs.

The proper inscription of the Crown is born here, and censures those malignant
spirits that dare whisper into the ears of sacred Majesty, that our selves
only, not your sacred person, not your Royal posterity, are the supreme
objects of the givers.

The preservation of the public union, the supply of your Armies, the
distresses, miserable distresses of the Northern parts, the common calamities
of the times begat the consideration of this Bill (the remainder of the six
entire Subsidies happily presented to your sacred Majesty by this unworthy
hand) the first vote advanced a credit to us to issue them for the use of your
sacred Majesty.

The full perfection adds growth to that credit, and enables us to return to
your sacred Majesty, as to the Ocean the Tribute due to Justice and Sovereignty.

These are the vast earnests of our desires, which take their rise from the due
regard, from the safety of your Throne, of your posterity.

Your Royal assent stamps your image here, and makes this yours, and yours
only, which I (by the commands of the Commons) humbly beseech of your sacred
Majesty.

THE SPEECH OF Master Plydell, ESQUIRE.
Master Speaker,
I Have heard, since I had the honor to sit here, many grievances presented,
and truly Sir, my heart bleeds within me when I think of them, especially
those that concern Religion. But what should I speak of grievances concerning
Religion, when Religion it self is become a grievance, nay the very Nurse and
Mother of all grievances, all scandalls, all reproaches?

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. SIR,

Not to trouble you with any long discourse, if I have any sight, that Bark
both of Church and State has a long time floated betwixt Scylla and Charibdis,
Popery on the one side, and I know not what to call it on the other; in many
respects both alike dangerous, unless the Italian Proverb may alter the Case;
God defend me from my reputed friends, and I will defend my self from my
professed enemies.

Sir, We are entrusted by God, the King and the Country, with the managing of
this Bark, fraught with the fortunes of three great Kingdoms: Now, should we
so decline the former Rock, that we dash on the other side. I humbly offer it
to this Honorable Assembly, whether she might not have just cause to say,
she had changed her Pilot rather then her condition, and only shifted places
to find her ruin: For Sir, there is as much beyond Truth, as on this side it;
and would we steer a right course, we must be sure to keep the channel,
lest we fall from one extreme to another; from the dotage of Superstition, to
the frenzy of Profaneness; from bowing to Idols, to worship the Calves of our
own imaginations.

Sir, I beseech you consider what libellous Pamphlets are now printed, what
Sermons are preached, not building hay and stubble, but utterly subverting the
foundations of Truth; what irreverence in Churches, what profanation of Gods
Service, to the scandal of Christianity, the reproach of Religion, and the
intolerable grief of all good men; of which I may take up the words of Petrus
de Aliaco to the Council of Constance, Nisi celeriter fiat Reformatio, audeo
dicere quod licet magna sint quae videmus, tamen in brevi incomparabilia majora
videmus, and post ista tam horrenda majora alia audiemus.

Sir, I take God to record, I am no man's Advocate, no man's enemy; but a
faithful lover of truth and peace, and a dutiful Son of our distressed
Mother, the Church of England; in whose behalf, and our own, my motion shall
be shortly this, That the Ministers Petition, with so much of their
Remonstrance as has been read, may be committed, and the rest of it,
concerning matter of Doctrine, may be referred to some learned and approved
Divines, who have spent their time in that noble study. For, give me leave to
tell you, there is a vulgus among the Clergy, as among the Laity, Et in utroque
nil modicum; and for these and all things which strike at the root and branch,
as they please to call it, I shall humbly move, that we rather consider how to
satisfy the Petitioners with some timely declaration from both Houses of the
lawfulness and convenience of Episcopal Government, derived from the
Apostles, and so long established in this Kingdom, rather then to venture upon
any alteration, the consequence whereof the wisest man cannot foresee. And in
truth, Sir, should we once begin (for my own part) I know not how, or where
we should stay. Nevertheless, if any one doubt the superiority of Bishops
over Priests and Deacons in Ecclesiastical government, or in ordination, I
shall be ready, whenever this House shall command me, to make it good, and I
think, by as pregnant testimonies as we are able to prove the difference
betwixt Canonical and Apocryphal Scripture, the necessity of Infants
baptism, or that the Apostles were the Authors of their own Creed. But, Sir,
I hope you will save your self and me that labor, and rather devise of some
set way to bind up the Churches wounds, which (God knows) are too wide
already, that so the Clergy and Laity being made friends, and all reduced to
the model of our Ancestors since the Reformation, we may altogether preserve
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and so his Majesty having
graciously and prudently expressed himself, I am the more confident we shall
not only put an end to all mis-intelligence betwixt Prince and People, but
also highly advance the Protestant cause, and give a deadly blow to the Sea of
Rome.

Sir, I humbly crave the favor of the House, for God is my witness, Non potui
aliter liberare animam meam.

Sir THOMAS ROVVES REPORTS, To the COMMONS HOUSE of PARLIAMENT. 1640.
Master Speaker,
I Am to make a Report of what was delivered at the conference of a Committee
of both Houses of Parliament upon Thursday last.

I hope, Master Speaker, so much upon the favor of this House that they will
give me leave to be a Reader, and that they will not expect from my age and
weakness a particular repetition of the same words, a task too great for my
memory unpractised for many years in such exactness; neither am I able to
represent without diminution, that life, and grace, that those relations
received from so great abilities, desiring their Lordships pardon, and your
acceptance of the substance and matter, wherein I hope I shall omit nothing
substantial; and if I could repeat every word, yet would it want as much
luster as copies of ordinary hands, do of the best originals.

My Lord Keeper did first let us know, that his Majesty had commanded the Lords
Commissioners of the great Council, to give an account of their Treaties at
York and Rippon, to both Houses; and of his Majesty's gracious intentions, in
a business so much importing the honor and safety of the Kingdom, that there
might be made a faithful relation with all candor and clearness, which was
the sum of his Majesty's instructions.

His Lordship declaring that my Lords of the upper House, for the saving of
time, had thought fit to give this account to a Committee of both Houses, which
has occasioned the meeting at this Conference; and election being made of the
Earl of Bristoll by the Lords Commissioners, he began his Narration, directed
to the Lords of the upper House, and to the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
the house of Commons: and thus the Earl of Bristoll began;

That the Lords Commissioners intended not to look further back into the
business, then the Acts of their own employments.

They did intend to give no account of the pacification interrupted, nor war
renewed; no account how the Armies in England, Ireland, and by Sea were
designed, nor of any occasion: They purposed not to lay fault upon any man, nor
to enquire into the cause why the Scots (as they pretended from necessity) were
drawn to enter this Kingdom, nor why the Kings Army, when service was to be
done, was out of the way; But that those through whose hands these have passed,
might hereafter give their own account.

His Lordship told us, that his Majesty was pleased to call his great Council
at York, to whom he made two propositions.

The first was, how his Army, which seemed to be in distress for want of pay,
should be relieved and maintained.

To this, to show their duties to the King, the Lords resolved to engage
themselves, and to that purpose to send chosen Deputies to London, to negotiate
a supply.

The second proposition was, that after the Scots had passed Northumberland,
taken Newcastle, and possessed the Bishopric of Duresme, they sent a Petition
to his Majesty, which contains, in general terms, a desire to have their
grievances taken into consideration.

Which Petition and Answer thereunto was read unto us, A. N. A.
and presented for our clearer understanding.

Upon receipt of his Majesty's Answer, the Scottish Lords sent his Majesty a
second Petition, directed in a Letter to the Earl of Lanrick, K. Q.
in which they made their particular demands, and declared, that, according to
his Majesty's command, they would advance no further; and this Petition was
also read and delivered unto us, of which his Lordship desired that great
Assembly to take especial notice, for that much of the future discourse would
depend upon it.

The business thus stated at the great Council, the second proposition was,
what Answer should be made to that Petionary Letter, and in what manner it
should be carried; In which his Majesty required their Council.

Whereupon the Lords replied, that it was impossible for them to give any well
grounded advice, unless the true state of his affairs, and the Condition of
his Army were laid before them.

Whereupon his Majesty commanded the Earl of Traquaire, N. L.
to make the Narration of the Scottish business, and their late Acts of
Parliament, and the Lord Lieutenant general, to give an account in what
condition the Army stood, and what was answered by my Lord Lieutenant, was read
in his own words.

Besides this declaration, the Earl of Bristoll delivered upon a further
enquiry, how the state of the business then stood:

That the Scots Army had passed Northumberland without resistance; that they
had disputed the passage of the River of Tyne at Newburne, where our horse
retired in disorder; that his Majesty's foot Army consisting of twelve or
fourteen thousand men in Newcastle, likewise retired to York, whereby the
Town of Newcastle, a place of great consideration, was without one stroke
stricken, fallen into the Scots hands, and the Bishopric of Duresme drawn
under Contribution.

That in this state, the Gentry of the Bishopric repaired to Master
Treasurer, who carried them to his Majesty, from whom they were referred to my
Lord Lieutenant of the Army, who gave them this answer positively; That they
could look for no help nor protection from the King, and therefore they might
use the best means they could to preserve their lives and estates. Whereby
those distressed Provinces, the ancient Bulwarks of this Kingdom, full of
brave and valiant men, being now fallen into the power of an Army, which of
necessity must live, were forced to consent to a contribution by Treaty, and a
very heavy one, though such without which the Scottish Army could not subsist.

The agreement was 350. l. a day for the Bishopric of Duresme, 300. l. a day
for Northumberland, 200. a day for the Town of Newcastle, in all 850. l. a
day; which, should it continue, would amount unto 300000. l. for one year.

These Gentlemen much lamented their estates that the Scots should be irritated
(as they call it) by being proclaimed Traitors.

His Lordship made a little digression, and asked leave to speak truth in such
language, as the Scots had presented their state unto them: That having
proclamation made against them, being threatened with a great Army of thirty or
forty thousand men; another of ten thousand out of Ireland, and by Parliament
declared Traitors and Rebels, and having heard of another Army providing, of
eight or ten thousand by shipping to hinder their Trade, at least their
Commerce with England, that they were drawn together by necessity, as they
pretended, of defense; further alleging that it was a common discourse, of
which they had seen papers, that they should be reduced into a Province,
which would be but one Summers work; and therefore they having drawn their
power together, as any Nation would do, and being assembled, and their Country
being poor, taking advantage of the time, and that all those Armies that
should oppose them were out of the way, and those unfortunate Provinces left
like a list of Cloth; they were forced to enter in England; that thus they had
lamented, and thus the state stood before the Lords, when it was examined in
the great Council.

Thus their Lordships found, that the Scots had increased their confines near
fourscore miles in England, and had passed the Rivers of Tweed and Tyne; and
that the River of Tees the boundary of Yorkshire, (Duresme being possessed)
was not to be defended, being foordable in many places by forty horse a front;
that if the Scots should pass that River, there was no possibility to hinder
them from coming to York, or to any part of England, without hazarding a
Battle, which my Lord Lieutenant had declared unto them he would not advise,
for though the Kings Army consisted of seventeene or eighteen thousand good
bodies of men; yet being untrained and unused to Arms, he would be loath to
hazard such an Adventure upon them; but if they should advance to York, he
might make good that City: This being the case as it was presented, my Lords
advised his Majesty that they conceived the fittest way was, that the Scots and
their grievances might be heard.

And whereas their maine Complaint had been, that their Petitions to his
Majesty had been conveyed by Conduits of an evil relish, that there might be
chosen such Lords Commissioners, of whose integrity they could not doubt.

Whereupon, his Majesty was pleased to refer the choice of the Commissioners
to the great Council, who made the election with the assent of his Majesty,
The Commissioners names N. B.
to whom power was given, under the great seal of England, to hear whatsoever
the Scots would lay before them; and to enter into Treaty with them, and to
give safe conducts, and to do all things preparatory to a Treaty.

The first place of meeting was appointed at North-Allerton, but some
inconveniences being found, it was by consent transferred to Rippon.

For the inducement of this meeting, N. B.
a Letter of the Lord Lanricks to the Scots Commissioners was read and given
unto us.

The Treaty thus settled, the Lords to be employed receiving instructions from
his Majesty, by the consent of the great Council; it was agreed they should
treat upon the whole business propounded by the Scots, and left to their
discretion to treat of a Cessation of Arms, as the ordinary forerunner of all
Treaties of Peace.

When their Lordships came to Rippon, the Cessation of Arms was the first
proposed, but being entered upon it, the Scots Commissioners did let their
Lordships know, that there was something necessary first to be done, that the
Countries where they lay were become poor; that they could not think, as
their affairs stood, of returning home; that his Majesty had restrained them
from passing further: so that a Treaty in this Exigent was worse then a War,
unless means might be thought upon how they might subsist; and hereupon they
did propound, that if it were expected that they made no further progress
therein, obeying his Majesty's command, which nothing but invincible necessity
should force them to transgress, by plundring the Countries, they must have
maintenance for their Army.

This motion seemed very strange to their Lordships, that it should be demanded
to provide a maintenance for the Scots, when the Kings own Army was in great
distress; yet the necessity seemed to be such on both sides, that the Lords
appointed some of their Company to repair to the King at York, to acquaint
his Majesty with the Scots demand.

Upon debate of the business, though it were of hard digestion to his Majesty,
the Lords, and the whole Kingdom, that they, whose Ancestors had been called
to advise upon the Ransom of Kings, should now come to consult how to
maintain an Army got into our own bowels; Therefore, their Lordships would
not proceed without the knowledge of his Majesty and the great Council; where
it was found necessary, not for maintaining the Scots Armies (for they might
easily supply their own wants by plundring, in which course they might get a
million, whereas five thousand pounds would serve but for two months) but to
preserve the Countries from utter ruin, and the Scots from further advancing,
to give to their Lordships Commission to treat for a competency of maintenance
during the Treaty.

The first demand was forty thousand pounds a month, which by Treaty was
reduced thus: That instead of giving them any allowance, they should be left
to their proportion of that contribution already agreed upon by the Counties,
as less dishonorable then to assign them maintenance.

This point being thus settled, N. D. E.
their Lordships proceeded to the Treaty of Sessions, and both were agreed and
concluded, his Lordship proposing the Articles themselves to be read for more
satisfaction.

His Lordship proceeded, that these preparatives being settled at Rippon,
twenty miles from York, and the time far spent, and the Parliament
approaching, their Lordships resolved to be humble suitors to his Majesty,
that the general Treaty might be transferred to London, by consent of both
parties thereunto agreeing.

Here his Lordship proposed the reading of a Letter whereby this translation of
the Treaty was moved, which was done and delivered unto us.

To this Letter his Majesty made a gracious answer, and consented to transfer
the Treaty to London, where some of the Scots Commissioners are already
arrived, and the rest within a day or two expected.

Their Lordships having proceeded in the Treaty as far as they could go,
repaired to York, and both Articles concluded were read in his Majesty's
presence; and that they declared that they had in all things punctually
observed their Instructions, whereupon his Majesty required them to give their
counsel, whether he should ratify and sign these Articles or not.

To which the Lords made answer, that they had served his Majesty in quality of
Commissioners Ambassadors and had duly observed their Instructions; but now He
being pleased to ask their advice, they would be glad to serve him according
to their consciences, and therefore besought his Majesty for leave to retire
themselves, and consult of the business; to which his Majesty was graciously
pleased to consent.

Upon resolution, considering the great strait into which his Majesty's
affairs were reduced, they concluded to advise his Majesty to sign, and
craved leave to present unto his Majesty a declaration of their reasons; which
were accepted and read in the great Council.

And their Lordships held it necessary to be read again in that great
Assembly, N. G.
as the rest of their Council.

These reasons being read, his Majesty was pleased to ratify the Articles in
express words also read unto us.

His Lordship concluded this Narrative as the full account of the Treaty, N. D.
and proceeding in it to his Majesty's ratification; and craved leave in the
next place, to present the hard and woeful condition in which his Majesty's
affairs then stood in the North:

First, that by consent a contribution of 850. l. a day was agreed.

That there was already some doubt that the Countries were not able to bear it.

On the other side, it was objected by the Scots, that it was impossible if the
payment should fail, to keep their promise, or to obey his Majesty, but that
they should be necessitated against their will to plunder the Country.

These doubts considered, it was declared by my Lord Lieutenant, that the
Counties of Cumberland and Westmerland being at pleasure under the Scots power,
it was reasonable that in subsidium they should contribute some help to their
Neighbors: But he declared since their Lordships coming away, the
Commissioners left at Duresme had written, that it was impossible for them to
proceed in the agreement; which if it were broken on their part, the Scots
would allege an impossibility to consent to starve; so that if some means
were not found, by which those Counties engaged might be relieved, he was
afraid all their labor and Treaty would come to nothing: and this letter was
read and presented unto us.

His Lordship represented, N. H.
that the Commissioners and all the Lords had engaged themselves faithfully and
truly to declare to the Parliament the distress of the Counties.

He declared that it was far from their Lordships purpose to move any supply
of money from the House of Commons, but to lay the cause before them, and to
leave it to their wisdom; averring certainly that if some course were not
taken, the whole kingdom would be put into disorder; Armies would not starve,
retiring was not yet as he thought in the thoughts of the Scots: Therefore
they must plunder and destroy, or advance into Yorkshire, and so into England
to seek subsistence; the prevention whereof did highly import the King and
kingdom.

His Lordship proposed another, no less worthy of consideration to the whole
kingdom: But if the Scots Army were provided of a competency for the ease of
those Counties, it were very strange there should not an equal care be had for
mainteining the Kings Army that stands before them. He said the Scots Army was
strong and powerful, and little other resistance against it, but the
impediments of an Army marching in winter: But whether it were fit for a
kingdom to be trusted to accidents of Frosts, with a people bred in Swedland
and cold Countries, he left to their discretion.

His Lordship confessed, that the Scots had made great protestations, and with
great execrations averred, that they had no intent to advance forward, but
return when they shall have received satisfaction.

Yet their Lordships did not conceive that the kingdom should rely upon
promises or protestations.

Many accidents might happen when a Nation, come from a far Country to a
better, should be told the business they come about was just and their
quarrel good; who finding themselves in a fat pasture, may pick quarrels
which their Leaders, if they should go about to prevent them of the reward of
their virtue and valor.

Upon these grounds his Lordship presented to the general consideration the
supply of his Majesty's Army, that it be not disbanded; which if it should
come to pass. Yorkshire and other parts of England were left to the Scots
discretion.

His Lordship said, He durst not say the Scots would not come forward, but
that it was in their power if they would; and therefore he recommended this
representation to the whole body of the kingdom, to prevent furture dangers.

He concluded with a prayer to Almighty God, to direct the hearts of all the
kingdom, and to give a blessing only able to remove the great distractions,
so many and so grievous, as under which, since the Conquest, this kingdom
never labored.

There were presented unto me two papers more, the one being Instructions from
Newcastle to Sir Thomas Hope and others, concerning the contribution; the other
an account of Arreers from the eleventh of September to the twentieth of
November, which were all read unto us; nor do I know how or to what use to
employ them.

Mr. RIGBYES SPEECH, In answer to the LORD KEEPERS last SPEECH, 1640.
Master SPEAKER,
THough my Judgment prompts me to fit still and be silent, yet the duty I owe
to my King, my Country and my Conscience, moves me to stand up and speak.

Master Speaker, had not this Siren so sweet a tongue, surely he could never
have effected so much mischief to this kingdom: you know Sir, optimorum
putrefactio pessima, the best things putrefied become the worst: and as it is
in the natural, so in the body politic; and what is to be done then Master
Speaker, we all know, ense recidendum est, the sword, Justice must strike, ne
sinceratruhatur.

Master Speaker, it is not the voice, non vox sed votum, not the tongue, but
the heart and actions that are to be suspected: for does not our Savior say
it, Show me thy faith by thy works, O Man? Now, Master Speaker, has not this
kingdom seen, (seen say I?) nay felt and smarted under the cruelty of this
man's Justice? so malicious as to record it in every Court of Westminster; as if
he had not been contented with the enslaving of us all, unless he entailed
it to all posterity. Why shall I believe words now, cum factum videam? Shall we
be so weak men, as when we have been injured and abused, will be gained
again with fair words and complements? Or, like little children, when we have
been whipped and beaten, be pleased again with sweet meats? Oh no: there be
some birds in the Summer of Parliament will sing sweetly, who in the Winter of
Persecution will for their prey ravenously fly at all, upon our goods, nay
seize upon our persons; and has it not been with this man so, with some in
this assembly?

Master Speaker, it has been objected unto us, that in Judgment we should
think of mercy, and Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful;
now God almighty grant that we may be so, and that our hearts and Judgments
may be truly rectified to know truly what is mercy, I say to know what is
mercy; for there is the point Master Speaker: I have heard of foolish pity,
foolish pity: do we not all know the effects of it? and I have met with this
Epithete to mercy, Crudelis misericordia; and in some kind I think there may
be a cruel mercy: I am sure that the spirit of God said, Be not pitiful in
Judgment, nay it says, Be not pitiful of the poor in Judgment; if not of
the poor, then a Latiori, not of the rich; there is the Emphasis. We see by the
set and solemn appointments of our Courts of Justice, what provision the
wisdom of our Ancestors has made for the preservation, honor and esteem of
Justice, witness our frequent Terms, Sessions and Assizes, and in what pomp
and state the Judges in their Circuits, by the Sheriffs, Knights, and
Justices, and all the Country, are attended oft-times for the hanging of a
poor thief for the stealing of a hog or a sheep, nay in some Cases for the
stealing of a penny, and Justice too, in terrorem; and now shall not some of
them be hanged that have robbed us of all our propriety, and sheered at once all
our sheep and all we have away, and would have made us all indeed poor
Bellizarasses to have begged for halfe-pennies, when they would not have left
us one penny that we could have called our own?

Let us therefore now, Master Speaker, not be so pitiful as that we become
remiss; not so pitiful in Judgment, as to have no Judgment; but set the
deplorable estate of Great Britain now before our eyes, and consider how our
most gracious Sovereign has been abused, and both his Majesty and all his
Subjects injured by these wicked Instruments; for which my humble motion is,
that with these particulars we become not so merciful, as to the generality
(the whole kingdom) we grow merciless.

Fiat Justitia.

Mr. VVALERS SPEECH, In the HOUSE of COMMONS, 1640.
Master Speaker,
I Will use no preface, as they use to do who appear men for some thing to
which they would persuade and move their affections: I will only propose what
I conceive fit for the House to consider, and shall be no more concerned in the
event then they that shall hear me.

Two things I observe in his Majesty's demands:

First, the supply, Secondly, our speedy dispatch thereof.
Touching the first, his Majesty's occasions for money are but too evident; for
to say nothing how we are neglected abroad, or distracted at home, the calling
of this Parliament and our sitting here (an effect which no light cause could
in these times have produced) is enough to make any reasonable man believe that
the Exchequer abounds not so much in money, as the State in occasions to use
it; and I hope we shall all appear willing to disprove those who have thought
to dissuade his Majesty from this way of Parliament, as doubting and
uncertain, and to let him see that it is as ready and more safe for the
advancement of his affairs, then any new or pretended old way whatsoever.

Now (Master Speaker) for the speedy dispatch required, which was the second
thing, not only his Majesty but Res ipsa loquitur; the occasion seems to
importune no less: necessity is come upon us like an armed man, and yet the
use of Parliaments heretofore, (which appear by the writs that call us hither)
was to advise with his Majesty of things concerning the Church and
commonwealth.

And, Master Speaker, it has ever been the custom of Parliaments, by good and
wholesome laws to refresh the Commonwealth in general, yea and to descend
into the remedies of particular grievances, before any mention made of supply.
Look back upon the best Parliaments, and still you shall find that the last
Acts are the free gift of the Subsidies on the peoples part, and general
pardons on the Kings part; even the wisest Kings have acquainted their
Parliaments with their designs, and the reasons thereof, and then demanded the
assistance both of their counsel and their purses: But (Master Speaker)
Physicians (though they be called of the latest) must not stomach it, or talk
what might have been, but apply themselves roundly to the cure; let us not
stand too nicely upon circumstances, nor too rigidly post pose the matter of
supply, to the healing of our lighter wounds. Let us do what possibly may be
done with reason and honesty on our parts to comply with his Majesty's desires,
and to prevent the imminent ills which threaten us: but consider (Master
Speaker) that they that think themselves undone can never apprehend themselves
in danger, and they that have nothing left can never give freely, nor shall we
ever discharge the trust of those that sent us hither, or make them believe
that they contribute to their own defense and safety, unless his Majesty be
pleased, first to restore them to the propriety of their goods and lawful
liberties, whereof they esteem themselves now out of possession. One need not
tell you that the propriety of goods is the mother of courage, and nurse of
industry, makes us all valiant in war, and good husbands in peace: the
experience I hear of former Parliaments, and my present observation of the
care the Country has had to choose persons of worth and courage, makes me
think this House like the Spartans, whose forward valor required some softer
music to allay and quiet their spirits, too much moved with the sound of
martial Instruments. It Is not the fear of imprisonment, or, if need be, of
death it self that can keep a true hearted Englishman from the care to leave
this part of his inheritance as entire to posterity as he received it from his
Ancestors.

This therefore let us first do, (and the more speedily,) that we may come to
the matter of supply; let us give new force to the many laws which have been
heretofore made for the mainteining of our rights and privileges, and to
restore this Nation to the fundamental and vital liberties, the propriety of
our goods, and freedom of our persons; no way doubting but we shall find his
Majesty as gracious and ready, as any of his Royal progenitors have been, to
grant our just desires therein: for, not only the people do think, but the
wisest do know, that what we have suffered, we have suffered from his
Ministers. That the person of no King was ever better beloved of his people,
and that no people were ever more unsatisfied with the ways of levying moneys,
are two truths which may serve one to demonstrate the other; for such is their
accession to the present courses, that neither the admiration they have of his
Majesty's native inclination to Justice and Clemency, nor the pretended consent
of the Judges, could make them willingly submit themselves to this late tax;
and such is their natural loves, and just esteem of his Majesty's goodness,
that no late pressure could provoke them, not any example invite them to
disloyalty or disobedience. But what is it then has bred this misunderstanding
betwixt the King and his people? How is it that having so good a King, we have
so much to complain of? Why (Master Speaker) we are told of the son of
Solomon that he was a Prince of a tender heart, and yet we see, by the advice
of violent counsels, how rough an answer he gave to his people. That his finger
should be as heavy as his fathers loins, was not his own, but the voice of
some persons about him, that wanted the gravity of moderation requisite for the
Counselors of a young King. I love not to press Allegories too far; but the
resemblance of Jobs story with ours holds so well that I cannot but observe it
to you. It pleased God to give his Enemy leave to afflict him more then once or
twice, and to take all he had from him, and yet he was not provoked to rebel
so much as with his tongue, (although he had no very good example of one that
lay very near him,) and felt not half that which he suffered. I hope his
Majesty will imitate God in the benigner part too, and as he was severe to Job
only while he discoursed with another concerning him, but when he vouchsafed
to speak himself unto him, began to rebuke those who had mistaken and
mis-judged his Case, and to restore the patient man to his former prosperity:
so now, that his Majesty has admitted us to his presence, and spoken face to
face with us, I doubt not but we shall see fairer days, and be as rich in the
possession of our own as ever we were. I wonder at those that seem to doubt
the success of this Parliament, or that the misunderstanding betwixt the King
and his People should last any longer, now they have so happily met. His
Majesty's wants are not so great, but that we may find means to supply him;
nor our desires so unreasonable, or so incompetible with government, but that
his Majesty may well satisfy them. For our late experience (I hope) will teach
us what rocks to shun and how necestary the use of moderation is: And for his
Majesty, he has had experience enough how that prospers which is gotten
without the concurrent good will of his people: never more money taken from the
Subject, never more want in the Exchequer. If we look upon what we have paid,
it is more then ever the people of England did in such a time; if we look upon
what has been effected therewith, it shows as if never King had been worse
supplied; so that we seem to have acted Belids part, whose punishment was to
endeavor the filling of a Sive with water. Whosoever gave advice for these
courses, has made good the saying of the wise man, Qui conturbat domum suam
possidebit ventum. By new ways they think to accomplish wonders, but in truth
they graspe the wind, and are in the mean time saevus ambobus Achilles,
cruel to us, and to the King too: for if the Commonwealth flourish, then he
that has the Sovereignty can never want nor do amiss, so as he govern not
according to the interest of others, but go the shortest and the safest ways
to his own and the common good, with regard how they stand in order to any
private man's desires, or a preservation. The Kings of this Nation have always
governed by Parliaments: And if we look upon the success of things since
Parliaments were laid by, it resembles that of the Grecians, Ex illo fluere and
vetito sublapsa referri Rex Danaum, especially on the Subjects parts; for
though the King has gotten little, they have lost all: but his Majesty shall
hear the truth from us, and we shall make to appear the errors of Divines,
who would persuade us that a Monarch can be absolute, and that he may do all
things, ad libitum, receding not only from their text, (though that be a
wandering too) but from the way which their own profession would teach them,
Stare super vias antiquas, and remove not the ancient bounds and land-markes
which our Fathers have set. If to be absolute were to be restrained by no
laws, then can no King in Christendom be so, for they all stand obliged to
the Laws Christian, and we ask no more: For to this Pillar are our
privileges fixed, our Kings at their Coronation taking a sacred oath not to
infringe them. I am sorry these men take not more care of informing our faith
of those things which they tell us for our souls health, whiles we know them
so manifestly in the wrong, in that which concerns the liberties and
privileges of the Subjects of England: But they gain preferment, and then
it is no matter, though they never believe themselves nor are believed of
others. But since they are so ready to let loose the Conscience of our Kings,
we are the more carefully to provide for our protection against this
Pulpit-Law, by declaring and re enforcing the Municipall Laws of this
kingdom. It is worth the observing how new this opinion is, or rather this way
of rising, even amongst themselves. For, Master Hooker, who sure was no
refractory man (as they term it) thinks that the first Government was
arbitrary, until it was found, that to live by one man's will became the cause
of all men's miseries, (these are his words;) and that this was the original of
inventing Laws. And (Master Speaker.) if we look furtner back, our Histories
will tell us that the Prelates of this kingdom have often been the mediators
between the King and his Subjects, to present and pray redress of their
grievances, and had reciprocally then as much love and reverence from the
People: but these Preachers, more active then their Predecessors, and wiser
then the Laws, have found out a better form of Government; the King must be
more absolute Monarch then any of his Predecessors, and to them he must owe
it, though in the mean time they hazard the hearts of his people, and involve
him into a thousand difficulties. For, suppose this form of Government were
inconvenient, and yet (Master Speaker) this is but a supposition, for these
five hundred years it has not only maintained us in safety, but made us
victorious over other Nations; but (I say) suppose they have another Idea of
one more convenient, we all know how dangerous Innovations are, and what
hazard those Princes run, that enterprise the change of a long established
Government. Now (Master Speaker) of all our Kings that have gone before, and of
all that are to succeed in this happy race, why should so pious and so good a
King be exposed to this trouble and hazard? besides that, Kings so diverted
can never do any great matter abroad. But (Master Speaker) whiles these men
have thus bent their wits against the Laws of their Country, whether they
have neglected their own Province, and what Tares are grown up in the field
which they should have tilled, I leave it to a second consideration; not but
that Religion ought to be the first thing in our purposes and desires, but
that which is first in dignity is not always to precede in order of time; for,
well-being supposes a being, and the first impediment which men naturally
endeavor to remove, is the want of those things without which they cannot
subsist. God first assigned unto Adam maintenance of life, and gave him a title
to the rest of the Creatures before he appointed a Law to observe. And let me
tell you (if our adversaries have any such design) as there is nothing more
easy then to impose Religion on a People deprived of their Liberties, so there
is nothing more hard then to do the same upon Freemen. And therefore (Master
Speaker) I conclude with this motion, that an order may be presently made,
that the first thing this House will consider of, shall be the restoring this
Nation in general to the fundamental and vital Liberties, the propriety of
our goods, and freedom of our Persons: and that then we will forthwith
consider of the supply desired; and thus we shall discharge the trust reposed
in us by those that sent us hither, his Majesty will see that we make more
then ordinary haste to satisfy his demands, and we shall let all those know
that seek to hasten the matter of supply, that they will so far delay it, as
they give interruption to the former.

A Speech made by the Honorable DENZELL HOLLES, Esquire, at a Conference by a
Committee of both Houses of Parliament in the painted Chamber, May 4. 1641. in
the presenting of the Protestation.
My Lords,
THe Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, having taken into
their serious consideration the present estate and condition of this Kingdom,
they find it surrounded with variety of pernicious and destructive designs,
practices, and plots against the well-being of it, nay, the very being of it,
and some of these designs hatched within our own bowels, and, viper-like,
working our destruction.

They find Jesuits and Priests conspiring with ill Ministers of State to
destroy our Religion: they find ill Ministers conjoined together to subvert our
Laws and Liberties.

They find obstructions of Justice, which is the life blood of every State, and
(having a free passage from the Sovereign Power, where it is primarily seated,
as the life blood in the heart, and thence derived through the several
Judicatories, as through so many veins, into all the parts of this great
collective Body) does give warmth and motion to every part and member, which is
nourished and enlivened by it: but being once precluded, stopped, and seared
up, as the particular must of necessity faint and languish, so must the whole
frame of Government be dissolved: and consequently Sovereignty it self, which
as the heart in the body, is Primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, must dye and
perish in the general dissolution, and all things return, as in the
beginning, in antiquum Chaos.

They find the propriety of the subject invaded and violated, his estate rent
from him by illegal Taxations, Impositions, Monopolies and Projects (almost
upon every thing which is for the use of man) not only upon superfluities, but
necessaries; and this to enrich the vermin and caterpillars of the Land, and
to impoverish the good subjects, to take the meat from the children, and give
it to dogs.

My Lords, If we find these things so, we must conceive, they must be ill
counsels which have brought us into this condition: These counsels have put all
into a combustion, have discouraged the hearts of all true English men, and
have brought two Armies into our bowels, which (as the Vulture upon Prometheus)
eat through our sides, and gnaw our very hearts.

Hinc dolor: sed unde medicina?

Heretofore Parliaments were the Catholicon, the Balm of Gilead which healed
our wounds, restored our Spirits, and made up all the breaches of the Land; But
of late years they have been like the Fig Tree in the Gospel, without
efficacy, without fruit, only destructive to the particular members, who
discharge their duties and consciences, no way beneficial to the
Commonwealth; Nobis exitiabile, nec Reipub. profuturum, as he said in Tacitus;
commonly taken away, as Elias was, with a whirle-winde, never coming to any
maturity, or to their natural end; whereas they should be like that blessed
old man, who dies (plenus dierum) in a full age, after he has fought a good
fight, and overcome all his enemies; as the shock of wheat which comes in in
due season, to fill our Granaries with Corn, uphold our lives with the staff
of bread.

For, Parliaments are our panis quotidianus, our true bread; all other ways
are but Quelques chooses, which yield no true nourisshment, breed no good blood.

This very Parliament which has sat so long, has all this while but beaten
the air, and striven against the stream; for I may truly say, wind and tide
have still been against us.

The same ill counsels which first raised the storm, which almost shipwrackt
the Commonwealth, do still continue; they blow strong like the East Wind that
brought the Locusts over the land.

These counsels cross our designs, east difficulties in our way, hinder our
proceedings, and make all that we do to be fruitless and ineffectuall; they
make us to be not masters of our business, and so not masters of money, which
has been the great business of this Parliament, that we might pay the Armies
according to our promises and engagements.

For, (My Lords) our not effecting of the good things which we had undertaken
for the good of the Church and Commonwealth, has wounded our reputation, and
taken off from our credit.

Is it not time then (my Lords) that we should unite and concentrate our
selves in regard of this Antiperistasis and circumvallation of hurtful and
malicious intentions and practices against us? (My Lords) it is most agreeable
to nature, and I am sure, most agreeable to reason, in respect of the present
conjuncture of our affairs: for one maine engine by which our enemies work our
mischief, is by infusing an opinion and belief into the world, that we are
not united amongst our selves; but that, like Sampsons Foxes, we draw several
ways, and tend to several ends.

To defeat then the counsels of those Achitophels, which would involve us, our
Religion, our King, our Laws, our Liberties, all that can be near and dear
unto an honest soul, in one universal and general desolation; to defeat (I
say) the counsels of such Achitophels, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of
the House of Commons (knowing themselves to be specially entrusted with the
preservation of the whole, and in their consciences persuaded that the dangers
are so imminent that they will admit of no delay) have thought fit to declare
their united affections, by entering into an Association amongst themselves, and
by making a solemn Protestation and Vow unto their God, that they will
unanimously endeavor to oppose and prevent the counsels, and the Counselors
which have brought upon us all these miseries, and fears of greater; to
prevent the ends, and bring the Authors of them to condign punishment, and
thereby discharge themselves both before God and man.

The Protestation your Lordships shall have read unto you, together with the
grounds and reasons which have induced the House of Commons to make it, which
are prefixed before it by way of Preamble.

The PREAMBLE.
We the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house in Parliament,
finding, to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests
and Jesuits, and other Adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more
boldly and frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and
danger of the ruin of the true reformed Protestant Religion in His Majesty's
Dominions established: And finding also that there have been, and having just
cause to suspect that there still are, even during this sitting in Parliament,
endeavors to subvert the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to
introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most
pernicious and wicked Counsels, Practices, Plots, and Conspiraces: And that the
long intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliaments has occasioned many
illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and grieved: And
that diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church,
multitudes driven out of His Majesty's Dominions, Jealousies raised and
fomented betwixt the King and His people, a Popish Army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of His
Majesty's Royal Person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown, and
Treasure of this Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of Jealousy, that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a
misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army, with force
to bring to pass those wicked Counsels, Have therefore thought good to join
our selves in a Declaration of our united affections and resolutions.

NOte, That because some doubts were raised by several persons out of the
Commons House, concerning the meaning of these words contained in the
Protestation lately made by the Members of that House, viz. The true Reformed
Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England against
all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same
Doctrine; The House of Commons did declare, That by those words, was and is
meant only the public Doctrine professed in the said Church, so far as it is
opposite to Popery and Popish Innovations; And that the said words are not to
be extended to the maintaining of any form of Worship, Discipline, or
Government, nor of any Rites or Ceremonies of the Church of England.

MY Lords, The House of Commons have commanded me to present unto your
Lordships this Protestation: Every member in that House has made it, not one
refusing it; and they have sent it unto your Lordships, with an assurance of
your Lordships concurrence in the same zeal and affection for the public
safety. And it is their desire your Lordships would likewise make the same
Protestation, which I humbly leave to your Lordships wisdoms.

Directions for more orderly making of the foresaid Protestation.
IT is thought fit that the Protestation which the Parliament late y made be
taken by the City of London, in the several Parish Churches, in the afternoon
of some Lords day, after Sermon, before the Congregation be dissolved, by all
Masters of Families, their sons, and menservants, in manner and form
following, viz.

First, That forthwith notice of this intention be given to the Minister,
Churchwardens, and some other me persons of each Parish in London, Liberties,
and adjacent Parishes, and some of them to give notice to the rest of the
Parishioners.

Secondly, That the Minister be entreated (if he please) to acquaint his Parish
in his Sermon, either forenoon or aftternoon, with the nature of the business,
more or less, as he shall think fit, for the better and more solemn taking
of the said Protestation; or if the Minister refuse it, that some other be
entreated to preach that will promote the business; or if neither of these may
be had, that some other convenient course be taken by some well affected to
the business, to stay the Parish, and communicate the matter to them.

Thirdly, That the Minister or Ministers of every Congregation first take it in
his or their own person, reading the said Protestation in so distinct a voice,
that all present may conveniently hear it, and that all the Assembly present
do make the same Protestation distinctly after this manner, every man taking
this Protestation into his hand.

IA. B. do in the presence of Almighty God freely and heartily promise, vow,
and protest the same which the leading person took, naming the person.

Fourthly, That there be a Register Book wherein every man taking this vow or
Protestation subscribe his name, with his own hand or mark, and that the names
be taken of such as do refuse the same.

Fifthly, That all the Parishioners abovesaid, whether in Town, or out of
Town, be earnestly requested to be present at their own Parish Church in the
afternoon of that Lords day whereon it shall be taken, that every man may take
it in their own place; and if any be necessarily absent, that they may be
desired to take it the next Lords day after, or so soon as may be with
convenience.

Sixthly, and lastly, That all whom it does not immediately concern, be
earnestly requested to depart.

FINIS.
Mr. Grimstons Speech in the High Court of Parliament.
M. SPEAKER.
THese Petitions which have been now read, they are all Remonstrances of the
general and universal grievances and distempers that are now in the State and
Government of the Church and Commonwealth: and they are not them alone, But his
Majesty's gracious Expressions the first day of Parliament, that calls me up to
speak at this present, contrary to my own Intentions.

Mr. Speaker, his Majesty, who is the head of the body politic, and the
Father of the Commonwealth, has complained first, declaring his sensiblenesse
of our sufferings, and amongst other things, has put us in mind of our
grievances, and has freely left it to our selves (for our redress and repair
therein) to begin and end, as we shall think fit. And this draws me on with
much cheerfulness and zeal to contribute my poor endeavors to so great a
work.

And Mr. Speaker, I conceive it will not be altogether impertinent for your
direction and guidance in that great place, which by the favor of his
Majesty, and this House you now possess, a little to recollect our selves in
the remembrance of what was done the last Parliament, and where we ended.

It will likewise be very considerable what has bin done since that
Parliament, and who they are that have been the Authors and Causers of all our
miseries and distractions, both before and sithence.

Mr. Speaker, the last Parliament, as soon as the House was settled, a
Subsidiarie aid and supply was propounded, and many Arguments used to give the
precedencie before all other matters and Considerations whatsoever.

On the other side, a multitude of Complaints and Grievances of all sorts,
as well concerning our Eternal as our Temporal estates were presented and put
in the other balance: The wisdom of that great Council waighing both
indifferently, and looking not only upon the dangers then threatne^ from
Scotland (which are now upon us) but likewise taking into their consideration
the Condition and Constitution of the present government here at home,
concluded that they were in no capacity to give, unless their grievances were
first red ressed and removed.

For Mr. Speaker, it then was, and still is, most manifest and apparent, that
by some judgments lately obtained in Court of Justice, and by some new ways
of Government lately st rted up amongst us; the Law of property is so much
shaken, that no man can say he is Master of any thing: But all that we have,
we hold as Tenants by courtesy, and at will, and may be stripped of it at
pleasure.

Yet Mr. Speaker, desirous to give his Majesty all possible satisfaction and
contentment, as well in the manner of supply for expedition, as in the
substance and matter of it, we confined and limited our selves but to three
particulars only, and to such matters as properly and naturally should have
reference and relation to those three heads.

1. The first was the privileges of Parliament. 2. The second matters of
Religion. 3. The third, the propriety of our goods and Estates.
And we began with the first, as the great Ark, in which the other two,
Religion and property are included and preserved.

Mr. Speaker, the violations complained of the last Parliament, touching our
privileges, were of two sorts; either such as had been done in Parliament or
out of Parliament.

Concerning the violations of the first sort, it was resolved by vote, that the
Speaker refusing to put a question, being thereunto required by the House,

Or to adjourne the House upon any command whatsoever, without the consent and
approbation of the House it self, were breaches and violations that highly
impeached our privileges.

And having passed the vote, I conceive it were fit we should now proceed a
little further, and consider of a way how to be repaired against them that have
been the violaters: For Execution does animare Legem. The putting of an old
Law in Execution, you know Mr. Speaker, does oftentimes do more good then the
making of a new one.

As concerning the violations of the other sort, done out of Parliament in
Courts of Justice, and at the Council board, where neither our persons nor our
proceeding ought to have been controlled or meddled withal: And as concerning
matters of Religion, and the property of our goods and estates, there were
diverse things then likewise agreed upon by vote, whereupon a conference was
desired to have ^eene with the Lords: But what interjections and rubs we met
withal by the way, and how the Lords countervoted the precedence of our
grievances, and how our Speaker was taken away from amongst us, and what an
unhappy conclusion we had at the last, the remembrance of it were a subject too
sad to begin another Parliament wi hall.

Therefore Mr. Speaker, I shall pass from what was done the last Parliament,
and come to what has been done since that Parliament ended.

M. Speaker, there are some worthy Gentlemen now of this House that were
members of the last Parliament, that carried themselves in the matters and
businesses then and there agitated and debated, with great Wisdom, and
unexampled moderation. But what had they at last for all their pains, in
attending the public strince of the Commonwealth, As soon as ever the
Parliament was ended, their Studies and Pockets were searched, as if they had
been Fellons and Traitors, and they committed to several Goales, with an
intention I am confident of their utter ruin and destruction, had they not
foreseen a danger approaching; For Master Speaker, if I be truly informed, an
information was drawn, or at least, directions given for the drawing of it,
against them in the Star Chamber.

Master Speaker, there has been since the last Parliament a Synod, and in
that Synod a new Oath has been made and framed, and enjoined to be taken.

Master Speaker, they might as well have made a new Law, and enjoined the
execution of that, as enjoined and urged the taking of the other, not being
established by Act of Parliament, and in point of mischief, the safety of the
Commonwealth, and the freedom and liberties of the Subject are more concerned
in the doing of the one, then if they had done the other.

The next exception I shall take to it, is to the matter contained in the Oath
it self.

Master Speaker, they would have us at the very first dash swear in a damnable
Heresy, that matters necessary to salvation are contained in the Discipline of
our Church.

Whereas Master Speaker, it has ever been the tenet of our Church, that all
things necessary to salvation are comprehended and contained in the Doctrine of
our Church only; And that has always been used as an Argument until this
very present, against Antidisciplinarians, to stop their mouths withal; And
therefore that for that reason they might with the less regret and offense,
conform and submit themselves to the Discipline of our Church.

And Master Speaker, for prevention in case the Wisdom of the State in this
great Council, should at any time think fit to alter any thing in the
government of our Church, they would anticipate and fore-stall our judgments,
by making us swear beforehand, that we would never give our consent to any
alteration.

Nay Master Speaker, they go a little further, for they would have us swear,
that the government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Archdeacons,
etc. is Jure divino, Their words are, as of right it ought to stand; Whereas
Master Speaker, we meet not with the name of an Archbishop, or a Deane, or an
Archdeacon in all the new Testament. And whatsoever may be said of the
Function of Bishops it is one thing: But for their Jurisdiction it is merely
Humana institutione, and they must thank the King for it.

As for their gross, absurd, etc. wherein they would have men swear they know
neither what, nor how many fathom deep: There is neither Divinity nor charity
in it, and yet they would put that upon us.

Master Speaker, what they meant and intended by this new Oath, and their Book
of Canons, and their Book of Articles, which they would have our
Churchwardens sworn unto, to enquire of, and to present thereupon, I must
confess I know not, unless they had a purpose therein to blow up the
Protestant Religion, and all the faithful professors of it, and to advance
their Hierarchy a step higher, which I suppose we all fear is high enough
already.

Master Speaker, they have likewise in this Synod granted a benevolence, but
the nature of the things agrees not with the name, for in plain English it is
six Subsidies to be paid by the Clergy in six years: And the penalty they
have imposed upon the refusers, for none-payment, is to be deprived of their
Functions, to be stripped of their freehold, and to be excommunicated, and
this Act of their Synod is not published amongst their Canons, for which they
might have some colorable seeming authority: But it comes out, in a Book
alone by it self in the Latin tongue, supposing as I conceive that Laymen
are as ignorant as they would have them; And thus they think they dance in a
Net.

And as in this, so in most of their new Canons if they be thoroughly
considered, any judicious man may easily discern and perceive, that they do
therein like Watermen that look one way and row another, they pretend one
thing, but intend nothing less; And certainly Mr. Speaker in this they have
flowne a high pitch; For a Synod called together upon pretense of reconciling
and settling Controversies and matters in Religion, to take upon them the
boldness thus out of Parliament, to grant Subsidies, and to meddle with men's
Free-holds, I dare say the like was never heard of before, and they that durst
do this, will do worse if the current of their raging Tyranny be not stopped
in time.

Who are they (Master Speaker) that have countenanced and cherished Popery and
Armianisme to that growth and height it is now come to, in this Kingdom?

Who are they (Master Speaker) that have given encouragement to those that have
boldly preached those damnable Heresies in our Pulpits?

Who are they (Master Speaker) that have given authoritry, and license to them
that have published those Heresies in Print?

Who are they (Master Speaker) that of late days have been advanced to any
dignity or preferment in the Church, but such as have been notoriously
suspicious in their Disciplines, corrupt in their Doctrines, and for the most
part, vicious in their lives?

And who are they (Master Speaker) that have overthrown our two great Charters,
Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta?

What imposition has been laid down, or what Monopoly has been damned in
any Court of Justice since the last Parliament?

Has not ship money, Coal and conduct money, and money for other Military
charges, been collected and leavied, with as great violence as ever they were,
in violation of our liberties, confirmed unto us in our Petition of Right;
notwithstanding all our supplications and complaints the last Parliament?

And who are they Master Speaker, that have caused all those dangerous
Convulsions, and all the desperate unnatural bloody distempers, that are now
in our body politic?

Master Speaker, I will tell you a passage, I heard from a Judge in the
King's Bench. There was a poor man committed by the Lords, for refusing to
submit unto a project, and having attended a long time at the King's Bench
Bar, upon his Habeas Corpus, and at last pressing very earnestly to be
bayled, The Judge said to the rest of his brethren, Come Brothers (said he) let
us Bail him, for they begin to say in the Town, that the Judges have
overthrown the Law, and the Bishops the Gospel.

Master Speaker, I would not be misunderstood in what I have said; for there
are some of both functions and professions, that I highly honor and reverence
in my heart, for their wisdoms and integrities. But Master Speaker, I may say
it; for I am sure we have all felt it, that there are some of both functions
and professions, that have been the Authors and causers of all the Miseries,
Ruins, and Calamities that are now upon us.

Master Speaker, This is the Age; This is the Age (Master Speaker) that has
produced and brought forth Achitophells, Hammans, Woolsies, Empsons, and
Dudlies, Tricilians, and Belknapps, Vipers and Monsters of all sorts. And I
doubt not, but when his Majesty shall be truly informed of such matters, as we
are able to charge them withal, we shall have the same Justice against these,
which heretofore has been against their Predecessors, in whose wicked steps
they have trodden.

And therefore Master Speaker, to put our selves into a way for our redress
and relief, I conceive it were fit that a Committee might be named to take
these Petitions, that have now been read, and all others of the like nature,
into their considerations, to the end, that the parties grieved, may have just
repair for their grievances; and that out of them, Laws may be contrived, and
framed for the preventing of the like mischiefs, for the future.

FINIS.
THE LORD DIGBYES SPEECH IN THE HOUSE of Commons, to the Bill of Attainder of
the Earl of STRATFORD, the 21. April. 1641.
Master Speaker.
WE are now upon the point of giving (as much as in us lies) the final
Sentence unto death or life, on a great Minister of State and Peer of this
Kingdom, Thomas Earl of Strafford; a name of hatred in the present age by his
Practices, and fit to be made a terror to future Ages by his punishment.

I have had the honor to be employed by the House in this great business,
from the first hours that it was taken into consideration: it was a matter of
great trust, (and I will say with confidence) that I have served the House in
it with industry, according to my ability, but with most exact faithfulness
and secrecy.

And as I have hitherto discharged my duty to this House and to my Country, in
the progress of this great Cause; so I trust I shall do now in the last
period of it, to God and to a good conscience.

I do wish the peace of that unto my self, and the blessings of Almighty God
to me and my posterity, according as my judgment on the life of this man
shall be consonant with my heart, and the best of my understanding, in all
integrity.

I know well Master Speaker, that by some things I have said of late, whilst
this Bill was in agitation, I have raised some prejudices upon me in the cause.

Yea some (I thank them for their plain dealing) have been so free as to tell
me, that I suffered much by the backwardness I have shown in this Bill of
Attainder of the Earl of Strafford, against whom I had been formerly so
keen, so active.

Mr. Speaker, I beg of you and the rest but a suspension of judgment
concerning me, till I have opened my heart unto you freely and clearly in this
business.

Truly Sir, I am still the same in my opinions and affections, as unto the
Earl of Srafford, I confidently believe him the most dangerous Minister, the
most insupportable to free Subjects, that can be charactered.

I believe his practices in themselves as high, as tyrannical, as any Subject
ever ventured on, and the malignity of them hugely aggravated by those rare
abilities of his, whereof God has given him the use, but the Devil the
application. In a word, I believe him still that grand Apostate to the
Commonwealth, who must not expect to be pardoned it in this world, till he be
dispatched to the other. And yet let me tell you Master Speaker, my hand must
not be to that dispatch. I protest, as my Conscience stands informed, I had
rather it were off.

Let me unfold unto you the Mystery, Master Speaker.

I will not dwell much upon justifying unto you my seeming variance at this
time from what I was formerly, by putting you in mind of the difference
between Prosecutors and Judges,

How misbecomming that fervor would be in a Judge, which perhaps was
commendable in a Prosecutor. Judges we are now, and must put on another
Personage.

It is honest and noble to be earnest in order to the discovery of Truth, but
when that has been brought as far as it can to light, our judgment
thereupon ought to be calm and cautious.

In prosecution upon probable grounds, we are accountable only for our
industry or remissness, but in judgment, we are deeply responsable to God
Almighty, for its rectitude or obliquity. In cases of life, the Judge is Gods
Steward of the parties blood, and must give a strict account for every drop.

But as I told you Master Speaker, I will not insist long upon this ground of
difference in me now, from what I was formerly.

The truth on it is, Sir the same ground whereupon I (with the rest of the five,
to whom you first committed the consideration of my Lord of Strafford) brought
down our opinion, that it was fit he should be accused of Treason, upon the
same ground I was engaged with earnestness in his prosecution, and had the
same ground remained in that force of belief with me, which till very lately
it did, I should not have been tender in his condemnation. But truly Sir, to
deal plainly with you, that ground of our accusation, that spur to our
prosecution, and that which should be the basis of my judgment, of the Earl
of Strafford, as unto Treason, is to my understanding quite vanished away.

This it was, Master Speaker.

His advising the King to employ the Army of Ireland, to reduce England.

This I was assured would be proved, before I gave my consent to his
accusation. I was confirmed in the same belief, during the prosecution, and
fortified in it most of all since Sir Henry Veins preparatory examinations, by
the assurances which that worthy member Mr. Pymme gave me, that his Testimony
would be made convincing by some notes of what passed at the Junto concurrent
with it, which I ever understanding to be of some other Counselor, you see
now prove but a Copy of the same Secretaries notes, discovered and produced in
the manner you have heard, and those, Such disioynted fragments of the venomous
part of discourses, no results, no conclusions of Counsels, which are the only
things that Secretaries should register, there being no use at all of the
other, but to accuse and to bring men into danger.

But Sir, this is not that which overthrowes the evidence with me, concerning
the Army of Ireland; nor yet that all the rest of the Iunto upon their oaths
remember nothing of it.

But this Sir, which I shall tell you, is that which works with me under
favor, to an utter overthrow of his evidence, as unto that of the Army of
Ireland: Before, whilst I was a prosecutor, and under tie of Secrecy, I might
not discover any weakness of the cause, which now as a Judge I must. Master
Secretary was examined thrice upon Oath, at the preparatory Committee.

The first time he was questioned to all the Interrogatories, and to that part
of the seventh which concerns the Army of Ireland, he said positively in these
words, I cannot charge him with that. But for the rest, he desires time to
recollect himself, which was granted him.

Some days after, he was examined a second time, and then deposes these words
concerning the Kings being absolved from rules of government, and so forth very
clearly. But being pressed to that part, concerning the Irish Army, again can
say nothing to that.

Here we thought we had done with him, till diverse weeks after, my Lord of
Northumberland and all others of the Junto, denying to have heard any thing
concerning those words of reducing England by the Irish Army, it was thought
fit to examine the Secretary once more, and then he deposes these words to have
been said by the Earl of Strafford to his Majesty: You have an Army in
Ireland, which you may employ here to reduce, (or some word to that sense) this
Kingdom.

Mr. Speaker, these are the circumstances which I confess with my Conscience,
thrust quite out of doors that grand Article of our charge, concerning his
desperate advice to the King, of employing the Irish Army here.

Let not this, I beseech you, be driven to an aspersion upon Master Secretary,
as if he should have sworn otherwise then he knew or believed, he is too
worthy to do that; only let thus much be inferred from it, that he who twice
upon Oath with time of recollection, could not remember any thing of such a
business, might well a third time misremember somewhat: and in this business
the difference of one Letter, here for there, or that for this, quite alters
the case, the latter also being the more probable, since it is confessed of all
hands, that the debate then was concerning a war with Scotland, and you may
remember that at the Bar he once said to employ there. And thus Mr. Speaker, I
have faithfully given you an account what it is that has blunted the edge of
the Hatchet or Bill with me toward my Lord of Strafford.

This was that whereupon I accused him with a free heart, prosecuted him with
earnestness, and had it to my understanding been proved, should have
condemned him with innocence. Whereas now I cannot satisfy my conscience to
do it.

I profess I can have no notion of any bodies intent to subvert the Laws
treasonably, or by force; and this design of force not appearing, all his
other wicked practices cannot amount so high with me.

I can find a more easy and more natural spring, from whence to derive all
his other Crimes, then from an intent to bring in Tyranny, and to make his
own posterity as well as us, Slaves, as from revenge, from Pride, from
Avarice, from Passion, and insolence of Nature.

But had this of the Irish Army been proved, it would have diffused a
complexion of Treason, over all, it would have been a With indeed, to bind all
those other scattered and lesser branches, as it were into a Faggot of Treason.

I do not say but the rest may represent him a man as worthy to dye, and
perhaps worthier then many a Traitor. I do not say, but they may justly direct
us to Enact that they shall be Treason for the future.

But God keep me from giving judgment of death on any Man, and of ruin to
his innocent Posterity, upon a Law made a posteriori.

Let the mark be set on the door where the Plague is, and then let him that
will enter dye.

I know Master Speaker, there is in Parliament a double power of life and death
by Bill, a judicial power, and a Legislative: the measure of the one, is
what is Legally just, of the other, what is prudentially and politickly fit for
the good and preservation of the whole. But those two, under favor, are not to
be confounded in Judgment. We must not piece up want of Legality with matter
of convenience, nor the defailance of prudentiall fitness, with a pretense of
legal Justice.

To condemn my Lord of Strafford judicially as for Treason, my conscience is
not assured that the matter will bear it.

And to do it by the Legislative power, my reason consultively cannot agree to
that, since I am persuaded, neither the Lords nor the King will pass the Bill,
and consequently that our passing it will be a cause of great divisions and
combustions in the State.

And therefore my humble advice is, that laying aside this Bill of Attainder,
we may think of another, saving only life, such as may secure the State from my
Lord of Strafford, without endangering it, as much by division concerning his
punishment, as he has endangered it by his practices.

If this may not be hearkened unto, let me conclude in saying that unto you all,
which I have thoroughly inculcated to mine own conscience upon this occasion.
Let every man lay his hand upon his heart, and sadly consider what we are going
to do, with a breath, either justice or murder; justice on the one side, or
murder heightened and aggravated to its supreamest extent. For as the Casuists
say, that he who lies with his sister commits incest, but he that marries his
sister sins higher, by applying Gods Ordinance to his crime: So doubtless he
that commits murder with the sword of Justice, heightens that crime to the
utmost.

The danger being so great, and the case so doubtful, that I see the best
Lawyers in diametrall opposition concerning it, Let every man wipe his heart,
as he does his eyes, when he would judge of a nice and subtle object. The
eye, if it be pretincted with any color, is vitiated in its discerning. Let us
take heed of a blood-shotten-eye of Judgment.

Let every man purge his heart clear of all passions, (I know this great and
wise body politic can have none, but I speak to inviduals from the weakness
which I find in my self.) Away with personal animosities, away with all
flatteries to the people, in being the sharper against him, because he is
odious to them; away with all fears, lest by the sparing his blood they may be
incenst; away with all such considerations, as that it is not fit for a
Parliament, that one accused by it of Treason should escape with life.

Let not former vehemence of any against him, nor fear from thence, that he
cannot be safe while that man lives, be an ingredient in the sentence of any
one of us.

Of all these corruptives of judgment, Mr. Speaker, I do before God discharge
my self to the uttermost of my power,

And do with a clear Conscience wash my hands of this man's blood, by this
solemn protestation, that my Vote goes not to the taking of the Earl of
Straffords life.

FINIS.
The Two last SPEECHES of Thomas Wentworth, Late Earl of Strafford, and Deputy
of Ireland.
His speech in the Tower, to the Lords.
RIght Honorable, and the rest, you are now come to convey me to my death, I
am willing to dye, which is a thing no more than all our Predecessors have
done, and a debt that our Posterity must in their due time discharge, which
since it can be no way avoided, it ought the less to be feared; for that which
is common to all, ought not to be intolerable to any: It is the Law of Nature,
the tribute of the flesh, a remedy from all worldly cares and troubles; and to
the truly penitent, a perfect path to blessedness. And there is but one death,
though several ways unto it: mine is not natural, but enforced by the Law
and Justice: it has been said that the Laws vex only the meaner sort of
people, but the mighty are able to withstand them: it is not so with me, for to
the Law I submit my self, and confess that I receive nothing but Justice: for
he that politikly intends good to a Commonweal, may be called a just man,
but he that practices either for his own profit, or any other sinister ends,
may be well termed 2 delinquent person; neither is delay in punishment any
privilege for pardon. And moreover I ingenuously confess with Cicero, That the
death of the bad is the safety of the good that be alive.

Let no man trust either in the favor of his Prince, the friendship and
consanguinity of his Peers, much less in his own wisdom and knowledge, of
which I ingeniously confess I have been too confident. Kings, as they are men
before God, so they are Gods before men, and I may say with a great man once in
this kingdom, Had I strived to obey my God as faithfully, as I sought to
honor my King fraudulently, I had stood, and not fallen. Most happy and
fortunate is that Prince, who is as much for his justice feared, as for his
goodness beloved: For the greater that Princes are in power above other, the
more they ought in verrue to excel other; and such is the royal Sovereign
whom I late served.

For my Peers, the correspondence that I had with them during my prosperity,
was to me very delightful and pleasing, and here they have commiserated my
ruin, I have plentifully found, who (for the most generous of them) I may
boldly say, though they have detested the fact, yet they have pitied the person
delinquent; the first in their loyalty, the last in their charity:
ingenuously confessing, that never any Subject, or Peer of my rank, had ever
that help of Counsel, that benefit of time, or a more free and legal trial
than I have had: of the like to which, none of my Predecessors has had so much
favor from his Prince, so much sufferance from the people; in which I
comprehend the understanding Commons, not the many headed monster, Multitude:
but I have offended, and sentenced, and must now suffer me.

And for my too much confidence in my supposed wisdom and knowledge, therein
have been the most deceived: For he that is wise to himself, and knows by
others faults to correct his own offenses, to be truly wise is to be
Secretaries to our selves; for it is mere folly to reveal and intimate
thoughts to strangers: wisdom is the most precious Gem with which the mind
can be adorned, and learning the most famous thing for which a man ought to be
esteemed, and true wisdom teaches us to do well, as to speak well: in the
first I have failed, for the wisdom of man in foolishness with God.

For knowledge, it is a thing indifferent both to good and evil, but the best
knowledge, is for a man to know himself; he that does so shall esteem of
himself but little, for he considers from whence he came, and whereto he
must, he regards not the vain pleasures of this life, he exaiteth God, and
strives to live in his fear; but he that knows not himself is wilful in his
own ways, unprofitable in his life, unfortunate in his death, and so am I. But
the reason why I sought to attain unto it was this: I have read that he that
knows not that which he ought to know, is a bruit beast amongst men: he that
knows more then he ought to know, is a man amongst beasts: but he that
knows all that may be known, is a God amongst men. To this I much aspired, in
this I much failed; Vanity of Vanities, all is but vanity.

I have heard the people clamor and cry out, saying, That through my occasion
the times are bad, I wish that when. I am dead they may prove better: most true
it is, that there is at this time a great storm in ending (God in his mercy
avert it.) And since it is my particular lot, lik Jonab, to be cast into the
sea, I shall think my life well spent, to appease Gods wrath, and satisfy the
peoples malice.

O what is eloquence more than air? fashioned with an articulate and distinct
sound, when it is a special virtue to speak little and well, and silence is
often the best oratory; for sools in their dumbness may be accounted wise: It
has power to make a good matter seem bad, and a bad cause appear good: but
mine was to me unprofitable, and like the Cypress trees, which are great and
tall, but altogether without fruit.

What is honor, but the first step to disquietnesse? and power is still waited
on by envy, neither has it any privilege against infamy. It is held to be the
chief part of honor, for a man to join to his office and calling, courtesy
and affability, commiseration and pity: for thereby he draws to him with a
kind of compulsion, the hearts of the multitude. But that was the least part
of my study, which now makes me call to mind, that the greater the persons are
in authority, the sooner they are caught in any delinquency, and their smallest
crimes are striven to be made capital, the smallest spot seems great in the
finest linen, and the least flaw is soonest found in the richest Diamond. But
high and noble spirits finding themselves wounded, grieve not so much at their
own pain and perplexity, as at the deriding and scoffing of their enemy: but
for mine own part, though I might have many in my life, I hope to find none in
my death.

Amongst other things which pollute and contaminate the minds of great
spirits, there is none more heinous than Ambition, which is seldom
unaccompanied without A varice: Such, to possess their ends, care not to
violate the Laws of Religion and Reason, and to break the bonds of modesty and
equity, which the nearest ties of Consanguinity and Amity; of which as I have
been guilty, so I crave at Gods hands forgiveness. It is a Maxim in
Philosophy, that ambitious men can be never good Counselors to Princes; the
desire of having more is common to great Lords, and a desire of Rule a great
cause of their Ruin.

My Lords, I am now the hopeless President, may I be to you all an huppy
example: For Ambition devoureth gold, and drinks blood, and climbeth so high
by other men's heads, that at the length in the fall it breaks its own neck:
therefore it is better to live in humble content, than in high care and
trouble: For more precious is want with honesty, than wealth with infamy: For
what are we but mere vapors, which in a serene Element ascend high, and upon
an instant, like smoke, vanish into nothing: or like Ships without Pilots, ^ost
up and down upon the Seas by contrary winds and tempests. But the good
husbandman thinks better of those ears of Corn, which bow down, and grow
crooked, than those which are straight and upright, because he is assured to
find more store of grain in the one than in the other. This all men know, yet
of this, how few make use? The defect whereof must be now my pain: may my
suffering prove to others profit.

For what has now the favor of my Prince, the familiarity with my Peers, the
volubility of a tongue, the strength of my memory, my learning, or knowledge,
my honors, or Offices, my power and potency, my riches and treasure (all these
especial gifts, both of Nature and Fortune) what have all these profitted me?
Blessings I acknowledge, though by God bestowed upon man, yet not all of them
together upon many: yet by the Divine providence the most of them met in me: of
which had I made happy use, I might still have flourish't, who now am forced
immaturely to fall.

I now could wish (but that utinam is too late) that God with his outward
goodness toward me had so commixed his inward grace, that I had chused the
Medium path, neither inclining to the right hand, nor deviating to the left;
but like Icarus with my waxen wings, fearing by too low a flight to moisten
them with the Waves: I soared too high, and too near the Sun, by which they
being melted; I aiming at the highest, am precipitated to the lowest: and am
made a wretched prey to the Waters: But I who before built my house upon the
sand, have now settled my hopes upon the Rock my Savior: by whose only merits
my sole trust is, that whatsoever becomes of my body, yet in this bosom my
soul may be Sanctuaried.

Nintrod would have built a Tower to reach up to heaven, and called it Babel;
but God turned it to the confusion of Languages, and dissipation of the people.
Pharaoh kept the Children of Israel in bondage, and after having freed them, in
his great pride would have made them his prey; but God gave them a dry and
miraculous passage, and Pharaoh and his boast a watery Sepulcher. Belshazzer
feasted his Princes and Prostitutes, who drunk healths in the Vessels taken
from the Temple, but the hand of God writ upon the wall, Mean, Tekel, Phoras,
and that night before morning was both his Kingdom and life taken from him:
Thus God lets men go on a great while in their own devices, but in the end it
prove their own ruin and destruction, never suffering them to effect their
desired purposes: therefore let none presume upon his power, glory in his
greatness, or be too confident in his riches: These things were written for
our Instruction, of which the living may make use, the dying cannot; but wit
and unfruitful wisdom are the next neighbors to folly.

There can be no greater vanity in the world, than to esteem the world, which
regards no man; and to make slight account of God, who greatly respects all
men; and there can be no greater folly in man, than by much Travel to increase
his goods, and pamper his body, and in the interim with vain delights and
pleasures, to lose his soul. It is a great folly in any man to attempt a bad
beginning, in hope of a good ending; and to make that proper to one, which was
before common to all, is mere indiscretion, and the beginning of discord, which
I positively wish may en^ in this my punishment.

O how small a proportion of earth will contain my body, when my high mind
could not be confined within the spacious compass of two Kingdoms? But my hour
draws on, and I conclude with the Psalmist, not aiming at any one man in
particular, but speaking for all in general: How long will you Judges be
corrupted? how long will ye cease to give true judgment? etc. Blessed is the
man that does not walk in the Council of the wicked, nor stand in the way of
sinners, nor s^t in the seat of the scornfall, therefore they shall not stand
in the Judgment, nor sinners in the Assembly of the righteous, etc.

About the hours of 10 and 11 a Clock the foresaid Lord of Strafford was
conveyed to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, where was a Court of Guard made by the
several Companies of Soldiers of the City of London, and the Hamlets of the
Tower on each side as he passed to the Scaffold: before marched the Marshals
men to make way, then the Sheriffs of Londons Officers with their Halberds;
after them the Kings Guard, or Warders of the Tower: Next came one of his
Gentlemen, bare h^aded, in mourning Habit, the Lord Strafford following him
clad in black cloth, with diverse others in the same habit, which were his
atten^^^ts; then the Lord Bishop of Armagh, and other good Divines, with the
Sheriffs of London, and diverse honorable personages.

When he came upon the Scaffold, he there showed himself on each side to all
the people, and made this short speech, with as much alacrity of Spirit as
could be expressed. Viz.

The Lord Wentworths speech on the Scaffold.
MY Lord Primate of Ireland, and my Lords, and the rest of these noble
Gentlemen, It is a great comfort to me to have your Lordships by me this day,
because I have been known to yours long time, and I now desire to be heard a
few words:

I come here my Lords to pay my last debt to sin, which is death; and through
the mercies of God, to rise again in eternal glory.

My Lords, if I may use a few words, I shall take it as a great courtesy from
you: I am come here my Lords, to submit to the judgment that is passed against
me, I do it with a very quiet and contented mind; I do freely forgive all the
world, a forgiveness not from the teeth outward (as they say) but from my
heart; I speak it in the presence of Almighty God, before whom I stand, that
there is not a displeasing thought that arifeth in me against any man; I thank
God, I say truly, my conscience bears me witness, that in all the honor I
had to serve his Majesty, I had not any intention in my heart, but did aim at
the joint and individual prosperity of the King and his people, although it be
my ill hap to be misconstrued: I am not the first man that has suffered in
this kind, it is a common portion that befalls men in this life, righteous
judgment shall be hereafter; here we are subject to errors and misiudging one
another.

One thing I desire that I might be heard, and do hope that for Christian
charities sake I shall be believed: That I was so far from being against
Parliaments, that I always did think Parliaments in England to be the happy
constitutions of the Kingdom and Nation, and the best means under God, to make
the King and his people happy: As for my death I do hear acquit all the world,
and beseech God to forgive them: In particular, I am very glad his Majesty
conceives me not meriting so severe and heavy a punishment, as the utmost
execution of this sentence, I do infinitely rejoice in it, and in the mercy of
his, and do beseech God to return to him the same, that he may find mercy when
he has most need of it. I wish this Kingdom all prosperity and happiness in
the world, I did it living, and now dying it is my wish.

And I profess heartily, and do humbly recommend it to you, and wish that
every man would lay his hand on his heart, and consider seriously, whether the
beginning of the peoples happiness should be written in letters of blood. I
fear they are in a wrong way: I desire Almighty God, that no one drop of my
blood rise up in judgment against them. I have but one word more, and that is
for my Religion.

My Lord of Armagh, I do profess my self seriously, faithfully, and truly, to
be an obedient son of the Church of England: in that Church I was borne and
bred, in that Religion I have lived, and now in that I dye, prosperity and
happiness be ever to it.

It has been said I was inclined to Popery: if it be an objection worth the
answering, let me say truly from my heart, that since the time that I was 21.
years of age, unto this day, going on 49. years, I never had thought or doubt
of the truth of this Religion, nor had ever any the boldness to suggest to me
the contrary (to my best remembrance,) and so being reconciled to the mercies
of Christ Jesus my Savior, into whose bosom I hope shortly to be gathered, to
enjoy eternal happiness, which shall never have end. I desire heartily to be
forgiven of every man, if any rash or unadvised words or deeds has passed, and
desire all your prayers; and so my Lord farewell, and farewell all things in
this world.

The Lord strengthen my faith, and give me confidence and assurance in the
merits of Christ Jesus, I trust in God we shall all meet to live eternally in
Heaven, and receive the accomplishment of all happiness, where every fear
shall be wiped from our eyes, and sad thought from our hearts: And so God
bless this Kingdom, and Jesus have meroy on my soul.

Then turning himself about, he saluted all the Noblemen, and took a solemn
leave of all considerable persons on the Scaffold, giving them his hand:

And after that he said, Gentlemen, I would say my prayers, and I entreat you
all to pray with me, and for me; then his Chaplain laid the book of
Common Prayer upon the chair before him as he kneeled down, on which he prayed
almost a quarter of an hour, then he prayed as long or longer without a book,
and ended with the Lords prayer; then standing up he spies his brother Sir
George Wentworth, and calls him to him, and says, brother we must part,
remember me to my sister, and to my wife, and carry my blessing to my eld^st
son, and charge him from me, that he fear God and continue an obedient son
of the Church of England, and that he should approve himself a faithful
subject to the King, and tell him that he should not have any private grudge or
revenge toward any concerning me, and bid him beware that he meddle not with
Church livings, for that will prove a moth and canker to him in his estate, and
wish him to content himself to be a servant to his Country, as a Justice of
peace in his County, and not aiming at higher preferments; carry my blessing
also to my daughters Anne, and Arrabella, charge them to fear and serve God,
and he will bless them, not forgetting my little Infant that yet knows
neither good nor evil, and cannot speak for it self, God speak for it and
bless it; then said he, now I have nigh done, one stroke will make my wife
husbandlesse, my dear children fatherles, and my poor servants master less,
and separate me from my dear brother and all my friends, but let God be to you
and them, all in all.

After that, going to take off his doublet, and to make himself unready, he
said, I thank God I am no more afraid of death, nor daunted with any
discouragements rising from any fears, but do as cheerfully put off my doublet
at this time, or ever I did when I went to bed. Then he put off his doublet;
and wound up his hair with his hands, and put on a white cap.

Then he called, where is the man that should do this last office? (meaning the
Executioner) call him to me. When he came and asked him forgiveness, he told
him he forgave him and all the World. Then kneeling down by the block, he went
to prayer again himself, the Bishop of Armagh kneeling on the one side, and the
Minister on other; to the which Minister after prayer he turned himself, and
spoke some few words softly, having his hands lifted up: this Minister closed
his hands with his; then bowing himself to the earth to lay his head on the
block, he told the Executioner that he would first lay down his h^ad to try
the fitness of the block, and take it up again before he would lay it down for
good and all, and so he did: and before he laid it dow again, he told the
Executioner that he would give him warning when to strike, by stretching forth
his hands; and then laid down his neck on the block, stretching out his hands,
the Executioner struck off his head at one blow, then took the head up in his
hands, and showed it to all the people, and said, God save the King.

SIXTEEN QVERIES Propounded by the Parliament of Ireland, to the Judges of the
same Kingdom.
THat the Judges may set forth and declare, whether the Inhabitants of this
kingdom be a free people, or whether they be to be governed only by the
ancient common laws of England.

II. Whether the Judges of the Land do take the Oath of Judges, and if so,
whether under pretext of any Acts of State, Proclamation, Writ, Letter, or
direction under the great or privy Seal, or privy Signet, or Letter, o^other
commandment from the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, Justice, Justices, or
other chief Governor, or Governors of this Kingdom they may hinder, stay or
delay the suite of any subject, or his judgment, or execution thereupon, if
so, in what cases, and whether, if they do hinder, stay or delay such suite,
judgment or execution, what punishment they incur by the Law for their
deviation and transgression therein.

III. Whether the Kings Majesty's privy Counsel, either together, or with the
chief Governor or Governors of this Kingdom, without him or them be a place
of Judicature, by the common Laws, where in case between party and party for
Debts, Trespasses, Accounts, Covenants, possessions, and title of Land, or any
of them, and with them may be heard, and determined, and of what civil Causes
they have jurisdiction, and by what Law, and of what force is their order or
Decree, in such cases or any of them.

IV. The like of the chief Governors alone.

V. Whether Grant of Monopolies be warrantable by the Law, and of what, and in
what Cases, and how, and where, and by whom, are the Transgessors against such
Grantees punishable, and whether by Fine and mutilation of Members,
imprisonment, loss, and forfeiture of goods, or otherwise, and which of them.

VI. In what Cases the Lord Deputy, or other chief Governors of this Kingdom
and Counsel, may punish by Fine, imprisonment, Mutilation of Members, Pillory,
or otherwise, they may sentence any to such the same, or the like punishment,
for infrigeing the commands of any Proclamation, or Monopoly, and what
punishment do they incur, that doevote for the same.

VII. Of what force is an Act of state or Proclamation in this Kingdom to bind
the liberty, goods, possessions, or inheritance of the natives thereof, whether
they or any of them can alter the common Law, or the infringers of them lose
their Goods, Chattels, or Leases, or forfeit the same by infringing any such
Act of State or Proclamation, or both, and what punishment do the sworn
Judges of the Law, that are privy Counselors, incur that vote for such Act
and execution of it.

VIII. Whether the subjects of this Kingdom be subject to the Marshall Law,
and whether any man in time of peace, no enemy being in the fields, with
displayed colors can be sentenced to Death, if so, by whom, and in what cases,
if not, what punishment do they incur that in time of peace, execute
Marshall Law.

IX. Whether voluntary Oaths taken freely before Arbitrators, or others for
affirmance, or disaffirmance of any thing, or for the true performance of any
thing, be punishable in the Castle-Chamber, or in any other Court, and why and
wherefore.

X. Why, and by what Law, and upon what Rule of policy is it, that none is
admitted to reducement in the Castle-chamber, until he confess the offense
for which he is censured, when as Revera he might be innocent thereof, though
subordined proofs or circumstances, might induce him to be censured.

XI. Whether the Judges of the Kings Bench, and by what law, do or can deny,
the copies of Indictments, of Felony, or Tyeason to the parties accused of
Treason, contrary to the statute of 42. Edw. 3.

XII. Whether the statute of Baltinglase take from the Subi^cts, outlawed for
Treason, though erroniously, the benefit of his Writ of Error, and how and by
what means, that blin^ clause not warranted, by the body of that Act came to
be interted, and by what Law is it countenanced to the diminution of the
liberty of the subject.

XIII. What power have the Barons and the Court of Exchequer, to raise the
respite of homage Arbitrarily to what value they please, and to what value they
may raise it, and by what law they may distinguish between respite of homage,
upon the diversities of the true value of the Fees, when as all Escuage is the
same for great and small Fees, and they apportionable by Parliament.

XIIII. Whether it is censurable in the subjects of this Kingdom, to repair
into England to appeal to his Majesty for Redress of Jnjuries, or for other
their accusers, if so, why, and in what condition of persons, and by what law.

XV. Whether Deanes and other Dignitanies of Cathedral Churches, be properly
de mero jure donative, by this King, or not elective or collative, if so, why,
and by what law, and whether the confirmation of a Deane de facto of the
Bishops Grantee be good, and valid in the law, or no, if not, by what law.

XVI. Whether the issuing of Quo Warranto's against Burroughes, that anciently,
and recently sent Burgesses to the Parliament, to show cause why they sent
Burgesses to the Parliament be legal.

CAPTAIN AVDLEY MERVINS SPEECH To the House of Commons in Ireland.
Mr. Speaker,
IT was equal care and policy in our Predecessors. First to lay a foundation,
and then by a continued industry to build and perfect so glorious a fabrique as
the house of Commons lawful summoned by the Kings writ represents it self
unto us at this day. In which so elaborate and exquisite a structure being
finished and crowned with those fruitful and peace-speaking events, may
challenge by right the title of a Jubilee.

To so great a model with neat and provident husbandry they intend no less
then suitable furniture (which allowed pride) disdain to cloth it with any
other, but with what by his Majesty's favor they had procured out of his own
store; I mean those great and large privileges, which by several acts of
royal favor have bin dispensed, annexed, nay hypostatically united, to the
same Privileges are the soul, by which we move the Sins and Nerves, by
which we are compacted, they are them, by which we breath. Privileges for
their birth allied to the Kings Prerogative, for their antiquity sacred, for
their strength so re-intrenched by common law, fortified by statutes, insconsed
by precedents of all times, that no man ever attempted their violation with
impunity, so that now and then it may be truly said, The Kings house is all
glorious within. If we which are Heirs to their laws, as unto their lands,
will strive to make no addition to the rich inventurie of those privileges
they have bequeathed unto us, yet with united spirits, let us all at least
prevent the dilapidation, nay the diminution of the least of them.

This present occasion of debating Mr. Fitz-Gerralds petition exhibited to this
honorable house, sets before us blessings and cursings, and is the first leaf
(as we may term it) of the house of commons Almanak, not made to serve for
one, but for many years, and calculated to serve indifferently for all
latitudes, in which, our carriage makes this and all succeeding days but
servil and working days, or otherwise imprints this day and our privileges in
a conspicuous, plausive rubrique to posterity; whilst the Palladium was in
Troy, neither the power nor the long siege of the Grecians, could prevail
against it, whilst Minoes purple locks curled from their native roots, Creete
was unvanquished. The Moral of these (affictions) emphatically preach and
teach us this Doctrine, that the safety, pregnancy, glory, and strength of this
house, is but only sent us upon this condition, whilst we keep, preserve, and
defend our liberties, our rights, our privileges unbetrayed, unsuppressed, and
uncontrolled: if any more allied to the corruptions of our own distempers,
then challenging an interest in us by a legitimate birth, could involve this
grave and great assembly, in such epidemicall liturgy, as directly to snore,
or at lest to wink whilst our privileges clothed in a purple robe of glory
(like a word never to be recalled) escape from among us, I say if ungrateful,
I should out off the inheritance of these immunities entailed upon us, and
confirmed as a monument all portion upon this younger brother of state this
House of Commons, what can we expect, but that our Fathers Ghosts apparelled
with indignation, should appear unto us with this or the liking branding
phrase. Most ungrateful and unfortunate posterity. O aetas parentum pejor
Avis; better had it bin for you not to live then to outlive your own infamy.
If there had been a necessity, you should involve your selves in a
general-guilt, the election ought to have been of such a one as might have
died with your selves; but this like original sin, binds your posterity to
sigh for a redemption. Did we bequeath unto you those fair ornaments to be
stolen or snatched from you? Oh, where, where was your vigilance and boldness
to present so disasterous and fatal a consequence. Did we with no better
success of imitation by your labor, and even unto hoarsenesse contend in the
Parliament held 39. Hen. 6. as Prophesying your weakness, leave you a record
to build upon? Where we admitted and privileged one Walter Clarke a Burgess
of Chepengham, though at that time in execution ad s^ct. Reg. Did we for this
purpose recommend unto you Ferrars case and our proceecings against the
disturbers of his right? Did we for this purpose recommend unto you Belgraves
case 43. of the Queen. Who notwithstanding be procured his election in
Winchester by collusion, yet Maugre the great opposition raised by the Earl of
Huntington upon the sight of the Sheriffs return (a sufficient amerment to
satisfy us) we admitted and c^nfirm^d him in the protection of our house, did
we for this purpose exemplify unto you the case of Richard Chidder, 5. Henry 4
who being arrested in his journey toward the Parliaments (where note that the
date of the election is the date of the privilege.) They are twins of one
birth, we ingraft them as a twig to be writhed by our common root, and
quickly lopt off that so perilous authority which would prunne our branches.
Nay Mr. Speaker, our fellows laboring Parliament in England, with their
hearty commendation have transmitted unto us a precedent from each house. The
house of the Lords opening the gates of the Tower to prepare an entry to the
censured Bishop of Lincoln, and the house of Commons with like imitation and
like success having performed the same in Sir John Elliot and innumerable
others. But now I will endeavor to allay the distempered spirits of our
Fathers, whilst with more patience and duty we attend the modest corrections
of our indulgent King. And so exeunt Patres, and Intr. H. 8. in his own person
commending the resolution and zeal of the house of Commons in preserving the
luster of their own Privileges from being Eclipsed, aledging himself to be
interessed in them, since that he and they, knit together, completed one body,
who in this our deserved calamities, would not rather imitate us by scofs, then
qualify our untimely repentance by absence of our own murdering wrongs. What
may not E. 4. exprobrate unto us, who in the 3. year of his reign, records
his regal pleasure to posterity? That all Acts, Suites, judgments, censures
and qui dicit omne excludit nullum, awarded against any Member of Parliament,
should be utterly void and frustrate, crowning the Act with an Emphaticall
epiphonema, and this act to endure for ever. And surely common reason is
pregnant in the justification thereof. That where the public service and good
is primarily intended, a supersedias must issue to private respects, since they
cannot stand in competition, and inhabit our s^ hear. If their judgments are
not yet calmed and settled, behold his Majesty, that now is, clothed in his
royal Robes, and thus speaking unto you from underneath his state. Gentlemen,
why stagger you thus, that are your selves the pillars of the commonweal, you
are not upon breaking the Ice, nor bound upon the discovery of the unknown
world, each leaf reports your precedents that are like Maps that secure and
expedite your fortunate Navigation. From me you can expect no more
satisfaction, then what I have declared in the third year of my Reign, in
answer to the Petition of Right in Parliament, that I am interested in the
maintaining of the Privileges of this House, being a main Pillar of the
liberty of my Subject, the goods of one (...) being seized in my name, and for
my use, for denying Tonnage and pondage, they reassumed, he being at the time
of that seizure a Member of the House, and whether I distasted, sure I am, I
had no redress. As for the tender care of my interest in the fine of 10000 l.
and that you admitted my Attorney general to a favorable hearing in my
behalf, though against your selves (a Parliamentary custom not to be written
in small Print) I thank you Gentlemen, yet I think you know, as well as I, that
these great sounding Fines to me, have in their effects, but short and little
accounts, if there be 3. bags, the little one is mine: the 5000 l. damages to
the party (a sum equal) or more to the defendants estate) is as much as
Magna Charta, by those words of salvo contenemento, would warrant: Therefore my
Judges, by dividing it, might have considered me somewhat, whereas now the old
proverb binds me, Where there is nothing left, the King loses his right.

Now Mr Speaker, in a Parliamentary way, we must withdraw and enter into our
own Sphere. Enter into a discuss of those objections, that impugn Mr
Fitz-Gerralds election, admittance and privilege of this House;

The first that ushers in the train, is a sentence clothed in sable, standing
on tip-toe, and with a rusty dagger thrusting at a star, I mean a sentence
speaking error, a sentence visitng the third and fourth generation, a sentence
striving to leap over the bounds of Magna charta, thirty times confirmed, a
sentence awarded against a Judge of a higher Court, than from which it issued.
The cause in question is to nullify this sentence, which if he appear a person
capable of his privilege, more sua vivit, and then neither it, nor any thing
derivatory, or collateral to it, may be admitted against him by the rules of
common, civil, or common Law, it being a maxim consonant to them all. Non
potest adduci ejusdam rei excepio cujus petitur dissolutio. Now to prove this
sentence void (Mr. Speaker) I being no professor of the Law, yet a Disciple of
reason, and the body of the audient Subject to the like guilt: I will couch my
self in arguments, quae probant and non probantur, leaving precedents and
Book-cases to the learned long Robe: Then thus I argue. By the Star. 3. E. 4.
All judgments, censures, sentences, etc. awarded against a member of
Parliament are void, so was this government: some may say, the King is not here
included, I say (qui dicit omne, excludit nullum) And experience, the mother of
knowledge, teaches the same in precedents before rehearsed, and one I will add
for all, which Trewman, 38. Hen. 8. who was in execution upon a writ of exigent
after a Capias adsatis faciend. at the Kings suit, and yet privileged, besides
this is not at the Kings suit, for the King is interessed here but secondarily
both in name and profit. Now I must make good my minor, that he is a member of
this house: he that was duly elected and truly returned, is a member of this
house, so was he. Ergo, etc. My minor will be questioned, I confirm it thus,
where the Kings writ for election is duly pursued, according to the most used
and received form, there such an election is good, so was this. Ergo. Here (Mr.
Speaker) falls the weight of their objection, which we will master, and answer
with equal speed, and first vellicat mibi aurem nescio quis, and says the
writ is Burgensis de Burgo. but he is not Burgensis de Burgo. First I say
quomodo constat, here is none to offer in proof he is not so, beside I offer it
in Quaere, whether the election does not ipsofacto make him a Burgess, and in
omni instanti, again I say the writ is directive not positive. v. g. in a
venire facias, the Sheriff commanded to return 12. yet if he return not 24. he
shall be fined, in respect experience and practice proves, some of the 12. may
be questioned and challenged, besides the writ explains it self, the Knights
must be Comitatus tui, but the Burgesses and Citizens de qualibet Civitate and
Burgo, which can admit of no other construction, but these two Burgesses out of
every Borough, and not as Comitatus tui, is, which were then of every
Borough, and certainly the Law provided this with great reason, as not
doubting every Shire could afford two Knights, resident, yet jealous, whether
every Borough could provide two resident Burgesses qualified with these
necessary adjuncts, as could befit a member of so noble a place; Again the writ
commands duos milites, and yet exception was never taken upon returning of
Esquires, so that the writ expounds it self, it is not literally to be taken.
Next there is Thunder and Lightning shot out of the Statute, 33. H. 8. being a
Stat. to regulate election, and absolutely commanding every Knight and Burgess
to be resident and have a certain Fee-simple in every borough and County, out
of which they are elected; Here they suppose our Privilege will cry quarter as
ready to be murdered by the Statute, but it is ominous ante victoriam canere.
For first, we answer, that the disuse of a Statute antiquates a Statute, as is
observed upon the Statute of Merton, and custom applauded by fortunate
experience, has in all Parliaments ever prevailed; a house of Commons would
rather present Babell in it is confusion, if the Tincker would speak his
Dialect, the Cobbler his, and the Butcher conclude a greasy Epilogue, then the
writ were well pursued, these were Idonei homines to take and give counsel de
rebus arduis; but even to cut off the head of their own argument by a Sword of
their own, this Stat. of 33. H. 8. seems by the preamble to be made in repeal
of all former Statutes, by which, election not qualified with residency, was
made void, and so became a grievance to the Commonwealth, and therefore this
Statute makes the election not observed ut supra, only penal, so that there
is nothing offered in objection, either from the writ or Statute to avoid this
election. Now I have placed him and daily elected him, and then his privilege
grows by consequence, yet we have other objections minoris magnitudinis, and to
repeat them is to confute them; First, say they, every Libeller is de jure,
excommunicated; I answer, every Libeller must be Scriptis, Pictis, or
Cantilenis, our member is guilty of none of them, no, he is not termed, so
neither in the censure, nor in any present proceeding. Another flourish is,
that he pleaded not his privilege in the Castle-Chamber, in which very
objection, they confess him privileged, and make themselves guilty, that they
would proceed against a known member of our House. But see the Roman spirit of
Mr. Fitzgerald, who would rather undergo the hazard of being a Star Chamber
Martyr, than to submit our Privilege to an extrajudiciall debate. It was in
our honor he did this, and for his eternal applause: some body says the
Castle-Chamber will think it self injured, there being Lords of the house of
Parliament at and in the censure. As for the Lords, humanum est errare, but the
Judges are rather involved in these words Premeditata malitia, for his election
was the 11 of November sitting then in Parliament; and his censure the 13 of
December, so they had 22 or 23 days to repent of their ill-grounded
resolution, a greater affront never offered to the house of Commons, being
comparative, as if the Recorder of the Tolsell should sentence the Lord chief
Justice of Ireland, a member of our house is a walking Record, and needs not to
melt the Kings picture in his pocket. Others allege, it was an election
purchased by collusion, but de non existentibus and non apparentib, cadem est
ratio. And since the end of his election is in it self and per^se, for the
advancing of the public service, as well to prove a sentence not then in rerum
natura, both Law and charity in a benign construction of these two ends will
allow the more favorable. Another objection is whispered, that the entrance is
not found in the Clerk of the Parliaments Role; This is no matter to the
validity of his election, for his privilege commenced 40 days before the
Parliament, therefore this and the like are to be judged of as accidentia quae
possunt abesse and adesse sine subjecti interitu. Truly (Mr. Speaker) my
memory and lungs begin to prove Traitors to me; Another objection, if omitted,
may be judged by these of what strength and maturity they, even as by the
coynage of a penny, one may judge of a shilling; What hinders then, since here
is wa^er, but that he may be baptized? Here are no non obstant's to be admitted
in his new Pattent of Denization, the common law, the Statute law, the Canon,
the Civil law plead for his admittance, the writ of election, the
exemplification of the Sheriffs return, all presidents of all ages, all reports
plead for his admittance, our forefathers Ghosts, the present practice of
Parliaments in England plead for his admittance, the Kings successive commands,
command and confirm his admittance; Away then Serieant, and with the hazarding
power of our Mace touch the Marshals gates,, and (as if there were Divinity in
it) they will open and bring us our Olive branch of peace, wrested from our
stock, that with welcome Art we may ingraft him to be nourished by a common
root. Thus the King shall receive the benefit of an able subject, who is
otherwise, civiliter mortuus, we enjoy the participation of his labor, and
posterity, both ours and this.

CAPTAIN AVDLEY MERVINS Speech to the Lords in the Upper house in the
Parliament March 40. 1640.
Concerning the impeachment of Sir Richard Bolton Knight, Lord Chancellor of
Ireland; John Lord Bishop of Derry, Sir Gerrard Lowther Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, and Sir George Ratcliffe Knight, with high Treason by the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House.

My LORDS;
I Am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Bur-Burgesses of the Commons
House to present unto you Irelands Tragedy, the gray headed Common Laws
funeral, and the Active Statutes death and obsequies; this dejected spectacle
answers but the prefiguring Type of Caesar's murder, wounded to the death in
the Senate; And by Brutus his bosom friend, our Caesar's image by reflection,
even the fundamental Laws and Statutes of this Kingdom, the sole means by
which our estates are confirmed, our liberties preserved, our lives secured,
are wound to death in the Senate, I mean in the Courts of Justice, and by
Brutus too, even by those persons that have received their beings and
subsistence from them, so that here enters those inseparable first Twins,
Treason, and Ingratitude.

In a plain phrase (My Lords) I tender unto you Treason, High Treason; such a
Treason that wants nothing but words to express it.

To counterfeit the Kings Seal, to counterfeit the Kings money it is Treason;
but this dies with the individual party.

To betray a Fort is Treason, but it dies with a few men.

To betray an Army is a Treason, but it dies with a limited number, which may
be reinforced again by politic industry.

To blow up both Houses of Parliament is Treason, but succeeding ages may
replant Branches by a fruitful posterity; but this High Treason which I do
move in the name of the Houses of Commons, charge and impeach Sir Richard
Bolion Knight, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and Sir Gerard Lowther Knight, Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, John Lord Bishop of Derry, Sir George
Ratcliffe Knight; is in its nature so far transcending any of the former that
the rest seem to be but petty Larcenies in respect of this.

What is it to subvert the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, (High Treason?)

What is it with a contumacious malice to trample under feet the rich legacies
of our forefathers purchased with sweat and expense, I mean the Statute laws,
what is it but High Treason?

What is it through an Innate Antipathie to the public good to incarcerate the
liberty of the Subject under the Iron and weighty chains of an arbitrary
Government (High Treason?) What is it (since his Majesty the most amiable and
delightful portraiture of flourishing and indulgent Justice to his Subjects) to
present him personated in their extrajudiciall censures and judgments; but to
possess (it possible) the hearts of his loyal Subjects of this Kingdom: That
he is a bloody and devowring Tyrant, and to provoke their never dying
allegiance into a fatal and desperate Rebellion.

What is it to violate the sacred Graunts of many of his Majesty's Progenitors
Kings and Queens of England confirmed under the broad Seal, being the
public faith of this Kingdom by an extrajudiciall breath grounded upon no
record?

What is it to insent a surreptitious clause forged by some servile brain in
the preamble of our last Act of Subsidies by which the Kings most excellent
Majesty, and the Earl of Stofford are placed in one and the same sphere,
allowing them but equal influencies to nourish the allegiance of this
Kingdom, what is this but to extol other then Regal Authority, and to
crucify the Majesty of our most gracious Sovereign betwixt the two Thieves of
Government, Tyranny and Treason.

My Lords, having such a full and lasting Gale to drive me into the depth of
these accusations, I cannot hereby steer and confine my course within the
compass of patience, since I read in the first volumes of their brows, the
least of these to be the certain ruin of the Subject, and if proved, a most
favorable Prologue to usher in the Tragedy of the Actors, Councellers and
Abetters herein.

What was then the first and main question, it was the subvertion of the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, let then magna Charta that lies
prostrated, besmeared and grovelling in her own gore, discount her wounds as so
many pregnant and undeniable proofs, mark the Epethite Magna (...) confirmed by
30. Parliaments in the succession of eight Kings, the violation of which has
several times engaged the Kingdom of England in a voluntary sacrifice: a
Charter which imposes that pleasant and welbecomming oath upon all
Soveraigntie, to vindicate and preserve the Immunitie thereof; before the Crown
incircle their Royal Temples in this oath of so high consequence and general
interest his Majesty does in a manner levy a fine to his Subjects use for
avoiding all fraudulent conveyances in the Administration of Justice. And this
oath is transplanted unto the Judges as the Feoffees in trust, appointed
between his Majesty and the Subject, and sealed by his Majesty's provident
care with that imphaticall penalty, that their estates and lives shall be in
the Kings mercy upon the violation of the same, either in whole or in part,
neither has the deserved punishment for the breach of this oath enacted as
fulgura ex vitrio, or as bugbears to enforce the obedience of Children; no my
Lords, the just execution of it upon their Predecessors though in breaches not
so capital, might have warned them to have strangled their ill born
resolutions in the Cradle, before they now proclaim their infancy and petition
for their punishment. Witness Sir Thomas Weyland his banishment, confiscation
of his goods and lands only for his mercenarie Justice contrary to his oath,
who was Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the time of Edward the first.
Witness Sir William Thorpe, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in the time of
Edward the third, who was adjudged to be hanged, because he had broken the
Kings oath made unto the people wherewith he was entrusted in the Roll.

Now my Lords, though Magna Charta be sacred for antiquity, though its
confirmation be strengthened by oath, though it be the proper Dictionarie that
expounds meum and tuum, and assigns a Subject his birth right; yet it only
survives in the Rolls, but now miserable rent and torn in the practice.

These words Salvo cantenemento, live in the Rolls, but they are dead in the
Castle Chamber.

These words; Nullus liber bujus ejicitur e libero sue tenemento, in
praejudicium parium, live in the Rolls, but they are dead where property and
freehold are determined by paper Petitions.

These words; Nulli vendemus, nulli differemus Justitiam, live in the Rolls,
but they are dead when the Suites, Judgments, and excecution of the Subject
are wittingly and illegally suspended, retarded and avoided.

Shall we desire to search the mortal wounds inflicted upon the Statute Laws,
who sees them not lying upon their death bed stabbed with Proclamations, their
primitive and genuine tenures escheated by Acts of State, and strangled by
Monoplies.

Will you surveigh the liberties of the Subjects, every prison spues out
illegad attachments and commitments, every Pillory is dyed with the forced
blood of the Subjects, and has ears, though not to hear, yet to witness this
complaint.

Do you doubt of the defacement of the amiable Offices of his Majesty's most
transplendent and renowned Justice, and grace, let then that Microcosme of
Letters Patents confirmed under his Majesty's and his Predecessors broad Seal
of the Kingdom, being the public faith thereof, and yet unchristened by
frivolous and private opinions, rise up in judgment, let the abortive
Judgment of the tenure in Capite, where no tenure was expressed, nay let the
Heretical and Traitorous opinions where the Tenure was expressed, yet to draw in
all by Markets and Faires granted in the same Patents rise up in Judgments.
What glass has this unhappy divided Kingdom from his Majesty's presence and
andience, to contemplate the fair and ravishing form of his royal intentions
in, but in the clear and diaphanous administration of his Justice, and what do
these traytrous and illegal practice aim at but in affront to his Majesty
(which we most tenderly resent) and discontent to his Subjects, to multiply as
by a Magic glass the royal dispensation of his favors into the ugly and
deformed visage of their suppression of the liberties, devastations of the
estates, and the deprivation of the lives of his loyal Subjects, so that it
may be said; Regali Capiti cervicem consul equinan^ Jungere sic vellet
variasque inducere plumas.

My Lords, these ought to be considered with as serious an ear, as they were
practiced by mischievous experiments.

Inquire of the Netherlands why their fields are grown fertile, by the
inundation of blood, why the pensive Matrons solemnize too too frequent
funerals of their Husbands and issue, and they will answer you it was for the
preservation of their hereditary Laws, which Tyranny would have innovated.

This Kingdom personated in the sable habit of a widow with dishelved hayrs
seems to Petition your Lordships, that since she is a Mother to most of us, yet
cer^ainly a Nurse unto us all, that you would make some other for redress of
her Tyrannical oppression.

These persons impeached, resemble the opacious body of the earth interposed to
eclipse that light and vigor, which the solar aspect of Majesty would
communicate unto his Subjects.

They imitate the fish Sepia, that vomits a dark liquor out of her mouth to
cloud the waters for her securer escape.

They are those to whom the keys have been committed, yet they have barred the
door to them that knoc't.

They are those unnatural Parents, that give their children stones, in stead
of bread, and scorpions for fish. Was it for this purpose that the royal
authority situated them in these eminent places, that like Beacons upon high
Hills, they should discover and proclaim each innovation and stratagem against
the public weal; whilst they in the mean time employ therein fire to
public Incendiary, or, like Ignes fatui, seduce the easy and believing
Traveller into pits and unexpected Myres?

Were they sworn to seal their damnation, and not their confirmation of our
liberty, estates, and lives? Shall a man be censured for perjury, in that
breach of his private Faith, and those be justifiable in Treason, aggravated by
perjury against the dignity of the Crowns, and public faith of the
Kingdoms? No my Lords, the grave, judicious, and mature examination, and
deserved punishment of these traitorous proceedings, will speak these times as
glorious to posterity in their information, as they are now lamented in their
persecution.

The bloud-thirsting sword of an hostile enemy, by a timely union, and a
defensive preparation may be prevented.

The thin rib'd Carcass of an universal famine, may have his consumption
restored by a supply from our neighboring Nations.

The quick spreading venom of infectious pestilence may be prevented by
Antidotes, and qualified by physical remedies. But this Catholic grievance,
like a snake in the most verdant walks, (for such are the unblemished laws
truly practiced) stings us to death, when we are most secure; and like the
Kings evil, can only be cured by his Majesty's free and gracious permission of
our modest and gentle proceedings, for his vindication and our preservation
therein concluded.

Spencer, and Gamston who have left their names monumentally odious for the
evil counsel they fed the Kings ear with, yet did possibly advantage their
own friends, while these dart their envy and Treason for a common Center,
equally touching the bounds of every superficies: for as concerning the valide
estates they have illegally overthrown, when the Laws by your Lordships
industry receive their native vigor, they will reassume their confirmation:
but the estates happily in themselves legal, that they have in an
extrajudiciall form established, will haste as speedily to their dissolution,
so that Judas-like they betray their best friends with a kiss.

My Lords, I cannot find any surviving Cronologie of times, this season to be
paralleled with all circumstances, which makes me view the Records amongst the
infernal spirits to find, if matched there I might extenuate their facts:
where 1. they appear like the false spirit sent into the mouth of the Prophet
to Abab to speak delusions to subvert the host of God.

The most vehement and traiterous encounter of Satan, is lively deci hered in
the true example of Job: where first, I observe the dismologie, he overthrowes
not Jobs. Magna Charta, he d^sseizes him not of his inheritance, nor
dispossesses him of his Leases; but only disrobes him of some part of his
personal estate: when he proceeds to infringe Jobs liberty, he does not
pillorie him, nor cut off his ears, nor bore him through the tongue; he only
spots him with some ulcers; here Satan stains, when these persons by their
traitorous combinations, envy the very blood that runs unspilt in our veins;
and by obtruding bloody Acts, damned in the last Parliament, will give Satan
size ace, and the Dice at Irish, in inthralling the lives of the Subjects by
their arbitrary Judicature.

I would not my Lords be understood to impute to the Judges, and infallibility
of error: nor in impeaching these, to traduce those, whose candor and
integrity, shine with more admired luster, then their white furs, who like
trophies of virgin-justice, stood fixed and unmoved in the rapid torrent of the
times, while these like strawes and chips played in the streams, until they
are devolved in the Ocean of their deserved ruin.

No my Lords, humanum est errare, and the Law allows Writs of Error, and
arrest of Judgment: but where there is crassa ignorantia against their Oath,
against the Fundamental, Elementary, and known Laws of the Kingdom: Nay (my
Lords where it is rather praemedita^a malitia, where there is an emulating
policy who should raze and embessell the Records in the practique, that are
for the tender preservation of our liberties, estates, and lives, seeking only
to be glorious in a national destruction, as if their safety were only
involved in our ruin, there I have command to pity, but not excuse them.

To kill a Judge, quatenus a Judge, is not Treason, but to kill a Judge sitting
in the place of Judicature, is Treason; not for that the Law intends it out of
any malice against the party, but for the malice against the Law: where then
can an intensive, or an extensive malice be expressed or employed against the Law,
then the practical dialect of these persons impeach't, speaks with a known and
crying accent.

The Benjamites slang stones with their left hands, yet they would not miss a
hairs breadth; these extrajudiciall proceedings are slung with the left, I
mean they are sinistrious, and imprint their black and blew marks, more
certain, and more fatal; for that they may say, Quae regio in terris nostri
non plena laboris? Though these things be familiar unto us, yet I cannot but
admire how this unproportionable body of Judicature should swell up into such a
vast and ulcerous dimension, but why should I considering this excentrick
motion of the body of the Law had his birth obscure, resembling the tares that
were sowed in the night time, but here is the difference; they were sown by
the enemy in the absence of the Master: but these are sown by the
Grand-masters themselves, purposely to overtop and choke the expected Harvest.

Innovations in Law, and consequently in government, creep in like heresies in
Religion, slily and slowly, pleading it the end a saucy and usurped legitimacy,
by uncontrol'd prescription.

My Lords, this is the first sitting, and I have only chalked out this
deformed body of high Treason: I have not drawn it at length, least it might
fright you from the further view thereof: in conclusion, it is the humble
defire of the Commons, that the parties impeached, may be secured in their
persons, sequestered from this House, from the Counsel Table, and all places of
Judicature, as being Civiliter mortui; that they may put in their answers to
the Articles ready now to be exhibited against them: and that all such further
proceedings may be secretly expedited, as may be suitable to Justice, and the
precedents of Parliaments, so his Majesty may appear in his triumphant
goodness, and indulgency to his people: and his people may be ravished in their
dutiful and cheerful obedience, and loyalty to his Majesty: your Lordships
may live in Records to Posterity, as the isntrumental reformers of those
corrupted times, and that the Kingdom and Commonwealth may pay an amiable
sacrifice in retribution, and acknowledgement of his Majesty's multiplied
providence for our preservation herein.

Articles of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Parliament assembled,
against Sir Ric: Bolton, Knight. Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John, Lord B. of
Derry, and Sir Gerard Lowther Knight. L. Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe, Knight. in maintenance of the accusation,
whereby they, and every of them, stand charged with high Treason.
FIrst, that they the said Sir Richard Bolton, Knight, Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, John, L. Bishop of Derry, Sir Ger. Lowther, Knight. Lord Chief Justice of
his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe, Knight,
intending the destruction of the Commonwealth of this Realm, have traitorously
confederated and conspired together, to subvert the Fundamental Laws and
Government of this Kingdom, and in pursuance thereof, they and every of them,
have traitorously contrived, introduced, and exercised an arbitrary and
tyrannical Government against Law, thorowout this Kingdom, by the countenance
and assistance of Thomas, Earl of Strafford, then chief Governor of this
Kingdom.

II. That they and every of them, the said Sir Richard Bolton, Knight. L.
Chancellor of Ireland, John, L. Bishop of Derry, Sir Gerard Lowther, Knight. L.
chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe, Knight. have
traitorously assumed to themselves, and every one of them, regal power over
the goods, persons, lands, and liberties of his Majesty's Subjects in this
Realm; and likewise have maliciously, perfidiously, and traitorously given,
declared, pronounced, and published, many false, unjust, and erroneous
opinions, Judgments, Sentences, and Decrees, in extrajudiciall manner against
Law, and have perpetrated, practiced, and done many other traiterous and
unlawful acts and things, whereby as well diverse mutinies, seditions, and
rebellions have been raised, as also many thousands of his Majesty's liege
people of this Kingdom, have been ruined in their goods, lands, liberties, and
lives, and many of them being of good quality and reputation, have been utterly
defamed by Pillory, mutilation of members, and other infamous punishments: By
means whereof his Majesty and the Kingdom have been deprived of their service
in Juries, and other public employments, and the general trade and traffic
of this Island for the most part destroyed, and his Majesty highly damnified in
his customs and other revenues.

III. That they the said Sir Rich. Bolton. John, L.B. of Derry. Sir Ger.
Lowther, K. and Sir G. Radcliffe, and every of them, the better to preserve
themselves, and the said Earl of Strafford, in these and other traiterous
courses, have labored to subvert the rights of Parliament, and the ancient
course of Parliamentary proceedings: all which offenses were contrived,
committed, perpetrated, and done at such time, as the said Sir Richard Bolton,
Sir Gerard Lowther, and Sir George Radcliffe, Knights, were privy Counselors
of State within this Kingdom, and against their and every of their oaths of
the same, at such times as the said Sir R. Bolton, Knight. was Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, or chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, within this
Kingdom, and Sir Gerard Lowther, Knight, was Lord chief Justice of the said
Court of Common Pleas, and against their Oaths of the same, and at such time
as the said John, L. Bishop of Derry, was actual Bishop of Derry, within this
Kingdom, and were done and speciated contrary to their and every of their
allegiance, several and respective oaths taken in that behalf.

IV. For which the said Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, do impeach the said
Sir Richard Bolton, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John, L. B. of Derry, Sir
Gerard Lowther, Knight. L. chief Justice of his Majesty's said Court of Common
Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe, Knight. aforesaid, and every of them of high
Treason, against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

The said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, by Protestation, saving to
themselves the liberty of exhibiting at any time hereafter, any accusation or
impeachment against the said Sir Rich. Bolton, John, L. Bishop of Derry, Sir
Gerard Lowther, and Sir George Radcliffe aforesaid, and every of them, and also
of replying to them, and every of their answers, which they and every of them,
shall make to the said Articles, or any of them, and of offering proof also of
the premises, or of any other impeachment, or accusation, as shall be by them
exhibited; as the case shall according to the course of Parliament require.

And the said Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses do pray, that the said Sir
Richard Bolton, Knight, Lord Chancellor of Ireland, John, Lord Bishop of Derry,
Sir Gerard Lowther, Knight, Lord chief Justice of his Majesty's said Court of
Common Pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe, Knight, and every of them, be put to
answer to all and every of the premises, and that all such Proceedings,
Examinations, Trial, and Judgment, may be upon them and every of them, had
and used, as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

Copia vera.

Signed, PHILIP PHERNESLY, Cler. Parliamenti.

Sir Thomas Wentworths speech, XXijd. Martij, 1627.
MAy this days resolution be as happy, as I conceive the proposition (which
now moves me to rise) is seasonable and necessary, for whether we shall look
upon the King or the people, it did never more behove this great Physician the
Parliament, to effect a true consent toward the parties then now; This debate
carries with it, a double aspect, toward the Sovereign, toward the Subject,
though both innocent, both injured, both to be cured.

In the representation of injuries, I shall crave your attention in the Cures;
I shall beseech your equal cares, and better judgments (surely in the
greatest humility, I speak it) these illegal ways are marks and punishments
of indignation.

The raising of Leavies strengthened by Commission, with unheard of
instructions, the billetting of Soldiers by Lievetenants without leave, have
been, as if they could have persuaded Christian Princes (nay Worlds) the right
of Empire had been to take a way by strong hand; and they have endeavored, as
far as was possible for them to do it.

This has not been done by the King (under the pleasing shade of whose Crown I
hope we shall ever gather the fruits of Justice) but by Projectors, They have
extended the prerogative of the King, beyond the just Center, which was the
sweet harmony of the whole.

They have rent from us the light of our eyes* enforced a company of Guests,
worse than the Ordinaries of France, vitiated our wives and daughters before
our faces, brought the Crown to greater want than ever it was, by anticipating
the Revenue, and can the Shephard be thus smitten, and the flock not scattered?

They have introduced a Privy Counsel ravishing at once the Spheers of all
ancient government, imprisoning us without Bail or Bond. They have taken from
us what shall I say (indeed what have ^hey left us) all mean of supplying the
King, and ingratiating our selves with him, taking up the roots of all
propriety, which if it be not seasonably set into the ground by his Majesty's
hand, we shall have instead of beauty, baldness.

To the making of them whole I shall apply my self, and propound a remedy, to
all these diseases, by one and the same thing has the King and people been
hurt, and by the same must they be cured, to vindicate what? New things? No.
Our ancient, sober, vital liberties, by reinforcing of the ancient Laws made
by our Ancestors, by setting such a Character upon them, as no licentious
spirit shall dare hereafter to enter upon them. And shall we think this away
to break a Parliament? N^. Our desires are modest and just, I speak truly, both
for the interest of the King and People. If we enjoy not those, it will be
impossible to relieve him; Therefore let us never fear that they shall not be
accepted by his goodness.

Wherefore I shall descend to my motions, which conconsists of four parts, two
of which have relation to the persons two to the propriety of goods, for the
persons, the freedom of them from imprisoning.

Secondly from employments abroad, contrary to the ancient customs for our
goods, that no leavies may be made but in Parliament. Secondly, no billetting
of Soldiers: It is most necessary, that these be resolved, that the Subjects
may be secured in both.

Then for the manner in the second place, it will be fit to determine it by a
Grand Committee.

Sir Thomas Wentworths Speech 21. of April, Anno, 1628.
Right wise, Right worthy:
TOo many instigations importune the sequel of my words; First, the equity of
your proceedings. Secondly, the honesty of my request, for I behold in all your
intendments a singularity grounded upon discretion and goodness, and your
consultations steered as well by Charity as extremity of justice.

This order and method I say of your procedings, together with the importunity
offered of the Subject in hand, have emboldned me to solicit an extension of
the late granted protections in general. The lawfulness and honesty of the
propositions depends upon these two particulars.

I. The present troubles of the parties protected, having run themselves into a
further and almost irrecoverable hazards, by presuming upon, and feeding
themselves with the hopes of a long continuing Parliament. II. Let the second
be this consequence; That that which is prejudicial to most, ought to minister
matter of advantage to the rest; since then our interpellations and disturbances
amongst our selves are displeasing almost to all, if any benefit may be
collected, let it fall upon those, for I think the breach of our Session can
befriend none but such, nor such neither, but by means of the grant before
hand. And because it is probable, that his Majesty may cause a Remeeting this
next Michaelmas, Let thither also reach their prescribed time for liberty. And
that till then their protections shall remain in as full virtue and authority,
as if the Parliament were actually sitting.
To the Right Honorable, the LORD Deputy.
Showing that in all ages past, since the happy subjection of this Kingdom, to
the imperial Crown of England; it was and is a principal study, and Princely
care of his Majesty, and his most Noble Progenitors, Kings and Queens of
England, and Ireland, to the vast expense of Treasure and blood, that their
loyal and dutiful people of this land of Ireland, being now for the most part
derived from the British Ancestor, should be governed according to the
municipiall and fundamental laws of England, that the Statute of Magna
Charta, or the great Charter for the liberties of England, and other laudable
laws and Statutes, were in several Parliaments here enacted and declared,
that by the means thereof, and of the most prudent and benign government of
his Majesty and his royal Progenitors, this Kingdom was (until of late) in
its growth to a flourishing estate, whereby the said people were hertofore
enabled to answer their humble and natural desires, to comply with his
Majesty's Royal and Princely occasions, by the free gift of 150000 l. ster.
and likewise by another gift of 120000 l. ster. more during the government of
the Lord Viscount Faulk-land, and after by the gift of 40000. l. and their free
and cheerful gift of 6. entire Subsidies, in the 10. year of his Majesty's
Reign, which to comply with his Majesty's then occasions signified to the then
H. of Commons they did allow should amount in the collections unto 250000. l.
although as they confidently believe, if the said Subsidies had not been levied
in a moderate Parliamentary way, they would not have amounted to much more than
half the said sum, besides the four entire Subsidies, granted in this present
Parliament. So it is, may it please your Lordship, that by the occasion of the
ensuing and other grievances and innovations, though to his Majesty no
considerable profit, this Kingdom is reduced to that extreme and universal
poverty, that the same is now less able to pay a Subsidy, then it was
heretofore to satisfy all the before recited great payments, and his Majesty's
most faithful people of the same, do conceive great fears that the grievances
and the consequences thereof may hereafter be drawn into precedents to be
perpetuated upon their posterity, which in their great hopes and strong belief,
they are persuaded is contrary to his Majesty's Royal and Princely intention
toward his said people, some of which said grievances, are as follows.

I. First, the general and apparent decay of Trades, occcasioned by the new
and illegal raising of the book of Rates and Impositions, as xii, d. a piece,
custom for Hides bought for 3.4. or 5. s. and many other heavy Impositions
upon native and other commodities exported and imported, by reason thereof and
of the extreme usage, and sensures, Merchants are beggered, and both disinabled
and discouraged to trade; and some of the honorable persons who gain thereby,
are often Judges, and parties, and that in conclusion his Majesty's profit
thereby is not considerably advanced.

II. Secondly, the arbitrary decision of all civil causes and controversies,
by paper petitions before the Lord Lieutenant, and Lord Deputy, and infinite
other Iudicators upon references from them derived in the nature of all
actions, determinable at the Common Law, not limited unto certain times,
seasons, causes, and things whatsoever, and the consequence of such
proceedings, by receiving imomoderate and unlawful fees by Secretaries,
Clerks, Pursivants, Serjants at Arms, and otherwise, by which kind of
proceedings, his Majesty loses a considerable part of his Revenue, upon
original writs, and otherwise; and the Subject loses the benefit of his writ
of error, Bill of reversall, vouchers, and other legal and just advantages,
and the ordinary course and Courts of Justice declined.

III. Thirdly, the proceedings in civil causes at the Council board, contrary
to the law and great Charter, and not mitted to any certain time or season.

IV. Fourthly, that the Subject is in all the material parts thereof, denied
the benefit of the principal graces, and more especially of the Statute of
Limitations, of the 21. Jan. granted by his Majesty in the 4 year of this
Reign, upon great advice of the Counsel of England, and Ireland, and for great
consideration; and th n published in all the Courts of Dublin, and in all the
Courts of this Kingdom in open Assizes, whereby all persons do take notice,
that contrary to his Majesty's plous intention, his Subjects of this Land have
not enjoyed the benefit of his Majesty's Princely promise thereby made.

V. Fifthly, the extraiudiciall avoiding of Letters Patents of estates of a very
great part of his Majesty's Subjects under the great Seal (the public faith
of the Kingdom) by private opinions delivered at Council Board, without
legal Evictions of their estates, contrary to the Law and without precedent or
example of any former age.

VI. Sixthly, the Proclamation for the sole exemption and uttering of Tobacco,
which is bought at very low Rates, and uttered at high and excessive Rates, by
means whereof thousands of Families within this Kingdom and of his Majesty's
subjects in several Islands, and other parts of the West Judies (as your
Petitioners are informed) are destroyed, and the most part of (...) Coin of
this Kingdom is engrossed into particular hands: Insomuch that your
Petitioners do conceive that the profit arising and engrossed thereby, does
surmount his Majesty's Revenues certain and casual within this Kingdom, and
yet his Majesty receives but very little profit by the same.

VII. Seventhly, the unusual and unlawful increasing of Monopolies to the
advantage of few, to the disprofit of his Majesty, and the impoverishment of
his people.

VIII. Eighthly, the extreme and cruel usage of certain late Commissioners and
other, toward the British Farmers and Inhabitants of the City and County of
Londonderry, by means whereof the worthy plantation of that Country is almost
destroyed, and the Inhabitants are reduced to great poverty, and many of them
forced to forsake the Country, the same being the first and most useful
Plantation in the large Province of Vlster, to the great weakening of the
Kingdom, in this time of danger, the said Plantation being the principal
strength of those parts.

IX. Ninthly, the late erection of the Court of high Commission for causes
Ecclesiastical in these necessitous times, the proceedings of the said Court
in many causes without legal warrant, and yet so supported as prohibitions
have not been obtained, though legally sought for, and the excessive fees
exacted by the ministers thereof, and the incroaching of the same upon the
jurisdiction of other Ecclesiastical Courts of this Kingdom.

X. Tenthly, the exorbitant and Barbarous Fees and pretended Customs exacted
by the Clergy against the Law, some of which have been formerly represented
to your Lordship.

XI. Eleventhly, the Petitioners do most heartily bemone that his Majesty's
services and profits are much more impaired than advanced by the grievances
aforesaid. And the Subsidies granted in the last Parliament having much
increased his Majesty's Revenue by the buying in of Grants, and otherwise, and
that all his Majesty's debts then due in this Kingdom were satisfied out of
the said Subsidies, and yet his Majesty is of late (as your Petitioners have
been informed) in the House of Commons become indebted in this Kingdom in
great sums, and they do therefore humbly beseech that an exact account may be
sent to his Majesty, how and in what manner his treasure issued.

XII. Twelfthly, the Petitioners do humbly co^ceive great and just fears, at a
Proclamation published in this Kingdom in Anno Dom. 1635. prohibiting men of
quality or estate for to depart this Kingdom into England, without the Lord
Deputies License, whereby the Subjects of this Kingdom are hindered and
interrupted from free access and address to his sacred Majesty and Privy
Counsel of England, to declare their just grievances, or to obtain remedy
for them, in such sort as their Ancestors have done in all ages, since the
Reign of King Henry the second, and great Fees exacted for every of the said
Licenses.

XIII. Thirteenthly, that of late his Majesty's late Attourny general has
exhibited informations against many ancient Buroughs of this Kingdom into his
May sties Court of Exchequer, to show by what warrant the said Burroughes, who
heretofore sent Burgesses to the Parliament, should send the said Burgesses to
the Parliament. And thereupon for want of an answer, the said Privilege of
sending Burgesses was seized by the said Court, which proceedings were
altogether Coram non Judice, and contrary to the Laws and Privileges of the
House of Parliament (and if way should be given thereunto) might tend to the
subversion of Parliaments, and by consequence to the ruin and destruction of
the Commonwealth, and that the House of Commons has hitherto in this present
Parliament bin deprived of the advice and Counsel of many profitable and good
members by means thereof.

XIV. Fourteenthly, that by the powerfulness of some ministers of State in
this Kingdom, the Parliament in its members and actions has not his natural
freedom.

XV. Fifteenthly, that the fees taken in all the Courts of Justice in this
Kingdom, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil, and by other inferior Officers and
Ministers, are so immoderately high, that it is an unspeakable burden to all
his Majesty's Subjects of this, who are not able to subsist, except the same be
speedily remedied and reduced to such a moderation as may stand with the
condition of this Realm.

And lastly, That the Gentry, Merchants, and other his Majesty's Subjects of
this Kingdom, are of late by the grievances and pressures aforesaid and other
the like, very near to ruin and destruction. And Farmers of Customs,
Customers, Waiters, Searchers, Clearks of unwarrentable proceedings,
Pursevants, and Gaolers, and sundry others very much enriched, whereby, and by
the slow redress of the Petitioners grievances, his Majesty's most faithful
and dutiful people of this Kingdom, do conceive great fears that their
readiness approved upon all occasions, has not been of late rightly
represented to his Majesty.

For Remedy whereof, the said Petitioners do humbly and of Right beseech your
Lordship, that the grievances and pressures may be speedily redressed. And if
your Lordship shall not think sit to afford us present relief therein, that
your Lordship may admit a select Committee of this House of persons un
interessed in the benefit arising, the aforesaid grievances to be licensed by
your Lordship, to repair to his sacred Majesty in England for to pursue the
same, and to obtain fitting Remedies for their aforesaid and other just
grievances and oppressions, and upon all just and honorable occasions, they
will without respect of particular interest or profit to be raised thereby,
most humbly and readily in Parliament, extend their utmost endeavors to serve
his Majesty, and comply with his Royal and Princely occasions,

And shall pray, etc.

A Speech against the Judges, per Ignotum quendam.
Mr. Speaker,
IT was a custom among the Romans (who as by their power they once gave laws,
so by the happy success of their long flourishing Government, might they well
give examples to all the world) that in their Senates the youngest men spoke
first: partly that they might not have their weaker notions anticipated by the
more knowing Senators. And partly that the Senate might not be diverted from
the mature resolutions of the more ancient by the interposition of the younger
men; They as all free States ever allowing free members to express themselves
according to their several capacities. And me thinks 'twas a happy Method. So
your opinions and inclinations of the Assembly, being discovered and ripened to
resolution by such gradations, the sentences of the Sages sounded as
Judgments, not orations, their wisdom and gravity put a seasonable Period to
others, perhaps otherwise endless discourses.

Their precedent encourges me (who worst may) to break the Ice: Children can
lay their fingers on the Sore, point out their pain; and Infant Graduates in
Parliament, may groan out the grievances of a diseased Commonwealth, but they
must be Doctors in the Art of Government that can apply apt remedies to recover
it.

Mr. Speaker, Ancient and approved has been that parallel of the body
politic with the body natural: It Is the part of their Patients in either
distempered, to impart freely their griefs to the Physicians of the body or
state, if they expect a cure.

This Commonwealth is (or should be) but one body. This house, the great
Physician of all our maladies, and alas, Mr. Speaker, of what afflicted part
shall we poor Patients complain first? Or rather of what shall we not complain?

Are we not heart-sick? Is there in us that which God requires, unity, purity,
and singulari y of heart? Nay is not Religion (the soul of this body) so
miserably distracted, that, I speak it with terror of heart, it is to be
feared, there is more confusion of religions amongst us, then there was of
tongues at the subversion of Babell: And is it not then high time that we
understand one another, that we were reduced to one Faith, one Government.

Sir, Is the Head whole: The sear of Government and Justice, the Fountain from
whose sweet influence, all the inferior members of this body should receive
both vigor and motion: Nay, has not rather a general Apoplexy, or Palsy,
taken, o^shaken all our members? Are not some dead? Others buried quick? Some
dismembered, all disordered by the diversion of the course of Justice.

Is the Liver (Natures Exchequer) open; from whose free distribution each limb
may receive his proper Nutriment, or rather is it not wholly obstructed? Our
property taken from us? So that it may properly be said of us, Sic vos non
vobis fertis aratra, our Ancestors drunk the juice of their own Vines, reaped
and eat the fruit of their own harvest. But now the poor man's Plough goes to
surrow the Seas, to build Ships: we labor not for our selves but to feed the
excressions of Nature, things grown up out of the ruins of the natural
members. Monopolists.

Sir, these are Maxima vitalia; Religion, Justice, property; The Heart, the
Head, the Liver of this great body, and these distempered or obstructed, can
the subordinate parts be free? No sir, the truth is; all is so far out of
frame, that to lay open every particular grievance were to drive us into
despair of cure; In so great confusion where to begin first, requires not much
less care than what to apply.

Mr. Speaker, I know it is a plausible motion to begin with setting Gods House
in order first: who presses that, moves with such advantage, that he is sure no
man will gainsay him. It Is a welbecoming zeal to prefer Religion before our
own affairs, and indeed it is a duty not to be omitted; where they are in equal
danger: But in cure of the body, politic or natural, we must prefer the most
pressing exigents.

Physicians know that Consumptions, Dropsies, and such like lingering diseases
are more mortal, more difficult to cure then slight external wounds: yet if
the least Vein be cut, they must neglect their greater cures to stop that,
which if neglected, must needs exhaust the stock of nature, and produce a
dissolution of the whole man.

A Defection from the duties of our Religion is a Consumption to any State, no
foundation is firm that is not laid in Christ.

The Denial of Justice, the abridgement of our liberties, is such an
obstruction as renders the Commonwealth Leprous; but the wounds in our
property lets out the lifeblood of the people.

The Reformation of Church Government must necessarily be a work of much time,
and God be thanked the disease is not desperate; We serve one God, we believe
in one Christ, and we all acknowledge and profess one Gospel. The difference
is only de modo, we vary but in Ceremonies to reduce which, to the Primitive
Practice, must be a work of great debate, is not a work for us alone to settle.

The stop of Justice can yet injure but particulars, It Is true, there may be
many, too many instances of strange oppressions, great oppressors, but 'twill
be hard to judge the Conclusion. Et sic de caeteris.

But take from us the propriety of our estates, our subsistence, we are no more
a people. This is that veyn which has bin so deep cut, so far exhaust, that
to preserve our being, we must doubtless stop this current: Then settle Rules
to live by, when we are sure to live.

Mr. Speaker, he that well weighes this little word Property, or propriety in
our estates, will find it of a large extent; The Leeches that have sucked this
blood, have bin Excise, Benevolences, Loans, Impositions, Monopolies, Military,
Taxes, Ship Money (cum multis aliis) all which spring from one Root.

And is it not high time to grub up that root that brings forth such fruit?
Shall we first stand to lop the branches one by one, when we may down with all
at once? He that to correct an evil tree, that brings forth bad fruit, shall
begin at the master bough, and so lop downwards, is in danger to fall himself
before the tree falls. The safer and speedier way is to begin at the root, and
there, with submission to better judgments, would I lay the Axe

The Root of most of our present mischiefs, and the ruin of all posterity, do
I hold, to be that extraiudiciall (Judgment I cannot say, but rather) doom,
delivered by all the Judges under their hands out of Court, yet recorded in all
Courts, to the subversion of all our Fundamental Laws, Liberties, and
Annihilation, if not Confiscation of our estates. That in case of danger, the
King may impose upon his subjects, and that he is the ^ole Judge of the danger,
necessity, and proportion, which in brief, is to take what, when, and where he
will, which though delivered in the time of a gracious and merciful Prince,
who we hope will not wrest it beyond our abilities, yet left to the
Interpretation of a succeeding Tyrant, if ever this Nation be so fortunate to
fall into the hands of such; it is a Record wherein every man might read
himself a slave that reads it, having nothing he can call his own, all
prostistute to the will of another.

What to do in such a case, we are not to seek for precedents, our Honorable
Ancestors taught us in the just and exemplar punishments of chief Justice,
Tresilian and his Accomplices (for giving their judgments out of Parliament
against the established Laws of Parliament) how tender they were of us, how
careful we ought to be to continue those Laws, to preserve the Liberty of our
Posterity.

I am far from maligning the person, nor in my heart wish I the Execution of
any man, but certainly it shall be a Justice well becoming this House, to lay
their Heads at his Majesty's mercy, who laid us under his feet, who had made us
but tenants at will of our Liberties and Estates.

And though I cannot but approve of Mercy, as a great Virtue in any Prince, yet
I heartily pray it may prove a Precedent as safe and useful to this oppressed
State, as that of Justice.

Mr. Speaker, blasted may that tongue be, that shall in the least degree
derogate from the glory of those Halcyon days our fathers enjoyed, during the
Government of that ever blessed, never to be fogot, Royal Elizabeth. But
certainly I may safely say (without detraction) it was much advantage to the
peace and prosperity of her Reign, that the great examples of Empson and Dudley
were then fresh in memory: The Civility of our Laws tell us, that Kings can do
no wrong, and then is the State secure, when Judges (their Ministers) dare do
none. Since our times have found the want of such examples, it is fit we leave
some to posterity. God forbid all should be thought or found guilty, there are
doubtless some Ringleaders, let us sift them out. In public Government to
pass by the Nocent, is equal injustice, as to punish the Innocent. An
omission of that duty now, will be a guilt in us, render us shamed in History,
cursed by Posterity, our gracious and (in that act of voluntary Justice) most
glorious King, has given up to the satisfaction of his afflicted People, the
authors of their Ruins: the power of future preservation is now in us. Et qui
non servat patriam, cum potest, idem facit destruenti patriam.

What though we cannot restore the damage of the Commonwealth, we may yet
repair the breaches in the bounds of Monarchy. Though it be with our loss and
charge, we shall so leave our childrens children, fenced as with a wall of
safety, by the restoration of our Laws, to their ancient vigor and luster.

It Is too true, and it is to be feared, the Revenues of the Crown, sold
outright, would scarce remunerat the injuries, repay the losses of this
suffering Nation, since the pronouncing of that fatal sentence. What
proportionable satisfaction then can this Commonwealth receive, in the
punishment of a few inconsiderable Delinquents? But it is a Rule valid in Law,
approved in equity, that Qui non habent in crumen Luant in Corpore. And it is
without all question in policy, exemplar punishments conduce more to the safety
of a State, than pecuniary reparations; Hope of impunity lulls every
bad-great-officer into security for his time, and who would not venture to
raise a Fortune, when the allurements of honor and wealth are so prevalent, if
the worst is can fall, be but Restitution.

We see the bad effects of this bold-erroneous opinion; what was at first but
corrupt Law; by encouragement taken from their impunity, is since become false
Doctrine, the people taught in Pulpits, they have no property, Kings instructed
in that destructive principle, that all is theirs, and is thence deduced into
necessary state policy, whispered in counsel, That he is no Monarch, who is
bounded by any Law.

By which bad consequences, the best of Kings, has bin by the infusion of such
poisonous positions diverted from the sweet inclinations of his own Natural
Equity and Justice, the very essence of a King taken from him, which is
preservation of his people: and whereas Salus populi is, or should be, Suprema
Lex, the power of undoing us, is masqu'd under the style of what should be
Sacred Royal Prerogative.

And is it not high time for us to make examples of the first authors of this,
subverted Law, bad Counsel, worse Doctrine?

Let no man think to divert us from the pursuit of Justice, by poisoning the
clear streams of our affections, with jealous sears of his Majesty's
Interruption, if we look too high. Shall we therefore doubt of Justice, because
we have need of great Justice? We may be confident the King well knows, That
his Justice is the Band of our Allegiance: That it is the staff, the proof of
his Sovereignty.

It Is a happy assurance of his intentions of grace to us, that our loyalty has
at last won him to tender the safety of his people: and certainly (all our
pressures weighed this 12 years last past) it will be found the passive loyalty
of this suffering Nation, has our-done the active duty of all Times and
Stories. As the Poet has it, fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest: I may
as properly say, Fideliter fecimus, we have done loyally to suffer so patiently.

Then since our Royal Lord has in mercy visited us, let us not doubt, but in
his Justice he will redeem his people. Qui timide rogat docet negare. But when
Religion is innovated, our Liberties violated, our Fundamental Laws abrogated,
our modern Laws already obsoleted, the propriety of our Estates alienated.
Nothing left us, we can call our own, but our misery and our patience: if ever
any Nation might iustifiably, this certainly may now, now most properly, most
seasonably cry out, and cry aloud, vel Sacra Regnet Iustitia, vel Ruat Coelum.

Mr. Speaker, the sum of my humble motion, is, that a special Committee may
be appointed, to examine the whole carriage of that Extraiudiciall judgment.
Who were the Counselors, Soliciters, and subscribers to the same: the reasons
of their Subscription, whether according to their opinions; by importunity or
pressure of others, whether proforma tantum. And upon report thereof to draw up
a charge against the guilty, and then Lex Currat, Fiat Iustitia.

A brief Discourse, concerning the power of the Peers and Commons of
Parliament, in point of Iudjcature.
SIR, to give you as short an account of your desires as I can, I must crave
leave to lay you as a ground, the frame or first model of this State.

When after the period of the Saxon time, Harold had lifted himself into the
Royal Seat; the Great men, to whom but lately he was no more equal either in
fortune or power, disdaining this act, of arrogance, called in William then
Duke of Normandy, a Prince more active than any in these Western parts, and
renowned for many victories he had fortunately achieved against the French
King, then the most potent Monarch in Europe.

This Duke led along with him to this work of glory, many of the younger sons
of the best families of Normandy, Picardy, and Flanders, who as undertakers,
accompanied the undertaking of this fortunate man.

The Usurper slain, and the Crown by war gained, to secure certain to his
posterity what he had so suddenly gotten, he shared out his purchase, retaining
in each County a portion to support the Dignity Sovereign, which was styled
Demenia Regni; now the ancient Demeans, and assigning to others his adventures
such portions as suited to himself dependancy of their personal service,
except such Lands as in free Alms were the portion of the Church, these were
styled Barons Regis, the Kings immediate Freeholders, for the word Baro
imported then no more.

As the King to these, so these to their followers subdivided part of their
shares into Knights fees, and their Tenants were called Barons Comites, or the
like; for we find, as in the Kings Writ in their Writs Baronibus suis and
Francois and Anglois, the Sovereign gifts, for the most part extending to
whole Counties or Hundreds, an Earl being Lord of the one, and a Baron of the
inferior donations to Lords of Town-ships or Manors.

And thus the Land, so was all course of Judicature divided, even from the
meanest to the highest portion, each several had his Court of Law, preserving
still the Manor of our Ancestors the Saxons, who jura per pages reddebant; and
these are still termed Court-Barons, or the Freeholders Court, twelve usually
in number, who with the Them or chief Lord were Judges.

The Hundred was next, where the Hundredus or Aldermanus, Lord of the Hundred,
with the chief Lord of each Township within their limits judged; Gods people
observed this form in the public Centureonis and decam Judicabant plebem omni
tempore.

The County or Generale placitum was the next, this was so to supply the
defect, or remedy the corruption of the inferior, Vbi Curiae Dominorum
probantur defecisse, pertinet ad vice comitem Provinciarum; the Judges here
were Comites, vice comites and Barons Comitatus qui liberas in hoc terras
babeant.

The last and supreme, and proper to our question, was generale placitum apud
London universalis Synodus in Charters of the Conqueror, Capitalis curia by
Glanvile, Magnum and Commune consilium coram Rege and magnatibus suis.

In the Rolls of Henry the 3. It is not stative but summoned by Proclamation,
Edicitur generale placitum apud London, says the book of Abingdon, whether
Epium Duces principes, Satrapae Rectores, and Causidici ex omni part
confluxerunt ad istam curiam, says Glanvile: Causes were referred, Propter
aliquam dubitationem quae emergit in comitatu, cum Comitatus nescit dijudicare.
Thus did Ethelweld, Bishop of Winchester, transfer his suit against Leostine,
from the County ad generale placitum, in the time of King Etheldred, Queen
Edgine against Goda; from the County appealed to King Etheldred at London.
Congregatis principibus and sapientibus Angliae, a suit between the Bishops of
Winchester and Durham, in the time of Saint Edward. Coram Episcopis and
principibus Regni inpresentia Regis ventilate and finita. In the tenth year of
the Conqueror, Episcopi, Comites and Barons Regni potestate adversis
provinciis ad universalem Synodum pro causis audiendis and tractandis
Convocati, says the book of Westminster. And this continued all along in the
succeeding Kings reign, until toward the end of Henry the third.

AS this great Court or Council consisting of the King and Barons, ruled the
great affairs of State, and controlled all inferior Courts, so were there
certain Officers, whose transcendent power seemed to be set to bound in the
execution of Princes wills, as the Steward, Constable, and Marshall, fixed upon
Families in Fee for many ages: They as Tribunes of the people, or explori among
the Athenians, grown by unmanly courage fearful to Monarchy, fell at the feet
and mercy of the King, when the daring Earl of Leicester was slain at Evesham.

This chance and the dear experience H the 3. himself had made at the
Parliament at Oxford in the 40. year of his Reign, and the memory of the many
straights his Father was driven unto, especially at Rumny-mead near Stanes,
brought this King wisely to begin what his Successor fortunately finished, in
lessoning the strength and power of his great Lords; and this was wrought by
searching into the Regality they had usurped over their peculiar Sovereigns,
whereby they were (as the book of St. Albans terms them.) Quot Domini tot
Tiranni. And by the weakening that hand of power which they carried in the
Parliaments by commanding the service of many Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses
to that great Council.

Now began the frequent sending of Writs to the Commons, their assent not only
used in money, charge, and making Laws, for before all ordinances passed by
the King and Peers, but their consent in judgments of all natures whether
civil, or criminal: In proofe-whereof I will produce some few succeeding
Presidents out of Record.

When Adamor that proud Prelate of Winchester the Kings half brother had
grieved the State by his daring power, Liber S. Alban, fol. 20.7. An 44. H. 3.
he was exiled by joint sentence of the King, the Lords, and Commons, and this
appears expressly by the Letter sent to Pope Alexander the fourth,
expostulating a revocation of him from banishment, because be was a Churchman,
and so not subject to any censure, in this the answer is, Si Dominus Rex and
Regnimajores hoc vellent, meaning his revocation, Communit as tamen ipsius
ingressum in Angliam jam nullatenus sustineret. The Peers subsign this answer
with their names and Petrus de Mountford vice totius Communitatis, as Speaker
or Proctor of the Commons.

For by that style Sir John Tiptofe, Prolocutor, Charta orig. sub figil An. 8.
H. 4.
affirms under his Arms the Deed of Intaile of the Crowns by King Henry the
4. in the 8. year of his Reign for all the Commons.

The banishment of the two Spencers in the 15. of Edward the second, Prelati
Comites and Barons and les autres Peers de la terre and Communes de Roialme
give consent and sentence to the revocation and reversement of the former
sentence the Lords and Commons accord, and so it is expressed in the Roll.

In the first of Edw. the 3. when Elizabeth the widow of Sir John de Burgo
complained in Parliament, Rot. Parl. 15. E. 3 vel. 2.
that Hugh Spencer the younger, Robert Boldock, and William Cliffe his
instruments, had by duresse forced to make a Writing to the King, whereby she
was dispoyled of all her inheritance, sentence is given for her in these words,
Pur ceo que avis est al Evesques Counts, and Barons, and autres grandes and a
tout Cominalte de la terre, que le dit escript est fait contre ley, and tout
manner de raison si fuist le det escript per agard del Parliam. dampue
elloquens al livre a ladit Eliz.

In An. 4. Edw. 3. it appears by a Letter to the Pope, Prel^. Parliam. 1. Ed.
3. Rot. 11
that to the sentence given against the Earl of Kent, the Commons were
parties, as well as the Lords and Peers, for the King directed their
proceedings in these words, Comitibus, Magnatibus, Baronibus, and aliis de
Communitate dicti Regni ad Parliamentum illud congregatis injunximus ut super
his discernerent and judicarent quod rationi and justitiae, conveniret, habere
prae oculis, solum Deum qui eum concordi unanimi sententia tanquam reum
criminis laesae Majestatis morti adjudicarent ejus sententia, etc.

When in the 50 year of Edw. 3. the Lords had pronounced the sentence against
Richard Lions, Parl An. 5. Edw. 3.
otherwise then the Commons agreed, they appealed to the King, and had
redress, and the sentence entered to their desires.

When in the first year of Richard the second, William Weston, Parl. An. 1.
Rich. 2 11 3.8. and 3.5.
and John Jennings were arraigned in Parliament for surrendering certain Forts
of the Kings, the Commons were parties to the sentence against them given, as
appears by a Memorandum annexed to that Record. In the first of Hen. the 4.
although the Commons refer by protestation, the pronouncing of the sentence of
deposition against King Rich. the 2. unto the Lords* yet are they equally
interessed in it, as it appears by the Record, for there are made Proctors or
Commissioners for the whole Parliament, one B. one Abbot, one E. one Baron, and
2. Knights, Gray, and Erpingham for the Commons, and to infer that because the
Lords pronounced the sentence, the point of judgment should be only theirs,
were as absurd as to conclude, that no authority was best in any other
Commissioner of Oyer, and Terminer then in the person of that man solely that
speaks the sentence.

In 2. Hen. 5. the Petition of the Commons imports no less than a right they
had to act and assent to all things in Parliament, Rot. Parl. An. 2. H, 6.
and so it is answered by the King; and had not the adjourned Roll of the
higher House been left to the sole entry of the Clark of the upper House; who,
either out of the neglect to observe due form, or out of purpose to obscure
the Commons right, and to flatter the power of those who immediately served,
there would have been frequent examples of all times to clear this doubt, and
to preserve a just interest to the Commonwealth, and how conveniently it
suites with Monarchy to maintain this form, lest others of that well framed
body knit under one head, should swell too great and monstrous. It may be
easily thought for; Monarchy again may sooner groan under the weight of an
Aristocracie as it once did, then under Democracie which it never yet either
felt or feared.

Sir John Hollands Speech in Parliament, 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
THe time of actions are not for rethorick and elocution which emboldens me to
rise; And though I must acknowledge my self to be one of the youngest
Scholars, and meanest proficients in this great Sch^ole of wisdom, yet I
conceive it a great part of my duty at this time both to deliver my suit and
conscience. We are called hither Master Speaker by the Royal power, we sit
here by the Kings Majesty's grace and favor, and since his Majesty has been
graciously pleased to leave the government of all in our hands, I doubt not but
we shall lay such a foundation in the beginning of this Parliament, that we
shall make it a happy Age, a long lasting one since the dangers of these times,
the present distempers of this State, and therein both his Majesty, and our
necessities, yea and the whole Kingdoms safety do require it.

We are called now, Master Speaker, as I conceive from the reports you have
made of his Majesty's gracious Declaration, for four principal causes. First,
for supply of his Majesty's wants. Secondly, for the relief of our Brethren in
the Northern parts. Thirdly, for the remove of the Scots forces. Fourthly, for
redress of ourowne grievances. That his Majesty's wants are great and many,
Master Speaker, I think there is no man doubts it; and it is as cer^ain out
grievances are so to, they are great and many both in Church and Commonwealth;
I shall but touch them in either, since they have been so fully remonstrated in
both.

First in the Church, by the usurping power of some Prelates and their
adherents, by which means many great dangers, innovations of doctrines, of
discipline, of government have been thrust upon us.

Secondly in the Church, by public sufferances of Priests and Jesuits, not
only to come into the land, by which means the number of Romish Catholics are
dangerously multiplied, Idolatry increased, and Gods heavy judgments highly
provoked.

Thirdly in the Commonwealth, by the late inundations of the Prerogative
Royal, which have broken out, and almost overturned all our liberties, even
those which have been best and strongest fortified, the Grand Chartea it self.
Mr. Speaker, that which has been so often, so solemnly confirmed in the
Succession of so many Princes, ratified in his Majesty's name, founded by the
wisdom of former ages, purposely to keep the beam over and between
Sovereignty.

Even this Master Speaker, the dearest and chiefest part of our inheritance
has been infringed, broken, and set at naught in the Commonwealth by the
over-potencie of some fair great ones, sacred Counselors of State; by whose
advices it is thought the greatest part of these present distempers, under
which the body of this Commonwealth at this time labors, do deprive their
originalls.

Fourthly in the Commonwealth, by the mischievous practices and policies of
some subtle Projectors, and under the title of the Kings profit, and the
public good; they have entitled themselves to great and vast estates, and
that by the damage of the whole Kingdom.

They are Master Speaker, the very moths and cankers that have fretten and
eaten out all Trade and commerce, the very beauty, strength, and health of this
famous Island.

In the Commonwealth, by the entertainment of Forraigners and strangers, and
that at his Majesty's excessive charge, by which means his Majesty's Coffers
are emptied, his Revenues shortened, and the whole Kingdom many other ways
oppressed. But Master Speaker, I shall not trouble my self any further in so
vast, so large a field; I shall now represent my own weak apprehensions for
our progressions in all the particulars for which we have been called, and in
all humility submit unto them.

First, of supply in his Majesty's wants, I do humbly desire we may proceed
there within its due time; and that with as much loyal duty and liberality,
as ever any people expressed toward their Prince, I think I may say the
present affairs of the Kingdom require it.

For the relief of our Brethren in the Northern parts, with a sense of
charity, and fellow feeling of the miseries, afflictions, and losses, In the
removing of the Scottish Army with a soft and gentle hand of mediation,
purification, and reconciliation, if possible it may be wrought with his
Majesty's honor, and the Kingdoms safety (if not) then to repel and repulse
them with stout and resolute spirits, with valiant and united hearts and hands,
such as shall best suite with our duty to God, our King, our Country; such as
shall best become his honor, and ancient renown of this English Nation.

In redress of our grievances in those of the Church, which ought to have
priority in our consultation; as well in respect of necessity, as dignity. In
these Master Speaker, I do humbly desire, and doubt not but we shall proceed
with all true piety, and well grounded on each guiding Helve toward Gods
House, and his truth. In those of the Communalty, with a religious care of our
Countries freedom, in the faithful performance of the trust reposed in us, by
them that sent us, in the preservation of our rights, our ancient rights, the
rights of our inheritance, our liberties, our privileges, our properties.

Yet in all, Mr. Speaker, I do humbly desire we may proceed, as best suiting
the matter and condition of these distempered times, or as best becoming the
honor, dignity, and wisdom of this so great a Court, so great Council, with
all temper, modesty, and all due moderation.

SIR EDWARD HALE HIS SPEECH.
Mr. Speaker,
HIs Majesty has been graciously pleased to call us together again, to
consider freely of all matters of grievances, both of this Church and
Commonwealth of England, and for to be assistants in our Counsels and helps
unto him, about the Scottish Nation, that forceably have entered into our
Kingdom, so as they may be ordered into their own Country, or chased away out
of this, without any dishonor to the Kings Majesty and this Kingdom; all
which matters are of great importance, moment, and consequence, and will crave
great consideration and debating, in our best wills, wisedoms, and discretions,
and that must be freely to give us leave.

First therefore, under your favor, I do conceive it fit to make this a happy
Parliament, to begin at home; For better it were the Scots come unto us, than
the devil should raise his Army, to overthrow us both in Church and
Commonwealth*

For it is too pla^^^, he is come with great power, and his malice is great,
and his policy strong, put into the heads of the Papists (no mean ones) and
Prelates, Schismatics, and Atheists, in several Bands, which has and seeks
to prevail so much by their several designs. Carefully, lovingly, and
dutifully mentioned, and rightly too by the Lords Petition at York, and by a
Petition of the Citizens at London, and also by a Petition of worthy Gentlemen's
sons, Apprentices thereof, so reputed to be. All which show the whole estate of
our Church and Commonwealth to be grievously diseased of a Plurisie, and must
have a present and good cure, or else England is overthrown, which is the
mother and Almoner of the Kings welfare, and his posterity. Which disease,
the King not fearing nor knowing, he had some ill counsel to let it run so
far in jeopardy of trouble and distress: And herein give me leave to tell
you the story of Noah, a King in the the Ark; yet after he was over-shot, and
taken by the Vines of his own planting, and brought himself to some dishonor
thereby, as some use our English Kings heretofore have done by their
favorites, until they saw it, and this is it that made the Papists and
Prelates rejoice in their own wisdom and honor, like Chams, that saw his
father so deceived; but such deserve a curse for it, both of God and man, in
respect of the matters contained in the foresaid Petitions of our English
Lords, as also for that the former Parliament might have settled all things in
quiet, enriched the Kings Coffers, enabled to withstand all powerful
pretenses, and no doubt, but to have qualified the humor of the Scots, to all
our contents. Therefore these deserve the curse of Cham that were movers and
stoppers, and hinderers of it.

When things might have been composed convenient, without war or strife, and
not upon so extreme necessity, which is now brought upon us, and makes the
Scots proverb in use (necessity has no (...)) for their defense.

But now our Proverb is drawn fr^^ thence, we must make a virtue of necessity,
a hard case for a good take heed and counsel; For since the plot of an after
intended war, had an ill policy, that would wrong good Noah their father, and
his children, in such a manner of proceeding, and then in glory and defense of
it, against this House of Commons, cause a book to be published against our
proceedings, these men which were the cause of publishing of it, are fit to
published as Noah's cursed son Cham, shameless. And we for our parts in the
House of Commons, together with the higher House of Lords, I hope will not so
leave them, but be rejecters of them, as good Shem and Japheth, acknowledging
them to be vain members, that go about to supplant our wrong, the Vineyard, our
just King and his Kingdom.

Now therefore consider the former, it shall be fit before we enter upon
conference, to be strengthened and enabled for discharge of our well meaning
both to our King and Country, answerable to his late speech, to gain and obtain
his free love, consent, power on these three points and cautions, handled and
moved the last meeting.

First, free liberty of speech. Secondly, each ones right to our selves.
Thirdly, for reformation of Religion.
And these things granted to proceed freely without delay of time or matters,
to the cure of such deadly diseases if they be let alone.

First, I would conceive, under favor of bette judgments, to begin with
Satan's Roots of evil, viz. All Papists, because they are of the most
dangerous seed of the Serpent, to the hurt of the Church and Commonwealth
herein; that we agree with a general consent of Parliament, to search, see,
and find out all the Jesuits, Priests, Friars, Cappuchines, and all such
Romish factions; and by order to all the Justices of Peace in England, to
imprison them, or to send them all to some out-Townes, to banish them all out
of the Land speedily, while you be in other Council here sitting, and thence
to ship them away at their own chages, and upon good bonds and security, that
they never return into England, Scotland, or Ireland; and if they should, both
the bonds and the Laws to be executed upon them.

And for other long Inhabitants, Papist, and Recusants, such as may seem
honest Subjects (only for Religion) the old orders and Statutes to be put in
execution, without the abatement of the penalties, till they shall conform to
our Religion; and if any have wincked, or underhand compounded for the time
past, to be punished, and made pay so much unto the Kings Cofers, as justly due
by the Statute ever since King Charles his Reign.

The first course and Act of Parliament being speedily put in execution whilst
we sit here, will not only excuse the pretended charity that Papists hope for
from the King and Queen, but will also manifest the true piety against their
heresies for ever, and will be a good satisfaction to the Scots, which make
these one of the chiefest intents and causes of their coming into this
Kingdom, which we wish they had no worse intents; and sure it will be a means
to try their intents, and our own too, and then we have hope to entreat the
Scots to stay our leisures.

Sir John Wray his Speech touching the Canons the 15. of December, 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
A Man may easily see to what tend all these innovations and alterations in
Doctrine and Discipline, and (without perspect time) discover a far off the
active toylsomenesse of these spiritual Ingineeres to undermine the old and
true foundation of Religion, and establish their tottering heresy in Rome
thereof, which least it should not hold being built with untempered mortar: You
see how careful they are by a past oath to force men's consciences not to alter
their government Archiepiscopall.

And Master Speaker, the thoughts of the righteous are right, but the counsels
of the wicked are deceits, and nothing else in their hearts but destructions
and devastations, but to the counselors of peace is joy, so long as they kept
themselves within the circle of the spiritual commerce, and studied to keep
men's hearts upright to God, and his Truth; there was no such complaining in our
Streets of them, nor had we never seen so many thousand hands against them as
now there are come in. And no marvel though God withdrawes so many hearts and
hands from them, who had turned so many out of the way of truth, (vita tuta)
they have stopped up but (via devia) they have enlarged and laid open, as appears
by their crooked Canons,

Master Speaker, I shall not go about to overthrow their government in the
plural, but to limit it, and qualify it in some particulars. For Sir Francis
Bacon long since well observed there two things in the government of Bishops,
of which he could never be satisfied, no more can I; the first was the sole
exercises of the authorities.

And secondly, by the deputation of that authority.

But Master Speaker, I shall not now dispute of either, for mine own part
Master Speaker, I love some of them so well, and am so charitable to the rest,
that I wish rather their reformation, then their ruin.

But let me tell you withal, that if we should find amongst them any proud
Becket, or Wolsey Prelates, who stick not to write Ego and Rex meus. Or if
there shall be sound any cruel Bonners, etc. such I confess I would not
spare, for they will spare none. But in the counterballance, if there may be
found but one good Cranmer, or one good Latimer, or Ridley, I would esteem and
prize them as such jewels to be set in the Kings own Cabinet; for such I am
sure will pray for the peace of Jerusalem, and for the peace of King Charles,
and his three Kingdoms, which God long preserve in concord and unity.

But Master Speaker, we must also be Actors in the preservations of Religions
concordance, which will never be safe, nor well at quiet, until these heavy
drossie Canons with all their base metal be melted and dissolved; let us then
dismount them, and destroy them, which is my humble motion.

A SECOND SPEECH made by Sir John Wray, in the Commons-House, 24. November,
1640.
Mr. Speaker,
BY the report made from the Committee of Religion, you may see to what
exorbitant height Popery is grown, and yet how slowly we go on to suppress
it. I fear God is displeased with us, or else no disaster should have
prevented the sealing of our Covenant, when intended, and I hope it shall be
performed the next Sabbath.

Had our Fast been accepted, and our Humiliation Cordial, no blow should have
distracted our preparation. Master Speaker, if we had taken the good Counsel
of our Teachers at the Fast, and believed their Report, we had done well; and
by this time (no doubt) we might have found out Achan with his Wedge of Godl,
and Babilonish garment. But we have spent our time only in peeling of the
Bark, and snatching the boughs and branches of Popery, and that will do us
no good, for they will prove, and grow thicker and harder.

What must we do then, Master Speaker, to preserve our Religion safe and sound
to us and to our Posterity, that our Candlestick be not removed. The only way
is to fall to our work in earnest, and lay the Axe to the Root, to unloose the
long and deep fangs of Popery and Superstition, which being once done, the
body will soon fall down.

Let us then Master Speaker, endeavor a through Reformation; for if it be
imperfect, it will prove the seed of dissolution, if not dissolutions, which
God forbid. and to prevent it, I shall humbly move that the Groves and
High Places of Idolatry may be removed and put down, and then Gods wrath will
be appeased, and till then never.

Mr. GRIMSTONS SPEECH, In the House of Commons IN PARLIAMENT, CONCERNING
EPISCOPACY, In Feb. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
THese two honorable Lords, Lord Digby, Lord Faulkland, that spoke last, have
not only prevented me in much I intended to have spoken my self, but they have
likewise taught me much I knew not before; Therefore it is not much you can
expect from me: All that I shall say at this time, is rather to prepare the
matter for the question, which has already been so learnedly debated by them,
than to speak any thing of the matter it self. I must confess, when I look
upon the Bishops, or at least, upon some of them, and the way of their
Government, and the sufferings of the people, under their Tyranny: I wonder not
at all at the multitude of Petitioners and Petitions, that have this Parliament
been preferred against them, and that they all cry out, Crucify Crucify, or
that they would have been up by the roots, but it is necessary we should
distinguish between the persons of the Bishops, which are so obnoxious, and
their Functions and Offices; for there is no more weight in the Argument, that
because the Bishops have done amiss, therefore take away Episcopacy, than
there is in it, because the Judges of the Common Law are in fault, therefore
take away Judges, and take away the Common Law: For my own part; I conceive it
an easier matter, and safer for us, (Addere Inventis) to reform what is amiss
in them and their Government, then (Creare Novum) to set up a new form of
Government, which we have had no experience of, nor do we know how it should suit
either with the humors of the people, or with the Monarchiall Government; And
it may be the new Government which is so much desired, if it be brought in upon
the grounds and foundations that some would have it, it will be out of our
powers ever to minister it again. Whereas on the other side, the Government
which is already established, if the Governors exceed their bounds, they may
fall into a Praemunire, and other penalties which the Law has provided in that
Case; and if that be not sufficient, we have yet another hanck upon them, for
our Parliaments have continually a command over them.

Then, Sir, It may be demanded of me of their being so much amiss, what is
that I would have done?

Truly Sir, I am of opinion, that much must be done, or else we had as good do
nothing.

Therefore I come to the particulars, Church Government may be compared to a
Castle, let a Castle be never so strong, once in four-score years (for so long
it is since the first reformation) it may need repair, and it is not the Castle
alone, I mean the Government, that needs repair, but likewise the Governors
themselves, who most wickedly and traitorously have turned their Canons upon
us, which should have been used for our defense.

In the first place therefore I conceive it not only convenient, but of
absolute necessity, and the payring of their excrescences, I mean their
temporal Jurisdiction: I must confess, I know not to what purpose they should
sit upon our Benches at our Sessions of the Peace, and Goal-Deliveries, or in
the Star Chamber, for by woeful experience, we find that their Judgments
are guided there more by their boundless wills, and fiery transported
passions, than by reason, and the rule of Law, which ought to have been their
director. I conceive that of less use their sitting at the Council board, to
be there at the Helm to guide and steer the temporal affairs of the
Commonwealth, certainly that is not the Plough they ought to follow, and by
the neglecting of it, that is the reason that so many briers, brambles, and
stinking weeds, are sprung up in Gods House, the Church, to the great
destruction of all his Majesty's Kingdoms here at home, and the great wonder
and amazement of all the reformed Churches abroad.

And I conceive it of the least use of all their sitting in Parliaments, as
powers to give their voices in the making of Laws; and yet I would not utterly
exclude them. For I conceive it might be convenient that all, or at least, some
of them might always be present there as Assistants, to give their advice in
Spiritual matters when they are thereunto required by the Lords, as the
Justices do in Temporal.

In the next place I conceive it of, as absolute necessity, the robbing of the
Jurisdiction of the high Commission Court, or at least, to limit and bound it,
that it may (quadrare) with the great Charter of our liberties, and the Laws of
this Kingdom.

This Court has for many years together, ridden upon the back of the common
Law Courts, which ought to have been subservient to them. Each river must be
kept within its, own bounds, and it is unpossible to have two Suns shine
together in one Firmament.

They have likewise many superfluous Courts, which I conceive might very well
be spared, as their Official Courts, and Commissary Courts. Sir, they are no
better than cozening Lotteries, where the Kings Subjects are detained of their
moneys, and where their Judges and inferior Officers do, like Physicians that
always cure themselves, though they destroy their patients. I confess, I could
willingly give my consent that they should keep their Chancellors Court, and an
Archdeacon Court, if such limits and bounds were put upon them, as by the
wisdom of this House may easily be done.

The Chancellor is (custos consciencie) the Keeper of the Bishops conscience,
and the Archdeacon is (oculus Episc.) the Bishops eye; And as I would not take
away their consciences or their eyes, so I would not have them like Briarius
have their finger in every business. This Sir, I have shortly presented you
with my opinion, that is, that I am not willing it that should be referred to,
or committed upon the point of subversion, but I am willing it should be
referred upon the point of reformation. And if the sense of the House shall run
that way, I doubt not but at the Commitree I shall make it manifest, that my
heart stands affected with as much zeal, for the having a reformation, as any
man that sits within these walls.

DENSELL HOLLIS Esquior, His speech at the deliverie of the Protestation to the
LORDS, May the fourth, 1641.
My Lords,
THe Kuights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, having taken into
their consideration the present estate and condition of this Kingdom, they
find it surrounded with variety of pernicious dangers, and destructive
designs, practices and plots, against the well being of it, and some of those
designs, hatched within our own bowels, and Viper-like working our own
destruction.

They find Jesuits, and Priests conspiring with ill ministers of State, to
destroy our Religion; they find ill ministers conioyn'd together to subvert
the Laws and liberties. They find obstructions of Justice, which is the
life-bloud of every State, and having a free passage from the Sovereign power,
where it is as primarily seated as the life-bloud in the heart, and there
derived from the several Judicatories, or through so many veins, into all the
parts of this great collective Body, does give warmth and motion, to every
part and member, which is nourished and inlivened by it. But being once
precluded stoppd, and reared as the particular must of necessity faint and
languish, so must the whole frame of government be dissolved.

And consequently Sovereignty it self (which as the heart in the body, is
primum movens, and ultimum moriens, must dye and perish in the general
dissolution, and all things as in the beginning in antiquum Chaos.

My Lords,

They find the property of the Subject invaded and violated, his estate rent
from him by illegal taxations, Monopolies and proiects almost upon every thing
that is for the use of man, not only upon superfluities, but necessaries? and
that enrich the Vermin and Caterpillars of the Land, and impoverishing good
Subjects, to take the meat from the Children, and give it to Dogs.

My Lords, if the Commons find these things, they conceive they must needs be
ill counsels, that have brought us into this condition.

These Counsels have put all into a combustion, have discouraged the hearts of
all true English men, and brought two Armies into our bowels, which is the
Unlture upon Prometheus, eats through, and sucks and gnaws our very hearts out.

Hic Dolor, sed ubi Medicina?

Heretofore Parliaments were the Catholicall, the balm of Gilead, which healed
our wounds, restored our spirits, and made up the breaches of the Land.

But of late years they have been like the Fig Tree in the Gospel, without
effecacie, without fruit, onley destructive to their particular members, who
discharged their duties and consciences no way beneficial to the Common-welth.
Nohis exitiale, nec Reipublico profuturum. As he says in Tacitus, being taken
away still as Elias was with a whirlwind, never coming to any maturity, or
to their natural end, whereas they should be like the blessed old man, who
dies, plenus dier^^^, in a full ago, after he had fought a good fight, and
overcom^ all his enemies, Or as the sh^cke of wheat, which comes in due
season to fill our Garnaries with corn, uphold our lives with the staff of
bread; for Parliaments are our panis quotidianus, our true bread, all other
ways are but Quelkachees which yield no true nourishment, bread, nor good
blood.

The very Parliament which has sat so long, has but beat the Air, and
strive against the stream, I may truly say the wind and tide has still been
against us. The same ill counsel which first raised the storm, and almost
shipwrackt the Commonwealth, they still continue, they blow strong like the
East wind that brought the Locusts over their Counsels, cross our designs,
cast difficulties in our way, hinder our proceedi^gs, and make all that we do
to be fruitless and ineffectuall: They make us not masters of our business, and
so not masters of many, which have been the great business of this Parliament,
that we might pay the Armies, according to our promises and engagements.

For my Lords, our not effecting of the good things which we have undertaken
for the good of the Church and of the Commonwealth, has wounded our
Reputation, and taken off from our credit.

Is it not time then, my Lords, that we should unite, and concentrate our
selves, in regard of this Anteparisiasis, of hurtful and malicious intentions
and practices against us.

My Lords, it is most agreeable to nature, and I am sure most agreeable to
reason, in respect of the present coniuncture of our affairs, for one main
Engine by which our enemies work our mischief, is by infusing an opinion and
b^lei^ into the world, that we are not united among our selves. But like
Sampsons Foxes, we draw several ways, and tend to our several ends.

To defeat the Counsels of these Achitophels which would involve us. Our
Religion, our being, our Laws, our liberties, all that can be near and dear
unto an henest soul, in one universal and general desolation, to defeat I
say, the Counsels of evil Achitophels, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of
the House of Commons (knowing themselves to be specially entrusted with the
preservation of the whole, and in their Conscience are persuaded that the
dangers are so eminent, as they will admit of no delay) have thought fit to
declare their united affections, by entering into an assosciation amongst
themselves, and by making a solemn Protestation and vow unto their God, that
they will unanimously endeavor to oppose and prevent the Counsels and
Counselors which have brought upon us all these miseries, and the fears of
greater, to prevent the ends, and bring the Authors of them to condign
punishment, and thereby discharge themselves better before God and man.

The Protestation your Lordships shall have read unto you, together with ground
and reasons which have induced the House of Commons to make it, which are
prefixed before it by way of Preamble. Then the Protestation was read by Master
Maynard.

Die Mercurii 5 May, 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament,
that the Preamble, togtheer with the Protestation which the Members of this
House made the third of May, shall be forthwith Printed, and the Copies
printed, brought to the Cleark of the said House, to Attest under his hand, to
the end that the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses may send them down to the
Sheriffs, and Justices of Peace of the several Shires, and to the Citizens
and Burgesses of the several Cities, Boroughes, and Cinque Ports respectively.
And the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses are to intimate unto the Shires,
Cities, and Boroughes, and Cinque Ports, with what willingness all the Members
of this House made this Protestation. And further to signify, that as they
justify the taking of it in themselves, so the cannot but approve it in all
such as shall take it.

A Preamble with the Protestation made by the whole House of Commons the third
of May, 1641. and assented unto by the Lords of the upper House the fourth of
May last past.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons House in Parliament,
finding to the grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests and
Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late more boldly and
frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and danger of the
Ruin of the true reformed Religion, in his Majesty's Dominions established,
and finding also that there has bin, and having cause to suspect there still
are, even during the sitting in Parliament, endeavors to subvert the
fundamental Laws of England, and Ireland, and to introduce the exercise of an
Arbitrary and tyrannical government, by most pernicious and wicked counsels,
practices, plots, and conspiracies, and that the long intermision, and
unhappier breach of Parliaments, has occasioned many illegal Taxations;
whereupon the Subjects have been prosecuted and grieved, and that diverse
Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church, Multitudes
driven out of his Majesty's Dominions, Jealousies raised and Fomented between
the King, and his people, a Popish Army leavied in Ireland, and two Armies
brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of his Majesty's Royal
Person, the Consumption of the Revenue of the Crown, and the treasure of this
Realm. And lastly, finding the great causes of Jealousy, endeavors have
been and are used to bring the English Army into misunderstanding of this
Parliament; thereby to incline that Army by force, to bring to pass those
wicked counsels, have therefore thought good to ioyn our selves in a
Declaration of our united affections, and resolutions, and to make this ensuing
Protestation.

The Protestation.
I A.B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and
estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all popery and popish Innovation within this Realm,
contrary to the said Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, I
will maintain and defend his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate.

As also the power and privilege of Parliaments, the lawful Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects. And every person that shall make this Protestation,
in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same, and to my
power, as far as lawfully I may, I will oppose, and by all good ways and
means endeavor to bring condign punishment on all such as shall by force,
practice, counsels, plots, conspiraces, or otherwise, do any thing to the
contrary in this present protestation contained, and further, that I shall in
all Just and Honorable ways, endeavor to preserve the union and peace betwixt
the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. And neither for hope,
fear, or any other respects, shall relinquish this promise, vow, and
Protestation.

The Bill of Attainder, that passed against Thomas, Earl of STAFFORD.
WHereas the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, in this
present Parliament assembled, have, in the name of themselves, and of all the
Commons of England, impeached Thomas, Earl of Strafford of high Treason, for
endeavoring to subvert the Ancient and Fundamental Laws and Government of his
Majesty's Realms of England, and Ireland, and to introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government against Law in the said Kingdoms; and for exercising a
Tyrannous and exorbitant power, over and against the Laws of the said Kingdoms,
over the Liberties, Estates, and Lives of his Majesty's Subjects; and likewise
for having by his own authority, commanded the laying and asseising of
soldiers upon his Majesty's Subjects in Ireland, against their consents, to
compel them to obey his unlawful commands and orders made upon pap^r
Petitions, in causes between party and party, which accordingly was executed
upon diverse of his Majesty's Subjects in a Warlike manner, within the said
Realm of Ireland; and in so doing, did levy War against the Kings Majesty
and his liege people in that Kingdom; And also for that he upon the unhappy
Dissolution of the last Parliament, did slander the House of Commons to his
Majesty, and did counsel and advise his Majesty, that he was loose and
absolved from the rules of Government, and that he had an Army in Ireland, by
which he might reduce this Kingdom; for which he deserves to undergo the pains
and forfeitures of high Treason.

And the said Earl has been also an Incendiary of the Wars between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland: all which offenses have been sufficiently
proved against the said Earl upon his impeachment.

Be it therefore enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and by the Lords
and Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same,
That the said Earl of Strafford for the heinous crimes and offenses aforesaid,
stand, and be adjudged and attainted of high Treason, and shall suffer such
pain of death, and incur the forfeitures of his Goods, and Chattels, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments of any estate of Freehold or Inheritance in the
said Kingdoms of England and Ireland, which the said Earl, or any other to his
use, or in trust for him, have or had the day of the first sitting of this
present Parliament, or at any time since.

Provided that no Judge or Judges, Justice or Justices whatsoever, shall
adiudge or interpret any Act or thing to be Treason, nor in any other manner
than he or they should or ought to have done before the making of this Act, and
as if this Act had never been had or made. Saving always unto all and singular
persons and bodies, politic and corporal, their Heirs and Successors, others
than the said Earl and his heirs, and such as claim by, from, or under him, all
such right, title, and interest, of, in, and to all and singular, such of the
said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, as he, they, or any of them, had
before the first day of this present Parliament, any thing herein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided that the passing of this present Act, and his Majesty's assent
thereunto, shall not be any determination of this present Sessions of
Parliament, but that this present Sessions of Parliament and all Bills and
matters whatsoever depending in Parliament, and not fully enacted or
determined. And all Statutes and Acts of Parliament, which have their continuance
until the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall remain, continue,
and be in full force, as if this Act had not been.

The first Speech concerning the the right of Bishops to sit in Parliament, May
21. 1641.
My Lords,
I Shall take the boldness to speak a word or two upon this subject, first as
it is in it self, then as it is in the consequence: For the former I think he
is a great stranger in Antiquity, that is not well acquainted with that of
their sitting here, they have done thus and in this manner, almost since the
conquest, and by the same power and the same right the other Peers did, and
your Lordships now do, and to be put from this their due, so much their due, by
so many hundred years strengthened and confirmed, and that without any offense,
nay pretense of any, seems to me to be very severe; if it be jus, I dare boldly
say it is summum. That this hinders their Ecclefiasticall vocation, an argument
I hear much of, has in my apprehension more of shadow, then in substance in
it: if this be a reason, sure I am it might have been one six hundred years ago.

A Bishop, my Lords, is not so circumscribed within the circumference of his
Diocese, that his sometimes absence can be termed, not in the most strict
sense a neglect or hindrance of his duty, no more than that of a Zievetenant
from his Count y, they both have their subordinate Ministers, upon which their
influences fall, though the distance be remote.

Besides my Lords, the lesser must yield to the greater good, to make wholesome
and good Laws for the happy and well regulating of the Church and
Commonwealth, is certainly more advantageous to both, then the want of the
personal execution of their office, and that but once in three years, and then
peradventure but a month or two, can be prejudicial to either. I will go no
further to this, which experience has done so fully, so demonstratively.

And now my Lords, by your Lordships good leave, I shall speak to the
consequence, as it reflects both on your Lordships, and my Lords the Bishops.
Dangers and inconveniences are ever best prevented e longinquo; this president
comes near to your Lordships, and such a one, mutato nomine de vobis. Pretenses
are never wanting, nay, sometimes the greatest evils appear in the most fair
and specious outsides, witness the Shipmony, the most abominable, the most
illegal thing that ever was, and yet this was painted over with color of the
Law; what Bench is secure, if to allege be to convine, and which of your
Lordships can say then he shall continue a member of this House, when at one
blow twenty six are cut off. It then behooves the Neighbor to look about him,
cum proximus ardet Vcalegon.

And for the Bishops, my Lords, in what condition will you leave them? The
House of Commons represents the meanest person, so did the Master his slave,
but they have none to do so much for them, and what justice can tie them to the
observation of those Laws, to whose constitution they give no consent, the
wisdom of former times, gave proxies unto this House merely upon this ground,
that every one might have a hand in the making of that, which he had an
obligation to obey: This House could not represent, therefore proxies in room
of persons were most justly allowed.

And now my Lords, before I conclude, I beseech your Lordships to cast your
eyes upon the Church, which I know is most dear and tender to your Lordships,
you will see her suffer in her principal members, and deprived of that honor
which here and throughout all the Christian World, ever since Christianity she
constantly has enjoyed; for what Nation or Kingdom is there, in whose great
and public assemblies, and that from her beginning, she had not some of hers
if I may not say as essential; I am sure I may say as integrall parts thereof;
and truly my Lords, Christianity cannot alone boast of this, or challenge it
only as hers, even Heathenisme claims an equal share.

I never read of any of them, Civil, or Barbarous, that gave not thus much to
their Religion, so that it seems to me to have no other original, to flow from
no other spring than Nature it self.

But I have done, and will trouble your Lordships no longer, how it may stand
with honor and justice of this House to pass this Bill, I most humbly submit
unto your Lordships, the most proper and only Juges of them both.

The second Speech about the lawfulness and convenieny of their intermedling
in Temorall Affairs.
My Lords,
I Shall not speak to the Preamble of the Bill, that Bishops, and Clergy men
ought not to intermeddle in temporal offairs. For, truly my Lords, I cannot
bring it under any respect to be spoken of. Ought is a word of relation, and
must either refer to humane or divine Law to prove the lawfulness of their
intermedling by the former, would be to no more purpose, than to labor to
convince that by reason, which is evident to sense. It is by all acknowledged.
The unlawfulness by the latter, the bill by no means admits of, for, it
excepts Universities and such persons as shall have honor descend upon them.
And your Lordships know, that circumstance and chance alter not the nature and
essence of a thing, nor can except any particular from an universal
proposition by God himself delivered. I will therefore take these two as
granted, first that they ought by our Law to intermeddle in temporal affairs,
secondly, that from doing so they are not inhibited by the Law of God, it
leaves it at least as a thing indifferent. And now my Lords, to apply my self
to the business of the day, I shall consider the convenience, and that in the
several habitudes thereof, but, very briefly; first, in that which it has to
them merely as men; qua tales, then as parts of the Commonwealth, Thirdly,
from the b^st manner of constituting laws, and lastly, from the practice of all
times both Christian and Heathen.

Homo sum nihil humanum a me alienum puto, was indeed the saying of the
Comedian, but it might well have becom'd the mouth of the greatest Philosopher.
We allow to sense all the works and operations of sense, and shall we restrain
reason? must only man be hindered from his proper actions? They are most fit
to do reasonable things that are most reasonable. For, Science commonly is
accompanied with conscience; So is not ignorance: they seldom or never meet.
And why should we take that capacity from them, which God and nature have so
liberally bestowed?

My Lords, the politic body of the Commonwealth is analogicall to the body
natural: every member in that contributes something to the contribution of the
whole, the superfluity or defect which hinders the performance of that duty,
your Lordships know what the Philosopher calls (...), Natures sin. And truly
my Lords, to be part of the other body, and do nothing beneficial thereunto,
cannot fall under a milder term. The commonwealth subsists by laws and their
execution: and they that have neither head in the making, nor hand in the
executing of them, confer not any thing to the being or well being thereof.
And can such be called members, unless most unprofitable ones? only fruges
consumere nati.

Me thinks it springs from nature it self, Senatus populusque Romanus, the most
glorious Commonwealth that ever was, and those many others in Greece, and
elsewhere, of eternal memory.

argumentum ad bominem. Nay my Lords I will go further (for the same reason
runs through all Religions) never was there any Nation that employed not their
religious men in the greatest affairs. But to come to the business that lies
now before your Lordships, Bishops have voted here ever since Parliaments
began, and long before were employed in the public. The good they have done,
your Lordships all well know, and at this day enjoy for this I hope ye will not
put them out, nor for the evil they may do, which yet your Lordships do not
know, and I am confident never shall suffer. A position ought not to be
destroyed by a supposition, and aposse ad esse non valet consequentia. My
Lords, I have done with proving of this positively, I shall now by your good
favors do it negatively in answering some inconveniences that may seem to
arise.

Argumentum symbolicum non est argumentativum.

Grace and Nature are in some respects incompossible, but in some others most
harmoniously agree, it perfects nature, and raises it to a height above the
common altitude, and makes it most fit for those great works of God himself, to
make Laws, to do Justice. There is then no inconsistency between themselves, it
must arise out of Scripture, I am confident it does not formally out of any
place there, nor did I ever meet with any learned Writer of these or other
times, that so expounded any Text.

admonitions, in exhortations to virtue, dehortations from vice, and partly in
easing the burdened conscience. These, my Lords, complete the office of a
Churchman. Nor are they altogether tied to time or place, though I confess
they are most properly exercised within their own verge, except upon good
occasion, nor then the omission of some can be termed the breach of them all.
I must add one more, an essential one, the very form of Episcopacy, that
distinguishes it from the inferior Ministry, the orderly and good government
of the Church, and how many of these, I am sure, not the last, my Lords, is
interrupted by their sitting here, once in 3 years, and then peradventure but a
very short time: and can there be a greater occasion than the common good of
the Church and State? I will tell your Lordships what the great and good
Emperor Constantine did, in his expedition against the Persians, he had his
Bishops with him whom he consulted with about his military affairs, as Eusebius
has it in his life, lib. 4. c. 56.



But, of matter of fact there is no disputation, some of them have done ill,
Crimine ab uno disce omnes, is a poetical, not a logical argument. Some of
the Judges have done so, some of the Magistrates and Officers; and shall there
be therefore neither Judge, Magistrate nor Officer more? A personal crime goes
not beyond the person that commits it, nor can another fault be mine offense.
If they have contracted any filth or corruption through their own, or the vice
of the times, cleanse and purge them thoroughly. But still remember the great
difference between reformation and extirpation. And he pleased to think of your
Triennall Bill which will save you this labor for the time to come; fear of
punishment will keep them in order, if they should not themselves through the
love of virtue. I have now, my Lords, according to my poor ability, both showed
the conveniences, and answered those inconveniences that seem to make against
them. I should now propose those that make for them. As their falling into a
condition worse than slaves, not represented by any; and then the dangers and
inconveniences that may happen to your Lordships; but I have done this
heretofore, and will not offer your Lordships Grambenbis coctam.

A Speech in Parliament delivered by Mr. PEARD, against the Oath Ex Officio.
1640.
Mr. SPEAKER,
I Assure my self, we are here met to discover, and reform (as much as in us
lies) all abuses of the Church and Commonwealth; many and great ones have
been spoken against, some contrary to all Law, and some established by new
Laws, contrary to all Law: The Wolf having put on the Lions skin, and
rapine, presuming to pass undiscovered under the robe of Justice. But I shall
not need to light a candle to search out that, which already the sun has
made manifest; That which I shall speak, has not been spoken, but if I shall
speak that. that shall seem to be against Law, I humbly crave the pardon of
this House, since if it be law, it is summum jus, Law without conscience: That
which I shall speak against, is the Oath Ex Officio. It is acknowledged by
themselves, that Administer this Oath that it is unjustly done to tender it to
any man, unless there be a public Fame, or particular Presentment or
Articles testified against him: I make no question, but the practice of this
confessed Injunction will be found common amongst them, And I hope it shall be
severely censured, since unjust proceedings upon unjust grounds, are double
Injustice; I shall therefore leave that as a plain case, and examine their
best grounds; First, Fame (they say) is a just cause for them to take
Cognizance of a matter to proceed against it; Fame we know may arise upon very
small and groundless suspicions, by secret whisperings, creeping at first, but
quickly gets it wings; And as the Poet says, Creseit eundo.

This is the manner of all Fame; if this be Fame, their Court shall never want
work, as long as a Promooter has an ill tongue, or a knave can slander an
honest man; Therefore I think Fame no good ground to proceed upon.

If Fame be just, what most men speak, certainly some men will testify; No
man will testify it is false.

Let no accusation then stand, but out of the mouths of two or three
witnesses, of Presentiments, are a just ground of proceedings in all Courts, and
upon all causes: But neither witnesses nor presentiments are or can be a just
ground of the Oath Ex officio; For if the party accused be examined no further
then is testified, then the Oath Ex Officio is superfluous.

If he be examined further, or upon other matters then is testified, then a man
is made to betray himself, which is unjust.

Mr. Speaker, such is the Mercy of the Common Law, that Murderers and Poysoners
are not examined upon the rack, but the Civil law upon every occasion racketh
the Conscience.

These are the Lyme-twigs which were set to catch the poor Martyrs in Queen
Mary's days; And in our days, I dare believe it will appear that some good
men are fallen into this snare.

Mr. Speaker, If the foundations fail, what shall the buildings do? If the
conformity of good men shall undo them, who shall stand? I desire nothing but
that evil men may suffer, I desire the Law may punish, not make offenders, I
desire that our words and actions at this time, and at other times, may be
subject to the Law, I would have thought free.

Mr. Speakers Letter to Sir Jacob Ashley.
SIR,
WE have had cause to doubt, that some ill affected persons have endeavored
to make a misunderstanding in the Army, of the intentions of the Parliament
toward them; To take away all mistaking in that kind, the house of Commons
have Commanded me to assure you that they have taken the affairs of the Army
into their serious Care; And though for the present their moneys have not come
as they wished, and as was due, by reason of the many distractions, and other
Impediments which this House could no ways avoid, yet they rest most assured
that they shall not only have their full pay, but the House will take their
merits into their further consideration, in regard they take notice that
notwithstanding their want, and endeavors of those ill-affected persons, they
have not demeaned themselves otherwise, then as men of honor, and well affected
to the Commonwealth, which this House takes in so good part, that we have
already found out a way to get money for a good part of their pay, and will
take the most speedy course, we possibly may for the rest.

From my house at Charing-Crosse, the 4th of this present Month of May. 1641.
So I remain; Your very Loving Friend.
SIR,
It Is the pleasure of the House, that this Letter be Communicated to the Army,
to the end their Intentions may be clearly understood by them.



Sir BENJAMIN RUDYERDS Speech. Tuesday the 29. December.
Mr. SPEAKER,
THe principal part of this business, is Moneys, and now we are about it, I
shall be glad we may give so much, as will not only serve the turn for the
present, but likewise to provide that it come not quick upon us again, I
believe that the two subsidies are spent already. We know how much time this
business has cost us, if we be but half as long about another, it may cost
more then money: For if two Armies should be driven to extreme necessity, and
they will be Judges of their own necessity, we shall not be able to sit here,
and give more, though we would.

Believe it Sir; this is the business of all the businesses in the House, of
all the businesses in the Kingdom; If we stand hacking for a little money, we
may very thriftily lose all we have, this being a business of so peremptory
and destructive a nature.

Wherefore Mr. Speaker, my humble and earnest motion is, that we may dispatch
it fully, and at once; If there should be an overplus of money remaining, we
can soon resolve how to dispose of it.

Four subsidies will do the work, if they be given presently, for every day
tells us that we are not so much Masters of our own time, and occasions as to
do nothing when we would; Let us do this whilst we may, though I dwell not
in the North, yet I dwell in England.

Sir BENJAMIN RUDYERDS Speech concerning the QUEENS Jointure. Jan. 1640.
Mr. SPEAKER,
GOD has blessed the Queens Majesty with a blessed Progeny already, whereby
she has relieved and fortified this Kingdom, which may put us in mind in a
fit time to provide according to their birth, and interest.

She is the daughter of a great and famous King, she is the wife of our King,
which to us includes all expressions. But in one thing, Mr. Speaker, her
Majesty is singular in that she is the Mother to the greatest Prince that has
been borne amongst us above these hundred years, which cannot but work a
tenderness in us.

The Queen likewise may be another Instrument of happiness to us in her good
affection to Parliaments, by a good hansell in this. And I believe we shall see
effects of it, for it nearly and wisely concerns her Majesty, even in all the
Relations that are most dear to her to contribute her best Assistance to
Uphold the Government and greatness of the kingdom. By which means also the
king will be better enabled to make a further enlargement of his bounty toward
her, in some degree proportionable.

Wherefore, Mr. Speaker, it will become this House to show our cheerfulness in
passing of the Bill.

Articles against Doctor Piercie, Bishop of Bath and Wells; exhibited by Mr.
James Minister within his Diocese.
1 HE has Ex officio convented me before him, for having two Sermons
preached in my Church on Michaelmas day, to the great disturbance and
hinderance of the sale of the Church Ale, as his Lordship pretended, and
further examined me upon Oath, whether I had not the said Sermons preached for
the same purpose and intent, admonishing me for the future, neither to preach
my self, nor suffer any other to preach in my Cure, in the afternoon, of
either the Lord's Day, or holy days.

2 I heard him say to his Register, That whereas Information had been given
concerning certain Ministers, that they expounded upon the Catechism, this
Information was too narrow to catch them, and therefore it should have run
thus, that they Catechized or expounded upon the Catechism Sermon-wise, and
then they would have been obnoxious to censure.

3 At the meeting to elect Clerks of the Convocation he threatened to send forth
Censures of the Church, against all that would not pay in the Benevolence, late
granted, in the late Synod, within a fortnight after the second day of November
last past; And further at the said election, his son gave eight single
voices; two, as Archdeacon of Bath; two, as Prebend of the Church of Wells;
two, as Parson of Buckland Saint Mary; two, as Vicar of Kingsbury: and many
others also there present, gave as many double voices, as they had Benefices
and Dignities; against which one Mr. Rosnell protested, saying, that it was
illegal; The Bishop replied, that they gave in several capacities, and
thereupon commanded him silence, saying, that he was a young man.

4. That upon the mere Information of Mr. Humphry Sydenham Rector of
Buckington, that in a certain Sermon Preached at the Visitation of the Arch
Deacon of Taunton, I bespattered the Clergy; The Bishop summoned me before him
down to Wells, and there objected unto me, that I had preached a scandalous
Sermon, wherein I had cast some aspersions on some of the Clergy. Upon which
charge I proferd to bring in an exact Copy of the Sermon I preached, and to
depose, that I spoke neither more nor less, then was contained in the said
Copy; This the Bishop would not accept of, saying that he would not have the
Ministers, who came to witness against me, troubled with a second journey:
One of my Proctors desired time, till the next Court day for me to give in my
answer; the Bishop commanded him to hold his Peace, and the other Proctor
though he was retained by me, and had received a Fee, never opened his mouth,
pretending unto me, that because the Bishop was so highly displeased with me,
he durst not appear in my behalf, being denied time to give in my answer at
the next Court day; I desired respit until the afternoon, this also was
denied; In fine contrary to the rules of their own Court, he examined witnesses
against me, and proceeded to Censure me, before he received my full answer, he
would not hear the answer, which I could give to the Articles objected to me,
which I proferd to give, and which he had by oath required me to give; further
by virtue of the oath he administered unto me, he questioned me not only
concerning matters of outward fact, but also concerning my most secret
thoughts, intentions and aims. Moreover whereas the witnesses confessed that I
only said, in the foresaid Sermon, that some put the Scriptures into a staged
dress; the Bishop persuaded them, that, that expression was equivalent with
the Article objected, that some men's Sermons were Stage Plays, and they by his
persuasion, swore down right, that I saidsome men's Sermons were Stage Plays;
The Doctor made an Act and Order, that I should make public retractation,
which I refused to do, and appeald unto the Arches; But upon either the
Bishops, or M. Sidenhams Information my Procter Hunt renounced my appeal, and
Sir John Lamb dismissed the same cause, without hearing, unto the Bishop
again.

5 The Churchwardens of my Parish, by order from the Bishop, were enjoined to
turn the Communion Table, and place it Altar-wise, etc. Now they, that they
might neither displease the Bishop, nor transgress against the Rubric of the
Liturgy, made it an exact square Table, that so notwithstanding the Bishops
order, the Minister might still Officiate at the North side of the Table; M.
Humphry Sydenham informed against this, and upon Information, the Bishop sent
to view it; and upon his view he certified the Bishop, that it was like an
Oyster Table, whereupon the Bishop ordered the Churchwardens to make a new one.

6 Upon M. Humphry Sydenhams Information that M. John Pym was a Parliamenteer,
the Bishop would not suffer me any longer to sojourn in his house, although
before such Information he gave me leave: And when I demanded of some of his
servants, the reason why his Lordship had thus changed his mind, they told me
that his Lordship was informed by M. Sydenham that M. Pym was a Puritan.

The Lord Andevers speech in March 1640. concerning the Star Chamber.
MY Lords, since your Lordships have already looked so far into privileges
of Peers, as to make a strict inquisition upon foreign honors: Let us not
destroy that among our selves, which we desire to preserve from strangers.

And if this greivance I shall move against, have slept till now; It is very
considerable lest custom make it every day more apparent than other: your
Lordships very well know, there was a Statute framed, 3 Hen. 7. Authorizing the
Chancellor, Treasurer and Privy Seal, and the two Chief Justices calling to
them one Bishop, and a temporal Lord of the Kings Council, to receive
complaints upon Bill or information, and Cite such parties to appear as stand
accused of any misdemeanour, and this was the Infancy of the Starchamber, but
afterward the Starchamber was by Cardinal. Woolsey 8 H. 8. raised to man's
Estate, from whence (being now altogether unlimited) it is grown a Monster, and
will hourly produce worse effects, unless it be reduced by that hand which
laid the foundation; for the Statutes that are ratified by Parliament admit of
no other than a repeal.

Therefore I offer humbly unto your Lordships these ensuing Reasons, why it
should be repealed.

First the very words of the Statute clearly show that it was a needless
institution, for it says they who are to Judge, can proceed with no delinquent
otherwise, then if he were convicted of the same crime by due process of Law.

And do your Lordships holdth is a rational Court that sends us to the Law,
and calls us to the Law, and calls us back from it again.

Secondly, diverse Judicatories confound one another, and in pessima republica
plurimae Leges.

The second reason is from circumstance, or rather a Consuetudine, and of this
there are many examples both domestique and forain; but more particularly by
the Parliaments of France abbreviated into a standing Committee by Philip the
King, and continued according to his Institution until Lewis the eleventh came
to the Crown, who being a subtle Prince buried the volume in the Epitome, for
to this day, when ever the three Estates are called, either at the death of the
old King, or to Crown the new, It is a common Proverb Allons voire Le van des
Estates; My Lords Arbitrary judgments destroy the Common Laws, and in them the
two great Charters of the Kingdom, which being once lost, we have nothing left
but the name of liberty.

Then the last reason is (though it was the first cause of my standing up) the
great Eclipse it has ever been to the whole Nobility; For who are so
frequently vexed there as Peers and Noblemen, and notwithstanding their appeal
to this Assembly, is ever good whilst that famous Law of the 4 Ed. 3. remains
in force for the holding of a Parliament once a year or more if occasion
require, yet who durst a year ago mention such a Statute, without the incurring
the danger of M. Kilverts persecution? Therefore I shall humbly move your
Lordships that a select Commitee of a few may be named to consider of the act
of Parliament it self, and if they shall think it of as great prejudice as I
do, that then the house of Commons in the most usual manner may be made
acquainted with it either by Bill or conference, who also happily think it a
burden to the Subject, and so when the whole body of Parliament shall join in
one supplication, I am confident his Majesty will desire that nothing shall
remain in force which his people do not willingly obey.

Lunae, the 10. of May, 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament,
that the Lord Mayor of London, the Justices of Peace of Midlesex, Westminster,
and the Liberties of the Duchy of Lancaster, and those of Surrey, that are
for the Borough of Southwarke, and the place adjoining, do employ their best
endeavors to prevent that none of the Kings Subjects do frequent the houses of
any the Ambassadors, Somerset House, or St. James, to hear Mass, And that
they give an account to this House, of the Execution of this Order, at all such
times, as by the said House they shall be required.

My Lord Finch his Letter to my Lord CHAMBERLAIN.
My most welbeloved Lord,
THe Interest your Lordship has ever had in the best of my fortunes, and
affections, gives me the Privileges of troubling your Lordship with these few
lines, from one that has now nothing left to serve you withal but his
Prayers; Those your Lordship shall never fail, with an heart as full of true
affection to your Lordship, as ever any was. My Lord, it was not the loss of
my place, and with that of my fortunes, nor being exiled from my dear Country
and friends (though many of them were cause of sorrow) that afflicts, but that
which I most suffer under, is that displeasure of the House of Commons
conceived against me; I know a true heart I have ever borne toward them, and
your Lordship can witness in part, what ways I have gone in, but Silence and
patience best becomes me, with which I must leave my self, and my Actions to
the favorable construction of my Noble Friends, in which number your Lordship
has a prime place; I am now at the Hague, where I arrived on Thursday the last
of the last month, where I purpose to live in a fashion agreeable to the
poorness of my fortunes, for my humbling in this world, I have utterly cast
off the thoughts of it, and my aim shall be to learn to number my days, that
I may apply my heart unto wisdom, that wisdom that shall wipe all tears from
mine eyes, and heart, and lead me by the hand to true happiness, which can
never be taken from me. I pray God of heaven bless this Parliament with a
happy, both progress and conclusion: if my ruin may conduce but the least to
it, I shall not repine at it; I truly pray for your Lordship, and your Noble
Family, that God would give an increase of all worldly blessings, and in the
fullness of days, to receive you to his glory; if I were capable of serving
any body, I would tell your Lordship, that no man should be readier to make
known his devotion, and true gratitude to your Lordship, then

Your Lordships most humble, and affectionate poor kinsman and servant, J.F.
Hague, Jan. 3. 1640.
The Lord KEEPERS Speech TO HIS MAJESTY, at the Banqueting House at
White Hall, in the name of both Houses.
May it please Your Majesty,
I Am to give your Majesty most humble and hearty thanks in the name of both
houses of Parliament, and this whole Kingdom, for the speedy and gracious
Royal assent unto the Bill, Entitled, An act for preventing of inconveniences
happening by the long intermission of Parliaments, which as it is of singular
comfort and security for all your Subjects for the present, so they are
confident it will be of infinite honor and setlement of Your Majesty's Royal
Crown and dignity, as well as comfort to their postiritie.

The Declaration of the Scots Commissioners to the House of Parliament,
touching the maintenance of their Army. March, the 16th, 1640.
IN the midst of other matters, necessity constrains us to show your
Lordships that fourscore thousand pounds and above of the Moneys appointed for
relief of the Northern Countries, there is no more paid but 18000 l. the
Country people of those Countries have trusted the soldiers so long as they
are become weary and unable to furnish them, their cattle and victual being
so far exhausted and wasted, as it is scarce able to entertain themselves;
The Markets are decayed because there is no money to buy their Commodities, and
are become so dear, that no sort of victual is sold, but at a double rate;
And which is hardest of all, the Army is stinted by the Articles of Cessation
to stay within these two Countyes, whose provisions are all spent, expecting
from time to time the payment of those moneys, which were promised for their
relief, and are reduced to such extremity, as they must either starve, or
(sore against their will) break their limited bounds, unless some speedy
course be taken for their more timous payment, that so soon as may be, the
Arreers may be paid; And because the continued payment of that monthly sum,
for relief of the Northern Countries, is a Burden to the Kingdom of
England, our Army is a trouble to the Country where they reside, our charges of
entertaining our Army (besides what is allowed from England) is exceeding
great; And our losses and prejudice through absence and neglect of our affairs
not small, Therefore that all evils, and troubles of both Kingdoms may be
removed, it is our earnest desire that the Parliament may be pleased to
determine the time and manner of Payment of the 300000 l. which they were
pleased to grant toward relief of their Brethren, that there may be no let
about this, when matters shall be drawing toward an end, And that his Majesty
and they may give order for Accelerating matters in the treaty, that the peace
being concluded, England may be eased of the burden of two Armies, and we may
return to our own homes, which is our earnest desire.

Ad. Blaire.

The Remonstrance of both the Houses of Parliament unto the King, delivered by
the Lord Keeper, January the 29th 1640.
May it please your Majesty,
YOUR loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons, now assembled by your Majesty's
Writ in the high Court of Parliament, humbly represent unto your gracious
consideration that Jesuits and Priests ordained by authority from the Sea of
Rome, remaining in this Realm, by a Statute made in the 27 year of Queen
Elizabeth are declared Traitors, and to suffer as Traitors.

That this law is not so rigorous, 27 Eliz. cap. 2.
as some apprehend, or would have others to believe, for that it is restrained
to the natural born Subjects only, and does not extend to any strangers at all.

That it is enacted in the first year of King James, 1 Jac. cap. 4.
that all Statutes made in the time of Queen Elizabeth, against Priests and
Jesuits, be put in due and exact execution.

And for further assurance of the due execution of these laws, the Statute of
the third year of King James invites men to the discovery of the offenders, by
rewarding them with a considerable part of the forfeiture of the Recusants
estate.

So that the Statute of Queen Elizabeth is not only approved, but by the
judgment of several Parliaments in the time of King James of happy memory
adjudged fit and necessary to be put in execution.

That considering the state and condition of this present time, they conceive
this law to be more necessary to be put in strict execution, then at any time
before; and that for diverse weighty and considerable reasons, viz. For that by
diverse Petitions from the several parts of this Kingdom, complaints are made
of the great increase of Popery and Superstition, and the people call earnestly
to have the laws against Recusants put in execution; Priests and Jesuits swarm
in great abundance in this Kingdom, and appear here with such boldness, and
confidence, as if there were no laws against them.

That it appears unto the House of Commons by proof, that of late years about
the City of London Priests and Jesuits have been discharged out of Prison, many
of them being condemned of high Treason.

They are credibly informed that at this present the Pope has a Nunci^, or
Agent resident in the City, and they have a just cause to believe the same to
be true.

The Papists, as publicly, and with as much confidence and importunity resort
to Mass at Denmark house, and St. James, and the Ambassadors Chapels, as
others do to their Parish Churches: They conceive the not putting of these
Statutes in execution against Priests and Jesuits, is a principal cause of
increase of Popery.

That the putting of these laws in execution, tends not only to the
preservation and advancement of the true Religion established in this Kingdom;
but also the safety of your Majesty's person, and security of the State and
Government, which were the principal causes of the making of the Laws against
Priests and Jesuits, as is manifestly declared in the preamble of the laws
themselves, which are the best interpreters of the minds of the makers of them.

And because the words being penned by the advice and wisdom of the whole
state, are much more full and clear then any particular man's expression can be,
they were therefore read, as they are vouched, those of the 27 year of Queen
Elizabeth, being thus, viz.

That the Priests and Jesuits come hither, not only to draw the Subjects from
their true obedience to the Queen, but also to stir up Sedition, Rebellion, and
open hostility within the Realm; to the great endangering of the safety of her
Royal Person, and to the utter ruin, desolation, and overthrow of the whole
Kingdom, if not timely prevented; and the tenor of the words of the third year
of King James are in this manner, viz.

Whereas diverse Jesuits and Priests do withdraw many of his Majesty's Subjects
from the true service of Almighty God, and the Religion established within this
Realm, to the Romish Religion, and from their loyal obedience to his
Majesty; and have of late secretly persuaded diverse Recusants, and Papists,
and encouraged and imboldned them to commit most damnable Treasons tending to
the overthrow of the whole State and Common Wealth; if God of his goodness and
mercy had not within few hours of the intended time of the execution thereof,
revealed and disclosed the same.

The Houses did further inform, that some Jesuits and Priests had been
executed in the time of Queen Elizabeth, and King James of happy memory; and
when any of them have received mercy, it was in such time, and upon such
circumstance, as that the same might be extended unto them without dangers,
whereas now of late, there has been a great apprehension of endeavors by some
ill agents, to subvert Religion; and at this present both Kingdoms have a
general expectation of a through reformation.

And there is already found so ill a consequence of the the late reprieve of
John Goodman the Priest; that the House of Commons having sent to the Citizens
of London for their assistance in the advancement of money, for the present and
necessary supply of his Majesty's army, and relief of the Northern Counties:
upon this occasion, they have absolutely denied to furnish the same: and how
far the like discontent may be effused into other parts of the Kingdom, to the
interruption of the levying of the Subsidies, the houses leave to your
Majesty's consideration. It is found that Goodman the Priest has been twice
formerly committed and discharged. That his residence now about London, was in
absolute contempt of your Majesty's Proclamation, as the Houses are credibly
informed, that he has been sometimes a Minister in the Church of England, and
consequently is an Apostate; both Houses are very sensible that any man should
presume to intercede with your Majesty in a case of so high a nature.

They humbly desire that a speedy course may be taken for the due execution of
the laws against the Priests and Jesuits, that all mischiefs before mentioned
may be timely remedied by your Majesty's great wisdom.

And lastly, that Goodman the Priest be left to the justice of the law.

The Earl of Straffords Letter, to his most Excellent Majesty, dated from the
Tower the 4th of May, 1641.
May it please your sacred Majesty,
IT has been my greatest grief in all these troubles, to be taken as a person
which should endeavor to represent and set things amiss between your Majesty
and your People; and to give counsels tending to the disquiet of the three
Kingdoms.

Most true it is, that this mine own private Condition considered, it had been
a great madness, since through your grations favor I was so provided, as not
to expect in any kind to mend my fortune or please my mind more, then by
resting where your bounteous hands had placed me.

Nay, it is most mightily mistaken, for unto your Majesty it is well known, my
poor, and humble advises concluded still in this, That your Majesty and your
people could never be happy, till there were a right understanding betwixt you
and them: no other means to effect, and settle this happiness, but by the
Counsel, and assent of the Parliament; or to prevent the growing Evils upon
this state, but by entirely putting your self in the last resort, upon the
loyalty, and good affections of your English subjects.

Yet such is my misfortune, this truth finds little credit, the contrary
seems generally to be believed, and my self reputed, as some thing of
Separation between you, and your people; under a heavier censure then which, I
am persuaded no Gentleman can suffer.

Now, I understand the minds of men are more incensed against me,
notwithstanding your Majesty has declared, that in your princely opinion, I am
not guilty of Treason, nor are you satisfied in your conscience to pass the
Bill.

This brings me into a very great straight, there is before me the ruin of
my Children, and family hitherto untouched in all the branches of it with any
foul Crimes. Here is before me the many ills, which may befall your Sacred
person, and the whole Kingdom, should your self, and Parliament part less
satisfied one with the other, then is necessary for the preservation both of
King and People. Here are before me the things most valued, most feared, by
mortal man, Life, or Death.

To say Sir, that there has not been a strife in me, were to make me less
man, then God knows my infirmities give me. And to call a destruction upon my
self, and young Children, where the intentions of my heart at least have been
innocent of this great offense may be believed, will find no easy consent from
Flesh and blood.

But with much sadness, I am come to a resolution of that which I take to be
best becoming me, to look upon that which is most principal in it self;
which doubtless is the prosperity of Your sacred Person, and the
Commonwealth, infinitely before any private man's interest.

And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the honor, and
justice of my Peers so clearly, as to beseech your Majesty might please to have
spared that declaration of yours on Saturday last, and entirely to have left me
to their Lordships, so now, to set your Majesty's conscience at liberty, I do
most humbly beseech your Majesty, in prevention of mistakes which may happen,
by your refusal, to pass this Bill; And by this means remove (praised be God)
I cannot say, this accursed, (but I confess) this unfortunate thing forth of
the way, toward that blessed agreement, which God, I trust, shall ever
Establish between you, and your subjects.

Sir my consent shall more acquit you herein to God, then al ^he world can do
besides. To a willing man there is no injury done. And as by Go^s grace I
forgive all the world with a calmnes and meeknes of infinite Contentment to my
dislodging soul; So, Sir, to you can I give the life of this world, with all
the cheerfulness imaginable; in the just acknowledgement of your exceeding
favors. And only beg that in your goodness, you would vouchsafe to cast your
gracious regard upon my poor Son, and his three Sisters, less, or more, and
no otherwise, then as their (in present) unfortunate Father, may hereafter
appear more, or less guilty of this death.

God long preserve your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most faithful, and humble Subject, and Servant. STRAFFORD.
Tower 4 May 1641.
The Petition of the EARL of STRAFFORD unto the Lords before he Dyed.
To the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in this present
Parliament assembled.
THE humble Petition of Thomas late Earl of Strafford; Shows that seeing it
is the good will and pleasure of God that your Petitioner is now shortly to pay
that duty which we allow to our frail nature; He shall in all Christian
Patience and Charity conform, and submit himself to your Justice, in a
comfortable assurance of the great Hope, laid up for us in the Mercy and Merits
of our Savior blessed for ever.

Only he humbly craves, to return your Lordships most humble thanks for your
Noble Compassion toward those innocent Children; whom now with his last
blessing he must commit to the protection of Almighty GOD, beseeching Your
Lord-ships to finish your Pious intentions toward them: And desiring that the
reward thereof may be fulfilled in You, by him that is able to give above all
we are able either to ask or think. Wherein I trust the Honorable House of
Commons will afford their Christian assistance.

And so beseeching your Lord-ships charitably to forgive all his omissions and
infirmities, he does very heartily and truly recommend Your Lordships to the
Mercies of Our Heavenly Father, and that for his goodness he may perfect you
in every good work. Amen.

Tho. Wentworth.

Lord FAULKLANDS first speech in Parliament.
I Rejoice very much to see this day; and the want has not lain in my
affections, but my lungs. If to all that has bind past, I have not been as
loud with my voice as any man's in the house, yet truly my opinion is; we have
yet done nothing, if we do no more: I shall add what I humbly conceive ought
to be added, as soon as I have said something, with references to him that
says it: I will first desire the forgiveness of the House, if ought I say
seem to entrench upon another profession, and enter upon the work of another
robe.

Since I have bin entrusted by the report of a learned Committee, and confirmed
by the uncontradicted rule of the House, since I shall say nothing of this
kind, but in order to somewhat further.

And which moves me most to venture my opinion, and to expect your pardon,
since I am confident, that History alone is sufficient to show this judgment
contrary to our Laws, and Logic alone sufficient to prove it destructive to
our propriety, which every free, and noble person values more then his
possession. I will not profess I know of my self, and all those who know me,
know that my natural disposition is to decline from severity, much more from
cruelty.

That I have no particular provocations from their persons, and have particular
Obligations to their calling against whom I am to speak.

And though not so much, yet far more then I have, so I hope it will be
believed, that only public interest have extorted this from me, and that which
I would not say, if I conceived it not so true, and so necessary that no
undigested meat can lie havier upon the stomach, then this unsaid would have
lain upon my Conscience.

Mr. Speaker, the constitution of this Commonwealth has Established, or rather
endeavored to Establish to us the security of our goods, and the security of
those Laws which would secure us and our goods, by appointing for us Judges so
settled, so sworn, that there can be no oppression, but they of necessity must
be accessory; since if they neither deny, nor delay us Justice, which neither
for the great nor little seal, they ought to do; the greatest Person in this
Kingdom cannot continue the least violence upon the meanest; But this
security, Mr. Speaker, has been almost our ruin, for it has been turned, or
rather turned it self into a Battery against us: And those persons who should
have been as Dogs to defend the Sheep, have been as Wolves, to worry them.

These Judges, M. Speaker, to instance not them only, but their greatest
crime, have delivered an opinion, and judgment in an extrajudiciall manner,
that is, such as came not within their cognizance, they being Judges, and
neither Philosophers, nor Politicians; In which when that is so absolute and
evident, the law of the land ceases, and of general reason and equity, by
which particular laws at first were framed, returns to his throne and
government, where salus populi becomes not only suprema, but sola lex; at
which, and to which end, whatsoever should dispense with the King, to make use
of any money, dispences with us, to make use of his, and one another. In this
judgment they contradicted both many and learned Acts and Declarations of
Parliaments; and those in this very case, in this very reign, so that for them
they needed to have consulted with no other record, but with their memories.

2 They have contradicted apparent evidences by, supposing mighty and eminent
dangers, in the most Cerene, quiet, and halcian days that could possibly be
imagined, a few conceptible pirates, being our most formidall enemies, and there
being neither Prince nor State, with whom we had either Alyance, or Amity, or
both.

3 They contradict the writ it self, by supposing that supposed danger to be
so sudden, that it would not stay for a Parliament, which required but forty
days. stay, and the writ being in no such haste, but being content to stay
seventimes over.

Mr. Speaker, it seemed generally strange, that they saw not the Law which all
men else saw, but themselves. Yet though this begot the more general wonder,
three other particulars begot the more general indignation.

The first of all the reasons for this judgment, was such that they needed not
any from the adverse party to help them to convert those few, who before the
last suspicion of the legallity of that most illegal writ, there being fewer
that approved of the judgment, then there were that judged it, for I am
confident they did not that themselves.

Secondly, when they had allowed to the King, the sole power in necessity, the
sole judgment of necessity, and by that enabled him to take both from us, what
he would, when he would, and how he would, they yet continued to persuade us
that they had left us our liberties and proprieties.

The third and last is, and which I confess moved most, That by the
transformation of us from the state of free subjects (a good phrase Mr.
Speaker, under Doctor Heylens favor) unto that of Villeins, they disable us by
Legal and voluntary supplies to express our affections to his Majesty, and by
that to cherish his to us, that is by Parliaments.

M. Speaker, the cause of all the miseries we have suffered, and the cause of
all our jealousies we have had, that we should yet suffer; is, That a most
excellent Prince has been most infinitely abused by his Judges, telling him
that by policy he might do what he pleased; with the first of these we are now
to deal, which may be a leading to the rest. And since in proving of these
Laws, upon which these men have trampled, our Ancestors have showed their
urmost care and wisdom, for our unaffected security, words having done
nothing, and yet have done all their words can do, we must now be forced to
think of abolishing of our grievances, and of taking away this judgment, and
these Judges together, and of regulating their successors by their examplary
punishment.

I will not speak much; I will only say we have accused a great Person of high
Treason, for intending to subvert our fundamental Laws, and to introduce
arbitrary Government, which we suppose he meant to do, we are sure these have
done it, there being no Law more fundamental, than that they have already
subverted, and no government more absolute, than they have really introduced:
Mr. Speaker; not only the severe punishment, but the sudden removal of these
men, will have a sudden effect in one very considerable consideration.

We only accuse, and the House of Lords condemn; In which condemnation they
usually receive advise (though not direction) from the Judges, And I leave it
to every man to imagine how prejudicial to us, that is, to the Common wealth,
and how partial to their fellow malefactors, the advice of such judges is like
to be. How undoubtedly for their own sakes, they will conduce to their power,
that every action be judged to be a less fault, and every person to be less
faulty, then in Justice they ought to do; Amongst these, Mr. Speaker, there is
one that I must not lose in the crowd, whom I doubt not but we shall find when
we examine the rest of them, with what hopes they have been tempted: by what
fears they have been assaid, and by what, and by whose importunity they have
been pursued, before they consented to what they did; I doubt not I say, but
we shall then find him to have been a most admirable solicitor, but a most
abominable Judge; he it is who not only gave away with his breath, what our
Ancestors had purchased for us by so large an expense of their time, their
care, their treasure, and their blood, and employed their industry, as great as
his injustice, to persuade others to join with him in that deed of gift, but
strove to root up those liberties which they had cut down; and to make our
grievances immortal, and our slavery irreparable, lest any part of our
posterity might want occasion to curse him; He declared that power to be so
inherent to the Crown, as that it was not in the power even of Parliaments to
divide them.

I have heard, Mr. Speaker, and I think here that common Fame is ground enough
for this House to accuse upon; And then undoubtedly enough to be accused upon
in this House: She has reported this so generally, that I expect not that you
should bid me name him whom you all know, nor do I look to tell you news,
when I tell you it is my Lord Keeper. But this I think sit to put you in mind,
That his place admits him to his Majesty, and trusts him with his Majesty's
conscience, and how pernicious every moment, whilst one gives him means to
infuse such unjust opinions of this House, as are expressed in a Libell, rather
then a Declaration, of which many believe him to be the principal Secretary,
and the other puts the vaste and most unlimited power of the Chauncery into his
hands, the safest of which will be dangerous; for my part, I think no man
secure, that he shall think himself worth any thing when he rises, whilst all
our estates are in his breast, who has sacrificed his Country to his
ambition, whilst he who has prostracted his own conscience, has the keeping
of the Kings, and he who has undone us already by wholesale, has a power left
in him by retaile.

Mr. Speaker, in the beginning of the Parliament he told us, and I am
confident, every man here believes it before he told it, and never the more for
his telling, though a sorry witness is a good testimony against himself; That
his Majesty never required any thing from any his Ministers but Justice, and
Integrity. Against which, if any of them have transgrest, upon their heads, and
that deservedly, it ought to fall; It was full and truly; but he has in this
saying pronounced his own condemnation; we shall be more partial to him then
he is to himself, if we be slow to pursue it. It is therefore my just and
humble motion, That we may choose a select Committee to draw up his and their
charge, and to examine their carriage in this particular, to make use of it in
the charge, and if he shall be found guilty of tampering with Judges against
the public security, who thought tampering with witnesses in a private cause,
worthy of so great a Fine, if he shall be found to have gone before the rest to
this Judgment, and to have gone beyond the rest in this Judgment, that in the
punishment for it, the Justice of this House may not deny him the due honor
both to preceed and exceed the rest.

Sir JOHN CULPEPPERS Speech in the Commons House of Parliament. 9o. November.
1640.
Mr. SPEAKER,
I stand not up with a Petition in my hand. I have it in my mouth, and have it
in charge from them that sent me hither, humbly to present to the consideration
of this House the grievances of the County of Kent; I shall only sum them up;
they are these,

First, the great increase of Papists by the remiss execution of those laws
which were made to suppress them: the life of the law is execution; without
this, they become a dead letter; this is wanting, and a great grievance.

The second, is the obtruding and countenancing of diverse new Ceremonies in
matters of Religion, as placing the Communion Table Altar-wise, and bowing or
cringing to, or toward it, the refusing of the holy Sacrament to such as
refuse to come to the Rayles, These carry with them some scandal, and much
offense.

The third, is Military charges, and therein first, that of Coat and Conduct
money, required as a loan, pressed as a due, in each respect equally a
grievance. The second is the enhancing the price of Powder, whereby the Trained
Bands are much discouraged in their exercising: howsoever this may appear
prima facie, upon due examination it will appear a great grievance. The third
is more particular to our County: It is this; The last Summer was twelvemonth,
1000. of our best Arms were taken from the owners, and sent into Scotland: The
compulsary way was this; If you will not send your Arms you shall go your
selves. M. Speaker, the trained Band is a Militia of great strength and honor,
without charges to the King, and deserves all due encouragement.

The fourth, is the Canons, I assign these to be a grievance; First, in
respect of the matter, besides the etc. Oath. Secondly, in respect of the
makers, they were chosen to serve in a Convocation; that falling with the
Parliament, the Scene was altered; The same men without any new election,
shufled into a sacred Synod, Thirdly, in respect of the consequence, which in
this age, when the second ill president becomes a Law, is full of danger. The
Clergy, without confirmation of a Parliament, have assumed unto themselves
power to make Laws, to grant Relief by the name of benevolence, and to
intermeddle with our freehold by suspensions and deprivation, This is a
grievance of a high nature.

The next grievance is the Ship Money; This cries aloud, I may say, I hope
without offense, This strikes the first born of every family, I mean our
inheritance; If the Laws give the king power, in any danger of the kingdom,
whereof he is Judge, to impose what and when he please; we owe all that is
left, to the goodness of the King, not to the Law, M. Speaker, this makes the
Farmors faint, and the Plough to go heavy.

The next is the great decay of clothing and fall of our woolls; These are the
golden Mines of England which gives a foundation to that trade which we drive
with all the World; I know there are many stars concur in this
constellation, I will not trouble you with more than one cause of it, which I
dare affirm to be the greatest. It is the great customs and impositions laid
upon our Cloth, and new Draperies: I speak not this with a wish to lessen the
King revenews, so it be done by Parliament; I shall give my voice to lay more
charge upon the superfluities, due regard being had to trade, which we import
from all other Nations: sure I am that those impositions upon our native
commodities are dangerous, give liberty to our neighbors to undersell; And I
take it for a rule, that besides our loss in trade, which is five times as
much as the King receives, what is imposed upon our Clothes, this it taken
from the rent of our lands. I have but one grievance more to offer unto you:
But this one compriseth many, It is a neast of waspes, or swarm of vermin,
which have overcrept the land, I mean the Monopoles and Polers of the people;
These like the Frogs of Egypt have gotten possession of our dwellings, and
have scarce a room free from them: They sup in our Cup, they dip in our Dish,
they sit by our fire, we find them in the Die fat, wash-boule, and Poudering
tub, they share with the Butler in his box, they have marked and sealed us from
head to foot. Mr. Speaker, they will not bate us a Pin: we may not buy our own
Clothes without their brokage; These are the Leeches that have sucked the
Common wealth so hard, that it is almost become hecticall: And Mr. Speaker,
some of these are ashamed of their right names; they have a vizard to hide the
brand made by that good law in the last Parliament of King James; They shelter
themselves under the name of a Corporation, they make bylaws which serve their
turns to squeese us, and fill their purses; unface these and they will prove as
bad Cards as any in the pack; These are not petty Chapmen, but wholesale men.
Mr. Speaker, I have ecchoed to you the cries of the kingdom, I will tell you
their hopes: they look to Heaven for a blessing upon this Parliament, they hang
upon his Majesty's exemplary piety and great justice, which renders his ears
open to the just complaints of his Subjects; we have had lately a gracious
assurance of it, they are the wise conduct of this, whereby the other great
affairs of the Kingdom, and this our grievance of no less import; And this
may go hand in hand, in preparation and resolution; Then by the blessing of God
we shall return home with an Olive branch in our mouths, and full confirmations
of the privileges, which we received from our Ancestors, and ow to our
posterity, which every freeborn English man has received with the air he
breathed in.

These are our hopes, These are our prayers.

Mr. BAGSHAW his speech in Parliament, 7 die November. 1640.
Mr, Speaker,
I Had rather Act then speak in those weighty businesses of the Kingdom, which
have been so excellently handled by these four worthy Gentlemen, that spoke
last, and therefore I shall be short. For when I look upon the Body of this
goodly and flourishing Kingdom in matters of Religion, and of our laws, (For
like Hippocrates Twins, they live and dye together) I say when I behold these
in that state and plight, as they have been represented to us, Flere magis
libet quam dicere; But this is our comfort, Mr. Speaker, that we are all met
together for the welfare and happiness of Prince and People; And who knows
whether this may not be the appointed time, wherein God will restore our
Religion as at the first, and our laws as at the beginning.

The honor of a King consists in the weal of his people: this undoubted
maxim his Majesty has made good by his late gracious speech and promise to us
to redress all our grievances, to destroy the enemies of our Peace, and plenty.

To make a people rich, they must have ease and justice. Ease in their
Consciences from the bane of Superstition, from the intolerable burden of
innovation in Religion, and from the racks and tortures of strange and new
fangled Oaths. They must be eased in their persons, being liberi homines, and
not Vilanes; All illegal arrests and imprisonment against Magna Charta, being
our greatest liberties. They must be eased in their lands from Forest, where
never any Deer fed, from depopulations, where never any Farm was decayed, and
from enclosures, where never any hedges were set. But must lastly be eased in
their goods from their exactions and expilations of Pursevants and Apparitors,
of Projectors and Monopolists, Humanarum Calamitatum mercatores, as an ancient
finely calls them: and if the people have all these easements, yet if they have
not Justice, they cannot subsist; justice is to the Civil body, as food to the
natural; If the streams of Justice be by unrighteousness turned into Gall and
Wormword, or by cruelty, like the Egyptian waters, be turned into blood, those
which drink of these brooks must needs die and perish.

The Law says that all Justice is in the King, who is styled in our book Fons
Justitiae, and he commits it to his Judges, for the execution wherein he trusts
them with two of the chiefest flowers, which belong to his crown: The
administration of his justice, and the exposition of his laws: but he will not
trust them without an Oath required of them, by the Statute of 18 E. 31. Which
is so strict and severe, that it made a Judge whom I know, though honest and
strict, yet to quake and tremble at the very mention of it. The effect of the
Oath is, that they should do equal law, and execution of right to all the
Kings Subjects, poor as well as rich, without regard of any person.

That they should not deny to do common right to any man by the Kings letters;
and for any other cause: And in case such letters do, that they proceed to do
come the law notwithstanding such letters, or for any other causes, as they
will answer to the King, in bodies, goods, and lands: how this Oath has been
performed, we have seen and felt; I need say no more. But when I cast mine eyes
upon the inferior Courts of Justice, wherein no such oath is required; I
mean, the High Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts, my soul has
bled for the wrong pressures which I have observed to have been done and
committed in these Courts, against the Kings good people; especially for the
most monstrous abuse of the Oath Ex Officio; which, as it is now used, I can
call no other than Carnificina Conscientiae: I have some reason to know this,
that have been an Attendant to the Court these five years for my self, and a
dear friend of mine, sometimes Knight of our Shire, for a mere trivial
business; that the most that could be proved against him, was the putting on
his hat in the time of Sermon. Of which Court I shall say more, and make good
what I say, when those ulcers come to be opened.

Mr. Speaker, I say these four worthies that spoke before me, have told you of
our miseries; but I cannot tell you of the remedies: For things are come to
that height, that I may say, as Livy said of the Roman state in his time, Nec
Vitia nostra scire possumus ne^ Remedia; for no Laws will now do us good;
Better Laws could not have been made, then the Stat. of Monopolies, against
Projectors, and the Petition of right against the infringers of liberties; and
yet as if the Law had bin the Author of them, there has been within these few
years more Monopolies and infringment of liberties, than has been in any age
since the Conquest: and if all those vile Harlets, as Queen Elizabeth called
them, that have been the Authors of those Evils and the Troublers of our Israel
do go unpunished; it will never be better with us; for now during Parliament,
like frozen Snakes their poison dryes up, but let the Parliament dissolve, and
then their poison melts and scatters abroad, and does more hurt then ever. What
then must be done? Why? what the Plaster cannot do, must be done by the Law:
Ense recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahatur. I can not better English it,
then in the words of a King, Let them be cut of in their wickedness, that have
framed mischief as a Law. My conclusion, Mr. Speaker, is this; Let the woeful
violation of the State of Monopolies, and the Petition of Right be made Felony,
or Praemunire at the least, but yet in the interim let them be made examples of
punishment, who have been the Authors of all those miseries, according to the
Counsel of Solomon, Take away the wicked from before the King, and his Throne
shall be Established in Righteousness.

To the right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in the high Court of
Parliament assembled, The humble Petition of Thomas Earl of Strafford his
Majesty's Lieutenant General of Ireland
Most humbly shows,
THat in obedience to your Lordships order, and in due respect and
acknowledgment of your noble justice you vouchsafed this your Petitioner the
other day, he now expresses in writing that humble request that he then made,
concerning the examining of witnesses; which, with your Lordships favor, was
this,

1 That there might be no admission of any examination of witnesses in the
cause, till your Petitioner has put in his answer to the charge of Treason,
exhibited against him.

2 That after answer, no witnesses should be examined, before your Petitioner
had the names of such witnesses delivered unto him by your Lordships order, to
the intent (as by his Council he should be advised) he might either except
against such witnesses, or crosse-examine them.

3 That before either of these two points should be overruled against your
Petitioners, your Lordships would be honorably pleased to hear him by his
Council, at the Bar, to show cause why he humbly conceives his desires
herein to be just and reasonable.

Finally, your Petitioner humbly craves your Lordships remission, if his
Petition be not so formal as it ought, and might be, had he the help of
Council: And shall ever with all expression of duty and thankfulness, retain
in full memory your Lordships most honorable Justice, and noble respects to
your Petitioner the other day; and pay your Lordships the duties of this whole
life for the same; and always, and unfainedly pray for your most noble
Lordships increase of all everlasting honor and happiness.

Concerning the Prices of Wine, etc. Die Mercurii, Maii 26. 1641.
UPon the whole matter of the Report,

It was resolved upon the question,

1 That the Patent for the payment of 40 shillings per Tun on the Wines by the
Merchants, is illegal in the creation, and a grievance.

2 That the imposition of a penny on a quart on French Wines, and two pence on
a quart on Spanish Wines, is a grievance.

3 That the Patent of the imposition of 40 shillings per Tun, is a grievance in
the execution.

4 That Alderman Abel, and Master Richard Kilvert are the principal Projectors
both in the creation and execution of this illegal imposition of 40 shill. per
Tun.

Resolved upon the question,

That there shall be a Bill prepared, declaring the offenses of Alderman Abel,
and Richard Kilvert, to the end they may be made exemplary.

Resolved, etc

That a select Committee be named, to examine who were the Referrers Advisers,
Sharers, Complotters and Contractors, and those that have received any bribe or
benefit by this Patent, and who drew the Patent.

Resolved, etc.

That the Proclamation dated the 15th of July, in the 14th year of the King,
prohibiting the Wine-Coopere to buy and sell Wine, is illegal, and against the
liberty of the Subject.

Resolved, etc.

That the Decree-made in the Star Chamber in December 1633. prohibiting
retailing Vintners to dress meat in their own houses, to sell again to
guests, is illegal, and against the liberty of the Subject.

Sir Thomas Row his Speech at the Council Table, touching Brasse-Mony, or
against Brasse-Money, with many notable observations thereupon, July, 1640.
MY Lords, since it has pleased this Honorable table, to command amongst
others my poor opinion concerning this weighty proposition of money, I must
humbly crave pardon, if with that freedom that becomes my duty to my good and
gracious Master, and my obedience to your great commands, I deliver it so.

I cannot my Lords, but assuredly conceive this intended project of infeobling
the Coin, will trench very far both into the honor of Justice, and profit of my
Royal Master.

All estates do stand Magis fa^^a quam vi as Tacitus says of Rome; And wealth
in every Kingdom is one of the essential marks of their greatness, and is
best expressed in the measures and purity of their moneys. Hence it was that so
long as the Roman Empire, a pattern of the best Government held up their
glory, or greatness, they ever maintained with little or no change the
standard of their Coin, but after the loose time of Commodus had led in need by
excess, and so by that shift of changing the standard, the Majesty of that
Empire fell by degrees. And as Vopiscus says, the steps by which that State
descended, were visible most by the general alteration of their Coins; and
there is no surer simptomes of consumption in State, then the corruption of the
Money.

What Renown is left to the Posterity of Edw. 1. in amending the standard both
in purity and weight, from that of elder and barbarous times; it must needs
stick as a blemish upon Princes that do the contrary.

Thus we see it was with Hen. 6. who after he had begun with abaiting the
measures, he afterward fell to abasing the matter; and gr^nted Commission to
Missend, and others to practice Alcamie to serve his Mint.

The extremity the State in general felt by this agrievance, besides the
dishonor it laid upon the person of the King, was not the least disadvantage
his disloyal kinsman took, to ingrace himself into the peoples favors, to
his Sovereigns Reign.

When Hen. the 8th. had gained as much of power and glory abroad, of love and
obedience at home as ever any, he suffered a loss by this Rock.

When his Daughter Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, she was happier in
Council to amend that error of her Father, for in a memorial of the Lord
Treasurer Burleighs his hand, I find that he and Sir Thomas Smith, a grave and
learned man, advised the Queen that it was the Crown, and the true wealth of
her self and people, to reduce the standard to the ancient party, and purity
of her great Grandfather Edward the 4th. and that it was not the short end of
wits, nor starting holes of devises, that can sustain the expense of a
Monarchy, but sound and solid courses, for so are the words; She followed their
a devise, and began to reduce the money the moneys to their elder goodness,
stiling this work in her first Proclamation Anno 30. a famous Act. The next
year following, Anno 30. having perfected, as it after stood, She tells her
people by another Edict; That She had conquered now that monster that had so
long devoured them, meaning the variation of the standard. And so long as that
sad adviser lived, She never (though often by Projectors importuned) could be
drawn to any shift or change in her Moneys.

To avoid the trouble of permutation, Coyners devised as a rule and measure of
Merchandise and Manufactaries, which if mutable, no man can tell either what he
has, or what he owes, no contract can be certain, and so all commerce both
public and private destroyed, and men again enforced to permutation with
things not subject to will and fraud.

The Regulating of Coin has been left to the care of Princes, who have ever
been presumed to be the Fathers of the Commonwealth, upon their honors they
are debtors and warrants to the subjects in that behalf.

They cannot says Bodin, alter the price of moneys to the prejudice of the
subject, without incurring the reproach of Faux moneyars. And therefore stories
term Phillip le Belle falsificator de monet. omnino monet. integritas debet
quaeri ubi vultiis noster Imprimatur, said Theodoret the Goth to his
Mint-master. Quidnam erit tutum si nostra peccetur effigy, Princes must not
suffer their faces to warrant falsehood.

Although I am not of opinion with the Minor des Justices, the ancientest books
of the Common Law, That Le Roy ne poit sa money impair ne a mander saus
Lassent des touts les Counties, which was the great counsel of the Kingdom.
Yet cannot I pass over the goodness and grace of many other our Kings, as
Edw. 1. Edw. 3. Hen. 4. and the 5th. and others; who out of the rule of their
Justice. Quod ad omnes specrat, ob omnibus debet approbari, have often advised
with their people in Parliament, both for the Allay, weight, number of pieces,
rate of Coynage and exchange, and most with infinite goodness acknowledge the
care and Justice now of my good Master, and your Lordships wisdoms, that
would not upon the information of some few officers of the Mint, before a free
and careful debate, put in execution this Project. Yet I must under your
Lordships favor suspect it would have taken away the tenth part of every man's
due debt or rent already reserved throughout the Realm, not sparing the King,
which could have been little less then a species of that which the Roman
stories call Tabula nova, from whence every sedition has sprang, as that of
Marius Grantidianus in Livio, who pretending in his Consulship, thatt the
current money was wasted by us, called it in, and altered the Standard, which
grew so heavy and grievous to the people, as the Author says, because thereby
no man knows certainly his wealth, that it caused a tumult.

In this last part which is the disprofit that the enfeobling the Coin, will
bring both to his Majesty, and to the Commonwealth. I must distinguish the
moneys of gold and silver as they are bullion and commodities, and as they are
measures, the one of the extrinsique quality, which is at the Kings pleasure,
as all other measures to name, the other the intrinsique quality, of pure
metal, which is in the Merchant to value as their measure, shall be either to
be lessened or enlarged, so is the quantity of the commodity that is to be
exchanged, if then the King shall cut his shilling or pound in money less than
it was before, a less portion of such commodities as shall be exchanged, for
it, must be received, it must then of force follow, that all things of
necessity, as victuals, apparel, and the rest as well as those of pleasure,
must be inhaunsed. If then all men shall receive in their shillings and pounds
a less proportion of silver and gold than they did before this projected
alteration, and pay for what they buy at a rate enhaunsed, it must cast upon
all a double loss, what the King will suffer by it in the Rents of his lands,
is demonstrated enough by the alteration since the 18 of Ed. 3. when all the
Revenues of the Crown came unto the receipts pondere and numero, after 5 Groats
the Ounce, which since that time by several changes of the Standard is come to
5 s. whereby the King has two third parts of his just Revenues.

In his Customs, the book of rates being regulated by pounds and shillings,
his Majesty must lose alike, and so in all and whatsoever moneys, that after
this he must receive the profits of his Coynage, cannot be much more permanent
in the loss lasting, and so long as it reaches to little less than yearly,
to accept part of his Revenue, for in every pound tale of gold is 7 Ounces, 1
d. weight, and 19 grains loss, which 25 l. in account, and in 700 l. tail of
silver, which is 14 l. 17 s. more. And his Majesty shall undergo all this loss
hereafter, in all his receipts, so shall he no less in all his dibursments,
the wages of his soldiers must be ratably advanced, as the money is decreased.
This Edward the 3, as appears by the accounts of the Wardrobe and Exchequer,
as all the Kings after him were enforced to do, as often as the lessened
Standard of the moneys of what shall be bought for his Majesty's service, must
in like manner be inhaunsed on him. As his Majesty has the greatest profits of
receipts and issues, so must be of necessity taste of the most loss by this
device.

It will destroy or discourage a great proportion of the trade in England,
Impair his Majesty's Customs for that part, being not the least that passes
upon trust and credit will be overthrown, for all men being doubtful of
diminution hereby of there personal estates will call in their moneys, already
out, and no man will part with that which is lying by him upon apparent loss,
as this must bring; what damage may befall the State by such a sudden stand of
Trade I cannot guess.

The moneys both of gold and silver formerly Coined and abroad, richer then
those intended, will be made of the most nereby Bulloin and so transported;
which I conceive will be none of the least inducements that has drawn so many
Goldsmithes to side this Project, that they may be thereby Factors for the
Strangers, who by the Law of Mintage bring but two shillings silver to the
pound weight, and 4 shillings for gold; whereas with us the one is (...) and
the other 5 shillings, many make that profit beyond the Sea, they cannot here,
and so his Majesty's Mint unset of work.

And as his Majesty's loss appears in the alteration of many a 14th in the
silver, and a 25th part in all the gold they after shall receive; so shall the
Nobility, Gentry, and all other landed men in all their former settled Rents,
Annuities, Pensions, and sums of money, the like will fall upon the laborers
and workmen in their statute wages. And as their receipts are lessened hereby,
so are their issues increased either by improving all prices, or disfurnishing
the Market, which must necessarily follow; for in the 5th of Edw. 6th. 3o Mary,
4to Eliz. as appears by their Proclamations. That a Rumor only of alteration
caused such effects, punishing the author of such reports, with Imprisonment,
and Pillory. It cannot be doubted, but the proiecting of such a change, must be
of far greater consequence and danger to the State, and would be wished that
the Actors, and authors of such disturbances in the Commonwealth at all times
hereafter, might undergo a punishment proportionable.

It cannot be held, I presume, an advise of best judgment that lays the
loss upon our selves, and the gain upon our enemies, for who are like to be in
this the greatest thrivers, is not visible that the strangers who support, or
money for bullion, our own Goldsmiths, who are their Brokers, and the
Hedgminters of the Netherlands, who termed them well, will have a fresh and
full trade by this abasements. And we do not the Spanish King, our greatest
enemy, a greater favor than by his, who being Lord of these commodities by his
West Indies, we shall so advance them to our impoverishment, for it is not in
the power of any State to raise of the price of their own, but the value that
their neighbors, set upon them, experience has taught us that the enfoebling
of Coin is but a shift for a while, as drink to one in a dropsy, to make him
swell the more, but the state was never thoroughly cured, as we saw in Henry the
Eighths time, and the late Queens, until the Coin was made rich again.

I cannot but then conclude my honorable Lords, that if the proportion of Gold
and Silver to each other be wrought to that purity, by the advice of the
Artists that neither may be too rich for the other, that the Mintage may be
reduced to some proportion of neighbor parts, and that the issue of native
commodities may be brought to overbalance the entrance of the foreign, we
need not seek any shift, but shall again see our trade to flourish, the Mint
as, the pulse of the Commonwealth, again to bear, and our Materials by
Industry, to be Mines of Gold and Silver, which we all wish and work for,
supported unto us, and the honor of Justice, and Profit of his Majesty.

Certain general Rules collected concerning Money and Bullion, out of the late
Consultation at Court.
GOld and silver has a two fold estimation in the extrinsique, as they are
moneys, and Princes measures given to his people, and this is a Prerogative of
Kings in the Intrinsique, they are commodities valewing each other according to
the plenty or scarcity; and so all other commodities by them, and that is the
sole power of Trade.

The measure in a Kingdom ought to be constant, It is the Justice and honor of
the King; for if they be altered, all men at that time are deceived in the
precedent contracts, either for lands or moneys, and the King most of all; for
no man knows either what he has, or what he owes.

This made the Lord Treasurer Burleigh in Anno 1573. when some Projectors had
set on foot a matter of that nature, to tell them that they were worthy to
suffer death, for attempting to put so great a dishonor upon the Queen, and
detriment and discontent on the people; for to alter this public measure is to
leave all the Markets of the Kingdom unfurnished: and what will be the
mischief the Proclamation of 5. and 6. 3o. Mary, and 4th. of Eliz. will
manifest, when but a rumor produced that effect so far, that besides the
faith of the Princes to the contrary delivered in their Edicts, they were
enforced to cause the Magistrates in every Shire respectively, to constrain the
people to furnish the Market, to prevent a mutiny.

To think then this measure at this time short, is to raise all prices, or to
turn the measure or money now current into disuse and Bullion; for who will
depart with any, when it is by seven more in the hundred in the mass, then the
now moneys, and yet of no more value in the Market.

Hence the necessity of it will follow, that there will not of a long time be
Minted of the new to drive the exchange of the Kingdom, and so all trade at
one instance at a stand; and in mean time the Markets unfurnished, and thus
far as money is a measure.

Now as it is a commodity, it is respected and valued, by the intrinsique
quality, and first the one metal to the other.

All commodities are priced by plenty or scarcity, by dearness or cheapnesse,
the one to the other. If then we desire our silver to buy gold as it has
lately been, we must let it it be the cheaper and less in proportion valued,
and so contrary for one equivalent proportion in both, will bring in neither;
we see the profit there of the unusual quantity of gold brought lately to the
Mint by reason of the price, we rate it at above all other Countries, and gold
may be bought too dear; to furnish then this way the Mint with both, is
impossible.

And at this time it was apparently proved both by the best Artists, and
merchants most acquainted with the Exchange, in both the examples of the
Mint-masters, in the Rix-dolor, and Royal of Eight, that silver here is of
equal value, and gold above with foreign parts in the intrinsique, but that
the fallacy presented to the Lords by the Mint-masters, is only in the
nomination of extrinsique quality.

But if we desire both it is not the raising the value that does it, but the
balancing the Trade, for we buy more then we sell of all other commodities, be
the money never so high priced, we must part with it to make the disproportion
even, if we sell more then the contrary will follow.

And this is plain in Spanish necessities, for should that King advance to a
double his Royal of Eight, yet needing it by reason of the barrenness of his
Country, more of foreign wares, then can countervaile by exchange with his
wares, he must then part with his money, and gain the more by enhaunsing his
coin, but he pays a higher price for the commodities he buyeth, if this work
of raising be his own.

But if we shall make improvement of gold and silver being the
Staple-commodities of this Kingdom, we then advancing the the price of his
abase to him our own commodities.

To shape this kingdom to the fashion of the Netherlands, were to frame a
Royal Monarchy by a society of Merchants, their Country is a continual
Fair, and so price of moneys must rise and fall to fit their occasions; we see
this by raising the Exchange of Franckford, and other places, of their usual
time of the Marts.

This frequent and daily change in the Low Countries of their moneys is no such
injustice to any there, as it would be here, for there they being all
Merchants, or mechanics, they can rate accordingly their labor and their
Ware, whether it be Coin, or other merchandise, to the present condition of
their own money in Exchange.

And our English Merchants to whose profession it properly belongs, do so
according to their just intrinsique value of their foreign Coin in all barter
of commodities or Exchange, except usance which we that are rated and tied by
the extrinsiques measure of moneys in all our constant reckonigs, and annual
bargains at home cannot do.

And for us then to raise our Coin at this time, to equal their proportions
were but to render our selves to a perpetual incertainty, for they will raise
upon us daily them again, which we of course shall follow, else receive no
profit by this present change; and so destroy the Policy, Justice, honor, and
tranquillity of our State for ever.

To the Right Honorable the Lord Deputy.
The ^^mble and just Remonstrance of the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in
Parliament assembled.
Showing that in all ages since the happy subjection of this Kingdom to the
Imperial Crown of England it was and is a principal study and Princely care
of his Majesty and his most noble Progenitors, Kings and Queens of England, and
Ireland, to the vast expense of treasure and blood; That their loyal and
dutiful people of this Land of Ireland, being now for the most part derived
from British Ancestors, should be governed according to the municipall and
fundamental Laws of England; That the statute of Magna Charta, or the great
Charter of the liberties of England, and other laudable laws and statutes were
in several Parliaments here enacted and declared; that by the means thereof
and of the most prudent and benign government of his Majesty and his Royal
Progenitors, this Kingdom was until of late in its growth a flourishing
estate, whereby the said people were heretofore enab^ed to a^^iver their humble
and natural desires, to comply with his Majesty's Princely and royal
occasions, by their free gift of 150. thousand pounds sterling: and likewise by
another free gift of 120. thousand pounds more, during the government of the
Lord Viscount Faulkland, and after by the gift of 40. thousand pounds, and
their free and cheerful gift of si^^ entire Subsidies, in the tenth year of
his Majesty's Reign^, which to comply with his Majesty's then occasions,
signified to the then house of Commons they did allow should ammount in the
Collections unto 2 hundred and fifty thousand pounds (although as they
confidently believe) if the Subsidies had been levied in a moderate
Parliamentary way, they would not have amounted to much more then half the sum
aforesaid, besides the four entire Subsidies granted in this present
Parliament.

So it is, may it please your Lordship, by the occasion of ensuing and other
grievances and Innovations, though to his Majesty no considerable profit this
Kingdom is reduced to that extreme and universal poverty, that the same is
less able to pay 2 Subsidies then it was hertofore to satisfy all the
before-recyted great payments and his Majesty's most faithful people of the
Land, do conceive great fears, that the said grievances and consequences
thereof, may be hereafter drawn into presidents, to be perpetuated upon their
posterity which in their great hopes and strong belief, they are persuaded is
contrary to his Royal and Princely intention toward his said people, of which
greivances are as follows:

1, First, the general apparent decay of Trades, occasioned by the new and
illegal raising of the book of rates, and impositions upon native, and other
Commodities, exported and imported, by reason whereof and of extreme usage and
censures, Merchants are beggered both, and disinabled and discouraged to Trade;
and some of the honorable persons who gain thereby often Judges and parties.
And that in the conclusion his Majesty's profit thereby is not considerably
advanced.

2. The arbitrary decision of all civil causes and controversies by paper
petitions, before the Lord Lieutenant and Lord Deputy, and infinite other
Iudicatories upon references from them derived in the nature of all actions
determinable at the Common Law, not limited into certain time, cause season or
thing whatsoever: And the consequences of such exceeding by immoderate and
unlawful fees, by Secretaries Clerks, Pursivants, Sergeants at Arms, and
otherwise, by which kind of proceedings his Majesty loses a considerable
part of his revenue upon original writs, and other wise: and the Subject
loses the benefit of his writ of Error, bill of reversall, vouchees, and
other legal and just advantages and the ordinary course and Courts of Justice
declined.

3. The proceedings in civil causes at Counsel board, contrary to the Law and
great Charter, not limited to any certain time or season.

4 That the Subject is in all the material parts thereof denied the benefit of
the Princely graces, and more especially of the statute of limitations of 21.
of Iac. Granted by his Majesty in the fourth year of his Reign, upon great
advice of Counsel of England and Ireland, and for great consideration, and
then published in all the Courts of Dublin, and in all the Counties of this
Kingdom in open assizes, whereby all persons do take notice, that contrary to
his Majesty's pious intentions, his Subjects of this land have not enjoyed the
benefit of his Majesty's Princely promise thereby made.

5. The extrajudiciall avoiding of Letters Pattents of estates; of a very great
part of his Majesty's subjects under the great Seal (the public faith of the
Kingdom) by private opinions, delivered at the Counsel board without legal
evictions of their estates, contrary to the law, and without president or
example of any former age.

6. The Proclamation for the sole emption and uttering of Tobacco, which is
bought at every low rates, and uttered at high and excessive rates, by means
whereof thousands of families within this Kingdom, and of his Majesty's
Subjects, in several Islands, and other parts of the West Indies (as your
Petitioners are informed) are destroyed; and the most part of the coin of this
Kingdom is ingross ed into particular hands: Insomuch as the petitioners do
conceive that the proffit arising and engrossed thereby does surmount his
Majestyes revenue, certain or cosuall, within this Kingdom, and yet his
Majesty receives but very little profit by the same.

7. The universal and unlawful increasing of Monopolies, to the advantage of
a few, to the disprofit of his Majesty, and Impoverishment of his people.

8. The extreme and cruel usage of certain late Commissioners, and other
stewards, the British Farmers and Inhabitants of the City and County of London
Derry, by means whereof the worthy Plantation of that Country is almost
destroyed, and the Inhabitants are reduced to great poverty, and many of them
forced to forsake the Country, the same being the first and most useful
Plantation in the large Province of that Ulster, to the great weakening of the
Kingdom, in in this time of danger, the said plantation being the principal
strength of those parts.

9. The late erection of the Court of high Commission, for causes*
Ecclesiastical in those necessitous times, the proceedings of the said Court,
in many causes without legal warrant, and yet so supported as prohibitions have
not been obtained, though legally sought for: And the excessive fees exacted by
the Ministers thereof, and the encroaching of the same upon the jurisdiction of
other Ecclesiastical Courts of this Kingdom.

10. The exorbitant fees and pretended Customs exacted by the Clergy against
the Law, some of which have been formerly represented to your Lordship.

11. The Petitioners do most heartily bemone that his Majesty's service and
profit are much more impaired then advanced, by the grievances aforesaid; and
the Subsidies granted in the last Parliament, having much increased his
Majesty's revenue, by the buying of graunts, and otherwise: and that all his
Majesty's debts then due in this Kingdom, were satisfied out of the said
Subsidies; and yet his Majesty is of late, (as the petitioners have been
informed, in the house of Commons) become indepted in this Kingdom, in great
somes; And they do therefore humbly beseech, that an exact account may be
sent to his Majesty, how and in what manner his treasure issued.

12. The Petitioners do humbly conceive just and great fears, at a
Proclamation published in this Kingdom, in Anno Domini 1635. Prohibiting men
of quality or estates, to depart this Kingdom into England, without the Lord
Deputies License, wherein the Subjects of this Kingdom are hindered and
interrupted from free access, to addres to his sacred Majesty, and privy
Counsel of England, to declare their just grievances, or to obtain remedies
for them in such fort as their Ancestors have done, in all ages since the
Reign of King Henry the second, and great fees exacted, for every of the said
Licenses.

13. That of late his Majesty's late Atourney general, has exhibited
Informations against many Boroughs of this Kingdom, into his Majesty's Court
of Exchequer, to show cause, by what warrant the said Burgesses (who heretofore
sent Burgesses to the Parliament) should send the Burgesses to the Parliament,
and thereupon for want of an answer, the said privileges of sending Burgesses
was seized by the said Court, which proceedings were altogether Coram non
Iudice, and contrary to the laws and privileges of the house of Parliament;
(and if way should be given thereunto) would tend to the subversion of
Parliaments, and by consequence to the ruin and destruction of the
Commonwealth.

And that the house of Commons, has hitherto in this present Parliament, been
deprived of the advice and Counsel of many profitable and good members by
means thereof.

14. By the powerfulness of some Ministers of state in this Kingdom, the
Parliament in its members, and actions, has not his natural freedom.

15. And lastly, that the Gentry, and Merchants, and other his Majesty's
Subjects of this Kingdom, are of late by the grievances, and pressures before
said, and other the like brought very near to ruin, and destruction: And
Farmers of Customs, Customers, Waiters, Searchers, Clerks of unwarrantable
proceedings, Pursivants, and Goalers, and sundry others, very much enriched,
whereby and by the slow redress of the petitioners, his Majesty's most
faithful and dutiful people of this Kingdom, do conceive great fears, that
their readiness approved upon all occasions, has not been of latere
presented to his sacred Majesty: For remedy whereof the said Petitioners do
humbly and of right beseech your Lordship, that the said grievances and
pressures may be speedily redressed, and if your Lordship shall not think fit
to afford present relief, that your Lordship might admit a select Committee of
this house of Persons uninteressed in the benefit a rising of the aforesaid
grievances to be licensed by your Lordship, to repair to his sacred Majesty in
England, for to pursue the same and to obtain fitting remedy for their
aforesaid and other just grievances and expressions, and upon all just and
honorable occasions, they will without respect of particular interest or
profit, to be raised thereby most humbly and readily in Parliament extend their
uttermost endeavor to serve his Majesty and comply with his royal and
princely occasions, And shall pray, etc.

Mr. Secretary Windebancks Charge in Parliament 7. December 1640.
1 SEventie four Letters of grace to Recusants within this fowr years signed
with his own hands.

2. Sixty four Priests discharged from the Gatehouse at Westminster within
these 4. years, and for the most part by him.

3. Twenty nine discharged by a verbal warrent from him.

4. Awarrant to protect one Musket a condemned Priest, and al^ the houses he
frequented.

5. One committed by the Kings own hand, and discharged by him without
signifying the Kings pleasure.

6. The Retition of the parish of St. Gyles in the fields to the King of the
increase of Popery and that 21. were turned by two Priests Moss and Souther,
which being committed were suddenly discharged by Secretary Windebanck,

A message from the House of Commons to his Majesty 15. December 1640
Mr. Treasurer
IS entreated from this house to acquaint his Majesty with the great care and
affection of the house to advance and settle his Majesty's Revenue, and for
that purpose we humbly desire his Majesty will give us leave to enter into
debate of his revenue and his expense.

His Majesty's answer thereto by Mr. Treasurer.
HIs Majesty being by me acquainted with the great care and affection of the
house of Commons to advance and settle his Majesty's Revenew, does very
graciously interpret the same, and has commanded me to give the House thanks
for it in his name; and his Majesty does give the House free leave to enter
into debate of his Revenews and Expenses, as is desired, and has given order
that all his Officers and Ministers from time to time, shall assist the House
therein, as there shall be occasion.

Vote concerning the Cannons in the House of Commons. 15. December. 1640.
THat the Clergy of England Convented in any Convocation or Synod, or otherwise
have no power to make any Constitutions, Cannons or Acts whatsoever in matter
of Doctrine, or otherwise to bind the Clergy or Laity of this Land without the
Commons consent of Parliament.

That the several Constitutions and Cannons Ecclesiastical, Treated upon by
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and York, Presidents of the Convocation for the
respective Provinces of Canterbury and York, and the rest of the Bishops and
Clergy of these Provinces, and agreed upon by the Kings Maiestics license in
their several Synods began at London and York 1640. do not bind the Clergy or
Laity of this Land, or either of them.

An Order concerning Monopolers. 19. November 1640.
IT is ordered that upon the question that all Projectors and Monopolizers
whatsoever, or that have had any share in any Monopolies, or that do receive
or lately have received any benefit by any Monopolies or Patten, or that have
procured any warrant or command, for the restraynt or molesting of any that
have refused to conform themselves to any Proclamation or project are disabled
by order of this House, and if any man have been known to have been a
Monopolizer or Pattentee shall repair to have been a Monopolizer, that he
shall nominate him; that any member of this House that is a Monopolizer, or
Pattentee, shall repair to Mr. Speaker, that a new warrant may issue forth or
other wise that he be dealt with as a stranger that has no power to sit here.

Order against Monopolies and Pattens 25. Nov. 1640.
IT is this day ordered in the Commons House now assembled in Parliament that
all Pattens and Grants of Monopolies that have been complained of in this house.

The Scottish Commissioners thanks to his Majesty 30. December. 1640.
WE do in the Name of the PARLIAMENT and whole Kingdom of Scotland
acknowledge in all humility and thankfulness, in granting our first demand
beving fully assured that the Parliament will leave nothing undone that may
serve for his Majesty's honor and the whole Kingdom, is Testimony of their
thankfulness, will earnestly pray, that God will grant his Majesty a long and
prosperous Reign. Adam Blaire.

The humble Declaration of the Master and Wardens of Vintners, William Abel
Alderman of London, and the rest of the Court of Assistants of that Company,
how in what manner the said Company, Farmers and Adventurers have proceeded in
the Farms of 40. shillings per tun and wine License.

IN the year 1632. The Lord Weston being then high Treasurer of England sent
for the Master and Wardens of the Company of Vintners, and demanded of them the
Vent and consumption of Wines, one penny a quart, which is 4 pound per tun,
which they utterly refused, alleging it would be the utter undoing of the
retayling Vintners.

In Anno 1633. a Decree was made by the advice of the Judges of England in the
Star Chamber: That the Retaylers of wines might not sell or dress Victuals in
their houses, which time out of mind they were accustomed to do. And this done
without any information or bill, or any called to defend or Justify their
trade or usage of it.

In Anno 1634. his Majesty questioned the Vintners, and Retaylers of Wine, for
the breach of the said Decree, and drew 6000. pounds from the Vintners to be
lent him: And thereon his Majesty did by order give way to the Retaylers of
Wines, to dress and sell Victuals till December then next following; at which
time his Majesty promised to settle it as he thought fit for him to sign, and
then to have the Vintners relying upon that Temporary License, and of his
Majesty's gracious Declaration continued to dress meat beyond the time.

In Anno 1635. The retaylors of Wines were again questioned for breach of the
former Decree by his Majesty, and the Lord Cottington, then propounded to yield
to pay somewhat on their vent of Wines, to his Majesty, which the Retayling
Vintners utterly refused to do.

In Anno 1636. many retaylors of Wynes were by information in Master Attourneys
name questioned in Star Chamber, for breach of the decree, and so far
proceeded against as that they were served with Process of that Court to hear
judgment.

That things thus depending Sir Richard Kilvert repaired to Alderman Abell,
then Master of the Company, being a mere stranger to Master Kilvert, and told
him his Majesty bid him command by warrant, to prosecute the Vintners in the
Star Chamber, for selling above the price, and breach of the Decree, for
dressing of meat, and against the Merchants scopers, and others; Intimating
further it was his Majesty's pleasure that some of the Company of Vintners
should attend the Right Honorable Marquis Hambleton concerning the same.

In October Anno 1637. at Vintners Hall London, William Abell Alderman being
then Mr. of that Company, imparted to the Company, that Master Richard Kilvert
had been lately with him, and acquainted him with the former passages.

At this court the company of vintners taking their business into their serious
considerations, and weighing how they might hazard the utter undoing of such as
had transgressed the Decree, if they should be brought to a sentence in
Star Chamber made choice and did entreat Alderman Abell, then their master,
Edward Kinaston, Robert Shawe, Ralph Moore, George Hubburt, and Michaell
Gardener. For the Committee, to wait upon the said Lord Marquis Hambleton, by
whom Master Killvert had intimated his Majesty's pleasure should be made
known, and to impart the same again unto the Company.

That Alderman Abell, and the rest, did attend the Marquess who told them,
that his Majesty had given him the Fines of all the Vintners to be imposed in
Star Chamber, but yet if the Vintners would condescend to pay his Majesty 4,
pound a Tun, upon Consumption of wines, he could forbear the fines, and all
prosecutions should be stayed, and himself would depend upon his Majesty's
favor in some other thing.

And after many attendances and several reasons offered by them on the behalf
of the Company, against paying any thing on the Consumption of Wines, and not
prevailing, being then by the Lord Marquess promised some advancing price and
other privileges, and being advised by Counsel that wine being a forraygn
Commodity, his Majesty might prohibit the coming of it, and impose what he
pleased on it, thereupon and upon the aforesaid threats and promises after the
same was imparted, and often debated by the Company, they submitted to the
payment of 40. shillings per Tun, 4. pound being demanded; And soon the 11.
of June 1638. together with the French and Spanish Merchants, they the said
Company of Vintners, contracted by Indenture Quadrupartite with his Majesty, to
pay him forty shillings per Tun on all such wines as they bought and
Vented, and the Company of Vintners being informed that the Farmers of his
Majesty's Customs, and some particular Merchants of the Company of Coopers,

London moved and sued to his Majesty to farm the said Duties, and the Company
of Vintners well knowing what great hinderance it would be to them, if
strangers should come in and search their sellers, and know the particular of
what they had bought and sold, the Company to prevent many inconveniences,
desired rather to Farm the duty from his Majesty, his Majestic declaring that
he would not contract with a generality of company for the same, but with some
particular members.

The Company did desire Alderman Abell, and nine others freemen of their
Company, to perform the contract with his Majesty for the same duty, who took
it to farm at 3000. Pounds Per Annum for eight years.

And it was agreed by the Company, that the farmers should have no more share
of profit and loss in the Farm then other brethren had, which should be
pleased to undertake, and go adventure with them: And it was ordered by the
Company, that if that Farmer or adventurer should decease, that then that
parties adventure should be transferred to some other free Vintner, and to
none other, and not to descend either to the Executors or Administrators of
such Vintners, so deceasing; the said ten Farmers, being nominated by the
Company, and adventured in the same farm of forty shillings per Tun on Wine
and Farm of Wine Licenses, which they likewise took by direction of the
Company, on the second of January 1640. Humbly Petitioned his Majesty to accept
of the said Farms, they accounting to his Majesty for all moneys received from
the beginning, they having allowance for what they disbursed, and stand engaged
for, for his Majesty's service, with interest and necessary charges, without
any profit to themselves.

And Master Alderman Abell and diverse others, the Contractors never dealt in
gross nor benefitted themselves by the Advance upon Retayle of wine, so that
he in all this has bin but a person entreated into this business for the
Company, and no whit for himself, nor has otherwise or in any other manner as
for other cause acted any thing at all in or concerning this business.

To the High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT, The humble Petition of the
University of OXFORD,
Shows,
THAT whereas the University has been informed of several Petitions
concerning the present Government of this Church, and maintenance of the
Clergy, which have of late been exhibited to this Honorable Assembly; We
could not but think our Selves bound in duty to God, and this whole Nation, in
charity to our Selves and Successors, who have and are like to have more then
ordinary interest in any resolution that shall be taken concerning
Church-affaires, in all humility, to desire the continuance of that form of
Government, which is now established here, and has been preserved in some of
the Eastern and Western Churches, in a continued Succession of Bishops, down
from the very Apostles to this present time; the like whereof cannot be
affirmed of any other form of Government in any Church. Upon which
consideration, and such other motives as have been already represented to this
Honorable Parliament from other Persons and places (with whom we concur) in
behalf of Episcopacy, We earnestly desire, that you would protect that ancient
and Apostolical Order from ruin or diminution.

And become farther Suitors for the continuance of those pious Foundations of
Cathedral Churches, with their Lands and Revenues,

As dedicate to the Service and Honor of God, soon after the plantation of
Christianity in the English Nation:

As thought fit and useful to be preserved for that end, when the Nurseries of
Superstition were demolished, and so continued in the last and best times since
the blessed Reformation, under King Edw. 6. Q Elizabeth and K. James, Princes
renowned through the world for their piety and wisdom:

As approved and confirmed by the Laws of this land, ancient and modern:

As the principal outward motive and encouragement of all Students, especially
in Divinity, and the fittest reward of some deep and eminent Scholars:

As producing or nourishing in all ages many godly and learned men, who have
most strongly asserted the truth of that Religion we profess, against the many
fierce oppositions of our Adversaries of Rome.

As affording a competent portion in an ingenuous way to many younger Brothers
of good Parentage, who devote themselves to the Ministry of the Gospel:

As the only means of subsistence to a multitude of Officers and other
Ministers, who with their Families depend upon them and are wholly maintained
by them:

As the main Authors or upholders of diverse Schools, Hospitalls, Highways,
Bridges, and other public and pious works:

As special causes of much profit and advantage to those Cities where they are
situate, not only by relieving their poor, and keeping convenient
Hospitality, but by occasioning a frequent resort of Strangers from other
parts, to the great (...) of all Tradesmen, and most Inhabitants in those
places:

As the goodly Monuments of our Predecessors Piety, and present Honor of this
kingdom in the eye of foreign Nations:

As the chief support of many thousand Families of the Laity, who enjoy fair
estates from them in a free way:

As yielding a constant and ample revenue to the Crown:

And as by which many of the learned Professors in our University are
maintained.

The subversion or alienation whereof must (as we conceive) not only be
attended with such consequences as will redound to the scandal of many well
affected to our Religion, but open the mouths of our Adversaries, and of
Posterity against us; and is likely in time to draw after it harder conditions
upon a considerable part of the Laity, an universal cheapnesse and contempt
upon the Clergy, a lamentable drooping and defection of industry and knowledge
in the Universities; which is easy to foresee, but will be hard to remedy.

May it therefore please this Honorable Assembly, upon these and such other
Considerations as your great wisdoms shall suggest, to take such pious care
for the continuance of these Religious Houses, and their Revenews, according to
the best intentions of their Founders, as may be to the most furtherance of
Gods glory and service, the Honor of this Church and Nation, the advancement of
Religion and Learning, the encouragement of the modest hopes and honest
endeavors of many hundred Students in the Universities

Who do and shall ever pray, etc. Dat. An. Dom. millesimo sexcent' quad' primo
e Domo Convocationis, in celebri Conventu Doctorum ac Magistrerum, omnibus and
singulis assentientibus.
The Speech of Sergeant Glanvill in the upper House of Parliament, for the
Redress of the present Grievances.
His Majesty being seated on his Throne, Sergeant Glanvill was called to the
Bar, being represented by the House of Commons for their Speaker; who spoke
as follows.
May it please your Majesty,
THE Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of your Commons House of Parliament in
conformity to ancient and most constant usage (the best guide in great
solemnities) according to their well known privileges (a sure warrant for
their proceedings) and in obedience to your Majesty's most gracious commands (a
duty well becoming loyal Subjects) have met together, and chosen a speaker,
one to be the mouth, indeed the servant of all the rest to steare watchfully
and prudently in all their weighty consultations and debates, to collect
faithfully and readily the Votes and genuine sense of that numerous assembly,
to propound the same seasonably and in apt questions for their final
resolution, and to present them and their conclusions, their declarations with
truth and light, with life and luster, and with full advantage to your most
Excellent Majesty. With what Judgment, with what temper, spirit, and elocution
he ought to be endued, your Majesty in your great wisdom is best able to
discern, both as it may relate to your own peculiar and important affairs of
State, to the proper work and business of this House of Commons, which was
never small or mean, and now like to be exceeding weighty.

It is a learned age wherein we live under your Majesty's most peaceful
government; and your House of Commons is not only the representative body, but
the abstracted quintessence of the whole Communalty of this your noble Realm.

I most humbly therefore beseech your Majesty as the father of the
Commonwealth, and hope of the whole nation, to whom the care of all our
welfares appertains, to have respect to your own interest, have regard to your
House of Commons, have compassion upon me the unworthiest member of that body,
ready to faint with fear, before the burden lights on me, I have only a hearty
affection to serve you and your people, little abilities for performance; In
the fullness therefore of your Royal power, your piety, goodness, be
graciously pleased to command the House of Commons to deliberate upon a better
choice who may be worthy of their choosing, and your Majesty's acceptations.

My Lord Keeper having by his Majesty's direction confirmed him as Speaker, he
addressed himself to his Majesty as follows.
Most gracious Sovereign;
My profession has taught me, that from the highest Judge there lies no writ
of error, no appeal; what then remains, but that I first beseech Almighty God
the author and finisher of all good works, to enable me to discharge honestly
and effectually so great a task, so great a trust; and in the next place
humbly to acknowledge your Majesty's favor? Some enemies I might fear, the
common enemy of such services, expectation and jealousy; I am unworthy the
former, and I contemn the latter. Time the touchstone of truth shall teach the
babbling world, I am and will be found an equal freeman, zealous to serve my
Sovereign, zealous to serve my dearest Country.

Monarchy Royal of all governments the most illustrious and excellent, whether
we regard the glory, wealth, or safety of the governors or people; I hope none
of this Nation are of Antimonarchicall spirits, nor friends to such, if there
be, I wish no greater honor to this Parliament, then to discover them and to
assist your Majesty to suppress and confound them.

To behold your Majesty in peace and safety affords complete joy to all Loyal
Subjects, who cannot but conclude with me in this desire.

Serus in caelum redeas, diuque
Laetus intersis Populo Britanno.
England is your seat of residency, Scotland is your native place, and herein
has the advantage; Ireland imitates England by a great and quick progression
in civility and conversation, in improvement of the soil and plantation.

France is still attendant on your Royal style; A Kings Prerogative is as
needful as great, without which he should want that Majesty which ought to be
inseparable from his Crown, nor can any danger result thereby to subjects
liberties, so long as both admit the temperament of Law and Justice, specially
under such a Prince, who to your immortal Honor has published this to the
whole world for your maxim, that the peoples liberties strengthen the Kings
Prerogative, and the Kings Prerogative is to defend the peoples liberties;
Apples of gold in pictures of silver.

Kings as Kings are never said to Err, only the best may be abused by
misinformation; this the highest point of Prerogative that the King can do no
wrong; if then by the subtilty of misinformers, by the specious false pretenses
of public good, by a cunning and close contrivance of their ways to seduce
the Sacred Royal Person, it be surprised and overwrought to command contrary
to law, and be executed accordingly; these commands will be void, and this King
innocent even in his very person, and the authors of such misinformations, the
actors of such abuses stand exposed to just censure, having nothing to defend
themselves but the color of a void command, made void by just Prerogative, and
the fundamental reasons of state.

Touching justice, there is not a more certain sign of an upright Judge, then
by his patience to be well informed before sentence given, and I may boldly
say, all the Judges in your Kingdom may take example by your Majesty and learn
their duties by your practice, my self have often been a witness thereof to
my no little admiration.

From your patience, please you give me leave to press to your righteous
judgment, and exemplify it but in one instance. When your Lords and people in
your last Parliament presented your Majesty a Petition concerning their rights
and liberties, the Petition being of no small weight, your Majesty after mature
deliberation, in few but most effectual words; (soit droict faict come est
desire) made such an answer, as shall renown you for just Judgment to all
posterity.

Let us heartily pray that this Parliament may be famous for the advancement of
Sacred Religion, and to that end that the most Reverend Prelates, sitting on
the right hand of your Kingly side, be most forward therein, to whom it is most
proper.

That the Nobles girt with their swords in their creation, and most especially
rewarded and honored for actions military: call to mind the most renowned Acts
of their Ancestors, whose lands and honors they inherit, and how renowned
this Land has been through the whole World for Art and Arms, and labor to
restore it to its ancient splendour: The best way to preserve peace, is to be
well fitted for War.

But were this Nation never so valiant or wealthy, if Unity be not among us,
what good will riches do us, or your Majesty, but enrich the conqueror? he
that commands all hearts by love, he only commands assuredly; greatness
without goodness can at best but command bodies.

It shall therefore be my hearty prayer, That such a knot of love may be knit
betwixt the Head and members that like Gordius knot it never be loosed: That
all Jesuited foreign States who look asquint upon our Jerusalem may see
themselves defeated of all their subtle plots and combinations, of all their
wicked hopes and expectations, to render us, if their mischief might take
effect, a people inconsiderable at home, and contemptible abroad.

Religion has taught us (Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos?) and experience I
trust will teach us (Si sumus inseparabiles sumus insuperabiles.) It was found,
and I hope it still shall and will be the Tenet of the House of Commons; That
the King and peoples good cannot be severed: And cursed be every one that goes
about to divide them.

Secretary Windebankes Letter to my Lord Chamberlain, from Callis, January 11.
MY Lord, I ow my self to your Lordship, for your late favors; and therefore,
much more the account of my self, though the debt in either respect, be of
little consideration, and the calling of both may be of greater advantage to
you, then to continue be Obligation.

This account had been presented to your Lordship, at my first arrival here
with my first dispatches, but I was so mortified with my hazardous passage in
an open shallop, and so perplexed with the thoughts to miseries, into which I
find my self plunged, and besides, the departure of the messenger that
carried those letters, was so sudden, that it was not possible to perform
this duty to your Lordship sooner; For the which I do most humbly crave
pardon: your Lordship may now please to accept the expressions, from the
saddest and most wounded soul in the whole World, who am a spectacle of misery
in my self, in my distressed Wife and Children, and in my whole fortunes, who
have left the attending of my Sovereign and Master, and access to the best
Prince in the world, who am become a scorn and byword to all the world, both
at home and abroad, a wanderer, an Exile from mine own Country, now in the
declination of my years, and likely to end my days, in a remote Country, and
far from the comfort of all my friends; What I am guilty of none knows so well
as his Majesty whom I have served faithfully, diligently, painfully, and with
as true and loyal an heart, according to my poor abilities, as any other
whatsoever, and if I found my Conscience charged with any crime of baseness,
corruption, infidelity, or any thing else unworthy of a Gentleman, I should not
venture to address these complaints to your Lordship, or to any other person
of Honor, in this disconsolate estate, being an object not altogether unworthy
of your Lordships compassion, be it for no other respect, but that I have long
served the King and Queens Majesty's, I doubt not but your Lordship, in your
generosity and goodness, will have a lively sense and f^^ling of my
sufferings, and vouchsafe me such relief as in your Honor you may; and if my
self, who by course of Nature cannot be now of long continuance, be not
considerable, I most humbly beseech your Lordship to have pity upon my poor
innocent wife, and children, that they receive such comfort and assistance from
you in my absence, that they may be preserved from perishing. And to that end I
most humbly crave your Lordships favor to this Bearer my Son, and to give
him the honor of access whenever he shall make his addresses to you,
wherein you shall do a work of singular charity; and because there is an
opinion in the world, that I have much improved my fortunes by the Roman
party; and there has been some design by my ministry to introduce Popery
into England, I shall most humbly crave your Lordships patience in giving me
leave to clear those two great misunderstandings, which if they were true, were
sufficient to render me incapable of his Majesty's favors, or of the
compassion of any person of honor whatsoever: For the first, it is notorious
to all the world that having now served his Majesty in the place of a
Secretary above eight years, I have not added one foot of Land to the
inheritance left me by my father, which in Land and Lease was not above 500.
pounds per annum, a poor and inconsiderable estate for a Secretary, and such
an one as most Secretaries have more than trebled in a short time; for my
manner of living, it has been much under the dignity of a Secretary; and if I
had not been very frugall, I could not have subsisted; where then this
concealed Mass of Treasury is (I wish those that speak so liberally of it)
would let me know; for I do protest to God I am utterly to seek where to
discover it, and at this present, I am so unfurnished with moneys, that if his
Majesty cause me not to be supplied, I am unable to subsist in these parts
without exposing my Family in England to the danger of starving, and yet
neither my purpose nor inclination is to live otherwise here, than in the
greatest obscurity and closeness that possibly I may. I assure your Lordship
that those of the Roman party that passed my hands by his Majesty's
commandment; were poor distressed creatures, and far from being able to
enrich me, and besides, how little I have attended my own private, and how
freely and like a Gentleman, I hope I may speak the truth without ostenation, I
have done courtesies to all, I wish it should rather appear by the testimony
of such as have made use of my services, then by mine own. My Father and I have
served the Crown of England near 80. years together, in which time, if a
greater estate had been raised it might well have been justified, confidering
the great employments near the persons of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and his
Majesty that now is, we both have had; and your Lordship may believe it (for I
avow it upon the faith of a Christian) that it is no more then I have above
mentioned, and whether there are not many from less employments have risen to
be Noblemen, and made their fortunes accordingly, I leave to the world to judge.

For the other suspicion of my being a favourer or an advancer of Popery, I
protest before the Almighty God, and as I shall answer at the last dreadful
day, that I know no ground for the least suspicion thereof, neither am I my
self, nor is any other to my knowledge guilty of the least thought of any such
purpose; For my self I received my Baptism in the Church of England, and I
know nothing in the Church of Rome that can win me from that Church wherein I
was made a Christian; I do therefore hold this Church of England, not only a
true and Orthodox Church, but the most pure, and near the primitive of any in
the Christian world, and this I will be ready to seal with my blood,
whenever there shall be occasion (with this further protestation) that if I
did not hold it so, I would not continue in it for any worldly respects
whatsoever.

For that which has passed my hands for favor of that party, it has been
merely ministerial, as his Majesty best knows, and I must be bold to say that
his Majesty has not been deceived by it, but has received many greater
advantages; besides that, if a Secretary of State should not hold intelligence
with the party, is absolute to disable him for the service of the State, and
that has been done always more or less, and so must always continue, Kings
and their Ministers of State, have ever had, and might ever have a Latitude
according to time and occasion, and cannot be so tied according to strictness
of law as others are, without peril to the government, therefore when the
Roman party were practique and busy about the State, there was reason to be
more strict, but now by the wisdom of the Queen and her good Officers, they
are better tempered, less severity has been used, it being the prerogative of
the Prince to use moderation according to accusation: further than this I have
not had to do with the Roman party, nor thus far but in obedience to my
Masters commandment, which I hope shall not be censured a crime, this being my
condition; I most humbly submit it to your Lordships wisdom and goodness, and
seeing there is no malignity in it, nor prejudice to the state, That your
Lordship would vouchsafe me your favor and protection, and preserve me from
perishing.

Callis, January 11. 1640. Your Lordships most humble and faithful, though
much distressed servant, Fran. Windebanck.

The Lord Andevers speech concerning the pacification, the 6 of March.
My Lords,
I Did lately move your Lordships that the breach of the pacification might be
speedily reviewed, as the ^num necessarium; and truly my opinion at that time
is yet nothing altered, although upon better thoughts (me thinks) it would
first be known who did actually engage us in these fruitles dissentions, and so
derive the mischief from some original. For my Lords, the kingdom cannot now
long stant at gaze or undergo new burdens.

Wherefore what is to be done (if you intend it should prosper) must presently
receive life from the whole people, otherwise we shall expire in a dream; and
when the success differs from expectation, it is not enough to cry, quod non
put ar am. My Lords, the wiseman says, there is a proper season for all things
under the Sun, and we often find the experiment in natural bodies, which are
voluntarily weakened, to recover strength, yet with a restriction to such
bounds, and limits, as the Physician prescribes himself; and truly, I think it
is your Lordships case at this point, either to consider what should further be
done then is already, or else how to get out of those labyrinths we now are in,
lest the words of the Psalmist come home to our selves, Vendidisti populum
sinepretio.

My Lords, I am confident the House of Commons does thoroughly see, both into
the prejudice, and vast expense that these two armies lay upon the land, and
undoubtedly so many Gentlemen of worth, as sit there, will have tender eyes
upon the Commonweal. It will therefore become your Lordships to second them in
your way, and whilst they apply to public wounds, the care of this house may
search the intestines, for if they be not cleansed, it will be but a
superficial Cure, and break out again.

My Lords, it seems the Earl of Strafford, and the Archbishop of Cant. have
gone the high ways of iniquity, and every one knows how to trace them, but
Mines under ground are most considerable, which (unless they be likewise found
out) may at any time spring and supplant the whole fabric of all our labors.
Let us then examine this fantastic war ab initio; lest, as the Duke of
Burgundy made a few Sheepskins the cause of his quarrel, so we shall find those
sheets of paper sent under the name of a Liturgy, and book of Canons, were but
the Mopsas of the story to divert our eyes from the main design.

Therefore my humble motion shall be for a selected Committee of no great
number, who may have power from the House to begin ab origne mali, revise every
man's negotiations, who was either an Actor or Counselor since the first
appearance of those troubles in Scotland, and that they may examine the
Scottish Counsel upon such Articles, as the heavy pressure of this Kingdom
shall upon common fame administer unto them.

By the Major.
The Order of the House of Commons to the Lord Major, for the due observing the
Sabbath day.
IT is this day ordered by the House of Commons, the Aldermen and Citizens that
serve for the City of London, shall intimate to the Lord Major, from this
House, that the Statutes, for the due observing of the Sabbath be put in
execution. And it is further ordered that the like intimation from this House
be made to the Justices of Peace in all the Counties of England and Wales. And
the Knights of the Shire of the several Counties, are to take care that the
Copies of this Order be accordingly sent to the Justices of Peace in the
several Counties.

FOasmuch as the Lords Day, commonly called Sunday is of late much broken and
profaned by a disorderly sort of People in frequenting Taverns, Alehouses,
and the like, and putting to sale victual and other things, and exercising
unlawful games and pastimes, to the great dishonor of God, and reproach of
Religion, whereof the House of Commons now assembled has been pleased to take
notice, and by their order, intimation has been given unto me, that the
Statutes for the due observing of the Sabbath be put in execution. These are
therefore in his Majesty's name to will and require you forthwith, upon the
sight hereof, that you give strict charge and command unto all and every the
Churchwardens and Constables within your Ward, that from henceforth they do
not permit or suffer any person or persons, in the time of divine service or at
any other time upon the Sunday, to be drinking or playing in any Tavern, Inn,
Tobacco-shop, Alehouse or other victualling house whatsoever, nor suffer any
Fruiterer, Milkwoman, or Hearbwomen to stand with fruit, milk, herbs, or any
other Victual or Wares, in any the streets, lanes, or allies within your ward,
or any other ways to put those things or any other to sale upon the Sunday at
any time of the day or in the evening, not to permit or suffer any Person or
Persons to use or exercise upon that day any unlawful exercises and Pastimes
within your ward, and that express charge be given to every keeper of any
Tavern, Inn, Cookshouse, Tobaccohouse, Alehouse, or any other tipler or
victualler whatsoever within your ward, that hereafter they receive not or
suffer to remain any person or persons whatsoever as their guests or customers
to tiple, eat, drink, or take Tobacco in their houses upon any Sunday, other
then that Inholders may receive their ordinary guests, or Travelers and such
like, who come to remain for a time in their Inn for dispatch of their
necessary business. And if any person or persons shall be found offending in
the premises, that then they be brought before me the Lord Major, or some
other of his Majesty's Justices of Peace, to the end they may receive such
punishment as to justice shall appertain. And hereof not to fail, as you will
answer the contrary at your peril.

This thirteenth of April. 1641.
Occasional Speeches, made in the House of Commons, this Parliament. 1641.
Concerning Religion. November. 12. 1640.
Mr. SPEAKER,
IT was well observed by my Lord Keeper, that a multiplying Glass may deceive;
but the right English Glass of the Commonwealth, never. In which I discern so
comely and active a Motion, that out of all question, some great work is here
to be done, some thing extraordinary is here to be decreed; or else God and the
King beyond all our expectations, at the last breath, would never so soon have
cemented us again, to meet in in this great Council.

Mr. Speaker, What an happy sight will it be to see the King and his People
accord? A threefold cord is not easily broken; and I hope King Charles his
threefold Kingdoms shall never be so divided, as to break in pieces.

Mr. Speaker, God knows, the divisions of great Britain have half untwisted
our long Union; and I fear that God is angry with our National lukewarm
temper: The zeal of his house has not kindled that flame in our hearts; which
our seeming good actions, have blown abroad; much like the walking of a Ghost,
or livelesse body which affrights many, but pleases no beholder. Omnia honesta
opera, voluntas inchoat; It is the heart or will which gives the beginning to
every good action; and I hope our constant resolutions will be to settle
religion in his splendour and purity, by pulling Dagon from the Altar; and
whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple; Pars prima bonitatis est
velle fieribonum. The first part of goodness is to have the will of being good.

God knows all our hearts, and takes notice of our inward resolutions, and for
what ends we come hither, if to propagate and advance his glory and Gospel,
blessed shall this Parliament and Nation be, and then most happy we, whose God
is the Lord, all things shall work together for our good. For Mr. Speaker, he
that turns the hearts of Kings like the rivers of waters, will make the King
and his kingdoms all of one mind: Long live King Charles the Great, and his
numerous Royal Issue, to defend the true faith, which will protect and keep
him and his, safe in his fathers Throne. Never King gave more full content to
his people, than his Majesty now has done, and I hope never subjects came with
better hearts and affections to their King and Country then we do: let it
then appear M. Speaker, by our outward actions and practice, that our inward
obedience both of heart and hand, is true, loyal, and current coin, not false
nor counterfeit; for, Nemo veraciter dicit, volo, qui non facit illud quod
potest; no man truly says, I am in will and heart resolved, unless according
to his ability, he endeavor to perform his resolution, which, to speak the
hearts of us all in this renowned Senate, I am confident, is fully fixed upon
the true reformation of all disorders and innovations in Church or religion,
and upon the well uniting, and close rejonting of the now dis-located great
Britain: For let me tell you Mr. Speaker, that, God be thanked, it is but out
of joint, and may be yet well set, by the skillful Chirurgions of this
Honorable House, to whose loving and Christian care, and to whose tender and
upright hands I leave it, only with this Aviso, let brotherly love continue,
and be constant and of good courage; for the keeper of Israel, who neither
slumbers nor sleeps, who delivered us from Romes November powder-blast, will no
doubt still preserve his Anointed our gracious King, and us his loyal
Subjects from all dangers of fire, or sword; For, Si Deus nobiscum, quis contra
nos?

Upon the Scotch Treaty. January 21. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
THere is no malady more destructive to the natural, or politic body, than
the mal Caduque, or falling sickness, nor is there any Physician or compound
more to be esteemed than that which can cure it in either. M. Speaker, this
unknown remedy, if we be wise to apply it, and take the receipt with all the
ingredients, without any scruple of distaste; I am confident the recovery will
be perfect, and the whole body of great Britain safe and sound. Mr. Speaker,
the happy Union of Scotland and England, has thus long ever since flourished
in interchangeable blessings of plenty, and mutual love and friendship. But of
late by what fatal disasters, and dark underminings we are divided, and
severed into Scottish and English Armies; let their well composed preambles
speak for me, which I wish were printed as an excellent emblem of brotherly
love, that discovers who has wounded us both, and how each should strive to
help the other in distress, seeing their and our Religion and Laws lie both
at stake together. Think of it what you will, (Noble Senate) their subsistence
is ours, we live or die, rise or fall together. Let us then find out the
Boutefaux of this Prelaticall war, and make them to pay the shot for their
labor, who no doubt, long for nothing more than that we should break with
them, who worship but one God, and serve but one Master with us: Nor need we
fear that they intend to dispossess the English of their inheritance or
freehold, being ready to withdraw their forces upon reasonable terms, referring
their demands of reparation for losses, to the justice and courtesy of this
House, which I assure my self will give both a bountiful, cheerful, and
speedy supply in this case of necessity; for, Bis dat, qui cito dat, is the
best motto, or motion at this time.

Upon the Impeachment of the Lord Strafford, and Canterbury, etc. February 26.
1640.
Mr. Speaker.
I Take it we have now sat in this great Council 15. or 16. weeks, a longer
time than any Parliament has done these many years; God has given us a fair
and blessed opportunity, if we lay hold of it; and call to mind the best Motto
for a Parliament, which is, Non quam diu, sed quam been

Mr. Speaker, We have had thus long under our Feathers many Estriges Eggs,
which as some observe are longest in hatching, but once hatched, can digest
Iron; and we have many Irons in the fire, and have hammered some upon the
anvill of justice into nails; but we have not struck one stroke with the right
hammer, nor riveted one nail to the head.

Mr. Speaker, God forbid we should be cruel or vindicative to any; but let us
take heed we be not so to our selves, and them the sent us; if we do not mend
our pace, and so run as we may obtain.

Mr. Speaker, I hope we shall make good the work we have undertaken, and win
that prize and goal we aim at; else if we fail in this our pursuit of
justice, it is time to look about us: for then I fear that we our selves shall
hardly escape scot-free. It will not be our fix Subsidies that will help us,
unless we be good husbands, and cut off all superfluous charges, disband all
needless Armies, and dis-arme all Papists, and banish all Priests, and
Jesuits; and then we shall thrive and prosper.

Provided always that we deny our selves, and trust not too much in the arm
of flesh, but be careful to preserve brotherly love and concord, lest discord
and faction break, divide, and ruin us: but I hope God will make us all of one
mind and one public spirit, that as we are descended from that ancient and
noble English quiver, we may prove our selves a right sheafe of English Arrows
well united, well feathered, and sharply piled for public use, stoutly to
defend and preserve the public good and safety of this famous Island of great
Britain, and that is my humble prayer and motion.

Upon the Straffordian knot. March 10. 1640.
Mr. Speaker,
IN this great and weighty cause, we ought seriously to consider,

First, what we our selves have done already in the accusation and impeachment
of this great Earl, of high Treason.

Secondly, let us remember what we now are, not only Parliament men, but
public men, and Englishmen.

As Parliament men, let us follow the steps of our ancestors, and be constant
to that rule of Law which was their guide, and should be ours.

As public men, forget not whom we here represent, and by how many chosen and
trusted.

As English men let us call to mind the undanted spirits, and stout hearts of
those ancient Heroes, from whom we are descended, how free they were from
Pusillanimity, and how they scorned all Flattery, and Slavery; let us then now
or never, Mr. Speaker, show the same blood runs in our veins.

Thirdly, let us be well advised what to do, if in case we shall be denied
justice in this particular, upon which depends not only the happiness, but the
safety of this Parliament, of this Kingdom, of our selves, and of our
Posterities: and this is my Aviso.

Upon the same Subject. April 9. 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
TRuth is the daughter of time, and experience the best Schoolmaster, who has
long since taught many men and estates the sad and woeful effects of an
halfdone work; those convulsions and renting pains, which the body of great
Britain now feels, shows us that the ill humors and obstructions are not yet
fully purged, nor dissolved.

Mr. Speaker, God will have a through work done; if in stead of redressing
evils, we think to transact all, by removing of persons, and not things, well
may we hush our troubles for a season, but they will return with a greater
violence.

For believe it, Mr. Speaker (let us flatter our selves as we please) a dim
sighted eye may see, that although we think we have now passed the
equinoctial of the Straffordian line, and seem to have gone beyond Canterbury;
yet their faction and undermining agents (of all Religions) grow daily more and
more powerful; and no doubt do labor an extirpation of all Parliaments, and
men that will not think, say, and swear to their opinions and practice.

Have we not then, Mr. Speaker, a wolf by the cares? is there any way to go
Scot-free, or wolfe-free, but one? then let us take, and not forsake, that old
English Parliamentary Road, which is Via tuta, and will bring us safely to our
journeys end: that is my humble motion.

A seasonable motion for a loyal Covenant May 3. 1641.
Mr. Speaker,
IF ever we intend to perfect and finish the great works we have begun, and
come to our journeys end, let us take and sollow the right way, which is Via
tuta; and that is in a word to become holy Pilgrims, not Popish, and to
endeavor to be loyal Covenanters with God and the King; first binding our
selves by a Parliamentary and National Oath, (not a Straffordian, nor a
Prelaticall one) to preserve our Religion emire and pure, without the least
compound of Superstition, or Idolatry: next, to defend the defender of the
Faith, his Royal person, Crown, and dignity, and maintain our Sovereign in
his glory and splendour, which can never be Eclipsed, if the balance of justice
go right, and his laws be duly executed.

Thus doing, Mr. Speaker, and making Jerusalem our chiefest joy, we shall be a
blessed Nation, and a happy People. But if we shall let go our Christian hold,
and lose our Parliament proof, and old English well-tempered mettle: Let us
take heed that our Buckler break not, our Parliaments melt not, and our golden
Candlestick be not removed; which let me never live to see, nor England to
feel the want of: that is my prayer conclude my former motion.

Mr. Hides Argument before the the Lords in the upper House of Parliament.
April. 1641.
MY Lords, I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House
of Commons to present to your Lordships a great and crying grievance, which
though it be complained of in the present pressures, but by the Northern parts,
yet by the Logic and Consequence of it, it is the grievance of the whole
Kingdom. The Court of the Presidents, and Council of the North, or as it is
more usually called, the Courts of York, which by the spirit and ambition of
the Ministers, trusted there, or by the natural inclination of Courts to
enlarge their own power and jurisdiction, has so prodigiously broken down the
banks of the first Council, in which it ran, has almost overwhelmed that
Country under the Sea of Arbitrary power, and involved the people in a
Labyrinth of distemper, oppression and poverty.

Your Lordships will give me leave not with presumption to inform your great
understandings, but that you may know what moved the House of Commons to their
resolutions to remember your Lordships of the foundation, and erecting this
Court, and of the progress and growth of it.

Your Lordships well know, that upon the suppression of all religious houses to
such a value in the 27. year of H. 8. from that time to the thirtieth year of
that Kings reign, many (not fewer than six Insurrections) and Rebellions were
made in the Northern parts, under pretense of that quarrel, most of the^ under
the command of some eminent person of that country, the which being quieted
before the end of the 13. year, that great King well knowing his own mind, and
what he meant to do with the great Houses of Religion; in the year following
for prevention of any inconvenience that might ensue to him upon such
distemper, in the 31. year of his reign granted a Commission to the Bishop of
Landaffe, the first President, and others for the quiet government of the
County of York, Northumberland, Cumberland and Westmoreland, the Bishopric of
Durham, the County of the Cities of York, Kingston upon Hull, and New Castle
upon Tyne. But my Lords this Commission was no other then a Commission of Oyre
and Terminer, only it had a clause at the end of it, for the hearing of all
causes real and person, quando ambae parts, vel altera pars sit gravata
paupertate fuerit, quod quomodo vis suum secundum legem Regni nostri, aliter
persequi non possit, which clause how illegal soever, for that it is illegal
and void in Law, little doubt can be made, yet whether they exercise that part
of the Commission at all, or so sparingly exercised it, that poor people found
ease and benefit by it, I know not; but at that time I find no complaint
against it, till the coming in of King James the Commission continued still
the same, and that in the first year of his Reign to the Lord Sheffeild varied
no otherwise from the former same, only it had reference to Instructors which
should be sent, though any new sent or no is uncertain, but we can find none.

In June, in the seventh year of the Reign of King James a new Commission was
granted to the same man (the Lord Sheffeild) very differing from all that went
before, it being left out, that they should enquire per sacramentum bonorum and
legalium hominum, and to hear and determine secundum leges Angliae; Relation
being had only to the instructions which were the first instructions, we can
find were sent thither, though I told your Lordships there were some mentions
of some In 1. Jac. I shall not trouble your Lordships with these Instructions,
nor with the other that followed in 14. Jacobi to the same man, nor in 16
Jacobi, when a new Commission was granted to my Lord Sunderland, nor indeed
with any till we come to these present Instructions, and Commissions under
which that part of the Kingdom groans and languisheth.

My Lord of Strafford came to that government in December. 4. Caroli, and since
the Commission has been three several times removed, in the fist year in
March, in the eighth in November. in the thirteenth year of his Majesty's reign
into that Commission of 8. and 13. a new clause served in for the granting,
sequestring, and establishing Possessions according to instructions, crowded in
a Mass of new exorbitant and intolerable power, though our complaint be
against this Commission it self, and against the whole body of those
instructions: I shall not mispend your Lordships precious time in desiring to
have the whole read, but shall presume to trouble your Lordships only with five
or six of the instructions, that by the vast irregularity of those your
Lordships may judge; how insupportable the whole burden is. I shall not
trouble your Lordships with the nineth Instruction, though it be but short,
which introduces that, miseram servitutem, ubi jus est vagum, and incognitum,
by requiring an obedience to such ordinances, and determinations, as be or
shall be made by the Council Table, or high Commission Court. A grievance my
Lords, howsoever consuetudo and peccantum claritas nobilitaverit hanc culpam,
of so transcendent a nature, that your Lordships noble Justice will provide a
remedy for it, with no less care, then you would rescue the life and blood of
the Commonwealth.

Read the 19.22, 23, 24.29. and 30: I will not trouble your Lordships with
reading more, there being among them in the whole 58. Instructions, scarce one
that is not against, or besides the Law.

Whether His Majesty may caution out a part of his Kingdom to be tried by
Commission, though according to the rules of Law, since the whole Kingdom is
under the Laws and government of the Courts established at Westminster, and by
this reason the several parts of the kingdom may be deprived of that
privilege, will not be now the question; that his Majesty cannot by Commission
erect a new Court of Chancery, or aproceeding according to the rules of the
Star Chamber, is most clear to all who have read Magna Charta; which allowed
no proceedings, nisiper legale judicium Parium and per legem terrae: for our
Court of Chancery here by long usage and proscription is grown to be as it were
lex terrae. But my Lords, the thircieth Instruction goes further, and erects
such an Empire, such a Dominion, as shall be liable to no contrary.

The Courts of Westminster, my Lords, have superintendences over all inferiors
Courts to regulate their jurisdictions, if they exceed their limits. As to hold
Plea of greater value, or the like in his exercise of Jurisdiction, the Judges
are sworn to grant, and send prohibitions, and to stop the granting of these
prohibitions, or to neglect them, when they are granted, is the greatest and
boldest scorn of the Law, and the Lawmakers that can be imagined.

The Kings Courts at Westminster, having been always of that awful and
reverent esteem, with inferior Judges, that the instances of such contempts
against them are very rare and exemplary in the punishment.

The Bishop of Norwich in Trinity Term, in the twentieth year of Edward the
third, in Rot. 289. in the common Pleas in Hilary Term 21. in the Kings Bench,
was attached for disobeying a Prohibition at the suit of Stracill, upon full
and solemn dissension of the whole matter, the Court resolved, that the
proceedings of the Bishop were inobedientiam and diminutionem Domini, and
potestatis Regiae authoritatis suae lectionem and coronae suae exhereditationem
manifestam, etc. As the words of the Records are, and therefore adjudged the
temporal ties of the Bishop to be seized into the Kings hand, and great, very
great damages to be paid to Plaintiffes: And whosoever gave directions for
these stout Instructions, might have remembered that no longer since then
Michaelmas, in the seventh year of Eliz. Rot. 31. an Attachment was granted
against the Archbishop of York then President of that Council, for forbidding
the Jailer of York to deliver one Lambert his Prisoner, who was sent for by a
habeas corpus from the Kings Bench; and if they would have believed the
resolution of all the Judges in England, in Trinity Term, in the 6 year of
King James, they would have known how unfit it had been to enlarge that
Jurisdiction, since most of their proceedings being of an inferior nature to
what they are now grown, were then declared to be illegal and inconsistent
with the liberty of the Subject.

And can such a Court, as this my Lords, deserve to live? what a compendious
abridgement has York gotten of all the Courts in Westminster Hall? whatsoever
sals within the cognizance, or jurisdiction of either Courts here, is
completely determinable within that one Court at York, besides the power it
has with the Ecclesiastical and high Commission Courts.

What has the good Northern people done, that they only must be disfranchised
of all their privileges by Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right; for to
what purpose serve these Statutes, if they may be fined and imprisoned without
Law, according to the discretion of the commissioners? what have they done,
that they, and they alone of all the people of this happy Island must be
disinherited of their birthright, of their Inheritance? For prohibitions,
writs of Habeas Corpus, writs of error are the birthright, the inheritance of
the Subjects.

And it is here worth your Lordships observation, that to those many
prohibitions, which have been granted from above, for till of late, the court
of York had not the courage to dispose prohibitions, nor indeed till our
Courts here, had not the courage to grant them. It Was never known, that Court
pleaded the Jurisdiction of their Council, which without doubt they would have
done upon the advantage of many great persons, in whose protection they have
always been, had they not known the Law, could not be misinterpreted enough to
allow it.

Your Lordships remember the directions I mentioned of Magna Charta, that all
proceedings shall be per legale Judicium Parium, and per legem terrae, now
these Jurisdictions tell you, you shall proceed according to your discretion,
that is, you shall do what you please, only that we may not suspect this
discretion will be gentler and kinder to us then the Law, special provision is
made no fine, no punishment shall be less then by the law is appointed, by no
means, but as much greater, as your discretion shall think sit; and indeed in
this improvement we find, Arbitrary Courts are very pregnant: if the Law
require my good behavior, this discretion makes me close Prisoner, if the Law
sets me upon the Pillory, this discretion appoints me to leave my cares there.

But this proceeding according to discretion is no new expression, 'twas in the
first Commission I told your Lordships of in the 31. Hen. 8. that they should
proceed secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni Angliae, vel aliter secundum
sanos discretiones vestras, which in the interpretation of the Law, and that is
the best interpretation, signifies the same thing, to proceed according to
discretion, is to proceed according to Law, which is summa discretio, but not
according to their private conceit or affection: For talis discretio (says the
law) discretionem confundit: and such a confusion has this discretion in these
Instructions produced, as if discretion were only removed from rage and fury:
no inconvenience, no mischief, no disgrace, that the malice, or insolence, or
curiosity of these Commissioners had a mind to bring upon that people, but
through the latitude and power of this discretion the poor people have felt,
this discretion has been the quickesand which has swallowed up their
property, their liberty: I beseech your Lordships rescue them from this
discretion.

Besides, the charge that this Court is to his Majesty, which is near 1300. l.
per annum, your Lor^ships will easily guess, what an unsupportable burden the
many officers (whose places are of great value) the Atturnies, Clarks,
Registers, and above 1000. Sollicitors that attend the Courts, must be to that
people (insomuch) that in truth the Country seems to be divided into officers
and dependants upon that Court: And the people upon whom these officers of that
Court prey and commit rapines, as he said in Petronius, Omnes hic aut
captantur, aut captant; aut cadavere quae laterentur, aut corni quae laterunt.
Truly my Lords, these vexed worn-people of the North are not suitors to your
Lordships, to regulate this Court, or to reform the judges of it, but for
extirpating these Judges, and the utter abolishing this Court; they are of
Catoes mind, who would not submit to Caesar for his life, saying, he would not
be beholding to a Tyrant for injustice, for it was injustice in him to take
upon him to save a man's life, over whom he had no power.

So these Gentlemen desire not to be beholding to this Court hereafter for
injustice. The very administration of injustice, founded upon such illegal
principles being a grievance and oppression to the subject.

First upon the whole matter the House of Commons is of opinion, that the
Commission and Instructions whereby the President and Council of the North
exercise a Jurisdiction, is illegal, both in the creation and execution.

Secondly, that it is improfitable to his Majesty, for besides so much, near
thirteen hundred pound taken out of his Majesty's revenues every year, his
Majesty loses the great benefit would accrue to him upon writs and upon Fines,
upon Outlaws, and other profits, which redound to his Majesty out of his Court
here.

And which I had almost forgot to tell your Lordships of, that his Majesty may
be sure to have benefit from that Court notable care is taken, by the fiftty
three Instructions, And if any money remains over and above all disbursements,
it shall be bestowed in providing Household Stuff, and furniture for the house,
where the Lord President and Council use to be.

And lastly, that it is inconvenient and grievous to His Majesty's subjects of
those parts.

And therefore they are humble Suitors to your Lordships, and the house of
Commons, on this behalf, that since this people do, and have, in all matters
of duty and affection contend with the best of His Majesty's subjects, that
they may not be distinguished from them in the manner of His Majesty's Justice
and protection, since this Court originally instituted and continued by his
Majesty, for the ease and benefit of his subjects, is apparently inverted to
the burden and discomfort of them, that your Lordships will join with the
House of Commons in beseeching His Majesty, that the present Commission may be
revoked, and no more such granted for the future.

A Speech of Master John White Counselor, concerning Episcopacy.
EPiscopacy as it stands in this kingdom, comprehends in it in linea recta,
these four degrees, the Deacon, the Presbyter, the Bishop and the Archbishop,
Every Archbishop wades through every of these ordinarily.

Of the first and last we have no vestigium in the holy scriptures. This Deacon
may Preach and Baptize and help the Presbyter to administer the Lords Supper,
Book of ordering of Deacons.
but may not consecrate the Elements in the Lords Supper: contrary to the
Scriptures, by which Preach and Baptize, is a full Commission for the exercise
of all the ministerial function. Mat. 28.19.

The Deacon mentioned in holy Scripture, is the same in Office with our
Churchwarden, to look to the Church goods and the poor, Acts 6. 1 Timothy 3.

The Presbyter is of all hands acknowledged to be, Jure Divino.

The Bishop is considerable in respect of his trayn, and secondly, in respect
of himself.

His trayn are these, first the Dean and Chapter (called Prebends, quia
praeherent auxilium Episcopo,) and were originally ordained for his Counsel to
advise him in difficulties in Religion, and to advise him in, and consent unto
his dispositions of his possessions, Cok. r. 3. Dean and Chapter of Norwiches
case.

Secondly, the Archdeacon is the oculus Episcopi to discover and punish
offenses spiritual and Ecclesiastical within his limits, and manus Episcopi,
to present unto him such as are to be made Deacons and Presbyters, and to
induct such as he admits and institutes into Benefices.

Thirdly, his Chancellors, Vicars General, Commissaries, Officials,
Surrogates, Registers, Promotors, and others belonging to his Cathedrals.

These be all merely humane, and may be taken away without offense to God or
conscience, if there appear just cause for it.

The Bishop in respect of himself is considerable in his Barony and
temporalties, and his spiritualties.

The first, is merely Exgratia Regis, and in this kingdom began 4. of William
the Conqueror: Case of tenures 35. a.
And by virtue hereof, they have had place in the house of Peers in Parliament.
7. H. 8.1846. Kel. it is resolved by all the Judges of England, that the King
may hold his Parliament by himself, his temporal Lords and Commons, without
any Bishop, for a Bishop has not any place in Parliament by reason of his
spiritualties, but merely by reason of his Baronry, and accordingly acts of
Parliament have been made, 2 Rich. 3. cap. 3. and at diverse other times.

They have usurped the name of Spiritual Lords but of late, and were first
called so 16 Rich. 2. c. 1. in our Statutes.

By his spiritualties, I mean those wherein he is more then a Presbyter, and
therein I consider his authority over Presbyters by the Oath of Canonical
Obedience, by which he may command them to collect tenths granted in
Convocation, etc. 20 Hen. 6.13. p. 25.

Secondly, his Office which is partly Judicial, and partly ministerial;
Judicial, by which he is Judge in his Courts of all matters Ecclesiastical
and spiritual within his Diocese, Cok. Rep. 8. Trollops. C. Secondly, he is
Judge of the fitness of such as are presented unto him to be instituted into
Benefices, Cok. rep. 5. Specots. cap.

Ministerial, and thereby he is to Sacred places Dedicate to Divine Service.
9. H. 6.17. page 8. Secondly, he is to provide for the officiating of Cures in
the avoydance of Churches on neglect of the Patrons, presenting thereunto.
Thirdly, he is to certify loyal Matrimony, general bastardy and
excommunication. Fourthly, to execute Judgments given in quare impedit, upon
the writ Ad admittendum Clericum, and other, etc.

Fifthly, to attend upon trials of life, to report the sufficiency or
insufficiency of such as demand Clergy. Sixthly, to ordain Deacons and
Presbyters.

All these I conceive to be Jure humano, given to these Bishops, and may upon
cause be taken away from them.





First, the holy Scriptures declare the duties and office of Presbyters and
Bishops to be one and the same. The Bishop is to teach and rule his Church or
Congregation 1 Timothy 3.2.5. and the Presbyter is to teach and feed his flock,
and to oversee, care for, and rule them, 1 Pet. 5.2.3.

Secondly, the Presbyters are in holy Scriptures, said to be the Bishops of the
holy Ghost, Acts 20.28. Paul charges the Presbyters of Ephesus to take heed to
the flock whereof the Holy Ghost had made them Bishops. And other Bishops the
Holy Ghost never made.

Thirdly, Ephesians 4.11. God is said to have given to his Church for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edifying
of the body of Christ, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers;
here is an expres enumeration of the officers God has given, whereof the first
three are extraordinary and ceased: and the last only remains, and is to remain
until we all come to perfection, as it is ver. 13. and this perpetual Officer
is called Pastor, in relation to his flock whom he is to govern in
Spiritualibus, and Teacher in respect of his duty to feed them with the word of
truth, and is the very same with the Presbyter, as appears above. Argumentum a
divisione est fortissimum. The Bishop as he is any more then a Presbyter, is
none of these, no Officer given by God, and therefore ought not to be in the
Church; Christ the King of his Church was faithful in his House, not only as a
servant, as Moses was, but as the Son in an excellency and eminency, Heb. 3.5.
and to his kingly Office it pertains to appoint the Officers he will use for
the government of his Church in spiritualibus, and it agrees not with his
faithfulness to neglect or omit the appointment of them, and leave his House,
his Church, without such Officers. He is only wise, and therefore best knows
what Officers are useful for his Church, and infinitely loving of his Church,
and therefore has not left her without any Officer fit for her.

Titus in the end of Paul's Epistle unto him, is said to be the first Bishop of
Crete, and Timothy in the end of the Epistles unto him, to be the first Bishop
of Ephesus.

Derk. upon Gal. 6. infine. For Tim. See 1 Cor. 4.17. and 16.10. Acts 17.13.15
and 19.22. and 20.4.5 1 These. 3.1.6. Heb. 13.25. Colos. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. and
2.19. For Titus See 2 Cor. 7.13 and 8.6.16.23, and 12.18. Gal 2.1. 2 Timothy 4.10.
Tim. 1.5. and ^.3.12.
and as Beza observes, are not in many greek ancient copies to be found, and
this is so evident as it is granted by most Divines. 2. And as they be no part
of the Scriptures of God, so they be apparently contrary unto them, for by them
it appears, that they, namely Titus and Timothy, were Evangelists,
extraordinary officers, associats and fellow-helpers of the Apostles in their
general and Universal function, attendant upon them, and sent by them (as
occasion required) from one Church to another, never keeping any fixed
residence any where, and if they had been Bishops of any place, Paul would
never have suffered, much less forced them to be non-residents.

Saint John Revel. 12.3. writing to the 7 Churches of Asia directs his speech
to the Angel of each Church, Ob. 2.
and in each of those Churches there were then several Congregations and
Presbyters, therefore the Angel was the Bishop over them.

To this I answer, that as Angel is a name common to all Presbyters who are
Christ's Messengers and Ambassadors: So it appears to be used here by the very
context cap. 2. v. 10. Where speaking to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, the
holy Ghost says, Fear none of the things thou shall suffer, the Devil shall
cast some of you into prison, but be thou faithful, etc. Angel (being nomen
multitudinis) is taken in these chapters collectively for all the Presbyters
(some of whom the adversaries should imprison,) and not for any one above or
before the rest. The same appears in the like manner, ver. 13.23.

Seeing then the Episcopacy may be taken away in all, wherein it exceeds the
Presbyters office, and that the office of the Presbyter is clearly jure divino;
I conceive we are first to restore the Presbyter to his due, and to him it
belongs to teach and feed his flock and to oversee, care for, and rule them in
spiritualibus, Act. 20.17. 1 Timothy 3.2.5. 1. Pet. 5.2.3. So says the holy
Scripture.

And so says our Law also. He is to minister the Doctrine and the Sacraments,
and the discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this Realm
has received the same according to the commandments of God: See the book of
Ordering of Priests in the 3. question, And he is called in our Law Rector
Ecclesiae, and the words of his institution be, Te^octorem Ecclesiae
instituimus curamque and regimen animarum parochianorum tibi^in Domino
committimus.

The Bishops have taken by usurpation from the Presbyter diverse rights: first,
contrary to his Ordination and institution, they will not suffer him to preach
in his own Cure without a license.

Secondly, they restrain him from preaching some doctrines, as of
predestination and others that overthrow Arminian tenets, when his
faithfulness in his Office requires he should keep nothing back, This is read
to the Presbyter upon his Ordination, and his charge then given him is
remarkable See the book of ordering Priests.
but to show them all the counsel of God, Acts 10.27. Thirdly, they will not
suffer him to intermeddle in the discipline. These usurpations I conceive are
to be taken away, and the Presbyter to be left free from them.

Secondly, for the Episcopacy, I conceive, that first their Baronies and the
intermedling of the Clergy in Civil Councels, affairs, and employments, ought
to be taken from them.

First, I conceive such Bar^ and intermedling is against the Law of God, Christ
refused to intermeddle in dividing inheritances (though more able and fit for
it then any Bishop) Luke 12.13. and says his Kingdom is not of the world,
John 18.36. and the Disciple is not above his Master, Mat. 10.24. and Acts 6.
The Apostles refuse to intermeddle in the Deacon or Churchwardens office,
though of all earthly employments the nearest to the Church; and the reason
they give is remarkable for this purpose, because they were to attend to Prayer
and Administration of the word, and therefore not meet for them to attend such
secular matters, and 2 Timothy 2.4. The Apostles lays down a rule in this case,
that nemo militans Deo se implicat negotiis hujus seculi, and upon this ground,
even the Popes Canon-laws are against these things, as inconsistent with the
ministerial function. And the due execution of the commission, Go preach and
baptize, is of it self burden and work enough for any man whatsoever his
gifts and parts be, and made Paul though of a more excellent and able spirit,
cry out under the sense of the weight of it, Who is sufficient for these
things? 2 Cor. 2.16.

Secondly, it is against the fundamental Laws of this Land, whereby they that
are within holy Orders, Non est consonum quod ille qui salubri statui animarum
and piis operibus continue deservit ad insistendum in secularibus neg^tiis
compellatur, vide the writ.
that they may the better attend upon, and discharge their duties, are not to
be entangled with temporal business, and therefore if any such be chosen to
any temporal office, the Law has ordained a writ to discharge them thereof,
Reg. 187.6.

The King may command the service of men in orders, and then it is to be given
him by natural allegiance.

This rule admits two exceptions and both are in this case: first, except the
service from that person be against the Law of God as here it is, and then it
is better obey God then man, in praesentia majoris cessat potestas minoris.

Secondly, if the service concern the Commonwealth, and the person of whom it
is required, be not sufficient for it, nor brought up unto it, the command is
against Law, and the service not to be done, if the King grant the Office of
the Clarke of the Crown to one not brought up to it, it is void, and the
service not to be intermedled withal by him, 9 Ed. 4.56. Winters case.

Secondly, that part of the Bishops spiritual office by which he claims
superiority over Presbyters ought to be taken as I conceive from them as being
against the will of God.

The Apostles questioning among themselves which should be the Superior, are
sharply reproved by our Savior for it, and he tells them plainly it shall not
be so among them, Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25. and Diotrophes, 3 Job. 9. is branded
for it, that he sought prehominence in the Church. The mystery of iniquity in
the Popish Hierarchy, in the Presbyters exalting themselves, began to work in
the purest primitive times, (as we see in Diotrophes, and Peter's cavear, 1 Pet.
5.3.) and never left till it came to the Pope, 2 These. 2.4.7.
the highest degree and top thereof; By which it seems to me evident, that to
leave the pattern of Church government set down in the word of God to follow
the examples of after ages upon a false cry of primitive times, is to forsake
the pure fountain, and wallow in the muddy and corrupted streams of
antichristian ambition.

Thirdly, that part of the spiritual office of the Bishop whereby he is to
instruct the people committed to his charge, with the holy Scriptures, as upon
the 2 question put unto him at his Consecration, he undertakes to do, ought
(as I conceive) to be reduced to a possibility for him to perform it. It is
impossible for him to do it to a whole Diocese, therefore he should be
limited to some particular Congregation, unto which he might perform this
trust, which requires sufficiency, attendance and diligence.

Fourthly, Ordination in the scriptures is ever expressed to be by them in the
Church, that had authority and were officers in the Church, as Apostles,
Evangelists and after by the Presbytery, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. And a shadow
of this remains in our Law, Acts 14.23. Titus 1.5, 6, 7.
for the Bishop only is not to lay hands upon the party to be ordained, but the
Presbyters there attending are to join with the Bishop therein. Books of orde
ring Priests.
This I conceive is not fit to be in the hands of any one ordinary officer in
the Church, the discerning of the gifts, abilities and faithfulness of persons
to be ordained Presbyters, requiring great judgment, care, and circumspection.
Plus vident oculi quam oculus. The like I say of deprivation.

Fifthly, Excommunication by the Scriptures ought to be only in case of enormous
offenses and obstinacy in them, and only in the Congregation whereof the party
to be Excommunicate is a member, 1 Cor. 5.4. Tell the Church cannot be meant of
one man, Mat. 18.17. Diotrophes is branded for taking upon him alone to cast
any out of the Church. This also abused as well as usurped by the Bishop is to
be reformed.

Sixthly, Institution and induction are usurped by the Bishops upon the
fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, by which the Patron after his Clerk was
ordained, did without any more invest him into the Church. See Seldom of tithes
86. And a relick of this we retain still in Churches that be donatives.

Seventhly, The jurisdiction of tithes, causes matrimonial, and causes
testamentary in the times of the increasing power of the Pope, when the Bishops
thereby grew more formidable, were taken from the Civil Magistrate to whom
originally they belonged, upon pretense, that the tithes were Jure divino, the
Churches patrimony and Marriage a Sacrament, and that the disposing the goods of
the dead, most properly belonged to him for the good of the soul in Purgatory
to redeem it thence, to whom the cure of the Soul appertained in his life
time, vide 2 R. 3. Testaments 4.11 H. 7.12 B. Plowden 279. B. Foxes c. Cok.
rep. 9.37. B. Heustoes case. Dames rep. 97. B. Lalors c. Seldom of tithes, 415.

Eighthly, The matters which are merely and only spiritual, (which are
properly of Ecclesiastical cognizance) were anciently by the Lawyers of this
Kingdom, heard and determined in the County and hundred Courts by the Sheriff
and the Bishop, and by William the Conqueror these matters were taken thence
and appropriated to the Bishop alone, 2 R. 2. Rotul. Parliament, number. 12.
Seldom of tithes 412. Book of Martyrs, 154.

And by the Law of God (as I conceive) they ought to be heard and determined by
them that have rule in the particular congregations and Churches, Mat. 18.17. 1
Cor. 5. which if it were so among us would be a wonderful ease, and save great
charges to the subject.

And where the difficulty of case or greatness of the persons whom it may
concern, or where the Governors in particular Congregations demean not
themselves as they ought, it ought to be referred to a Synod of Presbyters, so
many as shall be thought meet, as Acts 15. a question of difficulty arising in
the particular Church of Antioch, and the dissension growing great about the
same, they sent to Jerusalem, and there the Apostles and Presbyters convened,
debated, concluded, and decreed the matter, and imposed the observation thereof
upon Antioch and other Churches, ver. 1.2.6.28. The Apostles would not meddle
in the question without the Presbyters, and other Bishops there were none
there, nor in the Churches. And faelicius expediuntur negotia commissa
pluribus, in the multitude of Counselors there is safety, Proverb. 11.14.

And the change of our Laws (in case this House shall see cause for it) will
not be so great or difficult as is conceived by some. For ordination,
admonition, suspension and deprivation of Presbyters, and the judgment of the
fitness of persons to be invested into Benefices Ecclesiastical, and the care
of providing for the serving of Cures during the vacancy and avoydance of
Churches, and taking of the subscription of Ministers to the Articles of
Religion: 13 Eliz. cap. 12.14 Eliz. cap. 5.
and the visiting of Hospitals, whose Founders have appointed no visitors,
which are now in the Bishop, may be settled in a convention of Presbyters, to
be appointed for every hundred, from whom appeal may be had upon every
gravamen to a greater Assembly of them, and those Presbyters, or any one of
them, may be enabled to give the Oaths of Supremacy and allegiance, where the
Bishop is authorized to give the same. And Excommunication may be ordered to be
certified by the Parson, 3 Eliz. c. 1.7. Jac. cap. 6.
Vicar or Stipendary of that Church where the party is excommunicate. And all
Churches presentative, may be filled by investure of the Patrons, and all
questions concerning them be determined by the same rules of law as Donatives
are, And loyal Matrimony be tried by a Jury where the woman is party to the
suit, as now it is where she is not party, so E. 3.15. P. 5.11. H. 4.4. B. 30.
and as it is now, where the issue is Nient sa femme, 12. E. 3. Brief 481.50.
E. 3.15. B. 7. H. 6.12. June 35. H. 6.9. P. 10. Coke 8. E. 4.12. a Laton: And
Bastardy general and Bastardy beyond Sea, within the Stature, 25 E. 3. De
natis ultra mare, may be made tryable by Jury, as now special Bastardy is 11
Ass. 20.38. ass. 24.39. E. 3.31.6. and 7. Ed. 6. Dier. 79. P. 52. So tithes may
be reduced to the Common Law and be sued for there, as it was ever in the case
of the King or his Debtor 38. ass. 20. Cok. r. 5.16. a Cawdreis case, and as it
is by the Statute of 2 and 3 E. 6. cap. 13. And for the Bishops attendance on
trials of life, it is needless, he being no Judge in it, but the Court, who
may appoint any other, or do it themselves. And for Sacring of Churches and
other dead things, it is fit to be neglected and left off, being a Popish vain
superstition, and without color of countenance from the word of God, the
Leviticall consecrations being typical and shadows of the good things we enjoy
under the Gospel, Heb. 9.19, etc.

The Bishop being thus reformed and reduced to a condition and state agreeable
to the word of God, the only right rule of reformation:

The Deans, Chapters, Vicars General, Chancellors, 25 Exodus 9 40. 1 Chronicles.
28.11.19. Ezekiel. 4.10. 2 Cor. 4 6.
and the rest of his Train, qua tales (being tellaris inutile pondus) are to
be removed and taken away also as superfluous and useless.

We have entrusted the Episcopacy these fourscore and two years with the cure
of Souls, a trust of the highest concernment, if we consider the price of
Souls. Our Savior is at a stand in it, What shall a man give in recompense for
his Soul? Mat. 16.26.
the price of it is best seen in the price given for it, God and man must
become a curse to redeem it.

How have they discharged this trust? Survay the Churches throughout the
Kingdom, and you shall find near eight parts of ten of them filled with
Idol, idle, or scandalous Ministers, whom the Bishops might have by law
refused, if discovered unto them beforehand, and ought to have removed being
discovered unto them afterward. And it has abundantly appeared this
Parliament upon examinations taken in this House of Commons and the Committees
thereof; that when Ministers extremely scandalous, have been discovered to the
Bishops and their Officers, and in the High Commission Court, they have
received no further censure then admonition, or to be put to purgation, and so
sent home to destroy more Souls, as if they had not done sufficiently in that
way before.

But if any godly, learned, and painful Preacher has been discovered by them,
they have sought out all occasions against such, to thrust them out of the
Church, and lay their Congregations waste and desolate, and every trifle,
though indifferent in their own account, has been made use of, and sufficed
them for this, yea, they have made occasions and traps to overthrow such
worthies without Law and against Law.

And herein they have inherited the virtues of Diotrephes their first
Predecessor, who would not receive the brethren, and forbad them that would,
and cast both out of the Church, 3 John 10.

And though some of the Bishops have been and are good men, yet look into their
Diocese, and the Churches in their gift, and judge whether they be good
Bishops or no, you shall sinde them as faulty concerning this great trust as
any of the rest. And whether it be not from hence evident, or at least greatly
to be suspected, that some curse cleaves to the very Office of Bishops, when
good men cannot manage it to any better purpose then the bad, let any man judge.

This Spiritual Monarchy has two incidents inseparable unto it, first that it
is always incroaching and usurping upon other powers, and swallowing them up,
as the series of all ages abundantly manifests. Secondly, that it is ever
inclining and returning to Popery, and the Religion of Antichirst, as has most
clearly appeared, even in our days as well as before since the restoring of
Religion; I shall for this time instance only in three places of the Rubric
corrupted by Bishops: In the Rubric confirmed by act of Parliament, in the
beginning of it, It is directed, that prayer shall be in such place of the
Church or Chancell, and the Minister shall so turn him, as the people may best
hear.

In the Rubric as it is now Printed, prayer shall be used in the accustomed
place, etc. except it shall be otherwise determined by the Ordinary.

Whereby they have introduced the Popish practice of reading Prayers at the
upper end of the Chancell at their Altar, where few in the Church can see them,
and fewer hear them, and turning their faces to the East, and their backs to
the people in reading in the Desk, and color all with the determination of the
Ordinary.

Secondly, in the Letany, there are these words in the book of Common prayer
confirmed by the Statutes of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. and of 1 Eliz. From the tyranny
of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, good Lord deliver us;
and that the Bishops in the latter books have caused to be left out wholly.

Thirdly, in the Rubric concerning the administration of the Lords Supper, as
it stands now altered, an excellent declaration of the reason why kneeling at
this Sacrament was left in the reformation, and a renunciation of
Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, adoration of the bread and wine, as
abominable Idolatries, are wholly obliterate and left out, that the use of
that gesture there might be rendered the more suspicious and superstitious, and
a more clear way might be made, to induce the Popish superstitious innovations,
that have been since obtruded upon us, concerning the Table, Altar, supreminent
presence of God almighty there, cringings, Altar-worship and the like. And I
conceive alterations were made by the Bishops, as appears unto me by the
Proclamation they procured to be set forth 5. Martii, 1. Jac. concerning the
book of Common prayer.

And how can things prosper better in the hands of the Episcopacy, when Gods
blessing alone gives out prosperity, and the Lord disposes his blessing in
his own way only, and not in any other?

And this being no plant planted by God in his Church, how can it be expected
it should yield us any better fruits then we have received from it?

Again, (if I be not much deceived) the Episcopacy in whatsoever it exceeds
the Presbyters office (in which sense only I speak of it) is abranch of the
Hierarchy of Rome, and of the Antichrist: and of that consider what is
prophesied Revel. 14.11. They shall not have any rest day nor night, that
receive any print of the name of the Beast; and examine the former and present
times, whether the same has not been verified among us, and in all such places
where that Hierarchy has been entertained, whether the most troubles and
miseries of the Churches, and in great part also of the Commonwealth, have not
sprung from the said Episcopacy and the fruits thereof?

Therefore let us proceed to the perfecting of the Reformation of our Church,
and to the gathering out of it every stone that offends, even whatsoever is not
according to God, and the standard of his word, and reduce every thing in the
government to the rule, and walk in it in Gods way, which is the sure way to
have his presence with us, and blessing upon us and ours for ever.

It has ever been a point of higher honor from God, and of greater acceptance
and esteem with him to advance the reformation of his Church and worship; 2
Cro. 17.6. and 3. iI^ 1 Kings 15.14. 2 Kings 12.3. 1 Cron. 28.16. Zac. 4.7.
and was and ever will be a reproach from him, and blot upon such as have left
any thing not agreeable to his word unreformed, and not taken away: Up then let
us be doing, and the Lord will go before us, and make plain all mountains that
may occur in our way, and give a blessed issue and success.

To the honorable Houses of Parliament now assembled.
The humble Petition of many of the Inhabitants within his Majesty's County of
Kent:
Most humbly showing,
THat by sad experience we do daily find the Government of the Church of
England, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Archdeacons, with their Courts,
Jurisdictions, and Administrations by them and their inferior Officers, to be
very dangerous both to Church and Commonwealth, to be the occasions of manifold
Grievances unto his Majesty's Subjects, in their Consciences, Liberties, and
Estates, and likely to be fatal unto us in the continuance thereof, the
dangerous effects of which Lordly power in them have often appeared in these
particulars following.

1 They do (with a hard hand) overruled all other Ministers, subjecting them
to their cruel Authority. 2 They do suspend and deprive many godly, Religious
and painful Ministers, upon slight, and upon no grounds, whilst in the mean
time few of them preach the Word of God themselves, and that but seldom, but
they do restrain the painful preaching of others, both for Lectures, and for
afternoon Sermons on the Sabbath day. 3 They do countenance, and have of late
encouraged Papist Priests, and Arminian books and persons. 4 They hinder good
and godly books, yet they do license to be published many Popish and Arminian
and other dangerous Books and Tenants. 5 They have deformed our Churches with
Popish Pictures, and seated them with Romish Altars. 6 They have of late
extolled and commended much the Church of Rome, denying the Pope to be
Antichrist, affirming the Church of Rome to be a true Church in Fundamentals. 7
They have practiced and enforced antiquated and obsolete Ceremonies, as
standing at all Hymns, and at Gloria patri, turning to the East at several
parts of the Divine Service, Bowing at the Altar, which they term the place of
Gods Refidence upon earth, the reading of a second Service at the Altar, and
denying the holy Sacrament of the Eucharist to such as have not come up to the
new set rayl before the Altar. 8 They have made and confirmed new illegal
Canons and Constitutions, and framed a most pernicious and desperate Oath, an
Oath of covenant and confederacy for their own Hierarchicall greatness,
besides many other very dangerous and pernicious passages in the said Canons. 9
They do dispense with pluralities of Benefices, they do both prohibit and
grant Marriages, neither of them by the rule of Law or Conscience, but do
prohibit that they may grant, and grant that they may have money. 10 They have
procured a licentious liberty for the Lords day, and have pressed the strict
observation of the Saints Holidays, and do punish, suspend and deprive godly
Ministers, for not publishing that book for liberty of sports on the Sabbath
day. 11 They do generally abuse the great Ordinance of Excommunication, making
a great gain of it, sometimes, to the great discomfort of many poor souls,
who for want of money can get no absolution. 12 They claim their Office and
Jurisdiction to be jure divino, and do exercise the same contrary to Law in
their own names, and under their own Seals. 13 They receive and take upon them
temporal Honors, Dignities, Places, and Offices in the Common wealth, as if
it were lawful for them to use both swords. 14 They cognizance in their Courts
and elsewhere of matters determinable at the Common Law. 15 They put Ministers
upon Parishes without the Patrons and without the peoples consent. 16 They do
yearly impose Oaths upon Churchwardens, to the most apparent danger of filling
the land with perjuries. 17 They do exercise Oaths Ex Officio in the Nature of
an inquisition even unto the thoughts of men's. 18 They have apprehended men by
Pursevants without ciration or missives first sent, they break up men's houses
and studies, taking away what they please. 19 They do aw the Judges of the
Land with their greatness to the inhibiting of prohibition, and hindering of
Habeas Corpus when it is due. 20 They are strongly suspected to be confederated
with the Roman party in this Land, and with them to be Authors, Contrivers, or
Consenters to the present Commotions in the North, and the rather because of a
Contribution by the Clergy and by the Papists in the last year 1639. and
because of an ill-named benevolence of six Subfidies, granted or intended to be
granted this year 1640. thereby and with these moneys to engage (as much as in
them lay) the two Nations into blood.
It is therefore our humble and earnest prayer, that all this Hierarchicall
power may be totally abrogated, if the wisdom of this Honorable House shall
find that it cannot be maintained by Gods word and to his glory. And your
Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

The Petition of the Citizens of London to both house of Parliament, wherein is
a Demonstration of their grievances, together with their desires for Justice to
be excuted upon the Earl of Strafford, and other DELINQUENTS. To the most
Honorable Assembly of the Lords and Commons in this present Parliament. The
humble Petition of diverse Citizens of London
Shows, that notwithstanding his Majesty's gracious Answer to the humble
Petition of his Loyal Subjects in summoning this Parliament, with the great
care, and endeavored pains, taken by both Houses for the removing the heavy
Grievances in Church and Commonwealth, whereof the Petitioners have already
received some fruit; for which they desire to return their most humble and
utmost thanks, yet nevertheless, they are enforced with all Humility to
represent to this most Honorable assemblly, some of these Obstructions which
do still hinder that freedom and fullness of Trade in this City they have
formerly had, and which considering the numerous Multitude thereupon depending,
they conceive it not able comfortably to subsist.

As the unsettled Condition of the Kingdom, even since the troubles in Scotland
has caused both strangers, and also of our own, who did furnish great sums of
money to Use to call it in, and remit much of it by Exchange unto Foreign
pars, and stands now in Expectation of what the issue of things may be.

The stopping money in the Mint, which till then was accounted the safest
place, and surest staple in these parts in the world, still does hinder the
importation of Bullyon, the Scots now disabled to pay such debts as they owe to
the Petitioners and others in the City, and by reason of the oppressions
exercised in Ireland, their debts also are detained there.

The English Trade by reason of our general distractions and fears is so much
decayed, that Country tradesmen can not pay their debts in London as formerly.

The great sums of money unduly taken by his Majesty's Officers and Farmers,
for impositions upon Merchandise exported and imported, and the want of relief
in Courts of Justice against them.

The drawing out from the City great sums of money (which is the life and
spirit of Trade) for his Majesty's service in the North, and being there
employed is not yet returned.

Besides all which from what strong and secret opposition the Petitioners know
not, they have not received what so much time and pains might give and cause to
hope, but still incendiaries of the Kingdoms and other notorious offenders
remain unpunished, the affairs of the Church notwithstanding many Petitions
concerning it and long debate about it remains unsettled, the Papists still
armed, the Laws against them not executed, some of the most active of them
still at Court, Priests and Jesnits not yet banished, the Irish Popish army not
yet disbanded, Courts of Justice not yet reformed, and the Earl of Strafford
who as now appears has counseled the plundering of this City, and putting it
to fine and ransom, and said it would never be well till some of the Aldermen
were banged up, because they would not yield to illegal levies of moneys, has
so drawn out and spent his time in his business to the very great charge of
the whole Kingdom, and his endeavor to obtain yet more; all which makes us
fear there may be practices now in hand to hinder the birth of your great
endeavors, and that we lie under some more dangerous plot then we can discover.

All which premises with their fears and distractions growing therefrom, and
from things of the like nature, the Petitioners humbly offer to the most grave
consideration of this most honorable assembly, as being the true causes of
decay of Trade, discouragement of Tradesmen, and of the great scarcity of
moneys, with the consequences they labor under.

And do humbly pray that their said grievances may be redressed, the causes of
their fears removed, Justice executed upon the said Earl and other
incendiaries and offenders, the rather in regard till then, the Petitioners
humbly conceive neither Religion nor their lives, liberties or estates can
besecured.

And as in duty bound they shall ever pray, etc.
Subscribed to this Petition 20000. all men of good rank and quality.



Sir John Wrayes Speech concerning Bishops. 1641.
THE first challenge for Lordly Primacy has of old been grounded out of the
great Charter, by which they hold an Episcopal Primacy or Jurisdiction to be
long to their state of Prelacy: this is their temporal soundation and main
object. Here I demand of them, unto what Church this great Charter was granted,
and whether it were not granted unto the Church of GOD in England? Let the
words of the Magna Charta decide this, which are these; Concessimus Deo
pro^nobis in perpetuum, quod Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, habeat omnia Jura
sua iutegra and libertates suas illaesas. Now by this Charter, if it be rightly
interpreted, there is first provision made that honor and worship be yielded
unto God, as truly and indeed belong unto him.

Secondly, that not only such Rights and Liberties as the King and his
Progenitors, but also that such as God had endowed the Church of England with,
which God himself has given by his Law unto the universal Church, and in that
which the Kings of England by their Charter have bequeathed to the particular
Church of England; and this we doubt not was the cause that moved Hen. 8. so
effectually and powerfully to bend himself against the Popes Supremacy,
usurped at that time over the Church of England; for, says the King, we will
with hazard of life and loss of our Crown uphold and defend in our Realms
whatsoever we shall know to be the will of God.

The Church of God then in England not being free, according to the great
Charter, but in bondage and servitude to the Sea of Rome, contrary to the Law
of God, the King judged it to stand highly with honor, and his Oath to reform,
redress, and amend the abuses of the same See.

If then it might please our gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, that now is,
in Imitation of that his noble Progenitor to vouchsafe an abolishment of all
Lordly Primacy executed by Archepiscopall and Episcopal authority over the
Ministers of Christ, his Highness in so doing could no more rightly be charged
with the violation of the great Charter, then might King Henry the eight, with
the banishment of the Popish Supremacy, or then our late Sovereign Lady Q.
Elizabeth could be justly burdened with the breach of her Oath by the
Establishment of the Gospel. Now if the Kings of England by reason of their
Oath were so straightly tied to the words of the great Charter, that they might
not in any sort have disanulled any supposed Rights or Liberties of the Church
used and confirmed by the said Charter unto the Church, that then was supposed
to be the Church of God in England, then be like King Henry 8. might be
attainted to have gone against the great Charter and against his Oath, when by
the overthrow of Abbeys and Monasteries he took away the Rights and Liberties
of the Abbots and Priers, for by express words of the great Charter, Abbots
and Priers had as large and ample a Patent for their Rights and Liberties, as
our Archbishops and Bishops can at this day challenge for their Primacy.

If then the Rights and Liberties of the one, as being against the Law of God,
be duly and lawfully taken away, notwithstanding any matter, clause or
sentence contained in the great Charter, the other having but little reason by
color of the great Charter to stand upon their pantofles, and to contend for
their painted sheaves, for this is a Rule and Maxim in Gods laws; that In omni
Juramento semper excipitur authoritas majoris.

Unless then they be able to justify by the holy scriptures, that such Rights
and Liberties, as they pretend for their spiritual Primacy over the Ministers
of Christ, be in Deed and Truth inferred unto them by the holy law of God, I
suppose the Kings Highness (as successor to Hen. 8. and as most just
inheritour of the Crown of England) by the words of the great Charter, and by
his Oath, is bound utterly to abolish all Lordly Primacy, as hitherto upheld
and defended, partly by ignorance and partly by an unreasonable and evil
Custom.

My Lord DIGBIES Speech in Parliament, 1640.
Master Speaker,
THis happy meeting, is to bemoane and redress the unhappie State of this
Commonwealth. Let me have I beseech you your leave, to give you in a word, a
short view of our griefs, then see whence they flow. Our Laws, our liberties,
our lives, and which is the life of all, our Religion; all which have been by
the endeavors of so many Ages secured, and made so much our own, can scarce
be called ours. Our Laws, the only finews and ligeaments of our estates, which
should run in an even stream, are now made to disdain their bancks, and to
overflow and drown their fields, which they should gently redress our
liberties, the very spirit and essence of our weal, which should differ us
from slaves, and speak us Englishmen; are held away by them, that even whiles
they take them from us, cannot but confess they are our proper dues. Are not
our lives in danger, when an enemy disguised like a friend provoked, is as it
were suffered (because indirectly, and in vain resisted) to come almost into
our bosoms, to rifle some of their goods, others of their loyalty; which
perhaps they could not, neither would have touched, might we with united force
have resisted. And lastly, which is the soul of all our grievances; our
Religion, which should have been our Cordial in all our distempers; like a
forced Virgin laments ever, that her pure innocence is taken from her; and
sure all these effects must have their causes.

That we have just, and wise Laws, we may thank those good Kings that made
them; the settled exposition of just circumscribed Laws to bind and defend
the Subject. That they are so well framed and usefud, and to contain enough to
make a good King and people, be perfect, be safe, and happy.

What do we owe to these grave Counselors* who sat here before us, and that
they outlive the malice of some unbounded spirits; we are beholding to them
that Reprieved them from ruin, with their lives and fortunes; we call them
ours, because we are freely born to them, as to the Air we breath in;we claim
them and should possess them under the Protection of our gracious King, who is
their great Patron, and disposes them not inconsiderately, but by the advice of
those learned expositors of the Laws (the Judges) and those whom he trusts to
be his great and faithful Counselors. If those pervert the ground and meaning
of the Law, and contract ^he power of it, or make it speak louder or softer,
as they themselves are tuned for it; the blame should deservedly fall on those
mistrusted ministers, who are the base betrayers of his Majesty's honor, and
his Peoples right; to vindicate which necessity, has here assembled you.

Mr. Speaker, Is not this offense and m lice, as great, who should undermine my
Tenor, and surruptiously deprive me of my evidence by which I held my
Inheritance, as he who by violence should wrest it from me. The Scots we have
heard branded as Traitors, because they have contrary to the law of Nations,
and their loyalty, invaded our Kingdom in Arms; what other title have they
merited, who have invaded our Laws and liberties, the precious evidence by
which we should freely enjoy our selves, and our estates. The first, we may
resist and drive forth by united force, and it will be called piety to the
King and Country; if force be laid against the other, it will be styled
Rebellion.

What now remains, but that we should use the Law; which because it has been
inverted and turned against us, contrary to its own natural and plain
disposition, should now right us and it self against our Adversaries. Surely
the Law is not so weak and improvident, to take care for others, and never
provide for its own defense against those (be they Peers, or people) that
have abused it. If we examine the Law well, it will tell us what has been the
reward of such ambitious men, as have Monopolized and abused the Kings
Authority; what have been the punishment of such as have betrayed the well
meaning Subject to the Kings displeasure, and his Princes Council to his
enemies? what do they deserve, who have raised mountains of Monopolies,
heaps of impositions, oceans of grievances? what have been the punishment of
such as have belied Justice, and their conscience, and have made truth and
honesty our of fashion.

And lastly, If no penalty be found for these, sure there is some for such as
have so disguised Religion in fantastic dresses, that Heaven andearth cannot
be but angry to see it; and in their politic pride have been so long
moulding a new State, and a new old Church for their own advantage, till they
have by their too much order put all out of frame, and made us objects of
pity, and themselves of hate. What if for these innovations, we innovate an
examplary punishment? These are the ground-works of our miseries; and surely,
Mr. Speaker, there are too many of all these sorts, which like envious clouds,
hinders us from ^he gracious shine our Sun intends us; therefore for his great
r luster, and our more assured comfort, let us endeavor to remove these
interposers, that he may more freely see into his peoples bosoms, and read in
their hearts firm characters of loyalty and glad obedience, which the
practices of these later times have endeavored to obliterate, but in vain.

I shall not dare to borrow one minute of you more; but I shall already end,
though I have just now begun. If we consider the just extent of our grievances,
the deep search of which wound I leave to you better abilities; and I beseech
you think not that I sigh out these complaints, undertaking to instruct the
grave Council of this great Assembly, my infant advice presumes not to reach
so high: It is but to let you see how much the slightest parts of this abused
Commonwealth, is not only made sensible of our wrongs, but what we feel is
far exceeded by the numberless number of our just fears, which should have
before this time utterly distracted us, had not our great Physician now at
length applied his sovereign remedy, to keep up our fainting hopes, by which
we must either stand, or fall.

Master Pyms Speech in PARLIAMENT. 1640.
THe distempers of this Kingdom are well known, they need not repetition. For
though we have good Laws, yet they want their execution; or if they are
executed, it is in a wrong sense. I shall endeavor to apply a remedy to the
breaches that are made, and to that end, I shall discover first the quality of
the disease.

First, There is a design to alter Law and Religion: the parties that effect
this, are Papists, who are obliged by a maxim in their doctrine, that they are
not only bound to maintain their Religion, but also to extirpate all others.

The second is their Hierarchy which cannot amount to the height they aim at,
without a breach of our Law. To which their Religion necessarily ioynes, that
if the one stands, the other must fall.

Thirdly, Agents and Pensioners to foreign States, who see we cannot comply
to them, if we maintain our Religion established, which is contrary to theirs,
here they intend chiefly the Spanish white gold works which are of most effect.

Fourthly, Favorites, such as for promotion prize not conscience, and such are
our Judges spiritual, and temporal; such are also some of our Counselors of
State. All these, though severed, yet in their contrivements they aim at one
end, and to this they walk on four feet.

First, discountenancing of Preachers, and virtuous men, they persecute under
the law of purity.

Secondly, Countenancing of Preachers of contrary dispositions.

Thirdly, The negotiating with the faction of Rome by Preaching, and to
instructions to Preach of the absolute Monarchy of Kings.

Here follow several Heads.

First, The political interpretation of the Law to serve their turns, and
thus to impose taxes with a color of Law; a Judge said it when a babe is
corpus was paid for.

Secondly, By keeping the King in continual want, that he may seek to their
counsels for r liefe; to this purpose, to keep the Parliaments in distaste,
that their counsels may be taken. The King by them is brought to this, as a
woman that used her self to poison could not live with good meat. Search the
Chronicles, and we see no King that ever used Parliaments, was brought to this
want.

Thirdly, Arbitrary proceedings in Courts of Justice; we have all Law left to
the conscience of a single man. All Courts are now Courts of conscience,
without conscience.

Fourthly, Plotters to enforce a war between Scotland, and us; that when we had
well wearied one another, we might be both brought to what scorn they pleased;
The pertition wall is only unity.

Fifthly, The sudden dissolving of Parliaments, and punishing of Parliament
men, all to affright us from speaking what we think. One was committed for not
delivering up the Petitions of the House; then a declaration which slandered
our Proceedings, as full of lies, as leaves, who would have the first ground to
be our example. And Papists are under appearance to the King his best Subjects,
for they contibute money to the War, which the Protestants will not do.

Sixthly, Another is Military, by getting places of importance into the Papists
hands, as who are Commanders in the last Army but they? none more strong in
Arms, then they, to whom their Armor is delivered contrary to the Statute.
Their endeavor is to bring in strangers to be Billited upon us; we have had no
account of the Spanish Navy, and now our fear is from Ireland.

Lastly, The next is Papisticall that proceeds of Agents here in London, by
whose desires many Monasteries and Nunneries here in London were erected.

Sir Thomas Baringtons Speech in Parliament, 1640.
My Lords,
WE have of late entered into consideration of the Petition of Right, and the
relation of it; and upon good reason, for it concerns our goods, liberties and
lives. But there is a Right of higher nature, that preserved for us far
greater things, eternal life, our souls, yea, our God himself; a Religion
derived to us from the King of Kings, conferred to us by the Kings of this
Kingdom, enacted by Laws in this place, treading down to us in the blood of
the Martyes, and witnessed from Heaven by miracles, even miraculous
deliverances. And this Right in the name of this Nation, I this day require,
and claim, that there may be a deep and serious consideration of the
relations of it.

I desire first, that it may be considered what new paintings are laid on the
old face of the Whore of Babylon, to make the more lovely, and to draw so many
Suitors to her.

I desire that it may be considered, how the Sea of Rome does eat into our
Religion, and fret into he banks and walls of it, the Laws and Statutes of
this Realm, especially since these Laws have been made in a manner by
themselves, even by their own Treasons and bloody designs; and since that
Popery is a consused mass of errors, casting down Kings before Popes, the
Precepts of God, before the tradition of men, living, and reasonable men,
before dead and senseless stocks and stones.

I desire that we consider the increase of Arminianisme and errors, that makes
the grace of God to lackie it after the will of man, that makes the Sheep
keep the Shepherd, and make an immortal seed, of a mortal God.

Yea, I desire that we look into the very belly and bowels of this Trojan
horse, to see if there be not in it men ready to open the gates of Romish
tyranny, and Spanish Monarchy, for an Arminian is the spaune of a Papist; and
if their come the warmth of favor upon him, you shall have him turn into one
of those frogs that arise out of the bottomless pit; and if you mark it
well, you shall see an Arminian reach out his hand to a Papist, to a Jesuit, a
Jesuit gives one hand to the Pope, another to the King of Spain; and therein
having kindled a fire in our neighbors Country, now they have brought some of
it hither, to set on flame this kingdom also.

Let us further search and consider, whether these be not the men that break
in upon the goods and liberties of this Commonwealth, for by these means they
may make way for the taking away of Religion. It was an old trick of the
Devils, when he meant to take away Jobs Religion, he began at his goods; Lay
thy hand on all be has, and be will curse even to thy face. Rather they think
hereby to set a distance between Prince and people, or to find some other way
of supply to avoid or break Parliaments, that so they may break in upon our
Religion, and bring in their errors: but let us do as Job did, he held fast
his Religion, and his goods were restored with advantage; and if we hold fast
God, and our Religion, these things shall be unto us.

Let us consider the times past, how we flourished in honor and abundance, when
Religion flourished amongst us, but when Religion decayed, so the honor and
strength of our Nation decayed; when the soul of this Commonwealth is dead,
the body cannot long over live it. If a man meet a Dog alone, the Dog is
fearful, but though never so fierce by nature; if that Dog have his Master by
him, he will set upon that man from whom he fied before. This shows, the lower
natures being backed with the higher, increase in courage and strength; and
certainly, man being backed with omnipotence, is a kind of omnipotence.
Wherefore let it now be the unanimous consent and resolution of us all, to make
a vow and Covenant from henceforth, to hold fast on God, and his Religion; and
then may we from henceforth expect prosperity in the Kingdom and Nation to
this Covenant.

Let every one of us say, Amen.
The Accusation and Impeachment of Sir George Ratcliffe by the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, Charging him with High Treason, and other
misdemeanors as ensue. 1640.
IMprimis, That he had conspired with the Earl of Strafford to bring into
Ireland an Arbitrary Government, and to subvert the fundementall Laws, and did
join with the Earl to bring in an Army from Ireland, to subdue the Subjects
of England.

Secondly, That he has joined with the Earl to use Regal power, and to
deprive the Subjects of their liberties, and properties.

Thirdly, That he has joined with the Earl to take (...) thousand pounds out
of the Exchequer in Ireland, and bought Tobacco therewith, and converted the
same profits to their own uses.

Fourthly, That he had Traitorously confederated with the Earl to countenance
Papists, and build Monasteries, to alienate the affections of the Irish
Subjects from the subjection of England.

Fifthly, That he had Traitorously confederated with the Earl, to draw the
Subjects of Scotland from the King.

Sixthly, That to preserve himself and the said Earl, he had labored to
subvert the liberties and privileges of Parliament in Ireland.

The Charge of the Scottish Commissioners against the Prelate of CANTERBVRY.
NOvations in Religion, which are universally acknowledged to be the maine
cause of commotions in Kingdoms and States, and are known to be the true
cause of our present troubles, were many and great, beside the book of
Ordination, and Homilies. 1. Some particular alterations in matters of
Religion, pressed upon us without order, and against Law, contrary to the form
established in our Kirk. 2. A new book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical. 3. A Liturgy, or book of Common Prayer, which did also carry
with them many dangerous errors in matters of Doctrine. Of all which we
challenge the Prelate of Canterbury, as the prime cause on earth.

And first, that this Prelate was the Author and urger of some particular
changes, which made great disturbance amongst us, we make manifest. 1. By
fourteen letters subscribed, W. Cant. in the space of two years, to one of our
pretended Bishops, Bannatine, wherein he often enjoyneth him, and other
pretended Bishops, to appear in the Chapel in their whites, contrary to the
custom of our Kirk, and to his promise made to the pretended Bishop of
Edinburgh, at the Coronation, that none of them after that time, should be
pressed to wear these garments, thereby moving him against his will to put
them on for that time; wherein he directs him to give order for saying the
English Service in the Chapel twice a day, for his neglect showing him, that
he was disappointed of the Bishopric of Edinburgh, promising him upon the
greater care of these Novations, advancement to a better Bishopric, taxing him
for his boldness in Preaching the sound Doctrine of the reformed Kirks,
against Master Mitchell, who had taught the errors of Arminius in the point of
the extent of the merit of Christ, bidding him send up a list of the names of
Councillors and Senators of the College of Justice, who did not communicate
in the Chapel, in a form which was not received in our Kirk, commending him
when he found him obsequious to these his commands; telling him that he had
moved the King the second time for the punishment of such as had not received
in the Chapel: and wherein he upbraided him bitterly, that in his first Synod
at Aberdein, he had only disputed against our custom of Scotland, of fasting
sometimes on the Lords day, and presumptuously censuring our Kirk, that in this
we were opposite to Christianity it self, and that amongst us there were no
Canons at all: More of this stuff may be seen in the letters themselves.

Secondly, by two papers of memoirs and instructions from the pretended Bishop
of Saint Androis, to the pretended Bishop of Rosse, coming to this Prelate for
ordering the affairs of the Kirk, and Kingdom of Scotland; as not only to
obtain warrants, to order the Exchequer, the Privy Counsel, the great
Commission of Surrenders, the matter of Balmerino's process, as might please
our Prelates; but warrants also for sitting of the High Commission Court once a
week in Edinburgh, and to gain from the Noblemen, for the benefit of
Prelates, and their adherents, the Abbacies of Kelso, Arbroith, St. Androis,
and Lindors, and in the smallest matters to receive his commands, as for taking
down Galleries and stonewalls in the Kirk of Edinburgh, and St. Androis, for
no other end but to make way for Altars, and adoration toward the East; which
beside other evils, made no small noise and disturbance amongst the people,
deprived hereby of their ordinary accommodation for public worship.

The second Novation which troubled our peace, was a book of Canons, and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical, obtruded upon our Kirk, found by our general
Assembly, to be devised for establishing a tyrannical power in the persons of
our Prelates, over the worship of God, over the consciences, liberties, and
goods of the people; and for abolishing the whole Discipline and government of
our Kirk, by general and provincial Assemblies, Presbyteries, and
Kirk-Sessions which was settled by Law, and in continual practice since the
time of Reformation; that Canterbury was Master of this work is manifest.

By a book of Canons sent to him, written upon the one side only, with the
other side blanke, for corrections, additions, and putting all in better order
at his pleasure; which accordingly was done, as may appear by interlinings,
marginalls, and filling up of the blanke page, with directions sent to the
Prelates; and that it was done by no other then Canterbury, is evident by his
Magisteriall way of the prescribing, and by a new copy of these Canons, all
written with St. Androis own hand, precisely to a letter, according to the
former castigations sent back for procuring the Kings warrant unto it, which
accordingly was obtained; but with an addition of some other Canons, and a
paper of some other corrections. According to which, the book of Canons thus
composed, was published in Print, the inspection of the books, instructions,
and his letters of joy for the success of the work, and of others letters of
the Prelate of London, and the Lord Sterling, to the same purpose; all which we
are ready to exhibit, will put the matter out of all debate.

Besides this general, there be some things more special worthy to be
adverted unto, for discovering his spirit. 1. The fourth Canon of Cap. 8. for
as much as no reformation in Doctrine or Discipline can be made perfect at once
in any Church; therefore it shall, and may be lawful fort the Church of
Scotland at any time to make remonstrance to his M. or his successors, etc.
Because this Canon holds the door open to more innovations: He writes to
the Prelate of Rosse his privy agent in all this work of his great gladness,
that this Canon did stand bebinde the curtain, and his great desire that this
Canon may be printed fully, as one that was to be most useful. Secondly, the
title prefixed to these Canons by our Prelates. Canons agreed upon to be
proponed to the several Synods of the Kirk of Scotland; is thus changed by
Canterbury; Canons and constitutions Ecclesiastical, etc. Ordained to be
observed by the Clergy. He will not have Canons to come from the authority of
Synods, but from the power of Prelates, or from the Kings Prerogative. Thirdly,
the formidable Canon, Cap. 1.3. threatening no less then excommunication
against all such persons whosoever shall open their mouths against any of
these books, proceeded not from our Prelates, nor is to be found in the copy
sent from them, but is a thunder bolt forged in Canterburies own fire. 4. Our
Prelates in diverse places witness their dislike of Papists. A Minister shall
be deposed if he be found negligent to convert Papists. Cap. 18.15. The
adoration of the bread is a superstition to be condemned. Cap. 6.6. They call
the absolute necessity of Baptism, an error of Popery. Cap. 6.2. But in
Canterburies Edition, the name of Papists and Popery is not so much as
mentioned. 5. Our Prelates have not the boldness to trouble us in their
Canons, with Altars, Fonts, Chancells, reading of a long Liturgy before
Sermon, etc. But Canterbury is punctual, and peremptory in all these.
Although the words of the tenth Canon cap. 3. be fair, yet the wicked
intentions of Canterbury, and Rosse, may be seen in the point of justification
of a sinner before God, by comparing the Canon as it came from our Prelates,
and as it was returned from Canterbury, and printed, our Prelates say thus: It
is manifest that the superstition of former Ages, has turned into a great
profaneness, and that people are grown cold for the most part in doing any
good, thinking there is no place to good works, because they are excluded from
justification. Therefore shall all Ministers, as their Text gives occasion,
urge the necessity of good works, as they would be saved, and remember that
they are via regni, the way to the Kingdom of Heaven, though not causa
regnandi, howbeit they be not the cause of salvation. Here Rosse gives his
judgment, That he would have this Canon, simply commanding good works to be
preached, and no mention made what place they have, or have not in
justification. Upon this motion, so agreeable to Canterburies mind, the Canon
is set down as it stands without the distinction of via regni, or causa
regnandi, or any word sounding that way, urging only the necessity of good
works. 7. By comparing Can. 9. cap. 18. as it was sent in writing from our
Prelates, and as it is printed at Canterburies command, may be also manifest,
that he went about to establish auricular confession, and Popish absolution. 8.
Our Prelates were not acquainted with Canons, for afflicting of arbitrary
penalties: But in Canterburies book, wheresoever there is no penalty
expressly set down, it is provided that it shall be arbitrarie, as the
Ordinary shall think fittest. By these and many other the like, it is
apparent, what tyrannical power he went about to establish in the hands of our
Prelates, over the worship, and the souls and goods of men, overturning from
the foundation, the whole order of our Kirk, what seeds of Popery he did sow in
our Kirk, and how large an entry he did make for the grossest Novations
afterward, which has been a main cause of all their combustion.

The third and great Novation was the book of Common Prayer, administration of
the Sacraments, and other parts of divine Service, brought in without warrant
from our Kirk to be universally received, as the only form of divine Service,
under al^ highest pains both civil and Ecclesiastical, which is found by our
National Assembly; besides the Popish frame and forms in divine worship, to
contain many Popish errors, and ceremonies, and the seeds of manifold and
gross superstitions and idolatries, and to be repugnant to the Doctrine,
Discipline, and order of our Reformation, to the confession of faith,
constitutions of general Assemblies, and Acts of Parliament, establishing the
true Religion: that this also was Canterburies work, we make manifest.

By the memoirs, and instructions sent unto him from our Prelates, wherein they
gave a special account of the diligence they had used, to do all which herein
they were enjoined, by the approbation of the Service book sent to them; and
of all the marginall corrections, wherein it varieth from the English book,
showing their desire to have some few things changed in it, which
notwithstanding was not granted: This we find written by Saint Androis own
hand, and subscribed by him, and nine other of our Prelates.

By Canterburies own letters, witnesses of his joy, when the book was ready
for the Press, of his prayers that God would speed the work, of the hope to
see that Service set up in Scotland, of his diligence to send for the Printer,
and directing him to prepare a black letter, and to send it to his servants at
Edinburgh, for printing this book. Of his approbation of his proofs sent from
the Press. Of his fear of delay, in bringing the work speedily to an end,
for the great good, (not of that Church, but) of the Church Of his encouraging
Rosse, who was entrusted with the Press, to go on in this piece of service
without fear of enemies. All which may be seen in the Autographs, and by
letters sent from the Prelate of London to Rosse, wherein as he rejoices at
the sight of the Scottish Canons; which although they should make some noise at
the beginning, yet they would be more for the good of the Kirk, than the Canons
of Edinburgh, for the good of the Kingdom. So concerning the Leiturgy he
shows, that Rosse had sent to him, to have an explanation from Canterbury of
some passage of the Service book, and that the Press behoved to stand, till
the explanation come to Edinburgh, which therefore he had in haste obtained
from his Grace, and sent the dispatch away by Canterburies own conveyance.

But the book it self as it stands interlined, margined, and patcht up, is
much more than all that is expressed in his letters, and the changes and
supplements themselves taken from the Masse-booke, and other Romish Ritualls,
by which he makes it to vary from the Book of England, are more pregnant
testimonies of his popish spirit, and wicked intentions which he would have put
in execution upon us, then can be denied. The large declaration professes,
that all the variation of our book, from the book of England, that ever the
King understood, was in such things as the Scottish humor would better comply
with, than with that which stood in the English Service. These popish
innovations therefore have been surreptitiously inserted by him, without the
Kings knowledge, and against his purpose. Our Scottish Prelates do petition
that something may be abated of the English ceremonies, as the Cross in
Baptism, the Ring in Marriage, and some other things. But Canterbury will not
only have these kept, but a great many more, and worse superadded, which was
nothing else, but the adding of fuel to the fire. To express and discover
all, would require a whole book, we shall only touch some few in the matter of
the Communion.

This book inverteth the ordor of the Communion in the book of England, as may
be seen by the numbers, setting down the orders of this new Communion,
1.5.2.6.7.3.4.8.9.10.15. Of the diverse secret reasons of this change, we
mention one only; in joining the spiritual praise and thanksgiving, which is
in the book of England, pertinently after the Communion, with the prayer of
Consecration before the Communion, and that under the name of memorable or
oblation, for no other end, but that the memorial and sacrifice of praise,
mentioned in it, may be understood according to the popish meaning. Bellar. de
Missae, lib. 2. cap. 21. Not of the spiritual sacrifice, but of the oblation
of the body of the Lord.

It seems to be no great matter, that without warrant of the book of England,
the Presbter going from the North end of the Tabls, shall stand during the time
of Consecration, at such a part of the Table, where he may with the more ease
and decency use both hands; yet being tried; it imports much, as that he
must stand with his hinder parts to the people, representing (says Durand)
that which the Lord said of Moses, Thou shall see my hinder parts. He must have
the use of both his hands, not for any thing he has to do about the bread and
wine, for that may be done at the North end of the Table, and be better seen of
the people; but (as we are taught by the Rationalists) that he may be
stretching forth his arms, to represent the extension of Christ on the Cross,
and that he may the more conveniently lift up the bread and wine above his head
to be seen and adored of the people, who in the Rubric of the general
Confession, a little before, are directed to kneel humbly on their knees, that
the Priests elevation so magnified in the Mass, and the peoples adoration may
go together; That in this posture, speaking with a low voice, and muttering
(for sometimes he is commanded to speak with a loud voice, and distinctly) he
be not heard by the people; which is no less a mocking of God, and his people,
then if the words were spoken in an unknown language. As there is no word of
all this in the English Service, so does the book in King Ed. time, give to
every Presbyter his liberty of gesture, which yet gave such offense to Bucer,
(the censurer of the book: and even in Cassanders own judgment, a man of great
moderation in matters of this kind) that he calls them, Nunquam satis
execrandos Miss gestus, and would have them to be abhorred, because they
confirm to the simple and superstitious ter impiam and exitialem Miss fiduciam.

The corporal presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, is also to be found
here: for the words of the Mass Book serving to this purpose, which are sharply
censured by Bucer in King Ed. Leiturgy, and are not to be found in the book of
England, are taken in here. Almighty God is incalled, that of his Almighty
goodness he may vouchsafe so to bless and sanctify with his Word and Spirit,
these gifts of bread and wine, that they may be unto us the body and blood of
Christ.

The change here is made the work of Gods omnipotency: the words of the
Mass, ut fiant nobis, are translated in King Edwards book, That they may be
unto us, which are again turned into Latin by Alesius, ut fiant nohis. On the
other part, the expressions of the book of England at the delivery of the
Elements of feeding on Christ by faith, and of eating and drinking in
remembrance that Christ dyed for thee, are utterly deleated. Many evidences
there be in this part of the Communion, of the bodily presence of Christ, very
agreeable to the doctrines taught by his Secretaries, which this paper cannot
contain. They teach us that Christ is received in the Sacrament, Corporaliter,
both objective and subjective. Corpus Christi est objectum quod recipitur, and
corpus nostrum subjectum quo recipitur.

The book of England abolisheth all that may import the oblation of any
unbloudy Sacrifice; but here we have besides the Preparatorie oblation of the
Elements, which is neither to be found in the book of England now, nor in King
Edwards book of old, the oblation of the body and blood of Christ, which
Bellarmine calls, Sacrificium Laudis, quia Deus per illud magnopore laudatur.
This also agrees well with their late Doctrine. We are ready when it shall be
judged convenient, and we shall be desired, to discover much more matters of
this kind, as grounds laid for missa sicca, or the half mass, the private
mass without the people, of communicating in one kind. Of the consumption by
the Priest, and consummation of the Sacrifice, of receiving the Sacrament in
the mouth, and not in the hand, etc.

Our Supplications were many against these books, but Canterbury procured them
to be answered with terrible Proclamations. We were constrained to use the
remedy of Protestation; but for our protestations, and other lawful means
which we used for our deliverance, Canterbury procured us to be declared Rebels
and Traitors in all the Parish Kirks of England, when we were seeking to
posse^^e our Religion in peace, against these devices and Novations, Canterbury
kindled war against us. In all these it is known that he was, though not the
sole, yet the principal Agent and Adviser.

When by the pacification at Barwick, both Kingdoms looked for peace and
quietness, he spared not openly in the heating of many, often before the King
and privately at the Councell-Table, and the privy Join to to speak of us as
Rebels and Traitors, and to speak against the pacification as dishonorable, and
meet to be broken. Neither did his malignancie and bitterness ever suffer him
to rest till a new war was entered upon, and all things prepared for our
destruction.

By him was it that our Covenant approven by National Assemblies, subscribed
by his M. Commissioner, and by the Lords of his M. Counsel, and by them
commanded to be subscribed by all the Subjects of the Kingdom, as a testimony
of our duty to God, and the King, by him was it still called ungodly, damnable,
Treasonable; by him were oaths invented, and pressed upon diverse of our poor
Countrymen, upon the pain of imprisonment, and many miseries, which were
unwarrantable by Law, and contrary their National oath.

When our Commissioners did appear to render the reasons of our demands, he
spared not in the presence of the King and Committee, to rail against our
National Assembly, as not daring to appear before the World, and Kirks
abroad, where himself and his actions were able to endure trial, and against
our just and necessary defense, as the most malicious and Treasonable contempt
of Monarchiall Government that any bygone Age has heard of: His hand also was
at the Warrant for the restraint and imprisonment of our Commissioners, sent
from the Parliament, warranted by the King, and seeking the peace of the
Kingdoms.

When we had by our Declarations, Remonstrances, and Representations manifested
the truth of our intentions, and lawfulness of our actions, to all the good
Subjects of the Kingdom of England, when the late Parliament could not be
moved to assist, or enter in war against us, maintaing our Religion, and
liberties; Canterbury did not only advise the breaking up of that high and
honorable Court, to the great grief and hazard of the Kingdom; but (which is
without example) did sit still in the Convocation, and make Canons and
Constitutions against us, and our just and necessary defense, ordaining under
all highest pains, that hereafter the Clergy shall preach four times in he
year such doctrine as is contrary not only to our proceedings, but to the
doctrine and proceedings of other reformed Kirks, to the judgment of all sound
Divines, and politiques, and tending to the utter slavery and ruining of all
Estates and Kingdoms, and to the dishonor of Kings and Monarchs. And as if
this had not been sufficient, he procured six Subsidies to be lifted of the
Clergy, under pain of deprivation to all that should refuse. And which is yet
worse, and above which malice it self cannot ascend, by his means a prayer is
framed, printed, and sent through all the Paroches of England, to be said in
all Churches in time of Divine Service, next after the prayer for the Queen
and Royal Progeny, against our Nation by name of Traiterous Subjects, having
cast of all obedience to our anointed Sovereign, and coming in a rebellious
manner to invade England, that shame may cover our faces, as Enemies to God,
and the King.

Whosoever shall impartially examine what has proceeded from himself, in
these two books of Canons and Common Prayer, what Doctrine has been published
and printed these years bypast in England, by his Disciples and Emissaries,
what gross Popery in the most material points we have found, and are ready
to show in the posthume writings, of the Prelate of Edinburgh, and Damblane,
his own Creatures, his nearest familiars, and most willing instruments to
advance his counsels, and projects, sall perceive that his intentions were
deep and large against all the reformed Kirks, and reformation of Religion,
which in his Majesty's Dominions was panting, and by this time had rendered up
the ghost, if God had not in a wonderful way of mercy prevented us: and that
if the Pope himself had been in his place, he could not have been more popish,
nor could he more zealously have negotiated for Rome, against the reformed
Kirks, to reduce them to the Heresies in Doctrine, the Superstitions and
Idolatry in worship, and the Tyranny in Government which are in that Sea, and
for which the reformed Kirks did separate from it, and come forth of Babel.
From him certainly has issued all this deluge, which almost has overturned
all. We are therefore confident that your Lordships will by your means deal
affectually with the Parliament, that this great firebrand be presently removed
from his Majesty's presence, and that he may be put to trial, and put to his
deserved censure according to the Laws of the Kingdom, which sall be service
to God, honor to the King and Parliament; terror to the wicked, and comfort to
all good men, and to us in special; who by his means principally have been put
to so many and grievous afflictions, wherein we had perished, if God had not
been with us.

We do indeed confess that the Prelates of England have been of very different
humors, some of them of a more hot, and others of them, men of a more moderate
temper, some of them more, and some of them less inclinable to Popery, yet
what known truth, and constant experience has made undeniable, we must at
this opportunity profess, that from the first time of Reformation of the Kirk
of Scotland, not only after the coming of King James of happy memory into
England, but before the Prelates of England, have been by all means uncessantly
working the overthrow of our Discipline and Government. And it has come to
pass of late, that the Prelates of England having prevailed, and brought us to
subjection in the point of government, and finding their long waited for
opportunity, and a rare congruity of many spirits and powers, ready to
cooperate for their ends, have made a strong assault upon all the external
worship, and Doctrine of our Kirk. By which their doing, they did not aim to
make us conform to England, but to make Scotland first (whose weakness in
resisting they had before experienced, in the Novations of government, and of
some points of worship) and thereafter England conform to Rome, even in these
matters, wherein England had separated from Rome, ever since the time of
Reformation. An evil therefore which has issued, not so much from the
personal disposition of the Prelates themselves, as from the innate quality
and nature of their office and Prelaticall Hierarchy, which did bring forth the
Pope in ancient times, and never cease till it brings forth popish Doctrine
and worship, where it is once rooted, and the principles thereof fomented and
constantly followed. And from that antipathy and inconsistency of the two
forms of Ecclesiastical Government, which they conceived, and not without
cause, that one Island united also under one head and Monarch, was not able to
bear; the one being the same in all the parts and powers, which it was in the
time of Popery, and now is in the Roman Church. The other being the form of
Government, received, maintained, and practiced by all the Reformed Kirks,
wherein by their own testimonies and and confessions, the Kirk of Scotland had
amongst them no small eminency. This also we represent to your Lordships most
serious consideration, that not only the firebrands may be removed, but that
the fire may be provided against, that there be no more combustion after this.

THE CHARGE OF THE SCOTTISH Commissioners against the Livetenant of Ireland.
IN our Declarations we have joined with Canterbury the Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, whose malice has set all his wits and power on work, to devise and do
mischief against our Kirk and Country.

No other cause of his malice can we conceive, but first his pride and
supercilious disdain of the Kirk of Scotland, which in his opinion declared by
his speeches has not in it almost any thing of a Kirk, although the Reformed
Kirks, and many worthy Divines of England have given ample testimony to the
Reformation of the Kirk of Scotland.

Secondly, our open opposition against the dangerous innovation of Religion
intended, and very far promoved in all his Majesty's dominions; of which he
has showed himself in his own way no less zealous then Canterbury himself,
as may appear by his advancing of his Chaplain, D. Bramble, not only to the
Bishopric of Derry, but also to be Vicar-generall of Ireland, a man prompted
for exalting of Canterburian Popery, and Arminianisme, that thus himself might
have the power of both swords, against all that should maintain the
Reformation, by his his bringing of D. Chapel, a man of the same spirit, to
University of Dublin, for poisoning the fountains, and corrupting the
Seminaries of the Kirk.

And thirdly, when the Primate of Ireland did press a new ratification of the
Articles of that Kirk, in Parliament for barring such Novations in Religion, he
boldly menaced him with the burning by the hand of the Hangman, of that
Confession, although confirmed in former Parliaments.

When he found that the Reformation begun in Scotland did stand in his way, he
left no means unassaied to rub disgrace upon us, and our cause. The pieces
printed at Dublin, Examen conjurationis Scoticanae, The ungirding of the
Scottish Armor: the pamphlet bearing the counterfeit name of Lisimachus
Nicanor; all three so full of calumnies, slanders, and scurrilities against our
Country, and Reformation, that the Jesuits in their greatest spite, could not
have said more, yet not only the Authors were countenanced and rewarded by him,
but the books must bear his name, as the great Patron both of the work and
workman.

When the National Oath and Covenant warranted by our general Assemblies, was
approved by Parliament in the Articles subscribed in the Kings name, by his
Majesty's high Commissioner, and by the Lords of privy Counsel, and Commanded
to be sworn by his Majesty's Subjects of all ranks; and particular and plenary
information was given unto the Lieutenant, by men of such quality as he ought
to have believed, of the loyalty of our hears to the King, of the lawfulness
of our proceedings, and innocence of our Covenant, and whole course, that he
could have no excuse: yet his desperate malice made him to bend his craft and
cruelty, his fraud and forces against us. For first, he did craftily call up to
Dublin some of our Countrymen both of the Nobility and Gentry, living in
Ireland, showing them, that the King would conceive and account them as
Conspirers with the Scots, in their rebellious courses, except some remedy
were provided; and for remedy, suggesting his own wicked invention, to present
unto him and his own wicked Council, a petition, which he caused to be framed
by the Bishop of Raphoe, and was seen and corrected by himself, wherein they
petitioned to have an oath given them, containing a formal renunciation of the
Scottish Covenant, and a deep assurance never so much as to protest against any
of his Majesty's commandments whatsoever.

No sooner was this Oath thus craftily contrived, but in all haste it is sent
to such places of the Kingdom where our Contrymen had residence; and men,
women, and all other persons above the years of sixteen, constrained either
presently to take the Oath, and thereby renounce their National Covenant as
seditious and traiterous, or with violence and cruelty to be haled to the
Jayle, fined above the value of their estates, and to be kept close prisoners,
and so far as we know, some are yet kept in prison, both men and women of
good quality, for not renouncing that Oath which they had taken forty years
since, in obedience to the King who then lived. A cruelty ensued, which may
parallel the persecutions of the most unchristian times: for weak women
dragged to the Bench to take the Oath, dyed in the place, both mother and
Child; hundreds driven to hide themselves, till in the darkness of the night
they might escape by Sea into Scotland, whither thousands of them did fly,
being forced to leave Corn, Cattle, Houses, and all they possessed, to be prey
to their persecuting enemies, the Lievetenants Officers. And some indicted and
declared guilty of high treason, for no other guiltiness but for subscribing
our National oath, which was not only impiety and injustice in it self, and an
utter undoing of his Majesty's Subjects, but was a weakening of the Scots
Plantation, to the prejudice of that Kingdom, and his Majesty's service, and
was a high scandal against the Kings honor, and intolerable abuse to his
Majesty's trust and authority: his Majesty's Commission, which was procured by
the Lieutenant, bearing no other penalty then a certification of noting the
names of the refusers of the oath.

But by this his restless rage and insatiable cruelty, against our Religion
and Country, cannot be kept within the bounds of Ireland.

By this means a Parliament is called, And although by the six subsidies
granted in Parliament not long before, and by the base means which himself and
his Officers did use, as is contained in a late Remonstrance, that Land was
extremely impoverished, yet by his speeches full of oaths and asseverations,
That we were Traitors and Rebels, casting off all Monarchical Government, etc.
he extorted from them four new Subsidies, and indicta causa before we were
heard, procured that a War was udertaken, and forces should be levied against
us, as a rebellious Nation, which was also intended to be an example and
president to the Parliament of England for granting subsidies, and sending a
joint Army for our utter ruin.

According to his appointment in Parliament, the Army was gathered, and
brought down to the Coast, threatening a daily invasion of our Country,
intending to make us a conquered Province, and to destroy our Religion,
liberties, and Laws, and thereby laying upon us a necessity of vast charges,
to keep forces on foot on the West coast to wait upon his coming.

And as the War was denounced, and forces leavied before we were heard. So
before the denouncing of the War, our Ships, and goods on the Irish Coast were
taken, and the owners cast in prison, and some of them in Irons. Frigates were
sent forth to scour our Coasts, which did take some, and burn others of our
Barques.

Having thus incited the Kingdom of Ireland, and put his forces in order there
against us, with all haste he comes to England.

In his parting, at the giving up of the Sword, he openly avowed our utter
ruin and desolation, in these or the like words, If I return to that
honorable Sword, I shall leave of the Scots neither root nor branch.

How soon he comes to Court, as before he had done very evil offices against
our Commissioners, clearing our proceedings before the point: So now houseth
all means to stir up the King and Parliament against us, and to move them to a
present war, according to the precedent, and example of his own making in the
Parliament of Ireland. And finding that his hopes failed him, and his designs
succeeded not that way, in his nimblenesse he takes another course, that the
Parliament of England may be broken up, and despising their wisdom and
authority, not only with great gladness accepts, but uses all means that
the conduct of the Army in the expedition against Scotland, may be put upon
him; which accordingly he obtains as general Captain, with power to invade,
kill, slay, and save at his discretion, and to make any one, or more Deputies in
his stead, to do, and execute all the power and authorities committed to him.

According to the largeness of his Commission, and Letters Patents of his
devising, so were his deportments afterward; for when the Scots, according to
their declarations sent before them, were coming in a peaceable way, far from
any intention to invade any of his Majesty's Subjects, and still to supplicate
his Majesty for a settled peace, he gave order to his Officers to fight with
them on the way, that the two Nations once entered in blood, whatsoever should
be the success, he might escape trial and censure, and his bloody designs
might be put in execution against his Majesty's Subjects of both Kingdoms.

When the Kings Majesty was again inclined to hearken to our petitions, and to
compose our differences in a peaceable way, and the Peers of England conveened
at York, had, as before, in their great wisdom and faithfulness given unto
his Majesty's Counsels of peace, yet this firebrand still smoaketh; and in that
honorable Assembly, takes upon him to breath out threatenings against us as
Traitors, and enemies to Monarchiall government; that we be sent home again in
our blood, and he will whip us out of England.

And as these were his speeches in the time of the Treaty appointed by his
Majesty at Rippon, that if it had been possible, it might have been broken up.
So when a Cessation of Arms was happily agreed upon there, yet he cease not,
but still his practices were for war; His under officers can tell who it was
that gave them Commission to draw near in Arms beyond the Teese, in the time of
the Treaty at Rippon.

The Governor of Barwicke, and Carlisle can show, from whom they had their
warrants for their Acts of hostility after the cessation was concluded. It may
be tried how it comes to pass, that the Ports of Ireland are yet closed, our
Countrymen for the oath still kept in prison, traffic interrupted, and no
other face of affairs, then if no cessation had been agreed upon.

We therefore desire that your Lordships will represent to the Parliament, that
this great incendiary upon these and the like offenses, not against particular
persons, but against Kingdoms, and Nations, may be put to a trial, and from
their known and renowned justice, may have his deserved punishment.

16. December, 1640.
THE SCOTTISH Commissioners Demand concerning the Sixth ARTICLE.
COncerning our Sixth demand, although it has often come to pass that these
two have been joined by the bonds of Religion, and nature have suffered
themselves to be divided about the things of this World; and although our
Adversaries, who no less labor the division of the two Kingdoms then we do
all seek peace, and follow after it, as our Common happiness, do presume that
this will be the partition wall to divide us, and to make us lose all our
labors taken about the former demand, wherein by the help of God, by his
Majesty's Princely goodness end Justice, and your Lordships noble and equal
dealing, we have so fully accorded, and to keep us from providing for a firm
and well grounded Peace, by the wisdom and justice of the Parliament of
England, which is our greatest desire expressed in our last Demand. We are
still confident, that as we shall concerning this Article represent nothing but
what is true, just, and honorable to both Kingdoms; So will your Lordships
hearken to us, and will not suffer your selves, by any slanders or suggestions
to be drawn out of that straight and safe way wherein ye have walked since the
beginning.

It is now, we suppose, known to all England, especially to both the honorable
Houses of Parliament, and by the occasion of this Treaty, more particularly to
your Lordships, That our distresses in our Religion and Liberties, were of late
more pressing than we were able to bear, That our Complaints and Supplications
for redress, were answered at last with the terrors of an Army; That after a
pacification greater preparations were made for war, whereby many Acts of
Hostility were done against us, both by Sea and Land; The Kingdom wanted
administration of Justice, and we constrained to take Arms for our defense;
That we were brought to this extreme and intolerable necessity, either to
maintain diverse Armies upon our Borders against Invasion from England or
Ireland, still to be deprived of the benefit of all the Courts of Justice, and
not only to maintain so many thousands as were spoiled of their ships and
goods, but to want all Commerce by Sea, to the undoing of Merchants, of
Saylors, and many other who lived by Fishing, and whose Callings are upholden
from hand to mouth by Sea trade: Any one of which evils is able in a short time
to bring the most potent Kingdom to Confusion, Ruin, and Desolation, how much
more all the three at one time combined to bring the Kingdom of Scotland to be
no more a Kingdom: Yet all these behoved We either to endure and under no
other hope, than of the perfect slavery of our selves, and our posterity, in
our souls, Lives, and means; Or to resolve to come into England, not to make
any Invasion, or with any purpose to fight, except we were forced, God is our
Judge, our actions are our witnesses, and England does now acknowledge the
truth, against all suspicions to the contrary, and against the impudent lies of
our enemies, but for our relief, defense, and preservation which we could find
by no other means, when we had essayed all means, and had at large expressed
our pungent, and pressing necessities, to the Kingdom and Parliament of
England. Since therefore the war on our part (which is no other but our coming
into England with a Guard) is defensive, and all men do acknowledge, that in
common equity, the defendant should not be suffered to perish in his just and
necessary defense, but that the persuer, whether by way of Legal process in
the time of Peace, or by way of violence and unjust invasion in the time of
war, ought to bear the charges of the defendant. We trust that your Lordships
will think that it is not against reason for us to demand some reparation of
this kind, and that the Parliament of England, by whose wisdom and justice
we have expected the redress of our wrongs, will take such course, as both may
in reason give us satisfaction, and may in the notable demonstration of their
Justice, serve most for their own honor.

Our earnestness in following this our Demand, does not so far wrong our
fight, and make us so undiscerning, as not to make a difference between the
Kingdom and Parliament of England, which did neither discern nor set forward
a War against us; And that prevalent faction of Prelates and Papists who have
moved every stone against us, and used all sorts of means, not only their
Counsels, Subsidies, and Forces, but their Church Canons and Prayers, for our
utter ruin; which makes them obnoxious to our just accusations, and guilty of
all the losses and wrongs which this time past we have sustained: Yet this we
desire your Lordships to consider, That the States of the Kingdom of Scotland
being assembled, did endeavor by their Declarations, Informations, and
Remonstrances, and by the proceedings of their Commissioners, to make known
unto the Council, Kingdom, and Parliament of England, and to forewarn them of
the mischief intended against both Kingdoms, in their Religion and Liberties,
by the Prelates and papists, to the end that our Invasion from England might
have been prevented, if by the prevalency of the faction it had been possible.
And therefore we may now with the greater reason and confidence press our
Demand; that your Lordships, the Parliament, the Kingdom, and the King
himself, may see us repaired in our losses, at the cost of that faction by
whose means we have sustained so much damage; And which, except they repent,
we find sorrow recompensed for our grief, torments for our toil, and an
infinite greater loss for the Temporal losses, they have brought upon a whole
Kingdom, which was dwelling by them in peace.

All the devices and doings of our common enemies, were to bear down the truth
of Religion, and the just liberties of the Subjects in both Kingdoms. They
were confident to bring this about one of two ways: Either by blocking us up
by Sea and Land, to constrain us to admit their will for a law both in Church
and Policy, and thus to make us a precedent for the like misery in England, or
by their Invasion of our Kingdom, to compel us furiously, and without order,
to break into England; That the two Nations once entered into a bloody War,
they might fish in our troubled waters, and catch their desired prey. But as we
declared before our coming: We trusted that God would turn their wisdom into
foolishness, and bring their devices upon their own pares, by our Intentions
and Resolutions to come into England, as among our Brethren, in the most
peaceable way that could stand with our safety, in respect of our common
enemies, to present our petitions for settling our peace, by a Parliament in
England, wherein the intentions and actions, both of our adversaries and ours,
might be brought to light; The Kings Majesty and the Kingdom right informed,
The Authors and Instruments of our divisions and troubles punished, All the
mischiefs of a National and doubtful war prevented, and Religion and
Liberty with greater peace and amity than ever before established, against all
the craft and violence of our enemies. This was our Declaration before we set
our England, from which our deportments since have not varied. And it has been
the Lords wonderful doing, by the wise counsels, and just proceedings of the
Parliament, to bring it in a great part to pass, and to give us lively hopes
of a happy conclusion: And therefore we will never doubt, but that the
Parliament in their wisdom and justice, will provide that a proportionable
part of the cost and charges of a work so great and so comfortable to both
Nations be born by the Delinquents there, that with the better conscience the
good people of England may sit under their own Vines and Fig Trees, refreshing
themselves, although upon our great pains and hazard, yet not altogether upon
our cost and charges, which we are not able to bear.

The Kingdom of England does know and confess that the innovation of religion
and liberties in Scotland, were not the principal design of our common
enemies, but that both in the intention of the workers, whose zeal was hottest
for settling their devices at home: and in the condition so the work, making us
whom they conceived to be the weaker for opposition to be nothing else but a
leading case for England. And that although by the power of God, which is made
perfect in weakness, they have found amongst us greater resistance than they
did fear, or either they or our selves could have apprehended; Yet as it has
been the will of God that we should endure the heat of the day, so in the
evening the precious wages of the vindication of religion, liberties, and laws
are to be received by both Kingdoms, and will enrich, we hope, to our
unspeakable joy, the present age, and the posterity with blessings that cannot
be valued, and with the good people of England, esteem more than treasures of
Gold, and willingly would have puachased with many thousands. We do not plead
that conscience and piety have moved some men to serve God upon their own cost,
and that justice and equity have directed others, where the harvest has been
common to consider the pains of laboring, and the charges of the sowing, yet
thus much may we say, that had a foreign enemy, intending to reduce the whole
Island into Popery, made the first assault upon her weakness, we nothing doubt
but the Kingdom of England, from their desire to preserve their Religion and
liberties, would have found the way to bear with us the expense of our
resistance and lawful defense, how much more being invaded, although not by
England, yet from England, by common enemies, seeking the same ends, we expect
to be helped and relieved.

We will never conceive that it is either the will or the weal and honor of
England, that we should go from so blessed a work; after so many grievous
sufferings, bearing on our backs the insupportable burdens of worldly
necessities and distresses, return to our Country empty, and exhausted, in
which the people of all ranks, sexes, and conditions, have spent themselves.
The possessions of every man who devoted himself heartily to this cause, are
burdened, not only with his own personal and particular expense, but with the
public and common charges; of which if there be no relief, neither can our
Kingdom have peace at home, nor any more credit for Commerce abroad: Nor will
it be possible for us, either to aid and assist our friends, or to resist and
oppose the restless and working wickedness of our enemies: The best sort will
lose much of the sweetness of the enjoying of their religion and liberties,
and others will run such ways, and undirect courses as their desperate
necessity will drive them into. We shall be but a burden to our selves, a
vexation unto others, of whose strength we desire to be a considerable part,
and a fit subject for our enemies to work upon for obtaining their now
disappointed, but never dying desires.

We will not allege the example of other Kingdoms, where the losses of
necessary and just defense had been repaired by the other party, nor will we
remember what help we have made, according to our abilities, to other reformed
Churches; and what the kingdom of England of old and of late has done to
Germany, France, and Holland; nor do we use so many words, that England may be
burdened, and we eased, or that this should be a matter of our Covetousness,
and not of their Justice and kindness; Justice, in respect of our adversaries,
who are the causes of the great misery and necessity to which we have been
brought: kindness, in the supply of our wants who have been tender of the
welfare of England as of our own, that by this equality and mutual respect,
both Nations may be supported in such strength and sufficiency, that we may be
the more serviceable to his Majesty; and abound in every good work, both
toward one another, and for the comfort and relief of the reformed Churches
beyond the Seas, that we may all bless God, and that the blessing of God may
be upon us all.

The English Peers demand concerning the preceding. Articles.
WHether this be a positive demand, or only an intimation of the charge,
thereby to induce the Kingdom of England to take your distressed estate into
consideration, and to afford you some friendly assistance.

The Scottish Commissioners answer to the demand.
WE would be no less willing to bear our losses if we had ability, than we
have been ready to undergo the hazard; But because the burden of the whole does
far exceed our strength. We have (as is more fully conceived in our Papers)
represented to your Lordships our charges and losses, not intending to demand a
total repairation, but of such a proportionable part, as that we may in some
measure bear the remanent, which we conceive your Lordships (having considered
our reasons) will judge to be a matter, not of covetousness, but of the said
Justice and kindness of the Kingdom of England.

Proposition of the Peers to proceed to the other Demands during the debate of
the Scottish losses.
THat in the Interim, whilst the Houses of Parliament take into consideration
your Demand of losses and damages, you proceed to settle the other Articles of
the peace and intercourse betwixt the two Kingdoms.

Answer to the Peers Demand.
WE have represented our losses, and thereby our distressed condition
ingenuously, and in the singleness of our hearts, with very great moderation,
passing over many things which to us are great burdens, that there might be no
difficulty or cause of delay on our part, hoping that the honorable Houses of
Parliament would thereby be moved at their first convenience, to take the
matter to their consideration.

We do not demand a total reparation, nor do we speak of the payment, till we
consult about the settling of a solid peace, at which time the ways of lifting
and paying the money, may be considered; We do only desire to know what
proportion may be expected. That this being once determined, and all
impediments arising from our bypast troubles, removed, we may with the greater
confidence, and more hearty consent on both sides, proceed to the establishing
of a firm and durable peace for time to come.

It is not unknown to your Lordships, what desperate desires, and miserable
hopes our adversaries have conceived of a breach upon this Article; And we do
foresee what snares to us, and difficulties to your Lordships may arise upon
the post poning and laying aside of this Article to the last place.

And therefore that our adversaries may be out of hope, and we out of fear, and
that the settling of peace may be the more easy: We are the more earnest, that
as the former articles have been, so this may be upon greater reasons
considered in its own place and order.

Your Lordships upon the occasion of some motions made heretofore of the
transposing of our Demands, do know, that not only the substance, but the
order of the propounding of them, is contained in our instructions. And as we
can alter nothing without warrant, the craving whereof will take more time than
the Houses of Parliament will bestow upon the consideration of this Article. So
are we acquainted with the reasons yet standing in force, which moved the
ordering of this Demand. And therefore let us still be earnest with your
Lordships, that there be no halting here, where the adversaries did most, and
we did least of all, by reason of the justice and kindness of the Houses of
Parliament expect it.

Resolved on the Question.
THat this House does conceive, that the sum of three hundredth thousand
pounds is a fit proportion for that friendly assistance and relief, formerly
thought fit to be given, toward the supply of the losses and necessities of
our Brethren of Scotland. And that this House will, in due time, take into
consideration the manner how, and the time when, the same shall be raised.

Answer of the Scots Commissioners.
WE entreat your Lordships, whose endeavors God has blessed in this great
work, to make known to the Parliament, that we do no less desire to show our
thankfulness for their friendly assistance and relief, than we have been
earnest in demanding the same. But the thankfulness which we conceive to be
due, does not consist in our affections or words at this time; but in the
mutual kindness, and real demonstrations to be expected from the whole
Kingdom of Scotland in all time coming: and that not only for the measure and
proportion, which the Parliament has conceived to be fit; and which (to begin
our thankfulness now) we do in name of the whole Kingdom cheerfully accept
of, but also for the kind and Christian manner of granting it unto us, as to
their Brethren, which adds a weight above many thousands, and cannot be
compensed but by paying their reciprocal love and duty of Brethren. And for the
resolution to consider in due time of the raising of the same for our relief,
which also makes the benefit to be double. This makes us confident that God
(whose working at this time has been wnoderfull) has decreed the peace and
amity of the two Kingdoms, and will remove all rubs out of the way, that our
enemies, will at last despair to divide us, when they see that God has joined
us in such a fraternity. And that divine providence will plentifully recompense
unto the Kingdom of England, this their justice and kindness, and unto
Scotland all their losses, which shall not by these and other means amongst our
selves be repaired, but by the rich and sweet blessings of the purity and power
of the Gospel, attended with the benefits of an unhappy and durable peace under
his Majesty's long and prosperous reign, and of his royal posterity to all
generations.

FINIS.

