Several Votes and Orders of the House of Parliament.
Die Martis 23. October, 1649.
REsolved by the Parliament, that after the charges now on the Public
Receipts at Goldsmiths-Hall, shall be satisfied and taken off, the whole
Revenue to be raised out of, and by the Regulation of the Sequestrations and
Compositions of Delinquents, and the Confiscations of their Estates, shall be
applied toward the maintenance of the Army, and other public charges,
toward the abatement of the Assessements.

Hen. Scobell. Cleric. Parliament.

Die Jovis, 25. Octobr. 1649.
REsolved by the Parliament, That the Committee of Goldsmiths-Hall, have power
to receive from any person, or persons, who shall present the same to them, any
Ordinance, Act, or Orders of Parliament, whereby any charge is imposed on the
Sequestrations of Delinquents Estates, and to examine the grounds and nature of
them, and present the state of those several engagements to the House.

Resolved, etc.
THat it be referred to the same Committee to take into consideration* the
several penalties incurred by Delinquents, by any Act or Ordinance of
Parliament, for not paying in their first or second payments, and to report the
state thereof to this House; And what effectual way may be taken, for bringing
in those Compositions, and penalties; And likewise to consider what Delinquents
Estates (who have not compounded) or neglected to pay in their moneys, are fit
to be Confiscated, and sold to the use of the Commonwealth, and report it to
the House.

ORdered by the Parliament, That all Treasurers, Sub-Collectors, Committees,
and other Officers of Sequestrations in the several Counties, be enjoined from
henceforth, not to make payment of any Rents, Issues, or Profits, of sequestered
Estates by them received, or to be received, to any other person or persons,
save unto the Treasurers of Goldsmiths-Hall, or such as those Treasurers there,
shall appoint; upon penalty of making good and answering out of their own
Estates, to the use of the Commonwealth, such sums of money, as they or any
of them respectively, shall so pay contrary to this order.

ORdered by the Parliament, That it be referred to the Committee at
Goldsmiths-Hall, to consider of a way how the Rents and Profits of all
sequestered Estates in the hands of any Collectors, Tenants, or other persons,
may be brought in to the use of the Commonwealth, and present the same to the
House.

Eodem die. Hen. Scobell, Cleric. Parliament.

Resolved, etc.
THat the whole Revenue of the Sequestrations, in the several Counties of the
Commonwealth, be brought into the public Treasury of Goldsmiths-Hall, there
to be disposed of for the maintenance of the Army, and for other public uses,
in order to abate the charges of Assessements for ease of the people.

Hen. Scobell, Cleric. Parliament.

London, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1649.


