TWO ORDINANCES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.

ONE For the abolishing of Archbishops and Bishops, within the Kingdom of
England and Dominion of Wales, and for settling of their Lands and Possessions
upon Trustees, for the use of the Commonwealth: The other, For securing of all
those that shall advance the two hundred thousand pound for the service of the
State.

Die Martii, October. 13. 1646.
Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliament that these Ordinances be
forthwith printed and published.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the King's Head in the Old Baily. October. 14,
1646.

Die Veneris, 9. October. 1646.
An Ordinance of Parliament, for the abolishing of Archbishops, and Bishops,
within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales, and for settling of their
Lands and Possessions, upon Trustees for the use of the Commonwealth.
FOr the abolishing of Archbishops, and Bishops and providing for the payment
of the just and necessary debts of the Kingdom, into which the same has bin
drawn by a War, mainely promoted by and in favor of the said Archbishops, and
Bishops, and other their Adherents, and Dependents. Be it Ordained, and it is
Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and by the authority
of the same; That the Name, Title, Style and Dignity of Archbishop of
Canterbury, Archbishop of York, Bishop of Winchester, Bishop of Duresme, and of
all other Bishops of any Bishoprics within the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales, be from and after the fifth day of September, in the year
of our Lord God 1646. wholly abolished and taken away, and are hereby abolished
and taken away, And all and every person and persons are and be thenceforth
disabled to hold the place, function or style of Archbishop or Bishop of any
Church, Sea, or Diocese now established or erected, or hereafter to be
established or erected within the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales or
Town of Barwick, or to use or put in ure any Archiepiscopall or Episcopal
Jurisdiction, or authority, by force of any Letters Patents from the Crown,
made or to be made, or by any other authority whatsoever, any Law Statute,
Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And be it further Ordained;
and it is hereby Ordained, That all Counties Palatine, Honors, Manors,
Lordships, Styles, Circuits, Precincts, Castles, Granges, Messuages, Mils,
Lands, Tenemen^s, Meadows, Pastures, Parsonage, appropriate Titles, Oblations,
Obventions, Pentions, Portions of Tithes, Parsonages, Vicarages, Churches,
Chappells, Advowsons, Donatives, Nominations, Rights of Patronage and
Presentation, Parkes, Woods, Rents, Reversions, Services, Annuities,
Franchises, Liberties, Privileges, Imunities, Rights of Action and of entry,
Interests, Titles of Entry, Conditions, Commons Court Leet, and Courts Baron;
and all other Possessions and Hereditaments whatsoever, with all and every of
their appurtenances of what nature or quality soever they be, which now are,
or at any time within ten years before the beginning of this present
Parliament, were belonging to the said Archbishops or Bishops. Archbishopricks,
or Bishoprics or any of them, which they or any of them had held and enjoyed
in the Right of their Archbishopricks, or Bishoprics dignities, Offices or
Places respectively; Together with all Charters, Deeds, Books, Accounts, Rolls,
and other Writings and Evidences whatsoever, concerning the Premises or any of
them; which do belong to any the said Archbishops, or Bishops, Archbishopricks,
and Bishoprics, are vested and settled, adjudged and deemed to be and are
hereby in the real and actual possession, and seizing of Thomas Adams
Alderman, now Lord Major of the City of London, Sir John Wollaston Knight, Sir
George Clarke Knight, John Langham Alderman, John Fowke Alderman, J^me^ B^nce
Alderman, William Gibbs Alderman, Samuel Avery Alderman, Thomas Noell,
Christopher Pack, John Bellamy, Edward Hooker, Thomas Arnold, Richard Glide,
William Hobson, Francis Ash, John Babington, Laurence Bromseild, Alexander
Jones, John Jones, Richard Venner, Stephen Estwick, Robert Mead, and James
Story; Their Heirs and Assigns; And that they the said, Thomas Adams, now
Lord Major of the City of London, Sir John Wollaston Knight, Sir George Clerk
Knight, John Langham Alderman, John Fowke Alderman, James Bunce Alderman,
William Gibbs Alderman, Samuel Avery Alderman, Thomas Noell, Christopher, Pack,
John Bellamy, Edward Hooker, Thomas Arnold, Richard Glyde, William Hobson,
Franois Ash, John Babington, Laurence Bromfield, Alexander Jones, John Jones
Richard Vennor, Stephen Estwick, Robert Mead, and James Story and the Surviver
and Survivers of them and their Heirs, and Assigns, shall hold all such the
premises as are now held of the King, of the King his Heirs and Successors,
as of His Manor of East Greenewich in Fee and Common soccage by fealty, and
the Annual Rents thereof respectively due, and payable within ten years last
past, before the beginning of this present Parliament, and not in capite, nor
by other Tenures or services; and shall hold all and every the premises, which
the said Archbishops, and Bishops held of any other, then of the King, by the
Rents, and other services therefore due, and of right accustomed; And the said
Trustees, their heirs, assigns, Formers, and Tenants, shall also have, hold,
and enjoy the premises, and every of them; freed, acquitted and discharged of,
and from the payment of Tithes, as fully as the said Archbishops, and Bishops
did hold and enjoy, or ought to hold and enjoy the same, at any time, during
the space of ten Years aforementioned, or any time since. And it is further by
the same authority ordained, that the said Trustees shall have power and are
authorized, to make, nominate and appoint from time to time, fit and able
persons, such as they shall think fit, to servey the premises in any County or
Counties of England and Wales, and to hold Court of serveys, and to demand,
receive, and in safe custody to put all the said Charters, deeds, books,
accounts rolls, writings, and evidences, that they may be put in such place in
the City of London, as the said persons before named or the Major part of them
shall order and appoint; And the said Trustees or any three or more of them as
aforesaid are hereby authorized and required to administer an Oath unto all and
every the Serveyors who shall take the same before he shall execute the said
place, in these words, viz.

I A. B. do swear, that I will faithfully and truly, according to my best
skill and knowledge execute the place of a Surveyor, according the purport of
an Ordinance, entitled, an Ordinance of Parliament for the abolishing of
ArchBishops and Bishops within the Kingdom of England and dominion of Wales,
and for settling of their Lands and possessions upon Trustees, for the use of
the Commonwealth. I shall use my best endeavor and skill to recover the
Estate therein mentioned, and every part thereof, which shall be given me in
charge, and to find out the true values and improvements thereof, and thereof
shall make true particulars, according to my best skill and cunning; and the
same from time to time deliver in writing close sealed up, unto the said
Trustees, or any two of them, according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Ordinance; and this I shall justly and faithfully execute, without any
gift or reward, directly or indirectly, from any person or persons whatsoever.

Nevertheless it is declared and ordained, that the said persons before named,
their Heirs and Assigns shall have and hold the premises and every of them
subject to such trusts and confidence as both Houses of Parliament shall
appoint, and declare and dispose of the same, and the Rents and Profits thereof
as the said Houses shall order and appoint; wherein the Lords and Commons do
declare, that due respect shall be had toward such persons and their Assigns
as are interressed in the premises by virtue of any demise heretofore made,
provided that the said Trustees their Heirs or Assigns shall not avoid any
leases made for any Term or estate, not exceeding three lives, or one and
twenty years in possession, or in such manner as that together with the lease
in being shall not exceed three lives or one and twenty years, so as the old
and accustomed rent and rents or so much rent and rents, as the ancient and
accustomed rent amounts unto, be reserved payable during the said voidable
Term and Terms or estates, and so as the said leases have not been procured
or purchased of any Bishop, since the first day of December, Anno Domine. 1641.
And be it further Ordained by the authority aforesaid, that if any Archbishop
or Bishop have at any time since the first day of December, Anno Domine. 1641.
made any grant or lease to any person or persons, body politic or Corporate
of any the Houses, Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, or any other the premises aforesaid, or any of them in right of
their Arch-Bishopricks or Bishoprics, the same grant or lease shall be utterly
void and of none effect; and the person or persons, body politic or
Corporate, unto whom the same was made shall have no benefit thereby; provided,
and be it ordained, and it is hereby ordained, that if any person or persons,
body politic or Corporate, at any time or times since the first day of
December, in the year of our Lord God, 1641. who had any grant or lease for
one or more life or lives, or any number of years of the premises or any part
thereof as is aforesaid and surrendered the same; To the end that he or they
might have a new grant or lease granted or made unto him or them, which by this
present Ordinance is made void, and the same was accordingly granted or made
unto him or them; That the said person or persons, body politic or Corporate,
who has so surrendered any such former grant or lease, his and their heirs,
successors, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall have, hold, possess
and enjoy such time and term as he or they had in any part of the said
premises by virtue of any such former grant or lease, in such sort and manner
as he or they should have had, held, and enjoyed the same, if no such surrender
had been made, subject nevertheless to such payments of rent and other
services, and such covenants, conditions and agreements as in the said former
Leases were expressed and contained, saving unto all and every person and
persons, their heirs, executors and administrators, bodies politic and
corporate, and their successors, other then the King, his heirs, and
successors, all Archbishops, Bishops, and other them the founders and donors as
founders and donors of and to the said Archbishopricks and Bishoprics, and
their heirs, all such right and title, interest, possession, rights in Law, or
equity, entries, annuities, commodities, fees, and other profits which they or
any of them before the said first day of December, 1641. ought lawfully to have
had in, or to the Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, as if this
Ordinance had never been had or made; also saving to all such person or persons
as have adheared to the Parliament, all such estate as he or they since the
first day of May, An. Dom. 1641. have forfeited or made forfitable for non
payment of Rent, or not performing of services to any Bishop or Bishops, except
it be in the case of a Lease made utterly void by this Ordinance, by reason the
same has been procured or purchased of any Bishop since the aforesaid first
day of December, Anno Dom. 1641. and likewise saving to Philip Earl of
Pembrook and Montgomery, and his Heirs, all such right as he and they have to
the Message called Durisme House, and certain Stables, late of the possession
of Thomas Bishop of Durisme, situate in the Parish of S. Martins in the
Fields, in the County of Middlefex, lately granted by Act of this present
Parliament; this present Ordinance or any thing therein contained in any wise
notwithstanding. Provided also, and it is hereby further Ordained by the
authority aforesaid, that all and singular Revenues, Rents, Issues, Fees,
Profits, sums of Money, and allowances whatsoever as have heretofore been,
and now ought to be paid, disposed, and allowed unto and for the maintenance of
any Grammar School, or Scholars, or for or toward the reparation of any
Church, Chapel, Highway, Causeway, Bridges, Schoole-house, Almes-house, or
any other charitable or pious use, or for maintaining of any Lecture, or
Preachers payable out of any the Premises, or which are chargeable, or ought
to issue out of, or to be paid for, or in respect of the said Premises, or any
of them shall be and continue to be paid and allowed as they were, and have
been heretofore, any thing in this present Ordinance to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding. And it is further Ordained, that the Sheriff of every
County and place, who is to attend the respective Courts where any Felony is to
betried and determined, shall provide and present to the Judge or Judges of
such Courts, some able and fit person to do such things as by the Office of
the Ordinary have been used to be done; which person and persons shall have
Authority, and are hereby enjoined to perform that service in such manner as
the respective Ordinaries heretofore have used to do. Provided also, that all
Commissions upon the Statute of charitable uses shall be valid, though the
Bishop be therein omitted, and the other Commissioners shall proceed therein as
fully as they might have heretofore done, when the Bishop was therein named;
and that all Issues triable by the Ordinary or Bishop, shall be tried by Jury
in usual course.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

Die Martis 13 October 1646.
THe Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament intending to raise the sum of
two hundred thousand pounds, for the present service of the State, for the
encouragement of such as shall advance any sum for and toward the same, and
to the intent they may have notice thereof do declare, That every person who
has advanced any Moneys, Plate, or Horses, with their Furniture and Arms,
upon the Public Faith, may for every sum of money he shall further lend,
for the advancement of the said sum, be secured a like sum more out of the
Receipt of the Grand Excise in course, and the sale of the Bishops Lands,
(except Advowsans and Impropriations) which shall first happen, together with
the interest after the rate of eight per centum, per annum, to be paid every
six months, out of the Receipts of the Excise, till Principal and Interest
be fully discharged. As for example, If there be owing to any person 100 l.
Principal, which, with Interest due thereupon, for three years past, will
make 124. l. he adventuring 124. l. more, may be secured for the whole 248. l.
as aforesaid, and so proportionably for a greater or lesser sum, and
according to the Interest due thereupon; And for the more speedy re-imbursing
of the said money secured and lent for the purpose aforesaid, That the said
Lands of the Bishops, (except before excepted) are Estated and made over to
such Feoffees for the speedy sale thereof, and such Treasurers for the Receipt
of the Moneys, as may give satisfaction to the Lenders. And the said Lords and
Commons do declare, That it shall and may be lawful for any person or persons,
to assign his Right and Interest in any sum or sums of money owing to him
upon the Public Faith, as aforesaid, to any person or persons that will
advance the like sum, in manner as is before expressed.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

