THREE ORDINANCES, DECLARATIONS and VOTES of the Lords and Commons assembled in
PARLIAMENT, For the present assessing of all such within the Cities of London,
Westminster, and the Borough of Southwark, that have not contributed upon the
propositions of both Houses of Parliament.

With the Additionall instructions to the Lord Mayor, etc. and the Assessors
and Collectors of the said Contributions.

Die Martis 20 December. 1642.

ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that these
Ordinances, Declarations and Votes be forthwith printed and published.

I. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, December. 22. 1642.

An Ordinance and Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
WHereas the King seduced by wicked Council has raised war against the
Parliament, and great numbers of Forces are daily raised under the command of
Papists and other ill affected persons, by Commissions from his Majesty; and
whereas diverse Delinquents are protected from public Justice by His Majesty's
Army, and sundry outrages and rapines are daily committed by the Soldiers of
the said Army, who have no respect to the Laws of God, or the Land: but burn
and plunder the houses and seize and destroy the persons and goods of diverse
His Majesty's good Subjects; And whereas for the maintenance of the said army
diverse assessements are made upon several Counties and his Majesty's Subjects
are compelled by the Soldiers to pay the same, which said army if it should
continue would soon ruin and waste the whole Kingdom, and overthrow Religion,
Law, and Liberty; For suppressing of which said army and ill affected persons
there is no probable way under God but by the army raised by authority of the
Parliament; which said army so raised cannot be maintained without great sums
of money, yet for raising such sums by reason of his Majesty's withdrawing
himself from the advice of the Parliament, there can be no act of Parliament
passed with his Majesty's assent, albeit there is great Justice that the said
moneys should be raised. The Lords and Commons in Parliament having taken the
same into their serious consideration, and knowing that the said army so raised
by them has been hitherto for the most part maintained by the voluntary
contributions of diverse well affected persons, who have freely contributed
according to their abilities.

But considering there are diverse others within the Cities of London, and
Westminster, and the Suburbs of the same, and also within the Borough of
Southwarke, that have not contributed at all toward the maintenance of the
said army, or if they have, yet, not answerable to their Estates, who
notwithstanding receive benefit and protection by the same army as well as any
others, and therefore it is most just that they should as well as others be
charged to contribute to the maintenance thereof.

Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, and
by authority thereof; That Isaac Pennington Lord Major of the City of London,
Sir John Wollaston Knight and Alderman, Alderman Towes, Alderman Warner,
Alderman Andrews, Alderman Chambers, Alderman Fowke, Sir Thomas Soams Knight
and Alderman, Samuel Vassell, John Venn, Morris Thompson, and Richard Warring,
Citizens; or any four of them shall hereby have power and authority to
nominate, and appoint in every Ward within the City of London, fix such persons
as they, or any four of them, shall think fit, which said six so nominated,
or any four of them, shall hereby have power to enquire of any that shall
remain, or be within the said several Wards that have not contributed upon
the propositions of both houses of parliament, concerning the raising of money,
plate, horse, horsemen, and arms, for defense of the King and both houses of
parliament, and also of such as are able men, that have contributed, yet not
according to their estates and abilities. And the said six persons so nominated
or any four of them within their several and respective Wards and limits,
shall have power to assesse such person and persons, as are of ability and have
not contributed, and also such as have contributed, yet not according to their
ability, to pay such sum or sums of money according to their estates, as the
said assessors or any four of them shall think fit and reasonable, so as the
same exceed not the twentieth part of their estates, and to nominate and
appoint fit persons for the collection thereof: and if any person so assessed
shall refuse to pay the money assessed upon him, It shall be lawful to and for
the said assessors and collectors, or any of them to leavy the said sum so
assessed by way of distress and sale of the goods of the person so assessed,
and refusing; and if any person so distreined shall make resistance, It shall
be lawful to and for the respective assessors and collectors or any of them,
to call to their assistance any the Trained bands of the said City of London,
or any other his Majesty's Subjects, who are hereby required to be aiding and
assisting to the said assessors and collectors in the premises; and it is
hereby farther ordained, that the respective Burgesses of Westminster and
Southwarke, together with the several Committees appointed for the
subscriptions of money, plate, horse, horsemen, and arms within the said City
and Borough, shall respectively have power hereby to nominate Sessors for the
same City and Borough, in such manner as the Lord Major, etc. has for the City
of London, and the said assessors or any four of them to name Collectors as
aforesaid; Which said assessors and Collectors shall have the same power
respectively within their respective limits, as those to be nominated within
the said City of London have hereby limited to them. And for the Suburbs of
London and Westminster, the respective Knights of the shire where the said
suburbs are, shall have hereby the like power to name assessors, and they so
named, or any four of them, and the collectors by them to be nominated, or any
of them within their respective limits, shall have the like power respectively,
as the assessors and collectors for London have by virtue of this Ordinance.
And be it ordained that the sums so assessed and levied as aforesaid shall be
paid in at Guild Hall London to the hands of Sir John Wollaston Knight, John
Warner, John Towes and Thomas Andrews Aldermen, or any two of them; and the
assessors and collectors to be nominated by virtue hereof shall weekly report
to the committee of the House of Commons, for the propositions aforesaid what
sums of money have bin assessed, and what sums have bin levied weekly
according to the purport hereof, and the said moneys so levied and paid in
shall be issued forth in such sort as the other moneys raised upon the
propositions aforesaid, and not otherwise.

Die Martis, 29 November. 1642.
WHereas a late Ordinance is passed by both houses of Parliament for the
reasons therein declared, for the assessing of all such persons within the
Cities of London and Westminster, and the Suburbs thereof, with the Borough of
Southwarke, as have not contributed upon the propositions of both houses of
parliament, for raising of money, plate, horse, horsemen, and arms, for
defense of the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, or have not contributed
proportionably to their estates and abilities. And whereas it is though fit
that some additions be made for further explanation and better execution of the
said Ordinance: Be it further ordained and declared by the Lords and Commons
assembled in parliament, that such persons as shall be assessed by the
respective assessors in the said Ordinance appointed, and shall within six
days next after notice given to them, or left at their several houses within
the said Cities, Suburbs, or Borrough, pay in the one moity of the said sums of
money so assessed and within twelve days after the said notice given as
aforesaid, the other moity thereof, unto the Treasurers of money and plate in
Guild Hall London, or unto the Collectors appointed by the said Ordinance,
respectively to receive the same, that then the said treasurers, or collectors,
shall give acquitances for the same, as has been done to such who have lent
moneys or plate, upon the propositions of both houses as aforesaid. And the
said moneys so paid to the said treasurers, or to the said several Collectors,
shall be repaid upon the public Faith, as all other moneys lent upon the said
propositions of both houses. And as for those who shall so far discover their
disaffection, as not to bring in the several sums of money so assessed upon
them to the persons before appointed, within the times limited, that then their
goods shall be distrained and sold according to the said Ordinance. And if no
sufficient distress be found, that then the said Collectors shall respectively
have power to enquire of any sum or sums of money due, or to be due unto them
respectively so assessed from any person or persons for any Rents, tithes,
Goods, or Debts, or for any other thing or cause whatsoever.

And the said respective Collectors shall have power by virtue of this
Ordinance, to receive all or any part of the said sums due, or to be due unto
them, or any of them so assessed, until the full value of the sum or sums so
assessed, and the charges in levying and recovering of the same shall be
received and satified; And the said respective Collectors shall have further
power to compound for any of the said Rents, Tithes, Goods or Debts, due unto
the said person so assessed respectively as aforesaid, with any person or
persons by whom the said Rents, Tithes, Goods, or Debts, are or shall be owing,
as also to give full and ample discharge for the Money by them so received,
upon composition or otherwise, which discharges shall be good and effectual to
all intents and purposes. And if the sum or sums of Money so assessed cannot be
levied by any of these means or ways, then the persons so respectively
assessed, shall be imprisoned in such places of this Kingdom, and for so long
time as the Committee of the House of Commons for the Examinations, shall
appoint and order: and the families of all such persons so imprisoned, shall no
longer remain within the Cities of London and Westminster, the Suburbs, and the
Counties adjacent.

And be it further ordained, that all and every the assessors and Collectors,
of the said several sums, shall have the protection of both Houses of
Parliament, for their indemnity in this service, and receive such reasonable
allowances for their pains taken, and charges disbursed or to be disbursed
therein as the Committee of Lords and Commons for advance of Money and other
necessaries for the army, raised by the Parliament, shall apportion and appoint.

A Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
Die Mercurii, 7 December. 1642.
WHereas in and by a late Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, It is
ordained for the cause therein expressed, that all persons of ability within
the Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs of the same; and also within
the Borough of Southwark, who have not at all, or not answerable to their
estates, contributed toward the maintenance of the army raised by authority of
this present Parliament, shall be assessed in such manner and proportion as in
the said Ordinance is directed; of which the Lords and Commons now assembled in
Parliament do expect a vigorous and speedy execution: but finding some doubt to
be raised upon the point of time, whether that clause of not contributing at
all, or not in proportion to their estates, be meant of not contributing before
the passing of the said Ordinance in both houses of Parliament, or to be
extended to any time before the assessing of them, and giving them notice of
it, in such manner as in the said Ordinance is appointed. We the said Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, do hereby declare, That if any person or
persons who have not contributed at all, or not answerable to their estates,
shall before any assessement of them be made, and notice thereof left at their
Houses, according to the said Ordinance, contribute toward the maintenance of
the said Army, by loan or otherwise, according to their several and
respective estates, as others well-affected have already done, without evasion
or collusion, every such person so contributing, shall be accepted as doing an
acceptable service to the Commonwealth, and be freed from the payment of all
and every tax and assessement of him to be made by the Assessors, authorized by
the said Ordinance for that purpose; as likewise from all distresses,
imprisonment, and other Punishments to be inflicted by virtue of the said
Ordinance, or any addition to, or explanation made of it, for the not paying of
any such assessements: And hereof all such Assessors and Collectors, are hereby
required to take notice. And for this end, It is ordered by the said Lords and
Commons, that this Declaration be forthwith printed and published.

VOTES Of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, for the better
enabling of the Lord Major to put their said Ordinance in execution.
Die Mercurii, 7. December. 1642.
Resolved upon the Question.

THat the Lord Major and other persons named in the Ordinance, shall have power
to nominate and appoint six other persons to be Assessors in the several Wards
of Farringdon without and Cripplegate, and as many in other Wards as shall be
cause.

Resolved upon the question.

THat the Lord Major, and the other persons named in the said Ordinance, shall
have power to nominate two persons to be Assessors in the several privileged
places within the several Wards.

Die Mercurii 14. December. 1642. An Ordinance, made by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled, for the better and more speedy execution of the late
Ordinance of November. 29. 1642.
WHereas according to an Ordinance and Declaration of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament, of the 29 of November last, the persons whose names
are subscribed, are appointed and since approved of by both Houses of
Parliament, to be Assessors and Collectors of It is now ordered by the Lords
and Commons assembled in Parliament. And the said persons, are hereby required
and authorized, upon the Receipt of this order, forthwith to proceed,
effectually and diligently, to execute the said Ordinance, according to the
tenor thereof, in every behalf, without omission, favor, dread, malice, or
any other thing, to be attempted, by them, or any of them, to the contrary
thereof: And for that end, It is further ordained and declared: That the said
assessors shall hereby have authority to call before them, as well such
persons, as they shall think fit to their assistance: as also, all or any such
persons, as are to be assessed. And the said assessors shall appoint the said
collectors in their several Divisions and Precincts, for gathering the sums
that shall be assessed; and give notice of the sum and sums of money, at which
every person in their divisions and precincts shall be particularly assessed.

And whereas it is expressed, in the said Ordinance, (so as the assessement
exceed not the twentieth part of the estates of the persons to be assessed) It
is hereby declared, for prevention of all inequality in the said assessement:
That if the said assessors, or any four of them, proceeding in their
assessement according to their judgments, and best information, shall assesse
any person above the twentieth part of his estate; and that the person so
assessed, does find himself grieved with the same assessing or rating; that
then the party so assessed (paying one moity of the sum he shall be assessed
at, within six days next after assessement, and notice thereof given, or left
at the dwelling house of the party so assessed) may, (during six days, after
his having paid the said moity, as aforesaid) have liberty, and may address
himself for remedy and relief unto the persons nominated by the said Ordinance,
to nominate the assessors, or any four of them and may tender his voluntary
oath or protestation to such persons that he is over-rated, and of the true
value of his estate (if he please) and after due examination, and perfect
knowledge thereof had and perceived; the said persons authorized to nominate
assessors as aforesaid, or any four of them, shall hereby have power to order
such abatement of the said assessement, according as shall appear unto them
just and equal, upon the same examination. And it is hereby further Ordained
and Declared, that the persons so assessed and sworn, shall within three days
next after the order of abatement, in that behalf made, paid unto, or be repaid
by the Treasurers who received the other moity of such assessement, such sum or
sums of money, as by the said order of abatement shall be appointed: and in case
the said person, so sworn and assessed, shall not pay within the said three
days next after order of abatement made, the sum thereby ordered to be paid;
that then the same sum shall be recovered by distress or otherwise, as is
provided in the said Ordinance of the 29. of November last, (in case the sums
assessed shall not be paid into the Guildhall London, according to the true
meaning of the same) And if it be proved by witnesses, or by the parties own
confession, or other lawful ways or means, within six months after any such
oath made, that the same person so rated and sworn, was of any better or
greater estate, in lands, goods, or other things above specified, at the time
of the making the said Ordinance, then the said person so sworn did declare
upon his oath; That then every person so offending, shall lose and forfeit so
much lawful money of England, as he the same person so sworn was first
assessed at or taxed to pay, by virtue of the Ordinance aforesaid: to be
recovered by distress or otherwise, as is provided in the said Ordinance of
the 29. of November last, (in case the sums of money to be assessed by virtue
of the said Ordinance shall not be paid into the Guildhall London, according to
the true meaning of the same) And it is hereby further ordained and declared,
That the said assessors and collectors shall incur no damage by reason of
their over-valuing the estate of any person assessed, or to be assessed, or
recovering, or receiving the same by virtue of the Ordinance aforesaid, unless
some corruption or indirect carriage therein, shall be proved in Parliament
against them.

Die Martis, 20. December. 1642.
WHereas several Ordinances of both Houses of Parliament of the 29 of November
last, and of the 7. and 14. of this instant December, were passed concerning
the assessing such persons as are of ability, as in the said Ordinances do and
may appear, It is now further Ordained and Declared by the Lords and Commons
in Parliament assembled, That the several and respective Assessors shall not
assesse any of the Members of either of the Houses of Parliament, or the
Assistants of the House of Peers, any thing in the preceding forementioned
Ordinances, or any of them, to the contrary notwithstanding. But that the
members of either House shall be assessed by that House whereof they are
members, and the Assistants of the Peers by the House of Peers.

FINIS.

