THREE ORDINANCES OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament.

For the better observation of the monthly Fast; and more especially the next
Wednesday, commonly called the Feast of the Nativity of Christ, Thorowout the
Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales.

Die Jovis, 19 December. 1644.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed, and published on the next Lords day in all the Churches and Chapels
within the line of communication, and bills of mortality.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for I. Wright in the Old baily, December. 21. 1644.

Die Iovis, 19 December. 1644.
WHereas some doubts have been raised whether the next Fast shall be
celebrated, because it falls on the day which heretofore was usually called
the feast of the Nativity of our Savior, The Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled do order and ordain that public notice be given that the Fast
appointed to be kept on the last Wednesday in every month ought to be observed
until it be otherwise ordered by both houses of Parliament: And that this day
in particular is to be kept with the more solemn humiliation, because it may
call to remembrance our sins, and the sins of our forefathers, who have
turned this Feast, pretending the Memory of Christ, into an extreme
forgetfulness of him, by giving liberty to carnal and sensual delights,
being contrary to the life which Christ himself led here upon earth, and to
the spiritual life of Christ in our souls, for the sanctifying and saving
whereof Christ was pleased both to take a humane life, and to lay it down
again.

An Ordinnnce of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, for the better
observation of the monthly Fast. 24 Aug. 1642.
Whereas the Kings most excellent Majesty, upon the request of the Lords and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by and with their advise and
consent, considering the lamentable and distressed condition of His good
Subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland; (that there may be a general humiliation
of all the estates of this Kingdom before Almighty God in Fasting and Prayer)
was graciously pleased to Command the keeping of a monthly Fast; and to the
end that all persons might the better take notice thereof (and to leave such
without excuse as should not duly keep and observe the same) did afterward by
his Proclamation of the 8 of January 1641 appoint that the same should be
generally, publicly, and solemnly holden and kept, as well by abstinence from
Food, as by public Prayers, Preaching, and Hearing of the Word of God, and
other Religious and holy Duties in all Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish
Churches, and Chapels within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales
(without any exception) on the last Wednesday of every Month, to continue
during the troubles in the said Kingdom of Ireland: All which His Majesty did
straightly charge and command should be reverently and devoutly performed by all
His Subjects, as they desire the blessing of Almighty God, and would avoid his
heavy indignation against this Land and People; and upon pain of such
punishments as may justly be inflicted upon all such as shall contemn or
neglect so Religious a work and duty.

And whereas the Lords and Commons in both Houses of Parliament, have received
diverse Informations from several parts of this Kingdom and Dominion of Wales,
of the great neglect of the due observation and keeping of the said Fast upon
the days appointed, and of the prophanations of the same by many irreligious,
iil-affected, loose, and scandalous persons, as well of the Clergy as others,
who are so far from afflicting their souls, and loosing the hands of
wickedness, as that they provoke the wrath of Almighty God, and make so pious
a means to procure his blessings, the occasion of greater Judgments.

For the prevention whereof for time to come, the Lords and Commons do Order,
Declare, Ordain, that in all and every the Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish
Churches, and Chapels within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales,
(without any exception) upon every Lords day, next and immediately before any
the days appointed for the said public Fast, the Parson Vicar, Curate, or
Minister, that upon that day shall officiate, or exercise in any of the said
Cathedrals Collegiate, Parish Churches, or Chapels, shall give public notice
in every of the said Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches, or Chapels
respectively, of the Fast day next ensuing immediately after Sermon or Prayer
ended in the forenoon before the Congregation be dismissed, earnestly exhorting
and persuading all the people to the solemn due keeping and religious
observation of the whole day appointed for the said Fast, and that they would
repair to some Church or Chapel, there diligently and reverently to attend
all such holy Duties as shall be used in the observance of the same; that they
forbear to use all manner of Sports and Pastimes whatsoever, and their
ordinary Trades and Callings upon the said day, as well Carriers, Waggoners,
Carters, Waynmen, Drovers, Butchers, Hucksters, Shopkeepers, Laborers, or any
other using any Art, Trade, Mystery, or Manual Occupation whatsoever, and that
all Vintuers, Taverners, Alehouse-keepers, and keepers of Victualling-houses,
do forbear to keep open their Doors, Bulks, or Shops, or to sell or utter
(except in cases of extreme necessity) any Wine, Beer, Ale, or victual, till
the public Excercises, and religious Duties of that day in the respective
Cathedrals, Collegiate, Parish Churches and Chapels be past and over.

And lastly, all and every the Justices of the Peace, Majors, Bailiffes,
Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officers inhabiting or residing within
the limits or precincts of any such Cathedral Collegiate, Parish Church or
Chapel, are hereby required to take special notice as well of such Parsons,
Vicar, Curate, or other Minister that ought to officiate in any of the said
Cathedrals, Collegiate, and Parish Churches or Chapels, upon any such day
appointed for any such Fast, that shall either refuse or neglect to do the
same, or not do or cause the same to be done in that religious and solemn
manner as it ought to be, or that shall refuse to give notice of the Fast day
at the time, and in the manner as aforesaid, and forthwith to return their
names, and the names of all such (from time to time) as shall wilfully offend
herein, in contempt of the Laws, His Majesty, and both Houses of Parliament,
unto some one or more of the Knights, Citizens, or Burgesses that serve for the
County where such offense is or shall be committed, that some speedy course may
be taken for the severe punishing of such as shall offend herein, according to
the Laws.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament, have made an Ordinance for the
more strict and solemn keeping of the days of public Fast, which are not by
all persons duly observed, even in these times of public calamity, to the
great dishonor of God, and the contempt of the authority of both houses of
Parliament.

Now that more particular notice may be given to all such that shall offend
herein, before any exemplary punishment be inflicted upon them, It is ordered
by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that all Constables (or their deputies
shall the day before every public Fast repair to every house within their
several and respective Liberties, and charge all persons, that they strictly
observe the Fast, according to the directions in the said Ordinance.

And they shall upon the said days of the public Fast, walk through their
said Liberties, diligently searching for, and taking notice of all persons, who
either by following the work of their calling, or sitting in Tavernes,
Victualling, or Alehouses, or any other ways shall not duly observe the same,
and they are hereby required, to return the names of all such persons as they
shall find so offending, as also such informations as they shall receive
against any other persons within their Liberties guilty of the least offense
unto the Committee for Examinations, that so they may be proceeded against for
the contempt of the said Ordinance, and all Constables are to observe these
directions from time to time, so long as the said public Fast shall be kept,
without expecting any further Order.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

