VOTES CONCERNING THE POSTMASTER.

ALSO RVLES OF DIRECTION FOR The Government of Soldiers, made by Captain
DOVVET, and delivered to his Troopers.

With his Speech for their Observance.

LONDON: Printed for H: Blunden, August 22.

1642.

VOTES.
Upon Mr Prideaux Report from the Committee, for the Post-Masters, It was
resolved upon the Question, That the Taking of the several Letters in this
Case from the several Carriers, and the several restraints, imprisonments of
Dover, Chapman, Cotton, and Mackcarell, is against the Law and Liberty and
freedom of the Subject.

Resolved, etc. That these several persons ought to have Reparations and
Damages, from Sir John Cook, and Sir Francis VVindibanke, then Secretaries of
State, and Master VVitherings respectively.

Resolved. etc. That Sir John Cook, Sir Francis VVindibanke, and Master
VVitherings are Delinquents.

AN ORDER MADE BY CAPTAIN DOWET, FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF HIS SOVLDIERS.
GEntlemen,
being as it has pleased his Excellency, the Earl of Essex General, to
appoint me to be your Captain. Therefore I humbly desire you all to do your
endeavors to observe my Commands; which Command shall never be but for the
good and service of His Majesty, and High Court of Parliament, and your own
safeties, against those malignant parties which does employ their industries to
breed dissension between his Majesty and his great Council, which at length
will prove a destruction to his people, if God does not put his hand to the
Cause. Therefore to render you more capable for this employment, I have here
set part of the Rules which you are to observe under me.

1 First, That no man shall take the Name of the Lord in vain, or any other
profane Oath.

2 That all men shall observe the Lords day, excepting when you are upon duty.

3 That no man shall be drunk or disorder himself.

4 That no man shall bring, or cause to be brought, any lewd or uncivil women
in his Quarter.

5 That no man shall abuse his fellows by ill language, or stroke, or give them
the lie.

6 That none shall play at Cards or Dice, or any Game which is not lawful. And
if any plays above half a Crown at any game which is lawful, both winner and
looser shall be punished, and the money distributed to those that gives notice
of their gaming.

7 That every man shall give notice to his Officers, what quarrel there is
amongst the Troopers; and in case that any knows of the quarrel and does not
hinder it, and give intelligence to the Officers, both quarreller and spectator
shall be punished.

8 That all men shall repair to their lodging after the setting of the Watch,
which will be performed by the sound of the Trumpet or the touling of the Bell.

9 That no man upon a March shall offer to stay behind, or march before the
Troop, or go out of his Quarter without license of the Officers.

10 That no man shall offer to steal one from another, or any body else,
especially any Tackling belonging to Horse or Armor.

11 That no man shall abate the allowance of his Horse, or sell or pawn any of
his Armor.

12 That no man shall give any uncivil language in the quarters where they
lodge, or as they march, especially to a woman or maid.

13 That all men shall pay for whatsoever they call for, or have from their
Landlord or parts where they are billetted.

14 That none shall offer to shoot his Pistol or Carabine upon exercising,
especially upon the Watch without command.

15 That all men shall give notice to their Officers, if they hear of any that
means to fall off from the service.

16 That all men shall obey the command of the Officers from the highest to the
lowest.

17 That every man shall take notice that he is bound to do his endeavor to
bring to condign punishment any that transgresses in these Articles; And if
they know and do not give intelligence of it, they shall be as guilty as the
offenders.

Gentlemen, I am confident that he which desires to do his Country service,
and expect hereafter to deserve to be a Commander, shall not find this Rule
hard to be observed; he that is nobly minded shall find it easy.

One thing more which I desire of you all is, that you may love one another;
for where there is a true love and unity, there is a blessing of God: And where
there is a blessing of God; there can happen no evil.

Secondly, that you be careful of your horses and armor; for if you neglect
that, you can do no good service.

Thirdly, that you live peaceably with all those that stands for King and
Parliament; fly discentions amongst your selves, and be contented with your
pay, and extort upon no man. Fly from vices, and no doubt God shall bless all
that you shall undertake. And more assure your selves, if you do your
endeavors to follow these rules here mentioned, that nothing shall be lacking
of my part to do you good, and to further you in it.

If there be any of you that thinks he shall not be able to observe this, and
that this is too exact, let him freely speak before his name be listed, and he
shall have free leave to change Troop, and to put himself under the Command of
any other Captain.

FINIS.

