The VOTES agreed on by the LORDS and COMMONS concerning a TREATY; And their
Desire of a Safe Conduct for a Committee named by them in the Earl of
Manchesters Letter of the 28. of Febr. to the Lord of Falkland;

With His MAJESTY'S gracious Answer thereunto: And His MAJESTY'S Safe Conduct.

Also the ARTICLES of both Houses of Parliament concerning a Cessation, With a
Letter of the 28. of February from the said Earl of Manchester to the said Lord
Viscount of Falkland, wherein they were enclosed;

Together with His MAJESTY'S gracious ANSWER to the same.

LONDON: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. MDCXLII.

Agreed on by the LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament;
THat there shall be a Treaty upon the Propositions before the disbanding; in
which Treaty, so much of His Majesty's Propositions as concerns the Magazines,
Forts and Ships; and the Proposition of both Houses for the Disbanding of the
Armies, shall be first Treated of, and Concluded on, before the proceeding to
Treat upon any of the other Propositions.

And that this Treaty shall begin the fourth of March, or sooner if it may be,
and that from the beginning of the Treaty the time may not exceed twenty days.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parl.

MY LORD,
I Am commanded by the Lords in Parliament, to desire your Lordship to acquaint
His Majesty, that both Houses of Parliament having appointed a Committee to
Treat with His Majesty, They desire that a Safe Conduct may be granted unto
them by His Majesty; The number and the names of the Committee your Lordship
shall receive here enclosed.

My Lord, I am Your Lordships humble servant Manchester Speaker of the House of
Peers pro tempore.
Febr. 28.
For the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount Falkland, Principal Secretary to
His Majesty.
Manchester.
E. of Northumberland. M. Peirpoint. Sir Jo. Holland. L. Vis. Say and Seal.
Sir William Ermyne. M. VVhitlock.


royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
HIs Majesty has sent a safe Conduct for the Earl of Northumberland, Master
Peirpoint, Sir William Ermyne, Sir John Holland, and Master Whitlock, but has
not admitted the Lord Say to attend Him, as being excepted against by name in
His Proclamation at Oxford, of the third of November, and by Writ to the
Sheriff proclaimed then in that County, in which His Majesty's intention is
declared to proceed against him as a person guilty of high Treason, and so
falling to be within the case of Sir John Evelyn, who upon the same exception
was not admitted to attend His Majesty with the rest of the Committee at
Colebroke in November last: But His Majesty does signify, that in case the
House shall think fit to send any other person in the place of the Lord Say,
that is not included in the like exception, His Majesty has commanded all His
Officers, Soldiers, and other Subjects, to suffer him as freely to pass and
repasse, as if his name had been particularly comprised in this safe Conduct.

His Majesty is content that His Proposition concerning the Magazines, Forts,
Ships, and Revenue, and the Proposition of both Houses for the disbanding of
the Armies, shall be first Treated of, and agreed of, before the proceeding to
Treat upon any of the other Propositions; And that after, the second of His
Majesty's, and the second of theirs be Treated on, and agreed of, and so on in
the same order; And that from the beginning of the Treaty the time may not
exceed twenty days, in which He hopes a full Peace and right Understanding may
be established thorowout the Kingdom.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT
Our Will and Pleasure is, And We do hereby straightly charge and command all the
Officers and Soldiers of Our present Army, and all Our Ministers and Subjects
whatsoever, to Permit and suffer Our Right Trusty and Right Welbeloved Cousin
and Counselor Algernon Earl of Northumberland, and Our Trusty and Welbeloved
William Peirpoint Esquire, Sir William Ermyne, and Sir John Holland Knights,
and Bulstrode Whitlock Esquire, together with their servants to pass and
repasse to and from Us without any Let or Hinderance, they being now sent to
attend Us from Our two Houses of Parliament.

This Our safe Conduct under Our Sign Manual and Royal Signet, We charge and
command them and every of them punctually to observe and obey, as they will
Answer the contrary at their utmost Perils.

Given at Our Court at Oxford the third of March. 1642.
WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament, out of a tender sense of the
present Miseries and Distractions of the Kingdom, and for the obtaining and
settling of a happy Peace betwixt His Majesty and His People, have humbly
presented to His Majesty diverse Propositions, to which He has been pleased to
make this Return, That His desire was that a speedy Time and Place might be
appointed for the discussing of those Propositions, and likewise some others
proposed by His Majesty: It is thereupon agreed in both Houses, That a
Committee of both Houses shall be appointed to attend His Majesty, on, or
before the fourth of March, if His Majesty shall so please, to endeavor to
give Him all humble and fit satisfaction concerning the said Propositions, both
His Majesty's, and their own. And whereas for the more speedy removal of the
bloody and miserable Effects of War, His Majesty has likewise been graciously
pleased, by a late Message to signify His desire, That for avoiding all
intervening accidents of War, which might interrupt this Treaty, there might be
a Cessation of Arms under such particular Conditions and Limitations as should
be agreed on, their humble Desires therein concurring with His Majesty's, it is
by them assented and agreed, That a Cessation of Arms in order to such a Treaty
as is resolved upon by both Houses of Parliament may be enjoined to all the
Armies and Forces now afoot in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of Wales,
on either side, under the Restrictions and Limitations hereafter following; And
that neither side shall be bound or limited by this Cessation in any otherwise,
or to any other purpose, then is hereafter expressed.

I. THat all manner of Arms, Ammunition, Victuals, Money, Bullion, and all
other Commodities passing without such a safe Conduct as may warrant their
Passage, may be stayed, and seized on, as if no such Cessation were agreed on
at all.

II. That all manner of Persons passing without such a safe Conduct as is
mentioned in the Article next going before, shall be apprehended and detained,
as if no such Cessation were agreed on at all.

III. That His Majesty's Forces in Oxfordshire shall advance no nearer to
Windsor then VVheatly; and in Buckinghamshire, no nearer to Aylesbury then
Brill; and that in Berkshire the Forces respectively shall not advance nearer
the one to the other then now they are: And that the Parliament Forces in
Oxfordshire shall Advance no nearer to Oxford then Henley; and those in
Buckinghamshire no nearer to Oxford then Aylesbury: And that His Majesty's
Forces shall take no new Quarters above twelve miles from Oxford any way; and
that the Parliament Forces shall take no new Quarters above twelve miles from
Windsor any way.

IIII. That no Siege shall be begun, or continued against Gloucester, and that
His Majesty's Forces now employed in the Siege, shall return to Cirencester and
Malmsbury, or to Oxford, as shall be most for their conveniencie; And the
Parliament Forces which are in Gloucestershire, shall remain in the Cities of
Gloucester, Bristoll, and the Castle and Town of Berkley, or retire nearer to
Windsor, as they shall see cause; And that those of Wales which are drawn to
Gloucester shall return into their Quarters where they were before they drew
down to Gloucestershire.

V. That in case it be pretended on either side, that the Cessation is
violated, no Act of Hostility is immediately to follow; but first the party
complaining is to acquaint the Lord General on the other side, and to allow
three days after notice given for satisfaction; and in case satisfaction be
not given or accepted, then five days notice to be given before Hostility
begin: And the like to be observed in the remoter Armies, by the Commanders in
chief.

VI. Lastly, I hat all other forces in the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, not before mentioned, shall remain in the same Quarters and Places, as
they are at the time of the publishing of this Cessation, and under the same
Conditions as are mentioned in the Articles before: And that this Cessation
shall not extend to restrain the setting forth or employing of any ships for
the defense of His Majesty's Dominions.

All which they humbly desire His Majesty will be pleased to ratify and
confirm; And that this Cessation may begin upon the fourth of March next, or
sooner, if it may be, and continue until the five and twentieth of the same
month; And in the mean time to be published to the Commanders, Officers, and
Soldiers, and all other His Majesty's loving Subjects on either side; And that
the Treaty intended may commence upon the Fourth of March next, or sooner, if
it may be, and the continuance thereof not to exceed twenty days.

Jo. Brown Cler. Parl.

MY LORD,
I Am commanded by the Lords in Parliament to desire your Lordship to present
unto His Majesty these enclosed Articles concerning a Cessation of Arms, to
which they desire His Majesty's Answer, as soon as it may stand with His
Conveniencie. I am likewise commanded to send unto your Lordship the
Resolutions of both Houses, that His Majesty may see the ground of their
desires for a present Cessation of Arms. My Lord, this is that I have in
command, who am

Feb. 28. Your Lordships humble servant Manchester Speaker of the House of
Peers pro tempore.

For the Lord Viscount Falkland.
HIs Majesty hoped the Treaty would have been begun, and the Cessation agreed
on long since, and that much might in this time have been concluded in order to
the Peace and Happiness of the Kingdom. But since in almost a month (for His
Majesty's Propositions were made on the third of February, and He heard not
since from both Houses till the first of March) no consent has been yielded to
it; He conceives the Cessation cannot begin so soon as the fourth of this
Month, by which time (though His Majesty uses no delay in making His Answer)
the same can hardly be returned to them; and many of the Articles now presented
to Him from both Houses concerning the Cessation, are so strict, that such of
His good Subjects, who are not of His army (and for whom generally He shall
always have a principal, just, and compassionate regard) receive not any
benefit, or are restored to any Liberty thereby, which His Majesty shall ever
insist upon (when in matters merely concerning Himself He may descend to easier
Conditions) and which He has returned with such alterations, as He doubts not
both Houses will consent to, and do sufficiently manifest how sollicitous His
Majesty is for the good of His people, and how desirous He is, that in this
unnatural contention no more blood of His Subjects may be spilt (upon which He
looks with much grief, compassion, and tenderness of heart) even of those who
have lifted up their hands against Him; And His Majesty therefore desires
(against which He can imagine no objection can be made) that the Cessation may
begin upon the twelfth of this Month, or sooner, if the conditions of the
Cessation shall be sooner agreed on; and is willing the same shall continue for
twenty days, in which time He hopes by the Treaty, and a clear understanding
of each other, a full Peace and Happiness may be established thorowout the
Kingdom. And during that time His Majesty is willing that neither side shall
be bound or limited by this Cessation in any other wise, or to any other
purpose then is hereafter expressed.

I. THat all manner of Arms, Ammunition, Money, Bullion and Victuals passing
for the use of either Army, without a Pass or safe Conduct from the General
of each Army, may be stayed and ceased on, as if no Cessation were agreed on at
all.

II. That all Officers and Soldiers of either Army passing without such
License or safe Conduct, as aforesaid, may be apprehended and detained, as if
no such Cessation were agreed on at all; And that all manner of persons His
Majesty's Subjects, of what quality or condition soever (except Officers and
Soldiers of either Army) shall pass to and from the Cities of Oxford and
London, and back again at their pleasures, during this Cessation, as likewise
to and from any other parts of His Majesty's Dominions, without any search;
stay or imprisonment of their persons, or seizure and detention of their goods
or estates; And that all manner of Trade, Traffic and Commerce, be free and
open between all His Majesty's Subjects, excepting as aforesaid between the
Officers and Soldiers of either Army, or for Arms, Ammunition, Money, Bullion,
or Victuals for the use of either Army, without a Pass or safe Conduct, as
aforesaid; Which may be a good beginning to renew the Trade and Correspondence
of the Kingdom, and whereby His good Subjects may be restored to that Liberty
and Freedom they were born to, and have so happily enjoyed till these miserable
Distractions, and which even during this War His Majesty has to His utmost
labored to preserve, opening the Way by most strict Proclamations to the
passage of all Commodities, even to the City of London it self.

III. That His Majesty's Forces in Oxfordshire shall advance no nearer to
Windsor then VVheatley; and in Buckinghamshire, no nearer to Aylesbury then
Brill; and that in Berkshire the Forces respectively shall not advance nearer
the one to the other then they shall be at the day to be agreed upon for the
Cessation to begin; And that the Forces of the other Army in Oxfordshire shall
advance no nearer to Oxford then Henly, and those in Buckinghamshire no nearer
to Oxford then Aylesbury; And that the Forces of neither Army shall advance
their Quarters nearer to each other, then they shall be upon the day agreed on
for the Cessation to begin, otherwise then in Passage and Communication between
their several Quarters respectively, without any Acts of Hostility each to
other; but may enlarge themselves within their own Quarters respectively, as
they shall find convenient.

IIII. That the Forces of either Army in Gloucestershire, Wilsthire, and
Wales, as likewise in the Cities of Gloucester, Bristoll, and the Castle and
Town of Berkley, shall be guided by the rule expressed in the latter part of the
precedent Article.

V. That in case it be pretended on either side that the Cessation is Violated,
no Act of hostility is immediately to follow, but first the party complaining
is to acquaint the Lord General on the either side, and to allow three days
after notice given for satisfaction: and in case satisfaction be not given or
accepted, then five days notice to be given before hostility begin: and the
like to be observed in the remoter Armies by the Commanders in chief.

VI. That all other Forces in the Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales, not
before mentioned, shall remain in the same Quarters and Places as they are at
the time of publishing this Cessation, otherwise then in passage and
communication between their several Quarters, as is mentioned in the latter
part of the third Article: And that this Cessation shall not extend to restrain
the setting forth, or employing any ships for the defense of His Majesty's
Dominions: Provided that His Majesty be first acquainted with the particulars,
and that such ships as shall be set forth be commanded by such Persons as His
Majesty shall approve of.

VII. Lastly, that during the Cessation none of His Majesty's Subjects be
imprisoned, otherwise then according to the known Laws of the Land, and that
there shall be no plundering or violence offered to any of His Subjects.

And His Majesty is very willing, if there be any scruples made concerning
these Propositions and Circumstances of the Cessation, that the Committee for
the Treaty nevertheless may immediately come hither, and so all matters
concerning the Cessation may be here settled by them.

FINIS.

