Reader;
Evil men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived; as
a Fountain casts forth water, their hearts cast forth wickedness; and yet
none greater pretenders to truth and holiness, then these, and by these
pretenses they deceive many: This the Holy Ghost in Scripture fore-tells, the
Stories of former ages testify, that it may not seem strange to thee if in
our days also Egyptian darkness be accounted Gospell-light, licentiousness
Christian Liberty, and pretended Saints if unmasked, appear real Devils. In
two former Treatises the heretical and blasphemous opinions, the scandalous
and abominable practices of our Sectaries have been discovered, and to the end
thou may be warned, and the truth of God not left without witness in Ages
to come; This third (being a higher and fuller Discovery of the Frrours,
Herefies and Insolences of the Sectaries) is penned by the former Author, and
allowed to be printed by him that is thy Friend in the truth,

Ja. Cranford.

The third PART of GANGRAENA.

OR, A new and higher Discovery of the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and
insolent Proceedings of the Sectaries of these times; with some Animadversions
by way of Confutation upon many of the Errors and Heresies named.

As also a particular Relation of many remarkable Stories, special Passages,
Copies of Letters written by Sectaries to Sectaries, Copies of Letters written
from godly Ministers and others, to Parliament men, Ministers, and other
well-affected persons; an Extract and the substance of diverse Letters, all
concerning the present Sects: together with ten Corollaries from all the
forenamed Premises.

Brief Animadversions on many of the Sectaries late Pamphlets, as Lilburnes
and Overtons Books against the House of Peers, M. Peter's his last Report of
the English Wars, The Lord Mayors Farewell from his Office of Maioralty, M.
Goodwins thirty eight Queres upon the Ordinance against Heresies and
Blasphemies, M. Burtons Conformities Deformity, M. Dells Sermon before the
House of Commons; Wherein the Legislative and Judicial Power of the House of
Peers over Commoners is maintained and fully proved against the Sectaries, the
Power of the House of Commons clearly demonstrated to be overthrown upon the
Mediums brought by the Sectaries against the Lords; the late Remonstrance of
the City of London justified, the late Lord Mayor and the City vindicated from
unjust Aspersions, our Brethren of Scotland cleared from all the calumnies and
reproaches cast upon them, and the Magistrates power in suppressing Heresies
and Blasphemies asserted.

As also some few Hints and brief observations on diverse Pamphlets written
lately against me and some of my Books, as M. Goodwins pretended Reply to the
Antapologie, M. Buroughs Vindication, Lanseters Lance, Gangraena plays Rex,
Gangraena-Chrestum, M. Saltmarshes Answer to the second part of Gangraena. A
Justification of the manner and way of writing these Books called Gangraena,
wherein not only the lawfulness, but the necessity of writing after this
manner is proved by Scripture, Fathers, the most eminent Reformed Divines,
Casuists, the practice and custom of all Ages.

By THOMAS EDWARD'S Minister of the Gospel.

Jude 8. v. Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities.

2 Pet. 3. 17. Tetherefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before, beware
lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own
steadfastness.

London, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornehill. 1646.

The Preface.
IN this following Book as in a clear and true Glass, every impartial and
ingenuous Reader may plainly behold the many Deformities and great Spots of the
Sectaries of these times, Spots of all kinds, Plague spots, Fever spots,
Purpule spots, Leprosy spots, Scurvey spots, Spots upon them discovering much
malignity, rage and frenzy, great corruption and infection, of whom may be
said as in Moses Song, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. They have corrupted themselves, their spot
is not the spot of his children: they are a perverse and crooked generation. O
that the Sectaries themselves and others easy to be deceived with good words
and fair speeches, apt to be carried away with good names and specious shows,
as godliness, purity of Ordinances, Conscience, would but look into this
Glass and continue looking therein, diligently in the fear of God reading
over this Book, and observing what is here written, comparing and examining one
thing with another, which would they do, I am confidently persuaded many of the
Sectaries who know not the depths of Satan would quickly be taken off, become
out of love with their way and return, and others kept from going after those
ways: this would prove a Sovereign Antidote both to expel the poison already
received and to prevent the taking infection. Now that this Book (by the
blessing of God) may the better attain these ends, I shall in general pr^mise
two things.

1. Remove some objections that may lie in the way of the Reader, wipe off the
dust and dirt cast upon this Gl^sse that might hinder the clear sight of
things. 2. Give some Rules, Directions, and Cautions, as for the better
understanding of it, so for preventing some cavils and mistakes that otherwise
might be.
For the first, I observe two things have been objected against these Books of
discovering the Errors, Heresies, and Practices of the Sectaries: First, the
manner and way of writing, (...) (...)ing with matters of fact, particularising
men by name, and b^ing very bitter and sharp: Secondly the matter as being
untrue and consisting most of lies falsehoods and fables. Now for the
satisfaction of the Reader in the first, the manner and way of writing these
parts of Gangraena, I have drawn up a large Treatise upon this subject, viz. a
Justification of relating matters of fact and the names of Sectaries as well as
their Opinions and Arguments, which I have proved from the Scriptures of the
old and new Testament both in commands and examples, Orthodox Fathers
Augustine, etc. other Ancient Writers* as Bernard, etc. the most learned and
famous among the modern (...), Luther, Beza, Bullinger, Danaus, etc. the
judgment of (...), as Baldwin, etc. from the practice of Sectaries themselves,
as Donatists, etc. in all ages, both in writing one against another, and
against the Orthodox; and from many strong convincing Reasons; and besides
these proofs have answered fully all objections of all sorts brought against
it, as that it is a speaking against the Saints, uncovering our brothers
nakedness, a going against the Rule of Christ in Matthew. 18. which is to tell
our Brother alone: which Treatise of the Justification of writing these
Gangr^naes (I am confident) will not be only satisfactory, but triumphing over
all the clamors, o^tcries, and objections made by the Sectaries against my
Books, slaying their Abs^loms, and cutting off the heads of their great
Goliahs, as that of speaking against the Saints, and in the judgment of al
learned and ingenuous men stopping their months for ever: Notwithstanding al
which I cannot but expect(...) of the Sectaries will still clamor; speak evil,
and will not be persuaded, though never such reason be showed them, yea if an
Angel from he even, or one of the old Prophets arising from the dead, should
speak against their Opinions and ways, it is to befeared many of them would yet
go on. The strong delusion that God has sent upon many of them to believe
lies, the great interest of diverse in regard of preferment and profit, the
Popes Crown, and the Monks bellies, the deep engagements of others to that way
by many relations, and having men's (...) in admiration, make it is hard work to
convince men though there be never such evidence of Reason. I may complain of
the Sectaries of our times, as Paraeus in 2. Galath. v. 9. Hodi^ quid fit?
Opinionibus res geritur, imo affectibus. Nulla Argumenta, nullae Apologiae
locum inveniunt.
Paraeus does of some Lutherans and others in his time, that things are
altogether carried by opinions, yea by affections, no Arguments, no Apologies
can take place. They that at the will and pleasure of some men do not approve
of unprofitable, scandalous, yea monstrous opinions, they are cast off, the
right hand of fellowship denied them although they preach Christ sincerely. But
now in the interim till that Treatise can come forth, which I intend shall
preoede the Fourth Part of Gangraena, I wish the Sectaries to consult Baldwin
Cas. Consci^n. lib. 4. cap. 7. page 10. 53. 1055. Falsorum dogmatum
Propugnatores nominatim perstringendi sunt, quomodo enim alias ab auditoribus
caveri possunt?
Baldwins cases of Conscience who handling that case of Conscience, whether the
Authors and maintainers of false opinions are to be spoken against by name,
resolves it affirmatively giving Scriptures and Reasons for it, yea showing
that false teachers are rather by name to be branded, then those who lead only
wicked lives, and Calvin's Calvin. Instructio adversus libertines. cap. 4.
Tractate against the Libertins, giving reasons of his own practice, and
answering objections in not only writing against the opinions of the
Libertines, but naming Coppinus and Quintinus chief heads of that fastion.

Secondly, a man would wonder at it, that the Sectaries should so rage and cry
out against me, and my Gangraenaes for meddling with matters of fact, and
nominating men, when as long before I put pen to paper in that kind, diverse of
them had in Pamphlets spoken against many Presbyterians by name, both godly
Ministers and other worthy persons, as Master Calamie, Doctor Burges, Master
Prynne, etc. Master Burton telling in (...) Pamphlet a story of me by name a^
Colchester (but false) and raking (...) old matters at Bury against Master
Calamie in another Pamphlet called Truth, still Truth, though shut out of
doors, and all before the First Part of Gangrana was printed; and indeed the
Sectaries have all along both before my Books came forth and (...) since upon
all occasions (yea such of them as have spoken and written most against me for
so doing as M. Saltmarsh, M. Goodwin, M. (...)on, etc.) writ against the
Pres(...)rians by name, and related all (...) of fact and stories of them, and
in a disgraceful manner and way comparing them with D. Pockling (...), and in
a scoffing (...)ing abusive way dealing with them* and (...) has not (...)
only by Independents to Presbyterians, but the (...) written Books and given us
stories (and that long before I (...) thought of this way) of (...) Sectaries
a^ Anti(...)ians. Anabaptists, Familists, and that by names, with all
particulars of their doings as well as opinions, and of his judgment upon
them, as Master Wells his History of the Rise, Reign, and Downfall of the
Antinomians, and some others in that kind, so that in this I do but follow
them, and write after their Copy, and I appeal to the ingenuous Reader, how
they can with any color blame that as a great evil and wickedness in me,
which they account in themselves zeal of Gods glory, and a doing God service,
especially considering that the Sectaries in their naming of Presbyterians, and
bringing in matters of fact and stories have proceeded in a sixfold manner and
way, all which in matters of this kind be the things most liable to blame and
exception, and which I have all along carefully shunned and declined. First,
the Sectaries in writing Books against the Reformation and Presbyterians, have
not spared to write against, and that in a most reproachful and vild way,
whole bodies, Assemblies, Communities, and those the highest and greatest, as
the House of Peers, House of Commons, the City of London and Common Council,
the Assembly, the Kingdom and General Assembly of Scotland, some scores of
such Books written by Sectaries being in all men's hands; whereas in my writing
against Sectaries, I have spoken only against particular persons, but to whole
Bodies and Societies I have tendered all due respect, vindicating them and their
power against the Pamphlets and aspersions of Sectaries. Secondly, the
Sectaries in their writings of matters of fact have not* only named ordinary
persons, but persons of the greatest quality and place, abusing them by name,
as diverse Members of both Houses, the Speakers of both Houses, some of the
Lords and some of the Commons, the Lord Major of London by name, but I have all
along declined the naming of persons in authority and Magistracy, viz. in that
way. Thirdly, the Sectaries in their personal matters and stories of the
Presbyterians have still related things manifestly untrue, of which there has
been no ground at all, as Master Price' s story of Master Bellamie (...)ding it
unlawful to sell Prayer Books as the Anabaptists in the Lord Majors farewell
of the late Lord Major, as some stories of Cretensis, Master Buroughs and
Master Burton of me, the contrary unto them being the truth; as a passage in
Master Dels Epistle Dedicatory to the House of Commons concerning Master Ley of
the Assembly, most false, as a passage in Master Burtons Epistle of his
Conformities Deformity of the new Lord Major known to be untrue; and so I could
go on with instancing in passages in Master Saltmarsh, Lilburne, and other such
Books, manifestly untrue; and indeed of all the stories and matters of fact the
Sectaries have in their Pamphlets in disgrace of the Presbyterians, I hardly
know one true one, whereas the stories related by me of them, the most of them
are known to many, and are certain, and I have been all along careful, as by
my Reply to Cretensis is evident. Fourthly, the Sectaries in their matters of
fact have fallen upon Presbyterians with old matters many years ago, before
Presbyterians, yea gone back as far almost as to their childhood, as Master
Price did to Master Bellamie, and Master Burton goes back to Bury ten years
before, to find something against Master Calamie, and so I might instance in
others, but I have confined my self within three or four years, and to the
times since they were Sectaries. Fifthly, the Sectaries have brought in against
Presbyterians matters of bodily infirmities, of their complexions and such
like, as Saltmarsh in his pretended Answer to my Second Part of Gangraena,
upbraids me, saying, Your face and complexion shows a most sadly parched,
burnt, and withered spirit, but I have forborne that, least I should reproach
my Maker, for he that made me made them. Sixthly, many of the Sectaries in
their writings against the Presbyterians, the Assembly, godly Ministers, the
Scots, and particular persons by name, have done it in the most scornful,
profane, blasphemous and abusive way, even to the abusing of the Scriptures,
the Spirit of God, Proaching, Prayer, and other Ordinances, as ever was heard
of in any age, witness The Arraignment of Persecution, Martins Echo,
Cretensis, and diverse others, but in my Discoveries of the Errors, Heresies,
Practices of the Sectaries, I have shunned all such ways, setting my self
plainly to discover the Errors and abominable Practices, confuting them with
Scriptures and Reason, and in a serious sad manner applying the danger of those
evils to the consciences of all, both Presbyterians and Sectaries; and thus
much for removing that stone of offense out of the way, taken from the manner
and way of writing.

2. For the matter of this Book that there is a Truth in the Opinions, Stories,
Practices related in it, notwithstanding the clamours and speeches of the
Sectaries, that they are lies, all lies, I desire the Reader to observe and
remember these following particulars: 1. That the Sectaries of our time are so
shameless in this kind, as to say all things written against them, are lies:
thus they have said the stories of the old Anabaptists in Germany written by
Sleydan, Bullinger, Lambertus Hortens(...)s and other worthy men were lies, and
they would not believe them; so Master Saltmarsh in one of his Pamphlets
against Master Ley denies the truth of those stories, and other Sectaries in
Pamphlets before him have said the same, affirming if the King had overcome
the Parliament, stories would have made them as bad as the Anabaptists, and the
Princes of Germany prevailing against them, set men on work to set them out so,
but all was false; Now if our Sectaries will speak and write thus of all the
relations of the old Anabaptists, how can it be expected, but that they will
cry all down for false written of themselves? So our Sectaries will not
believe the stories of the Antinomians, Anabaptists, Familists in New England,
of Mistress Huchinson and the rest, but say all is false, all lies; and some of
them have cried out of Master Wells his Book of the Antinomians of New
England, as much as of mine. 2. The truth of the maine substance and matter of
this Book both for opinions and matters of fact is in the Book it self, by
quoting Books known to hundreds, by naming of persons known for witnesses, by
relating of things common in the times, and these set by the Errors in the
Margents, or joined to the matter, so manifest that he that runs may read it,
and rationally there can be no more question made of them, then whether the
Scots took New Castle, the Parliaments Forces had a Victory at Nazeby Field,
there be such a man as M. Hugh Peter's or John Lilburn. 3. That the Sectaries
have used devices and found out inventions on purpose to possess people that
relations of things in my Books are false, when most true; as for instance,
some Sectaries that have been of the same name of those Sectaries that I have
related stories of (though they could not but know by many circumstances and
particulars in the stories they were not the men but others) have said, There Is
a story related of me, I am the man he speaks of, and it is all false, for I was
at such a place then and could not do so: thus one Webb an Officer in the Army
did, telling the people in the West where he found Gangraena, that the story of
Webb was of him, I am that Webb in Gangraena, and (...) all false, I never
preached such things, nor was ever questioned about such things, or did such
things related* This a godly Minister in the ^^st of England told me he heard
one Webb an Officer in the Army speak thus to the people to possess them
against Gangraena; Now I writ not of that Webb, but another Webb a younger man
here in London, not one of the Army, who put out a Book for the vindication of
himself, where he confesses most of the things; and this other Webb could not
but by many passages related, as of the age, as of being a Schoolmasters, as
of the Christian name, and diverse others but know well enough I meant him not,
and yet by this did he labor to blast my Book. Again some who having been
mentioned in Letters written up to friends, and printed by me, have come to my
house, denying peremptorily those things spoken of them in the Letters,
desiring to know who writ them that they might have ^eparations, I having told
them their names, and withal writing to those Ministers to know more fully
their grounds of such relations, they have returned (...)e Answers, that those
things were most true, and they would make them good when ever they should
question them, in which kind I could give diverse notable instances, but the
nature of a Preface not admitting many, I will relate only one, namely of
Master Mascall of Dover spoken of in a Letter sent from Dover subscribed by
five hands to a Member of the Assembly, printed in the Second Part of Gangraena
in p. 135. of the Second Edition, who presently after the coming forth of that
Book, coming to my house with a friend of his and mine formerly, denied
positively and peremptorily what was written of him in the Letter, declaring he
was of another judgment then to speak so of our Ministers and Synods as is
expressed in that Letter, holding our godly Ministers to have a lawful
calling, and Synods to be needful; whereupon I writing to one of the Ministers
all passages that passed between us, and desiring to know what he said to it,
he sent me this Answer; Worthy Sir, I received your Letter dated June the 18.
but could not conveniently Answer it till now, because I would see the
carriages of the Independents on last wednesday when we chose our Elders. What
we wrote of Master Mascall we can clear, and will maintain and much more; and
according to your advice you shall not fail of sufficient testimony if that
Letter be crossed: whereas he says that he holds our godly Ministers to have a
lawful calling, he will not say it in Dover, till he have distinguished the
word godly into a shadow: For his saying they never kept Church-meetings in
time of the public exercises, its a very false untruth, and for his seeming
to accord with us in our account of Synods, he knows that we hold it a duty to
combine Churches, and to have a combination rule the Elders and Pastor of a
Congregation, which we know they will never allow. Thus much in breife for
Master Mascall who I dare say will not challenge any man in Dover, for that
that is done against him, or if he does, will find as ready an Answer as ever
man received by man.

Your loving friend and Brother. MICH. PORTER.
June 29. 1646.
And thus much for the First general head, concerning the manner and matter of
this Book.

For the Second, the commending some directions, and taking off some
misconstructions and cavils, for the better understanding of the subject matter
and manner of this Book let the Reader observe and consider these following:

1. That the Sectaries run such around of all opinions, as that they are come
to hold many Popish and Prelaticall opinions, and to go upon the Papists
grounds and mediums for many of their Tenets, which in the Errors, Positions
and Practices reckoned up in this Book the Reader may observe, as the 5, 6, 7,
36 Errors; nay there is almost no Popish or Prelaticall principle and Error, but
many Sectaries are fallen into it, and in the practice of it, as being against
the Perfection, Sufficiency, Perspicuity of the Scriptures, being for Pope
Toleration and a Dispensation for want of an Infallible Judge, as the Papists
are for the Pope upon that ground, denying preaching to be the word of God and
the service of God as much or more then ever any of the Prelates did, being for
Music, Organs, Hymns in the public Assemblies, holding anointing the sick
with Oil, maintaining Perfection in this life with some Popish Friars, besides
diverse other Popish Errors: hence diverse Popish The Vision of God by Cardinal
cusanus, The third part of the Rule of perfection by a Cappuchian Friar,
Another book written by a Priest.
Books written by Priests and Friars have been Translated and lately set
forth by some Sectaries, sold openly, and I suppose Licensed because the
Stationers names for whom printed, and Printers names expressed.

2. The Reader shall find in this Book the Sectaries Design and Practice, not
to be only corrupting Religion, running out into extravagancies and strange
conceits that way, but to be against Magistracy and Civil Government, their
design of opposing settled Government, and bringing an Anarchy and Confusion
into Church and State, being here so fully laid open that they who run may read
it; It Is in this Book unvailed and the w^^king of this spirit in all sorts of
Sectaries and places clearly manifested: they have in Terminis in diverse
Pamphlets and some Sermons declared against Monarchy and Aristo^acie, and for
Democracie they have expressed themselves in such a manner concerning that,
that they make it noe other then an Anarchie, making all alike, confounding of
all rancks and orders, reducing all to Adams time and condition and devolving
all power upon the state Universal and promiscuos multitude, whom they make
the Creator and Destroyer of Kings, Parliaments and all Magistrates at there
mere pleasure, without tying them to any rule, or bounding them by any laws.

3. I do more punctually and particularly give the proofs of the Errors and
Heresies named in this Third Part then in the two ^ormer, with Animadversions
by way of Confutation or Observation upon more of the Errors and Practices then
I did before, as having been desired by some so to do, and being that which I
judge will make the work more profitable; and the Reader shall find the proofs
of the Errors set in the Margents just by them, and the Animadversions under
every particular Error, or else of diverse of them put in one where the Errors
are more of a kind; and the Reader will find I have in all Books quoted all
along, to prove the things I charge the Sectaries with, dealt very punctually
and faithfully, and I challenge them to name any one thing quoted false, or
wrested among so many; and for other Relations I have them from such known
godly Ministers and Christians being ear and eye witnesses of them, that I
cannot easily be deceived: it is possible some circumstances of order, time,
place, number, may in some stories be mistaken, and yet the maine story true,
as we see in Histories of battles and other humane things they often are
(though I know n^ne such, and have been in all circumstances as well as
substance, as faithful and careful as a man can well be) and I can say it,
that of all the particulars in this kind that I have related in these three
Books, besides many matters of fact in Antapologia, (which in all amount to
some thousands) I do not know of any one particular related by me (excepting
one) that I have reason to suspect was not true, and yet that was written me in
a Letter by a Reverend and godly Minister and was the voice of the Country, and
all I did was only printing that Letter, no otherwise affirming it; which
particular, when the untruth of it shall be made apparent to me from the man
himself or his friends, I shall be ready, and have offered it to some who have
spoken of it, to right him publicly in print.

4. Whereas some Letters written to my self, or some other Ministers are
printed in this Book, which have some passages in them casting honor and
praise upon me, resembling me to some Worthies in their times, as Luther, etc.
for which I may be censured, as being the hand and instrument of publishing my
own praises, and counted vainglorious; I do by way of taking off this exception
desire the Reader to consider these things. First, that I have left out of
Letters many passages which reflect honor on my self, constantly passing by
such Titles, Epithites, and other expressions that are matters of praise in all
particulars, excepting the justifying of my work in writing thus against the
Sectaries. Now my Books for the manner and way of writing having been so cried
out of by all the Sectaries: and many weak Christians, by their means, having
been also offended; I thought it necessary to print some passages of Letters
from godly Ministers giving testimony to my Books, and approving me in the way
of my writing them, justifying me by the practice of Morney, Plesseus against
the Papists, and of Luther; and the judicious Reader shall find if he observe,
I print no other passages that may so much as reflect any kind of praise upon
my self, but only those that justify my undertaking in this kind against the
Sectaries; and which the Lord knows I print not so much for my self, or my
own praise, but for the sakes of others, that they may be satisfied of my
Books against all the calumnios cast upon them, and profit by the reading of
them. Secondly, It Is not unknown how the Sectaries by writing and speaking have
set themselves to disparage me, and to cast scorns of all kinds upon me, such
as hardly ever were upon any man in any age, and all to weaken my esteem,
credit and authority with the people, that being looked upon as a man so weak
that a woman can answer my writings, and that I know not how to put the
Nominative Case and Verb together, etc. all I do against the Sectaries might be
slighted as not worthy to be looked upon: Now it being apparent this is the
design of the Sectaries, and their master piece, and God by his providence
without my seeking in the least, stirring up many learned men to bear witness
to my works in Letters to their Friends, which have been brought to me, and in
Letters writ to my self, I suppose I may in such a case without the censure of
vainglory print such testimonies to counterballance the despisings and
scornings of the Sectaries; yea, if I had gone further, and printed not only
passages justifying my work, but what they had expressed of me in other kinds,
considering how the Sectaries vilify me, I might have been excused: Saint
Paul a humble and modest man, yet when by false Teachers he was in his person,
presence and speech among the people presented weak and contemptible, to the
end his ministry might be made ineffectuall, he would not bear it, but takes
off all those things, enters into a commendation of himself, showing he was
equal with the very chiefest Apostles, and speaks of his own knowledge and
gifts, and speaks that in this case he was compelled to glory, 2 Cor. 10. 10,
11, 12. 2 Cor. 11. 5. 6. 16. 2 Cor. 12. 11, 12. And in such a case as this if
Casuists be consulted with as Amesius, etc. they conclude that credit and a
good report may not only be maintained, but sought for, viz. for the glory of A
mesius lib. 5. de Co^sc. c. 14.
God, and that we may by our work and example profit others the more by that
means.

5. Whereas in my Book there are many Relations of Sectaries in the Army, some
passages in Letters speaking of the Army, and some things spoken by my self,
that some may take to reflect upon the whole Army, I desire the Reader to
understand aright that nothing related by me, though written by others, or
spoken by my self is meant of the whole Army, or the greater part of it, but
only of that part of the Army, viz. the Sectaries in the Army: I acknowledge the
New Model under Sir Thomas Fairfax has done gallant service against the
enemy, and did the greatest and best services when it had not so many Sectaries
as it has now, and my intent is not in the least to cast dirt upon the Army,
but only to relate Errors and insolences of a part of the Army: The Sectaries,
who though but a part, and much the lesser, may be sometimes in discourse or
writing called the Army, viz. in that sense as the Independents crying up the
Army in Pamphlets and Sermons use the word Army, saying, here is an Army, the
army has done thus, when they mean by the Army, and express so much in other
words the Independents and Saints in the army, so do I when I speak in any
place of the hurt the Army does, or the Errors there I understand not the Army,
but the Sectares in it.

6. Whereas in this Book there are many passages that Sectaries may be likely
enough to interpret a striking at the Parliament, a casting reproach upon them,
and more particularly upon the Honorable House of Commons; I do here declare
and profess against any such misconstructions, or consequences, it being not
my intent to reflect either upon both Houses as conjunct, or upon each as
considered distinct, or upon the Committees of either House, the most that can
be drawn is, that some passages in Letters or Relations show there are some
particular Members that are or favor Sectaries, which in writing so much of the
Sectaries (as I do) for the good of the Parliament and the Kingdom cannot
possibly be avoided, (though I forbear the naming of, or deciphering any of
them) and that there are some such crept into the Parliament all the Kingdom
knows and speaks of it, and therefore I meddle not to speak against the
Houses in all my Discourse, neither do I insinuate any thing in the least to
bring the people out of love with Parliaments, or this Parliament: I formally
declare, least any should mistake, it is the peoples great interest and blessing
to have the power and Privileges of Parliament maintained, and they must take
heed they be not so discontented with miscarriages of any particular Members or
Committees that may fall out, as to set loose in their hearts from Parliaments
and desert them. Parliaments are the strong Boundaries of the exorbitancies of
Princes and their Ministers; they have by the constitution of the Kingdom and
the Lowes, power more then sufficient to restrain the Tyranny of Princes, and
to correct their greatest Favorites and Officers of State, let the people once
lose Parliaments and be out of love with them, and then farewell all Liberty,
Property, and slavery will come in like an armed man; and that nothing in my
Book can be against the Honorable Houses, (however someparticular Members may
be guilty of some things I speak of, and that party wresting my words to such a
sense to make the Parliament offended with me) yet that there can be no such
thing, I desire these things may be considered: 1. I do de Industria and at
large discover and write against the Sectaries for speaking and writing against
the Parliament, against the House of Lords and Commons, and do plead and
contend for the power of both Houses, both in matters of Religion and civil
things, against the Sectaries, and therefore I cannot be thought to do any
thing against them, but for them, 2. That in speaking sometimes of the House of
Commons, I speak not positively that they do so, or use such words of them as
mine, or bring such Arguments as if I owned them, but speak the Sectaries
words, and show what follows upon their grounds against the power of the House
of Commons. 3. For any passages in Letters or Relations that may seem to have
any reference to one or both Houses of Parliament, a^ speaking against any
under them employed in Military or Civil affairs, or any other matter, I
meddle not with those passages at all as to justify or assert them, but do
only barely relate and print them; and for no other end but that the body of
both Houses may know that which may be they have not heard of, viz. such a
danger^us man employed in their service, such insolences committed by men
under their pay, and may know the Countries sense of such and such things, how
ill it is taken such wicked men should be implied and may prevent in time the
mischeifs and evils which may grow out of such things and the discontents that
may be occasioned thereby. Fourthly I do with salmission conceive that for a
Minister a known friend and servant of the Parliaments in a respective way (not
in a reproaching reviling way) to make known to the Parliament what the best
affected say and write to ^riends of such and such particulars, as the
suffering, yea preferring of all sort: of Sectaries, as the not settling
Religion in so long a time, as the letting friends wait long before they can
have their Petitions received, as about the Elections of some new Members, as
about the carriage of many Sectaries in the Army, etc. is so far from
speaking against the Parliament or becoming their enemy, that it is one of the
greatest and faithfullest services can be done them, and whatever passages I
may have printed in any of these, or any other of this kind, I conceive it is
highly for their service, that they may know what hurt the Sectaries do them,
and how the Kingdom takes things; and truly next to the glory of God, the
great thing that moves me to write as I do of the Sectaries, is the great
damage and prejudice that comes to the Parliament by them, that as Hester said
of Haman to Ahazuerus, the enemy could not countervaile the Kings damage. So
the Sectaries doings all the Kingdom over in all kind of Mechanics preaching,
in making tumults and riots in Churches, in driving away godly Ministers, and
venting all kind of abominable opinions does so much wrong to the Parliament in
the Countries several ways, that they can never countervaile the Parliaments
damage and loss, and I have related such things for no other end, but to let
them know so much; and I could wish both Houses had read all passages in
Letters sent from several parts of the Kingdom, and from beyond Seas to
London, which I have s^^ne of this nature, a^ what ill blood these things
breed, and how because of the Sectaries they lose a piece in the hearts of
their best friends, with many other passages which I forbear now to relate.
The Parliament upon many of the wicked doings of the Sectaries, as baptizing a
Horse, making uproares in Churches, etc. may take up a like speech which Jacob
said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me to make me to stinck among the
Inhabitants of the Land: You have troubled us, to make us to lose the hearts of
many well-affected people in City and Country, and thereby encouraged the
common enemy to be ready to gather themselves against us again, and we being
few in number, in danger to be deserted of the people by reason of you, we
shall be destroyed and our House.

7. Whereas some of the Sectaries in their Pamphlets, as Master Walwyn and
others have often insinuated that I have preached and written so much against
the Sectaries out of Policy, Superstition, worldly and self Interest to
maintain my own Covetousness, Ambition, desire of Domination, distinction
between Clergy and Laytie, out of a spirit of opposition and Persecution
against conscientions and peaceable men (all which they have done out of a
design to blast my books among many who know me not, not knowing otherwise how
to answer them) I do therefore that I may countermine the Sectaries in this and
take of these prejudices, declare as in the presence of God, I never have, nor
do appear against the Sectaries and Errors of the times from any of these
principles, but from a zeal of the glory of God and his Truth, and that
founded upon knowledge and search, a compassion to the Souls of poor people
deceived, and the discharge of my duty and Conscience as a Minister of the
Gospel; and as for those other of Policy, Self-interest, etc. they have never
fallen so much as under my consultation, unless that I have considered and
forecast that what I was doing in writting such a Book, and such a Book was
against all Policy, Self-Interest, and the ready way (as the times were and
are) to run the hazard of the ruin of my self and my family, and that what I
write is truth, and the Sectaries speeches aspersions, I desire the Reader to
observe these following particulars, and do challenge all the Sectaries to
disprove any one particular if they can. 1. Many years ago when I was
persecuted by some Prelates and their Creatures, in no possibility nor capacity
by my principles and practices, of preforment, and. (as the best of the
Independents well know) I preached against, and upon all occasions declared my
self against the Brownists, Separatists, Antinomians and all Errors in that
way, as well as against Popish Innovations and Arminian Tenets. There are many
who were my Auditors in those times can and will witness what I have preached
at London and at Hartford aginst those Errors, when I have in the same places
preached such Sermons against the prevailing Opinions Innovations and
Corruptions of the Prelates, that many thought I should never have preached
again; and indeed was not without manifold sufferings and troubles, being put
out of places, stopped from coming into others, and at last Letters missive
with an Attachment sent out to bring me into the High Commission Court. About
thirteen years ago at Magnus Church I preaching against forsaking the Public
Assemblies, had on a Lecture night at the same Church a Bill given me up (among
the Bills to pray for the sick) speaking bitterly for so doing. At Hartford
about 10. years ago, when Independency and the Church way began to be fallen
too by some men of Note and some people to look after it, I preached against it
early, and by all ways labored to preserve the people. About 8. years ago
when Errors on the right hand took with many, I did at a Lecture in the City
at Aldermanbury, and Coleman-street preach against Apostasy and falling to
Errors on the right hand, and more particularly at Coleman-street, (many in
that parish being then leaning that way) gave some considerations against
Errors on the right hand, and warned the people of the white Devil, quoting a
saying of Master Cartwright out of the Proverbs, and Master Brightman out of
the Revelations against leaving the Church of England, and Master John Goodwin
was then well pleased with my Sermon that he gave mo great thanks. 2. I never
yet sought any great things for my self, great livings, or coming into public
places of honor and respect, to be of the Assembly, or to preach in any
public places before the Magistrates either at Westminster or London, but
have contented my self with small means, and to preach in private places in
comparison, having refused many great livings and places, preaching here in
London for a little, and that but badly paid (a^ many well know) minding the
work and service, little the maintenance.

I can speak it truly that in these open times when many young men, raw
preachers, men who never bore the heat of the day, have got great Livings of
two or three hundred a year well situated with houses and all accommodations,
I have for the public good declined all such offers, spent my own temporal
estate to minister to my necessities, not having had for almost these two last
years 40. li. per Annum, not withstanding any constant preaching on Lords
days, week-dayes and all extraordinary occasions of Fastings and
thankesgiving: I have been willing to forsake my fatness and sweetness, to
neglect my profit, health, benefit of my Family, all advantages, and in a sort
to sequester my self from friends, and all worldly enjoyments to spend my
time, strengh, spirits, estate, and all in reeding, writing, studying of the
Controversy of these times, having prepared many Tractates against the Errors
of the times; And as for Domination and affecting of Rule and Government, I
have little meddled in that kind, been at few meetings of that nature, and do
profess I am so far from being ambitious in that way, that I should account
it a great happiness to have a call to a place only to preach and write, and a
yearly Pension for the maintenance, rather then Tyths. Thirdly, I began to
write my Gangrenaes, and have continued to write on (since which time I have
been accused to do all out of policy, worldly interest) in the times of the
growth and reign of the Sectaries, when they have been in their greatest
power and most formidable, able to sit on the skirts, and to crush those who
have opposed them (of which there are many instances, which I well knew) and to
prefer and honor those who adhered to them; and yet in such a time have I
writ against them, and more and more laid them open, which certainly could be
no policy, worldly interest, but piety and duty to appear in so open a manner
against the rising side: I well knew the Sectaries strengh, policy, activnes,
and how England was a bad Air at that time and still is for zealous
Presbiterians to thrive in, much might be lost by it, but nothing gained; I
understood the faithful witnesses had not yet put off their sackcloch; had I
indeed written against the Sectaries when they had been on the declining hand,
and cast out as the Bishops, when all men in high places had turned their hand
against them, this might have been interpreted Policy, wordly Interest, but to
do it in a time when the Sectaries had so many friends in high places, such an
influence upon our Armies, Councels, etc. so many for them in City and Country,
I believe no wise man who considers it will call it Selfseeking or Policy: I
may say in this case as Job in another, Is there any taste in the white of an
Egg? So, is there any Policy in what I have done? 4. I have been so far
from getting any thing by my open and earnest appearing against the Sects, that
I have suffered and lost much, and am exposed to all sorts of hazards and
dangers for so doing: I believe I have suffered more in my name, Estate, loss
of Friends, etc. then any Sectarie in England has done, for maintaining and
spreading his Errors. I could have been the darling of the Sectaries in regard
of my former Interest and acquaintance with many of them, so I would but have
held my peace and done them no hurt (though I had not been theirs) I could
have had more friends among the Presbyterian party to have been more moderate
(as they call it) (for such a time have we fallen into of Luke warmness, and
favor of Sectaries, that the being earnest against them has made some who go
for Presbyterians not to own me as otherwise they would for fear of being
taken notice of) but I have lost all them, and many friends more that had some
relation to Independents, having been deserted of many with whom I had kept
unviolable friendship a long time. I have suffered by that party in some places
in the City, where I have been sought unto and earnestly desired by the known
godly party, I having been kept out by the Sectaries means, either by joining
together with Malignants against me, or taking off some friends, or working one
way or other: I have suffered much in my name, all manner of evil having been
spoken of me, having been reviled, scorned, every Sectaries hand turned
against me been for a sign to be spoken against: O the ^ard speeches and
contradictions not only of sinners, but of many Saints to that I have endured.
I have been threatened in many kinds, and there have been consultations what to
do with me; Lawyers have been advised with, what might be done in Law in such
cases of men being named, the Parliament has been stirred up in several
Pamphlets against me, as in Gangraena plays Rex, Walwyns and Saltmarsh's
Pamphlets* they would upon pretenses make the Parliament fall upon me, and have
said they hoped the House of Commons would be at leisure ere long to talk with
me; and besides what I have suffered and do suffer, I look upon my self as
exposed to many dangers and sufferings, running a great hazard in this
undertaking: I know there are some desperate men among them like the
Circumcelliones among the Donatists, and what may not they do, if God restrain
them not: I am not ignorant what a strong party they have, what a proud
generation they are impatient of all contradiction and being crossed, to whose
Sheafe they think all
Sheafes should bow, nor what a subtle malicious revengefull people they are,
I am sensible what it is at this time to lay them thus open, even as much as to
catch an angry Lion by the beard, and to stop him in his way rearing after his
prey, or as to meet with a chafed Bear robbed of her whelps: and therefore in
stead of once dreaming of worldly interest, the favor of men, I have labored
to prepare my self for persecutions and troubles, to forecast the worst, having
set God and his Truth for my help, which are stronger then all. 5. I have
been so far from Policy, Selfe-Interest in wrighting against the Sectaries,
that I was never guilty of these things in any way I ever appeared for: I never
was the man since I came to years of understanding that ever put the question
which was the strongest and the rising side (they never fell under my
deliberation) but which was the good side for God and his Truth, that was
enough to me, I looked to that and never troubled my thoughts about rising or
great things in the world, as never expecting them; and in my adhering to one
party or side before another, I have still done it but so far as they have
been for God and his Truth, freely declaring my self at the same time I have
been theirs, against wherein they have declined from the Truth and way of God.
6. Whereas the Sectaries, cast Policy, worldly-Interest, etc. upon me, they
themselves are most faulty in this kind; and if the Independents Churches and
Lectures with other their worldly Interests be compared with mine, their
hundreds with my scores, their applause being cried up, with my being cried
down, their living in pomp and feasting almost every day, with my slender
diet, their ease with my labors, it will be found many of them fell to be
Sectaries out of ambition, pride, profit, and that they might live easily. Call.
Instr. advers. libert. c. 4 Quod autem Quintinus ejusque socius ex Sartoribus
Doctores facti atque ita immutati sunt, id in causa ^uit, quod delicate and
molliter vivere vellent: nec sibi putarent labores convenire. Propterea
co^modius omni no existimarunt, ut quemadmodum sacerdotes and monachi
cantillando, sic ipsigarriendo vitam quaererent.
Calvin in his Instruction against Libertines shows the reason why Quintinus
and his companions of Tailors became Doctors were so changed, that they might
live delicatly and easily, and not be put to labor for their Livings: They
thought it better for them that as the Priests and Monks got their Livings by
chanting, so they by prating; and so no question one great reason of many
Mechanics turning preachers and Dippers is, because they may leave working and
live delicatly and idely by going from Country to Country preaching. And indeed
instead of any Ministers or people opposing the Sectaries out of Policy,
worldly Interests, it is evident it is the high way to some gainful Place or other
to become a Sectarie or to favor them, hundreds turning Independents and
Sectaries merely for preferments and Places, as heretofore men turned
Prelatical, and Arminians because of great Livings; and how the Independent
party have feathered their nests, got well for themselves above other men, the
Reader shall find more spoken of it in this Book. 7. As for that which is said
I write so against the Sectaries out of a spirit of persecution and hatred of
peaceable conscientious men, I can say truly, if I persecute conscientious
peaceable men, whom do I then love? my love, delight and interest is in such,
and I am so far from a spirit of persecution, that I would be glad but to find
the same measure from Independents, Brownists, Anabaptists and others, which I
would measure unto them if it were in my power, namely I would not imprison,
banish them and such like, only hinder them from all places of power and trust
in the Kingdom, and from spreading their Errors and Opinions to the hurting of
others, keep the unsound from the sound, which if I differed in judgment from
what was established in a Church, and had nothing else done to me, I should
never conplaine of persecution and violence for that; for it is absolutely
necessary for the peace and welfare of the civil State, besides what it is for
the honor of God, in the preventing the spreading of all Errors and Heresies.
And for a conclusion of this I have the clear and full testimony of my
conscience, that my appearing against the Sectaries has not risen from any
such base and poor grounds as the Sectaries allege, but from a sense of my
duty that I might witness to the truth of God in this sinful and adulterous
generation. And now to draw to a conclusion of this Preface, nothing that has
yet befallen me of scandals, reproaches, and other sufferings, or that shall
further befall me in this way, of Books set out against me, of persecutions and
troubles to bonds, imprisonments, loss of estate shall (the grace of God
assisting me) turn me out of my way of constantly opposing the Sectaries, so
long as they go on in their way, but when they for my writing against them
shall speak against me as most vile and abominable, I shall answer them as
David, It was for the Lord that I have done it, and I will be yet more vile
then thus, and though every day, naybour in the year should bring forth some
book against me, as bad as Balthazar Paeimontanus writ against Zuingl. and
Bolsecu^ against Calvin, yet for my part I shall be so far from being troubled,
that I shall take all those books as Job speaks, and bind them as a crown to my
head, nay if all the Sectaries in England were combined against me, and there
were as many of them as tiles upon the houses in the City, and every one of
these Sectaries were a Devil, yea had a legion of Devils (as I believe some of
them are possessed with many) yet I would go on against them, and if the
Sectaries should be able out of this Book, or any other to take advantage of my
zeal, faithfulness and plainness of spirit, to make something of some words
to stir up the Civil powers to trouble me, yet for all that I shall not give
them ever, but write so much the more, p^int them (...), pray, speak against
their Errors, and if God should give me so into their hands as to be able to
deal with me as the Papists did with some of the ^itnesses of the truth, yet I
am confident they should have no cause to rejoice, but I should overcome even
in that, like Sampson kill more Philistims by my death then by my life, and
many Brethren would wax more ^old to preach and write against them, and out of
my ashes should arise those who should further discover them. I know the
Sectarian faction must be destroyed and fall, Babell must come down as well as
Babylon, and the making of them naked is a preparatory work to the making of
them desolate and eating their flesh. But O that God would rather give them to
see what
they have done, and make them to confess, give him glory, and return,
helping to build his House with both hands, which they have so laid waste and
hindered all this while; and O that they would take well this Book, look into
it, and observe Gods hand in finding them out, accept of it as it was indeed
intended for their good, and not cast it away, with saying it is sharp and
bitter, but rather remember that of the Apostle, that men must be sometimes
sharply rebuked That they may be sound in the ^aith. Erasmus often said of the
Erasmus saepe dixit. Deus dedit huic post^emae ae^ati propter morborum
magnitudinem acrem medicum. Mel. Adam. vit. luth p. 162.
Papacit in his time, that it was so corrupt that it weede^ acrem medicum, a
sharp Physician, a gentle would have done no good, and therefore he raised up
Luther a man of a free and hot spirit, that cared not for gold, and that feared
not great men, but went on in the cure of the Church, strong and rough humors
needing strong physic to purge them out. The foulness and strength of the
disease of Sectarisme at this time called, and calls for a strong P^tion and
may justly plead against the offense of any acrimonie and quickness that may
be found in it. Jesus Christ himself that meek Lamb, of whom it was written
he should not strive no^ cry, neither should any man hear his voice in the
streets, yet his zeal of his Fathers House made him as it is in the second of
John to make a (...)rge of cords and drive all that sold Ox^n, Sheep and
Doves, and the ch^^gers of money out of the Temple and overthrow the Tables,
saying unto them that sold Doves, take these things hence, make not my Fathers
House ^n house of merchandise; and I remember not that ever I re^d of the like
sharpness and quickness of Christ, as this, in any other case (that against
the Scribes, Pharisees, and S(...)es, false Teachers was the likest) and
certainly the servants of Christ in a (...) when the Church of God and Religion
is bought and sold, and made merchandise of by false Teachers, as Saint Peter
speaks, the precious truths of God, and the immortal souls of them for whom
Christ died, prestituted and sold to the base lusts and self ends of men, when
there are not found in the House of God so good intruders as th^se that sell
Oxen, Sheep and Doves, such profitable creatures, but those that sell T(...),
Crocodiles, Pipers, Serpents, and all kind of Monst^rs, they may and ought at
such times and in such cases to imitate Christ, and to do something more then
ordinary for the purging of the Church, and that may show their zeal for God
and for his House.

THE TABLE.
THe Catalogue of the Errors laid down in this Book from page 2. unto page
17. Animadversions by way of Confutation on the Errors of the Sectaries about
civil Government, as that all power of Civil Government is founded only in
the choice and election of the present people, as that all the legal, supreme
Legislative power of this Kingdom is in the House of Commons laid down in the
third and fourth sheets of this Book, and in page 158, 159, 160. A Catalogue of
some Blasphemies of the Sectaries, and a Relation of some passages in their
Prayers laid down in the latter part of the fourth sheet. A Relation of a
story of some Sectaries in contempt of Baptism pissing in the Font of the
Church at Yakesly in Huntingtonshire, and bringing a Horse into the Church, and
baptizing it. page 17. 18. which relation is attested by their hands. A
Relation of some Sectaries here in London, anointing with oil an old blind
woman to restore her to sight, p. 19. A Relation of a story of some Troopers
in the Army destroying a Dove-House, because they were fowls of the Air given
to the sons of men, all having a common right in them, p. 20. Copies of
Letters written from godly Ministers, Committees and other persons of quality
and well-affected to Members of the House of Commons, Minist(...) and Citizens
of London, concerning the opinions and insolent (...)ctises of Sectaries in the
Army, page 21, 22. p. 30. 41. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47. Copies of Letters written
from Ministers and others concerning the opinions and practices of Sectaries
not belonging to the Armies, and Sectaries in general, p. 33. 35, 36. 55. 66,
67, 68, 69. Copies of Letters written by Sectaries themselves to other
Sectaries or to some of our Ministers, p. 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 35, 56.
58, 59. 62. Copies of Letters written from godly Ministers, Committee men, and
other persons well-affected, out of the North concerning out Brethren of
Scotland and their Armies, p. 71. 72. 73. 74. Copies of Letters written from
godly Ministers out of several Countries to me, and other Ministers in the
City, approving of my manner and way of writing these Books against the
Sectaries called Gangrana, and of their usefulness, and the good they have
done, p. 33. 3^. 40. 74, 75* 77, 78. Copies of Letters written from Holland or
New England concerning some Errors, and Practices, p. 94. 168, 169. A Relation
of some opinions of a Lieutenant of a Company in the Army, p. 22. A Relation of
some words spoken by a Colonel in the Army, and another of the Ar(...)
concerning Ireland, p. 23. A Relation of the soldiers preaching in Oxford, and
in the public schools, p. 23. A story of a Sectarie that would not be married
by a Minister as holding it unlawful, and afterward when he had lived with
her casting her of, and denying she was his wife, p. 24. A Relation of some
words and speeches of Sectaries against the Scots, Assembly, Ministry, City,
the late Lord Mayor, p. 24. 25. A Relation of a story of Mr. Jenney, and Mrs.
Att^^a^ay, and of Letters sent her from a Prophet, and his Doctrine of general
Restoration, and of Esau's world, and Jacobs words. p. 26. 27. A Relation of a
Sectarie holding that the Parliament must give the Kingdom, that is both
England, Scotland and Ireland to the Saints, p. 28. 29. A Relation of a Troop
of Colonel Riches Regiment preaching and dipping in Wales, and of a woman's
dying within a day or two after being dipped by him, p. 31. A Relation of a
Minister hearing in a meeting of Sectaries one who exercised affirm that he
was Jesus Christ, and of the Ministers conference with him about it, and his
standing in it that he was Christ, p. 32. A Relation of some sectarian
soldiers affronting and disturbing a godly Mininister in the Church, and of
beating a man for gathering Tithes, p. 32. An Information from Norwich under
the Mayors hand of a she ^ectary one Priscilla Miles, p. 34. 35. A Relation of
one Sims a Shoemaker of Hampton with his examination, (who goes about as an
emissary all the West over) being apprehended by authority, p. 50. A Relation
of M. Sickmoore^ baptizing John Sims, p. 51. Animadversions by way of
confutation on a Letter of a ^^e Sectary, p. 61. A Relation of several
Positions laid down by M. Dell and preached before the General, p. 63. A
Relation of a story of one M. Kendall a great Sectary who has renounced his
Ministry turned Captain, when a godly Minister was to preach he stepped up
before him, p. 70. 80. A Relation of a story of some Sectaries who refuse to
keep Fast days or days of Thankesgiving, because they will not give thanks
for killing men, who affirm they have seen Christ and the Devil. p. 80. A
Relation of a young maid of 16. years of age that preaches. p. 86. A Relation
of a Minister who boasted he had pulled down the Bishops, and hoped to do as
much for the Presbyterians, p. 81. A Relation of an Officer in the Army who was
cashiered because he would answer the Sectaries when they spoke for their
opinions and against the Presbyterians, p. 81. A Relation of several Sectaries
tradesmen turned Ministers, and other Sectarian Ministers. p. 81. A Relation
of a Shoemaker of Coventry who goes about the Country venting his erroneous
points, p. 81. A Relation of one M. Downings preaching at Hackney, casting
aspersions on the Common Council of London, as if they were for the Cavaleers,
p. 81. 82. A Relation of M. Jesse commending one Mary Abram to one M. Clark of
London to look to his house, and how she worked on his son a young youth, and
(being in an Apoplexy) to be married to her by an old schoolmasters, p. 82,
83. The Petition of Mr. Clarke to the house of Commons, p. 83, 84. A Relation
how Mary Abraham had before entangled an Apprentice, and though M. Jesse knew
as much, ye^ he commended her to him, and how M. Clarke found a paper in his
sons chamber of her agreement with another young man, and he showing it to Mr.
Jesse, he kept it and would not give it him again, saying that this Mary
Abraham had confessed her sin. p. 85. A Relation of a story concerning Henry
(...) spoken of in the first part of Gangraena, and his examination by a
Justice of Peace, together with the replies made by himself. p. 85. 86, 87. A
Relation of a story concerning a schoole-^master of Gloucester, who denies the
holy Ghost to be God, though he was dealt with by all fairness to show him his
errors, p. 87, 88. A Relation concerning one Andrew Debman a Cooper, who can
neither write nor read, and yet is a great Preacher among she Sectaries, p. 88.
A Relation of a great Sectary whose wife lay a dying, who being spoken to, to
pray for her, said what good would prayer do her or them, p. 88. A Relation how
that the godly Mi- A Relation of a Letter sent from Newcastle by an
Independent, testifying the faithfulness of the Scots to the King, p. 88.
^isters of Newcastle are abused and discouraged by reason of the ^ndependents,
and other great Sectaries come in their rooms, p. 89. A Relation of a story
concerning M. Erburies venting of diverse Errors at a meeting, p. 89. 90.
Animadversions by way of confutation of the Errors vented by M. Erbury, p. 90,
91, 92. A Relation of one Sir Worts who would have had a place in Norfolk. but
being hindered he turned Independent. p. 95. A Relation of an old Anabaptist who
would often be drunk, and then bewail the blindness of the Church of England,
p. 95. A Relation of a story concerning a soldier in the Army who went up into
the Pulpit against the Minister his will, and being brought before the Justice
carried himself disrespectively, for which he was committed to prison, and how
released. p. 95, 96. A Relation of some words spoken by one against the Armies
going into Ireland, p. 96. A relation of one Potter a Smith now turned
Preacher, who has drawn many away to separated meetings on the Lords day, p.
96. A Relation of some soldiers that infected many where they quartered, and
of their undecent carriage, p. 96. A Relation of one John Durance and of his
speaking strangely concerning the King; and that there would be no peace in
England till there was a general liberty of conscience, p. 96. 97. A Relation
of one M. Larking a fierce Independent, p. 97. A Relation of a great Sectary
who vented many erroneous things, and does a great deal of hurt in Kent, p.
97. A Relation of one Brabson a great Sectary who preaches much against Tithes,
p. 97, 98. A Relation of one Cornwell a desperate Sectary, who has put forth
diverse Pamphlets, p. 98. A Relation of M. Blackwood an Anabaptist, who printed
a Book called the storming of Antichrist. p. 98. A Relation of what one M.
Nicholas Davison who came from New England, being required by the Independents
to go to Guild Hall, said to them what hurt they did, and how diverse Priests
turned Independents, p. 98. 99. A Relation of a young man a Preacher, who lived
in Holland, concerning the carriage of some English Sectaries there, and how
some of them gave thanks at their meetings for soleration (which as they heard)
had passed the House of Commons, and of their justifying M. Archers Book that
makes God the author of sin, saving they could show the copies of that, p. 99.
100. A Relation of a story concerning a Captain, who said the ^oules of the
righteous go not to heaven, and his exposition on that place, Luke 24. this day
thou shall be with me in Paradise, p. 100, 101. Animadversions on the said
exposition of the Captain, p. 101, 102. A Relation concerning Mr. Batcheler
Licenser General of all the Sectaries books, pleading for all manner of
damnable Errors, p. 102, 103, 104, 105. A Relation of the names of some
notorious Sectaries, p. 105. A Relation concerning one Carter a Sectarie. p.
105. A Relation concerning diverse Sectaries, M. Peter's converts, and one M.
Bunniard who will not keep Fast-daies, but his folks work on the Fasts, p.
105. A Relation concerning one Oats a a Weaver, who was arraigned upon his life
for dipping one who dyed within 14. days, and one reasoning with him, saying
that Rebaptization was the way to destroy the creature, and the answer made by
one, p. 105, 106. A Relation concerning a Captain who speak desperately
against the City Remonstrance, p. 106. A Relation concerning some of the
Sectaries that said they would not tolerate the Presbyterians, p. 106. A
Relation concerning a Captain who preaches on the Lords days and puts the
Minister by (though a godly man) p. 107. A Relation concerning a Sectary who
said Christ's righteousness was a beggarly righteousness. p. 107. A Relation
concerning a Sectary who affirmed Adultery and Drunkenness to be no sin, and
maintained diverse other errors, p. 107. A Relation concerning diverse Troopers
in the Army that hold very desperate and divellish opinions, p. 107. A Relation
concerning M. Buroughs who spoke against the City for their unthankfulness to
the Army, and spoke strange passages against the City Remonstrance, p. 107,
108. A Relation concerning M. Symonds of Sandwich, who said they should be
damned that had opportunity to come into their Church Way and would not, and of
his foul speech toward a godly Minister, p. 108, 109. A Relation concerning
some Sectaries in the Army, who said, what had they fought for all this while
if the Presbyteriall Government be settled, etc. p. 110. A Relation concerning
one Crab a dipper, who spoke very disdainfully of the King, p. 110. A Relation
concerning a Lieutenant a great Sectarie, who holds himself able to dispute
with the whole Assembly, he has often preached in his scarlet Cloak with
silver lace, p. 111. A Relation concerning one Webb who preached blasphemy, p.
111. A Relation of a Manuscript made by some of the Magistrates of New England
(as it was thought) for an arbitrary Government in the Commonwealth. p. 111,
112. A Relation of a Sectary who married a woman and went away from her, and
will not live with her, and how the Church whereof he is maintains him in it,
p. 112, 113. A Relation concerning M. Saltmarsh preaching, and of strange
things delivered by him, and how he said John Baptists Doctrine was a Leatherne
Doctrine, p. 113, 114. A Relation concerning Cretensis and his Errors, with
some brief Animadversions on his 38. Quaeries, and Opinions,* p. 114, 115,
116, 117, 118, 119, 120. A Relation concerning M. Peter's relating many of his
speeches and passages in his Sermons, together with an answer to a Pamphlet of
M. Peter's entitled, M. Peter's last Report of the English Wars, from page 120.
to p. 147. A Relation of M. Treake, and of opinions that he holds, and of some
Articles put up against him, p. 147, 148. A Relation concerning Richard Overton
who has printed many scandalous things against the House of Peers, and many
desperate Pamphlets scoffing and scorning of them, and his behavior to the
House of Commons and his ill speech of the Ministry, p. 148. 149, 150, 151,
152. A Relation concerning John Lilburn an Arch-Sectarie who has printed
diverse desperate Pamphlets abusing the House of Lords and diverse others, p.
153, 154, 155, 156. 157, 158, 159, 160. A Relation concerning John Price, M.
Goodwins Disciple, and of some of his opinions, p. 160, 161, 162. A Relation of
Mr. Cradock and of some things he has preached, p. 162. Animadversions on
something preached by M. Sympson at Blackfriars, p. 164. The Relation of a
story of the beating of a march of a Drum heard in the Chapel of Duckingfield
by the Independents at a meeting there, with Animadversions on that story, p.
164, 165. A Relation of a Petition on foot by some Sectaries for a Toleration,
p. 166, 167. A Relation of a story of one Andrew Wike, p. 169, 170. A Relation
of a story of Katherine Chidley and her sons being at Bury in Suffolk, and of
Gaffer Lanceter of Bury, and his Pamphlet entitled Lanceters Launc^, p. 170.
171. A relation of a Quarter Masters preaching, and of his telling the people
he had a command from the spirit to preach and was under the command of the
spirit, p. 172. A Relation of words spoken by a Captain in the Army concerning
the decolling of the King, p. 172. A Relation of a Trooper in
Northhamptonshiere standing up in the Church, and speaking to a Minister,
questioning his Doctrine, as also some soldiers wounding a Ministers son in
that County. p. 173. A Relation of a Captain speaking how they would come
against the City of London, if the House of Commons should give order so to do,
p. 174. A Relation of a Sectary saying of the Ordinance of Tithes the
Parliament made an Ordinance to rob men, and calling those Thieves and Robbers
who executed it, and of his arresting the Justices of Peace and the
Distrainers, p. 175. A Relation of an Independent Commander, declaring they
were against Independent Government as well as Presbyteriall, if it should be
settled, they were for liberty of conscience that no man should be tied to any
thing, p. 175. Animadversions on a Libellous Pamphlet entitled, The Lord
Mayors farewell from his Office of Majoral-ty, p. 175, 176, 177, 178. A
Relation of the true Reason, why breaches have been prevented in the Army,
there being so many Sectaries in it, namely the great forbearance, patience,
the passing by provocations and abuses, p. 179, 180. A Justification of that
passage in the City Remonstrance, that no Sectaries should be in places of
public trust, and what some of the Independents opinions was of that
heretofore as most equal, p. 180, 181. and a laying open the necessity of the
Remonstrance taking place in that, and what if no Justice nor good can be
expected, p. 181, 182. A Relation of a Discourse between a Citizen and an
Independent concerning the King, and of the Independents interpretation of the
Covenant concerning that part of it, of defending the Kings Person, p. 183,
184. A Relation of the Libertinisme and Atheism of the Sectaries. p. 185, 186,
187. A Relation of the many kinds of uncleanness of the Sectaries, as Incest,
etc. p. 187, 188, 189, 190. A Relation of the drunkenness of the Sectaries. p.
190, 191. A Relation of the looseness of the Sectaries. p. 191. A Relation of
the Sectaries couzening and deceiving. p. 191, 192. A Relation of the Sectaries
gross lying, and slandering. p. 192. A Relation of the pride of the Sectaries
and boasting in arms of flesh. p. 192, 193. A Relation of the Sectaries
unsufferable insolences and horrible affronts to Authority, particularly, 1.
Against the Laws of the Land, both Common and Statute, p. 194, 195. 2. Against
the King, 195, 196. 3. Against the House of Peers, 196, 197, 198, 199, 200,
201, 202. 4. Against the House of Commons, 203, 204, 205, 206, 207, 208, 209,
210, 211, 212, 213. 5. Against many particular Members of both Houses by name,
213, 214. Against Committees of both Houses, 214, 215. Against both Houses as
conjunct in their Authority and Power, p. 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 222,
223. Against our Brethren of Scotland, p. 224, 225, 226, 227. Against the City
of London, p. 228, 229. Against the Assembly, p. 230. Against the Ministers of
the Kingdom, p. 230, 231. Against the Reformed Churches, p. 231. Against
inferior Magistrates and Courts, p. 231, 232, 233, 234, 235, 236, 237, 238,
239* 240. Among all the wickednesses of the Sectaries, the Reader may observe
these six following particulars: 1. How they make it their work to destroy and
overthrow Religion, p. 233, 234, 235, 236. 2. How that when the King cast
himself into the arms of our Brethren of Scotland, they wished he had gone
rather to France or Ireland, p. 236. 237. 3. Their evil carriage toward our
Brethren of Scotland, p. 237, 238, 239. 4. Their prodigious carriage toward the
Kingdom of Ireland, p. 239, 240. 5. Their damnable hypocrisy and
dissimulation, p. 240. and that in seven particulars, 6. Their contemning and
abusing Gods Ministers.
A Relation of a Sectaries gross couzening one to whom he owed 50. pounds, the
latter end of the sheet. A Relation concerning some passages spoken in a Sermon
by M. Knollys an Anabaptist, p. 241. A Relation of some passages delivered in
diverse Sermons by M. Symonds, p. 241, 242. Animadversions on M. Burtons
Conformities Deformity, p. 243, 244, 245. Certain Quaeries propounded to M.
Burton, to show him how he is mistaken, p. 247, 248. A Relation concerning
Green a Felt-maker, that preaches in an Alley in Colemans-street, p. 248, 249.
A Relation concerning some Letters writ to worthy Members of the House of
Commons, Members of the Assembly, and other Ministers, by godly Ministers,
concerning the abuses done by the soldiers in the Army, p. 249, 250, 251, 252,
253, 254. A Relation concerning one in Authority, and what tricks and devices
he used to bring one in to be a Burgess of Parliament, p. 255, 256.
Certain Corollaries drawn from the Errors and Heresies laid down in this
Book.
Corol. 1. Shows that by the insolent proceedings of the Sectaries those
places of Scripture in Timothy and Peter are made good, and fulfilled in our
Sectaries, p. 256, 257, 258. Corol. 2. Shows that Errors and corrupt Doctrine
produce a wicked life, and looseness of manners, p. 258, 259, 260, 261. Corol.
3. Shows that many of the Sectaries are not only against Church Government,
but against Civil Government, p. 261, 262, 263. Corol. 4. Shows that our
evils are not taken away, but only changed, p. 263. Corol. 5. Shows into what
a condition we are fallen, and from what fallen, that we can do and suffer
such things as we do, p. 573, 294. Corol. 6. Shows what a great plague and
judgment to the Land so many Sectaries in the Army are, p. 265, 266, 267.
Corol. 7. Shows that never in any Age, or any Christian State, there has been
such a sufferance and Toleration as has been, and is in our Kingdom, p. 268.
269, 270. Corol. 8. Shows that the Sectaries though they will receive Liberty
of Conscience, yet they will not give it to others where they have power, p.
271, 272. Corol. 9. Shows (as in a glass) the true cause of all our present
evils to be a love of Sectarisme, and Errors p. 27. Corol. 10. Shows
well-meaning men* should learn to be undeceived, p. 278. A Postscript, in
which the Reader has an account given him of many Pamphlets put forth against
Mr. Edwards since he writ the second part of Gangraena, and some brief
Animadversions upon them all, as M. Buroughs Vindication, Gangraena plays
Rex, M. Saltmarsh's Shadows flying away, etc.
A Relation of the Names and of the Speeches, and doings of the principal
Independents and Sectaries spoken of in this Book.
Mr. Jesse, page 19. 82. 85. Mr. Knollys, p. 19. p. 48. 241. M. Peter's, p. 24.
27. 76, 77. 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132,
133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146. M. Tandy,
p. 54* 57, 58. George Young, p. 64. M. Dell, p. 63, 64. 213. 262. M. Randall,
p. 25. Thomas Collyer, p. 27, 28, 29, 51, 52. William Bowling, and his errors,
p. 35, 36, 37. Captain Paul Hobson the Tailor, p. 45. 49. John Sims a
Shoemaker, p. 50. (...) ^^ckmoore. p. 51. John P^^le, p. 54. Floid a Preacher,
p. 62. Matthewes, p. 66. M. Eaton, p. 68. 264. M. Saltmarsh, p. 72. 75, 76.
113, 114. Lamb, p. 78. 113. Kiffin, p. 78. Turner, p. 78. M. Kendall, p. 79.
Thomas Moore, p. 80. M. Wainwright, p. 81. Heath a Collar maker, p. 81. Rice a
Tinker, p. 81. Field a Bodiesmaker, p. 81. Crew a Tailor, p. 81. M. Feake, p.
81. 147. M. Harrison, p. 81. M. Downing, p. 81, 82. Henry Den, p. 85, 86, 87.
M. Beedle of Gloucester, p. 87. Andrew Debman, p. 88. M. Erbury, p. 89, 90. 250.
Sir Worts, p. 95. Potter a Smith, p. 96. John Durance, p. 96, 97. M. Larkin, p.
97. M. Powell, p. 97. Brabson, p. 97, 98. Cornwell, p. 98. M. Blackwood, p. 98.
M. Batcheler, p. 102, 103, 104, 105. Dagnall a Bookseller, p. 105. Bar a
Weaver, p. 105. Hich. p. 105. Carter, p. 105. M. Bunniard, p. 105. M.
Postlethwait, p. 105. M. Cra^ts, p. 105. Oats a Weaver, p. 105, 106. Tench, p.
106. M. Buroughs, p. 107, 108. 118, 119. 164. 180. 181, M. Symonds, p. 108.
131. Crab, p. 110. Thomas We^b, p. 111. Blunt, p. 112. Emmes, p. 112. Wrighter,
p. 112. Cretensis, p. 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120. 159, 160, 161. M.
Cradock, p. 131. 163. Richard Overton, p. 148, 149, 150, 151, 152. John
Lilburne, p. 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159, 160, 262* John Price, p. 160,
161, 162. M. Sympson, p. 163. Andrew Wicke, p. 169, 170. Katherine Chidley, p.
170, 171. John Hall, p. 171. Lanceter, p. 170, 171. M. Symonds, p. 241, 242. M.
Burton, p. 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 147. Green the Felt-maker, p. 248. Spencer
a Coachman, p. 249. Gorton. p. 249. Lieutenant John Web, p. 251, 252. 254.
Colonel John Hewson, p. 252, 253. Major Axton, p. 253. Margeret North, p. 253.
A New and further DISCOVERY OF The Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies and
Proceedings of the Sectaries of these times.
HAving given the Reader an account in my First and Second Parts of Gangraena
of many of the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, and pernicious Practices of the
Sectaries, I shall now proceed to add diverse more Errors, Blasphemies and
insolent unheard of Practices, by all which the Reader may observe those words
of Paul fulfilled in our times, viz. that evil men and Seducers shall wax
worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived, and that place speaking of
false Teachers and Doctrines, for they will increase unto more ungodliness,
and their word will eat as does a Gangrene, and in this Third Part I shall
more particularly and largely set down the corrupt Opinions and Principles
that have been vented against the Civil Magistrate, and the Government of
Commonwealths, as also relate more Practices and insolences of those
Sectaries who are Soldiers, and belonging to the Army, then I did in the
former Parts: And first of all I shall lay down the erroneous Opinions not
enumerated in the former Catalogues, which being added to the two hundred and
fourteen set down in the First and Second Parts will amount with those in the
Appendix too, to near upon three hundred.

The third Catalogue of the Errors, Heresies, and strange Opinions of the
Sectaries of these times.
1. THat God has a bodily shape and proportion: man was made according to the
likeness of God in personal shape, and God the Creator bears the same form
in shape and person which man has.

This Opinion was held by some Heretics in the fourth Century, For proof of
this vide Pamphlet entitled Little-Nonsuch, printed at London very lately,
page 2.
first known by the name of Audiani, and afterward called Anthropomorphitae.
Augustine in his Book de Haeresibus ad Quodvult Deum, cap. 50. writes of them,
Audianos quos appellant, alii vocant Anthropomorphitas, quoniam Deum sibi
fingunt cogitatione carnali in similitudinem imaginis corruptibilis hominis.
Theodoret in his fourth Book Haeret. Fabul. writes there was one Animadvers.
Audaeus, who said God was like to man, and gave to God the parts of a man, who
fell into this Error by his misunderstanding of those places of Scripture,
which speak of God according to man's understanding. Danaeus in his Tractate de
Haeresibus* fully confutes this Opinion, and shows the story of it; and in
that, this Heresy should be now pleaded for in Print, it shows us how the
Devil in these times revives old Errors dead and buried for many hundred years.

2. The story of Adams eating the forbidden fruit, and of Little Nonsuch, page,
4.
the Serpent, is an Allegory; by the Serpent in that place is no other then
concupiscence, and by the fruit of the tree, some other eating then the eating
of a material Apple is understood.

This also is an Error revived, held by David George, who lived Animadvers.
a hundred years ago: In David Georges life written in Latin by his son in
law Nicolaus Blesdikius, page 161, 162. it is related that by the Serpent
entising our first Parents, he meant concupiscence, and pleads for an Danaeus
in his Tract. de Haeresibus cap. 4. 3. Among other Errors of the Origenists
shows this to he one, that in the interpretation of Scripture they would
perpetually Allegorize, so that they left nothing certain in the word of God
neither that Parad^se, nor Adam, nor Eve, nor the waters, nor any thing which
Moses lays down in the whole Book of Genesis. Whereupon Augustine writ 12
Books de Genesi ad literam against such Allegorists and Corrupters of the
Scripture.
allegorical interpretation of the Serpent, because the Historical Narration
of the Serpent, as it is laid down by Moses, (says David George) draws diverse
absurdities with it.

3. In marriage there are no degrees of blood or affinity forbidden, but a man
may marry the next of kin to him; a brother may marry his Sister, an Uncle his
Niece, a Son his Fathers Little Nonsuch, page 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.
Wife, and so in any degrees without exception; so that if this liking to marry
happen betwixt the nearest of kindred, then it is also the most natural, the
most lawful, and according to the Primitive purity and practice.

The maine scope of this book called Little Nonsuch, or certain Animadvers.
new questions, is to plead for Incestuous Marriages, where the Author sets
himself to evade all the Scriptures in the Old and New Testament, saying, It Is
not marriage simply with Sisters, Brothers Wives, etc. that is forbidden, so
long as a man keeps wholly to such a one having taken her for wife, but the
committing fornication with them not being married. Now I shall show the
falsenesse of this by two Scriptures, The first in Leviticus 18. where both in
the general, verse 6. and in particular the several degrees are forbidden
expressly, verse 7. 8, 9, 10, etc. of the Fathers wife, of the Sister, of the
Fathers Sister, etc. And whereas the Author of that wicked Pamphlet pleads,
that uncovering of nakedness is meant of fornication only, and not of
marriage: I Answer, The Holy Ghost in that Chapter expounds the uncovering of
nakedness to be marrying, verse the 18. and makes taking to wife and
uncovering nakedness to be the same, as is evident by these words, Neither
shall thou take a Wise to her Sister to vex her, to uncover her nakedness
besides the other in her life time: that is, either thou shall not take one
wife to another, marrying another wife having one, or else marry the sister of
thy wife whether she be sister by mother or by the father. Again, the holy
Ghost in this Chapter forbids that which is unlawful with some kind of
persons, and not with all, and at some times and not at others; therefore
limits it to such a sort of persons, such degrees of blood; but now fornication
is unlawful with all, and at all times, a man may not uncover the nakedness,
that is, commit fornication with those who are remotest in blood or affinity,
and that it must be understood so is evident from the 19. verse, Vide Ainsworth
in Lev. 18. v. 19.
Thou shall not approach unto a woman to uncover ^er nakedness as long as she
is put apart for her uncleanesse; that is, every man was to abstain from his
own wife during the time of her monthly fluors, which necessarily shows it is
meant of a man's wife, for from all other women a man must abstain always, and
it is never lawful to approach to them, but even from a man's own wife over
who^e body he has power at other times, he is then to abstain. Lastly, the
holy Ghost comes to speak of fornication, verse 20. Thou shall not lie carnally
with thy neighbors wise: There he forbids fornication, but in the former part
of the Chapter he for bad Incest and Incestuons marriages. The other Scripture
is in the New Testament, Mark 6. 17, 18. verses, where John tell^ Herod it is not
lawful for him to have his brother Philips wife; and this cannot be evaded, by
saying John reproved Herod, taking her by force, or living in fornication with
her; but not barely for marriage with her: For the text faith expressly he had
married her, and she was willing to it as appears by the story, because she had
a quarrel against John Baptist, and would have killed him for preaching to
Herod against it, and afterward watched her opportunity of revenge against
John, verse 19. 24 preferring his head before half of the Kingdom. I have
been the larger in this Animadversion, because diverse Sectaries a^ guilty of
Incestuous marriages; I have the names of three Independents given me out of
one County
who have married incestuously.

4. For proof of this, see page 25. of this third Part of Gangr.
That our common food, ordinary eating and drinking, is a Sacrament of Christ's
death, and a remembrance of his death till his coming again.

5. That the Souls of the Saints departed now in Heaven, are on Earth
everywhere present with their friends, and with all the affairs of this world,
seeing and knowing them; though in a spiritual manner, and not in so gross a
way as when they were living upon earth; for look as the Saints whilst they
were on earth This Doctrine was Preached at a Funeral sermon in London, and
brought to comfort men against that trouble of death, They shall (...) and he
removed from their friends, and ^e strangers to the affairs b^low: This point
was (...) b^ way of Answer* i(...) upon and amplified: I and diverse other
Minister^ were ^are witnesses, and spoke together of the Sermon when it was
done. I have been told it also from good hands, that an Independent Minister of
great note, when he was dying (...) to his wife and friends to have a care how
they used his body when it was dead, for (...) should know what they did to him.
in their bodies, yet were in Heaven in their Conversations: So now, though
they ^e in He(...), yet they are on Earth with their friends, and know their
state and condition.

Does not this Doctrine open a gap for prayer to the dead? what bred and
nourished prayer to Saints departed but this? and is not Animadvers.
this a great ground of it among the Papists at this day? if this were true,
would it not put men upon praying to Saints whom they familiarly knew and were
interrested in, as their fathers, mothers, etc. A godly and able Minister who
was at this Sermon, professed to me and another Minister discoursing of the
Sermon, That if he believed this Doctrine to be true, he should pray to his
Father to remember and pray for him; and the Papists generally as Bellarmine
and others urge this as an argument for Prayer to Saints because they know our
affairs and the condition of things below: unto which the Protestants
generally Answer, That the Saints departed know not our wants, nor what is done
in the earth: and in Answer to that Argument, The Saints on earth pray for one
another: Ergo, much more we should desire the prayers of the Saints departed:
Among other Answers they still give this, We may request the prayers of one
another, because we know our mutual necessities, but the Saints departed know
not what things are done here upon earth, neither are every where present to
hear ou^ prayers. The holy Ghost tells us, Isaiah 63* 16. that Abraham is
ignorant of us, and Israel knows us not: Upon which Augustine writes thus, If
so great Patriarck^ were ignorant what became of the people which were borne of
their loi^es; how is it like that other dead can be present to understand and
be helping to men's affairs* So Job says of them who are dead, His sons come
to honor and (...) knows it not, and they are brought low but be perceives
it not; Job 14. verse 21. But for confutation of this Popish opinion, I refer
the Reader to Willets Synopsis the much general Controversy concerning the
Saints departed, quest. 3. to Amesius his Bellar. E^ervatus Tom. 2(...) de
Invocatione Sa^ctorum, and to learned Rivers Catholicus Orthodoxus Tract. 2.
Quest. 48.

6. The glorified Souls now in Heaven see in Christ as in a glass the state of
the whole Church on Earth, all their joys to rejoice with them, and all their
griefs and troubles, though not to greive with them.

This is B(...)nes opinion, an brought by him as a ground Animadvers.
for the Invocation of Saints, became at once they see in God as in a glass
all things here below, and so the prayers of the faithful directed to them.
Of the manner how the Saints in Heaven know the prayers of the living,
Bellarmine* sets down four opinons of the ways how; 1 Some say they know them
by the relation of Angels. 2 Others say, the Souls of the Saints by their
wonderful celerity and agility are in a sort every where and so know. 3 Many
hold, the Saints see at once in God as in aglasse all things which concern
them, and so the prayers directed to them. I astly, others say, they know them
by special revelation from God, when they are prayed, as Elisha knew Ge^azies
corruption, and Samuel knew Saul's estate. Now the Third, the beholding in God
as in a glass the prayers of the living, Bellarmine adheres to as the most
probable; so that this 6th Error, and Bellarmines agrees fully: but for
confutation of this Error, let the Reader read our Protestants in Answer to
Bellarmine upon this question: As Amesius Bellar. Enervat. Willets Synopsis,
with many others.

7 The glorified Souls who are in Heaven, do now with Christ govern and rule
the Kingdoms of the Earth and all the affairs here below; for proof of which
was brought these Texts as I remember, Revelation 3. 21. To him that overcomes
will I grant to ^it with me in my throne. Rev. 2. 26. And he that overcomes to
him will I give power over the nations.

This also is a Popish Error brought to strengthen prayer to Saints; for
seeing it were a vain thing to pray to them if they had Animad verse.
not power to help, they therefore are urged to confess that the Saints are
patrons of men, and have the government of the world committed to them, and
Bellarmine with the Rhemists bring this Scripture out of the Rev. To him that
overcomes will I give power over nations; Ergo, the Saints have the government
of men committed to them: But the Answer to this Scripture and such like, the
Reader may find at large in Willets Synopsis ninth gener. Controversy, quest.
3. the third part of the question, whether the Saints departed understand our
prayers and be always at hand to help us, and thither I refer him.

8 This Error and the other three last mentioned were preached last Sept. 17 at
a Funeral Sermon, by an Independent of great note, I, and many other Ministers
were ^are witnesses of these doctrines.
That the Angels dwell in the glorified Souls of the Saints departed.

9. Proof Webs Pamph. written against my first Part of Gangr. page 6.
That John's Baptism which was by water, did end at the coming of Christ, and
that there is no Baptism by water instituted by Christ.

Animad. This Error is both printed and licensed, Web professes he should
account me as his Father in Christ to convince him of the contrary by
Scripture, and this Error receives much countenance from Master Saltmarsh in
his Smoke in the Temple, page 16. in saying those Scriptures of Matthew 28. 19.
Mark 16. 15. Go and teach all Nations Baptizing them, etc. are not understood
of baptizing with water, but the Spirits baptizing, or the Baptism of the holy
Ghost, and therefore I shall animadvert upon it. For the first branch of this
Error, that John's Baptism which was by water, did end at the coming of Christ,
and so makes John's Baptism of another kind then Christ's, and diverse from it,
it is a Popish Error and confuted by all our Protestant Divines in handling of
the question of Baptism, who hold generally against the Papists, That John's
Baptism was not diverse from Christ's Baptism, but was all one with it in
property and effect, and that they who were baptized by John, needed not to be
baptized again; and for satisfaction I refer the Reader to Willets Synopsis
twelfth general controversy of the Sacrament of Baptism, Quest. 7. where the
arguments pro and contra by Papists and Protestants are set down, and to
learned Respond^o Baptismum Johannis discrepasse a Baptismo Christ's, qua* tenus
Christus Baptizat interius baptism^ spiritus. Et hac in part diff^rt Baptismus
Christi ab omnibus Minist^orum Sacrorum baptismis: nihil autem discrepasse a
baptism ceremoniali a Christo instituto, nisiration^ tem^oris, and
significationis cl^ritate, qu^ ante Chriti manifestationem ta^ta non suit,
quanta post came* Non s^^us, ac Apostolorum baptismus ante mortem Christi
divers^^ suit a baptismo* ab ipsis post mortem ejus administrato. page 25. 26
27.
Rivets Catholicus Orthodoxus Tract. 3. Quaest. 2. where against the Jesuit he
learnedly maintains the Baptism of John to be a Sacrament of the Gospel, and
that Christ's Baptism differs no more from John's, then it does from the
Baptism of other Ministers, and that John's Baptism differed nothing from
Christ's, but in respect of time and clearness of signification, which before
the manifestation of Christ was not so great as it was after it; and in this
respect the Baptism of the Apostles before the death of Christ was different
from the Baptism administered by them after his death. As for that Web ^aith,
that John's Baptism which was by water, did end at the coming of Christ, it is
apparently false, for Christ himself a little before his beginning to preach,
was baptized with John's Baptism, which was by water, Matthew 3. from verse 13.
to 17. and after Christ preached and called Apostles, they baptized with water,
and baptized more Disciples then John; compare John 3. verse 22, 33. with John
4. verse 1, 2. and it was a baptizing with water as those words show, J^^^s and
his Disciples baptized, and John was also baptizing in Aenon because there was
much water there, so that it was such a baptizing as John's, viz. by water, and
the place to do it in chosen, because there was much water. And lastly, it is
apparent by the Scripture, that a Baptism by water was used by the Apostles
and in the Primitive Apostolical Churches, not only since the coming of Christ
and his preaching in his own person, but since his going away, since his
Resurrection and Ascension, and for that I will name three Scripture, Acts 8.
36. 37, 31, 39. Philip baptizes the Eunuch with water upon believing, after
Christ's Ascension. Acts 10. 47, 48. Those Gentiles who were baptized with the
holy Ghost, verse 45. on whom was poured out the gift of the holy Ghost, these
men were baptized with water, as those words demonstratively prove, verse 47.
Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized, So
that this Scripture takes away that foundation that Christ's Baptism, and the
Baptism he spoke of in Matthew. 28. 19. etc. was a being baptized with the gifts
of the holy Ghost, and not with water; for here we see Peter commands those
baptized with the gifts of the holy Ghost to be baptized with water, and takes
it for granted, such persons are to be baptized, Can any man forbid water that
these should not be baptized? 1 Pet. 20. 21. The like figure whereunto, even
Baptism does also now save us, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh.
This Epistle was written long after the Ascension, yet even then now Baptism
saves, and it was such a Baptism like unto that where in eight souls were saved
by water, so that it must be a baptism by water, and those words clearly prove
it not the putting away the filth of the flesh which is done by water, which
shows that in the baptism under the N. Testament since Christ's death,
Resurrection and Ascension, we must look for more then the washing of the
outward man by water, namely the Answer of a good conscience by the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ; but however more then water, yet water is
necessarily supposed.

10. That it is injustice in God to punish the souls of the wicked in Hell
while their bodies lie at rest in their graves, for seeing both were sinners
together, both must be sufferers together; if God should punish the soul of
C(...) in Hell five or six thousand years before he punishes the body of Cain,
he then would show himself partial in his distribution of justice.

11. That the devils are mortal as well as men are in their bodies.

12. Proof of the 10. and 11. Errors page 36, 37. of this Third Part.
That Adams righteousness in innocence was but flesh, and opposed to the
spirit.

13. Some of the Manifestarians hold that they have seen Christ visibly, and
seen the Devil also. * Proof p. 80. of this Third part. Proof of the 13, 14,
page 80. of this Third part. Proof of the 15. page 21. Proof of 16. page 80. 45.


14. That it is unlawful to keep days of Thanksgiving, to give thanks to God
for Victories for one man's killing another.

15. There is no such office as the Ministry, its blasphemy for any one to say
that he is a Minister of Jesus Christ more then any other man; such an office
was, but its ceased.

16. That there is no need of Universities, that Universities are of the
Devil; that humane learning is flesh opposed to the spirit, and that if men be
anointed with the spirit, and accepted amongsts the Saints, they are
sufficiently qualified.

17. That believers ought not to be troubled or grieved for whatsoever sins or
evils they saw committed by any, because that God if he would could hinder
them, he had power and wisdom enough to hinder them, and to make things
otherwise; and therefore if he saw not good to hinder them, what should they
trouble themselves about them?

18. That Pigeons in Dove Houses are common for all men to Vide Proof of these
page 20. of this Third part.
take and eat them, as well as those who are owners of those Dove Houses,
because Pigeons are fowls of the air, and so common to the sons of men.

19. That it is unlawful to eat things strangled, as fowls whose necks are
broken and wrung about, and not cut off.

20. That there is no Predestination nor Election at all.

21. Vid. Proof of this page 107.
That Gods eternal Election is of all men, one as well as another.

22. For proof see a Book entitled Divine Light manifesting the love of God
unto the whole world, with the true Church, printed in the year 1646.
That many shall be actually saved who are not elected; and they who preach
none shall he saved but the elect and predestinate, are notable liars.

23. Divine Light mani^esting the love of God, page 25.
There is a twofold eternal life and salvation, a more glorious salvation, so
as to make them instruments of salvation unto the whole Creation, and that
belongs to the elect and predestinate; and a less glorious salvation, which
belongs to them who are not prede^tinate.

24. That all the Heathen shall be saved, because they are not guilty of
unbelief, never hearing of Christ.

25. That God is in our flesh as much as in Christ's flesh, he is as much in the
flesh of the members, as in the Head.

26. That all shall be saved at last, both all men and devils: Christ by
suffering has merited for the transgressions of his Creation, Angels and
Mankind, and all immortal Spirits, paying the price of our transgressions, and
the transgressions of all Angels, The maine scope of that Pamphlet called Divine
Light manifesting the love of God unto the whole world, is to plead for a
general salvation of all men and devils, and that Christ has paid the Price
of his blood for them all.
Spirits, and Mankind, sealing the pardon of all with his blood; the reprobate
condition of men and Angels shall be regained, cursednesse shall be taken away,
death and hell shall be destroyed, the grave shall deliver up the dead, all
shall be created anew to life and immortality: The damned prisoners shall be
sent forth out of the pit wherein there is no water by the power of the Holy
Ghost, who will maintain and make use of the blood of Christ, showing it to be
the holy Covenant of general Redemption.

27. They are the great Antichrist, and deny the whole Christ; God, and their
own salvation, who deny the Covenant of general Redemption of all men, devils,
and the whole Creation.

28. Christ descended into hell to break the bands of the damned, preaching
peace unto them; and for the proving it these Scriptures are wrested, 1 Pet. 3.
18. Ephesians. 4. 9. 10. Z^ch. 9. 11.

29. The Devils for a time have damned themselves for not believing, nor
receiving this truth in obedience to the Gospel of General Redemption, that
God has made all perfect to himself in Christ, and paid a price for the sins
of all, being by Christ justly condemned for their unbelief and disobedience,
in not obeying Divine Light, page 19.
the Gospel of peace, righteousness, and love to God and our fellow creatures.

30. The true Christian working faith which the Holy Ghost commends so much
unto all in Scripture, and calls for at the hands of all in case of salvation
receiving it, or damnation in refusing it, (for the want of which millions of
thousands were damned Divine Light, page 11, 12, 13.
for a time, though not damned to perish for ever, for there is none can be
damned totally) is to believe the Covenant of General Redemption, that all
shall be eternally saved, both men and devils, and shall see, feel, and
possess the blessedness of it to their everlasting salvation and comfort.
This is the true Christian working faith that removes the mountains of sins not
only for our selves but for others; and that faith which talks much of Christ,
and preaches that none can be saved but by faith, and denies this work of
General Redemption, is a formal faith, is a very mystery of iniquity, and
proclaims openly against Gods love and perfection unto his whole Creation in
Christ.

31. This true faith of believing the Covenant of General Redemption though it
were but in a few, in three persons only in the world, yet this faith in these
persons should save all the rest of the Creation: These believers are that seed
of blessedness unto Divine Light, page 11, 13, 14, 23.
all the Creation with them, in them, and by them: they are made isntrumental
means of God through Christ only by believing and declaring his goodness,
and in their spirits contesting with God for his Jehovah mercies toward the
rebellious, they are made instruments of blessing unto the whole Creation,
although there should be but three in the earth. This Christian faith is of
power to bring all things to life, If there were but three persons in the whole
world that had it in possession; it receives all things from God in Christ,
and works through God himself, it is perfect unto all in Christ from God: In
due time the Lord will bring it unto its full birth, to the breaking up of the
gates of hell, and meeting Christ in the general resurrection shall receive
life and power to immortalize all things.

32. That Christ shed his blood for kine and horses and all other The proof of
this is in p. 36. of this Third part of Gangraena.
creatures, as well as for men; for the proving of which that Scripture is
miserably perverted, Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22.

Animadvers. These Errors last set down from the 26. to 32. are not only (viz.
some of them) old Errors revived, held formerly by those Heretics called
Origenistae and Adamantii, who denied the punishments of reprobate men and of
devils to be eternal, and that after a time they should all be saved, (of
which the Reader may see more in Augustine de Haeresibus, and in Danaeus
Commentaries upon him) nor only against some express Scriptures, as Jude verse.
6. 2 Pet. 2. 4. Mat. 25. 41. (which unanswerably hold out these three things;
First, that the devils have not all their punishment, nor the greatest part
whilst this world lasts, but howsoever they are now in darkness, and in
chains, they are reserved to have their full doom at the day of judgment:
Secondly, that doom and sentence at the day of judgment both upon devils and
ungodly men is eternal and everlasting: Thirdly, that eternal cannot be taken
for a long time, or a time till such a period, but for ever and ever without
end; and the last appears thus, First, because this sentence is something more
and further then yet they have suffered, it is spoken of as reserved for it; now
the devils have suffered a long time, many thousand years before the day of
judgment comes, almost six thousand years already, besides what is to come, and
if their doom were but for a long time after, it would be but like that which
is past, a long time in both: Secondly, at the day of judgment that which is
^alled everlasting, eternal, must needs be properly so, and not taken for a
long time, as sometimes it is so taken for long times whilst this world stood,
because then the stage of this world is pulled down, and time in which things
were measured shall be no more, no more night nor day, summer nor winter, 2
Pet. 3. 7, 10, 11, 12. The heavens and the earth which are now are reserved
unto fire against the day of judgment; the heavens shall pass away, the
elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up, all these things shall be dissolved, and whatever
has a being after the day of judgment is eternal and for ever; so Revel. 10.
6. there should be time no longer, which some interpret, there shall be no
time, because time shall be finished and this variety of days and nights,
months and years, and an unchangeable eternity shall follow in the days of
the seventh Angel: but whether that be the meaning or no of the Vid Pareum in
hunc locum Nem^ nescit ut post consummationem saeculi fiat temporis abolitio,
sequatur aeternitas.
place, this is certain, that after the end of this world and the general
Judgment there will be an abolition of time, and an eternity follow; and
therefore eternal fire, and eternal chains, both for devils and ungodly men,
cannot be meant of a long time, but simply of eternal, a part post. Thirdly,
there is the same reason in every respect why eternal for judgment, fire,
destruction, should be taken in the same sense that eternal is when joined to
life, kingdom, etc. but there it is taken not for a long-lasting time, but
properly for everlasting, and therefore must of necessity be so here; and
whatever color, gloss, or evasion can be brought to evade that of hell
torments, damnation, that they should not be eternal, the same will lie as
strong against the eternal life and kingdom given to the Saints) but they
overthrow the whole doctrine of faith, break that golden chain of salvation in
the eighth of the Romans in all the links of it, Election, Vocation,
Justification, Glorification; nay further, these Errors as they are laid down,
do not only cross express Scriptures, and Articles of our Faith, but they
deny salvation to all men who believe not those wicked doctrines, making them
the great Antichrist, formal believers, and putting the cause of all damnation
to devils and men (viz. for so long as they are damned) upon the not-beleeving
and receiving these wicked doctrines, That all devils and men shall be saved,
and that Christ paid the price, laying down his blood for the pardon of all
reprobated Men and Angels, and that the believing of these doctrines is the
only true Christian working faith, commended so much by the Holy Ghost, and of
such an efficacy, that this faith being but in two or three in the whole world,
shall yet save all the rest of the Creation; then which Doctrines and Positions
nothing can be more repugnant to the Christian faith, and may properly be
called doctrines of devils.

33. Divine Light manifesting the love of God unto the whole world, page 5.
Vide Divine Light Manifesting the love of God.
The Trinity of Persons came down in Christ to suffer; Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost suffered for their transgressing creature.

34. There is a private Kingdom of Christ's justice in which he sat Judge over
the quick and dead to condemn and execute torments on the rebellious whom he
held as prisoners for a time, and there is Christ's public Kingdom, to which
the Private Kingdom must give place; and as the Father has given it to Christ
to rule it for ever, so Christ has committed it to the Holy Ghost to enliven
all things, to bring up all to life and immortality, and the Holy Ghost for the
Father and the Son shall execute the judgment of love and mercies unto all for
the destroying of death, of hell.

35. Proof p. 22. of this Third Part.
That it is unlawful to pray unto God kneeling.

36. Proof. A godly Minister of this City told me he heard an Independent
Minister maintain this Opinion before company.
That Organs are a sanctified adjunct in the service of God now under the
Gospel, and that if any man in the Church had a gift of making Hymner, he might
bring them in to be sung with Organs or other Instruments of music.

In several ages of the Church, wanton men who could not be content with the
simplicity of the Gospel, have brought both into Animadvers.
doctrines of Faith and Worship such opinions and practices still as have been
most suitable to their genius and education, to the principles of such Arts and
Sciences in which they were versed, as Origin and some others versed in Plato's
Philosophy, brought in opinions into the Church according to Plato's doctrine;
Some who have been much addicted to Painting and Imagery, they have brought in
Images into the Church; and now some of our Independents having fancies in
Music singing, taking great delight in that way, they have pleaded for and
brought into the Church Hymns and Music.

37. Proof of this Third Part of his Gangaena page 107.
That Adultery is no Sin, and that Drunkenesse is none neither, but a help to
see Christ the better by it.

38. Proof, vide p. 84. of this Third Part.
Though consent of Parents unto Childrens marriage was commanded under the Law,
to them that lived then; yet because that was but a ceremony, it is now lawful
to marry without their consent, because we live under the Gospel.

39. Proof p. 36. of this Third part.
Christ's death and sufferings were endured for to be our example, not to
purchase heaven for us.

40. I have been told from good hands, of several Anabaptists brought before
the Magistrate who have refused to take an oath, and of others who would speak
the truth as in the presence of Christ, but not swear.
That it is not lawful for Christians to take an oath, no not when they are
called before Authority, and brought into Courts.

41. Proof p. 147. of this Third part of Gangraena.
That Christ would destroy not only unlawful Government, but lawful
Government, not only the abuse of it, but the use of it; he was destroying both
Monarchy and Aristocracy.

42. Proof, Pamphlet entitled Certain Queres 1645. by Thomas C^lyer, and in
Third part of Gang. p. 28.
That the Saints, besides the spiritual Kingdom and Government of the Church
of Christ, must have an external Kingdom to possess; that this is the time
that the Kingdom, viz. England, Scotland, and Ireland, is to be taken from him
who shall arise and subdue three Kingdoms, thinking to change times and Laws,
and shall be given to the Saints.

43. Vid. Pamph. entit. An alarm to the H. of Lords. p. 1.
Gracious Lords, or Favorable Lords, are titles that cannot be proper amongst
Christians, but are marks of Gentiles.

44. Proof pamphlet Overtons defiance to the H. of Lords, p. 6
It Is an utter disfranchisement of the people, and a mere vassalage, for a man
to Petition to Courts of Judicature, as the House of Peers, for his right, and
to have justice done him: it is no better then a branch of tyranny to force a
man to turn Supplicant for his own, and of self-robbery to submit thereto: It Is
an inslaved and intolerable condition of this Nation, that indeed they cannot
have their own natural Rights and Immunities but they must be actual
Petitioners, as if their own were not their own of right, but of favor.

45. That for Crimes and Offenses committed in a Commonwealth there should not
be certain penalties appointed by Laws, Proof, vide page 111, 112, of this
Third part of Gangraena.
to which the Governors and Magistrates should be tied, but it should be lest
to the discretion and wisdom of the Magistrates to inflict what they thought
fit in case of such and such Crimes; and this liberty should be left, that a
Magistrate might exercise his gifts of Government, which if he were kept
strictly to the Law, how should his wisdom and gifts be manifested?

46. That Protestant States and Parliaments have no power nor liberty to
confirm and enact by Law Worship and Church Government, Proof, vide Master
Burtons Conformities deformity, the whole scope of the Book being to maintain
this, among other pages vide page 7, 8, 13, 14, 15. and for Animadversions on
this the Reader shall find in the latter part of this Book.
composed by Protestant Synods who have an eye to the Scripture in what they
do, but the assuming of such a power, so as to enact a Law to bind all to
conformity, it is a falling under that in Esaias, Their fear toward God was
taught by the precept of men; it is with Nebuchadnezzar to erect his golden
Image, with Jeroboam and his Council to set up the golden Calves; it is a
rejecting of Christ from being King, an utter overthrowing of the Kingly
Prerogative and Office of Christ, and a destroying a foundation of faith.

47. That all Power, Places, and Offices that are just in this Kingdom, ought
only to arise from the choice and election of the people, and that all the
power and right any man has in governing and ruling over those he rules,
stands wholly in the choice and election of those that are ruled; and that men
need not, ought not to yield obedience and subjection to the Commands, Summons,
Laws, etc. of any but of those they have chosen and who are their
Representers; and to submit, yield obedience to any others whom they have not
chosen, is inconsistent with the nature of just freedoms, and to exercise any
power not derived from choice, is no less then usurpation and oppression.

48. That all the Legal, Supreme, Sovereign, Regal, Legislative power of
this Kingdom is in the House of Commons, the chosen Commons of England, and in
no other whatsoever: there is no other the Svpreame Court of Judicature of this
Land but the House of Commons: That all Majesty and Kingship inherently
residing in the people or state universal the representation or derivation of
it is formally and legally in the state Representative or elect, and in none
else: The Supreme power only of right belonging to the House of Commons, they
only being chosen by the people.

49. That the state universal, the body of the common people is the Earthly
Sovereign, Lord, King and Creator of the King, Parliaments, all Officers and
Ministers of Justice: Underived Majesty and Kingship inherently resides in the
state universal; and the King Parliaments, etc. are their own mere creatures to
be accountable to them, and disposed of by them at their pleasure; the people
may recall and reassume their power, question them, and set others in their
place.

50. That whatever the Fundamental Constitutions of Kingdoms and Common
wealths have been by forefathers, whatever agreements, compacts have been of
subjection and obedience of such a people for themselves and posterities to
one, as under Kingly government, or to more, yet the men of the present age
following many hundred years after, ought to be absolutely free from what their
forefathers yielded unto, and freed from all kinds of exorbitancies,
molestations, without exception or limitation, either in respect of persons,
officers, degrees, or things, and estated in their natural and just Liberties
agreeable to right reason.

51. That the House of Commons cannot have any power, nor exercise any power
justly, but what the people who chose them Pamphlet entitled, A Remonstrance
of many thousand Citizens and other Freeborn people of Engl. to their own House
of Commons, p. 12, 13.
conferred upon them, and the common people having given them no power to
establish Religion (as having no such power in themselves, and therefore could
not confer that which they had not) therefore the House of Commons cannot
assume a power to control Religion or a way of Church Government upon the
people; and although the Kings Writ for choosing Knights and Burgesses implies
the establishment of Religion, yet all implications in the Writs of the
Establishment of Religion shows that in that particular, as many other, we
remain under the Norman yoke of an unlawful power from which we ought to free
ourselves; and the House of Commons ought not to maintain upon us, but to
abrogate.

52. That seeing all men are by nature the Sons of Adam, and from him have
legitimatly derived a natural propriety, right, and freedom, Therefore England
and all other Nations, and all particular persons in every Nation,
notwithstanding the difference of Laws and Governments, rancks, and degrees,
ought to be alike free and estated in their natural Liberties, and to enjoy
the just Rights and Prerogative of mankind, whereunto they are Heirs apparent;
and thus the Commoners by right, are equal with the Lords. For by natural
birth all men are equally and alike born to like propriety, liberty, and
freedom; and as we are delivered of God by the hand of nature into this world,
every one with a natural innate freedom, and propriety, even so are we to
live, every one equally and alike to enjoy his birthright and privilege.

53. That the body of the people may do all that lawfully of themselves, which
their Deputies, Trustees, Representors, chosen ones do for them, only for
greater convenience they Depute them, and they may go no further in any thing,
nor sit no longer, nor dispose of any thing but according to their Commission
and power received from the Represented.

I might here also annex to these Errors many strange and false Expositions of
Scripture given by Sectaries in their Sermons, and Discourses; but I will only
give two or three: 1 That of Many Ministers, M. Spurstowe, M. Cardel, M. Wills,
my self with others heard this Exposition given in the presence of a thousand
people at least.
Matthew 28. v. 18. Allpower is given to me in heaven and in earth: By heaven
there, is meant the uncreated heaven; there are the created heavens, and the
uncreated heaven; here is meant the uncreated heaven, the Godhead; so that the
meaning of these words is, all the uncreated power of the Godhead is given to
Jesus Christ. 2 That of Genesis the ninth, And surely your blood of your lives
will I require: at the hand of every beast will I require it. That by For proof
Vide page 23. 24. of this Third Part of Gangraena. Animadvers.
Beast there was meant a wicked man. 3 That of Luke 24. To day shall thou be
with me in paradise; that to day was to be referred to Christ's saying so, and
not to the time when he should be in Paradise, of which the Reader may find
more in some following pages, 100. 101.

In my First and Second Parts of Gangraena, page 28. 29. of the First Part,
Third Edition, and in page 1. and 117. of the Second Part, Second Edition, I
have laid down some Tenets of the Sectaries destructive to Civil Government
and humane Society; but now in this Third Part among these Errors mentioned, I
have discovered much more of their Anarchicall and Antimagistraticall spirit,
many of these last Errors plainly showing they are enemies to all Government,
Order, and Distinction, and would bring all into a popular confusion, and
reduce all Commonwealths and Kingdoms
into such a condtion as they were before they had Laws, Customs of Nations,
Rulers over them; and that as often as the weak judgments and humors of the
giddy in constant multitude pleased, and this spirit of Anarchy fully shows it
self in many whole Books written on purpose, some Sermons, many Speeches, and
in many late practices of the Sectaries. I have forborne quoting in the margin
one or more particular Books with the Pages just against the Errors for
proof, as I have done in other Errors, because not only one Book but many, not
only one page but diverse pages prove these Errors, the whole scope of many
books and pamphlets being to maintain these eight or nine Positions last
ment^oned, and for the Readers satisfaction, I refer him to these Pamphlets
hereafter named, An Alarm to the House of Lords against their insolent
usurpation of the Commons Liberties. A Remonstrance of many thousand Citizens,
and other freeborn People of England, to their own House of Commons. A
Defiance against all Arbitrary usurpations and encroachments, either of the
House of Lords or any other. The just man's justification. A Pearl in a
dunghill, or Leiutenant Colonel Lilburne in Newgate. An Arrow against all
Tyrants and Tyranny. The free man's Freedom vindicated. The just man in Bonds,
or Leiutenant Colonel Lilburne in Newgate. Arguments proving we ought not to
part with the Militia to any other but to the Honorable House of Commons. A
Petition and Appeal of Overton to the High and Mighty States, the Knights and
Burgesses in Parliament assembled. A Petition of Leiutenant Colonel Lilburns
wife to the chosen and betrusted Knights. The Copy of a Letter sent by
Leituenant Col. Lilburne to Master Wollaston keeper of Newgate: Queries to find
out who it is that holds out against the state of England. The last warning to
all the inhabitants of London. In which and diverse others he shall read
Principles so destructive to all Government whatsoever, Democraticall, as well
as Monarchical and Aristo^taticall, that the like are not to be found in the
writings of the old Anabaptists, neither ever did the old Anabaptists when they
were in the power of Princes and States, and brought before their
bars, ever carry themselves with that scorn and height of contempt toward
them, as Lilburne, Overton, and other Sectaries have done to that High and
Supreme Court of Judicature the House of Peers.

And certainly if these Assertions and Positions about Magistracy and Civil
Government were true and necessary, then all the Acts, Laws, Proceedings,
Processes of former Parliaments, and of this present Parliament, with the
proceedings of all kind of Magistrates and Inferior Courts are uncertain,
questionable, yea, unlawful, void and Null; all who have suffered by Sentences
of Courts of Justice, have suffered unjustly; all who possess any thing, as
Lands, Houses, Debts, by judgments of Courts, have no Title to them; all men
who exercise any power of Rule and Government over others, are usurper^,
intruders; and they may say, I never chose the men that made these Laws upon
which I was proceeded against and such verdicts given, I never gave my consent
that such men should be Judges, Justices of Peace, Sheriffs, Juries, or that
such Courts should be erected; yea these principles do bring in to this Kingdom
and all other Nations, all kind of confusion and Anarchy, overthrow all ancient
bounds, rancks, orders, differences of persons and things, as rich and poor,
Magistrates and people, servants and masters, bound and free, and reduce all
things back to unsetlement, uncertainties, perplexities, and that as often as
men's humors please, and indeed keep all things from a possibility of being
otherwise; and all rational wise men who understand the nature of Government
and Commonwealths must needs confess as much; and that I may even to weak men
deceived with specious pretenses discover the weakness and folly of diverse of
the later Positions, I commend these following particulars to the Readers
serious consideration.

1. These men who deny to the Peers of this Kingdom the Title of Lords, and
say, It Is not proper to Christians, but a mark of the Gentiles; yet they give
to the Commons greater Titles, as Vid. Overtons petition to the High and Mighty
States the Knights and Burgesses in Parliament. Assembled.
High and Mighty (the Titles of Emperors and Monarchies) and to the common
people, Majesty, Kingship, Sovereign Lord, yea, give Gods Title, calling the
people Creators; and Kings, Lords, their mere creatures.

2. Instead of Legal Rights and the Laws and Customs of this Nation, the
Sectaries talk of, and plead for natural Rights and Liberties, such as men
have from Adam by birth, and in many of their Pamphlets they still speak of
being governed by Right reason, so that look now as they do in matters of
Religion and Conscience
they fly from the Scriptures and from supernatural truths revealed there,
that a man may not be questioned for going against them, but only for Errors
against the light of nature and right reason; So they do also in Civil
Government and things of this life, they go from the Laws and Constitutions of
Kingdoms, and will be governed by rules according to nature and right reason;
and though the Laws and Customs of a Kingdom be never so plain and clear
against their ways, yet they will not submit, but cry out for natural Rights
derived from Adam and right reason.

3. According to all principles of Justice and Right reason, who is fittest to
judge in such and such cases what is according to right reason, whether every
Delinquent and ignorant Mechanic called in question (for if that may be allowed,
farewell all justice, none shall be punished, nor innocent righted) or the
Rulers, Judges, and settled Authority of a Land? Is it not rationally to be
supposed that those Ancestors who founded a Government for such a Nation, and
those who have followed in a Succession having yielded to and settled such
Laws, could better judge of right reason, what was for the good of such a
Nation, and accordingly made Laws then every mean man who knows no reason of
Laws and States nor is capable of Government, and the true nature of it,
neither conceives the Government of Nations in reference to other Nations, nor
in reference to the body of the people; but Ship, passengers and all might be
split upon many rocks if such unskilful Pilots had the steering.

4. It Is certain all Nations and people, though all came from Adam, have not the
same Laws, Customs, Constitutions of Government, and so are not, nor cannot
be alike ^ree: There is a liberty left in Commonwealths to frame and mould them
as shall be judged most convenient, and all are not tied to one Rule; this the
Independents grant when they deny it in the Government of the Church; and
seeing men are borne and live in different Climates, Countries, and are of
several Manners, Dispositions, Constitutions, Educations; the same Laws,
Customs, kind of Government, would not be for the good of all, but what would
fit one and be useful, would not serve another: some are of a more servile
Disposition, some of a harsher stubborner nature, some of a gentler freer
nature; some people are situated in Islands, some upon the Continent, some have
such neighbors of such a temper, others have not; some Countries wholly
subsists on such commodities, others subsist in another way; and so many such
differences might be given; now, whether Customs and Laws necessary for such a
people, founded on the proper reason and nature of such a place and people, be
proper for all, I leave to wise men to judge.

M. Peter's that great Sectarian statesman in his Last Reports of the English
Wars, p. T.
Polit. tells us The same Last will not fit an English and a Scottish foot: The
English must be ruled more by love. Now if two nations so near in one Island are
not alike free, but must be differently governed, then certainly Nations remote
from one another, are not alike free. Besides, to particular persons, yea
bodies of people, many providence and accidents may fall out to make one and
the same people and particular persons not so free as sometimes they have been;
there are some Parents who were free, but having incurred the Law, are tainted
in blood and so their children also, some are taken captivs or have sold
themselves for a necessity, and so their children are servants to, A nation
having bin saved by some Prince from ruin (though before a free state) may now
make him and his Heirs according to such Laws, King over them; nay Amesius in
his Cases of Conscience says, Ames. lib. 5. de Conscient. c. 25. De mutua
obligatione inter Magistratus, et subditos.
It cannot be denied but that a people forced by necessity may sell themselves
to a King to be all his servants, Genesis 47. 23.

5. It Is apparent that in one and the same Nation, as England, all the subjects
have not the same privileges and freedoms, but some have more then others,
some are not liable to be pressed to war, to bare such Offices, serve in
Juries, etc. as others are; some have voices, viz. Freeholders, to choose
Knights of Shires, others have not; some Cities, Towns, have Charters and large
privileges in several particulars, to send Burgesses to Parliament, which
other Towns have not; and certainly the Peerage of England have privileges and
liberties, which every Jack-straw has not.

6. I demand of the Sectaries whether in their Pamphlets speaking of election
and consent, they mean an immediate present choice and consent of the present
men now to be governed, or else an election consent in the first constitution
of this Kingdom and Government by our Ancestors many hundred years ago? Now if
they mean this last, how do they know but that this Government wherein the King
and Lords have such a power, was by consent and agreement, it being consented
such a man should be King, and such persons Nobles, who by birth should have
such power, and then such people according to such agreements should have power
to choose some men, who together with King and Nobles should make Laws, by which
the Nation governed, and the King should have such power, Nobles such
privileges, and people such liberties; but now if they mean the first, an
immediate election of the present peopl, that they are to obey none but so
chosen, it is most false, and a principle destructive to the sundamentall
government of this Kingdom, and destroying the House of Commons as well as the
King and Lords; and for the clearing of that, I would propound two things, 1.
That in this Commonwealth of England none have any power of Government at all
either in a lower or higher Sphere, either by election of the whole body of the
people (for all choose not, but some only) or founded upon election as the sole
cause and ground; for none of the people can choose, neither are men capable to
be chosen, till according to Laws, Writs are granted forth or Charters given
by Princes and Laws to such Corporations, and yet then the peopl must go in
choosing, not according to their wills, but to such rules agreed on by Laws, and
after men are chosen, some conditions also and rules must be observed, before
the persons so chosen have power of government; these chosen Commons must be
returned, and sworn, take such oaths before they can ^it, or if they do, their
election is ipso fact^ null, and they made incapable ever to fit again; so that
it is evident that election of some part of the people (not the whole) is only a
partial cause, not the total and plenary cause, or rather the true cause is
because such a man, according to Laws and Customs of this Kingdom is now in
such a place, whereof one of the conditions for such a place is election so and
so determined by former Laws; but now in many Officers of this Kingdom who
have power of government to hear, judge, and do many Acts, no sort of the
common people have any power at all to choose, as in Justices of Peace; they
have been always, and still are made without any such election; so the Judges
of the Land, Sheriffs, with diverse other Officers; and therefore much more may
the King and Peers who by the fundamental Laws of the Land, have an
hered^tary power in Parliament, to which the Kingdom has agreed and yielded
obedience so many hundred years, exercise their power without any electon of
the people. 2. That certainly people are bound and tied to Laws, Rules, as
well as Kings and Nobles, and that Covenants, Compacts, Oaths of Allegiance,
etc. made on their part, bind them as well as Princes oaths: I ever took it for
granted that Princes had not been bound, and their people left at liberty and
freedom to do what they pleased: I always thought fundamental constitutions
of Government made many hundred years before, and ancient bounds set by Laws,
with birthright inheritance, having gone through an uninterrupted succession
of many P^ogenitors had been a right and interest to Princes, which the mere
will and pleasure of common people could not have taken from them, and I
conceive that according to the conssitution and Laws of this Kingdom (which
gives all sorts their rights though some more some less) it is agreed on that
the Peers of this Land should have a Legislative and judicial power, and they
and their heirs be in such rank, born with such and such privileges over
others.

7. This Position of the Sectaries the Universal people having such a power
without whose election all Government is void, their Dagon and great Image
which they fall down before and worship, is a mere Chim^ra, a monstrum
horrendum, a Babell, which I could shatter and break so to pieces as not one
stone should be left of it, nor so much as the stump, but I may not now give
all my thoughts for fear of being too voluminous; only I will hint a few
things in this place by way of Question, and refer the Reader to what I
further say in page 154, 155. etc.

1. I Desire to know of these Sectaries, what, or who is this state Universal;
whether all the men, women, and children born in England, menservants,
maidservants, poor people and beggars, together with those of the better
sort; and whether if all these, or the greater part of these taken one equally
as well as the other, be the state universal, have they the like Sovereign
power over the King and Parliament.

2. Whether in what this state Uuniversall will do with the King, Lords, and
their own House of Commons; it must be carried by the most voices of this
state universal, so that if all the beggars, poor people, servants, children,
be a greater number then the rich, wise, etc. it must be as they will have
things in the Commonwealth; and if so, let it be considered what may and will
be the consequence of that, whether not a community, yea a making the rich
poor, and the poor rich, servants masters, and masters servants, and if it must
not be so, then how is it the state Universal?

3. What if this Universal people do not, or cannot agree among themselves
about the government and governors, but some are for one way, some for another,
some for such men, others for other men; and one sort say they are the most,
and the other say they are the most; who shall have power to judge between them
and determine the differences?

4. If Power of Government be founded on the consent of persons to be governed,
what if as great a part of the universal people within a few, and may be more
considerable, choose another man or men then the other greater part chose, must
they subject to them whom they like not, consent not to, or may not they set up
those they choose for the governing of them; and suppose twenty such great
parties choose all different men, may not each set up and obey only their onwe
chosen ones according to this doctrine?

5. How, where, and in what manner shall all the Universal people meet, men,
women, servants, children, poor, rich, beggars to declare their minds what they
would have, and how things should be carried; and whether ever did they, or can
they meet to make known their minds, and who shall be betrusted to take their
minds and report it?

6. Whether are not the Sectaries the Uuiversall state of England, that pretend
to have this power over King, Lords, Commons* and whether do they not mean
themselves by it in all their Pamphlets, and how do they know many things which
they confidently assert of the people in their Pamphlets, to be the judgment
and intent of any other, but of their own Sectarian party?

7. I desire to know how many of the persons who have writ all these late
Pamphlets against the King, House of Lords, and of the peoples power over the
House of Commons to call them to an account, and that they may do nothing but
what they give them power to do, and they may displace them at pleasure as
being chosen by them, etc. had any voice^, or power by the Laws and Customs
of this Kingdom to chuse^any Members for the House of Commons. Let Lilburne,
O(...), Larner, and the rest of that rabble who talk so much of the House of
Commons being their chosen ones, and that a man ought to obey none but whom he
chooses with such like, name any Knight or Burgess whom they chose, or were
capable to choose; for I believe they were of so mean estate that they had not
so much free-land per annum required by the Statute for them who have voices
Electio(...) of Knights of the ^^ire; and as for choosing* Bu^gesses in London
where they lived, they were no Livery men of any of those Companies who have
voices in Election; so that for ought I know, when the House of Commons shall
question them for their sedicious Anarchicall Pamphlets* a^ the Lords have most
justly done (and by these and many other Acts have end^ered the hearts of
thousand to them) they may answer the Commons as they have done the Lords, and
tell them they never chose any of them, nor gave them any power; they were
chosen not by the State Universal, all the freemen of England, but by a few
freeholders, and some ric^ Citizens and tradesmen, and therefore let them rule
over them if they will, and let those who chose them be subject; but unless
they will be content to (...) down and be chosen by the Universal people, they
will not betray their liberty to answer any questions, submit to their
Authority, but appeal from the(...) to the Universal people, or to the
Depu(...) and Trustees which shall be made by this Universal people* and that
they are likely to do it, may be judged by Lilburns carriage to the Committee
of Examinations, the House of Comm(...) it self, and by the many Pamphlets in
the ye^re 1645* set out against the House of Commons; and that they may say so
upon as good grounds, yea by the very same upon which they went in opposing the
House of Lords, I will undertake to make good, and of it the Reader may find
more about page 155, 156.

8. If all power be founded thus upon Election of the persons to be governed,
and the Commons have all their power thus from Election and from nothing else,
whether may any be put by from sitting in the House who are chosen by most
voices of those Towns and Counties who send them, and others chosen by fewer
voices by far sit in their rooms in the Commons House, and whether upon
Articles clapped in before proved, or complaints by the friends of those who have
fewer voices, may the Committee of Elections or the House it self put by one
chosen by most voices and admit the other, and according to this doctrine of
the people Universal represented being the Lords and Masters of the Commons,
and the Commons their Deputies and servants, how can they contradict their
Lords the people to turn back whom they send, and put in others?

9. Whether may not according to the Doctrines laid down in the late Pamphlets,
the Counties add Burgess Towns who have no Knights or Burgesses there to
represent them, nor have not had of a long time, and can yet get no Writs to
choose for themselves, answer the House of Commons when sent for, as Lilburne
and Overton did the House of Lords, We are not bound to obey any of your
Orders, as having none there that represent us or whose Election we have
consented to?

10. Whether according to these Doctrines of the Sectaries, may not such
Cities, Towns, Counties, choose men without Writs and send them up to
Parliament demanding to sit there, especially after alleging Petitions and
motions made for Writs to choose and none granted; and whether in such cases
whilst Towns are without any Parliament men for them, may they not refuse to
obey any Ordinances made by those whom they never chose nor know not, yea may
they not according to this doctrine say that all Ordinances whatsoever made
before the time their Representors came in they will give no obedience to?

11. If all power be founded thus wholly upon the Election of the people to be
governed, and that all Governors are their mere Deputies, servants, may do
nothing but what they give them a power to do and by Commission from them,
whether may the House of Commons exercise that power the Laws give them, and
go according to the Privileges and Customs of that House, though the people
Represented never gave them any such things in Commission, nor do not know nor
understand them? or must they keep only to what is the known mind of those
Countries and Towns that chose them?

12. If all power in Government be founded on immediate Election of the People,
and no sort of men have power further then the Universal people gave them, and
because they are Representors, Trustees, Deputies, etc. may do nothing against
the will and mind of the Major part of the Universal people who chose them,
whether have all the Parliament Men in all their Votes gone according to the
minds and desires of those Cities and places that chose them Represented in
Petitions, and whether in cases of doubt and yet of great importance, have they
still called their Countries together to know their minds and whether they were
willing such things should be, viz. Anabaptists, Brownists, and all kind of
Sectaries to enjoy such freedom of meettings, all sorts of ignorant Mechanics
to be suffered to turn preachers, and to go up and down seducing people,
whether so great an Army to be still continued in this Kingdom, and they
Assessed to pay such Taxes for their maintenance, and whether Committees shall
be still continued in the Kingdom; whether great sums of money and hundreds of
pounds in Land per annum in such necessitous times shall be given away on men
who little need it, and so in other particulars? and if things appear to be
against the mind of the generality of the people, whether are the people bound
to obey their Orders and Ordinances in such cases?

13. If all power of government be upon Election, and the chosen ought to go
according to the will of the universality of the people, suppose it should so
happen in a Commonwealth that the greater part of the chosen should apparently
go contrary to the trust reposed in them, carry things quite against the mind
of the people, as of the chief City, Country, Ministry, and none should be
pleased with their actions but a pure faction, a party of men engaged by
offices, places of preferment, liberty of licentiousness of living against the
true Religion by Laws established, whether then with a good conscience may and
ought this universal people with the consent and assistance of such Governors
chosen by them who are known to be faithful, demand to choose others in their
places, require justice upon them, and so deliver themselves and their Country?

14. Whether or no according to these Doctrines of the Sectaries there be any
in this Kingdom have any power of government or whom the people ought to obey,
seeing there is none among us chosen by the universal people, no not the
Commons in Parliament, but only by a part of the people the Freeholders and
freemen of Towns, which are not the twentieth part of the people of this
Kingdom, who yet sure are subject to Laws, and should live under obedience?

15. Seeing in all kind of lawful power and superiority every man that obeyes
any should choose him (as the Sectaries speak in their Pamphlets) and the power
of Colonels, Captains, Commanders in chief of such a party over Soldiers is
lawful, whether may such whole Companies and particular soldiers in such
Companies who have Commanders set over them whom they chose not, but were
unwilling of, and desirous of others (only it is the will of the General to
have it so) answer them when they command them, we chose you not, we will not
obey your commands, and whether this would be a good answer of the Presbyterian
Companies that have Independent Commanders set over them, and well taken at a
Council of War? And whether Colonel Lilburne in the Army would have taken
such an Answer well from his Regiment, notwithstanding his brothers doctrine?
And whether if gallant Colonel Whaley before Worcester should have stood upon
this Doctrine that those should command in chief who had the consent of the
soldiery there and the people of those parts, and thereupon opposed Colonel
Rainborough, it had been true Doctrine?

16. Whether do not the Sectaries ^ro^^e themselves in their positions about
Election, that no men have any power over any to question and judge (...) who
chose them not, and whom they represent not? when (...) they say the House of
Commons may question and punish (...) and judge the House of Peer, being the
Soveraign^ S(...) (...) both of the C^^^on^rs and of the Lords: Now certainly
neither the King nor the House of Peers chose the House of Commons, neither are
they the Representors of the King and Peers, they represent them not so much as
in name, having never the Titles of Kings or Lords given them by Laws, and
therefore if according to the Sectaries Doctrines the House of Commons have
power over King and Lords to judge them (which for my part I do not believe)
though they are not their chosen ones, then certainly the House of Lords may
have power to sentence Lilburne, Overton, etc. though not chosen by them.

17. If all power of Government stand solely upon the Election of the present
people, and has all its authority upon that, whether the power of Governors
can continue longer then the people chose them for, and suppose the people
never intending or once dreaming to choose them for always, but for a time,
whether when that time they were chosen for expired, their power did not also
expire? and whether may any with a good conscience, who believes the time is
long ago run out for which he chose Burgesses and Knights, submit any more to
the Summons, Orders, Censures A Remonstr. to the House of Commons. page 19, 20.
of the Commons then the Sectaries will to the H. of Peers? and whether can the
H. of Commons expect any submission and obedience from the Sectaries, who have
in the name of thousands declared professedly to the world their time was out
for which they were chosen, by such a day, which day is past, and therefore
they will find when they come to question some of them roundly upon any of
their Ordinances, that they will serve them as they do the Lords, telling them
they have no power over them, the time for which they chose them is out?

18. Whether according to this Doctrine of all subjection and power founded
only in Representation, Deputation, extending no further then from the
Represented to the Representors, may not the Ministry of the Kingdom plead
exemption from the power of the Commons as the Sectaries do from the Lords,
saying they have no Ministers there to sit in that House to represent them, or
who have Deputation from them; there may possibly be some Imitators of them in
the House of Commons, Lay Preachers and gifted Brethren imitating them in their
work of Ministry, as Apes use to imitate men in the works of their calling, but
no Representors of them.

19. If nothing the representative do be valid or binding, but what the greater
number of the Universal have given power in, whether may not and will not the
people question all Votes, Orders, Ordinances, as not being tied to them
because they know not that the Universal people consented, and so every thing
when it should be obeyed, may be questioned upon that ground, and nothing in
Government should be certain, but a man may say this Law, this Order is null,
void; for how does it appear the Universal represented people gave consent,
or the Representative acted in it from the instructions of the Universal?

20. If this Doctrine were true, that Magistrates might do nothing but what the
greater part of the generality of a Land would have, whether many good things
would ever have been done that now are, and whether in many Kingdoms would ever
a Reformation have been effected, and whether if the Parliament had gone by the
Pole of tagge and ragge, would ever Common Prayer Book, Bishops, with many
other things have been put down, which yet I hope the Sectaries dare not say
but the House of Commons did well in so doing?

A Catalogue of some Blasphemies of the Sectaries, not mentioned in the First,
nor Second Parts of Gangraena.
Proof Vide page 35. of this Third part of Gangr.
A Sectarie said, That the Prophets in the Old Testament Prophesied two and
fifty lies; That in the ninth chapter of the Romans Saint Paul lied, and said
he did acknowledge him self to be so, to gain some to Christ. The same Sectarie
being stowed a place of Scripture, which were the words of Christ, took the
book and threw it away, and said that was not ordered by the Holy Ghost to be
penned, but it was the Rogue Printer that did put it in.

For proof Vide M Bellam^es justification of the City Remonstrance, p. 11.
Another Sectary said there is no God, or if there be a God, the Devil is a
God.

Proof, p. 114. of this Th^rd Part of Gangr.
Master Saltmarsh the Sectary, preached at Bath, that as John Baptist wore a
Leathern Girdle, so the Doctrine that he preached was Leathern Doctrine.

Proof, p. 107 of this Third part of Gangr.
A Sectarian Soldier at Bristoll finding fault with something a godly Minister
had preached of Christ wondering at their unbeleif, this Minister told this
Soldier they were Christ's words, unto whom this Sectarian Soldier replied,
Christ spoke thus in his darkness: And another time this Minister speaking
with the same Sectary about being justified by Christ's Righteousness, this
Sectary replied, Christ's Righteousness was a beggarly Righteousness.

A She-Sectary an Anabaptist said it boastingly again and again, That she was
every whit as good as Christ, no way inferior to him, but equal to him, and
if she were not so the Scripture was a liar.

A Relation of some Passages in the Prayers of some Sectaries.
IT was for certain related to me, and to many persons of worth, that in June
last, when the King was with our Brethren of Scotland, an Independent prayed
publicly to God, that God would deliver the King out of the hands of those
evil Counselors in whose hands he now wa^.

It Is written to me in a Letter, and testified under the hands of three
witnesses, that an Independent in a public Church prayed thus; Lord, if thou
art not pleased to bless us in the seducing King, and traiterous Queen, then
bless us in the Prince his Son, or the Duke: And at another time the same man
prayed thus; Lord, now that the Sword is drawn, let it never be sheathed,
until it be glutted in the blood of the cursed Malignants.

A Great Sectary in London upon occasion of the City Remonstrance, prayed as
follows* (of which prayer many Citizens had Copies, and I was told it from
good hands it was brought in to the Court of Aldermen.)

O Lord, thou know there is a Remonstrance to go up to the Parliament, which
is much to thy dishonor, and the hurt of thy Saints, for Lord thou know the
Kingdoms of the Earth by right belong unto us thy Saints. Suffer not thy Saints
any longer to be trampled upon, but stand up for thy people, and do not suffer
the ungodly to go up with this wicked Remonstrance: Confound their device, and
suffer it to take no effect: And Lord we thank thee that thou have stirred up
some of thy Saints with courage already to protest against it, we beseech thee
stir up more. Lord, stir up the women that lie in their husbands bo(...)es, and
the children to cry unto their parents, every one to be helpful to one another
to stay this Remonstrance. Lord, we will fast and pray unto thee this day, to
morrow, and the next day. O Lord hear our prayers and let our cry come unto
thee; as thou ha^t been merciful unto us, so we beseech thee to continue thy
favor and love unto us.

I was told it also by an understanding godly Minister, that this Summer about
the time of Lilburns commitment by the House of Lord, a great Sectary in one of
their Conventicles prayed to this effect; O Lord, cast down, or confound all
Monarcks and Monarchies, and lift up or advance thy servant Lilburne. This
Minister had it from some, who said they were ear witnesses; and I desired to
speak with them about i^, and he promised I should, but having not yet spoken
with them, I do relate it but as a report, and not with that confidence as I do
things I hear, or find written, or that I have from godly persons I know who
are ear witnesses. Some of the Independents and Sectaries use to court God in
prayer, having as affected strains, and strong lines, as ever University
Preachers used to have in their Sermons at Saint Mary's. One of them began his
prayer, Right Honorable Lord God; another begins oft-times, Immortal God, and
then makes a stop and pause, and then comes on the Se^aphin^s tongues are tip^
with thy praises, and praying in an affected manner. Another Vide Doct.
Bastwicks utter rou^ing of the Army of the Independents: Epist. to the Reader.
Independent spoke to God in prayer by way of complaint against the
Presbyterians; Lord, they hate us because we know more of thee then they do;
but we beseech thee Lord give (...) still to know more of thee, and let them
hate us more if they will.

A Relation of stories and sundry remarkable Passages co(...)ng the Sects, and
Sectaries; and amongst others of some Soldiers who are great Sectaries.
JVly the third 1646. two Citizens, honest men related to me this story in the
hearing of another Minister, and that with a great deal of confidence (one of
them having la^en in the Town where the fact was committed, and having spoken
with many Inhabitants about it) that summer was a two years Captain Beamant
and his company being quartered at Yakesly in Huntingtonshire, there being a
child in the Town to be baptized, some of the soldiers would not suffer the
child to be carried to Church to be baptized, and the Lieutenant of the Troop
drew out a pa^^ of the Troop to hinder it, guar^ing the Church that they should
not bring the child to be baptized, and instead of the child being baptized, in
contempt of Baptism, some of the soldiers got into the Church, pissed in the
Font, and went to a Gentleman's stable in the Town, and took out a horse, and
brought it into the Church, and there baptized it, and after they had done so,
such of the Townsmen as spoke against them before they went away they did them
mischief* and this was so certainly and generally spoken of that a godly
Minister who dwelt hard by, heareing of it came next day to the Town to find
out him who baptized this horse, and the rest who had a hand in it, and to
stir up the Parish to complain and prosecute them. Which story being thus
related to me with much confidence from these two Citizens, as having spoken
with this neighbor Minister, and diverse of the Inhabitants of Yaksly; yet
because I well know that reports will fly variously and many mistakes may
arise in relations, and because this was so sad a(...)ory and such a d^sperate
proph(...)ation and contempt of Gods Ordinance of Baptism* I therefore
entreated these Citizens for my sati^faction, and for the credit of the story
to others, to get under the hands of some of the Inhabitants of quality who
related it, the truth of the story, wh(...) of it was true and what might be
built upon (...) certa(...) ^her^upo^ they sent about it, and took such a
course, that abo^t ten days ago, in September I received from the hands of a
godly Minister this certificate to a tittle, and do keep the Original by me to
produce when ever I shall be called to make proof of it.

August 15. 1646.
THat Captain B(...)ant was quartered at Yakesly in the County of Huntingdon
about June 2. 1644. and preached on the Lords day in the Parochial Church; and
in the time of his quarter there, his soldiers fecht a bald horse out of
Master Finnmo(...)s stable (of the Captains) where he was quartered, and in
the Church at the Font (having pissed in it) did sprinkle it on the horse, and
call him Ball(...) (because he was hairie) and crossed him in the forehead: They
had soldiers Godfathers, and one Widow Shropshire, a soldier sonick-named,
was the Godmother. This the Le^^tenant Brayfield by name reported to the
Captain, and they all gloried in it at Master Finnmo^rs, and the other
soldiers immediately reported the same to be done in many houses where they
were q(...) Which we the Inhabitants of Yakesly do witness whose names are
subscribed*

William Finn(...) Thomas Eva(...) John Caryer. Robert 8 Sumerly his mark.
John Pal(...)er. Robert Cu(...)dge. Holl^^ Bell.

Robert Ra(...)er Corporal was the man (...) acted the part of the Minister,
Bartly Ward by name was the Godmother, Laure^ce Dodds, (...) man, was (...)
that f^cht the horse out of the ^^able.

The ^ame godby Minister who has relation to those parts, and (...) whom I
hall this paper tells (...) here are (...)y other misde(...)anore of some of
the Sectaria^ souldier^ spoken of By many in these parts, as the baptizing of a
pigg^ and other strange exploith with he will enquire the (...) of and
(...)ordingly (...) finds, give me notice; and he says (...) S(...) soldiers
are so (...), that the godly Orthodox Ministers cannot with safety to their
persons preath against some of those (...) which they (...), as against
universal grace, and some others; some of these soldiers to one godly and
able Minister who preached against their opinions, laid their hands upon their
swords, threatening him with a great deal of ^ury.

There is a godly Minister, and a man of some place more then ordinary (whose
wise being much incl(...)ed to the Sectaries and going often to their meetings)
he went diverse times with her, and among many strange passages which he has
seen and heard in those Assemblies, he relates this following story for a
certain truth, which he both saw and heard, but was not willing to have his
name made known because of some estate lying so, that he perhaps might suffer
much for discovering any thing concerning the Sects.

About Algate in London there was a great meeting of many Sectaries, (among
others one Master Knowls, Master Jesse, and some other of the Sectarian
Ministers were there) for the restoring of an old blind woman to her sight, by
anointing her with oil in the name of the Lord: The manner of it was after
this manner, the old blind woman was set in the midst of the Room, and she
first prayed aloud (all the company joining with her) to this effect, that God
would bless his own Ordinance and Institution for the restoring of her sight;
after she had done praying, Master Knowls prayed for some spice of time to the
same effect for a blessing upon this anointing with oil, and after prayer she
was anointed with oil, these words being words uttered by him who anointed her
or to this effect, The Lord Jesus give, or restore thee thy sight.

In my first part of Gangr(...)a a story is related of some Sectarian Troopers
assaulting Master Andrews a Minister in Northamptonshire: Now I shall give the
Reader a continuation of that story, viz. so far as to show to what place
these men went from Wellingborrough, and what pranks these, and others of that
Troop played in Warwickshire, which was told me by a good hand from one who
came out of those parts, and assured me it was most true, and proferd to give
it me under his hand and the hands of others in that Town, and the story is as
follows. That very company spoken of came to a Town called Lemington or
Remington in Warwickeshire, and to the house of one John Mathews who looks to
Baron Trevers estate there, where their Captain quartred, viz. one Captain P.
and they told him of the passages at Wellingborrough, boasting what they had
done, and how narrowly the Priest escaped them, and what they would have done
if they had gotten him, and there was a great deal of applauding them by their
fellows who were there. The constant course of that Troop whilst they
quartered in that Town was to speak against the Ministry, calling them
Priests, dissuading the people from going to Church; hardly three of a hundred
of that Troop would go to Church, they would tell the people that they would
give them a Book should do them more good then all the Sermons they should ever
hear in all their lives from all the Priests; and that they could preach better
then the Ministers of England; and this Company of Sectarians was so rude, that
they did more hurt to a fine Dove-house of Baron Trevars, which this John
Mathews was to look to, then Prince Rupert and all his soldiers when they
quartered there: This John Mathews entreated them they would not make such
spoil and wast, killing old as well as young without distinction; and he
prevailed with their Captain to go to them to forbid them, but they answered
him that pigions were souls of* the air given to the sons of men, and all men
had a common right in them that could get them, and they were as much theirs as
the Barons, and therefore they would kill them, take their liberty, and not
part from their right; upon which words the Captain said he was so convinced
with their arguments, that he could not answer them, and so came away letting
them do as they would. At another time there being Poultrie provided by the
good woman of the house for their diet, which she killed with wringing their
neeks about (as the custom of the Country is) these soldiers would not have
them dressed, but threw them away, and fecht others, cuting of their heads, for
they would not eat things strangled; and such was the carriage of these
Sectaries, that though John Mathewes be a man well affected to the Parliament,
and well disposed, yet he professed he had rather have Prince Rupert and his
Company to quarter there, then that Troop of Captain P.

A Copy of a Letter written lately from a Reverend godly Minister in
Northamptonshire, to a person of quality and worth in London.
Worthy SIR,
THough I am persuaded that you know that many Errors abound in the Army, yet I
cannot think but such destructive tenets as some of them have broacht amongst
us when they lately quartered here, are not particularly come unto your ears.
Therefore out of zeal to Gods glory, the safty of our Church and Commonwealth,
Parliament and Ministry; I could not but impart what I have heard from their
own mouths, and by honest neighbors of them. The sacred Covenant binds me
with all faithfulness to endeavor to discover Incendiaries, hinderers of
Reformation of
Religion, dividers of the Kingdoms, etc. And truly I cannot think these any
other; though as ye^ God has hindered their sparks (which they cast into all
the straw which they pass by) from flaming into open and violent liscord. I
can produce both the names, and I think sufficient witness (people are afraid
almost to speak against the soldiers) that they have seriously spoken (as
being their judgments and purposes) that if the soldiers knew the Countries
minds, as the Country might know the soldiers, they would have another kind of
Reformation then this Parliament is about. That they have not so long sought
for liberty, and now to be inslaved; That they could go all England through by
force of
Arms if they listed. That the Country might call the Parliament to account for
what they had done, for they were set up by them. They commonly in derision
call our Brethren Jack Sect, and say they plot with the King against the
Parliament; but if there were any occasion of drawing the sword against them,
they would be
more fierce against them, then ever against the Cavaleirs. They upon long
dispure with me cominued in this that there is no such office as the Ministry;
and it is blasphemy for any one to say that he is a Minister of Jesus Christ
more then any other man; such an office was, but it ceased. A Captain
Reformadoe said, their swords shall never out of their hands, as long as one
Priest continued in England. They scorned all our religious days and duties;
call them fools that pay Tithes, and them thieves that receive them; will
believe no more Scripture, then what they prove by experience to be true. I
might have heard more, but that my heart abhors such seditious and blaspemous
speeches. They speak most contemptibly of Christ's person, and as I hear, deny
either the Trinity, or at least the holy Ghost. If it be for any public
benefit, I will search after more particulars, and sufficient proof.

Sir, I am bold to impart my troubled thoughts unto you, whom I have cause to
judge faithful to God, your Country, and your Friend: Truly, we fear some hurt
by these in Arms, if a speedy course be not taken with some of them; for I find
that they
stick not to their principle of Liberty, but only in receiving it: they will
not give it (if they had the power of giving it) unto others. For ought I can
observe, with all their Errors they labor to poison others where they come.
My mind will be much satisfied when I shall know you have read these lines,
concluding my duty of discovering Incendiaries, etc. discharged till further
occasions be offered. The good Lord look upon us, and save us from these
instruments of safety. I desire your spiritual health and
comfort, with all temporal happiness, and success:

Sept. 24. 1646. Yours to be commanded.


A godly young man of Summersetshire, or Dors^tshire, at whose house a
Lieutenant of a Company of Sir Thomas Fairfax Army quartered, told me, that
this Lieutenant maintained these Opinions; 1 That women might preach, and would
have had a gentlewom^n in the house (this young man's sister) to have exercised
her gifts, telling her he knew she had gifts* and had been alone a meditating.
2. That if a woman's husband was a^leep or absent from her, she might lie with
another man, and it was lawful; for sleep was a death; and pressed it upon a
young Gentlewoman in the house, whose husband was then at London. 3. That it
was unlaw^ull to kneell in prayer, which was maintained by him, or some others
of his company; and when they prayed, they prayed leaning.

There is a godly Minister of some place more then ordinary, that was in the
Army about Oxford, who heard a Colonel of that Army speak it in his hearing,
and the hearing of many, that as for fighting against the Irish he was against
it, for they did nothing but what they might do lawfully, and gave his reasons
and grounds for it; 1. Because they did but fight for their Religion and
Liberty of conscience, and for their Lands and Estates. 2. That if the whole
Commons and body of the people would agree and put down King and Parliament,
overthrow the Constitution of this Kingdom in King, Lords, and Commons, they
might do it: as this was told two godly / Ministers, from whom I had this
relation, so was it communicated to some members of both Houses.

June 24. A godly Citizen told me, he heard a great Sectary that belonged to
the Army say, speaking of Ireland, he doubted, and so did many more in the
Army, whether it were lawful to go fight against the Irish; and that that
Country was theirs, as well as England was ours.

Though the boldness and presumption of many of the Soldiers, Officers and
common Soldiers has been very great, both against the command of God, and the
Parliament, to preach in the open Churches in all Countries and places where
they have come, putting by many godly and able Ministers from their Office and
invading their Pulpits; yet their open and frequent preaching in the University
of Oxford, does most of all declare their impudency, that they should dare to
do it in the midst of so many learned men, and in a place so famous for
learning; and that in the public schools in Oxford to preach daily, and that
against humane learning as they did for some time; and after complaint of it to
the General as a thing so scandalous and odious to all ingenuous men, and his
forbidding their preaching in the Schools; yet the Soldiers continue still to
preach in Oxford daily in a great house where they meet for that end; and I
spak with one that came from Oxford in Aug. last who told me they preach now
daily in Christ's Church (one of the greatest Colleges in Oxford) in a kind of
Gallery, where the soldier stands that preaches, many sitting on the stairs,
others standing below; and this young man heard one of them preach there,
discoursing on these words: God would require the life of man at a Beast; this
Soldier expounded that by Beasts was meant a wicked man.

There are two honest men, who last July told me, that they had heard an
Independent who lives at Dover say it, and so had others, that the Scots and
the Assembly were pests and plagues of the Common wealth, the Assembly were a
company of dissemblers, the Presbytery was Antichristian; and speaking of the
Ministers, called them, that ugly tribe.

A Commander in the Army of known fidelity and worth, told me, he had heard
Master Peter's preach in Hedington Fort, against the City of London, incensing
the Army against the City; telling them, that after you have done all this,
they would not have you live nor enjoy any places.

July the first 1646. I was told by some of the Aldermen of the City, who were
come that day from the Sessions, and from hearing the cause, that a great
Sectary was brought to the Sessions of Peace before the Lord Major, for that
having woed a Maid to be his wife, and he profering to be her husband, she
consenting; he took her by the hand, and for his wife; but said, he would be
hanged rather then be married by a Priest (calling all our Ministers Priests)
and persuading her, there was no ground in the word to be married any other
way: whereupon they both consenting, came together; but afterward, he cast her
off and would have nothing to do with her, nor allow her no means: This woman
being brought a bed of two Children in her travel, related this, and was ready
to take her Oath, the Children were his, and that she never knew any man but
him.

Some who come from the Army tell me, that the Sectaries in the Army do
exceedingly rail against the City and Citizens, and call them the Sect of the
Adamites.

A Citizen of London of good rank, told me and diverse others, that he being at
Boston Fair but a little before, there was a Commander a great Sectary, spoke
to many whom he met with, against the City of London, how the City was quite
turned against the Parliament, and was come to that pass, that if the Army
came near London to lie near them and to awe them, they would raise an Army
to set them further off; and if the Army went northward against the Scots,
they would help the Scots against them; this Citizen said, he taking notice of
it, spoke freely to this Commander, and told him his mind of the faithfulness
and fidelity of the City: and at the same time this Citizen related (viz. the
fourth day of August) that it was given in to some Committee or members of a
Committee, under two hands, that this Officer having an Order for so many
Barrels of Powder and a Tun of Match out of the Tower to send to such a
place, he never sent it, but sold it; and afterward being sold again, it came
to be brought to the Tower, and some knew it to be such Powder that was given
out by order to such a man: and so it came to be discovered.

I was told it by two persons of quality, a Member of the House of Commons, and
a minister, that some of the Sectarian Soldiers speaking of the Remonstrance,
called my Lord Major Rascal; and for those who had a hand in the Remonstrance,
they hoped ere long to have the pulling them out of their houses.

August the 30. Two persons of quality and worth, a Reverend Minister, and
another person in public employment, went to the Spittle in the afternoon to
hear Master Randall (out of a desire to be satisfied upon their own knowledge
(as having heard many strange things of him) and coming, they heard him preach
on that text, A sower went out to sow: from whence he raised this observation,
That all the Creatures held forth God in Christ, and preached the Gospel.

The heavens declare the glory of God; that is, the glory of God in Christ: and
he preached that all the creatures and all actions are Sacraments, and do set
forth the death of Christ; common ordinary eating and drinking do set forth the
death of Christ, and are to be done as Christ said, Do this in remembrance of
me: He gave no blessing at the end of his Sermon, no Psalm was sung; there
were three great rooms full of people to hear him.

A mong many Physicians in these times that are Sectaries, Independents,
Anabaptists, Seekers, I have been told from good hands of two of them, these
speeches; one of them speaking about the Ministers, said there was a necessity
of the falling of the Tribe of Levi: The other about April last (at which time
the Independents were in their great ^uffe) that the Ministers would be a
contemptible generation, as hate^ull within a while as ever the malignant
Ministers and Prelates were.

About the latter end of April last, I entreated a Doctor of Physic, a godly
man and prudent, to go along with me to a house not far from Cheapside, where
some company were appointed to meet me, to discover some things to me about the
opinions and ways of some of the Sectaries; and there came three, who in my
heareing and the Doctors related these following particulars of Mistress
Attaway, Master Jenney, and some others of their way, and what they related
were such things that they had heard from their own mouths often. Mistress
Attaway held that the Book of Esdras and some other Apocryphal Books were
Canonical Scriptures; that she should never dye, and that she should bring
forth Children at Jerusalem, and that at Jerusalem she should meet with Christ,
and enjoy him visibly; and this Mistress Attaway had so persuaded Jenney that he
believed he should never dye, and both Mistress Attaway and Jenney held
themselves as pure from sin as Christ was, when he was in the flesh; and this
Mistress Attaway told Master Jenney she had Letters sent her from a Prophet,
who was shut up for a time, and none could come to him; only there was a Maid
one Ellen, whom they among themselves called the Prophets Maid that went to
him, and Mistress Attaway showed Jenney these Letters, which were to this
effect, that she must go to Jerusalem, and he must go with her, and he should
be a Preacher there, have a great hand in repairing Jerusalem, and there
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob should come down from Heaven, and meet them; and this
Prophet by the end of this Summer should come forth with power; For the present
there was none that was an Administrator and dispenser with power, but this
Prophet should come with power, and do greater works then Christ, saving only
he should not dye for the sins of men: This Mistress Attaway had a great
parchment role, wherein many things were written, and this was to be given to
Jenney; and this Jenney believed all Mistress Attaway told him as fully as might
be, that he should never dye, etc. This Mistress Attaway also gave out that
there should come ships from Tarshish to fetch away all the Saints to
Jerusalem, and all that would not turn Jews should be destroyed, and this
whole Land should be destroyed, and therefore she would go away before hand to
escape: This Jenney, Mistress Attaway and some of their Tribe held no hell but
what was in the conscience; the souls mortal; they held the Book of Esdr^s
had great things in it to them who had the spirit to understand it, and that
there was Esaus world and Jacobs world; this was Esaus world, but Jacobs world
was coming shortly, wherein all creatures shall be saved; And this Prophet who
was shut up, was to come forth to preach this new Doctrine of general
Restoration and Salvation of all; and though all should be saved, yet there
should be degrees of glory between those that have been Saints (they should be
more glorious) and those who were the wicked, though now restored: This Jenney
held from that Scripture in Genes. where God says I will make him an help meet
for him, that when a man's wife was not a meet help, he might put her away and
take another; and when the woman was an unbeleever (that is not a Sectarie of
their Church) she was not a meet help, and therefore Jenney left his wife, and
went away with Mistress Attaway.

A Commander belonging to the Army, told me last July he had seen some of the
Sectarian Preachers, preach lately with their hats on, and sitting; he told me
he had heard Master Cradock, Master Peter's, and other such Preachers insinuate
into the soldiers, flatter them all kind of ways, telling them what they had
done, what fame they had achieved, how they had conquered ^he Kingdom, and
particularly a little before, he heard Master Peter's preaching thus, you who
have conquered the Kingdom, done all this service, and now when you have done
all this might expect your Arrears, look to enjoy your Liberties, yea and
expect preferments, good places as you have well deserved, it may be, you shall
be cast into a stinking prison; but if it should be so, it is the will of God,
and ye must provide to bear it.

There is one Thomas Collier a great Sectary in the West of England, whom I
have spoken of in the second part of Gangraena, and have printed some Letters
of his in this third part page 51. 52.
. I have seen a Book of his printed in the year 1645. called certain Queres, or
Points now in controversy examined, wherein among other Certain Queres.
Errors laid down by him, he makes Baptizing the Children of the faithful not
only to be page 18. 19.
vain, b^t evil and sinful, ye^ the commission of Baptizing Children to come
from the Devil or Antichrist, or both; And secondly, that Magistrates have no
power at all to establish Church Government, or to compel any to the
Government of Christ by any humane power; and upon occasion page 22. 25.
of discoursing of the power of the Civil Magistrate, what he should do now
religion is corrupted, and the Magistrates endeavor is to Reform it, and to
this end have called an Assembly of Learned men to assist them in this work:
This Learned Master Collier if he might be thought meet, makes bold to present
these page 27.
three words in this case to the Parliament.

First, To dismiss that Assembly of Learned men, who are now page 27.
called together for to consult about matters of Religion; and the
reason this Learned Clark gives, is because he cannot conclude that God has
any thing to do there for them; he knows no rule in the Book of God for such
an Assembly, and therefore cannot expect a blessing.

The second Word, To go on in subduing of Antichristian enemies, page 28.
so far as by Civil Law they have power; for there must by this, or some
other means be a desolation upon the tenth part of the City.

The third Word is, That the Parliament would give the Kingdom to the Saints;
and for who gives the Kingdom to the Saints, so it be done, Master Collier will
not much dispute whether it be the Lord Jesus immediately, or Jesus by a
Parliament; only page 29.
thus much he would have men take notice that by the Kingdom is meant an
external Kingdom, for the Saints shall possess that as
well as the spiritual Kingdom and Government of the Church of Christ.

Hence we may see by Master Colliers words, that his Saints, viz. those whom he
has described before in the former part of Animadvers.
his Book, Separatists, Anabaptists do look for from the Parliament, that they
should give the Kingdom to them and all temporal power and rule, and take it
out of the hands of all others; So that the King, the Parliament (unless there
be some of Master
Colliers Saints among them) the Judges, and all men who by the Laws under the
King and Parliament, have any Civil power of rule in the Kingdom, must have
it taken from them and given to the Sectaries Saints: Yea I conceive by
Colliers words not only England, but Scotland and Ireland are to be taken from
the King, and to be given by the Lord Jesus immediately, or by Jesus by a
Parliament to the Saints; which whether it be not so or no, I leave the Reader
to judge upon transcribing Colliers own words, where giving his second word of
advice to the Parliament of going on to subdue Antichristian enemies, so far as
they have power, because there must by this, or some other means be a
desolation upon the tenth part of the City, he interprets his meaning in these
following words. Which I think to be England, and those Dominions belonging to
it, Scotland and Ireland. I conceive this to be the time that the Kingdom is
to to taken from him, who shall arise and subdue three Kings, that is Kingdoms,
speaking great words, thinking to change times and Laws; but the Judgment
shall fit and take away this Dominion to consume it, and destroy it to the end,
Dan. 7. 26. Therefore let not your hearts faint, neither your hands draw back,
God will finish his work. The third Word, is, that they would give the Kingdom
to the Saints, Dan. 7. 27. Who gives the Kingdom to the Saints? The judgment
that pulls down the power and Kingdom of the one, gives to the other. Whether
i^ be the Lord Jesus immediately, or Jesus by a Parliament, I shall not much
dispute, but leave it to your considerations; Only thus much take notice, that
by the Kingdom, is not only meant an external Kingdom, for the Saints shall
possess that, but the spiritual Kingdom and Government of the Church of
Christ, etc.

This Collier (as it appears by his Letter before mentioned) is a Master
Sectarie, a man of great power among them, and has Emissaries under him, whom
he sends abroad and commands to go into several parts, as Syms, Row, etc, and
supply his place in his absence; and as you have heard of him formerly, so
since my second part of Gangraena came abroad, a godly Minister out of the West
writ thus to me of Collier; He was driven out of the Island of Garnesy, because
of his opinions and turbulency, as a godly Minister of that Island told me, and
he could not deny it himself when I asked him the question: He has done much
hurt in Limington, Hampton, Waltham, and all along this Country. I had once a
conference with him upon two questions for five hours space (sufficient time
for one to trouble himself with such a vain unruly taulker. First, concerning
the Morality of the Sabbath. Secondly, concerning Baptism; in both which he
denied, I affirmed: It would require ^great deal of time to give you an account
of all particulars; and the truth is, if I should, some passages would have an
ill reflex upon some men of note and power, with whom perhaps it will not be
safe for me to meddle: And in a Letter from the same Minister, printed in this
third part of Gangraera, page, 40. 41, Collier being mentioned, he is said to
be the first that sowed the seeds of Anabaptisme, Antisabbatarianisme, and some
Arminianisme among the rest in these parts.

A Copy of a Letter to a tittle sent from some of the Inhabitants of Devizes,
to a worthy Member of the House of Commons.
Right Worshipful,
MAy it please you to be certified by us of certain passages this day at the
Church, in the time of Divine service; That is our Minister (Master Sheappard)
being in the Pulpit was commanded by one Captain Pretty (who is under the
command of Colonel Ireton) and who with his soldiers are (to our great
burden) quartered with us) to be silent and to come forth of the Pulpit,
saying (in threatening terms) he was unfit to preach, and that he was yesterday
(being Satturday) drunken, which evidently can be proved to the contrary, the
Gentleman being (to our knowledge) a very temperate and Religious Divine;) This
Captain was assisted with one Master Ives and Master Lamb, who are (as they
say) Preachers, and diverse soldiers armed in a most irreverent manner, to the
abominable disturbance of the whole Congregation, and (as we conceive) to the
great abuse and disgrace of the Honorable Parliament. By means where of our
Preacher fearing (as was too too much cause) what dangerous effects such
indecent and impious demeanours might produce, was enforced to depart, and
dares not to come in sight; so that we were destitute of preaching this day:
Whereof we thought good (being thereto (as we believe) bound in duty and good
conscience) to acquaint your Worship withal, hoping by your industrious means
these our most intolerable griveances may be taken into Religious
consideration, and we thereof eased; which we earnestly beg of you, (our
approved good friend and Countryman) may be effected.

These aforesaid abuses can be (if occasion) witnessed by the whole
Congregation.

From the Devizes this present Sunday, the 6. of September, 1646.

I Have received lately certain Information, from some who are come out of
Wales, that a Trooper of Colonel Riches Regiment has been for diverse weeks
last past in Wales in Radnorshire, and Brecknockeshire, a preaching and
dipping, where he has vented many Doctrines of Antinomianisme and Anabaptisme,
and rebaptized hundreds in those Countries; Among others, one woman whom he
dipped, he held so long under water, that what with the water getting into her,
and cold she died of it within a day or two. This Trooper going from these
Countries into Mongomeryshire another County of Wales to preach and dippe,
some in command and Arms for the Parliament, seized on him and committed him
to prison; but within a while after this commitment, by means used by some in
the Army there comes an order from higher Authority to those who committed him
to release him, and so he was set free. A Religious Commander who comes from
thence tells me, the preaching and dipping of this Trooper and other such,
makes the Countries being newly reduced, have an ill opinion of the Parliament;
and many of the people say, these are your Preachers at London, and such
Preachers as the Parliament
sends; for they being ignorant people, think verily these men are sent forth
by the Parliament to preach to them. This Commander tells me also there is a
strong report in those Countries of Wales where he has been, that there are
some Sectaries preach for Circumcision, and that some have been Circumcised,
but the truth of that he cannot assert, as of the rest, but must have more time
to find it out.

There is a Minister now in London, or here abouts, who going to a meeting of
the Sectaries, heard one of them in his Exercising, and preaching to the
company assembled, affirm that he was Jesus Christ; whereupon this Minister
spoke to him, and said how can you be Jesus Christ, where are the prints of the
nails in your hands? unto which this wicked Sectarie replied showing him his
hands, here they are, and in one of his hands there were some marks, which he
said were the prints of the nails; but said this Sectarie, for all this you
will not believe me to be Christ unless you saw Miracles, and turning over his
Bible to the Book of the Revelations, this Sectary quoted a place that Miracles
were wrought to confirm the Doctrine of Devils, which says he you would have
me to show to confirm the truth. This is a most certain story, related by an
ear and eye witness to a Noble Earl of this Kingdom, and to some others, and
the place where this Sectary dwells related also with many circumstances.

Some of the Sectarian soldiers quartering very dately at a Town in Lester
shire, upon the Lords day some of them shooed their horses; others who came
into the Church, disturbed and affronted a godly Minister one Master Boh^mus
Minister of the place, (put in by the means of Sir Arthur Hazelrig, to whom he
had formerly relation) who as he was reading in the Scriptures that passage,
The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; some of them stood up and
said that was a lie; and so insolent was their carriage, that this good
Minister was glad to get him out of the way. And as their carriage was so in
the Church, so a Townsman who rented the Tithes, being upon horse in the field
looking after his Tyth corn, some of these soldiers coming into the field
asked who that was, and being told he was a man that came to gather Tyths, they
came to him, and one took one leg, and another the other, and others laid hands
on him in other parts, and threw him off his horse abusing him, and hazarding
the limbs of the man, because he renting the Tithes, came to look after them.

When the Army was marching from Exeter for Oxford, upon their marching, there
was a Fast kept by the Army, and upon that Fast day diverse of the Sectarian
soldiers instead of keeping it were drinking all the day in Alehouses and
many of them were stark drunk. Of this there was a Letter written from a worthy
Colonel in the Army, which was communicated to diverse persons of worth, and a
worthy Member of the House of Commons who read it, and knew all the
particulars, of place, time, etc. related it to me in the hearing of a Member
of the same House.

A Copy of a Lettter to a tittle sent to me from two worthy Ministers in
Norwich.
Sir
TThe second part of Gangraena, gives us an intimation, that you intend a more
large and full reply unto him, whose juggling aquivocations, and fallacies have
cleared you, and deservedly branded himself and the rest of his fiction, with
the name of Cretensis: your work (the Title page tells us) is a fresh Discovery
of the Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies of the Sectaries of this time. We are
heartily sorry, that we have so real grounds, and so much cause in our City
of Norwich, to contribute any thing to so sad, (yet necessary) work; How daring
and insolent they be, appears as by many other things, so by this, that one of
them professed openly (which we can prove) that they would set up and maintain
in the City an Independent Lecture, in despite of the
Magistrate. What scorn, cont(...)ely, and reproaches we and our Brethren of
the Ministry meet with all, you may guess by this enclosed; which information
was taken by the Major, as appears by the date June, 18. 1646. and was the day
following deposed in open Court; Whereupon this woman Priscilla Miles was by
the Major and Justices bound over to the next Sessions: The paper we send is no
Transcript, but the very information taken by the Town-Clark, and subscribed by
the hand of the Major, and Informant; We leave it to your wisdom, whether you
will stifle and lay it aside or make use of it for the public, and subscribe
our selves

Norwich June 25. 1646. Your Brethren and fellow laborers in the Lords work.
John Carter. John Thornbe^ke.


The Information of Richard Gunton, Weaver, taken before Henry Watts, Major of
the City of Norwich the 18. of June, 1646.
HE says, that Priscilla the wife of Richard Miles of Saint Margarets Parish,
has often times abused Master John Carter the Minister of Saint Peter's Parish,
by very vild and wicked revilefull speeches, as namely, about three weeks since
she said, that the said Master Carter was one that ought not to preach to a
Congregation of people, for he did not teach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, but
was an opposer of it so far as he was able, and that when he should be
preaching of the Gospel of Christ, then he was talking of the height and length
of the Tower of Babell, which were lies; and further said it was a thousand
pitties he was not
pulled out of the Pulpit by the ears; And she further said, that she did
think the intent of his heart was when he came into the Pulpit to blaspheme
God, and to draw men from Christ so far as he was able: And she further said,
that before three years come to an end those black-coted preachers that now
did preach in the Steeple Houses, should have their black coats and gowns
pulled over their ears, and that there should not be one of them left; and
she said, the said Master Carter, and such as he is were sent from the Devil
and the Pope, and so they continued and lived Devils here: And he further
says that about a month since the Informant caused his servant to read some
notes of a Sermon of Master Thornebecks, the said Priscilla came into his
house, and this Informant commending Master Thornebecks Sermon, she said that
he spoke lies, and it was a thousand pitties that he was suffered and not
pulled out of the Pulpit, and said he was turned out where he was before, and
if he had been good he should never have come here: And he further says, that
about Lady last a maid servant of Henry Gunton said, that one Renniger, who had
teached in a private house, was a man who was sent from God, and fitter to
teach then Carter, for he was not sent from God, and further said, that they
were none but Whoremasters, Drunkerds and Liars, that would speak against the
Anabaptists.

Henry Watts Major. Richard Gunton.



And he further says, that the said Priscilla about six weeks since, said that
the Prophets in the Old Testament prophesied two and fifty lies, which was
occasioned by some discourse that was between this Informant, and the said
Priscilla upon some places of Scripture; And then this Informant showed her a
place in Scripture, in the ninth Chapter of the Romans, and she said Saint Paul
lied, and said he did acknowledge himself to be so to gain some to Christ: And
at another time before that, about a quarter of a year since when this
Informant and the said Priscilla were in discourse together, this Informant
showed her a place of Scripture, which were the words of Christ, she took the
book and threw it out of her hand and said, that was not ordered by the holy
Ghost to be printed, but it was the rogue Printer that did put it in.

Henry Watts Major. Richard Gunton



William Gunton does likewise inform that he has heard the said Priscilla
Miles say, that Master Carter did blaspheme God, and he likewise says, that
she said* Master Thornebecke preached a false doctrine, and if she had been
there, she would have bidden him come down you old fool.

A Copy of a Letter to a tittle written to me from a godly Minister at Dover.
Sir,
THough the Stories of Errors and Heresies be so sad as that pious souls cannot
but mourn and sigh, and grieve much at the reading of them; yet since your
publishing of them is many ways useful, as that false Doctrines and false
Teachers might be discovered and made odious, and that truth might be the
more manifest to, and lovely in the professors of it, opposita juxta se posita
magis elucescunt; Wherefore I have sent you a Copy of those Errors which were
stiffly defended by one William Bowling of Crambrock in Kent, on Wednesday last,
the eighth of July 1646 in my passage with him in a pair of Oars from
Gravesend to London, there be five other passengers in the Boat that did
witness these Errors and Heresies to be stoutly asserted by the party
aforesaid, so that you may be confident you shall publish nothing but the
Truth, in publishing that these Errors following were vented and justified by
him in less then four hours passage upon the waters.

1. He affirmed that Adams sin in eating the forbidden fruit did not deserve
Hell.

2. That Heavens blessedness was not proposed to Adam in case of his
obedience, therefore Hells torments were not threatened to Adam, nor due to him
in case of his disobedience.

3. That all the children of Adam that dye in their infancy, whether they be
children of Turks or Infidels, are undobtedly saved, as well as the children of
Christians, and would prove it out of John 1. 29. where, by sin he meant only
Original, where he seems to cross his first point.

4. That Christ's blood did not purchase Heaven for any man. And being asked how
came the Saints to be in Heaven: He answered, Heaven is a gift given to the
Saints as a reward of Christ's righteousness without relation to his Death and
Sufferings which were endured for to be our example, not to purchase Heaven for
us.

5. That Christ shed his blood for kine and horses and all other creatures, as
well as for men, miserably perverting that Scripture in the eigth to the Romans
19, 20, 21, 22. verses.

6. That the Heavens and the Earth mentioned, 2 Pet. 3. 7. shall not be set on
fire, nor are they reserved for the judgment and perdition of ungodly men; And
that there is no other fire in Hell, then the Hell that is and shall be in men's
consciences.

7. That the souls of Devils and all other men are mortal as well as their
bodies, and that there was none immortal but God.

8. That if the soul which was the breath of God were not mortal, then the
breath of God, which is part of God, should be eternally tormented in Hell.

9. That (those words) to day, or, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise,
is so to be understood (1) at the day of Resurrection when I come personally to
reign upon earth a 1000 years, at that day shall thou be with me in my Kingdom,
for there is Gods Kingdom which Christ has now, and there is Christ's Kingdom,
which the Theifshall share in then.

10. He a^firmed that place Revel. 20. 6. to be meant of a personal reign of
Christ in his body upon earth a 1000 years.

11. He affirmed that place in Eccles. 12. 7. is not to be understood as if the
soul after death was really separated from the body, for says he, the souls of
men rest in the grave with their bodies till the Resurrection, and then Christ
raises up both together; the soul may return to God that gave it, though it lay
with the body in the grave, for God is present every where, and the soul went
no more to God then the body did.

12. It is injustice in God to punish the souls of the wicked in Hell while
their bodies lay at rest in their graves, for seeing both were sinners
together, both must be sufferers together, if God should punish the soul of
Cain in Hell sive or six thousand years before he punish the body of Cain, he
then would show himself partial in his distribution of justice.

13. He said, sin was not conveyed ^o Adams posterity by Adams loins, He was
asked, how then came we to be sinners? He answered, only by Satan, for Satan was
the father, and our hearts was the mother to receive Satan's seed, for the
Devil is the father of all actual sins in men, and begets sin in them as
the Adulterer begets an Adulterous ^^ood upon the Adulteress, there can be but
one father of one child, so there can be but one father of sin, and that is
the Devil, for he is called the father of lies.

14. And he being told that the Devil was but a partial not a total cause in
the production of sin, for the Devil he works sin instigando, by
temptation, and corrupt nature works sin efficaciter agendo and operando, by
begetting actual sins, James 1. 15. Lust it brings forth sin. And the
law in Paul's members did bring me (says Paul) into captivity to the law of
sin. But he replied saying, The Devil was not only a partial, but a total
father in begetting sin upon Adams pure soul, for Adam had no corrupt nature
to help him sin the first sin, therefore it was wholly from Satan.

I told him the Devil could not by his temptation defile a pure soul, that is,
not consenting to his temptation, for then he would have defiled Jesus Christ
when he was tempted by the Devil, therefore I conceive the chief cause of
Adams fall was the consent of Adams own will, which could not be forced by
Satan, because he had power to stand against Satan's temptations, as well as
power to fall.

But seeing there would be no end of dispute, I desired the people present in
the Boat to beware of his Errors. But he said, they were such as I that did
deceive the people, and we would not open our eyes to see the light; our
receiving of Tyths did blind us, but he hoped shortly there would be no Tithes
paid in England.

How then will you have the Ministers of the Gospel live of the Gospel?

15. He answered they must take such as the people will give them, and if their
people will not maintain them, they must work with their hands as Paul did.

16. He further said our Ministers of the Church of England were Antichristian
Ministers, and our Parochial Congregations were no Churches, nor was there any
National Church now under the Gospel, though I told him where ever there is a
Nation professing the Gospel according to the Word, there must needs be a
National Church under the Gospel, But in England there is such a Nation
professing the Gospel, and to be ruled according to the Word of God, witness
our National Covenant; some corrupt members in the Nation do not hinder the
being of a National Church,

I asked him what he thought of the representative body of the Nation now
assembled in Parliament, and of the Clergy now assembled in the Synod, He
answered, as for the Assembly of Divines, they are as bad as other Ministers,
and that he hoped shortly they would be as contemptible as the Bishops are; and
that unless they could prove themselves to be guided by an infallible spirit,
the Parliament need not accept their advise, though they have called them to
give their advise in the things of Christ's Kingdom; but the Parliament I hope
shortly will dismiss them, says he, and call others in a new Assembly, that
may advise them better then they do.

Sir, I have hitherto told you a few things of those many that were in
discourse between this William Bowling and my self, he wearied me and
perplexed me so with his erroneous, heretical, and wild disputation, that when
we came ashore at Billinsgate, I was sorry that I forgate to have him
apprehended here, before the Committee of Examinations, who would have sifted
him to purpose. I do hear that Master Williamson of Cranbrook has heretofore
had him before the Committee at Ailesford in Kent for some misdemeanors, And I
hear by others that the man does Patrizare in some of his opinions, but no
wonder the world is full of such, and the Church too, and there must be
Heresies, and Sects, that they which are approved may be made manifest among
us. The good Lord in due time purge his Church, and now his Fan is in his
hand, let us pray that he may thoroughly purge his floor; nothing but pure
Wheat shall be in the Lords Barn: Lord thy will be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven, so commending your holy labors both in Pulpit and Press to the
blessing of God I rest

Your lover in the Truth, and for his sake who is ipsa veritas. Nichol. North.
From Dover, July 13. 1646.

Sir, Last day repeating to my people here in Saint James Parish, the sum of
these Errors, that they might avoid the like, Captain Temple (a great stickler
in this Town for the maintenance of all Sects as I hear) sent me this letter
after Sermon, being (as it seems) displeased that I should forewarn my people
of Heresies and Errors, I pray consider of it, and make the best use of it you
can. The man is a stranger to me and I an to him, I never saw him to my
knowledge, and he did not hear me preach that day he wrote to me, though in his
Letter he says he is my observer.

Mr. North,
Doubtless you may get into your peoples affections with enveighing against
any pretenders to Religion, as if all such did hold such points as your story
wherewith you filled up your hour. But I pray Sir, be so honest as to tell them
this afternoon that it was very likely that Tiltboat ^ent* your companion to
London was an Atheist one of your Church of England: For such swearers,
drunkards, blasphemers, do use to go in your Tilt-boat, and there talk of
Religion according to your story; But all wise men know your objects of spleen
called Independents, Anabaptists, etc. hold fundamentalls in Religion and can
maintain it by Scripture better then your self.

Your observer Miles Temple.
Dover the 12. July 1646.

This is a true Copy to a tittle, of Master Temples Letter sent to Master
North on the Lords day, July the 12. 1646. Attested by Nicholas North, John
Dy^us, Ministers.

A Copy of a Letter from a worthy Minister in the West of England.
Worthy Sir,
I Had not the happiness either to see or hear of the second part of
Gangraena, till within these very few days; The first part did so much good in
weakening the reputation of the Sectaries, and marring their market wheresoever
it came, that it is not unlikely there may be means used by some agents in
London to hinder the spreading of this; How it comes to pass I know not, but
if any corrupting Books come forth, making for Independency or any of the
Sects, we are sure to here of them soon enough, and find them in too many
hands: I am glad you have made good your ground so well against Cretensis,
whose bitter, arrogant, unministeriall style and passages, will be enough to
lay open to the world the temper of the man's spirit, though you should be
silent. In that which concerns Master Buroughs, I thought verily you had been
misinformed; He utterly denied the truth of that relation to a good
Presbyteriall friend of his and mine, who always has had him in good esteem
for piety; sure it will amaze his friend and many others, when they shall see
this largeness of conscience in Master Buroughs: You cannot immagine how I
was struck at the reading of it; If Saints of the first magnitude in the
Independent way, the greatest pretenders to conscience can do this, what credit
can we give to the rest? such Presbyterians, as they will scarce own to be
Saints, have not that latitude of conscience to tell (...) willingly, much
less write it, print it and give it under their h^^ds to all the world; This
is too too bad. As concerning that Collier whom you spoke of in your Book, I
could give you a large relation, as how he was banished out of Garnesey (he and
many more of his followers whom he had seduced) for their heresies and
turbulent behavior; afterward imprisoned at Po(...)th; (...) was the first
that sowed the seeds of Anabaptism, Anti-sabbatari^^ism; and some Arminianisme
among the rest in these parts; he has had the boldness to publish two or
three pamphlets full stuffed with erroneous principles, and ^avouring of an
illitterate Carter, or an Husbandman, (for so he is by his calling, I hear)
though now by usurpation a Preacher: The first time he preached amongst us
(which was in time of public exercise) some that heard him, said afterward if
that were true which Master Collier had taught them, they would never hear any
of our Min^^ters more: You may guess his doctrine by the use was made of it;
doubtless (...) was strong poison he gave them that wrought so strongly at
first* Sir, if I were not in great haste, I should writ more at large; I should
be glad to hear from you in a word o^ two, how things are likely to go, for
which I shall rest

June 1646. Your thankful friend.

A Copy of a Letter sent from some of the Committee of the City of Exeter, to
some of that City here in London.
GEntlemen we refer you to our former Letter sent you by post, wherein we
gave you information of the imprisoning of our honest Citizens by the Deputy
Governor and Officers of that Garrison, they yet continue in custody: The
Committee was refused to have the knowledge of the cause of their imprisonment.
Our Constables are opposed in doing their duties; in a word, they do openly
contemn, and violently incroach upon the civil power contrary to former ordem
sent them: Yesterday they demanded more moneys of us for the Garrison; We do
what in us lies to oppose them in their undue courses. But the insolency of
this day is such, that we thought it our duty to make this present dispatch to
you, doubting what a day may bring forth. The cause is thus; we taking notice
of the frequent preaching of Captains at the Castle, Guild Hall, and in
private houses, and of their drawing away of the people, thought it necessary,
with the advice of Ministers, to have the Ordinance of Parliament of the
twenty sixth of April, 1645. to be published, which prohibits all such to
preach as were not ordained Ministers, etc. which accordingly was read at the
Cathedral before the morning Sermon this day; The Deputy Governor hearing it,
commands it to be read the second and third time, the Officers jeering and
scoffing
all the time of the publishing of it, in contempt both of the Ordinance and of
the Committee. After the Sermon was ended, the Deputy Governor most
presumptuously stands up in the Bishops seat, and takes upon him publicly to
give the meaning of the Ordinance, and says aloud, that it did not forbid
their meetings, and that in the after-noones they would have their exercise in
the Custle (which accordingly they had) and that he had the command of the
City, and of all that were in it; with many words to the like effect: After
stands up Captain Leivtenant Vernum, and openly says that in despite of men
they would have their exercise, adding at last with submission to Authority;
Presently after Master Parsons, who published the Ordinance was sent for, and
although he showed the order of the Committee, yet he was sent to prison by the
Deputy Governor; the whole Church was in an uproare and the City is in
disorder; what the consequence may be we know not; we have been and still are
affronted by the
Garrison, and the civil power is in a manner trampled under foot. We conceive
the public presumption to interpret an Ordinance of Parliament, and to commit
to prison the publisher of it, is such an act as cannot be paralled in the
whole Kingdom. We have written to Master Prideaux very earnestly about it, and
have desired him to impart it to the Committee of the West; the like request is
made to you, that so some speedy course may be taken herein, and an answer
returned to

Exon. 2. August, 1646. Your affectioned friends and servants Samuel Clark.
Richard Saunders. Richard Crossing^



This is a Coppie of a former sent last night by a Post at nine of the clock
under Mr Prideaux cover; the packet was superscribed for the Parliaments
service, which packet going out of Eastgate was stopped by the Officers of the
Garrison, and was broken open; the Post-boy wasstopt about three hours between
Eastgate and the Drawbridge, and then a packet was returned, and put into his
hands again, and he willed to depart, the boy being unwilling, had twelve
pence given him and so went away. We are in great haste, and have sent this
bearer express, unto whose relation we refer your for more particulars; He
that commanded the guard gives us certain information that the packet was stopped
as above, and broken open, and he promises to bring three or four more to
testify it.

Exon. 3. of August, 1646. One of the clock.

Since upon examinations, we ^inde the stoping and opening the Letters to be
true.

UPon Sunday being the second of August, 1646. about nine or ten of the clock
in the night, the aforesaid Committee had dispacht away a packet and Post,
directed to the Honorable Edward Prideaux, a Member of the Honorable House of
Commons, and at the foot of it superscription for the Parliaments service,
which packet was cleared out of the Gates by two Constables of the said City,
who said to the Postillian, go hasten on thy way, to which some of the guard
said, and the plague go with them, but Captain Vernon and some others laid in
wait between the Port, and the out-work, to intercept the Post, and took from
the Postillion the said packet, which immediately was opened by them, and
reading the same they laughed and jeered thereat; afterward they commanded
some Musketeers to guard the Postilion that he may carry the packet to the
Deputy Governor, which they did; and after three hours time the said Captain
Vernon and some others returned with a Pa^ket, directed to Colonel Hamman, or
in his absence to Colonel -- or in his absence to -- When the packet was
delivered, the Postillion replied this is not my packet, I will not go with
this but return to my Master to acquaint him thereof, whereupon some of the
Captains said, Sirah get you gone, and withal gave him a shilling.

Copies of Letters, and extracts of Letter*s written from the Army, Garrison
Towns and other parts of the Countries unto Friends in London and Westminster,
concerning some Officers, Soldiers, and Preachers who are Sectaries.
Gentlemen,
NOtwithstanding all orders, they persist in incroatching on the civil
Authority; Yesterday in the Market they set Sir Francis Fulfetts son a
Minister in the stocks, under the gallows before the Guild Hall for being
drunk, refusing to accept of five shillings tendered by him for the poor; he
deserved punishment, but it was out of their cognizance, and their jeers, and
scoffs did plainly manifest they aimed and envied more at the function then at
the fault. We have since the departing of the express, had full testimony of
the intercepting, breaking open and reading of our Letters by Captain
Leivtenant Vernum, and some other of the Captains, and sending another
directed packet to Governor Hamond instead thereof; And this return they set
a guard on the Post House, and had we not been very vigilant and dilligent, we
should have missed out Letters. They soar very high, and if their wings be not
clipped 'twill be very dangerous, but if the proverb be verified, pride must
have a fall.

Exon. August, 8. 1646. Your truly affectionate Friends, Samuel Clark. Richard
Saunders. Adam Bennet. Richard Crossing. James Gould.



Gentlemen, The Martialists begin again to show themselves in their former
colors, and reassume their late usurpation: They have of late rescued a
prisoner from the Sergiants Arrest: The last Fast day one of the Captains
affronted the Constables in their office in observance of the Ordinance for the
Fast, not permitting them to question such as rid and traveled on that day.

Exon. August, 18. 1646. Your friends and servants, Samuel Clark. Richard
Saunders. James Gould. Richard Crossings.



A Copy of a Letter written from a godly Minister then in the Army.
Our Army is lazy, they fear that they shall be disbanded before our dear
Brethren depart the Kingdom; They rail against the City, and Assembly,
because of the Remonstrance. The House of Lords are much vil^^ied by them, and
our Noble
Scots constantly abused: In their Sermons Master Del, and Saltmarsh preach
free grace, and say, Christ judges not by the eye, or ear, he regards not men's
prayers or duties; if they have Christ in their heart, though they do not read
and pray, and trade in duties, Christ judges them according to their heart.
Secondly, We have no use of secular power, and they that would borrowe the
Magistrates power to make a Reformation in the Kingdom of Christ are
Antichristian; it is an evident sign that they have not the word nor spirit
to speak for them: Alas what can the Magistrate convert souls with the civ^ll
sword? the wicked are to be slain only with the breath of Christ's lips, Isa.
11. 4. That was Master Dels Text before the General. I told them that if this
doctrine were true, they might disband the Army. Thirdly, They pressed hard to
have the law of Love and Liberty observed, that there may be an equality; that
is their phrase and the Anabaptists.
Fourthly, They are most offended with that passage of the Remonstrance about
places of public trust. Fifthly, There is
no need of Universities; for if men be anointed with the spirit, and accepted
amongst the Saints, they are sufficiently qualified for the Ministry. Sixthly,
Paul Hobson the Tailor, and Leivtenant Colonel Hewson the one-eyed Shoemaker
(as Master Peter's calls him) are the most renouned preachers, but Hobson has
saluted the Army with a farewell Sermon, and is sent as an Emissary to Exeter,
to raise a party there. Seventhly, Banbury Castle must not be slighted, they
say it may be a Garrison for the Saints, it is conceived to be the strongest in
England. They use an Argument which takes with people much, that if they will
join with them, they shall pay no Tithes; and some are so foolish to give out,
there is a considerable party in all Countries where ere they have been,
that will stand for them, so they may be excused for paying Tithes. Ninthly,
Though that Argument do generally take with profane men, yet they see there
are a company of godly men that are willing to pay Tithes; to them therefore
they urge all Arguments against mixed communion, and they assure them that the
Assembly will bear with all close dangerous Malignants that can speak Greek
and Latin, if they be not scandalous in their lives, and will conform to the
Presbyteriall government and observe the Directorie. Tenthly, They would not
have the old military Orders observed, which was set forth by the Earl of
Essex, that Blasphemers should be bored through the tongue: The Argument which
they urged was, that sins which are directly against God, should be punnished
only by God, yet they confess that bold sinners should be admonished by the
Church, and bear a spiritual censure: I pleaded that men did consist of a
soul and body, and that both joined in this sin, the Devil in the soul
making use of the tongue to vent Blasphemies against the God of Heaven, and
therefore it was fit that the tongue should be pnnished; and that it was
probable that those spiritual means should work the better, which were used
for his reformation and edification; and with much ado by some underhand
dealing with honest Commanders, we prevailed to have the Blasphemer punished.
I hope there will be a disbanding very shortly; if not, there are five
Regiments that want Colonells, and if there could be five Presbyterians put in,
the Independents would be well balanced, for there are a great many
considerable men in this Army well affected to all godly Presbyterians.

June. 3.
A Copy of a Lettter to a Member of the House of Commons.
SIR,
IF Independents be made Governors of Castles, Cities, and strong holds as
fast as they are taken; if under a pretense of frugality for the state, and
reducing of Regiments, Presbyter Commanders are frequently outed, and the
Independents preferred to their places; if the souldierie under Presbyterian
Commanders be unpaied, and thereby enforced to abuse the Country to the
dishonor of that party, and the contrary party paid, and by that means gain
affections every where; if (under a pretense of charity) Independents plead in
the behalf of the greatest Malignants, and by that means scrue into their
favors to make a party; if their agents be working every where to choose
Parliament men of
their own opinions; if they be devising to send away the Scots into Scotland,
and the Presbyterian Commanders and soldiers into Ireland; ought not these
things to be seriously and speedily considered, and forthwith endeavors used
for the preventing the effects which the premises may produce.

Your humble servant.

Some passeges taken out of the Original Letter, sent from a godly Minister in
Northamptonshire to a Friend of his a Common Council man here in London.
SOme of Colonel Whalies soldiers quartered with us; full of Errors of a
high nature; The Lord reduce or rebuke them; I fear they will scatter much
poison as they spread their quarters, alas the poor souls in danger of their
seducements: They are full of high invectives and scorns against the
Parliament, Ministry, and all kind of religious duties. After a fortnights
free quarter, they had our free leave to march, and are marched beyond Market
Harborough, and are about Lough-Borrow in Lestershire; Though they draw
Northward, yet I hope not to the ends that some do hope, viz. to encounter
with our Brethren: I have heard some of them say, that had they the
opportunity, they would be more bitter against them, then ever against the
Cavaliers; but I hope their expectation shall perish,

September. 1. 1646.
The extract of a Letter sent to a Citizen of London, from a godly Minister in
Darbyshire.
SEctaries abound, strange yea damnable opinions are maintained with much zeal
and pretense of conscience, by those who (I fear) were never acquainted with a
good conscience: Monarchy is misliked, and a new fashioned Government too much
thirsted after: There are so many new fashions in Religion, that the true fear
of God is almost grown out of fashion. Sir, I thank you for your remembrance of
me, and I hear that Master Edwards has yet more work for a Mass Priest; when
it comes out I pray you let me have it.

August, 10. 1646.
An extract of a Letter from a godly Minister near Bristoll, to a godly Friend
of his in London.
Dear Friend, we have peace for the present, and hope of plenty for the
future; that only which damps our comfort is, That whiles the Teachers were
removed into corners, the envious man has taken his opportunity and sown
tares, which spring up in our neighbor Bristoll.
City, abundantly, and are spread much over the Country; the whole Kingdom I
think is sick of the same disease; Help Lord.

A true Copy of a Letter to a tittle, of Mr Knollys the Anabaptist, which
coming to the hands of some of the Committee of Suffolk, was shown me and I
extracted it out of the Original.
BEloved Brother, I salute you in the Lord; your Letter I received the last day
of the week, and upon the first day I did salute the Brethren in your name, who
resalute you, and pray for you: The City Presbyterians have sent a Letter to
the Synod, dated from Sion College against my Toleration, and they are fasting
and praying at Sion College this day about further contrivings against Gods
poor Innocent ones; But God will doubtless answer them according to the Idol
of their own hearts. To morrow there is a Fast kept by both Houses and the
Synod at Westminster; They say it is to seek God about the establishing of
Worship according to their Covenant. They have first vowed, now they make
enquiry; God will certainly take the crafty in
their own snare, and make the wisdom of the wise foolishness; for he chooses
the foolish things of this world to confound the wise, and weak things to
confound the mighty. My wife and family remembers their love to you. Salute the
Brethren that are with you, farewell.

Your Brother in the Faith and fellowship of the Gospel Hanserd Knollys.
London the 13. day of the 11. month called January, 1645.

To his beloved Brother Mr John Dutton in Norwich, these deliver.

Leave this Letter at Mr Buttevant his house to be delivered as a bove.

A Letter from a Sectary with this suprescription, To his much honored
Captain, Paul Hobson, at Mr Carwithyes house in Exon.
Endeared SIR,
MY best respects and service to you presented. That relation which formerly I
had unto you, has enboldened me to present you with these rude lines: It does
not a little rejoice me that providence has so disposed of it, as to bring you
down into this dark corner of the Kingdom: It is my desire for you to the
Throne of Grace, that God would cure that weakness of body, under which your
spirit has so long traveled, and that he would give you such strength and
utterance of spirit, whereby you may be able to declare unto the world, the
glory and the ^i^hes of the good news of Jesus Christ, which he has
manifested to your soul: John says, That which we have seen with our eyes,
and our ears have ^eard, and our hands have handled, even the word of life,
that declare we unto you; Such kind of preaching and declarations of Christ,
from experience of it in the heart, the Friests of England (but especially of
these Western parts) are unacquanted withal. I should account it a
happiness, if God would so dispose of it as to open such a way, that I might
have relation to you as formerly, That small remnant of the Saints in this Town
will be very joyful to see you here, and so shall he that desires to be

Your servant in any office of love, Robert Carye.
Dartmouth, June 12. 1646.

THere is one Sims of Hampton a Shoemaker, as appears by the following
Examination, and a Letter presently following, who goes about as an Emis^ary
all the West over, from place to pl^^e to infect the people, who at Bridgwater
in Summersetshire being apprehended by some in authority, was examined and
diverse Letters found about him, written by several Sectaries to the Saints (as
they call them) in Taunton, and elsewhere; this examination and Letters were
sent up to a person of worth then in London, and that Gentleman g^ve the(...)
me, so that I have the Original Letters by me.

The Examination of John Sims Shoemaker.
Sunday the last of May, preached in the Parish Church of Middl^s^y, took his
Text out of the 3. Col. 1. One Master Mercer, and Master Esquier Ministers,
with a hundred more persons, and being desired to know how he durst pres^^e to
^^ach so publicly being not called, and an Ordinance of Parliament to the
contrary, Answered, if Peter was called, so was he.

2. Being desi^ed to know what he teached contrary to the law of God and the
laws of the Land, answ(...), why are they suffered to teach in London so near
the Parliament House; and that he would allow of the Parliament, is for forth
as they go^ with his Doctrine.

3. Being desired to know whether he allowed of our Baptism, answered no, that
for his part he was baptized a year since, by one Master Sickmoore and his
manner of Baptisings was, that the aforesaid Sickmoore went first into the
water and he after him, so that he for his part would not allow of our Baptism.

The Letters taken about him. To the Saints in the Order and fellowship of the
Gospel in Taunton.
Your dear Brother Thomas Collier, desires the increase of grace and peace
from God the Father, and from out Lord Jesus Christ. Dear Brethren and
Sisters, I have not had an opportunity of writing unto you until now, although
my spirit has been up to the Lord for your continually: The Lord has
manifested his presence with me exceedingly in my journey; I desire the Lord to
raise up your heart in thankfulness, he has gathered Saints in Poole by me,
14. took up the Ordinance at once, there is like to be a great work, and
confirmed the Churches in other places; I am not yet got so far as London, but
I shall I expect to morrow: Dearly beloved my desire and prayer to our Father
on your behalf is, that your souls may be satisfied with his fulness, that
you may live above, and then your souls shall not want comfort: And my
exhortation to you is to wait upon the Lord in his own way, and not to look
forth into the world; there is bread enough in your Fathers h^use; There he
has promised his presence; though you seem to want gifts, yet you shall not
want the presence of your Father, your Jesus, if you wait upon him: There are
two Brethren I suppose will visit you from Hampton, Brother Sims, and Brother
Row* whom desire you to receive as from the Lord. The (...)ted power of the
Plesbyterians is denied them, of which you shall hear more shortly. I desire
to be remembered to all my kind friends with you and at present rest

Gilford, April 20. 1646. Your dear Brother in the faith and fellowship of the
Gospel, Thomas Collier.
I shall see you as speedily as possible I may.
To the Saints in the order and fellowship of the Gospel.
MY dear ones in the Lord Jesus, I salute you, desireing him who is our head
and husband, our life and liberty, our all and in all, to gather up our souls
more abundantly into the glorious unity and fellowship of the Son of God, that
you may not live upon these lower things, which are but instruments to conveigh
light and love unto us, I mean even Ordinances or the like, which indeed are
but as a shell without the kernel, further then we enjoy Christ in it. My
dear ones, you are in my heart continually, and my desire is to be with you as
soon as posible I can, to impart some spiritual gifts unto you, and to enjoy
fellowship with Jesus Christ in you; but what is this? your are upon the heart
of Christ, nay, engraven upon his hand, and shall be had in everlasting
remembrance before him. I am much in haste at present, the Post being coming
forth of Town, only I have sent you these few lines and two Books here
enclosed, as a remembrance of my love: I desire to be remembered to all my dear
friends with you, and at present rest and remain

Your dear Brother in the faith and fellowship of the Gospel. Tho. Collier.
London, May 2. 1646. To his Friend William Heynton Buttler in the Castle at
Taunton these.

Dear Brother in the Lord Jesus Christ, with the rest of our dear friends
with you, my kind love remembrd; my desire to you is that you will receive this
bearer Master Reeves as a dear friend, for he is a Member in the order and
fellowship of the Gospel with the Saints in Taunton: I need not tell you of the
oppositions here in Taunton; our Brother will tell you the particular passages;
our Governor does labor to beat us down, and does say, that any meeting in
private, is merely to cross the public meetings, and that it is not out of
tenderness of conscience, but damnable pride that we do; but this does not any
way cause us to draw back, or sadden our spirits, for our spirits are carried
above the fear of men. All our friends are in good health, so I remain

Your dear Brother William Hayward.
May 16. 1646.

MOst kind and loving Brethren and Sisters in the Lord Jesus, my indeared love
remembered unto all the Saints; unto you I writ which are called unto the Lambs
supper, who are arrayed in pure fine linen, and shining, which is the
righteousness of Saints; grace be with you and peace from God our Father, and
from the Lord Jesus Christ; be ye also patient therefore, and settle your
hearts for the coming of Christ is at hand, which are kept for an inheritance
immortal and undefiled, and that withers not, reserved in Heaven for you;
and though if we will have Christ, we must be tried, it shall be found unto
our praise and honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. I rejoce that
the Saints of Taunton, do break forth and t^ll of the in-comings of God in
Christ upon your souls, having gone through many trialls and persecutions; you
may speak the more of the free love of God in Christ, preserving you, and
giving you your life for a prey; I do desire Christ to declare more and more
the hidden things of God by his free grace in Christ; ye have not chosen
Christ, but I have chosen you, John, 15. 16. And I rejoice that Christ is
beginning to set up housekeeping, and his Saints shall not want while Christ
have one penny; Come buy without money gold tried and white raiment, and anoint
thine eyes with eie-salve that thou may see: Christ has made us set
together in heavenly places; and in the third of the Galatians Ye being
baptized into Christ have put on Christ; and the Church, I mean the Saints,
who are Christ's Temple, is still traveling in birth until Christ be formed in
them; and the spirit of God will not forsake you, until your mortal bodies
shall appear before Christ to be glorified; then them than win Saints to
Christ are called Angels, Revel. 2. and Angels fly in haste, so I rest,

Yours, as you are Christ's, Nicholas Bodis.


There was another Letter also taken about this Sims, written from one John
Pool, for the strenghtning of the Saints in Taunton to suffer persecution,
comforting them, that seeing that Christ by as great a power as that which
raised him up from the dead, had brought them into the way, they might be
assured that by that same power he would carry them through that way to the
ways end: But the Letter being but weak, and having only general things, I
will not trouble the Reader with any more of it.

THere is one Mr Tandy a great Sectary, who has been in the North parts and at
York, with whom a godly and learned Minister of York, by writing and Letters
passed between them, has had some debates a^out P^dobaptisme, and has
maintained against him these Theses or Positions.

1. That the Covenant that God made with Abraham and his seed, Genes. 17. was
the Covenant of Grace or new Covenant.

2. That there is an outward being in this Covenant, which does entitle to the
signs and seals of it.

3. That Circumcision was, and Baptism is a sign, and seal of this Covenant.

4. That Infants being the seed of Abraham were in that Covenant, and so were
circumcised; and so Infants being the seed of believers (whether in truth or in
profession only) are within this Covenant, and therefore are to be baptized.

I have seen Letters that have passed between them, it is too long to set down
the grounds, and the R^^li^^ given by this learned Minister to him about the
point of Poedobaptisme, the Jewish Sabbath, with other of his conceits: I shall
briefly extract a few passages out of Master Tandies Letters which I have taken
out of the originals themselves, they being sent to me; but first of all I
shall give the Reader an extract of that Letter sent from that learned and
godly Minister to a worthy Member of the House of Commons, acquainting him with
the true proceedings between them, and wishing they might be communicated to me.

SIR,
Not being able (as I wrote the last week) to send my Sermons about
Poedobaptisme, I have sent some Papers whereby you may perceive something that
has passed betwixt me and an Anabaptist, yea (as his own writings will show)
more then an Anabaptist. He was a Minister before these times, and is (as I
have heard) by name mentioned in Master Edwards his Gangr^^a. I wish he had a
^ight of his Letters, whereby he might have a more clear^ and full character of
the m(...); then yet perhaps he has: (...) said that he does earnestly desire
all to give him what information they can in this kind, and truly I think he
deserves to be encouraged, and assisted all that may be. It is a sad thing, and
much to be deplorud, that such boldness and activity should be
in so many to b^oa^h and abe^^ such (...)rid and monstrous Errors (as it
seems) are now daily vented and maintained, and that so few should be fo(...)
valiant for the truth, ready to stand up in defense of it.


SIR,
LEts lay aside tradition, custom, the reputation of learning, and all selvish
respects, and let speak and write so as knowing that we must shortly account
(...) Jesus Christ for all that we build, whether it be hay or stubble, gold or
wood. For my part I am thus far convinced by comparing Gods clear
providence, and some prophesies in the Revelations, which viewed together show
me whereabouts we are, that I am confident within these very few years I shall
see him wh^m our soul loves, and much will it go to my heart if I either
oppose a truth, or maintain an error. Sir, lets look about us, the veil is
not yet taken off, in something most good men have been blinded, it may be in
this for one, it is good to be tenderly jealous; pardon me that I thus exhort
you, I see so many temptations that strongly invite even godly men to contend
for Poedobaptism, and so far do I see also into the mystery of Antichrists
sitting in the Temple of God as God, that I cannot but give a caution to the
godliest man upon earth that undertakes the defense of this practice.

Fourth day of the week. Yours Philip Tandy.


SIR,
I Received yours as I take it upon the third of this week: I could not get
retirement and leisure to peruse it till this seventh. I accout it a Sabbath
days work to plead for truth, and I am heartily content that Jesus Christ who
searches the secrets of all hearts, should be both judge of it, and of my
heart in discussing it. Now in this Letter Master Tandy falls upon speaking to
those Theses sent by Master C. as that the Cov^nant mentioned, Genesis 17. was the
New Covenant, which Master Tandy denies, and in his Answers to these Theses
toward the end of his Letter says thus. That as in Circumcision which was a
peculiar worship to the time of the Law nothing was done in it but by command,
so in Baptism which is a peculiar part of the Gospel worship nothing is to be
done but by peculiar warrant now; since then the command of Christ bears
nothing, but the Baptism of Believers, none but such are to be baptized; nor
they neither as the case stands now, till we see some come abroad with a clear
Commission, A Seeker.
to go about such a work. At the close I would wish you amongst other things,
to consider this: Suppose the Saints as they were gathered by the preaching of
the Gospel in the Apostles days had been still in all ages to this day
careful to baptize none but Believers, and had kept themselves in as much as
lay in them pure from receiving any other into their communion, and had
worshipped God solemnly upon the old seventh day, as upon Gods Sabbath. I would
feign know what fault you could find with this Church so doing. Sir, if I can
gain leisure, which I confess is very small, I will endeavor either before
or after my departure hence, to let you see according to that which the Lord
has revealed to me, how the mystery of iniquity vailes us, nay and the whole
world beside.

Yours unfeinedly P. T.


THe Minister formerly spoken of sends to M Tandy a large and full Answer to
this last Letter, wherein he confutes him in all particulars expressed in his
Letter, which Answer because it is so large, consisting almost of a sheet of
paper close written, I shall sorbear to print, and shall only give the Reader a
small part of it, viz. that which he says to that part about Circumcision and
Baptism.

You take it for granted that Christ's command bears nothing but the baptism of
believers; but how will this be proved? That Christ commanded believers to be
baptized, ye and only believers being of age when they enter into Covenant,
this is granted; but that therefore absolutely none but Believers (actual
Believers) by Christ's command are to be baptized, it follows not. If Christ
had continued Circumcision still, saying, G(...) etc. circumcise all Nations,
He that believes and is circumcised shall be saved; Circumcision had been to
be administered to Believers, and only to Believers in respect of such as were
of age, when they would be admitted into Covenant; yet should not this exclude
Infants (being the children of believers, and so in Covenant) from
Circumcision. So neither are such infants excluded from Baptism, because
Christ said Go, etc. baptize all Nations, He that believes and is baptized
shall be saved. When Circumcision was in use, faith was required in men of
years, before it might be administered to them, Romans 4. 11. yet this hindered
not, but that it was to be administered to children. The Covenant being the same
now as before, and only the sign and seal changed, viz. Circumcision into
Baptism; as children were in the Covenant before, and therefore received the
sign and seal that then was, viz. Circumcision: except we find them excluded
and debarred (which we do not) in all reason they are to be in the Covenant
now, and therefore to receive the sign and seal that now is, viz. Baptism;
The Covenant being enlarged, viz. to all Nations, should the sign and seal of
it be straightened, viz. to them that are of years? yea an enlargement of the
sign and seal we find, viz. to females, but a restriction of it to those of
years we do not find: Yea when Christ bids baptize Nations, Matthew. 28. 19.
does not that comprehend Children? are they no part of the Nation? And if the
Children of believers be not in the Covenant, and to receive the token of the
Covenant, then shall there be no difference betwixt them and the Children of
Insidels, that one shall have no more birth privilege then the other, but the
Apostle teaches otherwise, 1. Cor. 7. 14.

A Letter of Mr Tandy, to the Minister upon receipt of the above mentioned
Papers.
Sir,
I Am making ready for my departure hence, and I have only so much leisure as
to read yours, by reason of the multiplicity of occasions that take up the
residue of my stay. How God will be pleased to afford me success in my
endeavors with you I cannot tell, but I will not be afraid to say that I am
sure I defend the truth, and yet not I but the spirit of God that is within me;
I know what construction you will be apt to make of this expression, but I will
reserve my defense, till I receive my foreseen objection. I send you this to
promise you (as God shall enable me) an answer to your Papers, but you must not
expect it suddenly, because I know not what urgencies I may be put to, when I
come to my journies end: By this which I have received, I see you begin to be
in some heat; you commend me for my free dealing; whether you do it ex animo,
as liking my freedom indeed, I leave it to God to judge, that ere long will
make the world know wherein they do amiss; but in the interim let me tell you,
that after the way that you call Judaism, worship I the God of my Fathers; And
I trust in God either to drive you into a necessity of denying there is any
Sa^both day at all to be observed, or else of granting that which I contend for
to be the right; And if you do the former who is the Antinomian? Where is the
fourth Commandment? If you do the latter, its very probable we shall meet in
the other controversy, since it is acknowledged that they both hang on a
string. Sir, since you commend freedom, I am emboldened to use a little more;
Expect before God end this quarrel that he has with the Land, that God will
bring all our hearts to submit with willingness to his truth, or else he will
consume us. The Lord in his mercy look upon us, and cause us to see the things
which concern our peace; which is the desire of his soul who is

Yours wheresoever you are Christ's, P. T^ndy.

A Copy of a part of a Letter written by a she Sectarie.
Dear Brother,
TO fulfill your desires, I here give you a few answers to your propositions:
First, for this proposition, what disorder will this produce if there be not
prayer in families?

Answ. If whole families be Saints then you may pray with them, and pray as
often as the spirit moves you; But this is the misery, we have taken up things
upon trust, and done what we thought good, and have not eyed the rule and
direction of the word.

2. Prayer is a natural thing, for it is a principle of nature in all men to
call upon God, so do Turks and Heathens; but God is a God of knowledge, and
what is not of faith is sin; so though the wicked pray, they being
unbeleevers, their prayer is sin: Paul in the Acts reproves the
superstitious ignorant worship of them there, when he found their
superscription to the unknown God, whom, says he, ye ignorantly worship, him
declare I unto you; so that ignorant people they cannot pray, they must have
God declared unto them.

3. We have no example nor precept in all the Gospel for Saints to pray with
unbeleevers; when Christ prayed he took his Disciples apart; indeed he taught
and exhorted all; so the Saints in the Acts they prayed alone from the world;
and Christ says go preach the Gospel to all, he does not say go pray with
all; and Christ nor his Apostles never prayed with the world; the Apostles
taught in their Synagogues and expounded in their Assemblies, but not a word of
praying with them; and experience teaches us how our hearts are straightened, and
how we limit the spirit (if I may so speak) when we pray with unbeleevers, and
faith comes not by praying with them, but by preaching, for faith comes by
hearing: I know no word for the Ministers praying with the world, nor Saints to
join with them.

Object. But Christ gave thanks: The Apostle Paul gave thanks before them all.

Answ. Christ's thanksgiving was sometimes miraculous, for by his blessing the
creature he did a miracle; so the Apostle's was too, as far as I know; for
you know how wonderfully after he and all with them were preserved: Or if we
may give thanks with them, it is because all have a right to the creatures
restored them by Christ, that in a way of exhortation or praise a Saint may
inform them therein of their right by Christ.

Object. But what shall they do that have families, shall they be as Heathens?
does not the word say that he will pour out his w^ath upon the Heathen, and the
families that call not upon his Name?

Answ. That makes nothing for it, for it is not said that the Heathen and these
that know him not, shall call on his Name; this is not for it, but to show the
misery of these that cannot; sure it is sweet for Saints to eye the rule for
all that they do: Sure I do not write this that I would diminish any of the
unbeleevers privileges; for Christ Jesus knows my heart is more pitiful unto
them then ever; but I find in the word that the Gospel must be preached unto
them, they must be exhorted and pitied and prayed for, and Saints must shine
before them by a holy --

The rest was torn away by a Sectary, it was signed M. D. Plymouth, the 5. day
of the second month. 1645. And subscribed thus, To her Loving Brother Nicholas
Couch in Dartmouth, This Couch is an Ensign in Dartmouth.

Animadvers. on this last letter by way of Confutation.
Thanksgiving is made a part of Prayer as well as the other three Petitions,
Intercessions, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. v. Acts 27. 35. Paul gave Thanks to God in
the presence of them all, where in the Ship by many passages of that chapter,
Acts 27. particularly the two first verses it is evident they were not
believers, and so Christ Joh. 6. 10. 11. v. gave Thanks among them all, and set
aside the Disciples, there is no ground to think any of them were believers, but
called the multitude, men, and such like phrases, not Disciples: in 1 Corinthians.
14. where the public meetings of Christians are spoken of, and several parts
of worship described, as Singing, Praying, Prophesying, unbeleevers are spoken
of as coming into those Assemblies where these parts of worship are performed,
and they are not excluded from being present at one more then another, nor
believers commanded to suspend Prayer upon their coming any more then
Prophesying, but the chapter carries it as free to come in at all, and the
Church free to perform Praying and Singing as well as Prophesying,
notwithstanding unbeleevers present, compare these Verses together, 14, 15, 16*
22, 23, 24, 25. As for those Answers in this Letter, that Christ's Thanksgiving
was miraculous, etc. they are mere subterfugies, and by the same reasons men
might argue against all giving of thanks before meat, saying these examples of
Christ and Paul were miraculous, and so not binding, but with these compare 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5. verses, how mea^s are to be received with Thanksgiving, and
sanctified by Prayer (speaking of meats and drinks) and then consider Christ's
and Paul's example, and it will show it is for our practice, besides it is such a
Thanksgiving as has Prayer and Petition in it for a blessing, as is clear
from the fifth verse, it is ^ancti^ied by Prayer, and Paul's Thanksgiving in that
twenty seven of the Acts had Petition and Prayer in it, not only for the meat,
but to raise up their dejected minds in the Ship almost killed with grief,
vide Calvinum in locum, Acts 27. 35. and lori^^m.

Some Passages taken out of a Letter written out of Oxfordshire, to a Citizen
in London.
ONe Floid newly come to be a Preacher to the Troop of Major Huntingtons that
now quarters at Aston Roreant, preaching in that Church on Sunday last, June
the 14. on John 20. 17. Touch me not, I am not yet ascended; collected from
those words these three transcendent points. First, That Laymen, Weavers,
Tinckers and Cobblers being gifted might be Preachers. Secondly, Learning was
not any means or help to understand the meaning of the Scriptures. Thirdly,
That any Chamber, Barn or Stable, or other place was as holy as the Church;
and that there was no holiness in the Temple, for God destroyed it, nor in any
Church. This Floid a youth of twenty years, did lie at Master Calverts the
Bookseller at Ludgate Hill. Major Middle^ons man did not only rend with his
hand the Service Book, but cut it with a knife, and burnt it in the fire at
John Chiches of Kinston, and it set the Chimney on fire till they quenched it.
And they justify the burning of the ten Commandments, Creed, Lords prayer,
Psalms, ninty five Epistles and Gospels. I would be glad to know of Mr
Edwards the Antagonist of Heretics what to do in this matter; To whom though
unknown, I present my love in the Lord.

June 16. 1646.
A Reverend and learned Minister living in Oxfordshire, was by some in the
Army, and some of the Parish conspiring together, as he was preaching in his
Church opposed and with tumults disturbed. There was one soldier a great
Champion that did openly and boldly in the Church affirm that he was raised up
of God immediately, and inspired with extraordinary revelations, whom the
Minister by this place of Scripture Matthew. 24. 26. Wherefore if they shall say
unto you, behold he is in the desert go not forth: Behold he is in the secret
chambers, believe it not; overcame and put to a nonplus, so that they went out
of Church with a kind of a Diabolical fury.


TThere is one Master Del a Preacher in the Army, and Sir Thomas Fairfax's
Chaplain, who summer was two years, preached a strange Sermon at Lincoln,
and since put out a Pamphlet against uniformity in Religion, calling it
Antichristian, etc. the man preaches and speaks much against Tithes, and yet
besides his Chaplains place to the General, keeps a great living in
Bedfordshire.

This Master Del Expounding the seven last verses of the 54. of Isaiah, in
Marston Church near Oxford before the General and other Commanders and
soldiers, June, 7. 1646. being Sabbath day in the forenoon used these, or the
like words in effect, viz.

1. There are no more of the Church of God in a Kingdom, then there be such as
have the spirit of God in that Kingdom.

2. Neither Old nor New Testament do hold forth a whole Nation to be a Church.

3. Whatsoever a State, an Assembly or Council shall say, ought not to bind
the Saints, further thenthe judgments of those Saints shall lead them.

4. The Saints are those that are now styled Anabaptists, Familists,
Antinomians, Independents, Sectaries, etc.

5. The power is in you the people; keep it, part not with it.

6. The first party that rose against you, namely, the profane ones of the
Land, are already fallen under you; and now there is
another party, Formalists and carnal Gospellers rising up against you, and I
am confident they shall fall under you.

7. They are willing to become subjects to make the Saints slaves, nay they are
willing to become slaves themselves, that they
may tread upon the necks of the Saints.

8. His Sermon or exposition for the greatest part of it tended merely to
division and sedition.

9. Being spoken with after his Sermon, by some of his hearers, to^ching these
and such like passages, he said to this effect, his intentions were not
according to his expressions, and he thought he had preached only to soldiers.

Peter Mills. John Haine. Nichoas Widmergole* Henry Potter. Theophilus Smith.



There were Copies of these Positions given into the hands of some Members of
both Houses, and some Citizens with these names subscribed; And when Master Del
did put forth his Sermon with an Episte before it; wherein some passages were
inserted to clear himself from these matters laid against him; the Citizens
above named put forth a Book entitled a Vindication of certain Citizens that
lately went to the Leaguer then before Oxford; weherin they attest the seven
former Positions against Mr Del, page 9. And of this Mr Del the Reader may read
more of him in a foregoing Letter written by a Learned and godly Minister out
of the Army.

Some passages taken out of a Letter written lately by a godly Minister in
Cheshire, to a worthy friend of his in London.
George Young, Lieutenant Colonel Ger. soldier, on Sabbath was sevennight, I
being absent, brake to pieces the railes which for these four years have been
transformed into seats very commodiously for the parish, refused to stay his
hand at the instance of diverse, (who told him I would amend it if any thing
were amiss) telling them I would sooner set up such things then pull them
down, and that he would do it if I were present, and that the Church should
down within a year; and reported in the Town that I was drunk with the blood
of the Whore of Rome; wishes his tongue had cleaved to the roof of his mouth
when he had taken the Covenant. And it is much feared that spirit works
mightily in Ger. Company and others. Five Independents are determined
for the five Captains of foot for this Country; judge you what is intended:
Great striving has been to get me out of my Lecture here that an Independent
might come in; but I have undertaken the Lecture if need be gratis, rather then
any evil fall out by my removal.

Some passages taken out of a Letter written from a Reverend and Learned
Minister in the Northern parts, to a worthy friend of his in London.
AN eminent Parliament man of our Country came down lately, with whom I had
some conference about Master Edwards, and about the Schisms and Blasphemies
that are broa^hed and connived at amongst you; He said he thought that Master
It has been usual for men given to fafour heresie^ and Schisms, to speak
evil of the zealous Ministers who oppose them; so Constan. the Emperor often
called Athanasius, (...) impi^m, item (...) s^elestum Theod. lib. 2. cap* 16.
Edwards was a very wicked man, and did as much as was in him to embroyle the
Kingdom in a new War, and deserved, etc. In all his discourse he savored of
the new leaven, which I fear many of the higher powers are too much tainted
with. I complained that Schisms and Schismatics were to much suffered by
them; He answered that truth was victorious, and will be triumphant of it self;
and as when many thick mists gather about the Sun in the morning, the Sun
by his own light and heat dissipates them by degrees, so would truth do all
contrary Errors of it self in time; and therefore it was but reason that men
should first be convinced of their Errors, and satisfied in their consciences
by reasons and arguments, and not be compelled by force to constrain their
consciences to men's wills. I objected Bests case to him, he said that Best
showed himself amoderate man; and willing to be satisfied by reason, and to lay
down his opinions if he might be convinced of them, and his conscience
satisfied. I also spoke of Lilburne to him; he said he was a very good and
deserving man, and thought that he might say and do and justify all that was
yet laid to his charge: He said that Anabaptists were not Heretics, but only
Schismatics at the worst; and that he thought the baptizing of Children could
not be proved out of the word of God. I labored to prove it by Scripture and
reason, the testimonies of the most Orthodox Fathers, and the constant practice
of the first best and purest times of the Primitive Church; but he slighted my
proofs, and said that my Scripture and reasons were not express and
demonstrative; and for the Fathers and practice of former times we were not to
be ruled by them; ex ungue leonem. He is learned and witty, active, quick and
ni(...)ble and magisteriall. I fear he has many abettors which are ejusdem
farinae: Yet I think that he is no broacher of these opinions, much less
perswader of any to them, but only by way of discourse accidentally as thus
with me.

June 22. 1646.
An Extract of a Letter written to me out of Lancashire.
SIR,
THere is employed in this County by the House of Commons (as it is commonly
taken) one Mathewes a man active and of strong parts; he boldly and confidently
denies the Scriptures to be the word of God, and pretends to Revelation; we
have heretofore signified to some Members of the House, what a scandal it is
that such men should be employed by them; but cannot yet learn that they have
put him out. I have here enclosed sent you two papers that were given me by one
of our Sectaries; here being diverse more, and some that are active of his
opinion.

August 8. 1646.
A Copy of the two Papers enclosed.
GOod Christian Brethren, forasmuch as the immortality of the Soul is
maintained to be a truth, whereof I am doubtful; I desire you who are able by
sound Doctrine to convince the gainsayers, to make it good by Scripture that
the Soul is immortal; and that it may so appear, I desire you will be pleased
in a rational way to proceed by giving in writing a definition of the subject,
whence it is, and what it is, and where it is in man, and whether it be any
part of man, and how, or when man is first possessed of it, and how it comes to
be guilty of Adams sin, and what promise of Salvation is made unto it in
Scripture, and how it is redeemed by Christ: and now desiring you will make it
good by Scripture, what you do affirm, that so your Christian Brother may
receive satisfaction, I rest and shall be thankful unto you.

Yours Thomas Sidebothom.

This was delivered me July 28. 1646. This is the Original.


Mr. --
I Received your Note, and for answer thereto, hoping you are not of the spirit
of those which sent to Christ to entangle him in his words; neither am I afraid
to declare what my Faith is, for I believe the word of God contained in the Old
and New Testament to be a truth; yet in them I cannot find that man or any part
of man is Immortal, but that he is wholly Mortal, even whole man is wholly
Mortal, and cease to have any lively Being betwixt Death and the
Resurrection: Now if this be an Error thus to believe, I require you as you
are a Christian, and spiritual, to restore such a one in the spirit of
mee^nesse, and to convince by sound Doctrine the gainsayer, proving by
scripture what you do affirm, and if you do affirm a Mortal soul, that you
will according to rationality give Answers to those Queries you have, and then
I will Reply, that so we may bring it unto the balance, and weigh the
scriptures on both sides, and so hoping in a loving and Christian way to bring
the grounds of these to light, I rest.

Thomas Sidebothom.

This was delivered me Aug. 3. 1646. and is the Original.


A Copy of a Letter written to me out of Lancashire.
SIR,
THe bearer having a great desire to see you, and my self a greater desire to
serve you; from whose faithful labors in the ministry I have formerly received
much good: I make bold to trouble you with these rude lines; the enclosed will
faithfully inform you of a sad accident fallen out in Yorkshire, if the
knowledge of it have not come to you from better hands; my self and some others
are here engaged with you in the quarrel against the Sectaries, and shall
endeavor to serve you and the Church of God according to your desires
expressed in your Gangraena: I hope ere long to present you with a true
relation of the Independents gathering and constituting their Church at Sawerby
in Yorkshire, which will not be unworthy your consideration; we have for the
present only one Independent congregation in all Lancashire, which never yet
had Officers, it consists not of above thirty persons, most women, all of mean
quallity; Mr. Eaton of whose activity to promote this way I believe you are not
ignorant, has been the great apostle to promote their design in these parts;
all our Godly Ministers generally stand right, and in their course preach a
weekly Lecture in Manchester against Independency. If I might have a few lines
of direction from you by this bearer how I and the rest of my friends might
best serve you, you should not fail of the faithful endeavors of him who is

Your real servant to love you and serve you,
May 25. 1646.

Though I be a stranger to you and unknown, yet Mr. -- can inform you what
credit you may give to me and what I shall write.

Some passages extracted out of a Letter written to me from out of the Northern
parts.
THe Church at Sawerby since our conference in March has been blasted in its
growth; only one (and she a woman) has been added. The Church at Birch which
is but two miles and a half from Manchester, grows in number, but yet has no
Officers (as I can hear of) I shall hereafter give you a particular account of
the Church of Duckenfield; the ruling Elder there is a Sequestrator in
Cheshire, and their Deacon a Sequestrator in Lancashire: The A fit man to be a
Deacon of an Independent Church.
Deacon I shall speedily bring upon the stage, and make a notable discovery of
his knavery in couzening the state.

Your real friend to love and serve you.
August. 3. 1646.
A Copy of a Letter written out of Yorkshire concerning an Independent Church
in that Country.
SIR,
MUch respected, I give you many thanks for your love when I was with you;
since we have spoken to Mr. Roats about a conference, but as yet have no
satisfying Answer: So soon as we heard of their intention to choose their
Officers, we sent a Note to him to this effect, That whereas we heard it was
their resolution so to do such a day; that we desired him, if that so he could
with convenience to forbear and suspend the doing thereof for a time, in regard
that we desired that there might first be a conference in the place by some
Godly Ministers, that if it might be, the true way might be more clearly found
out, that those that are deceived or misled, might be undeceived, so as we
might assent to them or they to us, so far as truth might appear so; his Answer
was first before any thing was done that they might have satisfaction given for
what wrongs they had sustained. And 2dly, he would allow us to propound some
questions, provided they might do the like against our way; so seeing no better
answer could be had, and that they resolved still to go on still in their
business: It was thought fit by the Inhabitants of the place for that day to
lock the Chapel door, to testify their not approving their way, and so it was
done; the which does much incense them: and the last Sabbath they had the
liberty of the Chapel, wherein they began their Election by the Deacons.

And in the forenoon such words as these was expressed in his Sermon, as it was
given in to me by an honest understanding man that was present, in an Use of
exhortation, to those that are joined together in Societies in a visible
Church, viz. You must de^end one another, as Abraham did Lo^, when he armed
those that was born in his house and brought up with him to defend him; and as
Moses did the Hebrew against the Egyptian; and as those who defended Paul when
he was in Prison, against those that had taken an Oath, etc. And denounced the
punishment threatened Zac. 14. 18, 19. against those who will not join into the
visible Churches, saying, It is a Gospel Text; see, the which me thinks are
strong applications, and may prove of dangerous consequence.

I cannot yet send you, nor Mr. Holinworth the Questions that are to be
discussed, nor certainly the day when, or whether or no; but Mr. -- is to be
with us next Sabbath, and then if any thing can be pitched, you shall hear by
the first: I pray you remember my respects to Mr. -- and desire him to take so
much pains if that we do send directions, to come; and also I pray write me in
two words by the first what was the issue of your conference at Bi^tch, and
what you hear from above as-concerning that way either pro or con. I have sent
you enclosed a copy of the Articles of their Covenant according to promise;
thus with my kindest respects remembered to your self and to Mr. Holinworth, I
take leave and rest, Sir,

Your affectionate friend being much obliged,
Feb. 9. 1645.
Some passages Extracted out of the Original Letter written from a man of worth
in the Army, to a person of worth here in London; which Letter was writ
presently after the taking of Oxford.
BEcause a man is a Presbyterian, he shall be turned out of his command; and to
compass it, they have sent as far as Pendennis for an Accuser, to London for
another, and Bristow for a third, and all they can say against our Adjutant
General Gray, (who is an honest godly Sco^shman) is, that three quarters of a
year since he was met (as they think) drunk because as they remmember, he
faultred in his speech, and all because he is Major Generals Officer: Mr.
Peter's said, That was not all, he had made a Faction in the Army by seducing
many to the Presbyterian party; so it seems its counted a Faction with them to
hold what the Parliament allows. A month since they have labored all they
can to get hands for -- to be Governor of Oxford; and he being here on set
purpose, the Petitioners are instructed to repair to the Generals at such a set
time, and -- the Tragical cornical actor, out of the tyring room of his own
contriving, comes and tells the General what a providence it is, that God has
stirred up those good men to such good intentions in such a juncture of time,
when it happened that -- was there, whereas he and they were sent for. Sermons
are daily preached to this effect, That God will rather honor himself with a
few, then with many; witness this Army, which they hope will be an instrument
to subdue all that oppose them, whether under the most specious show of
righteousness, and profession of an old ragged religion.

A Copy of some Letters, and some Extracts of Letters written out of the North
concerning our Brethren of Scotland and their Armies; which I have thought fit
to print, because of Letters, and many Libels that have been printed against
them.
Some Passages taken out of a Letter (the Original whereof I have by me)
written by one of the Committee in York to a friend of his in London.
THe lamentable complaints spread abroad concerning the Scottish Taxing the
Country so much, are occasioned from want of money; for they have no means
from any part of England to subsist, but by Assessing that corner of England
where they now quarter: If consideration be had by the Parliament that they are
neglected in wanting what was promised, it will clear them in that matter: As
for their misdemeanors, they go not unpunished with them; for there was the
other day at Richmond one suffered vivi comburium, for committing uncleanness
against nature; a week since they have disbanded Vandrusks regiment, which were
men of the worst carriages in all the Armies: As for the business at Tickhill
which so troubled all men, after full examination of the abuses, it is found
that the English, Irish, and Dutch were the authors of the outrages, (no Scot
was guilty thereof) and two of them have been shot to death therefore. My
cousen -- was last week at the Court, and is much satisfied concerning the
behavior of our Brethren both toward King and Parliament: He told me it was
wise, fair, and honest.

June 12. 1646.
An Extract of a Letter written from a Citizen in York to a Common Council man
here in London.
I Am sorry that when we expected an end, its feared a worse contention begins:
we hear by some Letters this week from London, one came from Saltmarsh
Minister, that a Petition from the Brethren is since put up to both Houses with
20000. hands, for which they had thanks returned, though the Common Council of
the City were high in their expressions, that if the Petition were delivered,
they should be accounted Incendiaries or such like. Colonel N. writes also of
this Petition. About 10. or 14. days since one Butterfield a malignant, that
did live at Middleham, and other four, writ to the General of the Scots, That
if he would send a Regiment to quarter there, he would ensure them to enjoy
Midhelam Castle; they sent a Regiment thither, and the Colonel sent the Letters
with the men's hands to the Captain of the Castle, and bid him take care of it,
and proceed against Butterfield and the other four as he saw cause: The like
was promised of Boulton Castle, but their treachery both revealed by the Scots
themselves.

Some passages taken out of a letter written from a godly Christian who was
sent from London into Scotland about some special business.
Mr. F.
I Pray remember me to Mr. Bolton, and let him know, that in Scotland there is
a precious people, a learned and godly Clergy, who are resolved in their low
condition not to rest upon strength of Armies, nor confederacies with Nations
for deliverance from their Armies without Reformation, but in a lively Faith in
God, and performance of the Covenant. There is a Sermon every morning before
the Parliament in the Parliament House, where the power of God is so eminently
seem, that I am not able to express it.

St. Andrews December. 20. 1645.
A Letter from a godly Minister out of the North, concerning the Scots.
My Dear friend,
YOurs was not a little welcome to me, nor am I put to it to send you a
requital: The News here is so good, that I can hardly hold my pen for joy;
the Kings coming to the Scottish Army in all probability will prove one of our
greatest mercies since these Wars began. And never did I hear of any Christians
carrying themselves so boldly and faithfully in reprooving their Prince, so
humbly before their God, so innocently toward their brethren, so desirously of
a settled and wel-grounded Peace, as the Scots now do; they labor with much
earnestness the Kings conversion; tell him plainly of his blood-guiltinesse;
have sent for out of Scotland the ablest Ministers to converse with him; have
banished all Malignants six miles from his Person by Proclamation; refused to
entertain him with any token of joy; told him he was a great sinner before God,
and that he must give satisfaction to both Kingdoms. The malignants droop who
were gathering toward him out of both Kingdoms: The French Agent who was
active in making a Breach, is much discountenanced: The Nobles and Ministers
profess their earnest longing after a happy Union, the settling the government
of Christ in his Church, which being done, they will presently return in peace.
The Independents themselves stand amazed at their wisdom, resolution, and
fidelity; Zeal does accompany all their actions with humility. The malignant
party which was much feared, is born down; the mouths that were so wide both of
Independents and malignants are sown up, they have not a word to say: And see
how the Lord blesses them; all their enemies in Scotland are routed and brought
to nothing. The King refuses to proclaim Montrosse and his adherents Rebels;
But the King of kings has taken the quarrel into his own hand and utterly
dispersed them; I have not time to write the particulars, only to let you know
I am

Your assured friend R. Balsom.
May 21. 1646.
A Passage Extracted out of a Letter written from a godly Minister in Suffolk
to a special Friend of his in London.
HEre in the Country Malignants and Sectaries do generally murmr against the
Scots, and would be glad to hear that the Armies should go against them, which
I pray God prevent: I pray that this Nation do not so requite their labor of
love and faithfulness unto us.

May 19. 1646.
A Copy of a Letter written to me from a friend out of Kent.
Worthy Sir,
SInce you are so pleased as both in your former and latter Letters to take
notice of me in your kind salutes, give me leave to take notice of your
kindness, and re-salute you; and both in my own name, and in the name of a
friend of yours, to let you know we have not only run over, but read your
Second part of Gangraena; and therein observe your willingness (if it be
possible) to cure that evil by sucking out the corrupt blood, which is the
method of the most careful Chyrurgions that are not so dainty as desirious of
their Patients recovery. Nimius amor et admiratio person^rum, has hitherto
been a great inlet to all Heresies, whence they say Cyprian unice admirans
Tertullianum, et antonomastice, often calling him his Master, sucked in that
error of his concerning the nullitie of Baptism administered by Heretics; yea
and so did Nestorius through his admiration of Anastasius find fault with some
expressions: So subject are most men, jurare in verba magistri; which Plutarch
also well observes in his Book de Auditione. And therefore we do freely
profess we cannot dislike your practice in lessning their credit that are
corrupters: Christ Jesus himself and all his Apostles heretofore endeavored no
less.

Yea, and if Mr. Saltmarsh, why may not you as warrantably distinguish and say
as he does, concerning the old Non-conformists, That it is the old man of your
adversaries you write against, and not their new, or themselves so far as they
are men, so far as they are lovers of themselves and have only a form of
godliness? etc. Surely the man would be hardly put to it ^o underta^e to
maintain his own, and yet take away your distinction, who will easily (we doubt
not) answer not only him, but all others in whom we see but little wisdom,
though perhaps some wit in inventing, as Apothecaries are wont for their Boxes,
such specious titles for their Books as those whereof Jacobus Acontius
complains in an Epistle of his to Johannes Wolphius, Nullam ad rem ingeniosi
sunt, praeterquam ad speciosos titulos excogitandum; quibus ex hominum manibus
bonos libros extorqueant, ac suos eorum loco ob^^udant; et tam stolidum est
vulgus, ut quos expuere debuisset and suspiciat, nonnunquam and celebret, etc.
Certainly Mr. Saltmarsh does not only want a grain but a whole bushel of salt
to season his unsavory mouth, opened not only against you, but the reverend,
learned and judicious Mr. Gataker, together with the whole City, and all the
Orthodox Ministry who might ask him more then ever he would be able to Answer,
if they should but chatechize him concerning his Baptism whether it be of the
first, or second, or third, or fourth sort; what think you? is he not a
Sebaptist, a Seeker? We are sure if all be true I lately heard from a good
friend of yours in these parts, that he the said Mr. Saltmarsh at a meeting of
sundry Ministers of this County at Maidstone publicly professed in presence of
them all his endeavor was to forget whatsoever formerly he had known, and
seemed to wish they might be all of his mind, until one Minister who was then
and there present ^old him merrily, He was but a young man, and such as himself
might happily wish with Themistocles that they had the art of Oblition; but as
for his own part he had too many gray hairs to desire to forget whatsoever he
had learned, least he might not have time to learn so much again. The Committee
of Kent intended by their late order the suppression of sundry Petitions of
dangerous consequence that were handed up and down by our Sectaries, and
toward the promoting whereof, the new Archbishop of Canterbury Mr. Hugh
Peter's was (as I am informed) come down to Maidstone to visit this his Diocese
as he usually calls it. The most and best of our Ministers hereabouts (for all
I can learn) are willing if they must die, to be buried as valiant Ensign
bearers in their colors: There is a merry story told by a Baron of the Ports
or Jurate of the town of Sandwich concerning Mr. Symonds the Independent who
has a living there; One coming to him to be Catechized, he sent him to a
Mechanic of that Town to Catechize him for him; and when his Father in law Mr.
H. another Jurate of the same Town expostulated the case with him and asked him
the reason why he would do so; his Answer (as Mr. F. related it) was, that one
Goose might best teach another to eat. So merry are our most demure
Independents: Among whom if there be a Stoic he is the most in show, who has
lately (as it is reported) got an addition of means to the Benefice he yet
holds, though it were formerly valued at above 100. pounds, and he himself be
absolutely in show against all tithes, himself therefore will not, but lets his
wife receive them: who whether he were not ab origin as well as Mr. Saltmarsh
a comic, your self may best find out, or we will, if you please but to get us
a writ. Ad melius inquirendam; till then we may perhaps the rather think them
to have been such, being so still, men that personate abundance of austerity,
but are etc.

June 22. 1646.
Some passages taken out of two Letters written from a godly Minister out of
the country to a reverend and godly Minister in London, who showed me the
Letters.
I Have read Mr. Edwards Book thorough, and as a friend to deal freely, I
profess Morney in my opinion never gave a greater blow to Papists then he has
given to the Sectaries; and that which is yet more, soberly, sadly. As for the
whole business of Webb of Milton taken before Colonel K. a Minister
thereabouts has promised to send M. Edwards an e^act narration. The working I
see of some humors makes me hope the summer is past, and it is near the autumn
of schism which had its spring before, etc. Only let us all be doing. Hugh
Peter's (as I hear) was lately at Maidstone, and had a mind to have promoted a
Petition among our Sectaries.

June 15. 1646.
OUr common friend M. Edwards his last Book Gangraena of the Second Edition I
received this last post, together with his Letter; I pray let him understand as
much; and withal let him know I shall my self (God willing) thank him for both
at better leisure and when I have read his Book thorough. Surely, he spoke
Prophetically that usually called him in Cambridge young Luther. Faxit Deus, that
the Sectaries may never be able to deal with him, as I doubt not many of them
desire, whose words would willingly be turned into swords both against him and
us all.


An Extract of a letter written from a godly Minister to me.
YOur Books I can assure you (I find) gain savor with all, but the common
adversary who much increases and multiplyeth in these parts, where I heard
last week at an open ordinary in presence of two of our Deputy Lieutenants,
that since Kiffen and Lamb have been here re-baptizing, now there is a third man
come that contradicts them both, and re-baptizeth again, So that the poor
people begin to stare and stand amazed to think what their deluded disciples
will do in the end: Many of the Brownists fall to them; however their doctor
Turner keeps his ground, who dispited (as some say) with Kiffen and drowned him
in the red sea, till at last they fell both from reasoning to down right
railing. Poor people I pity them, as also those others (then and there spoken
of also) as one (a very honest man otherwise) that affirmed lately he thought
the Apostles themselves never had more excellent gifts then a company of
tradesmen, that now preach in private at Sandwich. Another (it was said) there
was at A^ch near Sandwich, who was said to say he was Christ, but being
questioned, Answered no; he was only Christ's mouth and could feed such as were
hungry. etc. though as some say, he can hardly feed himself: Surely I often now
think on Matt. 24* Except in the Wilderness, or in Chambers where is Christ,
as they think: We should gladly see you here. I remember it was one of Don
Perdroes devices about his first coming into this Country to bring down with
him some Ministers out of your City to preach up the Parliament; and why should
not you to preach down Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, that the Country may know
of what Religion the City is? Certainly I am for such a change of courses as
they call it. Propheta in patria, etc. Thus in haste I heartily rest

Yours.
July 6. 1646.
A Copy of a Letter from a godly minister in Yorkshire to a friend of his in
Lancashire.
SIR,
I Returned from York June 3d. Our meeting proved very successesse; one of the
prime York ministers being the main Remora to our desires, which were to write
to the Assembly that we would join with them in the Presbyterian way according
to Gods word to the utmost of our power, and to declare against the Erastian
principles: when it was put to the vote, he desired to stay till he had further
light: I know not whether he meant from the word, or from the State: There Is so
much policy now in the world, that it has eat out, if not much of conscience,
yet very much of our care and zeal in promoting the work of Reformation
according to our Covenant; nay so far are we degenerated now (as I am informed
from a good ^and) that to be forward and zealous in the Covenant, is the sole
character of malignancy, and only badge of disaffection; but I hope it will
prevail in despite
of those who having formerly been takers, are now the only tramplers upon it.
We have appointed another meeting at Pomfret on monday seven-night; M. R. has
promised to meet the West riding ministers there.

Some passages taken out of a Letter written from a learned and godly minister
in Devonshire, to a friend in London.
I Am resolved to digest all abuses and contempts, and insultations of
Sectaries, and frustration of hopes, so I may honor Christ. You will easily
see by the enclosed what work is here. The Sectaries are grown so confident and
insolent, that we may say of them as Rivet of Mountague, I^ quo desideramus
hominem, for they seem so far from Religion, that they put off humanity.

A Relation of some stories, and other remarkable passages concerning the
Sectaries.
THe 16. of June 1646. It was related to me by a Justice of Peace who was an
ear and eye witness, and by a godly Minister in Northamptonshire, that there
is one Kendall (who in the Bishops times was a great creature of Sir John Lams,
a bower at the Altar and for all the Innovations) but since these times of
Sectarisme, is turned a great Sectary, having renounced his Ministry. This man
is now a Captain in Whitlesey the Isle of Ely, that Island of Errors and
Sectaries, and a great Preacher, who comes sometimes to visit Northamptonshire,
where formerly he was a Curate. Now the last Trinity Monday (as the day is
commonly called) on a Fair day in that Country where a great resort of people
was, Master Basely a godly Minister in those parts being spoken unto to preach,
and being provided for it, this Kendall stepped up into the Pulpit before him,
and preached on that text, Romans 8. For (...) ye live after the flesh ye shall
dye, on which words he preached against humane learning (as being flesh) and
that the Universities were of the Devil. Secondly, that Adams righteousness
in Innocence was but flesh, and opposed to the spirit. Master Basely in the
afternoon preaching, confuted his Doctrines, this Kendall would have stood up
in the Church, and have opposed him, but was hindered by a Justice of Peace who
was present.

The 10th of June 1646. A godly Minister living in Lincolnshire told me and
another City Minister, that he has in his Parish many Manifestarians,
Disciples and followers of one Thomas Moore spoken of in my First and Second
Part of Gangraena, who upon his knowledge will keep no days of Fast, nor none
of the days of Thanksgiving, because they will not give thanks to God for one
man killing of another. He told me that some of the Manifestarians hold, and he
has heard some of them say, they had seen Christ, and seen the Devil to. This
Minister related to us that there was a young maiden in his Parish about 16
years of age, one -- who preaches to many young men and maidens, he named her
name, and I well remember it, but forbear naming her, because being so young,
happily she may be reclaimed. This Thomas Moore comes often into this part of
Lincolnshire, and diverse times to this Town where he preaches in houses; but
the last time he was there he preached not, and the reason (some of the
Sectaries give out) was because this godly Minister is a persecutor, others say
because he could not have the use of a great house in that Parish for his
company to meet in. Many of these Manifestarians being at a time together,
there was some occasion fell out to send for the Constable of the Town, who
being come, charged some of the company in the Kings name to aid him, to which
some of the Sectaries replied, that the King was out of office; and therefore
to require any thing in the Kings name was nothing.

A Fellow of a College in Cambridge (whom I well know) meeting me in London,
told me he had been lately at the Leaguer before Oxford, and in the company of
some of the Sectaries belonging to the Army, where he met with one M.
Wainwright (so he related his name, formerly a Minister, who said he came out
of such a Country (Suffolk as I remember) and had a Living there of two hundred
pounds per annum, this man boasted he had pulled down the Bishops, and hoped to
do as much for some others, meaning the Presbyters; he vapoured he had left his
Living as being Antichristian, and says he, I have every day since asked God
forgiveness for holding it; he told me also that in the Army he was told from
good hands, of an Officer, a civil gallant man, because he would answer the
Sectaries when they spoke for their opinions, and against the Presbyterians,
was upon other pretended suggestions either formally casheered, or glad to be
gone.

There are four famous Preachers in Hartfordshire (as I have it from sure
hands) one Heath the Collar-maker of Watton, one Rice the Tinker of Aston, one
Field the Bodies-maker of Hartford, one Crew the Tailor of Stevenage; and
besides these, there are some other Preachers who sometimes were Ministers in
the Church of England, but now great Sectaries, as Master Feake at All Saints
Church in Hartford, one Master Harrison about Saint Albons side, and some
others of whose strange preachings, practices, of the complaint to the Judges
at the Assise of Master Feake, etc. I shall hereafter in a fourth part of
Gangraena, or some other Tractate about the Sects, give the Reader an account.

There is a Shoemaker in Coventry or thereabouts, a famous Preacher, who goes
from Coventry and those parts up and down Glostershire, Warwickeshire,
Wostershire, preaching and venting erroneous points of Antinomianisme,
Anabaptisme, preaching against Tyths, Baptism of children: A Minister of the
City of London being in Glostershire heard him preach, and heard of his large
Diocese, and perambulations from place to place.

August 16. 1646. Preached at Hackney one Master Downing, a Preacher of the
Army, and a young Peter's (as he was called) some who were eare-witnesses told
me of his Sermon, and it was to this effect; That the Country people say (that
is, he meant the Sectaries in the Army say) that the Parliament would do them
good, but he Lord Major, the Common Council and the Citizens of London would
not permit them; he feared God would bring the Plague upon them, and Risings
among them; and the cause of all was, the uncharitableness of London against
the Saints; and that the opposition now was not between worldly men, but
between Saints and Saints.

This Downing, alias Peter junior, spoke in Hackney pulpit of the Common
Council of London at that time in way of (...)persion of them as if they were
for the Cavaliers, that when they entered Oxford, the Cavaliers told them, It Is
your turn now, it may be ours hereafter, for we have the City of London and the
Common Council for us.

THere is one Master Clark in London whose wife being dead, and wanting a staid
Maid-servent to look to his house and Children; having some acquaintance with
one Master Josse sometimes a minister of the Separation, but now an Anabaptist,
a Seeker, and no man knows what: he commended to him for that use one Mary
Abram, aged between 40. and 50. a Separatist; an acquaintance of his highly
enrolling her; whereupon Master Clark entertained her, and he having a Son
between fifteen and sixteen years old falling very lick; his calling and
occasions necessitating him to be much from home; this Mary Abram being to
look to him, takes her opportunity in this weakness and want of
understanding (his disease being an Apoplexy) to labor to make this Boy marry
her, and for the effecting of that, works in a fl(...)ring fa(...)ing way with
one who often came to Master Clarks house, to pro^^re a License for two friends
of hers to marry (concealing the persons) who brought her word, they at the
Office could grant no License to any which had not their friends consent, and
one to be bound in a Bond to save them harmless: Now when she saw this way
would not do, then she further moved the same man that if he knew if any man
would marry them of any fashion she cared not. Whereupon this man ^old her he
knew one Master Stamp a Schoolmaster in Shoelane whom he heard one say had
done such a business: Upon that the man could not be quiet till he brought her
to this Stamp, and after a time she told him she was the woman party, but
concealed the man: At the last when her master Clark was gone from home, she
enticed the Boy to go with her, and they went to Stamps Chamber who lay
bedridden, and he spoke some words to them, which she pleads was a marrying of
them; and she gave this Stamp eleven shillings six pence for his pains. For
the proof of these things, besides master Clarks particular relation to me of
these things more then once in private, as also his relating it to me in other
companies, I have seen a Certificate under the hand of Doct. Meverell,
subscribed Sep. 29. 1643. Ottuell Meverell testifying of master Clarks Sons
disease in his brain for the space of six months, wherein he was diverse times
deprived of sense and motion, and sometimes vexed with Convulsions, ignorant of
things done and said to him; as also I have perused Certificates under other
hands, as Mr. Stamps, one Samuel Perkins and others, too large to set down,
besides the Petition of Master Clark drawn to be delivered to the House of
Commons for relief of his Son in this case, and for justice against this
Separatist who claims this youth for her husband: a Copy whereof is as
follows.

To the Right Honorable the Knights and Burgesses in the Commons House of
Parliament Assembled: The Humble Petition of Thomas Clark.
Most Humbly Showing:
THat the Petitioner entertained one Mary Abram to be his housekeeper, and to
be especially careful of his Son being grievously visited with the sickness
called the Apoplexy, and by the vehemence of the disease not sensible many
times what he did: She the said Mary being between 40. and 50. years of age,
and your Petitioners son being 16. years of age at most: The said Mary being
gone from the Petitioners house, comes and claims the Petitioners son for
her husband, and threatens the Petitioner for keeping her husband from her,
pretending she was married to him by a sick man who has lain bed-riden a long
time; who denies the marrying of them, that he had no License, nor any
Authority to marry them, as by his Certificate may appear, but as he confesses
took eleaven shillings and six pence of her to make show of something, as if he
married her to satisfy her humor; the youth not knowing any thing thereof
concerning het pretended marriage with him: For at that time and six weeks
after she pretends this marriage; your Petitioners son was ignorant of things
done and said unto him, and was weak in his understanding and right judgment,
and without his memory, and speechless as your Petitioner can prove. And
whereas she produces a Certificate to show as married in Saint Georges Church
in Southwark, where she never was with him, neither is there any such marriage
in the Church Register book to be found; the Lad takes it to heart he should
be so abused by her, and that it may be a discontent to him for ever during his
life. And the said Mary has done so in another house where she was a servant
by one P. H. an Apprentise about three months before this, and is not free from
him to this day. but by a bribe of ten pounds she received of him. She the said
Mary defending her practice in the streets to be lawful, saying, It was
commanded under the Law not to marry without consent of parents, but that was
but a ceremony to them that liyed under the Law; it is now lawful, because
we live under the Gospel.

He humbly prays if it might stand with your favor to grant unto him your
Warrant to bring before you the said Mary, that upon discovery of the Premises
and lewd practice, the Petitioners Son as he has bin by her publicly
disgraced, he may be publicly discharged from her, and she abide such further
Order as shall be thought meet.

And the Petitioner and his Son as in duty bound, shall and will daily pray
for your Honors long and happy preservation.

This Mary Abraham before her coming to Master Clarks had entangled a young
youth, an Apprentice here in London, and claimed a promise of marriage at his
hand, which business was heard before Master Jesse the Seeker, an Independent
Minister and some others, and it was concluded he should give her ten pounds,
and so there should be an end between them; which this youth gave her, and
there was a writing of discharge between them, which ten pounds given by the
boy M. Jesse received; and faith, it was since given to the Parliament. Now
though M. Jesse knew all this, yet he recommended this Mary to Master Clark to
be his housekeeper who knew nothing of her prancks: when this old wench came
to his house whilst the youth was well, she tempted him not, but when he was
thus ill (as above mentioned) she tempted him, and in the time of some
intermission of his sits before he was perfectly recovered, when the youth went
with a staff she carried him to that Stamp; and when the boy was ill and
weak, would come to bed to him: Now after Master Clark had put this Mary
Abraham away, he found this paper of agreement between a young Apprentize and
this Mary by meeer accident in his sons chamber, and with a great deal of
pains and enquiry found out this Apprentice in London, from whom he understood
the whole business, whereupon going to Master Jesse with this paper to tax
him, that he knowing such a business would commend such a one to him who was a
widdower; Master Jesse desiring to see the paper (Master Clarke letting him see
it) kept it, and would never restore it again; but Master Jesse told him he
must forgive her, and he speaking of complaining of her for doing such a wicked
fact, for the ruin of his son; Master Jesse wished him to take heed
of prosecuting a Saint, and to consider how Jesus Christ at the day of
judgment would take it at his hands, with such like words; And this Master
Clark tells me, having spoken to him and some other Sectaries of that company,
why they suffered such a wickedness, and kept her company, he told me I could
not imagine the shifts and put offs they had among them to color the
wickedness, the affirming and denying sometimes, saying she was not of their
Church, but only recommended by Letters Testimonial, sometimes affirming she
had repented.

There is one Master Den, whom I have spoken of in my first Part of
Gangraena, this man goes still up and down the Countries spreading his corrupt
opinions and dipping; concerning whom I have lately received this Information
from a hand that could not mistake in the relation; and I have the examinations
taken before the Justices of Peace who examined Den and others about him,
which I here give the Reader.

The Examination of Anne Jarrat of Spalding Spinster, June 22. 1646. before
Master Thomas Irbie, and Master John Harrington Commissioners of the Peace.
THis Examinate says, on Wednesday last in the night about 11. or 12. of the
clock Anne Stennet, and Anne Smith, the servants of John Makernesse, did call
out this Examinate to go with them to the little Croft, with whom this
Examinate did go; and coming thither, Master Den and John Makernesse, and a
stranger or two followed after. And being come to the River side, Master Den
went into the water, and there did baptize Anne Stennet, Anne Smith, Godfery
Root, and John Sowter in this Examinats presence.

Anne Jarrat W her mark.

June 21. 1646. Lincoln, Holland. Henry Den of Caxton in the County of
Cambridge examined before John Harrington and Thomas Irby Esquires, two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace.
THis Examinate says, that he lives at Caxton aforesaid, but does exercise at
Elsly within a mile of his own house, and says that he took Orders about 16.
years since from the Bishop of Saint David's. And that on Monday last he came to
Spalding, being invited thither by John Makernesse to come to his house. And
that he has exercised his gifts about four times in several places in
Spalding, viz. at the house of John Makernesse, and Mr. E^stons. As for
baptising of any he does not confess.

John Harrington.


Master Harrington sent for Denn by a Constable on the Lords day, with whom he
coming, Master Harrington confined him to the Provost Marshal (who had been an
Officer of the Committee) for that day being the Lords day that he should not
make a mutiny, nor stir in the Town that day by people resorting to him.

This Maiden Anne Jarrat confesse^ that she being by, heard Master Denn or some
of the company with him, lay upon them at their Baptism, and require a promise
of those that were dipped to hear none but of their own way. This Denn in his
travels about the country had two men attended him, who live (as they said)
with him; they were clad like Farmem, and they took upon them to question some
in the Town of Spalding to give an account of their Faith; as one Goodman
Goffery: Master Harrington upon questioning with Master Denn spak of committing
him to Lincoln, to which he replied He cared not; but this he took ill, to be
molested in his way, and told the Justice he was bound to the Committee of
Examinations upon a Bond of two hundred pounds to appear before them at any
time at four and twenty hours warning; and he made use of that as an argument
against his troubling of him; to whom Master Harrington replied, How can you do
that, appear before the Committee a^ so short a warning, when as you are now
almost a hundred miles from London? This Master Harrington a Justice of Peace
and a religious man told me he had had several Anabaptists before him upon
several occasions, and they have always refused to take an oath, saying they
would not swear.

There is one Beedle of Glocestar sometimes Schoolmaster there, who denies the
Holy Ghost to be God; had a Manuscript by him of his own making pleading
against the Third Person of the Trinity; which being known, some in Authority
in that Town questioned him, and getting this manuscript, have sent up either
the Original or a true Copy to some in Authority and place here; but the last
news I heard of him, he has not been questioned as yet by those above: Bishop
Usher that learned and godly Divine coming this summer through Gloucester, spoke
with him, and used him with all fairness and piety as well as strength of
Arguments to convince him of his dangerous Error.

A Minister of the City of Gloucester told me the Bishop labored to convince
him, telling him that either he was in a damnable Error, or else the whole
Church of Christ, who had in all ages worshipped the Holy Ghost had been guilty
of Idolatry; but the man was no whit moved either by the learning, gravity,
piety, or zeal of the good Bishop, but continued obstinate.

There is one Andrew Debman an Anabaptist, and a Preacher among them, a Cooper
by trade, a sorry fellow, that can neither write nor read, and yet is a great
Preacher among the Sectaries: This blind Bayard would fain Preach in the Parish
Church of Algate; saying, if they would let him Preach there, his Sermon would
be worth the Parish five pounds by a collection for their poor from his
followers; and he has further said, if they doubt of his ability to Preach,
let them give him a text at the Church door when he is going in to Preach, and
he would Preach of that, whereby they should see what he could do; and one
speaking to him concerning a City Colonel if he would be a member of their
Church he would make a good member among them; this Debman replied, that for
his part he believed if this forenamed Colonel would give all his Lands and
Estate, he could not be received into their Church.

There was a great Sectary who had his wife lay a dying (and she did die of
that sickness) to whom some well-affected neighbor spoke, that he should in
this dangerous case pray for his wife; he answered, what good would prayer do
her, or you either? you think prayer will do much good. I had this relation
from them to whom he spoke it.

An Alderman of this City, and a moderate man (so acknowledged by the
Independents) not long since received a Letter from Newcastle concerning our
Brethren of Scotland; which Letter he showed to some Common Council men and
other Citizens, and the Letter was written from an Independent in Newcastle to
this Alderman, wherein he confesses that the Scots have dealt very faithfully
with the King, and told him That if he would not Sign the Propositions, he must
expect no help from them, and that they would keep to their Covenant and not
desert the Parliament of England, with words to that effect.

I saw the Original Letter (and I read it twice over) written from a Townsman
of Newcastle (a man of some place there) to an Honorable member of the House of
Commons, wherein he complains that in Newcastle all was like to run to ruin
for want of Government, and from the faction of the Independents there, that
their good Ministers were so abused and discouraged by them that they would not
stay, but had left them, or were going away as Master Prideaux and Doctor
Jenison; some Independent Preachers sent thither will neither Baptize Children,
nor administer the Lords Supper; but say they came not thither to do such
drudgery
(this was twice repeated in the Letter) Doctor Jenison was sent for thither
again but for a stale; and he acquaints this Parliament man that the
Independents have a design one way or other either by threatening some men to
give their voices, or by pretending some reasons to try to get an Ordinance to
bring in a man for Major this year, who is a Sectary; but he desires this
Honorable Member of the House of Commons to stand their Friend in the House;
and hopes that seeing we have fought for Liberty, that town shall have their
liberty in free choice of a Burgess for Parliament, and of a Major the chief
Officer of their Town: This Gentleman also complains in his Letter, that
without so much as ever acquainting the free Burgesses, or once calling a
Common Council, an Ordinance was procured to appoint an Independent Deputy
Major, which if we should have done so (as the Independent party did) what
outcries would there have been of breach of Liberty? Upon this Letter being
communicated to me, I asked a worthy Member of the House of Commons, why the
Scots would suffer in Newcastle the Independents to domineer so, and abuse the
godly Orthodox Ministers, and not teach them better manners; he answered, the
Scots because of giving offense were tender of meddling in any thing with the
Civil Government, but rather suffered these things so much against their minds
that they might give no occasion of complaint.

There is one Master Erb^ry spoken of in my first part of Gangraena, who about
June or the beginning of July last, as he was going to Wales, lay at Marlbrough
one night; and being in the Town he came to a house where commonly once a week
many good people of that Town meet together to confer and discourse of good
things; and there Master Erbury spoke to them (many being there present) to
this purpose, that he knew not what they might expect, but he came neither to
pray nor to preach, but to learn of Christ and of his Saints, and making a
discourse to them, he declared his opinions, venting himself against Christ
being God, affirming he was only man, pleading for universal Redemption,
speaking against Baptism and all ministry, using words to this effect, that he
knew not how they stood affected, or how it was with them; but with many
Christians it was thus with them, that they knew not what to do without a man
in black clothes, or a black man among them; but that was for the time when
Christians were Babes and Children, but now they were all taught of God, and
needed not that any one should teach them: When he had done speaking, some of
the company stood up and opposed him as not being satisfied in what he had
said, telling him it was not only Error, but Blasphemy to deny Christ to be
God, and brought some Scriptures to prove it, as in 1 John 5. 7. speaking of
the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost, the Apostle says, These Three are One; unto
which Master Erbury replied, It was not so in the Original; but some of the
people re-joyned they knew not the Original, but they believed it was so; and
however they were assured that he was the Son of God: Master Erbury objected
again, those words were not in the Greek but put in by some who were against
the Arrians; and so the meeting broke up, the people who met, being much
offended at him.

For confutaion of this Heresy, and to confirm the people in the Doctrine of
the true Faith that Christ is God, let them remember Animadver.
1. these Scriptures, the first chap. of the Gospel of John, In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and indeed every
word proves him to be God, In the beginning was the Word, and so in the rest:
upon which words Beza, Calvin, Rollock do fully show Christ to be God
Essentially and Eternally. Calvinus in John 1. 1. v. Ne quis de divina Christi
Essentia scrupulus maneat, clare assetit esse Deum, Rolock in John 1. 1. v.
quare sensus hujus propositionis mihi videtur esse^ (...) cum esset in
principio, essetque apud Deum, erat quoque ipse Deus.

Beza in principio, id est a principio, id est tum, quam omnes re^ creatae
existere inciperent. Est autem haec sententia, Sermonem non capisse existere
quum Deus initium faceret creandi quicquid est conditum, Nam, inquit Johannes,
jam tu^ existebat Sermo ille quum res creatae con^i coeperunt, ac proinde ante
omnium illarum rerum principium jam erat. Est proprietas ipsius verbi ^^va^
observanda quod quidemuni Deo proprie convenit, Vide plur. Tit. 2. 13. Christ
is called the great God and our savior, not a lesser God then God the Father.
The first of the Heb. from the second to the ninth verse wherein besides that
the Son is said to be God who has a throne for ever and ever, he is called
the brightness of the Fathers glory and express image of his Person, which
cannot be affirmed of a creature. 1 John 5. 20. John speaking of Jesus Christ,
says, This is the true God, not in name, or qualities only, like to God as
Magistrates and Angels are called gods, but the true God as spoken by the Holy
Ghost foreseeing these evasions: This relative bic must be referred to Christ,
to the person last spoken of which was Christ; so Calvin, Relativam (...) ad
proxim(...) personam restringi solet; and Beza says, postulat pronominis
istius propria significatio ut ad Christum he referatur. Deinde peculiare
ubique est Johanni per vitam aeternam Christum significare (...). Continet
igitur hic locus expressum divinitatis Christi testimonium. Tamet^^ hunc locum
eludere Arriani conati sunt, and illis body subscribunt quidam, bic tamen
insigne hobemus. Divinitatis Christi Elogium. Calvinus in locum. 2. Divine
worship belongs to God, and to God only, as the Scriptures show in many places,
Maath. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou
serve: And therefore man may not worship the greatest Angels. Revela. 19. 10.
Rev. 22. 8, 9. and that upon this reason given in those places, they must
worship God: But now the most excellent glorious creatures are commanded to
worship Christ, the highest Angels, as well as men, Heb. 1. 6. Let all the
Angels of God worship him; and men are commanded in the highest manner and way
to worship the Son as well as the Father: Besides we are Baptized in the name
of the Son, as well as of the Father, Matt. 28. 19.

As for that place in 1 John 5. These Three are One, supposing it be not found
in the ancientest Greek Copies, yet there are so many other places as that in 1
John 5. 20. etc. of which there can be no such question, which prove Christ to
be God. But Secondly for this place. 1 John 5. 7. these learned Commentators
write as follows: Calvin, viz. That though this whole verse was omitted by
some, yet Hierome thinks it was done out of malice, and that he did willingly
embrace this as the Original, because he found it in the best Copies, and
those most approved. Beza says it seems to him that this verse should be
retained, and though the Syriack nor old Latin Interpreter does not read it,
neither some other Authors, Hilarie, Augustine, etc. Yet Hierome reads it, and
it is in some of the most ancient Books of of Stephen: Sed legit Hieronymus,
legit Erasmus in Britanico codice, and ex^at in Complutensi editione, and in
nonnullis Stephani nostri veteribus libris.

A Passage sent in a letter dated June 16. 1646. from a worthy Minister in the
West to a Citizen in London to communicate it to me.
Sir,
YOu may further acquaint Master Edwards with this Passage: I lately met with a
worthy Knight, who being mer^ily disposed would needs try an experiment upon a
Papist how that generation was affected toward Independents; therefore riding
by a Gentlewomans house, and a great Papist, not far from Reading, he was
resolved to go in and counterfeit himself an Independent; this Gentlewoman
conceiving him to be such, entertained him with as great friendly respects as
she could have done any Jesuit in the world; she professed she loved the
Independents with
all her heart; and if any men in the world did them right, it would be the
Independents; this the foresaid Gentleman related to me himself.

July 25. A godly Minister told me that an Anabaptist and Antinomian pleaded
against asking forgiveness of sins; saying, it was no more lawful to pray
for the pardon of sins then to pray for our election: It was answered, there
was an express command for one, none for the other; it was replied, where in
the Scripture? answer was made, in the Lords Prayer; the Anabaptist answered,
the Lords Prayer was only for that time.

A Lieutenant Colonel a man both valiant and godly, told me he had heard a
Captain who was a Sectary, preach that these Wars should not end till all the
wicked in the Land on both sides were destroyed; and says he, if you observe
it, it is commonly they that are slain still, it may be now and then one of the
godly.

About the beginning of June last, a Parliament man had a letter from a godly
Minister in Lynn, acquainting him with the increase of Errors there, and that
there was a woman Preacher there who ^ents many Heresies; as that the
Scriptures were not the word of God, that the drowning of the old World and
story of Noah were not true, there were no such things, with other things of
that nature.

July the eighth, a godly Minister lately of this City, told me in the presence
and hearing of other Ministers as a certain truth, this story, That at a house
in Red-crosse street or thereabouts, there met some Sectaries, where some forty
persons being present, one of then exercised his gifts, and in his exercise
preached these Doctrines.

1. That Jesus Christ was not God, not the Son of God.

2. That the Scriptures were not the word of God, and brought many arguments to
prove it.

3. That the souls of men dye with their bodies.

Now as he was delivering these points, there was a woman present that wept
bitterly, speaking words to this effect, If this Doctrine be true, what shall I
do? I have many years believed in Jesus
Christ, and hoped to be saved, but now what will become of me? Which words
this blasphemous Sectary taking notice of, said, good woman you need not be
troubled; for though Christ be not God, neither any certainty of the Scripture
being the word of God, yet if you live honestly and modestly, you shall do well
enough; besides, this fellow said, there are two Witnesses or Prophets coming
shortly that will bring Scriptures with them, and then you and I shall know
what to do and to believe.


There is an Independent who came some years ago out of New England, and is
made a Captain here, who left a wife and many children there, and after he was
come over, never sends, nor writes to his wife, nor takes no care for the^r
subsistence, but as it seems by Letters written to New England* and from
thence, this Captain has been sometimes near the marrying others here in
England, in so much as a Letter was written to him b^one (whom I suppose an
Elder) at the desire of the Church to deal with him about it, which Letter I
have read, as also a Letter from his wise, wherein she wonders she could not
hear from him, and prays him to consider in what state he left her and those
children, and how unable both she and they are for any inployment; and for to
show the truth of this Relation, I shall give the Reader a true copy of the
Letter sent him out of New England, which is as follows.

Captain -- and beloved Brother,
HAving an opportunity I embraced it to write unto you, being also desired by
the Church, we earnestly desi^ing your good in the Lord. I wonder that you
would never sens a word, neither to my self, nor any friend of yours; we knew
not whether to write unto you, until this opportunity. Your wife is yet a
live, and never received word, nor penny from you; And which is most sad, we
are informed by two Letters, that you have been sometimes ready to marry
others; which (you know) is very evil, and condemned by the Law of England, as
well as by the Law of God: we hope you will take it to heart, together with
your forgetfulness of your wife and children. It shows that your heart is
declined from God, and we hold it our duty to recover you if we can, by the
blessing of God upon the means we shall use. Good Sir, take some time to
consider of your ways, the time will come when you must give account for them
to the great Judge of all. We shall expect to hear an answer from you
concerning this business; for God calls us to purge his Church from such evils
as these are. Thus with my love unto you, and prayers to the Lord to recover
you, and humble you, I rest

Your loving friend Richard Blinman.
Gloucester in New England December 4. 1645.

THere is one Sir Worts, who being newly Bachelor of Arts came down into
Norfolk, and would have had such a place in Norfolk, which some of the godly
Ministers thought him not fit to take the Cure of upon him, being so young, and
having so lately commenced Bachelor; whereupon this young youth being angry at
the Ministers, for missing the place* the next news the godly Ministers heard,
was, that he was turned Independent, had gathered a Church, and people running
eight or ten miles after him, with a great deal of violence crying him up; and
amongst other of his converts that turned Independents and followed this Worts,
a godly Minister of that Country told me, one of his Parish who would lie often
in blind Alehouses and be often drunk (being not admitted by him to the Lords
Supper, but being wished by this Minister to repent and give some testimonies
of it before he came) upon non-admittance turned Independent presently and
followed this Worts; but a while after, this man was struck sick on a Monday,
dying on the Friday or Saturday after, and would not admit his Minister to come
at him, but sent for Worts, and in his sickness lay all the while speaking and
extolling the Church Way to all who came to see him, but not doing any thing
which concerned a man in that case, who had been guilty of so great sins, and
so died.

A godly Minister told me, that he knew an old man, an Anabaptist that lived at
Ashford in Kent, or thereabouts, who will be drunken, and when he is drunk,
then he will weep much, and bewail the blindness of the Church of England.

About May last I was told it by two or three good witnesses, that a Soldier
belonging to the Army, and one who had been a Dipper, came not long before that
to a Town in Bedfordshire called Ravensdowne, and got up into the ^^lpit
against the will of the Minister, preaching for Universal Grace, against
Poedobaptisme, against Tyths; whereupon for preaching whether the Minister
would or no, one of the Town fetched a Warrant for him against he came down from
the Pulpit to bring him before a Knight a Justice of Peace of that County, and
when he came before him he gave him uncivil words, and carried himself
disrespectively, telling him, that if he committed him, he should be fetched
forth with honor, and to the Justices dishonor; but the Justice binding him
over to the Sessions, and being brought thither, desiring some exemplary
justice against him for contempt of his authority, a Letter came from some
Commander (I am not sure who) for to send his Soldier to him, and so as the
story was told me, the Justices released him and let him go.

An honest godly man of good understanding told me lately, that one being
spoken unto about sending the Army into Ireland, he said there should not go
six parings of the nails of Sir Thomas's Army into Ireland though it were lost
ten times over; better that lost then England, hazarded, by sending away the
Army.

At Hampden in Buckinghamshire, there is one Potter a Smith who has been a
soldier and is come out of the Armies, that is a preacher there, and draws
away many people; and though the Minister of the place did yield much to give
him and others content, in being willing to join with him and others to keep
away scandal^us persons, promising to watch over one another, giving ^ree leave
to this Potter and others to except and object any thing against him, or others
admitted to the Lords Supper; yet nothing would give them content; but this
Potter, and many others whom he has drawn away, meet in Separated meetings on
the Lords day, will pay no Tithes.

A godly Minister told me. August 18. that some soldiers belonging to Colonel
Iretons Regiment quartering but two nights in his Parish, infected many, he had
rather have given a great deal of money then they should have come thither: He
says they be generally Arminians; and sat with their hats on in Prayer,
Singing of Psalms: One of these soldiers told a godly woman in his Parish,
that if she did not believe Christ died for all, she should be damned.

There is one John Durance spoken of in the Second part of Gangrana, who was
apprentise to a Washball-maker at the Three Herrings in Lumbard-street, who
after preaching some years without being ordained Minister, does now presume
without any ordination to Baptize and administer the Lords Supper against which
high presumption God has lately witnessed by making one in this kind a
fearful example in Yorkshire; which story most true and certain with the
particulars of it, I intend to give the reader in a Tractate of a Catalogue of
the judgments of God upon the Se-Sectaries within these four last years. Now
this Master Durance besides preaching at Canterbury in one of the Churches,
has gathered a Church, to which in one of the Prebends houses (wherein he
dwells) he preaches and administers the Lords Supper in the evening: this man at
Sandwich prayed strangly concerning the King as the Reader may remember; and
being spoken to about Second part of Gangrana, 131
it, he was so far from repenting, that he added this, That he hoped ere long
to see the King fettered in Newgate; which I hearing, could hardly believe a
man should speak so wickedly of the King, and therefore write down i(...)o Kent
to enquire of the truth of it, of them to whom it was spoken: and I had this
Answer returned me in a Letter, that Master G. a Jurate of Sandwich had averred
no less then what it should seem, you have heard already concerning him:

Besides, this Durance preaching presently after the news of the surrender of
Oxford, said, That for all that, there would be no Peace, till there were a
general Liberty of Conscience in England.

In Kent, not f^rre from Greenwich, there is a feirce Independent, one Master
Larkin, a man of wh(...) I have heard many things both of his preaching aod
conversation, concerning whom there are many Letters come from New England,
attested with many hands, writing of his ill behavior, and the scandals that
are upon him there; besides many passages related of his preaching here against
the Assembly, Ministry, and of his carriage in several particulars; but I
shall speak no further of him at this time.

There is one Master Powell at Dartmouth in Kent, a great Sectary; he sometimes
preached in Crooked-lane, where he vented many erroneous things, and ^ow does a
great deal of hurt in those parts of Kent: There was a neighbor Minister, a
godly man that being behind in paying some of his Taxes (being deeply taxed)
one employed to gather up moneys unpaid, coming to him for moneys not paid, he
demanded (...) shillings for his charges in coming, and used these words, You
are one that oppose Master Powell, and if the Minister would not pay whatever
he demanded, would strain his Cowes.

There is one Brabson in Middlesex about Han(...)ll, a great Sectarie and
Preacher, he preaches much against Tithes, and broaches many Errors, some of
the Middle (...) Ministers have told me of such a man, and I am promised a full
account of the man.

There is one Cornwell in Kent an Anabapeist, who has put forth diverse
Pamphlets, one against Baptizing of Children; others lately printed, Dedicated
to particular members of the House of Commons: The first pamp(...) called, The
vindication of the royal Commission of King Jesus, set forth about three years
ago, was given to diverse Members at the door of the House of Commons: In which
Book this Cornwell brands all the Reformed Churches and the whole Christian
world at this day which Baptize their children with the odious name of an
Antichristian Faction.

There is one Master Blackwood about the Wild of Kent an Anabaptist, who has
write about a year and a halse ago, a Book called The storming of Antichrist;
the subject matter being against Poedobaptisme, and for Liberty of Conscience
so called, wherein as I remember he is for a universal Toleration except it be
in Blasphemy, and denying the Scriptures to be the word of God: but about a
year ago a godly Minister told me he speaking with him about that book and
about his limitations, and whether he was of that judgment still, he told him,
he had received thanks for that book from a great Commander in the army for so
far as he had gone right, but wished him to re-collect his thoughts whether be
was not out in those limitation^ and bounds, so that (said M. Blackwood) I am
somewhat unsatisfied in my former limitations, doubting whether there ought not
to be a universal Toleration without any of those bounds; and in a Blackwood
Apostolical Baptism, or a Rejoinder to M. Blake, p. 81. 82.
book since printed, he is against any restraint in the c(...) of Blasphemy,
and denying the Scriptures retracting his ^ormer distinctions.

There is one Master Niob^las Davison of New England, who came over from
New England with accounts amounting to a good s(...)e, which he was to give
here in London; and landing in the West at that time when all the West was in
the Enemies power, for fear of loosing his accounts and being taken, durst not
venture to come up to London, but lived in Barstable unknown almost three
quarters of a year, which being then one of the Kings Garrisons he was glad to
conceal himself, they not knowing whence be came nor what he was: now being
sometimes in the company of the Cavaliers and of some of their Scholars, he
heard them often speaking among themselves of the Independents, and of the
differences among us, and they spoke to one another (not thinking he took
notice) that there were from several Colleges beyond the Seas Jesuits come
over (they named their names, and the places from whence they came) to act the
pitts of Independents and Sectaries to blow up the difference and contention:
Now when the West was open, and this man got fa^^ to London, he told this to
diverse, to a godly Citizen among ^^hers, who acquainted me with it; and this
Master Davison being spoken to by some Independents (as being a New England
man) to go to Guildhall upon some business when some Parliament men came down
(as I take it, upon one of the Cities Petitions about Church Government) for
say the Independents, the Presbyterians will get the upper hand, he refused to
go, and answered them who spoke to him in words to this effect, You little know
what you do, and whose work you further in opposing the Presbyterians: for
says he* the Independents in Old-England are nothing like to them of
New England no more then black to white: you Independents here do that which we
abhor there; I met ^ith this man, with one who came from New England, and he
held himself there an Apostle, for which he was whipped, and here h^ is a great
preacher, and in great account, and this he told to diverse. This man is
accounted a godly man in New England and went back thither this June.

For a further proof and confirmation of this, here is a person of good
account, one of the Committee of Account, that speaks confidently of
informations he has received of the coming over of Jesuits on purpose to mix
themselves with Independents and the Sectaries to increase that Faction for
their own ends: I have been told also with much confidence that a Gentleman
going through Col^man-street, and seeing great store of People coming out of an
Alley, asked what the matter was; some told him they were Sectaries come now
from their Conve^^ticles, whereupon standing still to take notice what manner
of People they were, he saw come out among them foam whom he had known to be
Jesuits and Priests.

There is a young man a Scholar and a preacher, who lived some years in
Holland, and that among some of our English Sectaries, sometimes of the Church
of Ar^b^im, who tells me they all generally and their Families were
Anabaptists, and that they made much of that scurrilous wicked book, The
Arraigment of Persecution: These Sectaries not many months before they came
over into England, namely about the Spring last, gave thanks at one of their
Church meetings for a Toleration of the Sects (which as they heard) had passed
the House of Commons; which the Beformed Ministers of that place hearing of,
were much troubled at it, yet hoping it was not so, that God would not leave
the Parliament to be guilty of so great an evil after he had done so much for
them: These Sectaries would speak much against the Covenant, and this Preacher
has heard some of them say they would be hanged before they would take it, and
had rather see one another hanged then to take that abominable Covenant. One of
the compapany used to preach constantly in the forenoon, and then in the
afternoon two or three others by turns, as Master C. Master A. and when these
were from home and there was no preaching, then their Families staid at home,
and would not hear the English Reformed Ministers, but some of them said, If
those Ministers would promise never to preach for Baptism of Children, nor
against their way, they would hear them: Upon the news coming over of the
burning of Master Archers book, that made God the author of sin, they
justified all in that book, saying, what was in it, was his to a word; and one
of them said he could show the Copy; and they spoke much against Assembly,
Parliament, and that he had as high a place in heaven as any of them would
have; and they would make what he had written good. This young man once
speaking against the opinion, they were very angry at him, saying, what had he
to do* and they would speak against our Ministers with much indignation and
scorn, as if none of them had any worth.

A worthy Member of the House of Commons told me the last I am of opinion that
Heaven received few such souls ^s this Sectarie, and Christ says, non retipio
tales animas.
day of August, that one Captain B. told him we had been fed by our Ministers
tha^ men's souls when they die went to heaven; but now we see a New Light in
that they do not go to heaven: to whom this Parliament man replied, That the
souls of the faithful do; for Christ told the thief, Luke 24. To day shall
thou be with me in Paradise: unto whom this Captain replied, That to day was to
be referred to Christ's saying so, and not to the time when he should be in
Paradise, so that the meaning was, Christ said unto the thief those words to
day, but not that to day he should be in paradise with him, and so the words
were to be read, Verily I say unto thee to day, and there the point; and then
after to be read, thou shall be with me in Paradise; which though it should not
be to the end of the world, would be no impeachment of the truth of Christ's
speech: whereupon this Parliament man answered to this purpose, this were to
make Christ eqivocate and deceive like as your faction does.

Animadversions upon this Exposition.
THis Sectary is not the first that has wrested this place thus, but some
before him have separated to day from the words that follow, and joined it with
the words going before, so that the distinction should be, Amen I say unto thee
to day, and then should follow thou shall be with me in paradise; upon which
let the reader look Theophylact who handle this place largely and Jansenius
Harmony on the Gospel, Cap. 143. besides in the Greek Copies to day is joined
with the words thou shall be, and not with the word I say, of which read Beza
upon the place: yea lets look upon the words, they are an answer of Christ's to
the Theifs prayer, that Christ would remember him when he came into his
Kingdom, not to remember him in this world to save him from the Cross and
temporal death: now Christ's answer is accordingly, that he shall be partaker
of his heavenly Kingdom, and tells him the time to day, that is, thou shall be
with me without any delay, and so there shall be no danger that I shall forget
thee when I come into my Kingdom, for behold, this very day I shall take thee
to my Kingdom, vide Rollock: in Cap. 19. Johan. The theif in his prayer speaks
to Christ as going presently into his Kingdom, and desires to be remembered
upon his coming thither as now being upon the Cross in a cursed condition: now
if Christ had said to him then, he should be with him, but not told him the
time when (the theif knowing he should be dead to day) but meaning it of a long
time, two thousand years after, this would not have been so comfortable to the
theif; besides there was no reason nor need of adding to day to that word I say
to th(...), for the theif knew they were spoken to day, yea at that instant to
him* neither could to day be for asseveration; Christ using that word word of
asseveraton A(...), instead of that neither is there any parallel place in
Scripture where to day is used in such an acception.

There is one Master John Ba^hil^r Licenser-Generall of the Sectaries Books,
and of all sorts of wicked opinions, Licenser to Master Saltmarsh, Cre^ensis,
Walwin, Webb, and diverse other Sectaries; who has been a Man-midwife to bring
forth more monsters begotten by the Devil, and borne of the Sectaries within
this three last years then ever were brought into the light in England by all
the former Licensers the Bishops and their Chaplains for fourscore years; he
has licensed Books pleading for all so^ts of Sectaries, as Seekers,
Antinomians* Anab^ptists, etc. as S^^t(...)sh, and Walwins Books; and for
Antibaptists denying since Christ's death all Baptism by water, as W^bb^ Book,
page 6. where is ^id down, that I (...) Baptism which was water did end at the
coming of Christ, and that there is no Baptism by water instituted by Christ;
yea, for Antiscripturists, Arians, Anitrinitar^ans, Questionists, and all
Blasphemers, as is apparent by his licensing that late wicked Pamphlet, called,
Some modest and humble Queries concerning a printed paper, Entitled an
Ordinance presented to the Honorable House of Commons, etc. where if the
Reader do but compare the former part of that Ordinance, in what cases only
that Ordinance inflicts death, viz. upon the wilful and obstinate publishers
of such damnable Heresies and Blasphemies, with the second Quere made upon that
Ordinance, whether it be agreeable to the mind of Christ, for men to inflict
the heavy censure of death upon their Brethren, for holding forth such
Doctrines, or opinions in Religion, suppose contrary to admonition, which for
ought the Inflicters know, except they make themselves infallible, may be the
sacred truths of God, he must needs find thus much pleaded for, that therefore
such blasphemies and Heresies contained in the Ordinance, yea Atheism it self
(for that is in the Ordinance, that God is) may not be punished with death,
because for ought any man knows they may be the ^acred truths of God, and the
maintainers and publishers of them our Brethren; So that at once in this Quere
upon the Ordinance, all the fundamentalls of Christian Religion are overthrown,
and such Doctrines, and opinions as are contrary unto them (for ought any man
knows except he make himself in^allible) may be the sacred truths of God, yea
gross Scepticisme and Atheism is brought into the Church. This Master
Bachiler has Licensed several Pamphlets for a Toleration, yea no^ only for a
limited bounded Toleration of some Sects and opinions, as suppose Anabaptists,
Independents; but for a Universal g^nerall Toleration of all consciences and
opinions, as may be seen in S^e Mr Walwins P^edict. of Master Edwards
conversion, Whisper in M. Edwards ear etc.
Walwins Books licensed by him; yea he has licensed unlice(...)sed Books
printed before he was borne, as a Pamphlet entitled Religious Peace, made by
one Bushers Book of the old Edition page 19. New Edition, page 23.
Leonard Busher, and printed 1614. wherein there is a pleading for a Toleration
of Papists, Jews, ^very person or persons differing in Religion; and that it
may be lawful, for them to write, dispute, confer, print and publish, any
matter touching Religion, either for or against whomsoever; And that the
wickedness of Master Bachiler the Independent may the more appear, I desire
the Reader to observe in his licensing this and some other Books, these
following particulars, First, He gives not a bare Imprimatur to his Book of
Bushers, but gives his Imprimatur with a special Recommendation in these
words; This useful Treatise (entitled Religious Peace) long since presented
by a Citizen of London to King James and the High Court of Parliament, then
sitting, I allow to be reprinted; and so to some of Saltmarshes Books, Smoke
in the Temple, Groans for Liberty, Reasons for Unity, Love and Peace, etc. We
have Imprimaturs with special approbations, and discourses of the loveliness,
exellenty, sweetness, glory shining in them. Secondly, in the reprinting of
this Book for general Toleration, called Religious Peace, Master Bachiler made
some material alterations, and writ in the margins of such places in the Book
where some special passages were for Toleration, that they should be printed
in a great letter, differing from the letter in which the body of the Book was
printed; for that end no doubt that the Reader might better observe them; and
this I was told from a person of some quality, and a Scholar who saw the
Original Book, wherein such alterations were made, and told me they were the
same hand with that which gave License to the Book. I shall give the Reader an
instance or two and no more: whereas Bushers Copy page 16, is thus, Therefore
I humbly desire his Majesty and Parliament, with all godly carfulness to
consider that it is not possible that the Church of Rome (called Catholic,) or
those that ate descended of her, and have received their Faith and Discipline
from her, ever was or could be the Apostolic Church (called Primitive Church)
or she that is descended from her; Master Bacheler changes it from Faith and
Discipline, into Ministry and Ordination, reading it thus, and have received
their Ministry and Ordination from her: That passage in the old Edition, page
11. printed in the same letter the whole Book is, viz. Therefore as the Papist
(when they complain of the Turks and Pagans for their bloody persecution) do
therein condemn themselves, because they are found to do the same, yea worse;
for it is a greater tyranny for one Christian to force and kill another, then
for Turks and Pagans to kill a Christian, for that is no such great wonder,
seeing it is a Paganish part, who have no better knowledge; but Christians
should have better knowledge, and more mercy then to play the Pagans against
Christians, is in this new Edition printed in a different character, a greater
letter; neither is this the only Book wherein it is discovered John Bachiler
treads in the steps of some Licensers who went before him, being acquainted
with Index. Expurgatorius, but in Webbs Book he altered and changed, as in the
second part of Gangraena I at large have showed. The man has justified and
acquitted the former Licensers, Doctor Baker, Doctor Bray, Doctor Heyward,
Doctor Weeks, and the rest of that race, who in the point of licensing were
Saints to him, who has licensed such books and things that I am confident none
of them durst have done for fear the people would have risen up and torn them
in pieces; and certainly the people would never have borne with such books in
the Bishops days; besides should any man before the sitting of this Parliament
have writ, or licensed such Books (of which good store have been both writ and
licensed within this three last years) that man, or men whoever they had been,
had without all question been first questioned and proceeded against by this
Parliament, of all men. This Bachiler is such a desperate Licenser, that
nothing now in that kind can stick with him, having swallowed down those wicked
Queries upon the Ordinance against Heresies and Blasphemies; and I am afraid
that if the Devil himself should make a book, and give it the Title, A plea
for liberty of conscience, with certain Reasons against Persecution for
Religion, and bring it to Mr. Bachiler, he would license it, and not only
with a bare Imprimatur, but set before it the commendations of A^sefull
Treatise, of A sweet and excellent book, making for love and peace among
brethren; or some such discourse.

In Buckingh ^mshire there are many notorious Sectaries, as at Ail^bury one
Dagnall a Bookseller, a map of errors, who to a godly Minister denied
Original sin, and maintained other wicked opinions: one Bar a Weaver; and
at Ch^sham, or thereabouts, one H^ch, spoken of at large in the First part of
Gangraena; and another a Gentleman, who was an Officer in the Army, a great
Seeker.

There is one Carter, having but one eye, a Sectary at Watton in Ha^tfordshire,
and a great Pr^acher, who keeps Conventicles on the Lords day, there being
great resort to him; never coming to the public Assemblies.

There are many Independents and Sectaries at or near Lewis in Sussex, some of
the chief being Mr. Peter's Converts, as one Mr. Banniard, Minister; one Mr.
Postlethwait, one Mr. Crafts, (as I remember the name;) Mr. Bunn^ard will not
preach upon nor keep the Fast-dayes: being at London on a Fast Day, he would
not go to Church; a Gentlewom^n who lives in his house uses to spin upon the
Fast Day. And there are diverse Sectaries in that Town, that work openly on
Fast-(...)yes.

Oats the Weaver, spoken of in the First and Second parts of Gangraena, being
arraigned upon his life at Chensford the last Assize, for dipping one Anne
Martin, who (...)ied some fourteen days after, and being found not guilty, was
bound by the Judge to his good behavior, and made to ^ind Sureties that he
should neither preach nor dip; and yet notwithstanding the very next Lord day
he preached in Chensford, and goes on still in Essex preaching his errors. The
people of Wethersfield hearing that Oats and some of his companions were come
to their Town, seized on them (only Oats was not in the company) and pumped
them soundly. And Oats coming lately to Dunmo(...) in Essex, some of the Town
hearing of it where he was, fetched him out of the house, and threw him into
the river, thoroughly dipping him. A Citizen who was at Chensford when Oats his
trial was, having some knowledge of him, reasoned with him, that setting aside
the dispute of the lawfulness of Rebaptization, in prudence it could not be
well done, to do that which in ordinary reason would destroy the creature;
viz. in cold weather to dip weakly persons: Unto which answer was made by one
Teach an Anabaptist, and a companion of Oats, that God had made a promise in
that case, When thou go through the fire, and through the water, I will be
with thee. And when this Citizen said, that was not understood literally in
that sense, it was insisted upon that it was to be taken in that sense.

The City Remonstrance, and my books, are exceeding hateful to the Sectaries
in the Army; they speak desperately against the City, and the City
Remonstrance; as among diverse other speeches, a Captain of Lieutenant General
Cromwells Regiment of Foot spoke words to this effect, That the City
Remonstrance was as devilish a thing as ever was penned by man: which this
Captain in his testimony against Adjutant General Gray, June the 19. being
examined, did give in himself under his own hand, of which I have seen a true
copy, taken out of the original Records. I have been told also from good
hands, that my books are so hated among the Sectaries in the Army, that no
Commanders nor Officers dare be known to have them, or to read them: and some
Presbyterians (whose names I shall conceal) getting the books, have been
forced to read them by stealth in the night in their beds, when they have been
sure none should carry tales of them. The Presbyterians and Orthodox have been
glad to deal with my books in the Army, as the Protestants are glad to do
with Bibles, Mr. Perkins Works, etc. in Countries, as Spain, where the
Inquisition is in force.

A godly young man and a Scholar who has been in the Quarters of the
Soldiers diverse times with them, yea some of the great out^, when they were in
the West, in July last, told me and some other company, that he had heard some
of the Sectaries in the Army say, they would not tolerate Presbyterians, though
they tole^ated all others; because they looked upon them as most destructive to
them.

September 23. I was told from good hands, both from a Minister in the City who
has relation to the place, and from one who came from the place, that a
Captain of the Army quartering with his Company at a Town called Auster, in
Warwickshire, preaches in the Parish Church, sometimes twice on the Lords day,
and the Minister, though an honest man, is glad to stand by.

A godly Minister of Bristow, preaching in Bristow by way of Exhortation, to
exhort men to go out of themselves, and to rest on Christ, one stood up in the
Church, either whilst he was preaching, or presently upon finishing his
Sermon, telling him that he had preached Antichristianisme to exhort men. The
same Minister related it, that a Soldier a great Sectary finding fault with
something he had preached of Christ's wondering at their unbeleefe, he told him
they were Christ's words; to which this Sectary replied, Christ spoke thus in
his darkness, or in the time of his darkness. This Minister also one day
discoursing with this Sectary about our being justified by the righteousness
of Christ, the same Sectary replied, Christ's righteousness was a beggarly
righteousness.

A godly Minister who lives in Somersetshire told me of a Sectary and a
Sequestrator, who to him maintained Adultery was no sin; and to another
Minister, that drunkenness was no sin, but a help to see Christ the better
by. He told me also that some Sectaries, having a Book among them called The
fullness of Gods love, maintained general election, that God had chosen all
men to life, and that election was of all men; with whom this Minister
reasoned, alleging that in the 9. of the Romans, verse. 11, 13, etc. and
telling them, the word Election implied it was of some, not of all; for if I
come and choose, I take some, and leave others; but if I take all, I do not
choose.

There is a godly Minister who came out of the Army lately, and understands the
state of it very well, that told some Members of the House of Commons, there
are some whole Troops in the Army that hold such desperate opinions, as denying
the Resurrection of the dead, and hell; which relation I had from a worthy
Member of the House, with the names of the Parliament men to whom it was told,
and of the Minister who told it.

I was told by some honest understanding men, who heard Master Barroughs
preach, that on the day of the last Thanksgiving in September, he preaching at
his Lecture at Michaels Cornhill, on Psalm. 78. 42. spoke against the City, for
being unthankful to the Army, the Instruments of their deliverance, by whose
means they enjoyed the clothes they wore, the bread they eat, the trading they
had; and discoursing of that liberty, peace, trading, which this City had by
their means, threatened heavy judgments on this City, what judgments they
might expect, for unthankfulness to the Instruments of their good, who had
been a means to save them, because they would not have them have their
liberty; but (says he, speaking of the Army) if they would stand upon terms,
or capitulate with us, what might they not have? and if they were an Army of
Papists, what would they not have? with other things
to that purpose, insomuch as these Citizens said, many spoke of the Sermon,
and that these were dangerous insinuations, especially there being diverse
Soldiers belonging to the Army there present. I enquired also of a godly
Minister who heard this Sermon, of the truth of these passages, and he said
there were such passages to that effect. And Master Buroughs in his preaching
at Cornhill, besides what he may do in other places, has often strange
passages and flings, as a little before that, against the City Remonstrance,
(though he named it not) which many took notice of; and at other times against
the Presbyterians, comparing them to Esau, and the Independents to Jacob;
speaking of Esau, how many rough, wild men had been brought down in the field,
and we had at home many Esaus, wild, rough men against their brethren, who he
doubted not should be brought down in due time; or words to that effect.

There is one Master Symonds of Sandwich a great Independent, who preached,
that though he would not say that all who came not into the Church Way were
damned, yet he would say that all who had opportunity to join to that way,
and did not, but lived and died without repentance, for not coming into the
Church Way, should be damned: And, says he, we had been in the Church Way in
this place before now, but for an Apostate Brother in this Town, speaking of a
godly Minister once an Independent, but converted from the error of that way:
and this Master Symonds brought that place Zech. 14. 17, 18, 19. that the Lord
will smite them that come not up to keep the feast of Tabernacles: Now a godly
Minister in the same Town showed these Notes to a Member of the House of
Commons, who asked this Master Symonds, why this place makes not as much
against those who will not join in a Presbyteriall way, as against those who
will not be Independents? This Master Symonds reporting of this godly Minister
that he was a liar, he went to him with two more, in a fair way, to speak to
him, and this Master Symonds was so imperious and high, that he called this
godly Minister, An intolerable Fellow and malicious. Some of the Magistrates of
that Town asking Master Symonds, why diverse of the people in the time of the
public Assemblies met in private, he answered, Can you blame them, when they
have nothing but bread and cheese in public? speaking of this godly man's
Ministry. Now upon occasion of Master Symonds branding this godly Minister for
an Apostate, because he had forsaken the Independent way, this godly Minister
presently after in his own Church publicly confessed, he was once of the
Independent way, and actually entered into a Church Covenant, and would baptize
none but the children of parents in the Church Covenant; but (says he) this
was, when I was in the Island of Providence alone, and in the dark; but when I
came into England, since this Parliament, and compared both ways together, the
Presbyterian and Independent, conferred with diverse Ministers about them, read
books, as Master Rutherfords, etc. heard Master John Goodwin preach some
Sermons for Presbytery, I saw the power of the Keys to be in the Ministers of
the Church, not the people, the Church Covenant, and all those ways of
admission, requiring men to give signs of grace, etc. to be Will-worships;
when I came to hold up the Independent way in the light, (like as men do the
cloth they buy) I saw it was a moth eaten garment, and had many flawes in it.
He told the people he had been humbled privately before God, that he had
been of that way, and now desired to be publicly humbled for it; and confessed
his sin in being a Minister of an Independent Church, and gave God glory,
saying, I am not ashamed to recant that wherein I did amiss and was mistaked;
it was (...) shame to Paul to confess he was a blasphemer; and he wished
that some Ministers who had been Stage Player, and Cringers to the name of
Jesus, pleading for bowings, would publicly confess, and follow his example;
for, says this godly Minister, I do this to set them an example; and who
would account the worse of them if they followed my example? This Minister
tells me he turned not (God knows) for any outward respects; for whilst he
was in Providence, he was ba^kt and upheld in that way, against all
oppositions, by some great ones; and when he was come to London, namely (since
this Parliament) he was offered maintenance and support in that way; but
coming to examine things, he found the Scriptures he went upon did not prove
the things; and observing that the way whilst he was in it was full of
factions, fractions and divisions, and finding diverse of his members that were
come out of Providence into England turned some to be Anabaptists, some
Antinomians, some Seekers, all these things laid together, God blessed to
recover him out of that dangerous way of error and schism wherein he was.

In May last, a Commander belonging to the Army told me, that he has heard
many Soldiers of the Army who are Sectaries say, when news has come to the
Army, of the Parliaments settling the Presbyterian Government, What have we
fought for then all this while, if that must be settled? The same Commander
tells me he has heard diverse of the Sectaries belonging to the Army pray, but
never, as he could observe, did they pray for forgiveness of sin; neither
does he think that any of the Sectaries in the Army use to pray for pardon of
sins.

There is one Crab of Southwar^ side, a Dipper and a Preacher, who vents
strange doctrines against the Immortality of the soul, etc. This man was
complained of this summer to the Lord Major, for speaking words against the
King, as that it was better to have a golden Cal^e or an Ass set up, with such
kind of expressions, then to have a King over them: For which words he was
bound over to answer at the Sessions; but I hear nothing what is become of him.

There is one Lieutenant B. a Lieutenant of a Troop of Horse, a great Sectarie,
who is so proud and conceited, that he thinks himself able to dispute with the
whole Assembly, and calls our godly Ministers Priests at every word; he affects
strange* high words, saying, they who have the invisible motions of the spirit
have nothing to do with them who are in carnality; he has given out that
Master Angelo and the other Priests at Bristoll, durst not dispute with him; he
makes nothing of any Minister, nor of those whom he formerly received most good
from; and that the Reader may have a true character of this Sectary, I shall
set down a Relation given me in writing from an understanding godly man, who
came this Summer from Bristoll and those parts; which is as follows. 'I was
lately at Bristoll, where I saw one Lieutenant B. who (as I was credibly
informed by ^are witnesses) has publikly contradicted Master Pa^le and Master
Angelo where they have preached (once the Deputy Governor, and the Major of
the City being present) his carriage toward the godly Ministers being
generally disliked by the Citizens, ^ieutenant B. was confined to his Chamber,
upon which he writes to the Deputy Governor that he cared not for Priests,
Governors, nor Committees, or words to the same effect. The same Lieutenant
has formerly preached publikly in his searlet Coat laced with silver lace. I
was told by one of the Committee, and a godly man, that he and Mr Angelo had
heard one Thomas Web pr^ach Blasphemy in Ratcliffe Church Bristoll, which Web
does go from place to place, in Gloucester and Summersetshires seducing people,
as I am informed by credible persons.

There is a godly understanding man come from New England this year, who lived
there many years, and knows well the Ministers, Magistrates, and state both of
their Church and Commonwealth (who also is drawing up a Tractate of their
Church way and practices, illustrated by examples and experiments made upon
many there; which has been communicated to me so far as he had proceeded in
it;) Now this m^n related to me July 27. in the presence of a godly Gentleman,
that he saw and read a Manuscript, which was in the hands of many, and made by
some of their Magistrates (as it was conceived) for an Arbitrary Government in
the Commonwealth; that in crimes and offenses committed, there should not be
certain penalties appointed by Laws, to
which the Governors and Magistrate should keep, but it should be left to the
discretion and wisdom of the Magistrate what he thought ^it to inflict in case
of such and such crimes; and in this written Book many reasons were given for
this Arbitrary Government, and against being tied to Laws, as the instance of
Solomon in commanding to divide the child upon the complaint of the true, and
false Mother; as that Magistrates were Gods, so called, especially in regard of
their wisdom: Now how or wherein should their wisdom and gifts be manifested,
if a liberty were not left to them? for a boy migbt read the Law, and pronounce
the sentence according to that, and therefore that the gifts of Government
might be exercised, sentences and penalties should be left to the Magistrates.
This man tells me, many others read this Manuscript as well as he, and so great
notice was taken of it, that some in New-Engl. when they were a going to
Boston, or speaking of going thither, would say, lets take heed what we do
there, least we loose our heads, for what offenses the Governor shall think
an^ say deserves beheading. Now as Independency, and many other opinions being
first broached in New England have come over into Old, so I have reason to
suspect by the Arbitrary Government exercised by too many in these times, and
the great workings of many to uphold Arbitrary power, and to keep all things
from being settled in Commonwealth as well as in Church, there are some
Sectaries of that opinion among us, especially when I lay to that opinion
broached in New England, some passages preached in a Sermon by Master Peter's,
August 2. 1646. at Islington, on that Text on the fourth of Colos. verse. 12. in
which Sermon Master Peter's speaking of perfect men, used these words, and such
like, Ye talk of Laws, Laws; the Kingdom is not to be maintained by Laws,
but by perfect men.

August 13. two Booksellers of Paul's Churchyard told me, that a Bookseller
offering to exchange Books, as Master Dents P^th-wayes to Heaven for some of
Saltmarshes Books, answer was made by a Sectarie, what do you bring such Books
for? you may stop bottles with them, we will take none of your old Divinity, we
have new light and new Divinity now.

A woman who sometimes was a Member of a Church of the Anabaptists, acquainted
me in June fifth, she was of one Blunt, Emmes, and Wrighters Church, one of the
first and prime Churches of Anabaptists now in these latter times: This woman
thought there was something more excellent in this company, and that way,
(...)en in other men, and that she might have trusted her life with them; but
after awhile she found them a wreched people; The Church broke into pieces, and
some want one way, some another, diverse fell off to no Church at all. She
married a husband a Box-maker, one of Lams company, who got from her all he
could, and set up a Boxmakers-shop on purpose (as she conceives) to get what
she had to furnish a shop with, and after a time went away from her into the
Army, and though he came out of the Army a long while ago, yet he keeps from
her, and will not live with her, nor allow her any maintenance; and she having
followed him to his Church and meetings, the Church maintains him in it (as
she reports to me) saying she is an unbeleever and of the world, what have they
to do with her, with other words to that effect; and when she goes to any
place, where shehears he is, or thinks she may find him, they abuse her, are
ready to offer her violence, andsome of these Sectaries will deny he is married
to her, and bid her prove it. Now she tells me that in those Anabaptists
Churches, (of which she sometimes was (they are not married by Ministers, nor
by any other man speaking words to each party which they assent to, but before
some of their way they profess to take each other to live together, and one of
their company writes down in a paper, with some hands subscribed to it, of two
such going together on sucha day; which writing this woman had in her keeping,
but her husband coming in one night late after she was a bed, got it out of the
place where she had laid it; and now she is troubled how she shall prove him to
be her husband.

There is one Mr Saltmarsh, a man who has of late writ many trashie Pamphlets,
full stuffed with all kind of Errors, ignorance, and impudency, and has been
well answered and bas^ed by three Learned Divines, two of them grave and
ancient, Master Gataker, and Master Ley; the third a young man, Master W. and I
am still in his debt for some passages in his Groa^es for Liberty, and Reasons
for Unity, Love and Peace, against my first and second parts of Gangraena, but
resolve to come out of it; For besides what I have said to him in the second
part of Gangraena, and shall say in this third, I purpose to reckon with him
once for all, in another Tractate. This Master Saltmarsh this last half year
has much followed the Army, a fit place for him; and of him and his Doctrine
there, the Reader if he turn back ^o page 45. may read more. When Oxford was
taken, he was one of those famous Preachers* who preached at Saint Marles (as
the weekly news Books gave it out,) as fit a man to credit the Parliament and
the Reformation with the Universitie, as his Brother Peter's. Master Saltmarsh
being to preach in the Army on a Fast day this Summer, made a Preface by way of
Apology, that he preached not for the Fast, he would not he understood to
preach as upon that occasion, or that his Sermon was a Fast Sermon. He has
been at Bath this year, and there in one of the lesser Churches preached, that
at John Baptist wore a leatherne girdle, so his Doctrine was leather at
Doctrine: He would have preached at the great Church, but the Minister would
not give way; whereupon he came to the Ministers house to contest with him,
about denying him his Pulpit, and speaking so of him to them who came for
leave, especially seeing he had never seen him before; unto whom the Minister
replied, he had heard of him by M. John Ley, and Master Thomas Edwards, and was
fully satisfied concerning him; besides he said I have heard of one Master
Saltmarsh, who in the time of the former differences between the King and the
Scots, viz. before this Parliament, made verses to incense the King to War
against the Scots, when he went into the North; and that when the late Oath,
made by the Bishops of etc. came forth, went many miles to an Archdea^on to
take that Oath upon his knees; unto which Master Saltmarsh replied, he was then
in his darkness, and the Minister of Bath rejoyned, he thought him to be still
in the smoke.

There is Cretensis, alias Master John Goodwin, a monstrous Sectary, a compound
of Socinianisme, Arminianisme, Libertinisme, Antinomianisme, Independency,
Popery, yea and of Seep(...)cisme, as holding some opinions proper to each of
these. This man for twelve years last past has disturbed the City of London,
with broaching continually one Error or other, which was the true cause why the
Bishops and their Chap(...)es suffered him, (though in several particulars
irregular according to the Bishops ways) to preach, when they put down others,
and would not suffer them, and all because by his conceits and fancies he would
disturb the Puritan party: I could allege what Mr Burton coming to (...)e him
in those times prophessed of him; what M. Thomas Goodwin has said of him for
his opinions about justification, and what others of the Church Way have said
of him, but I shall reserve them. A Reverend and learned Divine of another
Kingdom, hearing him pray and preach, gave this judgment of him before he
turned Independent, that he had hereticum ingenium, his genius seemed to be for
Error, and as some men discover a natural inclination, and a disposition to
one evil more then another, some to theft, being given more to st(...)ling,
some to lying; so is Master Goodwin to Heresy and Error, seems to be made for
a Heretic. I shall instance now only in a few things by which the Reader may
judge of the man, and of his way. A very godly and judicious Minister told me,
that he being at London about Spring was a twelve month, he went to hear
Master Goodwin preach, who preaching upon that subject how hard a thing it was
to believe the Gospel, aggravated the hardness of believing by these Reasons,
one was because there were many contradictions in the Scripture as they
appeared to us, and he instanced in diverse, as about Justification, etc. A
second was, because take two men of equal abilities for holiness, learning,
parts, and these shall expound the Scripures different ways, so that which
Exposition shall a man take to in this case? Now besides these he gave diverse
others such Reasons, never salving or reconciling any of them; so that the
Minister professed to me, he trembled to hear him, and has looked upon him
ever since as a wicked man, judgeing the scope of his preaching, was ^ather to
make unbeleevers and Atheists, then to work Faith in men. Another godly
Minister tells me, that some judicious hearers, among the rest a Gentleman of
parts, going to hear him preach on a Lords day, he then was upon the Majesty
of the Scriptures, and among other instances to prove the Majesty of the
Scriptures, he spoke of the contradictions in the Scripture, and went over many
particulars, and so left them without any solution or Answer; at which this
Gentleman was so offended, that he sp^^e of this to diverse the same day, and
said the Sermon was enough to have made all them Atheists who heard it. A godly
Minister in the City hearing him preach (and as I remember) it was on his
Tuseday Lecture at his Conventicle house, upon that point that there were many
necessary truths that cannot be proved by Scriptures, save only by a strong
hand of Reason; and instancing in that point of proving Christ to be God, he
run over those Scriptures brought to prove Christ to be God, and answered
them with the Arian, and Socinians evasions, and so left them, never taking
away those Answers, as if the man would in a subtle close way, whilst he
seemed to prove something else, and confute the Anabaptists, sow the seeds of
Socinianisme: This Minister was much troubled at it, spoke of it to many
Ministers of the City, how no Socinian could have pleaded against Christ being
God, more then M. Goodwin, so far as concerned the eluding of those Scriptures,
which are the proofs of it, and could not but leave a tincture in the mind of
the Auditors, that it could not be proved by Scripture that Jesus Christ was
God, seeing the chief and most pregnant places for it were so Answered.

These practices and way of Cretensis, brings to my mind the practice of
Sebastian Franck, a Learned man, and indeed the most Learned Sectary of all the
Sectaries in these latter times, both before him, and in his age, who has
written a Book ex professo, to show the discordances of Scriptures, laying down
many instances in this kind, and so leaving them without showing any harmony or
agreement; Which Franck being a great Seeker, and Enthusiast, did it without
all question upon a design to draw men off from the Scriptures, to
Revelations. Two religious and understanding Citizens told me the tenth of June
last, and said they could bring many more to attest it, that they heard (not
long before) Master John Goodwin preach at his Conventicle as follows; That we
should not condemn any thing for an Error, till we had taken as much pains in
the searching out whether it were so or no, as he which broached the Error had
done in promoting it; for he did believe a man might serve God better in an
Error, then he who was in the truth.

Here is a brave Patron of Error and a fine fetch to plead for and uphold it,
for if Error must not be condemned till men have taken so Animadvers.
much pains, it may never be spoken against, or at least not till it is grown
to such a head that it is past help: For a Heretic who broaches any Doctrine
against the Scripures, the Trinity, the humane nature of Christ, Justification,
may say to him who opposes these Doctrines, I have studied this twenty years
these points; when you have studied them as long, then preach (...), against
them, but not before; Besides this implies as if Ministers and Christians could
not be sure any Doctrines were Errors, without long searching whether they were
so or no, and as if there were no received known principls and Doctrines of
Christian Religion, laid down so plainly and clearly in Scriptures, that when
errors were published contrary to them, Ministers and Christians might not
condemn them at first, but must study and search to know whether they were
Errors or no; which preaching fits well with many passages in some Books of
Cretensis, especially his thirty eight Queres upon the Ordinance against
Heresy and Blasphemy.

Secondly, There are many thousand truths both to be believed and practiced,
that are not contained in the Scriptures, as that Jesus Christ Son of the
Virgin. Mary was the Son of God; as the Resurrection from the dead, as
Baptizing of Infants, women's receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; all
which could not be proved by Scripture, but by a strong hand of Reason deducing
them. Many other passages I have from good hands of Cretensis preaching, of his
preferring Reason before Faith in points of Religion; of holding the sleeping
of the soul till the Resurrection, of bodies that dye not rising the same
again, with diverse such; but I shall reserve them, with the proofs of them,
both persons, times and places, till my nex Answer comes out against him, and
shall now instance only in one Pamphlet lately set forth by This Pamphlet is
generally spoken and believed by all to be^ his, and many of his Church have
openly said so to.
him, called some Modest and humble Queen's, upon the late Ordinance against
Heresies; concerning which I may say as the Holy Ghost does of Herod's
imprisoning John, he has added yet this above all, to write such a wicked
Pamphlet, and at such a time, there being not a more desperate ungodly,
Atheistical piece written by any man since the Reformation: I have had
occasion to read many Discourses and Tractats of Libertines, and Scepticks that
have been writ within this last hundred years, and have seen much wickedness
in them, both in those of other Countries, and our own, especially those
written and newly printed within five years last past: but in none of them do I
find (all things considered) such a spirit of Libertinisme, Atheism,
profaneness and laying waste of all Religion, breathing, as in these Queres;
for besides those evil spirits of Error, scoffing, disorder, confusion,
irreligion that works in all the other Queres, there is a Legion of wicked and
unclean spirits (seven fold worse then those that have been cast out) in that
second Quere, wherein it will appear manifestly to all who compare the first
part of the Ordinance with that Quere, that all Christian Religion is
overthrown at once, yea that principle written in all men's hearts by nature,
that there is a God; for doctrines and opinions contrary unto these, for ought
any knows, may be the sacred truths of God, and the publishers of them our
Brethren, according to this Quere.

Now I challenge any man to show me a more desperate destenctive passage in the
writings of any Libertine or Sectary then this: How has the Lord left him to
himself, to write such Queries? I remember that in my Second Part of Gangrana,
in that part of it which is a Reply to Cretensis, in Page 35. I write thus,
That I feared (unless God gave him repentance) if he lived but one seven
years, he would prove as Arch an Heretic, and as dangerous a man as ever
England bred; and that he would be another David George, Francken, Socinus;
and behold within a few months, not giving God glory to repent of his evil
deeds, but going on to write, he has by these Queries made good what I
prophesied of him, and has filled up the measure of his iniquities; so that I
believe he has justified Corn^^rt, Sebastian Franck, Francken, S^cinus, David
George, with all the rest of that rabble; and I do not think it is lawful for
Christians to receive such a one into their 2 John 10. 11.
house, or to bid him God speed, but rather if they come where he is to fly
from him, and not to stay, as Saint John did from C^rinthus; and for his
writing of these Queries, I think godly Ministers speaking of him, may call him
as Polycarpus did Marcion: I hope some good hand will make Animadversions upon
them, and give an Answer to those Queries. Now, notwithstanding all the
desperate opinions and principles he pleads for, and the Independent separated
Church that he is Minister of, there is one opinion he holds, and practices
accordingly, different from the Independent way, viz. That Baptism belongs not
only to the Children of those who are added to a particular Church, and that
Ministers may not only baptize the Children of Parents of their own Church,
but may baptize Children to whom they have no relation, viz. in any Parish or
place where they are desired; and two honest Citizens told me they heard him
preach, That Baptism was not a Church Ordinance that required the presence of
the members of the Church, but might be administered any where, either in the
same Congregation, or in another place: And, I conceive, though he be an
Independent, yet he holds this and some other things in his Church way
different from the other Independents; as for this Reason, that he may be
singular in his way, and in something differ from them, so that he might keep
a door open for his profit and gain; and hence it is, I have been informed from
several hands, that as he is a zealous man for Funeral Sermons, so he is a
Baptizer general, baptizing in Stepney Parish, Hackney, several Parishes of
London, and baptizes sometimes three or four in a day, going from one place to
another, and that it is thought he
many times gets fifty shillings and three pound a day by baptizing children
who are not of his Church; and I have spoken with some women, who have been at
such baptizings, and have seen the gold put into his hand; which, I must
confess, is a good wise way to the maintenance allowed him by his Church, to
have this additionall means from them that are without, for the more
comfortable maintenance of his wife and children. But by the way, whilst Master
Goodwin baptizes those who are not of his Church, which surely he does no^ do
as a gifted Brother, but as a Minister, and is an act of power and office, not
of love and charity only, the Independents greatest and only Argument to
speak of, used in the Assembly, in their Sermons, and some printed Books
against a Presbyteriall Church, and Ministers ruling in common over more then
their particular Congregation, is fully answered; for if they may of themselves
without the consent of the Minister of that Congregation, baptize who are not
of their Church, then certainly they may with consent of the Ministers and
Officers of such Churches join in the ruling and governing of them who are not
of their Congregations; and by this the ruling power of Ministers does not
extend further then their power of feeding by the word and Sacraments; and
therefore till I give Master Buroughs a particular Answer to this Reason of
his, We would have the ruling power of Ministers not to extend further, etc.
page 29. of his Vindication against Master Edwards, and such a like passage in
his Irenioum, I refer him to Master Goodwin to be satisfied what reasons he
has to baptize those over whom he has not a Pastoral charge, and the same
will be found to hold stronglier for a power of governing those who are not of
a Ministers particular Congregation: and yet Master Buroughs, if he were
pleased to take notice, might find this very Argument answered in the
Antapologia, (being brought by the Apologists in their Apologeticall Narration)
and in the Assemblies Answer to the Reasons of the Dissenting Brethren given in
against Presbyteriall Government; which Answers were never yet taken away by
the Apologists, or any of them; and Cretensis in his late pretended Reply to my
Antapologie takes no notice of them, as he does not to the rest of the
Arguments against their Non-communion, etc. but is so wise as after taking two
years and upward for Answer, yet to crave further day for payment, filling up
many sheets with mending the Printers and Correctors faults, and making many
faults where there are none, let^ing pass all the material things both in
matters of fact and Arguments till a Second Part, which the Reader may expect
ad Grae^as Kalendas: And of this learned Reply to the Antapologie, a worthy
Divine writes to me, September. 12 as follows; I have lighted upon the frothy
Answer to the Antapologie, of which (lay aside pedanticall jeers, unchristian
misconstruction, Rhetorical flashes, and Jesuiticall equivocations) there will
be scarce so much of a solid Answer remaining as would fill one sheet of those
38. that swells its puffe-paste bulk.

There is one Master Hugh Peter's who came over from New England about five
years ago, a great Agent for the Sectaries, who has many ways, by
preaching, writing, conference and discourse, and above all by acting in
several kinds, promoted the Independent way: The Reader shall find him spoken
of in the First, and Second Parts of Gangraena, Page 40, 41. of the third
Edition, in some of Master * Pry^s Books, in a Book called, The Sectaries
Anatomized, page 3. Now I will give the Reader an account Minors no Senators. A
Discovery of New lights.
of him, in relating some of his passages in Sermons, Books and Discourses. In
Sermons he has preached as follows: In the first year the Scots came into
England he has in the Pulpit spoken well of them; as in a Sermon at Covent
Garden, commending their Army, he said there was in one Regiment of the Scots
fifteen hundred or seventeen hundred Bibles: but since that time of the new
Model of the Army, he has preached against them, as at Lewis in Sussex,
where also he spoke against the Presbyterians, because they will not live
voluntarily upon the good will of the people, but will stand upon such a
means, whereas the Independents will preach freely, asking nothing; So at
Master Gatakers Church at Redriffe on the monthly Fast Day, May 27. 1646. he
preached against the Scots by name, that these Scots now in the Land were a new
Generation, not those Scots that came in at first to our help, but these were
other Scots come from Sweathland, Germany, and he knew not whence; that to his
knowledge they had sent away whole bushels full, or ^uns full of money, at that
time also he preached concerning the monthly Fasts, that they were Canonical
set Fasts, and he wished they were suspended for a time, and Fasts taken up
occasionally: And on May 17. at Cruciat Friars, he preached concerning the
Scots, and of our Army, what a holy religious Army it was, and that they would
have no war with the Scots, unless it should appear out of the word of God
they ought to have; and if it should prove so, yet they would go to fight with
their Brethren of Scotland with tears in their eyes. On the last of May, 1646.
preaching at the Three Cranes in the Evening, he spoke against the * Common
Council, This was upon occasion of the City Remonstrance.
for meddling with that they had nothing to do with, going beyond their
Commission, saying, Let them look into their Charter and see if there be any
such thing mentioned: He found fault with the City Remonstrance, saying, We now
fall upon Remonstrating and Petitioning one against another, instead of giving
God thanks for his late deliverances and mercies vouchsafed unto us. In this
Sermon he spoke slightly of the Covenant, and of those who made such a stir
about it, in pressing the people to be careful in sticking to it, as if they
would have them to make an Idol of the Covenant: In this Sermon also he spoke
about the King to this purpose, what a stir here was about a King, as if we
could not live without one, and how fond we were to hug and embrace him, who
struck us a box on the ea^e the other day, and all because he now strokes us
on the cheeks: In this ^ermon also he spoke, that we were now grown to a
refined Malignancy, so that he saw no more difference between these times, and
the first times of the troubles, then between a half crown piece and two
shillings and six pence; by his discourse in the Pulpit it was carried in such
a way, as under the Malignant striking at the Presbyterian party, who opposed
Sectaries: In this Sermon he spoke also of the Army to this effect, that when
he thought of the Army, and the carriage of men toward them, he thought of
Jesus Christ, how like they were to him, that as he went about doing good and
working miracles, and at length the people crucified him, so will men do with
this Army. This Sermon was so offensive, that I was told of it by diverse; and
some Citizens went to speak with him about it, and the conference that passed
between him and them I shall acquaint the Reader with under the head of Master
Peter's discourses. Master Peter's in the Army in Hedington Fort has preached
against the City of London, incensing the Army against the City; of which the
Reader may read more if he turn backward to page 24.

Since the taking of Oxford by the Parliament forces he has preached in Saint
Mary's, the same day when Master It was in some of the News Books of that week.
Saltmarsh did, besides other times that he has preached in Oxford, and there
go credible reports from persons of worth, both of strange passages preached
by him concerning the King, and of soldiers in the Army that he could pick
out, that should be able to open Scriptures, draw Doctrines, make uses better,
and more proper, then any of the Scholars in the Universitie; and that he
would make a boy of twelve years of age to preach as good Divinity as most of
them, or to that effect: But because I had not these Relations at first hand
from ear witnesses, I will not assert them till I have fuller proof. Master
Peter's at Plymouth, and since at London preached, that suppose a Father have
five Children, one a drunkard, another an adulterer, a third a swearer, and so
in the rest, and he cannot reclaim them, will he presently throw them into
the Thames? will he not wait for their amendment, use means for their
conversion? so now in a Kingdom, their are some Anabaptists, others
Antinomians, others Brownists, others Papists; will the Magistrate presently,
because these cannot believe their Truths, cut off their heads and kill them?
with more words to this effect, M. Peter's preached at Linclons Inn, upon that
text, Acts 5. of Gamaliels counsel, and upon that Text in the same Sermon he
contradicted himself; for his first point taken from Gamaliel, that Gamaliel a
great man in place, a rich man, and yet a graceless wicked man was this, that
a man may be a great man in place, power, and yet a graceless man; and in the
latter part of his Text and Sermon, he fell upon speaking of Gamaliels giving
that counsel, Refrain from these men and let them alone, and there he called
him good Gamaliel, honest Gamaliel, wise Gamaliel, with many words to that
purpose, saying, I profess I had rather live under Gamaliels Government then
any I know of; where shall a man read of such a man? I had rather live under
Gamaliels Government, then under any of the Presbyterians. And in his pleading
for Liberty of conscience upon those words of Gamaliel, one of his Arguments
against all restraint was, because we the English Nation naturally above others
were given to change, and did not love to be held to any thing; in a few years
we turned four or five times, we were Papists in Henry the eights days,
Protestants in King Edwards days, Papists in Queen Marys days, Protestants
again in Queen Elizabeth's reign. Master Peter's preached on a solemn day of
thanksgiving at Christ Church, before both Houses, the City of London, the
Assembly; and in that Sermon among many other odd passages, he would make a
marriage that day between the Parliament and the City, marry them together, and
he bid all those who consented to this marriage to hold up their hands, he
holding up his own; but as it fell out this did not take, for very few of the
Congregation held up their hands: I heard not the Sermon, but it was related to
me by some Ministers, and Citizens, who did hear it, that they believe never in
the memory of man so weak and so odd a Sermon was preached before such an
Auditory.

In August last, Master Peter's preached at Stepny upon that Text, In me ye
shall have peace; on which words he discoursed as follows; That now every one
was inquiring after peace, asking for peace, desiring peace, he told them here
was peace in Christ, but as for that other peace which they so much asked
after, though now they had a month or two, a time of cessation, reprivall for
in Gods keeping Sessions, yet they must look shortly for War; and he said for
himself, though many are ^o^ peace, peace, he was for War; he said there
were times* and offers of peace, which God offers to places, and if they take
them, well and good, but if not, they may never have them more; and he cried
out, O Stepny, Steptny, thou have had thy time of peace, and the day of
visitation by Master Buroughs the morning starr, preaching about seven a cloak
in the morning, and Mr Green^al at three of the clock in the afternoon.
two famous and worthy lights; you have had your morning Star, and your evening
Star; still he spoke of two lights some half a score times in this Sermon,
never taking notice of a third, Doctor Hoyle, the Minister of the place; and
speaking of the offers of peace, which if men take not, they shall never have
again, he spoke of New Castle and the King, how he had had offers of peace in
the Propositions lately sent him, but for ought he knew for refusing the offer
of peace, he might never have it more, but he and his Children, and that ere
long might beg their bread. I might further relate some passages of Sermons
preached by him in diverse other places, as Islington, (where commonly upon his
return out of the Army he pays his first fruits) Wapping, Fishstreet-hil,
Lumbardstreet, Chensford, Kent, Holland, with other places; but I have yet
diverse things to relate of his conferences and discourses, and out of his
printed Pamphlets; and shall come from his Sermons to some of his Discourses: A
godly understanding Citizen told me the twenty ninth of May last, that Master
Peter's had said to him a few days before, that the City Remonstrance was the
foundation of all the Cities misery, and would be so, the Army would disband,
and the Commanders would come and lay down Arms presently upon it. He bragged
also to this Citizen, that he would prove the Church of England to be no true
Church, and meet any man to maintain it next morning at eight of the clock.
Upon Master Peter's Sermon preached the last of May, 1646. at the three Cranes
spoken of a little before, there were two Citizens being offended at many
passages in that Sermon, went to him that night to confer with him for
satisfaction, and under both their hands they gave me in writing the sum of
the conference between him and them, which is as follows. Upon occasion of
Master Hugh Peter's preaching at the three Cranes Church in the Vintry, we went
to speak with Master Peter's about his Sermon, and finding him at Colonel
Rowland Wilsons house, we waited on him till he came forth, and speaking to
him, one of us told him we had some business with him, and would come to him
another time, apprehending it unseasonable because late; he told us we must
speak with him now, for he was to go forth of London the next morning about
four of the clock: We then told him we came to speak with him about some
things he had preached that afternoon; and the first thing we spoke to him of,
was, that he should say men made an Idol of the Covenant, to which Master
Peter's replied, so you do, I can meet with none almost in London* but they
^ry(...), the Covenant, the Covenant, as if we were beasts before we took the
Covenant, and that made us men; he further said that he had taken it (as he
thought) at least twenty times, and saw nothing in it, that men should make
such a stir about it* W^ spoke to him of his speaking in his Sermon against the
City R(...)st, he stood to justify what he had said, and called it a wicked
thing, and being asked wherein, he said there was a passage in it, that no godly
man must live amongst us, or have any place of trust in the Kingdom; being
told there was no such passage in the Remonstrance, and that he being a
Minister might be ashamed to speak that which was so false; a friend of his
standing by, said, Master Peter's meant, it was so in effect; and Master Peter's
said, that we would let no Sectaries (as we termed them) live or have any
place of trust amongst us, and for his part he was an Independent, and one of
those we termed Sectaries, and in that no Independent nor Sectary might have
any places of trust, that employed the godly; it being replied the word
Independent was not expressed in the Remonstrance, he affirmed it was, but
other discourse put of the examination of it: Master Peter's said what would we
have, and asked if we did not live well and quietly enough, and might not
follow our Trades and business in peace, and why should we trouble our selves
with these things; the Sects and Schisms did us no harm; we told him there
was other danger besides our Trades, they destroyed souls, and we were bound
by our Covenant to oppose Heresies and Schisms, and asked him whether or no it
was not lawful and warrantable to Remonstrate, or Petition against sin and
^^rour* and whether our late Petitions against Popery and Prelacy were not
Justifiable, and whether or no he had not a hand in that against Bishops? He
answered he thought Errors did not so destroy souls, and that he could work
upon a Papist as soon as one of your Protestants: And for the Bishops; had not
they troubled him in his temporalls by taking from him his maintenance, and
subsistence, he had never molested or troubled them; for he knew not but that
the Papists, Prelates, and we might live quietly together, and serve God in love
and peace. And being asked then, how the Parliament could justiful their
quarrel, and War yet on foot, seeing they opposed both, by open Arms,
terming it in all their Declarations the cause of God and Religion; He answered
that the true cause was not for Religion, for he knew no word of God to warrant
fighting, or taking up of Arms in the cause of Religion, but it was only to
maintain our civil rights and liberties; and there being discourse of the
Magistrates power, he asked what the Magistrate had to do in Religion? answer
was made, the Magistrate had power to put Blasphemers and Idolaters to death;
Master Peter's replied, yes in the old law, but none in the Gospel; He being
asked by what power they in New England did banish for opinions, he made a kind
of a slight answer, saying they did but send them over a River out of the
Patent; and would you would give us Cornwell, we would be content to live
there. He being spoken to about what he said of the King, was asked whether we
ought not to use all lawful ways for bringing the King unto his people,
seeing he lately had made such fair offers? Master Peter's replied, we might
trust him if we would, but if we knew what Letters of his they had lately
intercepted in the Army, we would soon be of another mind. Master Peter's asked
us, whether as we came to him about what he preached, had we ever been with
Master Edwards about what he had written against the Saints: we told him we
conceived Master Edwards had written nothing against the Saints, neither was
what he had written any offense to us, as what he had preached was, and that we
had cause to believe what Mr Edwards had written was true, he being a godly
Minister: Master Peter's asked what had he to do with the particular infirmities
of particular men; we told him as he was a Minister of the Gospel, he had to do
with them, as Paul had to do with H^meneus and Rhile^as; Master Peter's said
that was in matter of Faith, but Master Edwards had meddled with the Saints in
matters of practice; to which we replied that Saint John wrote against
Diotrophes in point of practice; and wherein men made their seeming holiness a
means for the receiving of their Erroneous opinions, there was cause that
their practices should be spoken against to undeceive people; and so parting
with him, one of us advised him to forbear his practices, for he labored to
deceive the people. June the third, 1646. I walking in Westminister Hall,
Master Peter's meeting me, spoke to me, that I had abused him in Print, and that
I had broken a Gospel rule, which was, If thy Brother offend thee, go and tell
him his fault between him and thee alone; I answered him I had not transgressed
the rule, for that was in case of private of^^nding, but he had publicly
preached and vented himself, and private telling would not have been a remedy
sufficient; he said I had wronged him in those things I had written of him, and
that coming twice up from the Army, each time he found himself in a Book of
mine: I told him I would prove them, and name time and place when and where
delivered; and he was like to be in a third Book; whereupon he called me
Knave, and stinking ^ellow; I answered him he had abused our Brethren of
Scotland, and I told him what I had written I would make good; and so spoke
quick and freely to him; whereupon he said speak not so loud, and threatened to
beat me or fall about my ears, saying I spoke against the Saints; I replied,
Paul Best, Wrighter, etc. such Saints, but he made nothing to speak against the
Reformed Churches and Presbyterians in his Sermons, and they were no Saints
with him; some other discourse there passed at the same time between us, but no
more of it now: And lastly that the Reader may judge of Master Peter's by his
discourse, I was told it within these few weeks from good hands, upon occasion
of pigeons being on a table, that Master Peter's at that table spoke what a
world of pigeo^s they had in New England, how he had seen such a flight there,
such a ^^mber at once even covering the heavens, and being asked whence they
should come, he answered from an Island not far off, which was twenty miles
long and
three miles broad; which was so full of pigeons, that the Island was all
covered over with pigeons dun^ two foot deep. Now as I have given the Reader
some passages of his Sermons and discourses, so I will give a taste of the man,
by e^tracting a few things out of some of his Pamphlets, and I will begin with
his Book called Mr Peter's last Report of the English Wars, which a great
Commander of the Army commonly call's Peter's Politics, upon which I shall make
some Observations and Anima^^versions, though briefly.

N^w in this Pamphlet entitled Master Peter's last report of the English Wars
(which I heartily wish may prove his last Report of the English Wars) I desire
the Reader to observe two things* First, the maine design and scope of these
Answers and Reports: Secondly, the way and manner of managing i^, to make his
design take, not careing how falsely and partially he relates both of himself
and others, things manifestly known to be untrue. For his design and aim, it
appears to stand in these 11. particulars, as I shall point the Reader to the
pages all along, where he may find them.

1. He is solicitous and industrious to excuse, take off all blame and fault in
every thing from the Sectaries, and from such in the Army accounted of his
Religion and way, as appears by these passages among others, page 8. I could
add that we take causam pro non causa, we put our troubles upon Schismatics
and Opinionists, and never attend the true cause. There may shortly be a great
change in the Netherlands, but you shall find the cause not in the harmless
An^baptists, etc. page 2. Only let me be your true Informer, He speaks of the
surrender of Oxford.
that you had nothing committed then by * ours that had not its rise from
integrity and faithfulness to the State, accompanied with such skill, as the
Lord was pleased to dispense; and let me tell you, men upon the place (in such
case) can better judge, then lookers on afa(...) off. I hope you will not lose
by that bargain in the end, though (...) seem for present an ill peniworth.

2. He is careful to plead for Liberty and a Toleration of Sectaries, being
zealous to secure them from all harm and hurt, being such a harmless people
both in word and deed, as is evident by these passages, page 7, 8. God uses
his own ^edi^ o^dy, violence becomes not Saints: In Popish times the Clergy
had not the c(...)ve power, but subjected the civil Magistrate to do their
work, I wish the State keep a good bol^ upon that door: I am confident the
chief means to greate^ an Error, will be by violence and opposition, when
(...)ghted it dies, Coal^ blown get heat and strength, neglected grow cold. I
wish every one ^ight be severely punished that spoke against either Presbytery
or Independency, till they could define that aright, and distinguish about them
and their ways; then I believe we should have (...)um silenti^m, page (...) 1.
Let it be our care that after ages may not say we conquered our selves into a
new slavery.

3. His design is in laying together Presbytery and Independency, to advance
Independency, and set it on high, and depresse Presbytery in comparison, as in
Page 7. speaking of Scotland he says, It will be their mercy to keep what
they have, and ours to be growing up to what we desire; and again in the same
page, Let the present Church Government go on, and walk (...)ly and tenderly,
let those that longed for it improve it, E(...)at quan^um valere potest; let
others that are godly know, it may help, at least to hew stone, and square
timber for a more glorious building, to bring from one extremity to another*
Where by the way the Reader may observe, how he puts those that are godly, by
way of opposition, to those who longed for the present Church Government, Let
others that are Godly know it may help, as if none that were godly longed for
Presbyteriall Government; as also how contemptibly be speaks of the
Presbyteriall Government in comparison of the Independent, in th^se words, It
may help at least to hew st(...), and square sim(...) for a m(...)e glorious
building, to bring from one extremity to another, that is, from Prelacy to
Independency; but I can tell Master Peter's, that he is deceived in Presbytery,
for few that ever entertain that, and improve it, do fall to Independency; but
Independency (all the world may see) and I have fully proved it in the First
part of (...), the fourth Co(...)lary, that Independent Government is the
mother and (...) of all Heresies and Errors, and does not only help at least,
but is the chief work man to hew stone, and square timber, for the more
glorious building of Anabapti(...), Antino(...)nisme, Libertinisme, yea
Scep^ieisme and Atheism; and before I conclude this, I desire the Reader to
observe, ^ow God has left this man to wound his own cause with his own pen,
and against his will to speak well of Presbyteriall Government, whilst he was
advancing the one and depressing the other, viz. in those words, to bring from
one extremity to another, where ^e makes Independency to be the other extreme
to Prelacy, and Presbytery to be the medium between them: now all Scholars
know, In medio, viz. of extremes, though not of degrees, co(...)it virtus; and
if Independency be in extremity, it does o(...) against the rule, as well as
Episcopacy.

4. Master Peter's in this his last (...)port is not only curefull to excuse,
protect, and highly dom(...)end the (...) and Opinions of die times, but he is
studying of new projects for the propagating and spreading of Sectarisme (as if
it grew not fast enough) both in this and other Kingdoms, as the Reader may
easily observe in these passages: Page 8. Your demand of my thoughts of England
in order to foraign States, I answer with a wish, viz. That forthwith we might
have some choice Agents sent out, as two to Sweden, two to the Cantons our good
friends, two to the Netherlands, and so to other Parts, as we see cause, and
these accompanied with a Manifest of Gods gracious dealings with this State,
etc. Now certainly Master Peter's must be one, and some other honest godly men,
(which the Presbyterians are not, as appears, by what a little above I observed
from Master Peter's words) active Independents of Master Peter's acquaintance, as
Master H. Master B. Master P. Master T. and others, who together with the
Manifest of Gods gracious dealings with this State, may by way of comment and
enlarging tell brave stories of the Victories and Conquests of the Independents
in Nazeby Field, entering of Cornwall, at Torrington, of taking such and such
Towns, Cities, by such and such Colonels and Commanders, when indeed they
either never struck a stroke at that time, or were many miles absent, or the
work was done to their hands by others, and they only sent for to have the
honor to be made Governors, to enjoy the flesh, the skin, and the oil of the
Lion and the Leviathan, when they had their deaths wounds before; for the
proof of which several particulars, I could give notable instances most
certainly true, confuting the weekly Pamphleters, crying up of some men, and
saying nothing of others, and ask where such a one was, and how many strokes he
struck at Nazeby Field, and who routed Goring and his Horse in the West about
Bridgewater, and drew the model how to storm Bridgewater, and who routed the
Enemy at the entrance into Cornwall, and who reduced Exeter, and Worcester to
the last point of extremity, with many particulars about Bristow, and at
Oxford, but it shall not need, there are some men in the Army upon the places
keep a true account of these things, and in a convenient time will speak, and
undeceive the world. And so Master Peter's page 12. writes thus, How long
therefore shall I entreat some three or four I^inerury Ministers in a County?
Evangelists went out before Churches were settled; how easily might the Land be
in some measure reduced to God, and their own civil Interests, if provision
was laid in of this kind? But you will object, We have about nine thousand
Parishes, and not a thousand able men. I answer, You see the need of
Itinerants; and secondly, why may we not follow the practice of other Reformed
Churches? and gather up godly youths our of shops, and send them for
improvement somewhere, etc.

Master Peter's is careful to propagate his Church Way at home Animadvers.
as well as abroad, and that in all haste, and at once to overspread the
Kingdom with it, by his importunity for three or four Itinerary Ministers in
every County to go over each County, and therefore asks how long he shall
entreat, implying this was not the first time; and indeed the first fruits of
these Itinerary Preachers that I can hear of clearly shows the design, there
being three named who have passed the House of Commons for some parts of Wales,
Master Cradock, Master Symonds, Master Walter, or some such name, who are said
to be Sectaries, and two of them I know to be such, and decline coming to the
Assembly, though appointed by the House of Peers the Assembly should give that
House an account of them; and lest there should not be Independent Preachers
enough for this wor^, Master Peter's is earnest to have youths gathered out of
shops, and sent to Oxford for improvement, and though they fall short in Arts
and Tongues to be sent abroad: But by the way let me ask Master Peter's, why not
some sent to Cambridge, but all to Oxford* This clearly shows the design,
because Cambridge, all the Colleges in Cambridge are Presbyterian, but at
Oxford there being so many preaching Commanders and Officers, they may quickly
learn the opinions of the Army, and their way of preaching, and be sent forth
with their desperate Principles, destructive both to Church and State.

5. Master Peter's cries up, magnifies, and extolls to the heavens the
Commanders in the Army of his Religion and mind, and takes occasion to instance
in particular men, as if there were none to be compared with them, as may be
seen page 6. Fear not the Army whose Commanders (like Samuel) can ask any
County or Town where they have been, Whose Ox, or Ass have they taken? never
fewer complaints, nor many men of such quality, whose design is only to obey
their Masters, viz. the Parliament; the ^lighting the Army is their money,
triumphant chariors would have broke our necks. So page 4. For Worcester, I am
sorry so little is spoken of it, where so much worth and gallantry appeared,
and indeed I cannot remember where I have seen so much done in so short a time;
four Regiments of Foot under the command of Colonel Rainborow came, and
raised works within Pistol shot of their Royal Sconce, etc. wherein
Lieutenant Colonel Pride, and Lieutenant Colonel Ewers had a chief share,
whereupon the Enemy accepts of those Propositions you have seen: and truly I
wish Colonel. Ra^nborow a suitable employment by sea, or land, for both which
God has especially fi^ted him, Foraign States would be proud of such a servant.

6. Weakening and darkning the valor, faithfulness and worth of other
Commanders, not Independents (though of the same Army) and of the other Armies
in comparison, relating matters wrong and very partially, for the extolling his
own party, as the Reader may observe in the Relation of Worcester, giving to
Colonel Whaley only a preparatory part, making a little way for the taking of
Worcester, but attributing the glory of the work to Colonel Rainborow now
Governor of Worcester, Colonel Pride, etc. speaking thus, page 4. Where when
that valiant Commander of Horse Colonel Whaley had done his duty, and with the
help of Country Forces had block up part of the Town, four Regiments of Foot
under the command of Colonel Rainborow came, and raised works, within Pistol
shot, etc. whereas I have been told from good hands, and so I believe has
Master Peter's before this, of the great wrong and injury he has done Colonel
Whaley in this Relation, Colonel Whaley before ever Colonel Rainborow was
sent, having reduced Worcester to the last point, and Worcester being in a such
condition then, that there wanted little else tantu^^ non, that it was not
actually surrendered; but of this more afterward. So page 6. Fear not that
Army whose Commanders like Samuel, never fewer complaints, nor many men of such
quality, whose design is only to obey their Masters, viz. the Parliament; as if
no other Army or Commanders like them. And so page 10. By the same means the
mercy is gained, it may be preserved; if men, yea good men were isntrumental
in the one, they must be in the other; conside when you see cause to conside,
etc. as if no other Armies were means to gain Conques, and Victories but this,
nor none other to be trusted to conserve what is won; and instances in men to
be credited with Garrisons who are honest godly Englishmen, (he may know by
other passages who are his honest godly Englishmen, viz. Sectaries, and such
as are opposite to the Scots) though differing in opinion, as all France being
most Catholic trusts it self to their Protestant Leaders: So would he have all
places of strength and command trusted with Independents, Anabaptists, though
the Parliament be Presbyterian.

7. The seventh particular in this Pamphlet is, the excessive boasting,
trusting in, and omnifying this Army, as if it were omnipotent, able not only
for all ends and purposes at home, but to conquer all Christendom, yea the
whole world, to go to Bavaria, Lorain, the Palatinate, Ireland, France, to
encounter foreign threatenings, and teach Peasant^ to understand Liberty, to
secure us against Danes and Saxons, yea to cause the West Indies and the East
to offer themselves to our devotion; the proof of which the Reader may find
page 6. Were I persuaded that foreign threatenings were in earnest, I wish this
Army might be sent to encounter them, and teach Peasants to understand Liberty,
and I would not doubt but to see good fruit of it soon, I would rather our men
should live upon their wine, then they upon our beer. So page 9, 10. What you
hear of a conjunction between the Prince of Wales and his Lieutenant General
the Duke of Lorain, with some promises from his Uncle Bavatia, need not trouble
you; the Danes and Saxons never mastered this ^and by power, but by our
homebred distempers. To prevent those fears, let Englishmen keep to their
proper Interests, and Scots to their, and I know not why we might not mar^ch
into Bavaria and Lorain* before they come to us, and make them pay all old
Arreares. I must confess* I am divided between Ireland and the Palatinate,
only I quiet my self in this, that we may do both* And again, page 9. And if
our back-doore were well shut at home, how might Euphrates be(...)yed up; I
mean the West Indies and the East too offer themselves to our devotion. And
not only Master Peter's, but diverse other Sectaries do in a sort deifie this
Army; I believe never was there an Army, or rather one sort of men in the Army,
viz. Independents and Sectaries, so cried up in Pulpits, Pamphlets, Speeches,
and that to their faces, as this is: I might relate passages out of Sermons,
printed Pamphlets of the Saints in the Army, the Independents calling them the
strength, preservers, deliverers of the Presbyterians, the instruments under
God by which we enjoy all, etc. But I must abreviate and conclude this with a
speech lately related to me, of a great man of Master Peter's his Religion, that
a discourse arising about the great Turk seasing on some of our Merchants goods
in Turkis, upon occasion of the difference between King and Parliament (the
Ambassador there being on the Kings side) and what course there might be to
help it,; he answered to this effect, we had an Army that the terror of it was
such, that we needed not to fear the great Turk, but it might go to the gates
of Constantinople and demaud right.

8. Master Peter's design is to plead for the keeping this Army on foot still,
and that in England for this Winter at least, and to possess men of the need
of it, and to persuade against the disbanding of it by any means; and to work
this the more he runs into praises of the Army and Commanders, of which the
Reader may find such passages as these page 6. Your demand about the disposing
the Army, is not so proper for a private pen to engage in; yet this I may say,
that other Nations in our condition would think, if they look round about them,
and within them, the disb^nding an Army (if trusty) ought not to be a work of
haste: When the seas are down in England, I think the passage into Ireland will
be easier; and if we can maintain a defensive War this Winter, I trust the
spring will invite many over thither; in the mean if these faithful
Commanders were in Garrisons (without any design be it spoken) you have
always an Army ready, the private soldier will still run to his honest and
well known Commander, etc. Briefly I say this to your question, that this Army
was hardly gotten, and I wish it may be as hardly disbanded; and so page 10.
speaking of preserving the conquests, he writes thus, By the same means the
mercy is gained it may be preserved; if men, yea good men were isntrumental in
the one, they must be in the other: And of their praises, that they may not be
disbanded, see page. 5. I find our Soldiers generally in the old form, rather
wondering then boasting, admired by the enemy for their gallantry and Conduct:
And page 6. Fear not that Army, whose Commanders (like Samuel) can ask any
County or Town where they have been, whose Ox or Ass have they taken.

9. Master Peter's closely, but shrewdly strickes at that near conjunction and
union, joint interest of both Nations as one by virtue of the Covenant in a
uniformity of Religion, in Doctrine, Government and Discipline, and labors to
divide between them, by hinting passages, to look upon them not as one, but as
two Kingdoms, having different interests; for proof of which the Reader may
take notice of these following passages, page 7. Let us remember England as it
was never conquered but by faction, so it can never be ruled but by love; the
same Last will not fit an English and a Scottish foot; they came not suddenly
to what they enjoy, and therefore should give England a little breathing over
what is propounded; it will be their mercy to keep what they have, and ours to
be growing up to what we desire: So page 10. To prevent those fears let
English men keep to their proper interests, and Scots to their^. I would as
soon credit a Garrison to a known honest godly English man, differing from me
in his opinion, etc. And pray Master Peter's why not a known honest godly
Scotch-man differing from you in his opinion; implying a Scotch-man, though a
known honest godly man, differing in opinion, you would not trust.

10. Master Peter's strickes at the City of London and their Remonstrance page
11. in these passages, speaking of our late enemies, says, Their highest
design now is to make it Royal; you may remember how. willing I was once to
have made a match, my weakness was such, that I did not study whether both
parties were well agreed, and my simplicity kept me from thinking of a
Corrivall; and let London know, that if they think a Parliament sits the
quieter by being so near them, so (...) think when the Parliament doors are
shut up at Westminster, their shops will hardly stand open at London. I^ the
clashing of swords cannot be heard, yet death climbing up their windows by the
increase of the plague, calls for something* And in the same page again, Had
the Citizens Remonstrated more about their debts due, and less about* their
will, they might have had more thanks, and it may be by this time, some might
have kept Orphans from their doors, that ^ry for the money lent to supply the
States use.

11. Mr Peter's design in his Answer to seven Queres is to represent and render
himself all along as some great Statesman, and knowing man, a great Traveller,
and of great experience, a man beloved of godly men, and respected at home and
abroad, a man of great interest in the most Learned and godly men of other
Nations, as Master Forbs the Scotchman, Doctor Ames, a man so active as if he
did all, and so wise as to give Answer to Queres, and Counsel and Resolution
to Parliament men (as by some passages in these Answers, it should seem this
friend was) in the hardest matters, both of Church and S^ate, a man that could
not be missed by the Parliment, or the Army, not spared out of England, and
such hints have b^^n given out both in Sermons, and in Speeches. Now the whole
frame of the Queres and Answers shows this to be his ^^me, but more
particularly these passages, page; 4. Master Richard S^^w^y, a Member of the
House, who was of our Counsel in this work: I preached at Worcester at our
coming in, and did observe a door open to the Gospel. Master Peter's was of the
Counsel belike, for taking of Worcester, and the man who preached upon the
coming in of the Parliament forces to the Town: And I believe he, and others of
his follows were of the Council to get Colonel RSpan^ to be sent to take
Worcester, when that gallant Colonel Waley had done the deed, that so a
Presbyterian might neither enjoy the honor, nor the fruit of his labors: And
though I have never been at Worcester, yet upon report of credible persons, I
can make another observation then Master Peter's upon his preaching at
Worcester, and the ^a^^i^on and Government there, viz. instead of a door open
to the Gospel, a door is opened at Worcester to Independency, and to all kind
of Sects; a door opened for ^lemen^ Wrigh^e^ that Antiscrip^urist, Sceptick
(spoken so much of in my first part of Gangraena) to be ^here, and to (...)i^
Heresies and Blasphemies, And I am certainly informed, (...) Sectaries are
already public Preachers in the City of Worcester, o^ Master (...), who was
before at Wa^wick, and ^he Master M(...). And so page 6. Master P^ters gives
(...)ll, he ^^s(...)he Army may be as hardly di(...) as it was go(...), ^e
^^ates the disease of our pre(...) di(...), and prescribes the ^u^e^; he(...)
directions about sending to foreign States, page 8. 9. about the ordering of
our Counsels, and affairs, page 10. 11. 12. and then in page 13. 14. he comes
to a formal discourse concerning himself, where he tells the Reader fine
stories of himself; And if my different judgment offend any, my Answer is,
that with much expense of money and time, with diligent inquiry into Reformed
Churches, I have taken pains to satisfy my self, and remain now where I was
for substance ^ifte^^ years since, resolving by that experience to keep a
window open to more light and truth, though scoffed and slighted; my care has
been to acquaint my self with the most learned and godly in the Country where I
travel; First I lived about six years near that famous Scotchman, Master John
Forbs, with whom I traveled into Germany, and enjoyed him in much love and
sweetness constantly* from whom I never had but encouragement, though we
differed in the way of our Churches. Learned Amesius ^reathed his last breath
into my bosom, who left his Professorship in Freisland, to live with me
because of my Churches Independency at Roterdam, and charged me often, even to
his death, so to look to it, and if there were a way of public worship in the
world that God would own, it was that: He was my Colleague and chosen Brother to
the Church where I was an unworthy Pastor; and I thank the Lord such a Church
it continues to this day; that truly I slightly took up nothing in that kind,
nor did I loose all my seven years being in New England, amongst those
faithful, learned, godly Brethren, whose way of worship if we profess, it
will not be groundless, when their wri^ings are examined. And so much for
Master Peter's design in his last Report of the English Wars.

The second maine thing in his Pamphlet, is, the manner and way he takes to
effect his design and aim the better, which though at first view it be
seemingly carried in several phrases, with a great deal of moderation to the
Presbyterians, and a desire of propagating the Gospel, Religion, Piety, (the
name of God, Religion, and preaching being often spoken of) and of maintaining,
yea enlarging the glory of the English Nation, and the Rights and Liberties of
the Subject: Yet indeed it is written and calculated for the Meridian of
Independency and Secta^isme, in every particular of it, so as there is not one
passage in it but I could easily reduce to that Praedicament, and draw all the
lines to that center, clearly showing it is for the advancing of that party;
which that he may do the man cares not what he writes; but instead of a fair,
full, open, true Relation of things, he writes very partially in some things,
falsely in other things, hypocritically and doubly in most; and were I at
leisure to write Animadversions on every line of this Pamphlet, and give a full
Answer to it, laying one thing to another, I could discover many mysteries of
iniquity in it, and show it to be exceeding pernicious both to Church and
State, and very prejudicial to the League and Union between the Kingdoms, and
such a piece of Politics, that in this juncture of things, an Arch-Jesuite if
he were employed to write, would make much such another. I shall give some
instances.

First, his Relation of Worcester business is very partial, much wronging
that gallant Gentleman, Col. Whaley, giving the honor of reducing Worcester to
others, who has deserved better at the hand* of Master Peter's and some others,
then to be so served. This Gentleman did very great service at Naseby Field;
this Gentleman reduced that strong Castle of Banbury, besides many other
gallant services that he has done; but because he is a Presbyterian, and an
Antilibertine; therefore others who never did that work at Worcester, nor in
Naseby Field, etc. must have the honor of his labors, and must enter upon
them, reaping that which he has sowed with much faithfulness, valor,
hazards. The relation of this business of Worcester is so partial (that's the
best can be said of it) that I have been informed from persons of much worth
and trust, that when Col. Whaley read it, he went to a great Commander of the
Army, speaking to this purpose, do you not see how Peter's has abused and
wronged me, and shall he be suffered? well, if I meet him, I will cane him
soundly; and a Commander of the Army told in some company to a Lieutenant
Colonel, a great Sectary, that he had heard, Colonel Whaley wherever he met
Master Peter's, would cane him, if not cut him, for his relation of Worcester
business.

Secondly, speaking of Schismatics and Opinionists, he instances in
Anabaptists, and calls them the harmless Anabaptists, which is a false
Epithet given to them; for what Sect or fort of men since the Reformation this
hundred years have been more harmfull; surely Master Peter's cannot but have
read or at lest heard of the Tumults, Wars, Tragedies, Outrages, Rapes, raised
and committed by the Anabaptists in several parts of Christendom, especially
in Germany and M^^ster. Sl^idan, Bullinger, Schluselburgius, Horlensius, Guido
de Bres, with many others, have laid these open to the world: And if we look
upon our Anabaptists at home, and consider what many of them have done and do
daily; how can we call them harmless? Are they harmless who in contempt of
Baptism have pissed in the Font, have fecht a horse into the Church and
baptized it? Who assault with violence godly Ministers, put them out of their
Pulpits by force, openly affront them, and invade their Pulpits whether they
will or no: Who make tumults and riots in Countries* Who kill tender young
persons and ancient with dipping them all over in Rivers, in the depth of
Winter: Who give out that they will never lay down their swords whilst there is a
Priest in England: Who write and print libells, full stuffed with invectives
and seditious speeches against the Right Honorable House of Peers, undoubtedly
a Court of Record, the highest Court of Judicature in this Kingdom: Who make
wicked libells and spread them abroad of Noble men, and persons of great place
by name, as that religious and Noble Earl of Manchestor, the Lord Major of
London, a whole Kingdom, as Scotland, and a whole City, as London: Who have
endeavored and do by all ways to involve these Kingdoms into a new War, more
deadly and destructive then the former. And yet Anabaptists of our times are
guilty of all these and many more, as the Reader may sind proved in this Book,
and diverse others written in these times.

Thirdly, speaking of himself he says, He remains now where he was for
substance fifteen years since, which I cannot judge to be true, no nor that he
is the same for substance which he was seven years ago; and because I will be
brief I will put but one question to Master Peter's, and that is, whether
fifteen years or but seven years ago ^e was for a Toleration of ^ll sorts of
Sects, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Seekers, Papists, etc. and thought so lightly
of Errors and Heresies as now he does; or whether he ever did, or durst in
New England in the time of Anabaptists and Antinomians growing there, preach
such Sermons for a Toleration of them, and speak so favorably of them, as he
has done, and does here? I am of the mind if any man should have told him
fifteen, or seven years ago, Master Peter's, the time shall come, that you
shall live in a Kingdom where all damnable Heresies and wicked doctrines shall
be vented, by printing, preaching, and you shall be so far from seeking to
suppress and hinder them, as that you shall make nothing of them, preach for a
Toleration of them, cry them up for Saints who hold them, plot, act, ride, work
night and day for the upholding of them; he would have been very angry,
boisterous, and have said, as Hazael to the Prophet, Am I a dog that I should
do these things? nay, I am so well persuaded of Mr Peter's, that he was so far
fifteen years ago from being of these opinions and running these ways, that I
am confident it is but a few years ago since he is fallen thus; and that the
two things that have poisoned him, are his being in the Army, and his converse
with some wicked Politicians of these times, who upon matter of worldly
interest, being men of small and broken estates, that they may be great and the
Heads of a great party, countenance and patronize all kind of abominable
Sectaries; not caring what becomes of Religion, and who prophesies falsely, so
they may bear rule by that means.

Fourthly, Speaking of turning his cheek to the smiter, he says with Jeremy,
though he neither borrowes nor lends, etc. yet this may be his portion: Now I
wonder he can say so, when a^ his hand has been against every man, meddling
with all sorts of men, a Polupragmaticall, meddling in the Armies with many,
abusing the Common Council and the City of London, the Assembly, the Reformed
Churches, our Brethren of Scotland, Committees, the King and his children, and
indeed who not: I could name particular persons of both Houses of whom he has
spoken his pleasure, who have deserved a great deal better of him.

Fifthly, There is an unjust and scandalous passage, page 11. reflecting upon
the City and their Remonstrance, as if they remonstrated about their wills, and
not about things needful, and just grievances; and as if the increase of the
plague upon the City, were for any neglect toward the Parliament; whereas I
would have Master Peter's know and all his party, the City of London could not
do less, and have but done their duty; the Reformed Churches, Scotland, the
body of this Kingdom, and all who are not Independents and Independentish, do
bear witness of the faithfulness of this City to the cause of God and the
Parliament; and this Remonstrance was so far from being a matter of mere will
(as Master Peter's words import) that I am of the mind, and I believe not alone
in it, that it will never be well with England, till the City of London, the
Ministry of the Kingdom, and all the Counties as one man make a plainer
Remonstrance, in a more particular way and manner, of all the growing mischiefs
and abominations in Church and Commonwealth, desiring a speedy and effectual
redress of them. And as for his hinting the cause of the increase of the
plague to come from the City Remonstrance, or want of the Cities full consent
to a match with the Parliament, I dare boldly say of him, in ^o saying, He is a
false Prophet, a dreamer of dreams, speaking the visions of his own heart, and
declaring false burdens; and do offer from the word of God to make it good
against Master Peter's, that if the City of London would oftener Remonstrate and
Petition in this kind, and use the power they have by their Charter and the
Laws in force, to punish Heretics and Sectaries, and disturb their meetings,
the plague would sooner be removed from them.

Sixthly, That also is a false and untrue Assertion, That the design of the
Army is only to obey their Masters the Parliament; the slighting the Army is
their money, triumphant chariots would have broke our necks, understood in
Master Peter's sense, viz. of that part of the Army the Sectaries; for if it
were so as he speak^; what means the bleating of the sheep, and the lowing of
the oxen that I and many others hear? If their only design be to obey their
Masters the Parliament, what is the reason they break, conte(...) their
Ordinances, viz. that against m^ns preaching not ordained Ministers, that for
the better observing of the Monthly Fast, those for the settling of
Presbyteriall Government? etc. What means those speeches of some of them, If
they knew the Countries mind, as well as the Countries might know theirs, they
would have another kind of Reformation then the Parliament is about; that they
have not so long fought for liberty and now to be enslaved; with many such
like. And if the slighting of the Army is their money, and triumphant chariots
would have broke their necks, certainly they have then had little pay, and
their necks would have been broken long before now; for never was Army better
provided for, since these wars, with moneys, recruits, all kind of things;
and many particular men, special persons of that party, which Master Peter's
counts the Army, have been well rewarded over and above pay, etc. And for
triumphant chariots, there have been men on purpose employed to provide them
triumphant chariots weekly, to carry them throughout the Kingdom, and foreign
parts, in the weekly news books, wherein they have been lifted up to heaven in
praises, reports of victories, other men's valiant acts attributed to them, and
they upon all occasions pleaded for, excused, and fair glosses put upon the
^oulest actions of any Commanders and Soldiers of that party; so that a man
would wonder Master Peter's should write thus, but that he will say any thing,
if it be for the Sectaries; and they who know the man and his manner, what
stories he has told in Pulpits of ba^^ells that he has been in, and how many
victories have been achieved, will never marvel at what he writes here.

Seventhly, For that Master Peter's speaks of Master Forbes and Am(...)s, of
that constant sweetness and encouragement in the one toward him, and of the
speeches of the other to him even to his death, I much doubt of the truth of
them, and that upon these grounds: However Master Forbes might be great with
him before ^e declared himself for Independency and the Church Way, yet I have
been told from a godly understanding Minister who lived many years in Holland,
and that in the time of Master Peter's being there, both before he was looked
upon as an Independent, and (...)wards, viz. all the time till he went to New
England, that when Master Forbes by the power of the Bishops faction was put by
his place of Minister to the Merchant Adventures at Roterdam, he would have
received the Lords Supper at Master Peter's Church (Master Peter's Independency
or Church Way not being visible then) but Master Peter's offering to put upon
him or requiring some of his Church Way devices, spoke something to Master
Forbes of things in that kind, which Master Forbes nece^ted with so much
indignation and scorn, (knowing what love and ^espect he had shown to Master
Peter's, and what experience Master Peter's had had of him, and that now besides
all his sufferings in Scotland, he was put by all in Holland, for refusing the
Ceremonies and the Bishops ways) that now being deprived both of Ministry and
Sacraments, and coming to Master Peter's as his great friend, he should offer to
question him of his state of grace, or propound his Independent (...)icks to
him before he could be admitted, that he spoke very sharply to him, telling him
in these words, or to this effect, He would not come to the Lords Supper with
him if he would have ^im, nor have communion with a man in such a way: And I
believe there was little love or sweetness passed between them afterward, or
little encouragement that Master Peter's ever after had from that learned and
godly Scotch-man.

And as for the story he tells of learned Amesius, (for no other end as I know
but to gain credit to himself and the Church Way) I much question that he
should speak so of the Independent way, and give such a charge about it (as
Master Peter's relates) as also that he left his Professorship in Frizland to
live with Master Peter's mee^ly upon that reason, because of his Churches
Independency, and my grounds of doubt are these: First, Because in Doctor
Amesius his Works I find Principles against the Independency of Churches, as in
his Book of Cases of Conscience, Quaest non^* Quinam habent p^testatem
excommunica^di? Resp. Classium and Synodum est, quando di^^icul^as aliquae
subest, commu(...) consi^io declarare, and decernere, quinam debean^
excommunicari.
the fourth Book, cap. 29. in answer to that question, Who have the power of
Excommunicating? Among others who have power, he says, Synods and Classes when
any difficulty arises, have a power to declare and decree, who they be that
ought to be excommunicated. (...) in his Medull^ Theology(...), the first
Book, Chap. 39. having spoken of a particular Church, he comes in with this
Cantion or Proviso, Notwithstanding particular Churches, as their communion
requires, the light of nature, the equity of rules and examples of Scripture
teach, may, and also often ought to enter into a mutual confederation and
association among themselves in Classes and Synods, that they may use the
common consent and help, as much as conveniently can be, especially in all
those things which are of greater moment. I (...) also in Amesius his Works
many passages against other Principles of the Independent way, at the use of
Ecclesiae ta(...)en particulares, ^t car^m communio postulat, nature lumen, and
aequitas regularum, and exemplorum Scripturae docent, possunt(...) ac
saepissime etiam debent confoederationem a^t consoci^tio^em mutuam inter se
ini^e in Classibus and Synodis ut communi consensu and subsid^o mutuo utantur
quantum commode ^ieri potest, in iis praesertim, quae sunt major is momenti^
Ames. lib. 4^ de Conscient. cap. 29. quaesh oct^.
Suspension from the Lords Supper to go before Excommunication, which is
denied by the Independents; with many others. Now the writings of men are more
to be regarded and believed, then the words of such a man as Master Peter's,
especially in favor of his own cause. Secondly, For Doctor Ames leaving his
Professorship in Frizland to live with Master Peter's at Roterdam, I will not
deny that, but I do deny that it was because of his Churches Independency; it
was upon other reasons, and of this I can give the Reader some good account:
(and I must acknowledge it as a providence of God, that I many years ago by
reason of my intimate acquaintance with the eminentest and godliest men of
those times, and with the prime of those who are now turned Independents, did
hear and know many things of all sorts of godly men, both at home and abroad,
in Holland, England, New England, which I then little thought I should ever
have had any use of, but since have been, and are of great use in answering
Independents, when they come and tell the world stories of themselves, which
men know not how to disprove them:) Doctor Ames (as I have been told from grave
godly Ministers) for many years before he died was weary of his place in
Frizland, and would fain have had some place in England; he moved and
propounded it to some, that if he could but have any living or place to preach
in (though in a remote Village) without using the Ceremonies and being put upon
subscription, he would take it, for he had a mind to give himself to preaching,
and to enjoy the society of English Christians and Ministers, and was weary
because of that dullness and different way, in regard of the practical power
of godliness he found among those he lived with there, and the godly English,
whom he in the former part of his life had been acquainted with; and therefore
diverse years before there was any thought or speech of Independent Churches or
this way, he moved for a place in England, and would feign have left his
Professorship in Frizeland: And I am ready to depose I have been told this by
one or more godly Ministers of great note. It Is sufficiently known I was well
acquainted with Doctor Preston, Doctor Sibs, Master Bouls Doctor Prestons
Tutor, Doctor Tailor, Doctor Staughton, etc. and from some of these I had it;
and I remember I have been in company with Doctor Ames, at Doctor Prestons
lodging, who after the death of King James, coming to England, and to
Cambridge, I heard him preach there, and well remember the Sermon and Text,
Jude, verse. 20, 21. but times in England growing worse and worse, there being
no hope for such a man as he here, being weary of his Professorship in
Frizland, was willing to be Minister of an English Church in Holland since he
could not obtain it in England; and I make no question, if Doctor Ames could
have been assured of a comfortable place for people and maintenance in England,
without Ceremonies and Subscription, he would have taken a Parish Church in
England, before he would have gone to Master Peter's at Roterdam; but if upon
his coming to Roterdam there was any such change (as Master Peter's speaks of)
that he was really turned to be an Independent, and of the Church Way, and
would have carried on that way with Master Peter's, it was the mercy of God to
him to take him away just upon his removing, and new coming to Roterdam, before
he had appeared actually engaged in that way, or written for it; because his
name and authority, being a learned man, might have swayed the more with many;
and we see Master Peter's makes use of his name to credit that cause thirteen
years after, notwithstanding that he died upon the borders and entrance into
it, before any notice was ever taken by the Reformed Churches of any such
thing; though I much question whether or no in his latter time there was any
such change as Master Peter's speaks of.

Eighthly, Master Peter's writes many things hypocritically, which he and his
party neither practices, nor intends; but a snake lies under the green grass,
as that of a door open for the Gospel, and of Itinerary Ministers in a County
three or four, which is for no other end but to leaven the whole Kingdom with
Independency, and to fore-stall Presbytery from being settled; as that of almost
lost liberty, the English being ruled by love, as cautions about a new slavery,
and wishes of all marks of slavery to be taken off, when as it is evident he and
his party mean by liberty, a freedom to hold what they will, and to be under
no Church Government; and that he and his party are the greatest means in all
places for keeping up all those things, which the people have used to account
marks of slavery, and against English liberty; as that of walking plainly in
your Counsels; God preserves the simple, as speaking against Arcana Imperii,
deep-set counsels of men, etc. whereas he and his party have and do practice
quite contrary, having deep-set counsels, using all Machivillian tricks to
undermine men, looking one way and rowing another; which is so evident that all
men speak of it, and whereof I have given in my former Books many instances,
under that head of the practices of the Sectaries. Epiphanius resembles
Heretics to Moul^, who do all their mischief by working under ground; but if
once they be above ground they are weak and contemptible creatures; just such
are our Independents and Sectaries, they have done all, and still do by their
underhand working, but if they would play above board, speak plainly what they
would have, and not hide themselves, we should quickly take them all. Many
other particulars I might observe in the manner and way of carrying on his
designs, secretly laid down in these Answers, as also I had thought to have
made some Animadversions and Observations upon his Sermon preached at
Christ-Church, and another Mr. Peter's message from Sir Thomas Fair^ax.
printed pamphlet of his, but because I have enlarged already, and perceive I
shall exceed the number of sheets I at first intended when I fell upon writing
this Third Part of Gangraen^, therefore I shall forbear any more of this kind
for present. I have given the Reader some account of Master Peter's in his
Writing, Preaching, and Discourses; it remains I should speak of him in his
Actings, what hand he has had in promoting several Petitions in City and
Country, in favor of the Sectaries; as that Anti-Petition (commonly so called)
framed presently after the City Remonstrance, which was carried up and down the
City by his man, to get hands to it; what meetings he has been at several
times, at several places, as at the Nags-head, as in Coleman-street, etc. what
Countries and places he has ridden to, to get Burgesses for Parliament; what
persons of worth he has complained of to some in Authority, whereby they have
been sent for, and taken off their employment in such places (the thing aimed
at in it) and yet the things never proved, but the quite contrary proved; what
great sums of money, with other gifts, besides two hundred pounds per annum
for him and his heirs, lawfully begotten, which he by his stirring and acting
has obtained; but I shall speak no more of him now, but reserve what I have
further to say, unto a Fourth Part of Gangr^na.

There is one Master Feake an Independent named in page 81. of this Book, of
whom because when I writ that sheet I had not my full proof of particulars as I
desired, I passed him over lightly till another time, but having since received
full and particular information of him, I think at good to pay my debt of
promise sooner then I made account of: This Master Feake within this twelve
months was Preacher in London, and has preached many strange and odd things at
Peter's in Cornhill, besides Wool-Church, and other places, as for separation
from our Assemblies, expressing many heterodox things about mixed Communion at
the Lords Supper, against maintenance of Ministers by Tithes; and in Sermons
and Prayers has had many s^ings at the Assembly; but now is Preacher in the
Town of Hartford (the shire Town) and in the greatest Parish and Church of that
Town, viz. All Saints; being put into a Sequestrated Living, by the power of
some of the Independent party in that Town, without the approbation of the
Assembly, having never been with the Assembly; according to the Order of the
Honor. House of Commons, nor with the Committee of Plundered Ministers neither,
(as I believe) who use to send those that come to them for Sequestrated Livings
to the Assembly, before they grant them power and interest in such places. As
for his carriage at Hartford, where he has preached since last January, it
has been as follows. His preaching and praying shows him no friend to the
Assembly nor to the Directory: he has never used the Lords Prayer since he
came thither, but has preached against the use of it as a prayer. It Is
observed of him by understanding men his Auditors, that they never heard him
appoint or sing a Psalm, he reads but one Chapter or a piece of a Chapter; he
has not baptized any since his coming. One of the Committee, a Justice of
Peace, put up some Articles against him at the Assizes at Hartford, to both
Judges then on the Bench; The first was this That Christ would destroy not only
unlawful Government, but lawful Government, not only the abuse, but the
use of it; and as he had begun to destroy it in England, so would he by
raising combustions in the bowels of France and Spain; and that he would
destroy Aristocracy in Holland, for Tolerating Arminianisme: When he denied the
words, one being present, and asked, affirmed him to have preached thus; and
there are four others, understanding men and of good worth will testify the
same. Then Master Feake explained himself before the Judges, that there was in
Monarchy and Aristocracy an enmity against Christ, which he would destroy; and
as he was speaking some turbulent fellows and Sectaries, clambred up by the
Bench, and cried out my Lord, my Lord, Mr Pr. does it in malice, we will
maintain our Minister with our blood; whereupon the Judge threw away the
paper, and said he would hear no more of it, though he had before commanded
Master Eldred, to read openly all those Heterodoxies. The Lords day following,
Master Feake in the Pulpit endeavored to answer all the Articles put up against
him to the Judges, in a great Auditory. Many other things I have heard of him
since his coming to Hartford; but what I here set down of him, besides the
relation I have had by word of mouth of persons of worth, it is given me under
hand in writing, and that with this seal set to it, what I have here written I
will justify, and much more when I am called to it.

There is one Richard Overton a desperate Sectary, one of Lilburnes Breed and
followers, who has printed many scandalous things against the House of Peers,
and notice being given of him, there was an Order granted for the taking of
him, and seasing of his Press (a Press that had printed many wicked
Pamphlets, that have come out of late, against the King, the Lords, the
Presbyteriall Government, the City, and for a Toleration, and Liberty,
destructive to all Religion* Laws and Government, yea overthrowing by the
principles laid down in them, the This is fully proved in the first sheet of
this Gangraena, and in some sheets following this.
power of the House of Commons, whilst they seem to cry up and invest that
House with the Monopoly of all the power of the Kingdom) who being apprehended
by the Messengers sent out for him, was brought before a Committee of the House
of Lords, where he refused to answer any questions, and carried himself with a
great deal of contempt and scorn, both in words and gesture; and after this
being brought before the House of Lords, he refused to answer any questions
propounded by the Speaker as in the name of the House, and to that question,
whether he were a Printer or no, he would not answer, but told them he was
resolved not to make answer to any interrogatories that should infringe his
property, right or freedom in particular, or the rights, freedoms, and
properties of the Nation in general: Besides he gave saucie and peremtory
words to the House of Lords; and appealed from the House of Lords to the House
of Commons; whereupon the Lords committed him to Newgate, as he most justly
deserved: Now since his commitment to Newgate, there are some wicked railing
Pamphlets come out in his name, and sold openly; Pamphlets venting a company of
cursed principles, both against Religion and civil Government, tending to
nothing else but the overthrow of the fundamental constitution of this
Kingdom, in King, Lords, and Commons, and setting up the body of the common
people, as the Sovereign Lord and King; denying King and Lords any power, and
the House of Commons any further then the peoples Deputies, and at the pleasure
of and will of the people, and to the ruin of Religion, by pleading against
the Ordinance for punishing Blasphemies and Heresies. The first Book of this
Overtons, is called A defense against all Arbitrary Usurpations of the House of
Lords, and a Relation of their unjust and barbarous proceedings against that
worthy Commoner (stiling himself so.) The second is, An Arrow against all
Tyrants and Tyranny, shot from the prison of Newgate, into the Prerogative
Bowe^s of the Arbytrary House of Lords, by Richard Overton Prerogative Archer
to the Arbitrary House of Lords. The third is, A Petition and Appeal to the
House of Commons, calling them the High and mighty States, the most Sovereign
House, and himself their leigo Petitioner: In all which he most audaciously and
unsu^^erably abuses the House of Lords, charging them with Tyranny, ^surpation,
invading the Liberties of the people, denying them all legislative power,
desiring due reparations against them, scoffing and scorning them and their
power, descanting upon by way of con^utation the Order of the House of Lords
for his commitment; and stirring up the House of Commons, and all the people,
against the House of Lords, to free the people from their oppressions,
tyrannies, etc. I will give the Reader a taste of this Anabaptisticall spirit,
by transcribing a few passages out o^ these wicked and cursed Pamphlets. In
page 5. of his de^iance against the Lords, he speaks to Englishmen thus. Ye in
special be encouraged against all opposition and incroachment of Kings, Lords,
or others, upon the House of Commons, their rights and properties derived from
the people. And acknowledge none other to be the supreme Court of Judicature of
this Land, but the House of Commons; and in this gall^^t resolution live and
dye, and acquit your selves like men: For my part I Will trea^ upon the hottest
coals of fire and veng^ance that, that parcel of men, entitled the House of
Lords, can blow upon me for it. Page 15. 17. He makes the Lords to be
s^bordinate and subject to the Commons, the great Representors of the Land; and
calls the Knights and Burgesses Assembled the upper House, and the Judges of
the House of Peers as well as his. Page 19. 20. speaking of the power of the
Commons, has these words; Therefore these Lords being none of the peoples
Vicegerents, Deputies or Representors, cannot legally pass upon any of the
Represented, to (...)y, sentence, fine, or imprison; but such their actions
(exceeding the sovereign compass) must needs be illegal, and
Antimagistraticall; and therefore as by that sovereign power conferred from the
people upon the House of Commons, I made my appeals to the said House,
refusing altogether to submit unto that usurpation of the Lords over the
peoples properties, etc. In the same page speaking of the House of Lords, in a
scoffing manner, faith, Their Lordships might do well to send me to Doctor
Bastwicks School of complements, that I might have a little more venerable
Courtship against the next time I appeal in their presence. In page 17. 18.
relating how the whole House of Lords derided him, upon his refusing to answer
the questions of the speaker of the Right Honorable House of Pee^s, he sets
down that he replied to them; Gentlemen it does not become you thus to deride
me that am a prisoner at you^ Bar; And thereupon speaks of the House of
Lords, such ca^riage, such Court; for indeed Comedies, Tragedies, Masks and
Plays, are far more fit, for such idle kind of men. In page 6. Overton
speaking of the House of Lords, writes thus; And these are further to let them
know, that I bid defiance to their injustice, usurpation and tyranny, and
s^^rne even the lest connivance, glimpse, jot, or tittle of their favor. Let
them do as much against (...)e by the rule of Equity, Reason and Justice, for
my testimony and protestation against them in this thing, as possibly they can,
and I shall be content and rest. In this Arrow against all Tyrants, written (as
it seems) to some Member of the House of Commons; page 6. he writes thus, Sir,
We desire your help for your own sakes, as well as ours, chiefly for the
removal of two most insufferable evils daily encroaching and increasing upon
us, portending and threatening inevitable destruction, and confusion of your
selves, of us, and of all our posterity, namely, the encroachments and
usurp^tions of the House of Lords, over the Commons liberties and freedoms,
together with the barbarous, inhumane, blood-thirstie desires and endeavors of
the Presbyterian Clergy. O the desperate wickedness of this man, and some
other Sectaries! who have writ such like passages against the Lords, and the
Ministers* and that for no other cause, as appears by this Pamphlet and diverse
others (themselves being witnesses) but because the Lords questioning some men
for printing the most abominable, sedicious, cursed libells, against all Royal
Authority, and the fundamental ^awes and Government of this Kingdom, that
ever in any age were published, and they in the most unparralleld manner, (of
which I believe no presidents can be shown in any Chronicles or histories of
this Kingdom) carrying themselves contempruously and scornfully, they
committed them to prison; and because an Ordinance to punish damnable
Blasphemies and Heresies has been brought into the House of Commons, by two
worthy Members, and that by the pr^curement of the Clergy (as the Pamphlet
says.) Now for what the Lords have done against Lilburne, O^erton, Larner, and
such f^llowes, in laboring to suppress ^uch ^editious Presses, in punishing
them; as also in their speedy admitting into their House, and thankful
acceptance of the Remonstrances and Petitions of the City of London, County of
Lancashi(...), etc. And for what Master T^^t, and Master Bacon have done in
presenting such an Ordinance against Blasphemies and Heresies, they are highly
accou^^ed of by all the godly and Orthodox Ministers and people in City and
Country, and their names will be famous in all generations; when the names of
Lilburne, Overton, etc. yea and of all their great Patrons, whether in the
Army, or out of the Army, will be a byword and a curse, and canonized in the
Kalen^^r of such Saints, as John of Leyden, Thomas Muncer, K^ipperdoll^^g, etc.
In page 10. of this poisoned Arrow, Overton writes th^s; Why therefore should
you of the Representative body sit still, and suffer these Lords to devour
both us and our Laws? Be awakened, arise and consider their oppressions and
encroachments, and stop their Lordships in their ambitious career, for they do
not cease only here, but they soar higher and higher, and now they are become
Arrogators to themselves of the natural Sovereignty the Represented have
convayed and issued to their proper Representors, even challenge to themselves
the title of the supremest Court of Judicature in the Land, as was claimed by
the Lord Hounsden when I was before them; which challenge of his was a most
illegal, Anti-Parliamentary, audacious presumption, etc. Behold, Reader, this
wicked Sectary labors to set the House of Commons against the House of Lords,
to make division between them: All the hopes of these sons of division lie in
breaches, which they f^ment all kind of ways, and in all kind of things
wherein there is union; as between the Houses, the Scots and ^he Parliament,
the Parliament and the City, the Parliament and the Ministry of the Kingdom:
They have no hopes but in wars, fishing in troubled wa^ers and keeping all
things in confusion, and from being settled. In page 11, 12, he speaks thus,
Therefore the sovereign power extending no further then from the Represented to
the Representors, all this kind of sovereignty challenged by any, whether of
King, Lords, or others, is usurpation, illegitimate and illegal, and none of
the kingdoms or peoples, neither are the people thereto obliged: Thus, Sir,
seeing the Sovereign or Legislative power is only from the Represented to the
Representors, and cannot possibly further extend, the power of the King cannot
be Legislative, but only Executive, and he can communicate no more then he has
himself; and the Sovereign power not being inherent in him, it cannot be
convayed by, or derived from him to any: so that his mere Prerogative creatures
cannot have that which their lord and creator never has had, or can have,
namely the Legislative power. Many other strange passages there are, both in
his Pamphlets, and Petition and Appeal, made up of intolerable Arrogance,
Impudency, and Anarchy, point blanck against the Fundamental constitution of
the Government of this Kingdom; but by these the Reader may judge of the whole,
ex ung^e leonem; and so I leave him to the justice of the House of Lords.

There is one John Lilburn an Arch Sectary, the great darling of the Sectaries,
highly extolled and magnified by them in many Pamphlets; called, The Defender
of the Faith, A Pearl in a Dunghill, That Worthy Sufferer for his Countries
Liberty; this Worthy man, (a precious Jewel indeed) of whom I had thought to
have given a full Relation in this Book, and to have laid him open in all his
colors, by following him from place to place, and showing how time after time
he has behaved himself since he came out of his Apprenticeship, as by
declaring what set him first on work to print Books against the Bishops, how
he carried himself in the Fleet whilst he was Prisoner there, how since this
Parliament both before the wars begun and since the wars, how whilst he
was Prisoner at Oxford, how in the Earl of Manchestors Army, how in the City
at many meetings about Petitions since he left the wars, how before the
Committee of Examinations, how the first (...) he was in Newgate by order of
the House of Commons, how he behaved himself before the House of Lords, and
how the second time of his imprisonment in Newgate, and how since his last
commitment to the Tower; but because this Narration alone will take up some
sheets, there being many remarkable things to be written of him, of his
insolent loose ungodly practices, and of his Anarchicall Principles,
destructive to all Civil Government whatsoever, and I have already filled up
that number of sheets I a^ first intended when I resolved to write this Third
Part, (though I have many things yet to put in this Third Part) therefore I
must de^erre it till a Fourth Part, and shall then by the help of God do it so
largely and fully, that I shall make his folly and wickedness known to all
men, and vindicate the honor and power of the House of Peers from his, and all
the Sectaries wicked Libells; shewin^ the weakness of those Principles, That
all power in Government is founded upon the immediate free election of all
those that are to be Governed, And of a necessity that all who are to be
subject and obey must be represented, And that all who have power in Government
must be Representers; which I shall do for the vindication of the just Legal
power of the King, the House of Lords, yea and of the Commons; undertaking to
make it good, that according to the Sectarian Principles now vented in so many
Books daily, and so much countenanced by too many, the power and privilege of
the House of Commons would be overthrown and cut short, as well as the Kings
and Lords: For instance, (to say nothing of that, that the Commons power is not
only by being chosen by the several Counties and Towns, but by the virtue of
Writs under the Great Seal, and by virtue of Laws and Rules, according to
which the several Electors must go, or else their Elections give them no
power at all;) If this Principle were true, the House of Commons should have no
power over me, nor over many thousands more in the Kingdom, and we might all
say the same things to the House of Commons, which Lilburne, Overton, and all
the Sectaries say to the House of Lords; for we never chose them, had no voices
in their Elections, they are not our chosen ones, as the Sectaries say of the
Lords; I and many Ministers of the Kingdom, with hundred thousands of people
who have not so much free land per annum, are excluded from election of Knights
of the Shires, and not being freemen of Towns, have no voices in choice of
Burgesses, and so may refuse subjection to their Orders, resist their Officers
who come with their Warrants, and refuse to live by the Laws they make, as not
being chosen by us, who no question are the greatest number of persons in the
Kingdom; (I believe there are more men of years of understanding without so
much free land per annum, then there are those who have so much:) Besides, if
this Principle were true, That all subjection and obedience to persons and
their Laws stood by virtue of electing them, then besides all non-free-holders
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the House of Commons, all women at once were
exempt from being under Government, and all youths who were under age at the
beginning of this Parliament six years ago (though now men) and had no voices
in the choice of Parliament men; yea, if this Parliament sit many years longer,
all those who were boys and children, when they come to years of understanding
must be exempt too, as having had no voices in election; nay yet further, so
weak a Principle this is, upon which the Sectaries would overthrow all the
power of the King and Lords, and give all power to the Commons, that if it were
true, none were bound to any obedience of those Knights and Burgesses whom they
chose not, but opposed with all their might, so that by this rule all
Freeholders in each County who dissented from him that was chosen, should not
submit to that man, but set him up whom they have chosen; and though there be
four hundred Members in the Com. House, yet they who have voices in choosing,
and they whose voices carry it for such a man, because they choose but one or
two, viz. in that County where they live and have estates, therefore they
should be subject only to the determinations of those two men; but for all the
rest, they choose them no more then they do the House of Lords: And yet further,
if this Principle were good, that subjection and obedience is due from none,
and to none, but those who are chosen and represent, all strangers who come
into or live for a time in a Kingdom, when sent for upon suspicions or real
crimes, may answer the House of Commons, What have they to do with them, they
chose them not, they gave them no power over them, they are not their
Representors: And last of all, upon this Principle, all we who are born within
this fifty, sixty, or seventy years, may refuse obedience and subjection to all
the Laws made by Parliaments before we were born, or by such Parliaments
whereof we chose not the Members; and when men clip money, and counterfeit
coin, or men steal horses, and are sent for by Justices, and brought to the
Bars, they may with as much reason, and more appeal from those Courts of
Justice, because they never chose these men that made such Laws, nor ever
consented to them, as Lilburne, Overton, Larner, etc. did from the Lords, to
the present House of Commons, their Representors, their chosen ones, etc. and I
dare undertake to show, that all those seeming Arguments and rambling
Discourses in Overtons and Lilburnes Books, have as much strength for
justifying all Delinquents appeals from those Laws, made so many years ago,
and Judges going according to them, as for their declining the House of Lords.
Many other instances I could give of those who have by the Laws of England,
and other Kingdoms, power of Government, and that most justly, without any
immediate election of the people, and persons to be governed by them; so that
we must look for some other foundations and grounds of giving one man, or more,
power in Government over all besides this immediate Election, and
Representation, which will be found firm and strong, and which indeed give the
force to Election, and which in several cases, without any immediate Election
of the present persons to be governed, binds them before God and men to
obedience and subjection in all lawful things, and according to the Laws; but
I must de^errre the giving of more Instances about Election, with the Reasons
thereof, and of laying down the just grounds of lawful Authority and Power of
one man, or many, and of one and many, without any immediate Election either of
a part, or of the whole present people, till the Fourth Part of Gangraena; only
I will add two things, First, to show the Witnesses do not agree, but the
great Leaders of the Sectaries di^fer among themselves in this point, yea the
same men, as Lilburn, and the Authors of those Pamphlets, Englands Birthright,
etc. Secondly, propound some Queres to Lilburne, Overton, Larner, and the rest
of that generation to consider of in the mean time. For the first, However that
Lilburne, Overton, and the Sectaries use the House of Lords thus, denying them
power over Commoners, and a Legislative power, with an Interest in saving the
Kingdom, and put all the whole Supreme power upon the Commons, making the
House of Lords stand for a Cipher, because not chosen by the common people as
the Knights and Burgesses, yet till wit^ in this year and an half, they in
writings and actions declared the contrary, viz. before the recruit of the
House of Commons with new Members, and the success of the new Model, as is
evident by many Vid. A Letter e^tit. Englands lamentable slavery. The Copy of a
Letter from Lic v^en. Col. Lilburne to a Friend. A Pamphlet called, A Question
and an Answer. Lil(...)es (...) ^^d Truth j^s(...). Englands B^rth-right.
Pamphlets written before, wherein they abused the House of Commons, and
particular Members, crying out of them for making the free subjects slaves, and
for ruling in an arbitrary way, as much as they do now of the House of Lords;
yea the Lords are pleaded for and cried up above the House of Commons, for
their justice, and their readiness to hear the grievan^s of the subjects; and
their power pleaded for, and that by Lilburne himself, page 74, 75. of his
Pamphlet, called ^nnocency and truth justified, where pleading to have his
business of his sentence in Star Chamber to be transmitted up to the Lords
from the He use of Commons, by way of Answer to Objections against it, he has
these words, If I be transmitted up to the Lords, I confidently believe I shall
get forward, out of the former experiences of that Justice that I have found
there; and I will instance two particulars, first when I was Prisoner in the
Fleet, etc. but that is too long for me to write down, and I shall rather
ref^rre the Reader to the Book, page 74. Secondly, May 4. 1641. the King
accused me of high Treason, and before the Lords Bar was I brought for my
life, where although one Litleton servant to the Prince swore point blanck
against me, yet had I free liberty to speak for my self in the open House, and
upon my desire that Master Andrews also might declare upon his Oath what he
knew about my business, it was done, and his Oath being absolutely
contradictory to Master Litletons, I was both freed from Litletons malice, and
the Kings accusation, at the Bar of the whole House: and for my part I am
resolved to speak well of those that have
done me justice, and not to doubt they will deny it me, till such time as by
experience I find they do it. And in page 56. of Lilburnes Innocence and Truth
justified, he writes thus, Again I say, a Commi^tee of the House of Commons is
not the whole Parliament, no nor the whole House of Commons it self, according
to their own Principles; and therefore in my judgment, they are not to act
contrary to a known and received Law, and therefore cannot justly imprison any
man contrary thereunto, neither by a Committee of theirs, nor by the whole
House of Commons it self, they being not according to their own Principles the
whole
Parliament, but a part of it, and therefore that which is established by the
whole (as a Law is by 3. Estates, and (...) Ordinance by 2. Estates) cannot
justly be contradicted by a part, namely the H. of Com. but one Estate, much
less by one of their Committees, which is but a branch of that one Estate; and
therefore for my part I judge a Law to be a Law until it be made void by all
the three Estates that made it, or at least by the two Estates jointly, that
takes upon them to make Ordinances in this time of necessity, to make void a
Law at present, etc. And therefore I am abs^lutely of this mind, that neither
a Committee of the House of Commons, nor the whole House of Commons together,
can justly imprison me, or any other contrary to law, against which at present
there is not some Ordinance
made both by them, and the Peers, public at present to overthrow it. But I
have several times been imprisoned both by Committees, and by vote of the
House of Commons it self, contrary to a known Law made this present Parliament
by themselves, against which there is at present no Ordinance published and
declared by them and the Peers, for the cognizance; Ergo, I say they are tied
in justice according to the tenor of this Law to give me reparations against
those persons that were chief instruments, either in Committees, or in the
House of Commons it self, to vote and take away my liberty from me, contrary to
this L^w; and for my part I do accordingly expect my reparations for my late
causeless molestations and imprisonments.

And as Lilburne in these passages gives the House of Lords an equal
legislative power with the Commons, making them one of the three Estates as
well as the Commons, and expressly says, the Commons are but a part of the
Parliament, and that the Commons
cannot make void a Law, unless it be by the two Estates jointly, viz. the
Lords and Commons (all which are contrary to the many wicked Pamphlets printed
in this year, 1646. by which the Reader may observe what difference there is
between the same Sectaries in the year 1645. and the year 1646. such new light
has the success of the new Model, and the recruit of the House of Commons
brought to the Sectaries) so Lilburne and the Sectaries by many actions of
theirs have owned and established the power of the House of Lords, as well as
of the Commons, as In their several Petitions to the Lords House as well as
Commons, for abolishing Episcopacy; and in several other particulars, which
clearly proves the legislative power of the Lords as well as Commons; for is
not that a part of legislative power to repeal former Laws, Statutes, as well
as to make new? and if the Lords had not a power over Commoners, and that of
Judicature, why was Lilburne so earnest with the House of Commons, and in print
expresses to the great and high abuse of the House of Commons, their delaying
of having their votes transmitted concerning his sentence in Sar-chamber, yea,
and that against some Members of the House of Commons by name? Again, if all
the power were in the House of Commons, why did he not rest contented with
their votes, but desire the Lords concurrance, and that for the punishing even
of Members of the House of Commons, as in page 75. pressing the Commons to
transmit their votes, by way of answer to an objection, What justice can you
expect from the Lords, seeing Master Smart has spent four or five hundred
pounds? he shows his cause to be different from Master Smarts, in that he is
to have justice upon those whose estates are not sequestered, as Master Smarts
Adversaries were, but some of them still sit in both Houses. And lastly, if the
House of Lords have no power to try or judge Lilburne a Commoner, but their
offering so to do be a high usurpation, invasion of the Commons rights, why did
not Lilburne when he was accused of high treason before the Lords Bar upon
his life (as himself makes the relation, page 74.) appeal then from the House
of Lords to the House of Commons? And as Lilburne himself (the head of the
Sectaries in these Anti-Parliamentary principles) owned the power of the Lords
equal with the Commons, and preferred their justice before that of the House of
Commons, though not chosen by the people: so Cretensis alias * Master John
Goodwin, brings Arguments from the House of Commons Vide Mr Pryns Animadvers.
on Mr Goodwins Theomach. page 22. Master Pryns Truth Triumphing over falsehood,
page 106. 107. 108.
being chosen by the people against their power of making Laws in matters
Ecclesiastical, and the peoples submitting to them, because they are chosen by
the riffe raffe of the Land, all sorts of men, worldly men, drunkards, etc.
having a right of nominating persons to a Parliamentary trust and power. These
are a secular root, out of which Cretensis conceives an impossibility that a
spiritual extraction should be made, For who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean, etc. Now by this the Reader may see the Sectaries agree not, some
excluding the Lords from all power, because not chosen by the universality of
the people, others excluding the Commons from their power, because chosen by
the universal people; so that according to Master Goodwins doctrine, the Lords
being of Noble Parentage and well bred, not chosen by the rif^e raffe of the
people, Atheists, Drunkards, the profane world, may be fitter, and have more
Authority to nominate and appoint who shall be the men, that shall order the
affairs of Christ's Kingdom, then the Commons. And thus have I set the
Pharisees and Sadduces one against the other. Secondly, I propound some Queres
to Lilburne, Overton, etc. to Answer against I set forth a fourth part of
Gangraena.

1. Quere, If all subjection and obedience to Governors be founded only upon
the parties immediate present election of them, and not other wise; whether
then may any obedience so much as to appear before, answer any questions, or
submit, be given to Justices of Peace, Judges, Keepers of the great Seal,
Sheriffs, Committees, etc. who are not chosen by the people?

2. Whether any obedience, respect, coming without resistance upon Warrants
sent for, may be performed to Majors of Towns, or Deputy Majors, not chosen by
the Town where they serve, but appointed by Ordinance of Parliament?

3. When her if men remove from one Town to another, where they had no hand in
choosing Majors and Magistrates, must they demand a liberty and power to choose
them before they will obey any of their commands; and whether must all the
young youths of a Town when they come to twenty one years, ^or years of
subjecting, demand in the places where they live, a power of choosing Aldermen,
or Burgesses of Towns before they can submit to them?

4. Whether does not a constitution of a Government for such a people and
Nation, made by the wisdom of Ancestors some hunhundred years before, though
not by election of the people one in every year, or seven, or more, but founded
upon such and such good Laws, and in succession of persons by birth and
inheritance, bind a people to obey and subject, as well as if chosen by them?

5. Suppose in forms of civil Government and constitution of Kingdoms, every
particular were not so good and exact as might be desired by some, and possibly
might be, yet whether is not a peoples submitting, and accepting that form of
Government many years togethera consenting to it, and equivalent to a formal
Election.

There is one John Price an Exchange man, Cretensis beloved Disciple, and one
of his Prophets; who among others preach for him, when he has any Book to
Answer, or some Libertine Tractate to set forth; This man has put forth three
Pamphlets, one about Independencies, the other two Replies or Answers; one to
the City Remonstrane, the other to a Vindication of the Remonstrance; in all
which he shows himself to be Scholar to Cretensis, and somewhat allied to
Lilburne, Overton, and the rest of those Sectaries, who give all the supreme
power of this Kingdom to the House of Commons: For in his City Remonstrance
Remonstrated, and in his moderate Reply he is against the City Remonstrance,
for giving only a share of the supreme power to the House of Commons, and
instead of three Estates the City Remonstrance Remonstrated. page 23, 24, 25,
26.
King, Lords, and Commons, of which the fundamental Constitution of the
Government of this Kingdom is made up, he holds there is but one, and that the
Commons, for which he gives his Reasons (such as they be) and puts Queres to
the Author of the Justification of the City Remonstrance; their scope being all
along, to give the whole supreme power, and not only a part to the Commons.
Certainly these Books of Master Price were not written in the year 1645. but
in the year 1646. that they agree so with Lilburne, Overton, etc. And if I
should use his Master Goodwins Argument against him here, I wonder how he
would answer it; Those who are chosen by the generality of the Land,
Worldlings, drunkards, unclean persons are not fit to have the whole supreme
power of the Kingdom, and neither King, nor Lords to have any part with them.
But so are the Commons of England chosen. Ergo. Now both the major and the
minor are his Tutor Goodwins, only the major is stronger as I put it; for if
according to Master Goodwin, because they are chosen by the Common people, and
not only by Saints, they are incapable of a part of the supreme power, because
there is an impossibility of a spiritual extraction out of a secular root;
then much more should they not have the whole supreme power. And as this man
is bold with the power of the King and Lords to exchange it, and give it to the
Commons, so he is with the City, the Court of Common Council, calling the City
Remonstrance made by the Common Council, the disturber of the quiet and peace
of the Church and State, etc. And so in page 13. 22. there are passages Page 7.
City Remonstrance Remonstrated.
aspersing the Remonstrance and the Common Council. This Master Price contents
not himself to preach only in London, but I hear of him by a godly Minister
who was lately at Edmunds-Bury, that he has preached there in a house, and a
godly judicious Citizen told me and some others that he maintained to him some
dangerous and heretical opinions, as that men might be saved who were not
elected, and that if men did improve nature well, God would surely give them
grace; So that it seems this Exchange man sells other wares besides
Independency and Separation, and does as the Apostle Peter speaks, with fained
words make merchandise of men's souls.

Master Price also (I suppose this Price) was at a meeting here in London,
where some of several Sects, Seekers, Antinomians, Anabaptists, Brownists,
Independents, met with some Presbyterians to consider how all these might live
together, notwithstanding their several opinions, and he was, as all the
Sectaries were for a general Toleration, and they agreed together like buckle
and thong, only the Presbyterians were not satisfied.

There is one Master Cradock who came out of Wales, and is going thither again
to be an Itinerary Preacher whom I have spoken of in page 131. that he
declined coming to the Assembly, but now lately October 14. seeing the pay
could not be had without the concurrence of the Lords, and in all this time
having made some leading men his friends, he came to be examined and is
passed; but besides that he has gathered a Church, administering the Lords
Supper in a house at evening, he has preached many odd things in the City,
strains tending to Antinomianisme, Libertinisme, as speaking against men of an
old Testament spirit, and how poor Drunkards and Adulterers could not look
into one of our Churches but hell fire must be flashed in their faces. That if
a Saint should commit a gross sin, and upon the committing of it should be
startled at it, that would be a great sin in him. And now lately this
October, or at the latter end of September, he preached on that Text in
Thames Street, We are not of the night, but of the day; upon which Text he
delivered matter to this effect, that since the Apostles times, or presently
after them, there had been a great night, but now the day was breaking out
after a long night, and light was coming every day more then other; and there
were many Gospel privileges, and of the new Jerusalem that we should then
enjoy: In that day there should be no Ordinances to punish men for holding
opinions, there should be no Confessions of Faith, there every one should have
the liberty of their consciences, then as in Micah it is prophesied of those
Gospel times, All people will walk every one in the name of his God, and we
will walk every one in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever, which
place was brought for liberty of conscience by him; And in that day neither
Episcopacy nor Presbytery, nor any others should intermeddle, or invade the
rights of the Saints; many such flings he had; and this Sermon was preached
just upon that time when the Ordinance against Heresies was taken into debate,
and the Confession of Faith to be brought into the House of Commons, so that by
these and many more particulars, his hints about dipping often and suffering
such, shows what the first fruits of these Itinerary Preachers are, and what a
sad thing it is men so principled should go among such a people as the Welsh,
with so large a power of preaching as he and his fellows have.

Master Sympson the Independent, preaching presently after the second part of
Gangraena came forth, at Black-Friars on June 12. (as it is given me under ones
hand) and in his Sermon discoursing about the Angels bringing no railing
accusation against Satan, he advised his people how to behave themselves at
this time now the Saints infirmities were laid open; First, not answer a word,
as the King of Judah commanded those he sent to Rabshakeh. Secondly, to pray
against them, yea and to pray against them by name, for God would avenge them.

Reader take notice of the charity and love of Independents Animadvers.
to their Presbyterian Brethren, to stir up the people to pray against them,
and that by name, with giving them an incourragement from Gods avenging, which
I never read was practiced by the Primitive Church, but only against Julian the
Apostate, whom the Church judged with one consent to have sinned against the
Holy Ghost. These Independents and Sectaries did in many Books before my first
part of Gangraena came forth, name many Presbyterian godly Ministers, and
others, laying open infirmities committed long before, yea abusing Members of
both Houses, and worthy persons, by writing lies and false things of them, as
that religious and Noble Earl of Manchester, Master Pryn, Colonel King,
Master Calamy, with many more; and have abused by name in printed Books lately
many able and godly Ministers of the Assembly, as Master Vines, Master
Marshall, Master Sedgwick, Master Gataker, Master Ley, Master Newcomen, Master
Seaman, Master Hill, Doctor Burges, with some City Ministers; and this is no
fault in the Sectaries, neither are these worthy men, Saints be like in the
Independent Calendar, nor may the Presbyterians I hope pray against Master
Saltmarsh, Cretensis, Lilburne, and others of them by name; but for Master
Edwards because he has written of the damnable Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies of these times, and the better to preserve the people, and to make
them take heed, has given the names of some of the prime seducers, Wrighter,
Erbury, Hich, Wallwyn, Den, Kissin, Lamb, Lilburne, etc. not Saints in his
Creed, nor their opinions and ways, infirmities, but deliberated, plotted
abominations, therefore he must be prayed against, and that by name; and as
Master Sympson gives him his blessing, so his Brother Borroughs presently after
the coming forth of the Antapologie, preaching at Cornhill, was speaking of
some that laid open the infirmities of the Saints, and that raked up Letters,
stories, and all to bring out against the Saints; but of such (says he) I will
say no more, but as Michael the Archangell the Lord rebuke thee; which in the
carriage of the passage, and way of expression was so evidently against me,
that (I believe) of godly Ministers and Christians twenty told me of it; and
they said many who heard him, spoke of it, and said it was a poor thing of
Master Buroughs to speak so in the Pulpit, he should do well to answer the
Book. Now as for the prayers of the Sectaries against me and their curses, I
would have them know, that though I am sorry for them they should do so, yet I
fear not their curses, but well understand that when they curse, God will
bless, and that the curse causeless shall not come, Prove. 26. 2. besides I
know, in this very thing I have more with me then against me, and in many
Countries of this Kingdom both North and West, I am assured from godly
Ministers and Citizens, who have been with me, that I am in an especial manner
prayed for, and many thanks given to God in my behalf for enabling me, and
stirring me up to this work against the Sectaries.

There is a godly Minister of Cheshire who was lately in London; that related
with a great deal of confidence this following story as a most certain truth
known to many of that County, that this last Summer the Church of Duckingfield
(of which Master Eaton and Master Tailor are Pastor and Teacher) being met in
their Chapel to the performing of their worship and service, as Master Eaton
was preaching, there was heard the perfect sound as of a man beating a martch
on a drum, and it was heard as coming into the Chapel, and then as going up
all along the I Will through the people, and so about the Chapel, but nothing
seen, which Master Eaton preaching and the people that sat in the several
parts of the Chapel heard, insomuch that it terrified Master Eaton and the
people, caused him to give over preaching, and fall to praying, but the martch
still beating, they broke up their exercise for that time, and were glad to be
gone.

Now I conceive this passage of Providence toward these Independents speaks
thus much to them and to the Kingdom, especially Animadvers.
considering this Church of Duckingfield is the first Independent Church
visible and framed that was set up in England, being before the Apologists came
from Holland, and so before their setting up their Churches here in London,
First, that the Independents are for wars, desirous of wars, to maintain and
uphold their Independent Churches by them; and thirst for a new war with
Scotland, as much as ever an unhappy boy did to be at fisty-cuffes with another
boy; and for that end provoke the Scots all kind of ways, study all ways to
make a breach with them. Secondly, The wars which they would have, and
occasion, shall prove their ruin, the means to overthrow all their
Conventicles, separated Meetings; they are greedy of a war to establish them,
but as now the beating of ^his Drum drove them out of the Chapel, broke up
their Meeting, so shall the war which they have sought, overthrow all their
Opinions, Meetings, and cast them out of England for ever; as the Bishops and
their faction were greedy for a war against the Scots, to support their
greatness and Ceremonies, and have been active to promote this second war,
which has proved their ruin; so the Independents plotting, and driving on for
war shall break their necks, and break up their Conventicles, and cause the
Kingdoms to cast them out as an abominable branch; and the issue of all the
wars and blood they thirst after, shall be, that some of their Heads shall be
served by the Presbyterians, viz. put into that blood which themselves have
caused, perish by it, and that most justly, as King Cyrus was by Tomyris that
Scythian Queen, putting his head into a tub of blood, and saying, Satia te
sanguine quem sitisti, nam insatiabilis fuisti; and therefore let the
Independents and Sectaries take heed of a new war, and make use of this
warning given them at one of their Meetings.

Some Passages taken out of a Letter sent from a godly Minister in
Northamptonshire to a Friend of his in London.
Good Cousin,
I Pray read, seal, and at your best leisure deliver the The enclosed is the
first Letter in this Third Part of Gangraena, page 21. a copy of which was
given me from the Citizen in whose Letter it was enclosed, and not from the
Gentleman to whom it was written.
enclosed; wherein I have related some particulars very soul, though there be
many more, and more blasphemous: Its a wonder amongst us that other Soldiers
cannot be found, but such as fight against the soul, doing more hurt that way,
then they can do good any other way. If the Parliament take not a course with
them, they shall certainly become our future rods, or God himself will
overthrow them in our sight; take a note of the particulars and keep them, for
I have not time.

September. 24. 1646.
Some Passages extracted out of two Letters sent from a godly Christian in
Lancashire to Friends in London.
LOving Friend, God has safely returned our Friends in health; whatever our
Petition produces, yet we have this comfort, that we have done our duty. The
Sectaries here have got a Petition on foot for a Toleration, and hope they
shall not wait so long at the Commons door for an Answer, as ours has done.

Sir,
SInce our Petition was received into the House of Commons, (where it produced
an Ordinance for the settling of the Presbyterian Government in this County) the
Sectaries have promoted an Anti-Petition here and in C^eshire; they style it
The Petition of the peaceable and well-affected that desire liberty of
conscience as was promised by the House of Commons in their Declaration they
ordered formerly to be read in Churches: They have inserted some other
plausible things into it, the better to draw on hands, promote it with great
secrecy, show it to none but to such as beforehand they have some assurance
will sign it: It was framed and set on foot by the Members of the Church of
Duckingfeild, but I am confident they admit to sign it Seekers, Soul-sleepers,
Anabaptists: Rigid Brownists, etc. We hear of one Minister in our County who
has signed it that is a common Drunkard, and two or three young Scholars, who
have begun to preach without Ordination, one of which affirmed to me and some
others, that he would defend Independency with his blood. Master Tailor and
Master Eaton are wonderful active both in Cheshire and Lancashire, they much
improve -- who is become agreat zealot for them, has threatened some of the
godly Ministers that live near him to make their places too hot for them for
denying their Pulpits to Master Eaton: We have through the mercy of God a
learned and active Clergy in our County, sound and Orthodox, who I hope will be
assisted with many able and active men in their work of Government; but
Cheshire is miserably become a prey to the Sectaries, they have set up already
there two or three Independent Churches, and are setting up two or three more;
-- has so far encouraged them, discouraged and born down the Orthodox well
affected Gentlemen and Ministers, that they could never to this day get any
thing done against them. We are as sensible (I believe) as any County in
England, and fear the carriage of things is such as will make the Kingdom
weary. Men speak here freely, and say that now men may safelier blaspheme all
the Persons in the Trinity, then speak many things that are true of some
Members of Parliament. The suffering the Church of God to be rent and torn in
pieces by Heresies, Seismes and Divisions, the retarding the releif for poor
bleeding Ireland, the greiving and sadding the hearts of our Brethren of
Scotland, with many other things, makes us fear that the Lord has a further
controversy with us.

October. 10. 1646.

A Minister told me lately he having a Living given him, or fair for it, some
Sectaries, Independents and Antinomians desiring to bring in a Sectary and an
Antinomian, thereupon procured to petition the Patron for the Sectary and
against this honest Minister, and to effect their business the more probably
they set down to the Petition the names of some Inhabitants who were for the
Orthodox Minister in the behalf of this Sectary, when as they were against his
coming in, and never knew or once imagined their names were subscribed.

A Copy of a Letter written from a godly Minister in Holland to some Reverend
and godly Ministers here in London.
Reverend Brethren,
I Have been sparing in writing unto you, albeit I here have great need of
correspondence in respect I am as it were alone among so many of different
dispositions and nations. I acknowledge the blame in my self, who have not
sought it of you, of whose willingness I am confident. Now a particular
occasion has forced to break off, wherein I desire your resolution. The
Currents that are brought over hither these last two weeks make mention that
the Assembly of Divines are about the penning of the Articles of Faith, and
that when the Article concerning the Trinity was presented unto the The
Parliament may by this see what prejudice some of these Independent weekly
Pamphleters do them, by speaking of their affairs whilst under debate, and
before finished, and how by their expressions in their News Books, the
reformed Churches abroad and many at home come to be greatly offended with the
Parliaments proceedings, as if they denied the Three Persons in the Trinity,
whereas this debate was not upon the Assemblies presenting the Articles of
Religion, but upon an Ordinance to punish wi^h death those who should deny the
Terms expressed in the Ordinance, where among others Person was; but for the
thing whatsoever was said of the word Person, it was Voted at that time.
Parliament, they would not admit of the word Person, because it is a word not
used in the first three hundred years, and was the cause of great division and
troubles in the Christian Churches; This seems very strange unto many here,
seeing the word (...) Heb. 1. 3. was never nor is otherwise translated in the
Latin, French, Dutch, nor our language; neither have any excepted against it
but Antitrinitarians, Arrians, and Socinians and others of that sort. I have
spoken with the Dutch Ministers concerning this, and they admire that the
Parliament seems to have such respect unto those damned Heretics; and the
more that the Orthodox in Poland in their late Declaration would not grant the
name of Brethren in Christianity to the Socinians. One of the Dutch Ministers
of this Town told me, when we were speaking of this purpose, that a Bookseller
said to him, that sundry English Merchants were seeking to buy the works of
Socinus, Ostorodius, Oniedinus, Crellius, and especially Socinus de servatore;
and when the Bookseller answered that they could not have those books in those
Countries, because they are discharged by Ordinance of the General States, the
Merchants said unto him, Nevertheless you may bring them from other Countries,
and we will give you for them what you will; whereupon that Minister when he
told me this, said, The Estate of England is lamentable, for it seems that
Socinianisme waxes there; for this practice, and that excepting at the word,
is too great evidence thereof. I hear also that Master Simons has written
unto his Congregation here very confidently, that Toleration shall be granted,
even with these terms, In spite of them who have enterprised the contrary.
Wherefore, beloved Brethren, I humbly beseech you to let me know the certainty
of this matter, that (if possible) I may give satisfaction unto well-affected
persons, who think this excepting at that word to import no less then a
condemning of, or at least a departing from the Orthodox Confessions of all the
Reformed Churches. If in this or any other particular Occurrents it will please
you to give me intelligence, you may direct your Letters unto R. W. who is a
Skipper, and comes usually betwixt London and this Town; wherein you shall do
good unto many, and especially unto

October. 13. 23. 1646. Your Loving Brother


There is one Andrew Wyke of the County of Suffolk a Mechanic, but turned a
great Preacher and Dipper, who for his Preaching and Dipping being brought
before the Committee of that County, carried himself like Lilburne, Overton,
and other fellow Sectaries, refusing to answer the Chairman any questions, as
whether he had been at the University, saying, I am a free man, and not bound
to answer to any Interrogatory, I will answer to no Interrogatory, either to
accuse my self, or any other; besides he gave reproachful words, reproving the
Committee, as, You may think to speak what you please now, with such other
language. This Wyke, or some other Sectary has printed a Pamphlet, called The
Innocent in Prison complaining; or, A true Relation of the proceedings of the
Committee at Ipswich, the Committee at Bury St. Edmunds in the County of
Suffolk, against one Andrew Wyke a witness of Jesus, in the same County; who
was committed to Prison June 3. 1646. In which Pamphlet the Committee and
diverse Members of it by name are abused, resembling them to the Jews who
condemned Christ, and himself to Christ; and the Committee is exclaimed upon
fearfully page 10.

There is one Katherine Chidly an old Brownist, and her son a young Brownist,
a pragmaticall fellow, who not content with spreading their poison in and about
London, go down into the Country to gather people to them, and among other
places have been this Summer at Bury in Suffolk, to set up and gather a Church
there, where (as I have it from good hands) they have gathered about seven
persons, and kept their Conventicles together; who being one night very late
together about their Church Affairs, a mad woman breaking from her Keeper and
running out of the house she was kept in, happened to light upon the house
where this company was, and stood up in the entry of the house; they being upon
dissolving their meeting, and going to their several homes, as they were going
out, there stood this woman in her smock in the entry speaking never a word,
which when they saw, they ran over one another for fear of this white devil,
some one way, some another, almost frighted out of that little wit they had.
Gaffar Lanseter of Bury (for so he was, unless he has commenced Master by
preaching) whom I have spoken of in the Second Part of Gangraena, was a great
man with Katherine Chidly and her son, and is left Preacher to that company
of Sectaries in their room; and I have great reason to think by the Epistle to
the Reader, that Katherine Chidly and her son made that Book called Lanseters
Lance, because Katherine Chidly and her sons Books (for the mother and the son
made them together, one inditing, and the other writing) are highly magnified,
and the brasen-faced audacious old woman resembled unto Jael; but as for
Lann^ters Lance for my Gangrana, I shall show it to be made not of iron or
steel, in no sort able or useful to lance or enter the Gangraena, but a lance
of brown painted paper, fit for children to play with; and to assure the Reader
of it, I received this last week a Message to this purpose, from one of the
Ministers who gave intelligence about Lanseter, that he was about perfecting
the proofs and particulars about Lanseters business, and I should shortly
hear from him; and within this two days a godly understanding man who was
present at this meeting when Lanseter preached upon Ezra, gave me an account of
the business, of the truth of the whole, and has put me in a way, whereby,
under the hands of persons present at the meeting, I may have it confirmed; and
so among the confutations of some other Pamphlets, I shall insert this of
Lanseters.

There is one John Hall a great Sectary, who has vented many erroneous
Positions in some parts of Barkshire and thereabouts; I had a copy of them from
a Reverend Minister of the Assembly; and in the Second Part of Gangraena in the
Catalogue of Errors, such Errors as he vented, viz. such as were not reckoned
up in the First Part of Gangraena, were there inserted by me, though he was not
named at all in that Book; but now discovering in several Counties more
Sectaries then I did formerly in the First and Second Parts, I have thought
good to name him among many others, that the people of those parts may beware
of him, and shun him as a dangerous man; concerning whom I received a Letter
from a godly Minister in Barkshire, which is as follows.

Sir,
THat I may not be wanting to the Cause of God, or my promise to you, I sent
the last week to speak with Master F. but failed of a full answer, he not being
within; but thus much I received, that Master S. had been there, and that he
had taken a Copy of the Positions, so that if you have any acquaintance with
him he can fully inform you about this matter: He is one of the Synod, a
Reverend and Orthodox Divine. I shall send to Master F. again, and when I
understand more, if I see just cause, you shall hear further from me. The
Teacher of these things is one John Hall, sometimes of Colebrooke, but as I am
informed now resident in or about Henley upon Thames. Thus desiring the Lord
both to direct and prosper your labors in vindicating the Truth of God, and
opposing Heresies, I rest

Yours in the Lord Christ.


A^gust, 24. A godly and understanding young man told me that a Quartermaster
belonging to a Regiment of horse, coming up into a Pulpit to preach, prepared
the Country people for his Sermon, by saying they should not wonder to see a
man in such a habit to preach, for he had a command from the Spirit to preach,
and he was under the command of the Spirit, and must do accordingly,
and told them though they might say he was no Scholar, yet that was no matter,
for the Spirit without learning could enable a man to the work.

A Gentleman of good understanding told me lately before other company, that he
meeting with a Captain of horse belonging to Cromwells Regiment (as it is
commonly called) with whom he rid some miles, and dined also at the Sheafe in
Daintry the last of August, this Captain told him, that the Parliament and
Scots were agreed (that was the news) of delivering up the King to Colonel
Poyns, who was with his forces to convay him as far as Trent, or thereabouts,
and then Cromwells Regiment was to bring him up to London to see him safe
convayed to the Parliament, and if he would not sign the Propositions, then he
said the Parliament would decoll him, and thus they will decoll him, acting
with his hand in putting it to his own neck, in away of cutting off; and this
Captain added further, that he thought it would never be well with this
Kingdom till the King was served so. This man in his discourse speaking of
Presbyteriall Government, said it was a hundred times worse then Episcopal.
This Captain when he came to Daintry, enquiring for his Company where it
quartred, and not hearing suddenly where they were quartered, was much
troubled, miting his hand on his breast, that at such a time as this of going
to fetch up the King, he should be away, and he took care for fresh horses
for his journey Northward to fetch up the King.

This last August, I was informed from a good hand, viz. one who came out of
Northamptonshire, that some of that Regiment called Cromwells Regiment,
quartering in Northamptonshire, would not suffer the Ministers to preach
quietly, but affronted them; among others one Master H. a godly Minister going
to his Cure, one S. a Trooper who quartered in that Town, pleaded that Jesuits
should have their liberty of Conscience as well as other men; and in the
afternoon when this Minister had done preaching, stood up in the open Church,
speaking to the people, pretending as to question some things delivered, but
indeed fell upon venting to the people the doctrine of Universal Grace, that
no man was condemned for any thing but unbeleef; whereupon Master H. spoke to
him, why do you not speak to somewhat which I preached as you pretended? upon
that this Trooper said, I accept against that you preached for saying we might
not question God, but where he has given us a word for such a thing, we must
believe it without questioning him; to whom Master H. replied, if you will
question God, you may well question me. I was told at the same time by one who
came out of Northamtonshire, that one of the Sectarian soldiers laid his hand
on his sword, and said, this sword should never be laid down, nor many
thousands more, whilst there was a Priest left in England.

I have been told it by several that in Northamptonshire, some of the
Sectarian soldiers being in company with a young Scholar, a godly Ministers
son in Northamptonshire, one Master Smith, and venting some of their opinions
he reasoning against them, and belike putting them to nonplus, they wounded
him terribly, so that it was thought he could not live, yea it was feared he
was dead already.

A worthy Member of the House of Commons told me at the latter end of August
last, that Letters were written out of Hampshire from some persons in place
there, to Members of the House of Commons, complaining that the soldiers who
billited there carried themselves so ill, as that if they continued there, they
could not serve them, but must leave the Country; for they infuse such
poisonous opinions against all Government, and persons of Authority, as that
none of us shall be regarded.

August the 12. I was certainly informed from ear witnesses, that a few days
before, two very godly and understanding men well known, had discourse with a
Captain belonging to Colonel Hammonds Regiment, who positively maintained and
affirmed these things to them, speaking them often as his opinion, and the rest
of the Army of his way, That the House of Commons was the Parliament of England
and not only a part of it; That if this House of Commons should give any Order
for them to go fight with the Scots, they would go; That if the House of
Commons should give order to come against the City of London, they would do it;
and he spoke of the City of London with much detestation, saying, he was
persuaded the City of London hated that Army, with other words to that effect;
This Captain asked them, if they heard not of the plot to destroy the Army, to
send part of them into Ireland, to be there cut off (so the sending of forces
into Ireland was interpreted.) This Captain to another honest man, either the
same day, or within a few days maintained the same things in substance, so
that one of them telling a Colonel belonging to the Army what this Captain
had said, that upon an order of the House of Commons, they would as willingly
fight against the City of London and Scots, as ever they did against the
Cavaleers, the Colonel answered readily, it was no such wonder, for he
believed it was the sense of a great many in the Army.

A person of worth who was at the Bath this Summer, told me that he had heard
Master Saltmarsh, and Master* Del preach there before the General, but never
heard them pray for forgivness of sins; and said he was glad he had heard
them, that he might know what manner of men they were.

It has been told me by two or three of the Town of Wantwich in Barkshire,
that at a Town near Wantwich, and in Wantwich a great Market Town, a Sectary
belonging to the Army, preached in the Parish Churches; one of the Texts upon
which he preached was out of the Revelation, where he spoke much of Antichrist,
and that all those were Antichristian who were for childrens Baptism, and that
none could be saved unless they were rebaptized. The man when he had done
preaching at Wantwich, spoke to the people, and desired them to object what
they could against his Sermon, and he would answer them; he did not bid them
come to his chamber to be satisfied as many would, but he was publikly ready to
answer any objections made against what he had preached.

There is a very honest man of Master Whitakers Parish in Bermondseystreet told
me, that one Marshall of that Parish a great Sectary, refusing to pay his
Tyths, according to the Ordinance of Parliament, was questioned, and upon proof
before three Justices of Peace was adjudged to pay it, but not paying for all
this, two godly men, Master W. and he (who told me this story) came to demand
it, or else distraine, whereupon he called these honest men robbers and theifs,
and said the Parliament made an Ordinance to rob men, which being complained of
and proved, this Marshall
was committed. Now when he was committed, Lilburne assisted him in his
business, came to this honest man who related to me the story, to see the
Warrant, by virtue of which they proceeded to distraine; and in fine this
Marshall arrested the Justices of Peace
(who went according to the Ordinance) and the Distrainers, but at last being
brought before the Committee of Examinations, he promised to withdraw his
action, and said, he spoke those words in his passion; and yet since his
promise, has renewed his suite, and the Justices and Distrainers are now
troubled by him.

A godly Minister of this City told me June 12. 1646. that he discoursing with
a Major belonging to the Army about the Government of the Church, he told him
plainly that they were not so much against Presbyteriall Government (though
many thought them so) as against the being tied to any Government at all; for
if the Parliament would set up the Independent Government, and injoyne that
upon them, they should be as much against
that as against Presbyteriall Government: They held liberty of Conscience,
that no man should be bound, or tied to any thing, but every man left free to
hold what they pleased; that was the judgment and true genius of that sort of
men in the Army, called Independents, that in all matters of Religion no man
should be bound, but every one left to follow his own Conscience.

There is a libellous Pamphlet entitled, The Lord Majors farewell from his
Office of Majoraltie, which was sent to him in a Letter by an Anabaptist, one
of the meek and quiet of the earth, as he often calls himself and his fellows
in that Pamphlet, and coming to my Lords hands overnight, next day he heard
that it was in print; the substance of which Pamphlet is to charge my Lord
Major with breach of promise, in not endeavoring to procure of the Parliament,
a public disputation between the Anabaptist^ and the Presbyterians, and for
presenting an unjust Remonstrance to the Parliament, for suppressing both
Anabaptists and Separatists. Now I shall speak something to both these, and
vindicate the truth against this lying Libeller. Secondly, I shall Animadvert
on some passages and expressions in this Pamphlet.

For the first, my Lord Majors breach of promise, upon which he runns out and
descants, builds this inference among
others, That if Master Edwards or Doctor Bastwick had any such blot against
us, doubtless there would be great Volumes of a hundred sheets a piece blazed
throughout the Kingdom to disgrace us, as your breach of promise; I answer
briefly, the building must needs fall, when as the foundation falls; my Lord
Major broke not his promise, but was very careful of it, and mindful of what
you say he promised, namely, to know the pleasure of the Parliament, and to
endeavor the liberty of a public disputation, and my Lord was so
conscientious in it, both in regard of God and in regard of men, that he might
not be upbraided with breach of promise, knowing well what a generation he had
to deal with, that he was never at quiet after his promise was made, till the
House of Commons was moved in the business; and therefore every time when he
^aw Master Recorder, he minded him to move the House, he put a note into his
hands because he should not forget; when he saw him not for some time, he writ
to him to mind him, and was never contented till it was done; and Master
Recorder did take in his time within some weeks after my Lords promise,
watching when he might acquaint the House seasonably, without interrupting
other great public occasions of the Kingdom; and the House of Commons Answer
was, they approved of the wisdom of my Lord Major, in forbidding the
disputation at that time, and that they would not give consent for a
disputation; and for the truth of this, let Master Recorder be asked, and other
Members who were present; and therefore Master Recorder in all places, and to
all who speaks to him about it, clears my Lord Major that he punctually
performed his promise; and if it be any such heinous crime to hinder such a
tumultuous disputation, as that was like to have been, let them lay the blame
upon the House of Commons, if they dare, and not upon the Lord Major. And what
I write in this matter, I speak knowingly, as being assured of the truth of it,
from the mouth of him who should know. But least the Anabaptists should think,
whilst I vindicate the truth against a scandalous reproach cast upon the Lord
Major, I do it out of respects as being glad the Disputation was put off, and
since denied; I here declare my self, that I could wish withal my heart there
were a public Disputation, even in the point of Paedobaptisme and of Dipping,
between some of the Anabaptists, and some of our Ministers; and had I an
interest in the Houses to prevail to obtain it (which I speak not as to
presume of any such power, being so mean and weak a man) it should be one of
the first Petitions I would put up to the Honorable Houses for a public
Disputation, as was at Zurick, namely, that both Houses would give leave to the
Anabaptists to choose for themselves such a number of their ablest men, and the
Assembly leave to choose an equal number for them, and that by Authority of
Parliament public Notaries sworn, might be appointed to write down all, some
Members of both Houses present to see to the Peace kept, and to be Judges of
the fair play and liberty given the Anabaptists, and that there might be
several days of Disputation, leave to the utmost given the Anabaptists to say
what they could, and if upon such fair and free debates it should be found the
Anabaptists to be in the Truth, then the Parliament not only to Tolerate them,
but to Establish and settle their way throughout the whole Kingdom; but if
upon Disputation and debate, the Anabaptists should be found in an Error (as I
am confident they would) that then the Parliament should forbid all Dipping,
and take some severe course with all Dippers, as the Senate of Epist. Zuing.
and Oecolampad. lib. z.
Zurick did after the ten several Disputations allowed the Anabaptists.

For the second particular, my Lord Major is charged with presenting of an
unjust Remonstrance to the Parliament, for suppressing Anabaptists, etc I
answer, my Lord Major presented it not, he went not to Westminster with it,
but some Aldermen and Common counsel men chosen by the Court: The Remonstrance
was the Act of the Court of Common-counsell, and not my Lords Majors alone, nor
my Lord Majors any otherwise, but as a Member of that Honorable Court
concurring with the rest; and then whereas this Libeller calls it an unjust
Remonstrance, it is a most just and equal Remonstrance, as has been fully
proved by Master Bellamie in his Justification and Vindication of the City
Remonstrance, and in that Book entitled the Sectaries Anatomized; and if I
would give liberty to my pen, I could further justify not only the justness
of it, but the necessity of it, and show demonstratively, that it will never be
well with this Kingdom, whilst Sectaries are in places of public trust, and
that the subjects of this Kingdom can never expect justice, nor right, whilst
men of other Religions, then what is established by Law, are in
places of power; and I wonder that the Anabaptists and Sectaries, should be so
offended at that part of the Remonstrance, when as it is their daily practice,
not by fair and just ways (God knows) but by undermining, watching for
iniquity, laying snares for men; yea going against all principles, Military and
Civil, of Honor and of Justice, to put men from places of Trust and Command,
of which there are many remarkable unparalleld instances, and the world in due
time may have a true account of them.

And lastly, whereas it is said, presenting a Remonstrance for procuring License
and Authority, to suppress all such as have good principles and grounds for
their practices; that's most false, for in the same Remonstrance against
Heretics, Blasphemers, Anabaptists, etc. they petition for the settling of
Religion and Church Government, according to the word of God, and the example
of the best Reformed Churches, which Religion, Church Government so built, has
certainly good ground for its practice. For the second, I desire the Reader to
observe a few things upon some of the expressions in this Pamphlet, that he
calls the Anabaptists and Sectaries the meek and quiet of the Land, as Master
Peter's does, the harmless Anabaptists, then which that there are not a more
turbulent unquiet people in the world, made of Saltpeter, let this Book
witness, and the language in it given the chief Magistrate of the City, with
the railing seditious Libells put out daily against the King, House of Lords,
Assembly, yea and the House of Commons too. The Anabaptists of old called
themselves the meek of the Earth, and said, that now the promise must be
fulfilled, the meek shall inherit the Earth, when they by blood, Rapine, cruel
Wars, seized on the possessions of others. Secondly, that these Sectaries will
take things for granted, and thereupon pass desperate censures upon
Magistrates, Ministers, and all, when as there is no such thing but quite
contrary, as going on to aggravate things against my Lord Major, and resemble
him to wicked Ahaz, etc. for breaking his promise, when as he performed it most
punctually and conscientiously, considering himself both as a Christian, and as
a Magistrate, in such an eminent place. Thirdly, that these new Anabaptists, as
well as the old, are guilty of speaking evil of dignities, and bringing
railing accusation in print against Powers, branding the Lord Major with that
brand set by God himself on wicked Ahaz, this is that Lord Major of London,
Thomas Adams by name, etc.

A Citizen a friend of mine having been this last summer in Cheshire, and
diverse other Countries upon his occasions, heard many Malignants say, they
would turn Independents, for then they should not take the Covenant, nor be
forced to any thing, but be at their liberty.

June the 11. I was told by a godly Citizen, and a cordial friend to the
Public, that some of the Independents have said, they will have their way yet,
whatsoever it cost them.

In some of the weekly news-Books, I have observed passages inserted of the
great love and unity in the Army between the soldiers, Presbytery and
Independency making no breach; and in the Perfect Occurrences of the Week,
called the two and twentieth Week, ending the 29. of May, 1646. the Pamphleter
tells us it is very observable to consider the love and unity which is among the
soldiers; Now I asked about that time a Chaplain of the Army, a moderate
Presbyterian, whether it was so, and how it came about, he gave me this answer,
through the great forbearance of the Presbyterians, who suffered them to have
their wills, and crossed them not, took all patiently, and (said he) if the
Presbyterians should not have done so, but stood upon things as the
Independents, it had been impossible but the Army had been broken in
twenty pieces many a time before this, for the Sectaries are of such a proud
high spirit, that if they had not had their wills, there would have been no
peace; and indeed both in Armies, Assembly, City, there has been that
forbearing, yielding on the Presbyterian party, in reference to the public,
that the Independents and Sectaries, if they had been in their place would
never have done, though it had cost the total loss of three Kingdoms. I
believe no age nor story can parallel, all things considered, the Love,
Patience, long-suffering of the Presbyterians, yea the passing by and putting
up so many provocations, and unsufferable abuses as they have done, and that
from a contemptible handful of men in comparison; but that's our comfort, That
the patient expectation of the poor shall not be forgotten for ever, and that
God will save the afflicted people, but will bring down high looks.

I have been assured from diverse good hands, as Citizens and others, that the
greatest thing in the City Remonstrance that the Sectaries are offended at, is
that about places of public trust, they take that most hainously, that
Sectaries should not have places of honor, profit, and power; which clearly
shows to all the world, it is not a bare Toleration of their consciences, and
of enjoying their own personal Estates in the Land that they seek, or which
would content them; but they look for Preferment, Rewards, power to have others
under them; so that it is a Domination, and to be in such a condition that
others may seek to them to be Tolerated, that they aim at; a Toleration and
liberty of conscience contents them not, but a Liberty of Offices, and a power
of great places, both in Military and civil affairs they stand for. Master
Buroughs in the year 1645. both preached and printed, even in that Tractate
where he pleades for a Toleration, That the Magistrate may, to men who differ
from the State, in greater Errors, (at least) deprive them of Mr Rurr.
(...)enicon. page 34.
the benefits and privileges of the State, notwithstanding their pleas of
conscience: and in evils of less moment, put them to some trouble in those
ways of evil, so far as to take off the wantonness of their spirits, and
the neglect of means; some Mr Burroug. (...)enicon. page 36. 37.
trouble may be laid in the way, so that men shall see there is something to
be suffered in that way; and there is no reason why any should be offended at
this; yea Master Buroughs grants one step may be gone further, that in such
things as men by their weakness make themselves less serviceable to the
commonwealth or Church, they may be denied some privileges and benefits that
are granted to others. And of this, Master Buroughs gives instances and
enlarges it. Now certainly if this doctrine were good and true in the year,
1645. before the success of the new Model, and the recruit of the House of
Commons, the doctrine in the City Remonstrance, 1646. cannot be bad nor false,
that would have Anabaptists, Heriticks, and Schismatics kept, and removed from
places of Public trust; If they may be denied privileges and benefits that
are granted to others, and some trouble laid in their way, etc. for their
opinions, then certainly they should not be preferred above others to all
places of public trust, whilst men who conform to the true Religion
established by the State, be kept out, yea turned out of places; And as Master
Buroughs was of this mind, so I and diverse others have heard Mr Tho. Goodwin
ingenuously profess since this Parliament, though the Magistrate should
forbear tender consciences that could not come up to the Rule, yet it was most
equal that the countenance and preferments
in the Magistrates hands, should be bestowed only on those who conformed to
what was established; and therefore said he, we desire only to be suffered to
live, and enjoy the Ordinances, but expect no places nor any of that
maintenance which is in the States disposing; and therefore the Remonstrants in
that branch of their Petition were ^arre from Persecution, Injustice, if Master
Buroughs and Master Goodwin may be believed, and that which they desired most
necessary to take off the wantonness of men's spirits, and the neglect of
means; and in all this, the^'s no more grains of trouble then might help
aginst this wantonness, etc. and the truth of it is these preferments, places
of public trust, etc. have made more Sectaries and Anti-Presbyterians, then
all the Sermons and Books ever preached and printed by the Sectaries and it is
one of the great springs of all our evils, the prime cause of all Injustice,
Oppression, Error, Faction; and things will never go well with the public, nor
the union of both Kingdoms be soundly settled, till Heretics, Blasphemers,
Schismatics,
Seekers, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Libertines, Brownists, and Independents, be
removed from all places of public trust, both Martial and Civil; and it is a
most righteous thing to Petition for it. As the zealous Protestants of this
Kingdom could not expect Justice, protection from Popish Counselors, Judges,
Justices, etc. then in place, and we cried out of it before this Parliament, as
an intolerable griveance and mischief to the good subjects of this Kingdom,
because men but suspected of Popery, or whose Wives were Papists, were in
places of public trust (for by that means Papists were brought off, and such
as were called Puritants, felt their power upon all occasions) no more can the
Orthodox Presbyterians expect right, justice, from Sectarian Counselors,
Justices of Peace, etc. especially in differences between them and
Independents; for all Sectaries look upon cordial Presbyterians with a
greater eye of malignity, jealousy, particular interest then any other sort of
men; and therefore to strengthen their own party, will weaken and discourage
them all they can possibly.

There were some Independents, that dining in June last at the house of a
Presbyterian who married an Independent, were speaking of the Presbyterians,
that generally all of them desired that help might go for Ireland, and that on
the Fast day in June they preached and prayed much for help to relieve Ireland,
and among other Ministers they named one that should pray thus, or to this
effect, That now Oxford was taken, all might go, Lord let them all go: These
Independents said the Presbyterians had some design sure, they were so earnest
for the Army to go to Ireland; but some of the Independents said, they had
something else, or other use for the Army then to go to Ireland.

The Sectaries in the Month of May last raged extremely, and spoke
desperately, so that a Common Council man who had heard many of them speak,
told me he had said to some of them, that they must provide Bedlam for them:
The news of the Kings going to the Scots, the Remonstrance of the City of
London, with some other things that fell out that Month, vexed them terribly;
one Sectary a kind of Gentleman belonging to a Parliament man said in the
hearing of some, that the King, the House of Lords, the City, the Scots, and
the Assembly were joined together, but they had the House of Commons and the
Army; and gave out some such words as if some three or four thousand horse
should billet in the City: This man was had before my Lord Major for these
words, and I being told of it by one who went to my Lord Majors with him, I
also having an opportunity asked my Lord Major of the truth of it, who
remembered there was such a thing.

God grant the King, House of Lords, City, Scots, Assembly be Animadvers.
well joined together, and agreeing; and not only King, Lords, etc. but the
House of Commons also: The Lord send a perfect Peace and Union between the King
and both Houses, and give a good understanding and agreement always between
Parliament, City, Assembly, our Brethren of Scotland. These kind of speeches
of the Commons and the Army put by themselves, as divided from the House of
Lords, City, etc. are words of sedition; but to vindicate the honor of the
House of Commons and the Army from such speeches as these, too frequent in the
mouths of many Sectaries: I can assure the Kingdom from the mouths of many
worthy Members of the House of Commons, and of Commanders in the Army, how much
soever these Sectaries presume upon the House of Commons, calling them in many
Remonstrance of many thousand Citizens, and other Freeborn people of England to
their own House of Commons. An Alarm to the House of Lords.
Pamphlets of late, Their own House of Commons, our House of Commons, and upon
the Army, that they are Independents and for that party, that the greatest
number of Members of that House by far, are no Sectaries, and though some are
crept in among them, Yet the body of the House are neither Independents,
Anabaptists, Antinomians, nor such like; and so in the Army there are more
Presbyterians then Independents, yea if the Army were divided into four parts,
three parts of the four are no Independents, Anabaptists, Antinomians, etc. and
therefore I hope to see the day of King, Lords, Commons, Scots, City of London,
Armies, the body of the Kingdom, all concurring for the setlement of the
Reformed Protestant Religion, and for the extirpating of Heresy, Schism,
Profaneness, and all Doctrine which is not according to godliness.

A Citizen, an able understanding man, related to me and two Citizens within
these few days, that he and a great Independent speaking together about the
King, this Citizen urged that branch of the Covenant, That we have sworn to
defend the Kings Person and Authority, and to maintain His just power and
greatness; the Independent replied presently, what was his just power? suppose
(says this Independent) there were a theife, and you should make a Covenant
with him to maintain his just privileges, what of that? might you not for all
that bring him to punishment? laboring to bring him to the Gallows were his
just privileges, and no breach of Covenant: whereupon said this Citizen, Is
this your interpretation of the Covenant? I would never have taken it whilst
the world stood in that sense; and further said this Citizen, when this
Covenant was made and sworn, what ever you can say against the King, as
raising Wars against the Parliament, and what ever else you imagine, It was
before this Covenant was taken; you knew as much of him before as now; so that
it is strange you should speak so: And then this Citizen reasoned with this
Independent against punishing the King, David was guilty of Murder and
Adultery, and there were then Elders of the people, Princes and Judges in
Israel as well as now, and yet none of them offered to question David upon his
life, or inflict punishment: neither do we find that God by the prophets gave
any such direction to punish David, though by the Law death was due for Murder
to other men: we know God sent the prophet Nathan to reprove him, and to bring
him to repentance for his great sin, but not to stir up the Princes, Judges
and Elders of the people to proceed against him, as they did against
Malefactors.

A Relation and Discovery of the Libertinisme and Atheism, horrible fearful
uncleanness of several kinds, Drunkunnesse, general Looseness and
licentiousness of living, Cosening and Deceiving both of particular persons
and of the State and Kingdom, fearful Lying, Juggling and falsifying of
promises, abominable Pride and boasting in the Arms of flesh, unsufferable
Insolences and horrible misdemeanors of many Sectaries of these times;
particularly their Insolences against the Laws of the Land, the King, the
House of Lords, House of Commons, some particular worthy Members by name of
both Houses, Committees of both Houses, both Houses of Parliament as conjunct
in their Authority and Ordinances, against our Brethren of Scotland, the
Kingdom of Ireland, the City of London, the Assembly, the whole Ministry of
this Kingdom, and all the Reformed Churches, against inferior Magistrates and
Courts, as the Judges, Justices of Peace, Majors of Cities, Committes, and all
sorts of Officers of Justice.
THe Particulars in all these kinds are so many and so infinite, that
particularly to reckon them up and give their story, would fill a great volume,
and I have already in the foregoing part of the Book given some instances in
most of them, and therefore I shall but briefly point at, and give hints only
upon these several heads, referring the Reader for further satisfaction to
many Pamphlets and Books daily printed and openly sold, and to his own
observation of things.

1. The great Libertinisme and Atheism of many Sectaries appears by their
violent and feirce pleading for by word and writing a free Liberty and
Toleration of all kind of Religions and Consciences whatsoever, and that not
only in lesser points of Doctrine, but in the most fundamental Articles of
Faith, yea and of denying the Scriptures, and that there is a God, and by the
pleading for Liberty in such away, and by such mediums, viz. that no man is
infallible and certain in any thing he holds, that it is possible he may be
mistaken, etc. as do necessarily overthrow all Religion whatsoever. There have
been within these few years some scores of Books written wholly for Toleration
and pretended Liberty, and some hundred of Books wherein that is pleaded for,
together with other things, and so far are the Sectaries gone in Libertinisme
* that all true love, piety, Religion, conscience, is placed in a general
allowance of what men's corrupted and defiled consciences a Vide A Pamphlet
ontit. A Parable, p. 4. 12. 16 as also A Prediction of Master Edwards
Conversion.
like, and the greatest sin, wickedness, evil that men can commit or be
capable of, is placed in the using of good means and the power God has given
to hinder and restrain this Liberty. There is a Book called Toleration
justified, printed 1646. asserteth it is not safe to put any bounds to
Toleration, or to restrain in any thing whatsoever, no not in denying the
Scriptures and a Deity. There is a Pamphlet A Demurre to the Bill for
preventing the growth and spreading of Heresy, that came out lately since that
Ordinance against Heresies was brought in to the H. of Commons, that pleads
page 3. with many Libertine Arguments against all punishing of those that
maintain there is no God, as among others with this. We beseech you let not
God and the truth of his being be so excessively disp^raged as not to be judged
sufficient to maintain it against all gainsayers, without the help of any
earthly power to maintain it. Let Turks and those that believe in strange
gods, which are (...) gods, make use of such power and infirm supporters of
their supposed d(...)s; but let the truth of our God, the only God, the
omnipotent God, be judged abundantly able to support it self: it is a tacit
imputation of in(...)s to imagine it has need of our weak and impotent
assistance. There are Queres concerning a printed Paper, entituted, An Ordinane
for the preventing and growing of Heresies, etc. where among many Libertine
questions, the second proclaims it self to be Scepticall and Ath^isticall,
supposing except men make themselves infallible, that the preaching, printing,
and maintaining contrary to these Doctrines That God is, that God is present in
all places, that God is Almighty, that God is eternal, perfectly holy, etc.
may be the sacred truths of God for ought any man knows. There have been and
are daily many strange speeches uttered, wholly tending to Libertinisme and
Atheism: A Reverend godly Minister told me July the fourth 1646. he heard and
Independent say, what if I should worship the Sun or the Moon, as the
Persians did, or that Pewter
Pot standing by, what has any man to do with my conscience? A great Sectary
pleaded in the hearing of persons of worth (from whom I immediately had it) for
a Toleration of Stage Plays, and that the Players might be set up again. I
heard a Sectary plead for a Toleration of Witches, and I urging that argument,
that Witches might say, they in their conscience hold the Devil for their God,
and thereupon worship him; it was answered, that precept against not suffering
Wirches was spoken to the Israelites, not to us; and will you because Witches
deal with a familiar spirit, therefore send them to the Devil by taking away
their lives? Many Sectaries often say, that all the judgments of God upon us,
are, because we will not receive the Government of of Christ, suffer it to be
set up among us, viz. to let every one believe what he will, and serve God
according to his conscience; as also they say, if ever the Magistrates shall
come to use a co(...)cive power in matters of Religion, then this Kingdom will
be utterly destroyed. I might also relate some strange passages out of
speeches spoken not long since by some Independents as Master Sympson in the
Assembly, and elsewhere too, for a Toleration, but I for be are, and wish the
Reader to remember some passages related in foregoing pages of this Book,
especially that in page 175.

2. Many of the Independents and Sectaries of these times are guilty of many
kinds of uncleanness; First, of Incest, of which out of one Country I have
the names of three sent me up, and attested by the hand of a godly Minister,
one who ma(...)ed the mother, and afterward the daughter, (...) this liberty
of consciences; mother marrying his own brothers wife, and the third marrying
his brothers wife: I have been informed also for (...)taine by a Gentleman of
quality in Kent, that a great Sectary in Kent has married his N(...). It has
been related to me also of one in London (...) of the like(...)d; but I may not
enlarge, having exceeded already the number of sheets I intended, and having
yet many things to (...) of. Secondly, of wicked and ungodly matriages, leaving
their own husbands and wives, and taking others to live with them, as Master
Jenney and Mistrisse Attaway; and so that New England Captain who was about
another wife, his wife being living, of which the Reader may read page 94. and
so others of them living wholly from their wives, not coming at them, denying
they have been married to them, or else saying they are unbeleevers, and of the
world, of which I could give stories, as of one M. and in a precedent page of
this Book the Reader may find more; And for ungodly marriages some Sectaries
are guilty of entising children to marry unequally in regard of years, and
without Parents consents, taking advantage of sickness, etc. of which there is
a remarkable story in this book of Mary Abraham a notorious Sectary, page 82,
83, 84, 85. And lately a Widow, an Anabaptist about forty years of age,
entangled and inveagled a youth of about nineteen years of age, and married
him without his father ever knowing or imagining any such thing; This youths
father lives in Swithins parish, and Mr. Knowls the Anabaptist (as it is said)
married them. Thirdly, of^ rapes and forcing young maidens too young for the
company of men, of which I could tell some sad stories of Independents in
New England in this kind, and upon whose daughters; but I forbear out of my
respect to the Parents. Fourthly, of adulteries and fornications, and if I
should here set down all the instances in this kind that I have had from good
hands, and relate the stories at large, I should fill some sheets. There are
diverse of the Dippers and mecanick Preachers of the Sectaries, not only
shroudly suspected for filthiness and uncleanness, but some of them accused
by women, and have been so taken as they could not well deny it. There is a
famous Sectarian Preacher in the Isle of Ely between a Cobbler and a Shoemaker,
who is now accused by many women for tempting them, and soliciting their
chastity, and one woman cries out of him for being naught with her, and (...)
distracted upon it. There is a Fiddler here in London a great preacher, to whom
many women resore, that has been taken in the act, and has in a manner
confessed it. There is one of the first Dippers in England, one of the first
that brought up the trade, of whom I heard a modest and good woman say that had
observed his filthy behavior (he resorting often to her house upon some
acquaintance formerly between her husband and him, though indeed for the wives
sake as she plainly discovered, and so could not endure him) that it was no
wonder he and many such turned Dippers to dip young maids and young
women naked, for it was the fittest trade to serve their turns that could be,
and no question but it was found out and propagated with so much industry as
being fed by lust, that a company of unclean men under the pretense of
Religion, might have thereby fair opportunities to feed their eyes full of
adultery in beholding young women naked, and in handling young women naked,
being about them in dressing and undressing them; and indeed Saint Peter
speaking and prophesying of the Anabaptists, 2 Epist. chap. 2. verse 10, 11,
12. (viz. those who despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, as we see
our Anabaptists do of all Kingly government, and Lordly government, despising
both King and Lords, and being presumptuous and self-willed in it, as is
evident by their sayings and doings) tells us these men are unclean persons,
walk in lusts of uncleanness, have eyes full of adultery that cannot cease
from sin, and that he makes the ground of their beguiling unstable souls,
verse. 14. It Is observed there have been and are a company of lusty young men
between twenty and and thirty years of age
that are Dippers, and their chief commodity they trade in, is in young maidens
and youdg women, and that in the night oft-times, and these fellows living in
idleness, going from Country to Country, being feasted and well fed, and
having converse so much with women in preaching to them alone, and washing
them, what can be expected else but a great deal of filthiness? and thereupon
I have been told it from a godly Minister who came out of those part in
Essex, where Oats has been dipping, that it was spoken of by many, that some
young women who having been married diverse years, and never were with child,
now si^ce their dipping are proved with child. There was a Sectaries wife with
me who showed me several Letters written from Sectaries to other men's wives,
Sectaries, to tempt them from their husbands; she had intercepted the Letters
that she might the better discover her husbands naughtiness, she told me the
names of the women and of the men, and entreated me to move some Parlia. men
that there might be a Committee appointed, and she would produce the Letters,
bring witnesses that should upon ^ath discover such uncleanness and
wickednesses among some Anabaptists and Seekers as could hardly be believed: I
moved a worthy Member of the House of Commons about it, who told me the House
was full of public businesses and would hardly intend to appoint any such
Committee, and if the House should, there would come little of it, for these
Sectaries would find such friends at a Committee, as it should go hard but
they would obstruct it one way or other. There is a famous she Sectary, an
Antinomian, and an Anabaptist that living in ones house here in London, was a
means to turn the woman of the house, and she being converted, did highly
extall this Sectary for her rare gifts and new light to all she conversed
with, but this woman's husband coming out of the Army, this famous Sectary was
naught with him, and they were taken in the act; this is known to many in
London, and some to whom she had ^o commended her, asked her what she thought
now. In Bermondsey Parish there is a Sectary has committed adultery with
another man's wife, and for it he has been before a Justice of Peace, and
could not deny it. There is an Independent Preacher who has lectured in and
about London one of M. Greenhils Church (as it is commonly said) who has carried
himself unchastly toward a young woman having a husband an old man, and
toward a young maiden who was to warm his bed after Preaching, he did things
unseemly, and would have gone further, but the married wife acquainted her
husband, abominating this young Independent, saying, does he think I am such a
one as to be his whore? and the young maiden to resist him burnt his hands with
the warming-Pan to keep him off from her. There are diverse other instances of
their uncleanness and filthiness; but I must reserve them for a fourth part,
and wish the Reader for the present with the^e here related to join other such
relations of the sectaries uncleanness as are mentioned in the former parts
of Gangraena, and in precedent pages of this third part.

3. Many of the Sectaries in these times are given to drink and will fit
tippling all the day; there are diverse Sectarian Troopers faulty in this kind:
I have been told a story of the drunkenness of an Independent Captain in the
Army, and of the complaint against him, and how he was brought off and
continued in his command for all that, but it is too large to relate particulars.
A godly Minister tells me of a special friend of his, that is fallen to be a
drunkard and a sot since turned an Independent. I have been told a story of an
Independent, a member of a famous Independ. Church here in London, that was
taken drunk in the night by the Watch, and carried to the Counter, and next
morning carried before an Alderman. Many other instances there are, with
instances of many drunkards turning Independents and Anabaptists, but I must
pass them by for present.

4. Many Sectaries and Independents are very loose in the general course of
their lives, and take a great deal of liberty, which the Presbyterians dare
not take, neither did they before they turned Independents: many of them make
little of the Lords day, nothing at all of Fast days, nor of Thanksgiving
days, not of the fifth of November; many of them will play at Cards and
Tables, and use liberally other kind of sports and recreations; they will plead
for going to Plays, and thousands of them are careless in all holy duties,
casting of Prayer, singing of Psalms, reading the Scriptures, repeating of
Sermons, instructing their families; yea, many are not ashamed to speak against
them: I have been told for certain there are Sectaries will swear by their
tender
consciences, and all the Sectaries generally take more liberty in brave and
fashionable apparel, in long hair, in jesting and laughing, in loose and idle
discourses, then godly strict Christians use to take, many of them preach
seldomer then before turned Independents, and will have a care they take not
too much pains.

5. Many Sectaries are very guilty in cosening and deceiving both the public
and particular persons: I am persuaded if all that the Sectaries have cozened
the State in, of monyes that they have received and never brought in, of moneys
paid them for such services which they never performed, of monyes paid them for
bad commodities, and not valuable, were known, it would amount to a great mass
of money: I have been told diverse stories from good hand^, of moneys received
in Kent by Sectaries and never brought in to the public but pocketed up, of
some Sectarian Chaplains that have received for pay good sums of money, and
never gave the Regiments to which they belonged a Sermon, or ever looked after
them, of two Sectaries that would have hired a poor man to have sworn falsely
against a woman one Mistress B. by which they hoped to have gotten fifty
pounds, of a great Independent, who mingled with Silver base mettle, of lead,
brass, iron, and so carried it into the Tower in great Ingots to be melted,
and to have money according to the weight of it, and is now in question for it
he being at last found out; but I cannot stand to enlarge any further, and the
Reader may find more instances in this kind in the Appendix of the first part
of Gangraena, and in this third part, page 25. and 26.

6. The Sectaries are guilty of gross lying, slandring, juggling, falsifying
their word and promises, so that a great Book would not contain the
particulars, and I have thoughts to set them forth in a Tractate by themselves:
I could relate at large notorious lies raised by some of them of godly
Ministers of the Assembly and City, of which not the least color or ground
for, as also promises and engagements made by some of them to persons of worth,
Ministers and others, upon their coming in and being chosen for places, which
they have not only not performed, but afterward boldly denied any such
promises, with many things of this kind. I could tell also of propagating and
supporting the credit of the Independent party by many lies told in Pulpits,
written in Letters, and printed on purpose of the great valor and gallantry of
such and such Sectaries in the Army, when as Presbyterian Commanders performed
these very services; and of many Relations Printed of such and such unworthy
things done by Presbyterian forces and Commanders, when no such matter; but I
must for bear particulars, and for present do refer the Reader to Master
Pryns Liar Confounded, to Master Calamics Answer, and Apology against Master
Burton, to Doctor Bastwicks Books written against the Independents, and
particularly his Book written against Lilburne, and his last Book entitled The
utter-routing of the whole Army of the Independents and Sectaries; page 357,
358.

7. The Sectaries are guilty of excessive pride, boasting and trusting in Arms
of flesh, as in that Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax; I do not think that in this
latter age of the world, the great Tuck, the Spaniard, or any other Nation,
have gloried and trusted more in any one Army of theirs, or attributed greater
things to it then the Independents have done to that which they call theirs: O
how strangely have they boasted and trusted in it, as if humane things were not
changeable, as if that Army could conquer all the world, recover the
Palatinate, Ireland, and give Laws to France, Lorraine, Constantinople, etc.
and do whatsoever they pleased: I have been told from an honest and faithful
Commander in the Army, that Master Peter's speaking of the Army, said, they
wanted nothing but more Nations to conquer, and his folly in this kind is
extant in print, of which the Reader may find some Animadversions upon it by me
in the 133, 134. 142. pages of this Book. I might fill a Book in relating the
passages in Discourses, Sermons, and printed Books, spoken in way of boasting
of this Army and of particular persons belonging to it of the Independent way,
calling one Infallible, the Savior of three Kingcomes; a second, the Terrible,
a third, whom God has especially fitted for Sea or Land, one whom foraigne
States would be proud of having such a servant, and so of others; but I will
only point at some expressions in a late Book of Master Burtons, called
Conformities Deformity, wherein the Army is in a sort deified, page 17, 18.
speaking of pressing the Parliament for an Ordinance against Heresies and
Schisms, he speaks what this Ordinance would do against those men who have
prodigally poured their dearest blood, viz. trample upon them, and not suffer
them to breath in their native air, and thereupon runs out in the extolling of
that sort of men in the Army, that by them we yet breath, that they have been
the preservers of the Land, that many glorious victories have made them
admirable to the neighbor Nations, yea to the whole world, and terrible to
their professed enemies and ours; yea, and to pretended friends too, who would
master us at home, were not these masters of the field: God has made them the
great instruments of the preservation and deliverance of our Country and City
from the most desperate bloody and beastiall enemies that ever the earth bred,
or hell hatched. God has vouchsafed to cast great favor and honor upon them,
and as he has crowned them with so much glory, and they have ^ast their
crowns at the feet of the Lamb that sits upon the Throne: So should we come
and first giving all the glory to God, gather up those crowns, and set them
upon the heads of those our Preservers and Deliverers, and put chains about
their necks; so far off should we be from trampling such Pearls under foot, or
casting them out of our Gates and Ports.

8. The Sectaries are guilty of unsufferable Insolences, horrible affronts to
Authority, and of strange outrages, having done those things, that all things
considered* no story of former ages can parallel; and here I have so large a
field that I might write a Book in Folio upon this head, but I will only give a
touch upon the particulars, and refer the Reader for further satisfaction to
their own Books. 1. Some of the Sectaries have spoken and written that against
the Laws of the Land, both Common and Statute, as I believe neither Papists,
nor any English men ever did before them: I have read diverse passages of this
kind, in diverse Pamphlets within these two last years, as in some books written
against Master A help to the right understanding of a Discourse concerning
Independencie, page 2, 3.
Pryn, but above all, Leiutenant Colonel Lilburne in his Just man's
Justification, page 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. and A Remonstrance to their own House
of Commons, page 13. 15. 19. damns the Common Law as coming from the Devil,
and being the great bondage of England, the Norman Yoke, as the Reader may
easily see by these words. That which is the greatest mischeife of all, and the
oppressing bondage of England ever since the Norman Yoke, is this, I must be
tried before you by a Law called the Common Law that I know not, nor I think
no man else, neither do I know where to find it or read it; and how I can in
such a ^as^ be punished by it, I know not: such an unfathomable gul^e have I by
a little search found the Law practices in Westminster Hall to be, that
seriously I think there is neither end nor bottom of them, so many
uncertainties, formalilities, punc^ilios, and that which is worse, all the
en^ries and proceedings in Latin, a Language I understand not, nor one of a
thousand of my native Countrymen, so that when I read the Scripture, it makes
me think that the practices in the Courts at Westminster flow not from God nor
from his Law, nor the Law of Nature and Reason, no nor yet from the
understanding of any righteous, just or honest men, but from the Devil, and
the will of Tyrants. The Kings Writs that summons a Parliament, implying the
establishment of Religion, shows that we remain under the Norman yoke of an
unlawful power from which we ought to free our selves. Ye know the Laws of
this Nation are unworthy a free people, and deserve from first to last to be
considered, and seriously debated, and reduced to an agreement with common
equity and right reason, which ought to be the form and life of every
Government. Magna Charta it self being but a beggarly thing, containing many
marks of intolerable bondage, and the Laws that have been made since by
Parliaments have in very many particulars made our Government much more
oppressive and intolerable. The Conqueror erected a trade of Judges and Lawyers
to sell justice and injustice at his own unconscionable rate, and in what time
he pleased; the corruption whereof is yet upon us, from which we thought you
should have delivered us, we cannot but expect to be delivered from the Norman
bondage, and from all unreasonable Laws made ever since that unhappy conquest;
By which passages it is evident the Sectaries aim at a total change of the Laws
and Customs of this Kingdom. 2. They have spoken and written much against the
King, speaking of him as a Delinquent, terming him the great Delinquent: and
that he should not come in but as a Delinquent; when news has been of
messages and gracious offers from the King, and when his late Letter to the
City was spoken of, they have slighted all, saying we can have them without
him, and what can he do for us? he is a Delinquent. They have taken one of his
titles from him and given it to that unworthy mean man Lilburne, stiling him
Defendor of the Faith; they have taken other of his Titles, as Sovereign, Liege
Lord, Majesty, Kingship, Regality, and given them to the H. of Commons, and to
the common people, making the Universal people to be the King and Creator, and
the King their mere creature, servant and vassal; and as they have taken from
him his Titles, so his power, denying him all Legislative power, and to be one
of the Estates of Parliament, yea they have pleaded for the King to be deposed,
and justice to be done upon him as the grand murderer of England, and not only
that he should be beheaded, but the Kingdom also, viz. this Kingdom deprived
of a King for ever, and Monarchy turned into Democracie. And as they have
endeavored to strip him of all his Titles and power as a King, so to take from
him all privileges as a man and a Christian, speaking against Ministers
praying for him, and that he should be excommunicated from all Christian
society. For proof of which particulars let the Reader read over the late A
Pamphlet so styled by the Sectaries.
Remonstrance of many thousand Citiznes to their own House of Commons, and
among other passages, that in page 6. It is high time we be plain with you: we
are not, nor shall not be so contented that you lie ready
with open Arms to receive the King, and to make him a great and a glorious
King. Have you shook this Nation like an Earthquake to produce no more then
this for us? We do expect according to reason that you should in the first
place declare and set forth King Charles his wickedness open before the world,
and withal to show the intolerable inconveniences of having a Kingly
Government, from the constant evil practices of those of this Nation, and so
to declare King Charles an en(...)my,
and to publish your resolution never to have any more, but to acquit us of so
great a charge and trouble for ever; and to convert the great rev(...)w of the
Crown to the public treasure, to make good the injuries and injustices done
heretofore, and of late by those that have possessed the same; and that we
expected long since at your hands, and until this be done, we shall not think
our selves well dealt withal in this original of all oppressions, to wit,
Kings. The Just man's Justification, page 10. I wish with all my soul the
Parliament would seriously consider upon that Law, Who so sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed, that so wilful murderers might not escape the
hand of Justice, but especially that they would think upon the grand murderer
of England; for by this impartial Law of God there is no exemption of Kings,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, more then of fishermen, etc. The Arrow against all
Tyrants, page 11, 12. Soveraignity challenged by the King is usurpation,
illegitimate and illegal, etc. The power of the King cannot be Legislative,
but only Executive. So Overtons Defiance to the House of Lords: Overtons
Petition and Appeal to the High and mighty States, the Knights and Burgesset
in Parliament Assembled Englands Legal Soveraign^ power: The last warning to
the Inhabitants of London, with diverse such like. 3. The Sectaries have spoken,
written, done much against the House of Peers, the supreme Judicature of this
Kingdom, that House which gives to the Parliaments of England* the
denomination of the Not but that the Commonsa^e a part of the High Court of
Parli. as well as the Lords, and assembled in the High Court of of Parlia. too,
both making one high court of Parliament, only I mention this privilege of a
Court of Record and power of judicial trial by oath against the Sectaries who
so underv^l^e the power of the Lords in their Pamphlets, and ordinary
discourses.
High Court of Parliament, as it is a Court of Record, and having power of
judicial trial by oath, etc. of the greatest subjects of this Kingdom in the
greatest matters, as life, estates, liberty, whose Tribunal and Power has
ever been acknowledged and dreaded in this Kingdom in all times by the
greatest Peers and persons of the Land, and when questioned by them, have
given all high respect and humble submission, as we see that great Favorite the
Earl of Strafford did; yet this Supreme Court has been by word and deed so
used by base unworthy sons of the earth, as the (...)st Court in England, or
p(...)jest Constable never was till these times; and certainly the ages to come
who shall read the History of these times, and the Books of the Sectaries
written this last year against the House of Lords, will wonder at our times,
and inquire what exemplary punishment was done upon them: The facts of some
Sectaries (abetted and pleaded for also by other of their fellows) have been
these. 1. Refusing upon the Summons, Warrants of the House of Peers to appear
before them, and resisting to the utmost, so that the Officers have been
necessitated to drag them and bring them by force, as Overton, who in print is
not ashamed to relate it: (...). When they have been committed and under
custody, refusing to be brought by their Keepers to the House of Peers upon
command of the House, to answer to their charge, as Lilburne did, keeping his
chamber shut, refusing to come forth, and resisting to the utmost, so that glad
to carry him by power to the House of Lords, which relation also Lilburne has
printed. 3. In refusing to answer any questions put them by the House of
Peers. 4. In refusing to kneel at the Bar in token of any submission to the
House, or to be uncovered. 5. In appealing from, and protesting against the
House of Peers, and any power they have over them both by word of mouth and
writing drawn up, and thrown into the House. 6. In stopping their ears in a
contemptuous manner, that they would not hear their charge read. 7. In
reproving, saucy taking up, and reproaching the House of Peers to their faces
in the House. 8. In Petitioning the House of Commons for justice against the
House of Peers, and for reparations of damages, using many reproachful words
of that Right Honorable House even in their Petitions, as is to be seen in
Overtons, John Lilburnes and Elizabeth Lilburnes Petitions. 9. Threatening the
House of Peers what they will do against them if they maintain their power
and honor, and what the house of Commons will do. 10. Stirring up and inciting
the common People also to fall upon them, to pull them down, and overthrow
that House. The Speeches and writings of the Sectaries against the House of
Peers within this last six months or thereabouts, ever since the commitment
of Learner about The last warning to the inhabitants of London, are fearful
and strange (many Pamphlets having been written in that time) tending
apparently to the total overthrow of the House of Peers, and of having any
Lords in this Kingdom, denying them all Legislative and Judicial Power, and
giving it all to the House of Commons, or rather to that Beast of many heads,
the common People, allowing the Commons only so much as they please, and for so
long, making them their mere deputies and servants at will, I shall give the
Reader a few passages out of their Books, and refer for further satisfaction
to the Books themselves. A Pamphlet entitled The Just man in Bonds, writes
thus, page 1. The power of the House of Lords is like a shallow uneven water,
more in noise then substance, no natural issues of Laws, but the extub^rances
and mushromes of Prerogative, the wens of Just Government, putting the body of
the people into pain, as well as occasioning deformity, Sons of conquest they
are and usurpation, not of choice and election, intruded upon us by power, not
constituted by consent, not made by the people from whom all power, place, and
office that is just in this Kingdom ought only to arise. A Pamphlet called A
Pearl in a Dunghill, page 3, 4. speaks thus: And why presume ye thus, O ye
Lords? Set forth your merit before the people, and say, For this good it is
that we will reign over you. Remember your selves, or shall we remember ye?
Which of you before this Parliament minded any thing so much as your pleasures?
Plays, Masks, Feastings, Gamings, Dancings? etc. What good have you done
since this Parliament, and since the expulsion of the Popish Lords and Bishops?
where will you begin? It was wont to be said when a thing was spoiled, that the
Bishops foot had been in it; and if the Lords mend not, it will be said of
them, and justly too. For what other have they been but a mere clog to the
House of Commons in all their proceedings? How many necessary things have they
obstructed? How many evil things promoted? What devices have they had of
Prudentialls and Expedients, to delay and pervert what is good, and subtle
policies to introduce things evil? The Pamphlet called An Alarm to the House
of Lords, page 4. speaking of the Lords imprisoning Lilburne, and removing him
from Newgate to the Tower of London, says, Whether to murder him privately
from the peoples knowledge, we cannot tell; but we judge little less: And in
page 5. speaking of the Lords giving order that none must see Lilburne in the
Tower, but they must first given in their names, and the places of their
habitation, uses these words, An act so unreasonable and destructive to us,
that we cannot but take notice of it, and let you know, That we cannot, neither
will we suffer such intolerable affronts at your hands. If timely cautions will
not avail with you, you must expect to be bridled; for we are resolved upon
our natural
Rights and Freedoms, and to be enslaved to none, how Magnificent soever with
rotten Titles of Honor. For do you imagine there is none abroad of his mind,
who though he were dead, and destroyed by you, would prosecute those works and
discoveries of the Peoples Rights, which he has begun? Yes, more then you are
aware of, that can, nay, and are resolved to paint forth your Interest to the
life, if you will not content your selves the sooner with what is your own, and
leave the Commoners to the Commons. The Remonstrance of many thousands to their
own House of Commons, page 6, 7. speaks thus to them: Ye must also deal
better with us concerning the Lords, then you have done: Ye only are chosen by
us the People, and therefore in you only is the power of binding the whole
Nation, by making, altering, or abolishing of Laws: Ye have therefore
prejudiced us,
in acting so, as if ye could not make a Law without both the Royal assent of
the King (so ye are pleased to express your selves) and assent of the Lords;
What is this but to blind our eyes that we should not know where our power is
lodged, nor to whom we apply our selves for the use thereof; but if we want a
Law, we must await till the King and Lords assent? yet ye knowing their assent
to be merely formal, as having no root in the choice of the people, from whom
the power that is just must be derived, do frequently importune their assent,
which implies a most gross absurdity. For where their assent is necessary and
essential, they must be as free as you to assent, or dissent, as their
understanding and consciences shall guide them, and might as justly importune
you as you them. Ye ought in conscience to reduce this case also to a
certainty, and not to waste time, and open your counsels, and be liable to so
many obstructions as ye have been, But to prevail with them (enjoying their
Honors and possessions) to be liable, and stand to be chosen for Knights and
Burgesses of the people, as other the Gentry and Freemen of this Nation do,
which will be an obligation upon them, as having one and the lame interest,
then also they would be distinguished by their virtue and love to the
Commonwealth, whereas now they Act and Vote in our Affairs but as Intruders,
or as thrust upon us by Kings to make good their Interests, which to this day
have been to bring us into a ^lavish condition to their wills. Lilburne in his
F(...)s freedom Vindicated, p. 7, 8, 9. speaks thus, I must be forced to d^nce
at^endance contrary to Law, to answer a Charge without for(...) or fashion in
Law at the Bar of the House of Peers, who know very well, or at least might
know, that I knew as well as any of themselves their power, jurisdiction, and
Prerogative Fountain from whence they spring; and calls the Lords the mere
Creature of the peoples Creature, the King; and the common people the earthly
Lord and Creator of the Lords Creator; and says that in the Honorable House of
Commons alone by right resides the formal and legal supreme power of England.
Overton in his Arrow shot into the Prerogative Bowels of the Arbitrary House of
Lords (as he calls it) shows page 10. how he denied subjection to the Lords,
affirming, that if their Officers had sh^wn a thousand such Warrants to him as
they did, he would have accounted them all illegal, Antimagisteriall and void
in Law, as having no power over Commoners which are not their Peers, and
thereupon stirs up the people to Arm themselves, fortify their houses, to
^eat, wound, and kill their officers that come to fetch them before the Lords,
and then turns his speech to the House of Commons, Why therefore should you of
the Representative body sit still and suffer these Lords thus to devour both
us and our Laws? Be awakned, arise and consider their oppressions and
encroachments, and stop their Lordships in their ambitious careere, for they
do not cease only here, but they soar higher and higher, and now they are
become Arrogators to themselves of the natural soveraignity the Represented
have conveyed and issued to their proper Representors, even challenge to
themselves the title of the supremest Court of judicature in this Land, and in
page 11, 12. Overton says further, Therefore the Sovereign power extending no
further then from the Represented to the Representors, all this kind of
soveraignity challenged by any, whether of King, Lords, or others, is
usurpation, illegitimate and illegal, and none of the Kingdoms or peoples,
neither are the people thereto obliged: Thus seeing the Legislative power is
only from the Represented to the Representors, and cannot possibly further
extend, the power of the King cannot be Legislative, but only Executive, and
he can communicate no more then he has himself, so that his mere
Prerogative creatures cannot have that which their Lord and Creator never had,
has, or can have, namely the Legislative power: Indeed all other Courts might
as well challenge that Prerogative of Soveraignity, yea better then this Court
of Lords. But and if any Court or Courts in this Kingdom should arrogate to
themselves that dignity to be the Supreme Court of Judicatory of the Land, it
would be judged no less then high treason, to wit, for an inferior subordinate
power to advance and exalt it self above the power of the Parliament. The same
Overton in a Pamphlet entitled A Defiance against all Arbitrary usurpations
either of the House of Lords or any other, page 5. says, And though I be in
their Prerogative clutches, and by them unjustly cast into the prison of
Newgate for standing for my own and my Countries rights and freedoms, I care
not who lets them know that I acknowledge non^ other to be the Supreme Court of
Judicature of this Land but the House of Commons, the Knights and Burgesses
assembled in Parliament by the voluntary choice and free election of the people
thereof, with whom and in whose just defense I Will live and die, maugre the
malice of the House of Lords; and in page 18. he in way of de^ision calls the
Lords House the Superlative House, and speaking of the Lords laughing at his
answers, he says of that House such carriage such a Court; For indeed
Comedies, Tragedies, Masks and Plays are more fit for such idle kind of men.
And above all other Demonstrations of the outrageous insolences of the
Sectaries against the House of Peers, let the Reader peruse that Pamphlet
entitled An Anatomy of the Lords tyranny and injustice exercised upon
Lieutenant Colonel Lilburne, which is throughout insolent both for matter and
manner, particularly page 12, 13. Lilburne writes that he being in the painted
Chamber, desired Master Brisco, one of his Keepers, to go and tell the Lords
from him, that seeing they had the impudency and boldness to tread the Laws
and Liberties of England under their feet, and did so contemn and undervalue
the authority of the Honorable House of Commons to whom he had appealed, as yet
to go on in their illegal courses with him, with whom by Law they had nothing
to do, that he must be forced in the highest nature he could to contemn and
despise their proceedings; and therefore was resolved not to come to their Bar
without a forcible compulsion and to come in with his hat on his head, and to
stop his ears when they read his
charge in detestation, and bearing witness against their usurpations and
injustice, page 14, 15. Lilburne writes he thus spoke to the Lords. And my
Lords I tell you to your faces, that by right the House of Commons are your
Judges as well as mine in this case, and I do not doubt but to live to see the
day that they will make you to know whether you will or no, that they are so,
and
of their justice and protection I do not in the least doubt: And therefore my
Lords seeing you have dealt so illegally and tyrannically with me as you have
done; I now bid defiance to your power and malice to do the worst you can. And
therefore my Lords I protest here before the God of Heaven and earth, if you
shall be so unworthy as to persevere in endeavoring the destruction of the
fundamental Laws and Liberties of England, as at present you do, I will
venture my life and blood against you to
oppose you with as much zeal and courage as ever I did any of the Kings
party, that you set us together by the ears with: page 21. Lilburne says all
his catriage and expressions before the House of Lords in the case now betwixt
them to be as justifiable by the Law of this Kingdom, and in the eyes of all
understanding men as for a true and just man to draw his sword, and cut the
theif or rogue that sets upon him upon the highway on purpose to rob
him of his life and goods, and in page 23. he earnestly beseeches the
Honorable Committee to remember the Commoners, and improve all their interest
to punish, or at least effectually to curb the Lords House.

Thus the Sectaries in their Petitions and all their Pamphlets printed,
speaking of the Lords House and of their proceedings, they give such kind of
terms as these, Barbarous, Tyrannical, Arbitrary, Illegal, unjust dealings,
worse then the unjust Statchamber it self, Insolent unheard of usurpations,
intrusions, and many such like. And in diverse Pamphlets now of late the
Parliament being spoken of, is understood only the Commons of England, and they
called the Parliament by way of exclusion of and opposition to the H. of Peers,
and Books written on purpose and dispersed, given freely to stir up the people
to adhere to the Commons as considered apart and distinct in interest, power
from the Lords, with unworthy reflections upon the Lords, as The last warning
to all the Inhabitants of London, p. 7. Mind your own good, and cleave fast to
the House of Commons, let no sorcery or sophistry divide you from them, the
Lords are not to go before the Commons in determining what concerns the
Nations; their large answer to your last City Petition for Church Government,
and suppression of Conventicles insinuates they would allure you from the
Commons; therefore observe them watchfully, and trust them accordingly. So A
word in season to all sorts of wellminded people in this distracted Nation,
with Answers to the City Remonstrance, and diverse other Pamphlets, 4. The
Sectaries have been guilty of and daily are of abusing, contemning, and taking
away the power of the House of Commons given it by the Laws, Constitutions and
Customs of this Kingdom, and though in many Pamphlets (especially this last
year) they cry up the House of Commons, and seem to give them not only their
own power, but the power of the King and House of Lords, making both them
mere ciphers; yet it will be found by many of their principles laid down,
they have destroyed the House of Commons, and do break their Privileges,
speak their pleasure of them both by words and writing as often as they please.
Many Pamphlets and whole Books have been written by Sectaries against the
House of Commons it self, (and not only against Committees or particular
Members) charging the House with tyranny, injustice, oppression, horrible
pride, seeking of particular interests, Arbitrary Governm(...), breaking of
Magna Charta, and going against the Liberties of the subject, resembling them
to the Star Chamber, High Commission Court, to Strafford and Canterbury,
refusing to answer any questions upon the command of the House, scorning to
Petition the Commons either to sue for their favor, or to acknowledge their
justice; and after such favor shown as to release without petitioning, yet
taxing them with dishonesty, and demanding reparations for imprisonment; for
the abundant proof of which I refer the Reader to many Pamphlets written by
Sectaries, as Englands Birthright, The Copy of a Letter from Lieutenant
Colonel Lilburne to a friend, Lilburnes Innocence and truth justified; Englands
lamentable slavery, with other Letters printed about that time: Another word to
the wise, written by M. John Musgrave: A Pamphlet entitled An exact collection
of the Parliaments Remonstrances, Declarations, etc. A Remonstrance of many
thousand Citizens and other free, borne people of England to their own House
of Commons; out of which I shall faithfully transcribe some passages, that the
insolences of the Sectaries against the House of Commons may be observed.
Lilburn in his Letter to his friend writes thus, page 1, 2. That Master Corbit
being in the chair, and telling him he was commanded by the House to demand a
question of him, Lilburn instead of answering him, desired to know the cause of
his commitment, and M. Corbit replying, the House was not bound to declare unto
him the cause of his commitment, thereupon Lilburne answered, Then I have been
a long time mistaken, for had I thought that the Parliament had had no rule but
their own will to have walked by, I should never have drawn my sword for
them; and for my part I knw no difference betwixt tyranny and such proceedings;
therefore I pray read the Petition of Right, and the Act made this present
Parliament that condemned the Star Chamber and High Commission. Page 5. he
writes as follows, Time was when the Parliament had to do with the King, and
had the Bishops, Star Chamber and High Commission to pull down, they would
own me and do me justice, etc. but having served their own turns of me, I
never could have justice from them since, though I think I have been as
faithful a servant to the Commonwealth as any they ever employed; and whereas
Magna Charta says, justice and right we will deny to (...)or we will defer to
none, yet have I waited these four years upon them at great expenses, and
cannot get them to put their own Votes in execution; and if this be according
to Magna Charta, let the world judge. And p. 10. speaking of the H. of Commons
committing him, says, O brave times, and brave justice? and yet for all this,
I say, my
resolution is to stand fast in the liberty and freedom wherewith Magna Charta
and the Petition of Right and several Acts made this present Parliament, as
also diverse late Declarations have made me free, and not to be entangled again
with any yoke of bondage that shall be hung about my neck by any kind of
Tyrant by what name or title soever he be dignified or distinguished.

Master Musgrave a great Separatist (as he shows himself in many passages of
his Book entitled Another word to the wise) writes thus of the House of
Commons. Courteous Reader, thou may very much wonder at the delatory and slow
proceedings of the House of Commons in doing justice and right, from whom the
Commons of England may justly expect more then from any Judicatory, being they
are immediately chosen by them; and to speak properly are no more but their
Stewards and servants, for whose good and benefit all their actions ought to be
extended: Yet by their poceedings daily we see it is in vain to expect justice
from them, so long as they are linked and glued in factions each to
other by their private interests in their great places, which ties all such
amongst them to maintain one another in all their unjust ways, and to
oppress and crush us as much as they are able, all the prosecutors of just and
righteous things, and so to bar and stop justice that it shall have little or
no progress, diverse of them and their creatures, Sons, Brothers, Uncles, and
Kinsmen, and Allies in the sub-Committees, having already committed so much
unjustice that they are undone in their blazed honor and ill-gotten estates,
if justice should run in its native luster and full current, and of necessity
they and their great places would quickly be destroyed. O therefore that the
Freemen of England had but their eyes open to see the mischeife of Members of
the House of Commons (men of their own election and choosing to sit in the
supreme Court of England) to be entangled themselves, or intermeddle with any
other place whatsoever, then that whereunto their Country have chosen them;
what a shame is it to see the mercinary long gown-men of the House of Commons
to run up and down like so many ^ackney Petty-^oggers, from Bar to Bar in
Westminster Hall to plead before inferior Judges? and besides how can such
great practisers choose but mercinarily be engaged to help their clients over a
style, in case that ever they have to do with any of their own Committees?
and besides what is this else but to sell justice for money? Besides, what a
snare is it to the new Judges (who are placed in the room of those that have
bought, sold, and betrayed the lives, liberties, estates of all the free
Deni^ons of England) to see three or four eminent Lawyers, Members of the
House of Commons come before them ^n an unjust cause, when they consider, that
if they should displease them, it partly lies in their power to turn them out
of their places, being they are (as it were) wholly made Judges by the House of
Commons, and nominated by the Lawyers therein: we profes^e seriously that to
pull the gowns over these mercinary men's ears, and for ever to throw them out
of the House of Commons as men unfit to ^it there, or to plead at any Bar in
England is too little a punishment for them, and the same (we conceive) do
they deserve that are Members of the House, and take upon them to sit as Judges
in inferior Courts, by means of which they rob the freemen of England of the
benefit of any appeal in case of injustice, because they have no where to
appeal to but the Parliament, where they sit as Judges in their own cause,
which is a most wicked intolerable and unjust thing in any Judge whatsoever: we
hope shortly that if these men be not ashamed of their evil herein, some
honest and resolute hearted English man will be so bold as publicly to post up
their names as destroyers of
the Kingdom. And as great an evil it is to the Kingdom for Members of the
House of Commons to take upon them to be fingerers and Treasurers of the
public money of the Kingdom, because they are thereby in a condition to fill
their own coffers, and do what wrong they please, or else how comes it to
pass that so many of their children are so richly married of late that were
but mean before? (and no man knows how to call them
to account, unless they deal with them as the Romans sometimes dealt with
their Senators, or, as the Switzers dealt with their Tyrants) for the money is
the Kingdoms, and not the Members of the House of Commons; and the Kingdom
ought in justice, reason, and right, to have a public, punctual, and
particular account of it; and therefore it ought not to be in the hands or
fingers of those that are able to make so great a faction, as are able to
protect them from justice, and an exact account. O that that gallant man Lieut.
General Cromwell (to whom the Kingdom for their preservation under God owes
so much) would a little more deny himself, and cease to be a stalking horse,
and a dangerous president of most dangerous consequence to these wicked
mercinary Pluralists, Non, residentary great place men, for whom an Hospital
of any great consequence cannot fall but they must be Governors of it; nor a
petty place in the petty bag office, but they must get into it: which men, if
the Kingdom would rightly consider it, have just cause to disclaim as none of
their Patrons, but proclaim as their enemies and destroyers, being pecuniary
self-seekers. For so long as Parliament men can get into their hands the riches
and treasures of the Kingdom, and live like Kings and Emperors, and like
lawless men,
none such being of Gods creation, there will never be an end of this
Parliament, which by its everlasting continuance, by the abuses of lawless and
rotten-hearted men, will become the most absolute burden and greatest
oppression that ever was upon the
people; when as in times by past, it used to be their only remedy from their
oppression and oppressors. In a Pamphlet entitled, Yet another word to the
wise, there is a Letter directed To Master John Musgrave, chosen to present the
Countries greivances to the House of Commons, which Letter speaks thus. But the
House of Commons instead of hearing and redressing your greivances, have added
new greivances unto those which formerly you have suffered in their own
quarrel against the common enemy, they have unjustly imprisoned you these last
twelve months, protected Traitors among themselves from the Law, etc. Yet we
shall rather with tears seek their repentance then their persisting in such
courses, seeing they are placed in lawful authority, and have a good Cause,
though they seek too much their own, etc. And as for their lamentable
submission to the Bishops servants the Presbyterian Synodians in establishing
that will worship and Popish maintenance, which now themselves do well know to
be jure diabolico, through these blind guides their Diviners and Southsayers
inability to answer their Queres whereby to prove themselves jure divino,
surely if they will notwithstanding obstinatly persist in such wilful,
dangerous, and unwarrantable courses, they will doubtless show themselves to
be fighters against God, his truth and people to their own destruction without
speedy conversion. In a Pamphlet entitled Liberty against Slavery, there is a
Letter written by a Sectary called An e^cellent Letter, written by a prisoner
to a worthy Member of the House of Commons, where are these passages: O, where
is justice? may not these royal plunderers as well justify all their
Robberies and Depraedations, as either our House of Commons or the House of
Peers these
kinds of imprisonments and commitments? Nay, is it not the greatest injustice
when done under the color of justice. Sir, I assure you, it were less
grievous unto us to die at once then to be thus inslaved and fami^hed in your
cruel prison houses, where we are exposed to all misery, contempt, obloquie
and scorn of the worst men, and thereby the hearts of our wives and aged
Parents broken with grief. Sir, be pleased to consider how by these and the
like doings the affections of many thousands of people is estranged from you,
who have formerly adventured all to uphold you in your authorities; and if this
course be continued, we shall not, we cannot think and say less then that the
Parliament (and not the Prerogative) makes us a bondage and miserable people.
And some already do not spare to say that the Parliament is now become the
burden of the Kingdom. You were
entrusted by the people for their good, and not for the continuation of their
thraldom; let us then have justice, which without showing your selves to be
most unjust men, you cannot any longer deny us. The Pamphlet entitled Englands
Birthright, page 33. speaking of the Commons in Parliament, says, By which
manifest abusing, negligent, and not true using the Laws, oppressions,
mischeifes, greivances, are no less (if not far more) increased then they were
before the Parliament began; and many times by the powerful interest of a
faction in the Parliament to save some
one, two or three of their Members undeserving credits, they so violate the
known, unrepealed and declared Law of the Land, yea and their own Votes,
Ordinances, Declarations and Protestations, as if they had never made them: I
say, all these things considered, ought not the free men of England, who have
labored in these destroying times both to preserve the Parliament and their
own native freedoms and birthrights, not only to choose new Members where
they are wanting once every year, but also to renew and inquire once a year
after the behavior and carriage of those they have chosen. Lilburne in that
Pamphlet of his called Innocence and Truth justified, page 75. speak^ thus of
the House of Commons* But it may be you will say the House of Commons is not at
leisure by reason of public; I answer, less then an hours time will serve my
turn in this particular, and it is very strange in 5. years space so much time
cannot be found from the public to transmit my business; sure I am they can
find time enough to settle great and rich plac^ upon some of themselves, and to
enjoy them for all their own Ordinances to the contrary; yea, and I know some
of them has plurality of places, and I say the thing I desire of them is more
justly my due then any of their great places are theirs, and therefore I hope
they have no true cause to be angry with me for craving justice at their hands;
And page 37. I am absolutely of this mind, that neither a Committee of the
House of Commons, nor the whole House of Commons together can justly imprison
me, or any other contrary to a Law which at present there is not some Ordinance
made both by them and the Peers public at present to overthrow it. But I have
several times been imprisoned by the Committees, and by Vote of the House of
Commons it self contrary to a known Law made this present
Parliament by themselves, against which there is at present no Ordinance
published and declared by them and the Peers for the Cognizance of: Ergo, I
say they are tied in justice according to tenor of this Law, to give me
reparations against those persons that were chief instruments either in
Committees, or in the House of Commons it self, to Vote and take away my
Liberty from me, contrary to this Law, and for my part I do accordingly expect
my reparations for my late causeless molestations and
imprisonments. A pamphlet entitled A Remonstance to their own House of
Commons, page 11. speaks thus to the Honorable Commons. For we must deal
plainly with you, ye have long time acted more like the House of Peers then the
House of Commons: we can scarcely approach your door with a request or motion,
though by way of Petition, but ye hold long debates, whether we break not your
Privileges: The King or the Lords pretended Prerogatives never made a greater
noise, nor was made more dreadful then the name of Privilege of the House of
Commons. Your Members in all Impositions must not be taxed in the places where
they live like other men: Your servants have their privileges too: To accuse
or prosecute any of you is become dangerous to the prosecutors. ^e have
imprisonments as frequently, for either witnesses or prosecutors, as ever the
Star Chamber had; and ye are furnished with new devised arguments to prove,
that ye only may justly do those gross injustices
which the Star chamber, High Commission, and Council board might not do, Ye
now frequently commit men's persons to prison without showing cause: Ye examine
men upon interrogatories and questions against themselves, and imprison them
for refusing to answer: Ye have entertained to be your Committees servants,
those very prowling Va^le^s that were employed by those un just Courts, who
took pleasure to torment honest conscionable people, yea, vex and molest
honest men for matters of Religion and differences with you and your Synod in
judgment, and take upon you to determine of Doctrine and Discipline, approving
this, and rep(...)thing that, just like unto former
ignorant politic and superstitious Parliaments and (...)cations. So page 17.
Truly it is a sad thing, but too true, a plain quiet minded man in any place in
England is just like a harmless sheep in a thicke^, can hardly move or sti^
but he shall be stretched and lose his wool: such Committees have ye made in
all Cities and Countries, and none are so ill used as honest godly men. Ye^
have now ^are full 5. years, which is 4. years longer then we intended, for we
could choose you but for (at most) one year; and now we wish ye would publish to
all the world the good that you have done for us, the liberty you have brought
us unto, etc. And if y^ believe there is a God, ye must believe it, and if ye
do believe it, consider the way (...)ye have (...)d, and truly repent, show it
by w(...)ing contrary to what ye have done, or purposed to do, and let us
quickly and speedily (...) thereof; for God is a God that takes v^nge(...),
and will not suffer you to go on to your rui(...).

And (...) in these and (...) other printed passages, the Sectories (...) their
in sol(...) against the House of Commons, so they declare their insol(...) in
several other particulars, as

First, in going with a high hand against Votes passed in that House; for
instance, when a passage in a Letter sent (...) the House of Commons after
Naz^by fight about liberty of conscience, was upon debate Voted and Ordered by
the House to be left out, and was not in the Copies printed by co(...)d of the
House; the Sectaries presently printed that passage, and besides bare printing
it, did it with a blaming of them who lest it out in the Letters printed, and
being printed it was set up upon Church doors to make it more public, viz.
the Churches of greatest resort of people, as at Stepny at the time of Master
Buroughs preaching, and printed in a sheet with some motives to the
Presbyterians for liberty of conscience at the end of it, as a passage in such
a Letter written by such a man (whose name I forbear printing,)

Secondly, in scoffing at and writing against the privileges of Members of the
House of Commons, and declaring themselves against those provisoes of
exemptions made of Members in the House of Commons upon any Ordinances, as that
of Accounts, etc. declaring, they are as free as any Members of that House, and
that they ought not to be in bondage to any Law o^ Ordinance that they will not
stand to, declaring against theirs and their servants freedom from arests,
suits, etc. diverse scoffing passages to which purpose the Reader may ^inde in
Lilbur^s innocence and truth justified, and other Pamphlets above named.

Thirdly in taking notice of publicly, and publishing in pri^t matters in the
House under debate and deliberation there, before agreed on and resolved, yea
and speaking their pleasure of such things, and branding the Members who have
brought in, or spoken to such things, of which there are many instances, as in
the Ordinance for the preventing of the growing and spreading of Heresies,
Blasphemies, brought into the House of Commons, they printed it, they made
Observations* Animadversions, Queres, Invectives against it, spoke against
those worthy Members by name who presented it, and all when it was but newly
under debate; for proof of all which particulars let the Reader look upon
these, following Pamphlets: S(...)e mo^^s^ and ^umble Queres concerning a
printed paper entitled An Ordinance presented to the Honorable House of
Commons, for the preventing of the growing of Heresies: A D(...) to the Bill
for preventing the growth and spreading of Heresies. Some brief Observations
upon the foregoing Ordinance.

Master Burtons Conformities Deformity, Page 17. Overtons. Arrow against all
Tyrants, page 12. 13, 14. of which Ordinance yet but under debate in that House
this Overton writes, That by the powerful agitation of Master Taet and Master
Bacon, two Members of the House, a most Romish Inquisition Ordinance had
obtained admission into the House, there to be twice read, and to be referred
to a Committee, which is of such a nature, if it should be but confirmed,
enacted and established, as would draw all the innocent blood of the Saints,
from righteous Abel unto this present upon this Nation, and fill the Land with
more Martyrdoms, Tyrannies, Cruelties and Oppressio(...), then ever was in the
bloody days of Queen Mary, yea or ever before or since: For I may boldly say,
that the people of this Nation never heard of such a diabolical, murdering,
devouring Ordinance, Order, Edict o^ Law in their Land, as is that. So when the
Assemblies last Petition about Church Government was in the House under debate,
Master Salt(...)arish takes notice of it, prints is, writes against it.

Fourthly, In a contemptuous carriage to the commands of the House of Commons,
in refusing to answer any questions propounded, and instead of answering,
charging the House of Commons with injustice, etc. as is to be seen in a Letter
of Lilburnes to his friend (and diverse other Pamphlets. Yea Lilburne in a Book
lately printed, even since his Appeal from the Lords House was accepted by the
Commons (as himself says) and he so favorably and patiently heard by the
Committee of the House of Commons to consider of the privileges of the
Commoners of England, as appears by a wicked Pamphlet entitled An Anatomy of
the Lord Tyran^y and unjustice exercis^d upon Lieutenans Colonel Lilburne)
brands the House of Commons with injustice, ingratitude, saying page 20. of
Londons liberty in chains discovered, that he could never in his life enjoy
justice from the House of Commons, although (says he) I have wa^ted upon them
therefore this six years, and followed them as close as any man (I think) in
England: and I have been as serviceable to the Commonwealth of England in my
place and condition, as any one man whatsoever that site in that House; though
I have been ungratefully dealt with by them as ever man in England was.

Fifthly, In opposing the power of the House of Commons in meddling with matters
of Religion, making any Laws, Ordinances or Orders in reference to matters of
Church Government. Master John Goodwin first preached against their power in
this kind, because they were chosen by the common people of the Land,
worldlings, profane persons, ignorant, etc. who having no knowledge in
Religion, and so likely to choose such as themselves, were unfit for such a
work: and afterward in print being charged with it by Master Prynne, as proved
against him before the Committee of plundered Ministers, he justifies his
Preaching; of which the Reader may see more in those Answers and Replies that
passed betwixt Mr. Goodwin and Mr. Pryn, and particularly in Mr. Pryns Truth
triumphing over falsehood, Epist. Dedicat. and in the Book page* 106, 107, 108.
The Author of the last warning to all the inhabitants of London, page 5. says,
That the betrusted Commons have not permitted this liberty in policy of every
one worshipping God as they will, but in Justice and upon mature knowledge,
that they neither are, nor can be betrusted to make Laws to rule men in the
practice of Religion. The Sectaries Remonstrance to their own House of Commons
(as they call the Honorable House) page 12, 13. speaking of matters that
concern the worship of God, denis the Commons any power at a^ to conclude the
people in such things, It is not for you to assume a power to control and
force Religion, or to force a way of Church Government upon the people, because
former Parliaments have so done; and affirms the Commons could not have such a
power justly entrusted upon them by the people that trusted them. And what need
any further witness? The House of Commons to their faces in the last (...)ast
Sermon before them, heard
enough by Master Dell a famous Sectary, and the Generals Chaplain, against
their power and authority to meddle in things of this kind.

Fifthly, the Sectaries have written publicly and spoken openly against many
particular Members of both Houses by name, yea against the Honorable Speakers
of both Houses by name, and diverse other prime eminent Members, of note as well
for their estates and ranks out of the Houses, as power in the Houses, calling
by name some of them Traitors, Achan^, accusing them of treason and wilful
betraying of their Countries and Trusts, as the Religious Earl of Manchester,
Sir Henry Vane Senior, Master Barwis; charging others by their several names
with other crimes, as injustice, oppression, protecting of Delinquents, sending
many thousand pounds to the King at Oxford, procuring by their public places
in the House, contrary to the Self-denying Ordinances, private and profitable
places to themselves, pride and loftiness of carriage, breach of promises,
giving out of the Scots that they have a wicked design, tending to the
prejudice of the State. It would fill up many pages to relate all the passages
in Lilburns, Overtons, Master Musgra^es Books, Englands Birthright, and such
like Pamphlets of Sectaries against some of the Peers by name, as th^^ thrice
Noble and Worthy Earl of Essex ^^tely deceased, the Earl of Stamford, Lord
H^^sden, and diverse of the Commons, as Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Master Lilsle,
Master Glyn, Master Blackstone, Master Gorbet, Master Whitaker, Master Allen,
Master T^et, Master B^^on, yea they fall foul upon Sir Henry Van^ the younger,
Master Solicitor, Liev^enant General Cromwell, Sir Henry Mildmay, Master
Holland, etc. and would have them turned out of their places, as being
Nonrefidentiaries, Pluralists, strengthening others in those ways by their
examples, telling them these other places distinct from their Memberships of
Parliament prejudices greatly the Commonwealth, sowes up their lips, makes
them they dare neither speak nor do what they should, and without which it is
hoped they would; but I must not enlarge more on this head, and therefore
refer the Reader to the Books themselves to peruse the particulars at large.

Sixthly, The Sectaries have spoken, written publicly against contested with
the Committees of Parliament, the Committees of each House, both of the House
of Commons and Lords: How Lilburne carried himself to the Committee of
Examinations his pamphlet entitled The copy of a Letter from Li^^t. Col.
Lilburne (...) a Friend shows at large; what Master Musgraves carriage was to
a Committee of the House of Commons (of which Master Li^ts was the Chairman)
himself relates in his pamphlet entitled Another word to the wi^e; and in
that Book he speaks against the proceedings of that Committee, and in that of
all the Committees of the House of Commons, showing his reasons why he declined
that Committee, and the answering of their Interrogatories: Now his words are
as follows, I am blamed because I decline the Committee, how should I expect
any good from them, when they dare not, or will not suffer our cause to be
publicly heard and debated, but do shut their doors
against both our friends, and also against strangers, contrary to Law, yet
suffer they our adversaries whom we accuse to sit with their hats on, as Judges
in the cause, both permitting them, and they taking upon them to examine us.
And how can I assent unto the Committes demands to bring witnesses to be
examined before such a Committee as cannot, or is not authorized to administer
an oath, and so consequently cannot determine or give any judgment for or
against the party accused, for that all matters of fact and causes criminal
are to be tried and determined by the verdict of twelve men upon solemn oaths
and deposition of witnesses* And how can I without incurring the heinous sin
of perjury, submit unto the Arbitrary proceedings and determinations of any
Committee,
being bound by solemn oath and protestation to maintain the Laws and just
liberties of the people; and that the Proceeding, Orders and Results of the
Committees be Arbitrary, and not regulated by the Law, I need no further proof
then that exorbitant and unlimi^ted power they take upon them, and daily
exercise in seazing on free men's goods, and imprisoning their bodies contrary
to Law; for which, if they should, as they ought, pay 500. li. a piece, and
trebble dommages to every party greived; according to the Statute of 17. Carol.
made for the abolishing of the Star Chamber, I believe they would not adventure
so boldly to transgress. Overton in his Pamphlet called A De^^ance against all
Arbitrary usurpations either of the House of Lords or any other, p 14. 13.
declares his contempt^os insolent carriag toward a Committee of the Lords
House, how when he was asked by the Earl of Essex two several times whether
he were a printer or no? he answered that he would not answer any questions or
Interrogatories whatsoever, but would stand to the rights and properties of the
people of this Nation, as also that he asked the Committee some questions,
talked sawcily to them, as to know where or before whom he was, What is a
Committee of Lords the most supreme Court of Judicature in the Land? Gentlemen,
if you be a Committee of Lords, then I appeal* from you.

Seventhly, the Sectaries have carried themselves in word and deed insolently
against the Parliament of England, not only (as I have fully proved) abusing
apart, the House of Lords, the House of the Commons, Commit. of each House, and
diverse particular Members of both Houses by name, but as conjunct in their
Authority Power, and that in both the senses in which the Parliament is taken,
whether as we mean the three Estates in Parliament in their Legislative power,
the King, the Lords, the Commons, or whether the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament making the highest Court to punish other Courts and offenders
according to Laws already made, and having a power to make Ordinances and to
set out rules and directions in emergent occasions of the Kingdom till a Law
can be made. Now in the first acception of Parliament the Sectaries have by
word, writing, and all their proceedings (especially of late,) overthrown
Parliaments, and the fundamental constitution of the three estates, King,
Lords and Commons, and that in denying all Legislative power to the King and
Lords, and of three Estates, leaving and making but one, cutting off both King
and Lords from their unquestionable legal power according to the Laws and
fundamental constitution of the Government of this Kingdom; yea indeed
destroying all the three estates, taking away all the power and authority from
the King, Lords, and Commons, and placing it in the universal people, giving
them power to do what they will, and as often as they will, as being the
Creator of all, and making the King, Lords, and Commons their mere creatures,
to be disposed of as they please; and as the Sectaries are against the power of
the three Estates in Parlia. to make new Laws, giving this Legislative power
only to the Commons, and that to at the discretion of the people, so are they
against the Laws and Acts already made by King, Lords, and Commons assembled
in Parliament, having inveighed against all Laws from first to last both
Common and Statute, yea against Magna Charta it self, calling it a poor and
beggarly thing, below a Freeman, etc. of the proofs of which particulars,
though the Sectaries Books are full, I shall only name one place in the
Remonstrance of the Sectaries to their own House of Commons, page 15. where
they speak thus to the Commons: Ye know the Laws of this Nation are unworthy
of a free people, and deserve from first to last to be considered, and
seriously debated and reduced to an agreement with common equity and right
reason, Magna Charta it self is but a beggarly thing, containing many marks of
intolerable bondage, and the Laws that have been made since by Parliaments
have in very many particulars made our Government much more oppressive and
intolerable; and in all their Books they speak against the known positive
Laws of the Land, and cry out for Laws according to right reason, and for
natural primitive rights, the just rights and prerogative of mankind, which as
they are the sons of Adam, from him they have legitimatly derived; of which
they make themselves the sole Judges, for otherwise our Ancestors who first
founded this government and Laws, and the Parliaments ever since in all ages
being rational men, have judged the present form of Government and the Laws
to be most agreeable to Right Reason and Equity for this Nation, and
accordingly have confirmed and rati^ied them so many times. Now if this
insolent outrageous carriage of many Sectaries be well considered, it will be
found Treason in the highest form, not only against the King but the Kingdom
too, as my Lord Cook spoke in the case of the Gunpouder Traitors, they having
plotted, endeavored, written many Books, done many actions to overthrow the
fundamental constitution and laws of this Kingdom, and that not by blowing
up one Parliament,
but by their gunpowder spirits laboring to destroy all Parliaments in their
constitution of three Estates for ever; and if Strafford and Canterbury for
endeavoring to subvert the* fundamental laws of this Kingdom (though they
professed ignorance in many things, and for what they did pleaded the command
of the King, and carried themselves with all du^ifull submission to the
Parliament, not to their faces, and in the time of a Parliament endeavoring to
overthrow Parliaments and Laws, and confronting them) were yet charged and
suffered death; how many deaths has Lilburne, Overton, and the rest of their
fellows deserved,
who have with so much violence sought the overthrow of the three Estates and
the Laws of the Kingdom, and in the stead of the Fundamental Government
Laws and Constitution of this Kingdom to set up an Utopian Anarchie of the
promiscuous multitude, and the ^usts and uncertain fancies of weak people for
Laws and Rules; and if these audacious men and their daring books shall escape
without exemplary punishment; and instead thereof, be countenanced and set
free, I do as a Minister pronounce that the plague of God will fall upon the
heads of those who are the cause of it.

And in the second acception of the Parlia. for what has been done by the
joint power of both Houses in their Ordinances and commands, yea the power
which they claim, and is expressed in the Writs by which they make such
Ordinances and command obedience to them, both the Authority and the Ordinances
following from that Authority are denied and reproached all kind of ways by
the Sectaries; and here I have so large a field to walk in that I might make a
fourth part of Gangraena in laying open the particulars of this kind, but I
will only speak a few things: In the general, the Authority of both Houses of
Parliament in matters of Religion and all Ordinances whatsoever tending that
way, have been all viol^^ed with a high hand and trampled under foot with
scorn and detestation openly declared against in the strangest manner that
ever was in any age.

Now for the Sectaries opposing the Parliaments Authority to establish
Church Government, and to set up the true Religion, I will among many quote
only three: First, Collyer a Master Sectary, in his Queres p. 24. answering
that question, what power, etc. says, they have none at all; and that it is one
of the first and greatest degrees of Antichristian tyranny, for man to assume
to himself power in spiritual things, vide p. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.
Secondly, Mr. Burton in his Pamphlet entitled Conformities Deformity (it being
the maine scope of his Book) speaks against the power and practice of this
State and present Parliament to enact a Law to bind all to conformity in
Religion, and makes it to be the fear of God raught by the precept of men, to
be hypocrisy, idolatry, to be that which turns men away from the truth, and
so from Christ, page 7. 15. and in page 12, 1^. he writes thus. And therefore
in this time of pretended Reformation (belike the Parliament does but pretend
Reformation, because it sets not up by a Law Independencie and Sectarisme,
Presbyteriall Government, the Di^^ctory, Confession of Faith, Catechism, being
all but pretended Reformation with Master Burton) to erect this great Idol, to
wi^, a power in man to prescribe Laws, and to l^gi(...) commandments for
worship and Church government, and to press them upon every man's conscience:
w(...) is it but with Nebuchadnezzar to erect this golden Image, and with an
immortal Law of the Medes and Persians to bind all men to fall down and
worship it? Or what is it, but with Jeroboam and his Council to set up the
golden Calves with a strict commandment of universa^l conformity? none daring
among all those ten Tribes openly to pro^esse the pure worship of God, saving
the Prophet Elijah, to whom these seven thousand were not known: The
Parliament may do well to take notice that he resembles their settling
Church Government and Religion among us to Nebuchadnezzars erecting his golden
Image, and Jeroboams setting up the golden Calves. Thirdly, the Pamphlet
entitled The tender Conscience religiously affected descanting upon a part of
the Preamble of an Ordinance made by the Lords and Commons concerning
suspension of ignorant and scand alous persons from the Lords Supper, where the
Parliament says never any of Gods servants since the^ foundation of the world
had (...) high and strong engagements beartily and sincerely to endeavor the
complete establishment of purity and unity in the Church of God then we have,
charges the Parliament with speaking of blasphemy, and ask where had the Lords
and Commons this large Commission to middle* in the affairs of King Jesus so
far, etc. 2. For the Sectaries opposing all the Ordinances of Parliament in
matters of Religion and tending to Religion (to say nothing now of Ordinances
in civil m^tters, as the additionall Ordinance of Accounts, Lillurnes
Innocence, and Truth justified, page 69. the Ordinance of Excise, the
Ordinances for Takes spoken against in Englands birthright, page 44, 4^.) it is
so apparent that I can give not only passages out of Books written against all
the Ordinances in that kind, but relate insolent tumultuous practices contrary
unto, and in scorn and contempt of the Ordinances of Parliament. There are
many books and passages in books written against the Ordinance
of Tyths, as that Pamphlet called Ordinance for Tyths Dis(...)ted, Englands
Birthright, A Copy of a Letter written to Master William Pr(...), with diverse
others, wherein they speak both against the thing and the Parliament, calling
Tyths Antichristian, Jewish, Diaboli(...), the root and support of Popery, etc.
charging the Parliament with breach of ^ovenant for making that Ordinance.
There are Sermons preached all the Kingdom over against this Ordinance of
Tyths, that being one of their subjects commonly in all their preachings, and
the Sectaries in places have abused and beaten those who have been gathering
of Tyths, and themselves deny payment, and provoke others not to pay by all the
means they can. A great Sectary in Bermonsey parish being called in question
for non-payment of his Tyths, by virtue of the Ordinance of Parliament, said of
that Ordinance, the Parliament had made an Ordinance to rob men, and they who
executed it
were thieves and robbers. The Ordinance against men's preaching not being
Ordained, how has it been scoffed at in several Pamphlets of the Sectaries,
and how do souldlers and every mechanic, not only disobey it, but put by many
godly Ministers from their Pulpits preaching whether they will or no, causing
many tumults and riots in Churches, yea threatening and laying Ministers by the
heels for publishing it. The Ordinance for the better observation of the
monthly Fast, how has it been and is slighted by the Sectaries, spoken
against as legal, popish, not observed, but things done in contempt of the
Fast? and when civil Officers have questioned people for traveling, and
worldly works on those days, some Sectaries have opposed them in the execution
of their offices, the proof of which particular, and that of committing a
Minister to prison for reading the Ordinance against Lay men's preaching, the
Reader may find it in the Letters sent from the Committee of Exeter to some in
London. The National Covenant taken by both Houses, and appointed by Ordinance
with solemn instructions for all to take it, how fearfully is it scoffed at
and jeared in many Books of the Sectaries, Arraignment of Persecution, etc. and
forced Jesuiticall equivocations and interpretations put upon it by many, as by
Walwyn in A word more to Master Edwards, as by Cretensis in his large Preface
to the Reader before his Anapologesiates Antapologias? The National Covenant
is called a double faced Covenant, the greatest makebate and snare that ever
the Devil, and the Clergy his Agents cast
in among honest men in England in our age: which I dare pawn my head and life
so to prove it to be in a fair and public discourse against the greatest
maintainer thereof in England, Lilburns Londons liberty in chains discovered,
page 42. The Directory established by Ordinance, is in several Books of the
Sectaries spoken much against, resembled to Jeroboams calves, said to have
contradictions to the Canonical Scriptures: Turners Heavenly confidence for
Syons Saints, page 64, 65. scoffed at in a Ballad, called A Prophecy of the
Swin^herds destruction. The Ordinances for the Presbyteriall Government, and
the Government it self in the going to set it up have been preached, written
against, and all manner of ways opposed by the Sectaries. What has been more
familiar and common with the Sectaries in their Pulpits and Books, then to call
the Presbyterian Government Antichristian, a ^lim of Antichrist, Tyrannical,
Lordly, cruel, a worse bondage then under the Prelates, a bondage under
Taskmasters as the Israelites in Egypt, besides many bitter jeares and scoffs
have been made both of the Government and Ordinances, as (...) The Arraignment
of Persecution, Martins Echo, Ordinance for ^y^^s dismounted, The last warning
to all the Inhabitants of London; as also they have made disgraceful pictures
of the Presbytery, one printed and joined to a paper called Several Votes of
tender consciences, another to a Pamphlet called The tender Conscience
religiously affected. But among all the Sectaries Books abusing the Parliaments
Ordinances about Presbyteriall Government, let the Reader take notice of the
Pamphlet called Tender conscience religiously affected, propounding questions
of weighty consequence, in which the Author descants upon the Ordinances of
Parliament, and charges them with speaking blasphemy, and many other crimes,
and the Ordinance for Tyths dismounted, where that Sectary speaking
occasionally of the Ordinance of Parliament for the Lords Supper, says, For
indeed at the first onset it was not policy to rush such a diabolical and
vill^nous invention point blanck upon us, with an It is decreed and ordained by
the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament: But after a more mysterious
manner of Ordination, slily intrude it upon us unawares in the godly and
specious vizor of Rules and Directions, as if our Parliament men ^ad such a
spiritual and holy care ^ver ^s, to give us such wholesome and (...)
directions, (...) indeed under this innocent apparition in the shape of
Lam(...), they are no other then ravening Woolves rending and tearing us in
p(...)ces; again, this Sectary speaking of Parliament men about their
Ordinance, says, But what they are let all the people judge, let them consider
whether there can be the least dram of honesty or Religion in them, or respect
to the liberty of this freeborne Nation therein, seeing they lay upon us a
heavier ^eake then ever was laid upon us in the days of the Bishops? It will
be the greatest thraldom and bondage that ^ver the Kingdom was involved into,
and by this Ordinance of the Supper, I am afraid we shall all go supperlesse to
bed, and speaking of the Classes, Synods, he adds, if we can find no Justice
there we may appeal (for sooth) to our Gods themselves, the Parliament
(life everlasting world without end) of who(...), how may we expect(...) or
justice th(...) that thus before hand w(...) with the stings of Scorpions, and
gri^d us between the devouring jaws of such divilish tyr(...)icall Courts
which will even crush our (...)s in pieces, and squeese out our very marrow and
juice, and (...)ck out our very hearts blood like so many greedy (...)? And as
I have shown how the Presbyteriall Government and Ordinances for it, have been
by word and writing opposed, so I shall give some instances of the Sectaries
insolent actings and workings against it. In London when according to command
of Authority, the Ministers and people met to set up the Government, to choose
Elders in Congregations, some Sectaries came into Churches when they were
^^using, and made a disturbance by objecting openly against the office, a^ at
A^dersga^^, and some other Churches; other Sectaries joined together, hindered
the election, objecting they would not choose Elders till they had chosen
Ministers first, because their Ministers were put in by the Bishops in former
times, or by the Parliament of late without their formal choice; an instance
of the first was at Michael crooked ^ane, where by the means of some Sectaries
the Election was hindered, and is to this day, and things were carried with a
great deal of confusion and tumult; an instance of the second was at Th(...)
Apostles: As some other Churches, of London, where upon the Church doors a
paper was set up to give notice of Elders chosen in such places, and that they
were to be tried at such a time in such a Church and that if any had any thing
to except against them they should bring in their exceptions, these papers were
pu(...) down, and in their place a scandalous paper called several Vo(...) of
(...) consciences, having a disgraceful picture of a Presbyter, having
Antichristian written by him, in the midst of the Pope and Prelate, was set up;
as for instance 27. of July last on the Church door in Clements Eastcheap, the
paper about Elders was taken down, and this paper set up. At Dover in Kent,
when one of the parishes was to choose Elders, the Independents and Sectaries
carriage was extreme insolent, as the Reader may observe by these following
passages written to me in a Letter from a Reverend Minister of that Town.

Now for the day of Electing our Elders, if a State and the Truth were ever
trodden down at once by men, it was in the preparation for that day, and the
practice of it: Before the day some of them went about to persuade the people
to hold their liberties, and not to bring themselves in bondage. They chose our
Elders for us, and persuaded people to accept of them, and being asked by some
whether they thought them fit to be Elders in their Independent Church, they
answered no, nor members neither; they sp^ke evil of our best men, and accused
them of wavering and malice, and when some told that if they should choose such
Elders as they named, people would not be joined with them, they replied, no
matter, they might then come to their Church; and when the day was come and
time to choose our Elders, albeit their own Pastor was preaching in the town
at the same instant, yet some of them came to our choice, and there affirmed
(though not by an open ou^cry) yet by private persuasions to some, that we were
not building the walls of Babal, and went to diverse persous and got them to
forbear giving their voices to Master P. telling them that they knew he would
not take it, by which means we fear he will lose it; to be brief, we know
that they are opposite to order, and if there be not restraint will bring all
to a lawless condition, so thinks

June 29. 1646. Your loving friend and Brother


Eighthly, ^he Independents and Sectaries have spoken, written, and carried
themselves very unworthily toward our Brethren of Scotland; the Sectaries in
the Army* City; Country, and in all places of this Kingdom have at all tables,
and in all Pamphlets and all kind of ways abused and railed against the Scots,
inventing many wicked lies, raising groundless jealousies and fears of them,
and that of their Kingdom and State, their Army, their Commissioners resident
here, their General Assembly, of particular worthy persons by name, and as
they have done thus about this two last years with all industry and subtilty
employing Emissaries, so more especially since the Kings going to the Scottish
Army they have bestirred themselves by their weekly Pamphleters, by many
libellous Pamphlets written on purpose, by many strange and false reports
raised on purpose to incense the Kingdom against them, and to make them odious;
I could fill a great book in setting down all the hard speeches the ungodly
Sectaries have spoken against them in Sermons and other discourses, in
transcribing out of the Sectaries Books all the bitter, scoffing, lying,
railing passages written against them, in relating all strange facts, and
cruel unkind dealings of that party against them; but they are so well known,
and all wise men so well acquainted with them, that I need not much enlarge;
only for the sake of weak ones who live remote, I shall touch upon a few
things, and truly it is the honor of our Brethren of Scotland that the Sectaries
hate them so infinitely; for would they have been false or remiss in the
Covenant, and to their principles, they should have been the great favorites
with them, and might have had what they would; but because they were too
honest, and not to be corrupted by any worldly thing, and they looking upon
them as the great thing that lets and will let, until it be taken out of
the way, therefore they have sought to blast them and destroy them all kind of
ways they could desire. They have therefore labored to possess the people by
word and writing that the Scots are a false, dishonest, selfeseeking People,
all for their own ends, and always were, that they co^ply with the Kings
designs, are firmly his as ever the Cavaliers were, that they will join with
the King against the Parliament, a mercinary people that have got a world of
money and sent it out of the Kingdom in whole barrels full, that have had more
money, and now demand more hundred thousand pounds ^hen all Scotland is worth
if it were to be sold, that they stood for the King to come to London, and to
be disposed of by their advice for nothing else but to get great offices about
him, and places at Court, that they seek nothing but to encroach upon the
rights and liberties of this Nation in several of their demands, and therefore
what true English man can bear it? They have given out of their Armies that
they exercise strange cruelties, robberies, plunderings in the Countries
notwithstanding all their great pay, and yet they have done nothing for it;
what have they done almost this two last years, say the Sectaries? nay some
Sectaries have given out we owe them nothing, they have had more then their pay
comes to. Presently after the news came of the Kings going to the Scottish
Army, there were many jealousies raised and reports given out by the
Independent party, that all the forces of the Kings out of Newark were joined
to the Scots, and gone along with them; that Letters were intercepted going
from the King to Oxford, to wish them to holdout so many days and they should
have releife, that two thousand Irish were come to join with the Scots for the
King against the Parliament, that the Scots had broken the Covenant in
detaining the King, and in not delivering up Ashburnham, with diverse such
fables, and since all along we have by that party some fine stories or other
told of the Scots, as of so many thousands out of France to join with them,
and so many thousand fresh men come out of Scotland into England, and
Informations and Examinations printed of strange things the Scats will do, and
the King has spoken of since he went to them, reports of stories of Robin Hood
and little John, of Cocks and Bulls, plots that would be discovered of the
Scots, and some great Noble men. Now for proof of the Sectaries being guilty in
these particulars, I refer the Reader to diverse of the Sectaries libellous
Pamphlets against the Scots, as Master Burtons Conformities Deformity: A black
cloud in the North, a late Declaration by way of Letters, An unhappy Game at
Scotch and English.
etc. to diverse of the Weekly news Books of late, and particularly to the
Imperfect Diurnall, Immoderate Intelligencer, Imperfect Occurrences, three
sworn servants of the Independents, and to his own remembrance and
observation of things. For conclusion of this, there are none so hated in this
Kingdom by the Sectaries, as our Brethren of Scotland, not the Papists, not the
Prelates, not the Malignants, they exceed the Archbishop of Canterbury, Doctor
Wren, etc. who never spoke with that bitterness against the General Assembly
and Church Government, as some Sectaries have done; for insta^ce, let Master
Burtons Conformities Deformity be perused in what he writes against the
General Assembly and Church Government of Scotland, and it would be thought
rather to be Canterbury redivivus then Master Burton, for whom the Ministers of
Scotland and other godly Christians there put up so many prayers; but their
hatred and malice against the Church and Kingdom of Scotland God will in due
time remember and visit; And their extreme malignity against our Brethren of
Scotland appears principally in four things. 1. Though some of that party have
given great testimony to them of their faithfulness and worth, yet without any
cause of theirs or change in them (the Scots continuing constant and firm to
their first principles, and I challenge all the Sectaries to give but one
instance to the contrary) they have turned Jews against them, and spoken evil
of them all they could. 2. If any one Sectary take the Scots part as seeing
their faithfulness to the public, and so declare it, though yet at the same
time be speaks against the Scots Church Government, Covenant, etc. and come to
be in question and trouble upon some things (though we see Sectaries strangely
brought off of all troubles, notwithstanding all misdemeanors) he is deserted
by his party, may lie and perish in prison; and the reason is given in Another
word to the wise.
print to all the world, if we may believe it, for his complying with the Scots
to drive on some wicked design of theirs, and combining with them, whereas the
same party declares in print the honesty and justice of the Scots for the
redress of the great greivances of his Country, and though strangers to him,
yet upon the goodness of the Cause furthering it with all their power to bring
it to the hearing of the House of Commons; and he professes he neither knows
nor can suppose the Scots to intend any other wicked desig^ but the settling of
the Presbyterian Government among us. 3. In the many bloody speeches diverse of
the Sectarian party have spoken against the Scots, viz. that they would as
willingly fight against the Scots, draw their swords against them as ever
against (...) Cavaliers, that if they had an Order from the Commons to go
against the Scots, they would go as willingly as ever against the Cavaliers;
that it would never be well with us till we had beaten the Scots out of the
Kingdom, that if they would not go out now we had conquered the Kings party, we
would go lead them out, with diverse such speeches. 4. In making it their great
business to corrupt and poison men's minds with false notions and apprehensions
about the Scots as if they were the most per^idious people that ever were, many
stories in this kind might be told, but I will content my self with relating
one, which is most certain, as having it from the mouth of a godly minister
upon whom the experiment was made. There was a great Gentleman of the
Independent party, (I will not say he was a Member of the House of Commons) who
labored to possess a godly Minister (of some note in his Country) against
the Scots, and walked alone with him two hours to represent to him the state
of things, o^^^ring him confidently, and that he should find, that the King
^ad poisoned the Scots, and made them all for him, he had corrupted the Army,
the Scots Commissi(...), the Convention of Estates, yea the general Assembly
it self, and they would be all (...)s much for him as ever the Cavaliers were,
with several other things he labored to pos(...)e him with of the City of
London, the Army. etc. but the best was, the Minister wanted faith to believe
him and laughed secretly that this Gentleman should think to catch old birds
with chafe.

Ni(...)ly, the Sectaries and Independents have spoken and carried themselves
unworthily to the bleeding condition of the Kingdom of Ireland and the
Protest^^ts there, some of them have justified the Irish Rebellion, that they
did it for the liberty of their consciences, and for their Country, and what
had the English to do in their Kingdom, the Irish did no more then what we
would have done ourselves if it had been (...) case, and that they held it not
lawful to go fight against them; others of the Sectaries have reasoned against
sending releif thither, as saying, whom should we relieve to ^e Protestants
there were an unworthy people, that Kingdom had cos^ us more to keep it then
ever we go^ by it, that it was (...) to hazard that Army upon it which was so
faithful, and (...) for much for us, with other words to this purpose; other
Sectaries have laughed at the Presbyterians being so forward in preaching and
praying for releif to be sent over in all have into Ireland. A Gentleman in
public place told me not long since he had heard an Independent say upon
discoursing of the hazard of the loss of Ireland, that it was not a three
penny matter to England, if Ireland and Scotland both were lost, England had no
need of them; several strange speeches have fallen from the Sectaries in
reference to Ireland.

Tenthly, the Independents and Sectaries have spoken, written, and dealt most
unworthily with the City of London; a whole book might be written of all the
calumnies, reproaches, abuses that have been offered the City of London within
this last twelve months, especially about that late excellent Remonstrance; how
has the late Lord Major, the whole Court of Common Council and City
Remonstrance been written, preached, spoken against by the Sectaries of the
Army, City, and Country, giving reproachful names, raising wicked lies upon
them; and for nothing but for petitioning the Parliament for settling the
Government, and declaring themselves for the Covenant against Heretics,
Scismaticks, and Blasphemers? Cretensis, that great Sectary, calls the late Lord
Major of London and the Common Council Brethren in iniquity with me; the
Author of the Pamphlet called the Lord Majors farewell from his Office of
Majoralty, resembles the late Lord Major to wicked Ahaz, saying, the Saints
will say of him in succeeding ages, this is that Lord Major of London Thomas
Adams by name: Lilburne in his Pamphlet entitled Londons Liberty* calls by way
of scoffing the Prerogative Lord Major Adams; A Sectary in the Army called him
rascal. The Common Council and Citizens have been commonly called the Sect
of the Adamites, and in print to in the Pamphlet The just man's justification,
page 16. The Sectaries frequently call the Citizens Preist-riden slaves. They
have in Pulpits been called the great mountain that hinders the liberty of
the people, refined Malignants, and that if ever this Kingdom was brought into
slavery, the City would be the cause of it: some of the Sectaries have said
that the King, the Scots, and the Common Council did drive on one design, it
were too long to reckon up all the abuses offered the City of London and the
Honorable Court of Common Council by some of the weekly Pamphleters, as the
Moderate Intelligencer, Perfect Occurrences, and by some Sectarian soldiers
threatening that they would as willingly come against the City as ever against
the Cavaliers. The City Remonstrance has been branded by them; one Captain
in the Army said the Remonstrance was as devilish a thing as ever was penned by
man. Lilburne in his Londons liberty in chains discovered, page 36. speaking of
the City Remonstrance, calls it that most devilish, wicked, bloody,
unchristian, Papisticall Remonstrance of the Prerogative men of London, etc.
Other Sectaries
have called it that monster with many heads, the ^ifteene headed monster, a
base railing Remonstrance; M. Peter's has spoken his pleasure of it in the
Pulpit, and the Moderate Reply to the City Remonst* with the City Remonstrance
remonstrated, have many naughty passages against the Common Council and City
Remonstrance, as that it was the disturber of the quiet and peace of the Church
and State, etc. but I shall pass them by, and transcribe only one passage out
of M. Burtons Conform. Deform. where in the Epist. Dedicatory to the present
Lord Major, he writes thus, Give me leave tobeseech you, that you would improve
the whole power of your office (among other evils) for the not only
suppressing, but utter obliterating out of all Records of memory or mention,
that late Remonstrance of London, which like the Trojan horse, is stuffed with
such matter, as if the importunity of some might have had its desire, would
unavoidably hale in ruin both to City and Country. Nor does any thing more
clearly demonstrate that spiritual judgment of blindness and hardness of
heart to be upon all those who have their heads and hands in that Remonstrance,
and wilfully persist in the prosecution of it now in cold blood, then the
unnatural hating and hunting after the destruction of those very men as our
mortal enemies, who have with the extrem hazard of their lives been honored
of God to be the preser^ers of them, our City and Country, etc. For the spirit
of that tenhorned beast is now making war with the Lamb, and this spirit
warreth under new colors, not red, but white, whose word is Reformation, and
this under afair color of a Covenant by virtue whereof pretending a just title
to the War, he hopes by the help of the Remonsstrance and the prime Authors
thereof, and their adherents to erect a new bestiall Tyranny over souls,
bodies and estates, under new names and notions.

Elevently, the Sectaries have carried themselves toward the Assembly with the
greatest scorn and reproach that ever any sort of men carried themselves
toward such a company of Ministers learned and godly, and called by a
Parliament to advise with in matters of Religion: O how many books have been
written against them within these two last years or thereabouts, as The
Arraignment of Persecution, Martins Echo, and their fellows. O the railing,
bitter, disgraceful passages, in Li(...)ns Letter to Mr. Pryn, Tender
Conscience religiously affected, and diverse other Pamphlets against the
Assembly, calling them the black-coats in the Synod, D^ivines, good for nothing
but to be burnt, having two horns like a Lamb, but a mouth like a Dragon,
teaching the Parliament to speak blasphemy against those Saints that dwell in
heaven: O how commonly by word of mouth and in writing is the Assembly called
Antichristian, Romish, bloody, the plagues and pests of the Kingdom, Baals
Priests, Diviners, Southsayer^, all manner of evil being spoken of them? A
Ballad has been made of them, having a first and second part, wherein they
are scoffed with the title of Blackbird Divines; the name of the Ballad is A
Prophecy of the S^yn^eards Destruction, to the ^u^^ of the merry Soldier, or
the jov^^ll Ti^ker; this Ballad calls the Assembly Swinheards, says, these
Swineheards are sitting to build old Babels Tower: The Assemby ^^th been
abused all kind of ways, A Pamphlet entitled A Letter of Advice unto the
Ministers assembled at Westminster.
threatened if they give advise to the Parliament against a Toleration of
Independents, they shall be chastised as evil Counselors, disturbers of
Church and State, no less then great Strafford or little Canterbury; all kind
of imputations charged on them, and they made by the Sectaries the cause and
ground of all evil^ that are upon the Kingdom. The l^st warning to the
Inhabitants of London, page 7. says, the Assembly are only to advise the House
of Commons when they requi^r them, and have not dealt fairly to side with the
Scots, or to sway with the City, or to (...)ge the Parliament in the least.

Twelfthly, the Sectaries have carried themselves wickedly and insolently
toward the whole Ministry in this Kingdom, and that both in City and Country,
reproaching them and (...) against them in Pulpits, Presses, and in all places,
threatening them to send them packing to Rome, that they will leave never a
Priest in England, distu^bing them in their own Churches and Pulpits, in
giving them the lie, calling them by disgraceful names, as fool, knave, false
Prophet, Antichrist, Frog in the Revelation, pulling them out of the Pulpits,
keeping them by force from preaching, invading their Pulpits against their
wills, drawing swords against them, assaulting them in their houses with
weapons of war, and driving them from their habitations, and laying their
Churches wast. A large book would not contain all the stories of the Sectaries
misusing the godly Ministers in this kind; I have many instances with the
proofs by me of the Sectaries insolent carriages in these kinds in
Oxfordshire, Glostershire, Summersetshire, Wiltshire, Bedfordshire,
Northamptonshire, Warwickeshire, Lestershire, Devonshire; it would be too much
to particularize all the wicked facts done in this kind by Col. Heuson, Major
Axton, Leiut. Webb, Capt. Paul Hobson, and diverse others, as also to repeat all
the wicked reproachful names given the godly Ministers of the Kingdom in the
printed pamphlets of the Sectaries, as the Devils Agents, The professed ^nemies
of Christ, The sworn enemies of Christ, Persecuting Presbyters, Croaking
Fr^gs, and twenty such names, and worse.

Thirteenthly, the Sectaries have spoken wickedly against all the Reformed
Churches, scoffing at their Synods, Classes, Ordination, etc. Let their books
be looked into, and they will be found to have written more scoffingly and
reproachfully aganst those Churches then ever the Papists or Prelates did; yea,
they have blasphemed those Churches, the eminent servants of God among them,
and the truth of Christ taught in them. What should I speak of the Arraignment
of Persecution and his fellows belching out blasphemies against the reformed
Churches? many other pamphlets besides that sort are extremely faulty, as The
compassionate S(...)ri^^ne, Divine Light, etc. Divine light manifesting Gods
love. page 9. 15.
. The Reformed Churches are ranged by some of the Sectaries with Papists and
Turks, and Calvin that worthy Instrument of Reformation, and one of the Stars
of the first magnitude, is evil spoken of and ^ancked with the Romanists.

Fourteenthly, The Sectaries have inveighed against inferior Magistrates, and
Courts, as Judges, Justices of peace, Majors of Cities, Committees, and all
sorts of Officers of Justice, and have offered several affronts unto these;
and it is no wonder that they who with so high a hand dare affront heaven and
earth, God, his truth, Ministers and Ordinances, the higher powers, and the
supremest Court of Judicature, as I have showed the Sectaries have done, should
not be afraid of speaking against and carrying themselves uncivilly toward
Magistrates in lower places. The Courts of Justice in Westminster Hall, and all
their proceedings have been reviled by Lilburne and other Sectarian pamphlets.
All the Lawyers have been cried down, and reproached in Englands Birthright,
and other pamphlets, some of the Judges have been affronted in their Circuits
at the last Assizes by some Sectaries, as at Hartford and other places. Some
Justices of Peace for executing Ordinances of Parliament upon Sectaries, as
that of Tyths, and Committing upon blasphemies, have been arrested and sued by
Sectaries, as on Southwark ^ide, as also abused and reproached to their faces,
and books written against them for discharge of their office, besides
Constables and Officers who have distrained and served their Warrants, have
been molested and sued; Majors of Cities, Sheriffs, Aldermen have been
branded for arbitrary, tyrannical prerogative Aldermen, Sheriffs, and
miscalled at pleasure, as in Lilburnes late pamphlets, The Lord Majors farewell
to his Maioralty; Committees in the Countries have been affronted by
Sectaries, putting on their hats when brought before them, as in Bedfordshire;
and in one word, all sorts of officers of Justice have one way or other, by
word or deed, been abused by Sectaries, either by disobeying the Warrants they
have brought, or by miscalling them, or by branding them in print, as Lilburn
has done in several pamphlets, several officers, the Sergeant at Arms of the
House of Commons, the Keepers of Newgate, he being more insolent and
clomineering in prison over all kind of officers then his Keepers over him; but
above all, the Sectaries insolences toward that faithful Gentleman Colonel
Francis West, and other officers under him, appears by Lilburns Anatomy of the
injustice of the House of Lords Londons liberty in chains discovered.
Lilburnes late libellous pamphlets, and by the threatening speeches of some
Sectaries coming to see Lilburn in the Tower, who being by the Warders spoken
unto to give their names, and where they dwelt, told them they should answer
the prohibiting of them from going to Leiutenant Colonel Lilburne, and that the
time was at hand, when they would come in
whether the Leiutenant of the Tower would or no. And thus I have given a touch
upon several heads, of the Sectaries tumultuous insolent unsufferable
carriages: but among all their wickednesses and abomiuable courses which may
make them justly abhorred of all good men, and of these Kingdoms, the Reader
may observe these following. 1. That they make it their work and business to
corrupt, destroy, and overthrow all Religion and godliness, to lay all wast,
and to set open a wide gate to all error and licentiousness of living, for the
effecting of which they do not only use all means and ways for a Universal
Toleration of all Heresies, Blasphemies, Atheism, which may happen to arise;
that there being such, they may be tolerated, go unpunished (which Toleration
alone would cause growth of Heresies fast enough, and the ruin of Religion and
godliness) but they plot all ways, and take all courses under heaven that all
Heresies and Errors may grow and increase, that there may be both abundance of
Errors and persons holding them; and therefore they use all their power and
interest to hinder all things which might prevent the growth of Heresies and
Errors, as the settling of Church Government, and peace in Church and
Commonwealth, as the bringing in of Orthodox godly zealous Ministers into
places with the establishing of maintenance upon them, as the publishing of
such Books as might keep men from Errors, having suppressed some Books so,
which have come from New England, as a Tractate against Toleration, etc. And on
the contrary do any thing, though never so unreasonable, though never so much
against their own principles, though never so wicked and abominable, so it
will but advance Errors; hence they suffer many Emissaries to go from Country
to Country, from place to place to broach and vent among people all kinds of
Errors, and that by force of Arms against the will of the Ministers and people,
to invade Churches, Pulpits, to commit tumults, r^ots, break the Kings peace,
affront Ministers, Magistrates in their places; and if any of them be
questioned, troubled, they bring them off by one means and trick or other:
hence the more active any are in spreading Errors, the greater Preachers they
prove, the greater Errors, and stranger Opinions they hold, the more they are
countenanced, the sooner preferred to places of profit, trust, honor; hence the
Sectaries on all occasions, and in all places join and side with the arrantest
Malignants, Papists, loosest and ungodliest men in a Country or Kingdom to
further Errors, and to hinder any means which might probably suppress them;
hence they will go against their own professed avowed principles and Vide A
little book called Independents rasing their own foundation.
raze their own foundations, be mainly isntrumental to bind heavy burdens upon
others, which they account intolerable, wish, joy and be active in the Vide
Vindication of a printed Paper intitu^ed an Ordinance for the preventing the
growth of Heresies.
imposition of that upon their brethren, which themselves, who are for the
imposition of it, yet count unlawful to be submitted to, as in the point of
Commissioners, the imperfect enumeration of scandalous sins, in the laboring
to bring in scandalous and ignorant men to be Elders, and opposing able godly
men in their choice, on purpose to make the Presbyteriall Government odious,
and that people might fall to them, of which I could tell large stories, as at
Dover; hence the Sectaries will raise and invent all kind of lies, go against
all kind of j^stice and right, use all kind of dishonest ways and means
(indeed nothing comes (...)isse) to increase Errors and Heresies, and to stop
all means against them, they will with A^^zi^h go and enquire of B^^lzeb^^ the
God of Ekron for help; and lastly, hence our Sectaries do not only plead for a
Toleration, but plead for the things themselves, have found out many ways to
extenuate, lessen, justify, yea to saint the grossest Errors, worst practices,
and the vildest Heretics: It would fill a great book to reckon up all the
distinctions, excuses, pleas, pretenses, arguments, evasions, apologies found
ou^ and made use of by the Sectaries within this two or three last years
in defense of Heresies and Errors in general, and of the greatest Errors in
particular; as denying the Trinity, the Scriptures, etc. And in defense of
Heretics as being Saints, holy men, men of tender consciences, harmless,
peaceable quiet men: Whoever shall but read Cretensis Answer to my First Part
of Gangraena, his 38. Queres upon the Ordinance for preventing the growth of
Heresies, Walwy^^, Salt(...)arsh^^, Master Burtons, Master B^tchelers
Comm^ndatory Imprimaturs, with diverse other (...)te Pamphlets, must needs say
Errors are small things; and that many men go for Saints and Brethren among
Independents, that there are many better in Hell then they, and we may as well
call Dives Saint Dives, as such Sectaries Saints: All error now is christened
and called Conscience, tender Conscience, Piety, the fear of God, as in these
books Conformities Deformity, The Parable or Consultation about Master Edwards,
Tender Conscience religiously affected the Reader may find, and the vildest
Heretics, Schismatics, Blasphemers, loose ungodly persons are cried up for
Saints, the godly party, honest men; and it is observable, that among all the
Independents and Sectaries, who have written against my Books, as S^ltmarsh,
Gretensis, Walwin, Mr. Buroughs, Mr. Burton, with many
others, not one of them condemned any one Error, or man that I writ against,
but justified all, crying out upon me with great bitterness without any
distinctions at all of opinions or persons, for speaking against the Saints,
the Saints: Some say they know no Errors nor Sects at all, or if there be any,
none so
dangerous as the new sprung up Sect of Presbytery, and the opinion of
compulsion in matters of Religion: Errors in matters of Faith, as in the
Doctrine of the Trinity, the Divinity of Christ, etc. are pleaded for that they
be Errors not against the light of nature, but against Revelation and Faith,
and so more pardonable; that among the Arrians there were many good men, and
that when Errors are according to a man's conscience, and not against
conscience, they are not so dangerous. Paul Best that ^earfull Blasphemer, and
his damnable Heresy against the Trinity has been in my hearing excused,
extenuated, and publicly also thus pleaded for by many Sectaries, that he was
not guilty of blasphemy; that he denied only the tripersonality, not the
Trinity, Athanasiu^ Trinity, no^ the Scripture Trinity, that he denies not the
operation of the Persons, but only the name of the Persons, that he lent his
writing about the Trinity to a friend in private, and he betrayed him, not that
he had published his opinion. The questioning of the Doctrine of the three
Persons has been excused, that the Persons were School notions, the word
Person was not to be found in Scripture, that it came not into the Church till
some hundreds of years after Christ, that so long as men granted the thing,
that there were three, though they held them operations, or virtues, it was not
so material. And as Errors are thus pleaded for, excused by Sectaries, so all
kind of sins and wicked practices are pleaded for to be no sins, or else
made light account of, or the persons protected, and the offenses smothered;
thus some Sectaries plead for Incest to be no sin, the putting away and
forsaking
of husbands and wives to be lawful, and a casting off Antichristian yokes,
the making no conscience of the Christian Sabbath to be a part of Christian
liberty, the casting away of prayer and holy duties to be a coming unto
perfection, that nothing is sin to the regenerate, that they cannot sin;
that such persons committing vild ungodly practices must not be brought to
punishment, nor prosecuted because they are the Saints, and Christ will
not take it well to have his Saints molested; it is most strange to speak of the
fearful bating with, hiding, concealing, justifying, excusing, the shuffling
off uncleanness, drunkennesses, and all kind of wickednesses among the
Sectaries, as by Master Jesse and his company in the case of Mary Abraham, as
by Lams Church in the case of one M. leaving and living from his wife, as in
the case of some Sectaries that have been drunk in the Army, with many such, so
that the Sectaries of our times are in a special manner guilty of the
patronising, protecting, yea and taking pleasure in all kind of Errors and
wickedness, which is an aggravation of sin, and a greater evil then the
holding of such Errors, or committing such facts as is evident by these
Scriptures, Romans 1. 32. not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that
do them, Matthew* 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of bea^en, and Prove. 28. 4. They that forsake the Law, praise the
wicked, but such as keep the Law, contend with them, upon which text I wish the
Reader to look Mr. Cartwright on the Proverbs. 2. That when the King freely
cast himself into the Arms of our Brethren of Scotland in Covenant with us,
and did nor go for Ireland, France, or into Scotland to Montrosse and the
Rebels there, as he might have done (which courses as they might have proved
most sad and dangerous to himself and his posterity, so very pernicious to
these Kingdoms in the continuance of a most destructive civil War, and sad
effects thereof) the Independents and Sectaries were so far from blessing God
for keeping the King from running those ways, and inclining his heart rather to
go to our Brethren in Arms and Covenant with us, that they were much troubled
at it, and some of them have expressed as much, wishing the
King had gone rather to France or Ireland then to the Scots. An Independent
speaking with a Presbyterian of the Kings going to the Scots, the Presbyterian
answered him, what would you have had the King done? Would you have had him
gone to Ireland? the Independent replied, it had been better for us if he had
gone for Ireland then now, though may be not better for himself:
And since the Kings being with the Scots the Sectaries have expressed
themselves as being afraid of nothing more then the Kings yielding to the
Propositions, and a peace thereupon. A great Independent speaking of the
Propositions, said, God forbid the King should sign them; and some speaking of
the Kings refusing the Covenant, an Independent said, Gods blessing of his
heart for refusing of it: and I have been told from good hands, that so(...)e
of the Independent party underhand make use of some instruments
to keep the King off from taking the Covenant, and hint some encouragements to
him if he refuse it, all which shows the abominable wickedness of our
Sectaries, that they would rather have had the King run upon the destruction
of himself and his Kingdoms, then their Independent opinions to be hazarded
by the Kings agreeing with his Kingdoms, and settling of Church and State. 3.
The transcendent wickedness of the Sectaries and Independent party appears by
their evil carriage toward our Brethren of Scotland, by whom as by a special
means under God both the Kingdom and they came in a capacity to be freed from
Tyranny and Popery; and it has been acknowledged since, this Parliament, even
by some of themselves, that they were the first means and instruments of
casting off oppressions and Popery; and how useful and isntrumental from
first to last the Scots have been to this Kingdom and Parliament, all the
world cannot but know, who knows any thing, and without whose help according
to all humane reason and second causes the Sectaries* had not been in a way of
doing the Scots any wrong; notwithstanding all which, such has been the
horrid ingratitude of the Sectaries, that they have and do hate them
infinitely worse then the Papists and Malignants, have with all possible Art
and industry reproached, vili^ied them by printing and reporting by word of
mouth all kind of evil of them, studied to put upon them them all affronts and
disgraces, sought all occasions to fall out with them, and to engage in war
against them, not caring to involve these Kingdoms in a most deadly and
destructive war, that they might be revenged on the Scots for the Covenant,
and the Presbyteriall Government; and the Sectaries
have a long while made account of a war with Scotland, and ordered many
things in reference to that, that they might be ready for it: Many of the
Sectaries made such reckoning of falling ou^ with Scotland, that the last year
some of them bought many score chaldron of New Castle coals, thinking thereby
to get a great deal of mo^ey, and being disappointed have lost much by the
bargain* othe^s of them persuaded their friends to lay in good store of Coals
for their provision the l^st winter, because of wars with Scotland; and when
Lilburne was in prison in Newgate upon Order of the House of Commons, one
coming to visit him in prison, and giving him twenty shillings to relieve him
there, Lilburne told him for his love he would do him this good turn, wish
him to buy in his store of Coals, because of a breach that was likely to be
with the Scots. It would be too long to relate all the stories have been told
me of several passages and discourses used by Sectaries tending to a war
with Scotland, both by Sectarian Chaplains, Commanders and others of that way,
as preaching to soldiers of another party, Formalists rising up against* you,
but they shall fall under you, as the pressing upon some employed to Treat with
the Cava^ier^ to give them conditions contrary to Ordinances of Parliament and
all reason, that our Armies
might be at liberty to deal with the Scots, a^ of endeavoring to remove some
Commanders out of the way, because looked upon as great friends of the Scots,
as of some employed to sound and try men in City and Army how they stood
affected to a war with Scotland, as saying that they had been upon the Scots
before now but for this City, and that they would upon Order from the House of
Commons go as willingly against the Scots, as ever against the Cavaliers; as
intercepting and opening of Letters of the Scots, staying their Messengers at
Courts of Guard by Independent Officers, as --, as -- I shall therefore draw to
a conclusion upon this head, and conclude, that in the Histories and Chronicles
that shall be written of these times, the Sectaries wickednesses in reference
to the Scots will be recorded and fully spoken of, and they will be infamous
for it to all generations, and some particular men among them who now hold up
their heads full high will be by name branded for their ^alsities and unworthy
dealings with the Scots, and not caring to have involved the Kingdoms in a new
war for their fancies and New-light, of which themselves hold they have no
such assurance or certain^y, but before next week they may see a contrary
light. 4. Among all other wickednesses of the Sectaries, their carriage toward
the Kingdom of Ireland and the Protestants there is prodigious, some of them
having justified that Rebellion, others having reasoned against sending help,
many of them having retarded and hindered help from going, none of them as I
know having been forward and earnest for sending help, but have cast in many
objections, raised and nourished needless fears and jealosies of the Scots,
and of plots at home, not caring to have Ireland lost over and over again,
rather then their particular opinions or designs should in the least be
hazarded: In the beginning of the Rebellion in Ireland, when we had no Armies
on foot, nor knew not the way of war, and wanted many advantag^s we have now,
yet how was the House of Peers cried out on, great multitudes coming up to
Westminster in a tumultuous way, ready to pull the Lords out of their House,
and all to hasten releife for Ireland, and to pass what was sent up by the
House of Commons in reference to Ireland, and Oh how were those Lords branded
that were thought any way to delay or obstruct succors for bleeding Ireland?
and yet many of those men who heretofore when help could not so speedily nor
effectually be had clamored so against the Lords, in a time when all Armies in
the Field have been sub^lued and hardly a Garrison untaken, and great
powerful Armies with all provisions and necessaries for war have been
ready, though Ireland has been ready to be lost, and in a most desperate
condition, have been the great means of retarding releife, hindering many
thousands ready in a body from going, speaking against the the Presbyterians
for being so forward to send a great part of Army, and giving out there was a
plot to send away the Army, and such like; and indeed in this business of
Ireland, Scotland, the King, their laboring to keep all things unsettled in
Church and State, the great wickedness of the Sectaries plainly appears. I
here remember what I heard a worthy and knowing Member of the House of Commons
say upon occasion of discourse of the Sectaries: How could any man think these
Sectaries had any conscience, when as to maintain a
party and faction they fomented and nourished jealousies and differences
between the Kingdoms, hazarded the loss of Ireland by hindering releife, kept
both Church and State from being settled, and the great burdens of the
Kingdom in takes and Armies from being taken off, these men to keep up their
party, caring not to let Ireland be lost, the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland to be hazarded by a deadly war, Gods honor and truth to su^^er, and
all things to lie wast as they do. 5. Their damnable hypocrisy, and
abominable dissimulation; and I am persuaded there never was a more
hypocritical, false, dissembling, cunning generation in England then many of
the Grandees of our Sectaries. Now their gross hypocrifie plainly manifests it
self in these particulars, 1. they have covered all their practices and
designs under the pretenses of godliness, honesty, saintship, purity of
Ordinances, tenderness of Conscience, a perfect thorough Reformation, new
glorious truths, giving to themselves and their party the name of Saints,
Saints, the godly party, tender Consciences, and under that covert they destory
all godliness, good Conscience, truth, are enemies to holy duties, strict
observing the Lords day, humiliation, etc. encourage, protect, and cry up for
Saints, Saints, sons of Beliall, and the vildest of men; they have pretended
and talked of Reformation, but are all for a Toleration and a liberty for all
their party to believe and live as they lust; they have talked of purity of
Ordinances, and spoke against mixed Communion as one of their grand grounds of
separating from us, and yet they have spoken and done all they could to keep
mixed Communion among us, and to hinder a more exact and full purity; they talk
of tender Consciences
and Conscience, when as they have Consciences can swallow and digest any
thing, Ostrich stomachs, can lie grossly, deceive and cozen, profane the
Lords day, make nothing of holy duties, lay traps and snares to catch men, etc.
they speak of new truths and new light, but under those notions bring in all
abominable Errors and Heresies into the Church of God, pretend the spreading of
the Gospel, and preaching, but in truth the spreading and increasing of all
Heresies and Schism. Secondly, they have pretended, held out self-denial,
have commended the selfe-denying Ordinance, spoken much against men's enriching
themselves, seeking great places in these times, spoken of doing all for the
public, and that the Commonwealth might not suffer: and yet these men
pretending thus, by such pretenses have got into great offices and places,
procured great gifts, as other men's estates, great sums of money, great
Arrears with the first and with the highest, make use of their times in their
places as much as ever any men did, both for themselves and their kindred,
sons, brothers, cosens, friends; and many of them before being beggars and
mean men, are now fat, shining, and grown great. There is hardly a noted
Sectary in the Kingdom, or lately come out of New England, Holland, etc. who
is in any kind capable of an office, place, gift, or respect, but he is in some
one or other, and has been the better for these times. 3. The Sectaries have
pretended the liberty of the Subject, the public liberties of the Kingdom;
this they have much held out, and this they have fought for, they say, and not
Religon; and this is much spoken of in all their Pamphlets and Speeches,
whereas Sectaries have for the advancing of their own way and opinions, done
the highest acts against the liberties of the people that ever were, and indeed
make nothing of trampling upon the subjects liberties and making them slaves,
being men that where they are in place, and have power, carry things
arbi^rarily, making their wills laws, making nothing of going against
Charters, liberties of the peoples elections, etc. There are many sad stories
in this kind too large to be now related. What enemies many of the Sectaries
have been to the peoples petitioning the Parliament to make known their
greivances, what obstructions and blocks they have laid in their way in that
kind by printing of, and wriring against their Petitions before delivered, by
branding the Petitioners for then ill-affected, refined Malignants, driving on
the Kings design and I know not what, by preaching against their Petitions, by
endeavoring to get Votes and Orders against Petitions, by laboring to molest
the Petitioners to have them sent for to attend Committees, to be put to
charges, and kept in safe custody, etc. is well known to the Kingdom, and sure
that is a great part of the liberty and privilege of the subject, and if they
may not be free to Petition, what is become of the liberty of the subject? Such
Princes in all ages as have been looked upon most for advancing their
Prerogative, and oppressing the people, and been a against al defensive Arms and
other ways of the peoples seeking their right, yet still granted them the
liberty of petitioning* and would not prejudge
that; they have allowed preces and lachrymae to be the weapons of Christian
subjects, though not Swords and Guns. Whether many Sectaries are not very
forward to keep on foot all burdens and greivances of the Kingdoms, all
payments in their heights, great Armies, Committees complained of, etc. I leave
to those who know-affairs to determine, and if these things be for the liberty
of the subject, then are the Sectaries for the subjects liberty. It will be
found that the Sectaries, though they have pretended liberty, yet if they
should come to have the upper
hand, they would make the people of England the greatest slaves that ever they
were in any time, and indeed rule them by an Army, and force instead of Laws,
and would trample as much upon the City of London and the Countries as ever
John of L^yden, and Knipperdolling did upon the poor Citizens of Munster.
4. The Sectaries hypocrifie appears by their pretending a bare liberty only
pea^^ably and quietly to enjoy their own consciences, and that without any
offense or molestation to others; And however if this might not be granted
after they had helped to overcome the common enemy, they would quietly sit
down and leave the Kingdom, not offer to make any disturbance, and this was
held out along time in their speeches, and in many books. I have heard Master
Peter's speak thus, and he was wont in many places to speak thus; and the
Apologists in their Apologeticall Narrat(...) supplicate the Parliament to look
upon them as those that do pursue no other interest or design but a
subsistence (be it the poorest or meanest) in their own Land, with the
allowance of a latitude to some lesser differences with peaceablenesse, as not
knowing where else with safety, health and livelihood to set their feet on
earth: But by these and many other specious pretenses being increased in number
and power, and having gotten the sword into their hands, now they speak out,
and are not contented with a bare Toleration, but stand for all the places of
power, honor and profit in the Kingdom, crying out of the City Remonstrance
most of all, because it petitioned against Sectaries being in places of public
trust; its apparent a Domination they aim at, and to have things in such a
posture that they may suppress all the Orthodox;
hence many speeches have sallen from them to this purpose, that they will
never lay down the sword whilst there is a Priest lefe in England, that they
will pack them all away for Rome; and this last year in many places where they
come they ordinarily will not suffer the Ministers to preach in their own
Churches, Pulpits, but by sorce hinder them, yea pull them out of Pulpits,
threaten them, assault them; hence they will not endure zealous godly
Presbyterians to enjoy any places in the Armies or other where, but watch for
iniquity, use all tricks and unjust ways to keep them out and turn them out,
of which there are many examples.

5. The Sectaries abominable hypocrisy shows it self in yielding to things
against their mind and conscience, that thereby they may be in a capacity and
enabled to destroy and overthrow what they seem to be for, working and using
all their power against it; as for example many of the Sectaries took the
Covenant, and do take it (which they hate with all their souls) that so they
might come into such places, and keep such places, where being they improve
those places all they can to destroy the Covenant, and the contents of it,
hindering a Uniformity and the nearest conjuction in Government, etc. and are
all for a Toleration, and instead of endeavoring to extirpate Heresy,
Schism, they promote it all they can, and plead for strange forced
interpretations and Jesuiticall equivocations of the Covenant, contrary to all
literal sense, the general scope, and the minds of those that made it,
always so declared from first to last.

6. The Sectaries great hypocrisy is seen, in that in their speeches
oft-times, many of their Pamphlets, and for diverse of their actions why they do
such things, and why they refuse this and that, as not hearing our Ministers
preach, not joining to our Assemblies, not paying their Tyths, with many such,
they allege the Covenant and bring that for their ground, it is against such an
Article of the Covenant, or such a clause of an Article, when as it is known to
God, and hotoriously manifest to all the world they care not at all for the
Covenant, make nothing of it, but daily with a high hand break every-Article,
and every clause of each Article; but their doing and refusing of such and such
things, are upon other grounds and ends, as the saving their purses, their
destroying of a settled Ministry, the increasing and spreading of all Errors
and Heresies, and bringing in of confusion into Church and State: I could write
a large book upon this subject how the Sectaries daily break the Covenant, and
are indeed like to those spoken of in Daniel 11. 32. Such as do wickedly
against the Covenant. I will begin with the first clause of the first Article,
endeavoring the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of
Scotland in Doctrine, worship, Discipline and Government, etc. when as they
daily write with all bitterness against the Church of Scotland, their
Discipline and Government, etc. yea, have furthered the printing and spreading
wicked books against the Government of the Church of Scotland, written by
Prelates, and their greatest enemies. O how is Master Burton in his Conformities
Deformity in his 19, 20, 21. page guilty of breach of Covenant in writing so
against their Church Government, as to stir up Princes and all civil powers
against them, as much as against the Popes Supremacy? I might proceed to show
though they take the Covenant into their mouth, yet they go against that clause
of endeavoring to extirpate Heresy, Schism, profaneness, etc. on the contrary
endeavoring the spreading and growing of all Heresies, Errors, and so I might
in the rest; but I shall conclude this with one word, which is, that they are
fearfully and hypocritically guilty of the breach of the solemn League and
Covenant, and that if ever the Sectaries should be a means to involve and
engage in a war against Scotland, our Brethren in their weakest condition, even
when their Armie's put to the worse, might in the head of their Army spread
before God the solemn League and Covenant, and appeal to heaven to help them,
as the great. Turk did once in such a case against the Christians, and might
well trust, that God who is a God keeping
Covenant, a God of truth that helped the Turks against the Christians, in such
a case would help them his servants against the Covenant breaking Sectaries.

7. The Sectaries hypocrisy appears in casting that upon others, and unjustly
charging them with such things which themselves are faulty in, both practice
and purpose to practice, only speak against such and such things in another
party, that others being suspected by this means, and they not, they may
compass their ends the better: thus they have given out many reports, and
raised jealousies upon many worthy men, as if not right, that they sought not
the good of their Country, Religion, but only preferment, and their own ends,
that so they being taken to be the
faithful men, might raise their own fortunes, and bring about their own
designs: many Sectaries have given out things on purpose of the Scots, that
they are false, and always were for their own ends, etc. the better to hide
their own baseness, being indeed that themselves which they falsely cast upon
our Brethren: Thus the Sectaries give ou^, that if the Presbyteriall Government
should be set up and take place, the people would be made absolute slaves, and
under Egyptian bondage, whereas it is known it is a most excellent form of
Government, having appeals, and the Democraticall Independent Government a most
slavish Government where parties must be Judges; and there shall be no releif
for an innocent wronged person; and indeed these reports are kept up carefully,
spread by many of the Sectaries, that out of pretenses of liberty, and for
fear of slavery, all things being kept loose and unsettled, they may come to
bear rule by that means, be Tyrants and bring in upon the people by degrees
both spiritual and corporal slavery. The Sectaries cast upon the Presbyter.
division, being enemies of peace, worldly policy, whereas themselves cause all
our divisions, and hinder peace. Sixthly, the great wickedness of the Sectaries
appears in their fearful mocking and abusing the pai^full, faithful Ministers
of God in this Kingdom, and the despising their words; this is by the holy
Ghost reckoned as the concluding sin that brought that final ruin upon
Jerusalem and Judah, 2 Chronicles. 36. chapt. 16, 17. Now the Sectaries do all
manner of ways by word and deed abuse the Ministers, by all kind of
reproachful railing speeches, wicked Pamphlets, detaining their maintenance,
and stirring up others to do the like, disturbing them in the public
discharge of their ministry, as preaching and praying, invading their Pulpits
by force, keeping and pulling them out of their pulpits, driving them by
violence from their houses and habitations, assaulting them in the way and
their houses, putting upon them soldiers, and the most rude to vex them, of
which there are too many proofs by instances in Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire,
Wiltshire, Glostershire, Sommersetshire, and other Countries; and their
wickedness is the greater, in that they have no respect at all to the age,
gravity, learning, holiness of any one, but abuse the aged, the most learned
godly as much as any other, nor no respect to those Ministers who have been the
Parliaments greatest friends, suffered for them, and have assisted them always,
but use them even worse then Malig. Ministers, nor no respect that these
Ministers assisted them with their prayers and tears all along in the wars,
but requiting them thus to seek their destruction, who night and day publicly
and privately sought their preservation, nor no consideration that these
Ministers whom they now so abuse, were instruments of working grace in them, if
so be they have any at all; nor no consideration of such who are more
immediately employed, sent by the Parliaments authority, but affronting, abusing
them to their faces, and in print, as those Ministers of the Assembly sent to
Oxford to preach and prepare for the work of Reformation abused by the
Sectarian soldiers there; all which, with diverse other considerations, as the
godly Ministers fair carriage and respects to them, though contrary minded,
etc. exceedingly aggravates the Sectaries finne, and shows them to be monsters
rather then men, not only to be void of all Religion and charity, but of
humanity and common civility. And here I might add many things more that
clearly show the profaneness and wickedness of the Sectaries spirits, as
their scoffing and scorning at fasting and holy exercises, speaking by way of
reproach of the morning exercise, and giving in Bills among those given to the
Ministers to pray for persons, scoffing at
these exercises of fasting and prayer, as at Master Cases Church, as at Master
Seamans, and giving up Bills in several Churches on the public Fast day,
November 25. as follows, You are desired to pray for the suppression of those
Preistriden slaves who go about to get hands for the disbanding of Sir Thomas
Fair^ax Army, who under God have wrought the peace of the Kingdom: As taking
the wickedest men, the arrantest who remasters, profane swearers, etc. by the
hands, and in all public societies and places, where they have to do, and such
vild men are joined with them, to keep off Reformation, as men going against
all justice, equity, all principles of Honor, Religion, Civility, Humanity, and
will do any thing, nothing can come amiss to bring about their designs, as men
who have forsaken all principles of piety, and are degenerated into a
State-faction, resolving all into worldly interest and policy,
doing whatsoever may most advance that: So that all these premises being
seriously considered, viz. all the Errors, Heresies, Blasphe(...)es, Practices,
Insolences, Stories, and Passages of the Sectaries laid down both in the
former parts and in this third, may serve to undeceive many people in their
opinions of Independents and Sectaries, and may fully show them they are not
the men they have been taken for, and pretended themselves to be, but indeed a
pack of covetous, ambitio^s, self-seeking, b^asting, proud, unthankful, heady,
feir^^, unholy, false people, which seeing them to be so, they may follow the
advice of St. Paul, given just in the same case, 1 Timothy 6, 3, 4. speaking of
men doting about questions and destitute of the truth, supposing that gain is
godliness, From such withdraw thy self; and 2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof, from such turn away.

There is a great Sectary living in London, a Tradesman, who owed fifty pounds
to a Citizen of London, which money this Citizen could nor easily get, but at
last getting a bond, when it was due demanded it, and he not paying it, went to
an Atturny to advise with about suing his Bond. The Atturny wished him to try
again if he would not pay it by fair means, and to tell him he would put his
band in suit; whereupon this Sectary promised to pay him twenty five pound
suddenly on such a day, and when he came it should be ready, and the other
twenty five at such a time, with which answer this Creditor was content, and
came one the day set for the first 25. li. which this Sectary told him was
ready, and desired him to go up into his house with him, and he should receive
it; now when he came up into the room there the 25 pound was ready on a table,
but before he had received it, putting his hand into his pocket to pull out his
handkercher, the Bond for his 50 pound accidentally came forth with it, which
as he was looking upon it, this Sectary came of a sudden and snached it out of
the man's hand
and tore it all in pieces before his face, saying he owed him nothing,
whereupon this Citizen being amazed, asked him what he meant; he said he owed
him nothing, come by it as he could; to which the Citizen replied, I will have
this 25 pound howsoever, and laid hands on it, but he threatened him to meddle
with it if he durst, and knocked with his foot to call up some body out of his
shop, saying to them this man will take my money from me by force, so that this
honest man was glad to go away without his Bond or any of the money. Upon this
he went to a Counselor at Law, one Mr. W. related his case, desiring his
council in it. He advised him to make no words of it, say nothing, but at the
Sessions endite him, and get a Warrant of a Sudden before he could take
council to fetch him away, and it may be being so surprised he would pay him
the money rather then stand it out to answer it at the Sessions: The Citizen
followed his advise; when the Sessions came, had a bill drawn against him; the
Attorney who had seen the Bond witnessed there was such a special tie, the
Bill was found, and a Warrant sent out for to attach him; the Officer serving
it and threatening presently to carry him away; thereupon this Sectary confessed
his evil, he entreated his mercy that he would not shame him publicly, it
should be a warning to him for ever after, and so he paying the money, the man
prosecuted him no further.

A Relation of some remarkable Passages of diverse Sectaries, and of the
Contents of several Letters written up here to London, from good hands
conc^rning them.
THere is one Mr. Knollys an Anabaptist, spoken of in my first part of
Gangraena, and in this third part page 48. 49. a Letter of his is printed: this
man preaches up and down in several Churches in London and Southwark^, and
that with all fierceness against Childrens Baptism, and against our
Ministers, as being Antichristian, and having no call to baptize, and among
other places, where he has preached lately, he preached this November. the 15.
at Georges Church in Butolph-lane in the afternoon, on these words; He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, where after he had spoken of
believing, in the latter part of his Sermon, coming to speak of baptizing, he
used these words: I have spoken to you of the first part of the Gospel,
believing, I must be faithful and speak to you of the second, viz. baptizing,
and of that there is as great a necessity as believing, and therefore I advise
and charge all you who believe, to be baptized, and whereas it may be you will
object, you are baptized already, I answer that is a lie, indeed you were
rantized but not baptized, and that too was into the name of your Godfathers,
which was blasphemy; and not into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost;
besides, they who did it, had nothing to do with Baptism, as being no
Ministers, but Antichristian: and whereas heretofore these Ministers of the
Church of England rantized into the name of their Godfathers, now to mend the
matter, they do it into the name of their Fathers.

There is one Mr. Symonds a great Sectarie, Mr. Cradocks Colleague, who came to
London since the wars, and preached at little Alhallowes Thames Street, and at
the Tower, where I have been informed from godly understanding men, as well
Ministers as others, that he has preached several strange things, as for a
Toleration and liberty for all men to worship God according to their
consciences, and in favor of Antipaedobaptisme, and so preaching once at
Andrews Vndershaf^ for Mr. Goodwin, he preached high strains of
Antinomianisme, as that Christ was a legal Preacher and lived in a dark time,
and so preached the Law, but afterward the Gospel came to be preached, and
preaching at Laurence Pountneys summer was twelvemoneth on the day of
thanksgiving for taking of Sherborn Castle, he spoke of the great Victories the
Saints had obtained for us, viz. the Independents, and yet now the Parliament
was making Laws against these Saints, with other things to that purpose; and
as at London he has preached thus, so since he left London this last Summer he
preached at Bath before the General strange stuff (as I have been told from
understanding men who heard him,) viz. against Presbytery, saying it was a limb
of Antichrist, pleading for liberty of conscience, and for those who would not
have their children baptized till they came to years of understanding, and for
Weavers and ignorant mechanics preaching, and speaking of these men's gifts,
and having the spirit before learned men, and men bred at Universities, with a
great deal of this stuff, insomuch that Mr. Bode^ Minister of the Bath (as I
was informed) confuted his Sermon the next Lords day, and spoke against it,
insomuch that ^ome of the Independent Soldiers, as C. B. etc. ^lung out of the
Church in the midst of the Sermon and would not hear him out; and truly it is a
sad thing, that Sir Thomas Fairfax that valiant and well-affected Gentleman,
should have such kind of Chaplains and Preachers upon all occasions to preach
before him as Mr. Dell, Mr. Saltmarsh, Mr. Peter's, Mr. Cradock, M. Symonds, M.
William Sedgwick, and such like: and I have spoken the more of this Mr.
Symonds, because I hear he is nominated for one of the Itinerary Preachers of
Wales, that so the Country and Ministers may be ware of him where he comes,
and that the Assembly when he comes to be approved of may do their duties, and
not let him pass so easily as they did Mr. Cradock.

There is Mr. Burton of London a great Independent, who has these five last
years written many wild and weak Pamphlets, beginning with his Pr^testation
Protested, and ending with his Conformities Deformity, in which Pamphlets the
poor man has laid down many grounds of Donatisme and pure Brownisme, yea of
Libertinisme and of a general Toleration of all Religions, and has laid about
him, striking all who have come near him without fear or wit, whether whole
Assemblies and Societies or particular persons, he has cast dirt in the face
of the Church of Scotland and their general Assembly, our Assembly, this
famous City of London, and the Honorable Court of Common Council, the
Ministers of Sion College, particular Ministers, M. Calamie, my self, and
others, nay he has not spared his Brother Prynne, his Brother Bastwick, his
good old friend M. Vicars, and in all these five years among all the Books he
has put forth, notwithstanding all the damnable Heretics and Blasphemers
among us, has not had the heart to speak one word for God against them, which
gives too just ground for the world to think M. Burtons former oppositions of
Arminianisme, Popery, etc. was not out of zeal for God and his truth, and
hatred of those errors, but out of discontent and spleen against the Bishops,
who had crossed him in his hopes of preferment: For if it had been out of zeal
against the errors, and not out of anger against the men, how could he thus
patiently bear all the injuries and dishonours of Christ and his truth done by
other men even a hundred times worse then before. Did Mr. Burton know what some
of his wisest Brethren have said and do say of his Books, he would give over
writing, as that his writings are weak, and do more hurt then good, would to
God he would give over his writing: Shall I tell M. Burton what Mr. Nigh said
again and again of his Protestation Protested, I will if he will not be angry
with him, it was this, that in that Book there was gross Brownisme which he
nor his Brethren no way agreed with him in, and that for his part he would as
soon subscribe to the Book of Common Prayer, as to diverse things there. Shall I
tell him what Mr. Symonds of Roterdam one of the moderatest and modestest of
that way said upon the coming forth of his last Book Conformities Deformity,
to a friend of his that showed it him, and asked him of it; no, I will forbear
least it should trouble the old man too much. I could tell some stories of Mr.
Burton and his Church, I have a relation given me in writing by (...) wh^ was
present and heard all, about a difference that fell out in the time of the
Church-meeting, between M. Burton and a Butcher, and some others of his Church
about prophesying, but it is too long to insert here, and I promise it the
Reader in the 4* part of Gangraena: I have been told a late famous story by
diverse godly Ministers of the City, of a great falling out between Mr. Burton
and some of his Church, about singing of Psalms, Baptising of Children,
prophesying, and somewhat else, and upon some Brethren called in to hear the
business how far M. Burton yielded in those particulars, both against his
judgment and his practice, but I must reserve that too: I could make large
Animadversions on his Pamphlets, and show many strange positions in them,
beside contradictions, falsehood, weakness, hard speeches against the faithful
servants of God, much pride and arrogancy, but I will for present animadvert a
few things only on his last Book, Conformities Deformity, in a Dialogue
between Conformity and Conscience, and I shall refer all I have to say at this
time to three heads: 1. To show the scope of Mr. Burtons Book, and what the man
would have in it. 2. To represent to M. Burton and the Reader the great evil
of it, and how unlike Mr. Burton is to what himself was formerly. 3. Propound
some queries to Mr. Burton to show him how he is mistaken all along in the
ground he goes upon.

For the first his main scope is under the name of Conscience to represent the
Sectaries as the only conscientious men, and under that color to plead for a
Toleration of them all, and an indemnity from all restraint by the civil
Magistrate, and under the name of Conformity to brand all Presbyterians and to
speak against all establishment of Religion and Church Government by
Magistrates and Synods, as great Hypocrisy, Idolatry, rejecting Christ from
being King, etc. destroying the foundation of faith, and in his prosecuting
this, besides Sion College, the Assembly, the City of London, the Ordinance
for preventing the growth of Heresies, which he falls foully upon, he railes
fearfully and speaks most wickedly against the General Assembly and the
Scottish Church Government, saying, that in the General Assembly there is the
like Supremacy set up which the Pope (...)self* claims ^ver Kings, States,
Kingdoms, Commonwealths, that it is a spirit of Antichristian pride and
tyranny, of rebellion, and treason, in lifting up a Papal Throne above Kings
and Kesars, above Kingdoms and Commonwealths, to the ens^aving of the whole
Nation in their souls, bodies and estates, that it sets up in the Church an
Oracle of Infallibility, and such a Supremacy, as no true-bred English
Christian can interpret for other then Antichristian Tyranny, and all under the
name of a Christian Presbyterian Church Government, that if that Presbyterian
Government be set up, thereby our Fundamental Laws, Privileges, and power of
Parliaments, Liberties, and freedom of all true-bred English Subjects would be
brought under perpetual bondage, worse then that eitherof Egypt or Babylon;
all which and much more the Reader may find in page 19, 20, 21. of-that Book.

For the second, Mr. Burtons great evil, and how unlike Mr. Burton now, is to
Mr. Burton formerly, it may apppeare thus, in that M. Burton in all this book
builds up again the things he formerly destroyed, undoing all his own acts,
agreeing with Canterbury, Pocklington, etc. in their Principles, and Practices
against the Reformed Churches, particularly the Scots, and their
Church Government, M. Burton being Cantuariensis redivivus, nay let me not
wrong the dead, though they were great Enemies to the Scots and
Presbyteriall-Government, yet in all their writings I do not find such
rancorous malicious passages against the general Assembly, as in this Book of
M. Burtons, he makes use indeed of the Bishops and their creatures Arguments
and weapons against the Presbyteriall Government, and the Reformation, but
withal goes higher; and in patronizing and pleading for all Errors and
Heresies under specious pretenses, as they did Arminian Popish and Socinian
Doctrines, not writing one word against all the Heresies and Blasphemies of
these times, but speaking against my books and Dr. Bastwicks, for the
discovering of them. O how is M. Burton fallen! I heard a godly and ^^arned
Divine say lately of him (upon reading his Conformities Deformity) that he had
always thought M. Burton to be a godly man, but he now thought him the
greatest Apostate in England: He should not have wondered much to have seen
such a book written by John Goodwin, but that M. Burton should, he could not
have believed it, had he not read it, and certainly in his writing this Book
and many others, God left him: the man is departed from all his former
principles of zeal and love to truth, he can find no Deformity now in
Heresy, nor Blasphemy, but only in Conformity to Presbyteriall-Government,
and the Magistrates non-Toleration of Errors: The Lord has made him a
fearful example, and all men may take warning by M. Burton, for turning
Independents,
who before he turned Independent, was so zealous against the least Errors,
and the least Innovation in Worship, as that he would strain things, and make
a great matter of a little; but now he has no heart against the greatest
Errors, he can do nothing in all his Pamphlets for the honor of Christ, he
can see no deformity in all the Blasphemies, Heresies of these times, but
only in the Orthodox Reformed Churches, and Presbyteriall-Government: and that
which aggravates his sin is, he has done this after sad and serious admonition
given him in the fourth Corollarie of the first Part of Gangr^na, and after a
great sickness, this Book being styled by himself in his Title page, The first
fruits of his late recovery from death to life: If any man 9 or 10 years ago,
when M. Burton was upon the Pillory for writing against some great men, who
favored Popish and Arminian Tenets, should have said to the people, this man
whom you now see thus suffer, and whom you so love and adore, the time is
coming when he shall plead for a Toleration of all Religions, and speak against
the Magistrate, for defending Religion by Laws and Edicts; this man, whom you
thus see, shall come to preach again in this City, and have free Liberty of
his Ministry, when all damnable Heresies and Errors shall be vented by
preaching and writing, and yet shall never speak against them; this man who
has preached and written with so much earnestness against bowing at the Name
of Jesus, against people coming up to the Rail about the Table to receive the
Lords Supper, against Christ's dying for all men sufficiently, when the Divinity
of Christ shall be denied, the Scriptures denied to be the Word of God, when
all Churches Ministry and Sacraments shall be denied, he shall never write nor
preach against them; yea, this man who will not yield now to Bishops in a
Ceremony or some outward matter of order to keep his Ministry, shall
afterward yield to the people, and submit to base conditions, contrary to his
judgment, as to forbear baptizing some of his peoples children, and to let
singing of Psalms be suspended, with other such like, and all to enjoy his
Ministry and Church: Certainly the people would have been ready to have stoned
such a man, and said it could not be, or if they had believed it, fewer
certainly would have pitied him, or visited and rewarded him in prison: nay,
when Mr. Burton was in prison, if any man had sent to him such a Message, that
he should do what he does now, viz. write against, and be a more bitter enemy
against the Reformed Churches, our Brethren of Scotland, yea the godly
Ministers, Mr. Calamie, etc. then ever Canterbury was or Dr. Wren, certainly
the man would have defied such a Message, and said as Hazael, am I a dog that I
should do so? and yet now we see what he has done, and does daily. Mr. Burton
surely is in a sad condition, and I have often thought of him to be in the case
of that Idolater the Prophet Esaias speaks of 44. Esa. 20. he feeds of ashes,
a deceived heart has turned him aside, that he cannot deliver his soul, nor
say, is there not a lie in my right hand? The Lord in mercy open his eyes and
give him repentance for this last five years work, and particularly for writing
his last Book called Conformities Deformity.

Thrdly, I shall propound a few Quaeries to Mr. Burton, to show him how he is
mistaken all along in his grounds.

1. Let me ask you M. Burton why you are so angry with the Magistrate, the
Assembly, Sion College, the City, for establishing and settling of
Church Government, if it be of God, and they are persuaded so, why should they
not be for it? and if Independency, Brownisme, Anabaptisme, etc. be not of God
as they are well assured they are not, why should they not be against them,
hinder and suppress them? M. Burton you will upon your rash and weak
persuasion hinder Presbytery all you can, the Administration of the Sacraments
in a Presbyteriall way, may not then the Magistrate upon strong persuasions
after serious debates by a learned Assembly, and Scripture-grounds satisfying
their consciences, enact by a Law Presbytery, and forbid Independency, etc.

2. Mr. Burton whether is this a good Argument, because Jeroboam did evil, by
a Law and commandment to set up the golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, therefore
Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah, etc. might not lawfully command the true worship of God
in their Kingdoms, and put down the false: and whether may not Magistrates
lawfully make use of their power from God for good, because some Magistrates
abuse that power for evil; and if it be no good Argument, as certainly it is
not, then has M. Burton said little against the Magistrates power in matters
of Religion, for this is the way of his reasoning in Conformities Deformity,
and the strength of the man.

3. Pray M. Burton let me ask you this question, suppose the Parliament would
by a Law or Ordinance set up Independent Government and the Church way, would
you account this so great a sin as Hypocrisy, Idolatry, etc. and if not, how
can you then, the setting up of Presbyteriall Government, especially seeing the
question is not so much about this or that particular, but the enacting by a
Law that which all should conform to.

4. Mr. Burton, I am serious with you, pray answer me, here are such and such
men hold all kind of errors, and vent them up and down, and they say it is
their conscience, would you have them suffered to preach, write and infect all
that come near them? if there be no such evil and danger in errors but they
may be preached, printed, why were you so fierce and violent against the
Bishops and their Chaplains for preaching, writing Arminian Popish points,
though they vented them in an orderly way, in comparison of your Saints, who
go from Country to Country venting errors; in their own Pulpits, and when
called to preach by Authority; not intruding into other men's Pulpits, and
printing with license, not in contempt of Authority.

There are diverse other Sectaries to be discovered, and their ways and
preachings laid open, as Green the Felt-maker, who was one of the first
Mechanics that presently upon the first sitting of this Parliament preached in
our Churches publicly, as at Algate and elsewhere, and was one of that company
that went over with Colonel Homstead about Summer was two years to Trinidado,
but is returned lately, and now preaches in an Alley in Coleman-street, once on
the Lords day, and once on the week day, where there is great resort and
flocking to him, that yards, rooms and house are all full, so that he causes
his neighbors Conventicles as Cretensis and others to be often times very thin,
and Independents to preach to bare walls, and empty seats in comparison of this
great Rabbi, as Spencer sometimes the Lord Brooks Coachman an early Preacher
too, as Gorton who has lately set forth a Book called Simplicities Defense
against Seven-Headed Policy, wherein are many dangerous and erroneous passages,
but I cannot speak of them now: the fourth part of Gangraena will supply
what is now wanting.

I have lately seen diverse Letters and some Petitions that have been written
and sent up from godly Ministers and others to Worthy Members of the House of
Commons, to some Members of the Assembly, to other Ministers in the City, and
Citizens, concerning the insolences, tumults, and strange carriages of many
Sectaries, Commanders and Soldiers, as also other persons both men and women
of their Sect, but it would be too long to give a Copy of them as I have done
of others in the former part of this Book, and therefore I will only relate
the Contents of some of them: In one Letter a godly Minister about Bristow
writing to a Member of the Assembly, tells him he had formerly written to him
of a preaching Troop that had infected the Countries with errors, but now he
w^ites to him
that many of them break into houses, steal Horses, and have been indighted
here, These are our Saints (says he) who need no repentance; I am sure they
need much grace. In other Letters out of Somersetshiere from a godly Minister
who has done much public service, and is well known (if I should name him) he
writes thus, November. 16. 1646. to a godly Minister in London, I sent the other
day into Glostershiere for rents, and there out of forty pounds per a^num, my
Mother and my self pay five shillings per diem, and are now to pay six
months Contribution to Gloucester, besides pays to Bristow, and other taxes:
If such things were done in the Scots Army, they would be cried up and down
London streets, some are resolving to represent to
the House the same things as are represented out of the North and worse: we
are able to do it, and speak nothing but truth. He writes also as follows, The
other day Mr. Greenhill of Dodington in Glostershire was pulled down out of the
Pulpit, and one Minister more in Glostershiere were pulled out of their Pulpits
by the Soldiers, and Independents put up in their rooms: The Soldiers
threatened me last week to pull me out of the Pulpit only for reproving them.
This Minister also relates in one of his Letters, that upon a Lords day not
long since in the time of the morning exercise, diverse of these Soldiers played
at football upon a Green or Common.

Some Letters written from Oxford by some of the Assembly to persons of worth
in London, mention how M. Erbury (the same who is spoken of in my first Part of
Gangraena, and in this third Part, page 89, 90.) came attended with diverse
soldiers to a meeting that the Ministers sent down to Oxford had weekly, for
the satisfaction of the scruples of some in these times, and there started that
Question, that there was no such Office upon earth now as Ministers, that none
were now to be Select Officers, but every man might preach; that is, speak his
thoughts (as one Letter expressed it) and propounded it, with diverse of the
Soldiers backing him, to dispute that point with them: what the carriage of
the Sectaries was at the meeting to dispute it, and the issue of the
disputation, I cannot speak certainly nor particularly, as having not spoken
with any of our Ministers there present, only I shall desire the Reader to
observe this, That this Erbury who now comes on purpose to Oxford for such a
disputation, and challenges our Ministers, when as he has so many armed men to
back him and to domineere, never could all the while he was in the Earl of
Essexe's Army Chaplain there, be drawn by the Ministers to any
Conference or Dispute about the points he then held and often vented: Mr.
Bifeild and diverse other Chaplains then in the Earl of Essex his Army, are
ready to testify and prove this.
He was often moved to it, desired, but still declined, could never be brought
to it, for then he knew he could not have those to back him in his Dispute,
who were Commanders of many men, and had the power of the Sword in their hands.
A Letter out of Warwick shiere, dated the 2. of November. relates that two
soldiers did preach at Rugby on the 25. of October, and there said that no
Minister was a true one except he was rebaptized, and that our Ordinances were
false Ordinances, and the Printers have cozened us in printing the Scriptures,
and more tenants they hold which now I cannot write, and on the 26. day of
October they baptized six women in a Mill-dam about
eleven of the clock in the day, which was strange to us in these parts. Some
positions and speeches sent up in writing out of Staffordshiere, maintained and
spoken by some of the Sectaries in the Army, belonging to Colonel Whaleyes
Regiment, were showed me by a worthy Member of the House of Commons, the sum of
them is, that there are no created spirits, but every spirit whatsoever is God,
that the Angels are God, and that the soul is one with God, that the
Scripture is not the Word of
God, they dispute against prayer with Arguments drawn from the omnisciency and
immutability of God, they said they would go to Hell, for God was there, and
he was as much in Hell as in Heaven, they said where they were quartered, that
they would pull the Committees out of their places, and sit in their stead: one
of them meeting with an excise Book, asked the Master
of the house where he found it, whether he would pay money, the man demanding
how should he avoid it, he said rise with us and we will free you, for they
were all Knaves and Thieves: One of these Sectaries soldiers told a Minister
that it was their work to pull down such Antichrists as he, and that they made
them already to quake. Diverse Letters and some Petitions out of Oxfordshiere
speak of many strange things done there by the Sectaries, as of several
abuses offered in the Church of Aston to one M. Skinner a Reverend learned and
painful preacher of 70. years of age by one Lieutenant Webb, by Colonel
Hewson, and by diverse others speaking to and opposing him in the time of
preaching and expounding. On the 25. of October, 1646. John Webb a Lieutenant
guarded with his Soldiers, as M. Skinner was preaching in his Church, started
up and with a loud voice publicly interrupted him, called him ^oole three
times, Popish Priest, tub-preacher, bidding him often to come down out of his
tub, saying, he taught lies to the people: This Webb said, that himself was a
Minister of Jesus Christ, and cared not for the Ordinance of Parliament, or
Synod, for what were they to him, and in this manner he proceeded, troubling M.
Skinner and the Congregation till one of the clock, and then in a rage went out
of the Church, calling Mr. Skinner black frog of the Revelation, threatening he
would preach in the afternoon do what he could; and in the afternoon Web got
into the Church before M. Skinner could come (his Soldiers having picked the
locks of the Church door) and took possession of the reading pew, and was
there expounding when M. Skinner came in, Mr. Skinner being thus kept out of
his seat, went up into his Pulpit, and setting a Psalm, in the singing of it,
the said Web and his soldiers kept on their hats, whereupon M. Skinuer
entreated them to uncover, considering they were in Gods presence; But
Lieutenant Webb cried out aloud, soldiers and all ye that are on my side keep
on your hats, which was done accordingly. The Psalm being ended, Mr. Skinner
desired them all to join with him in prayer uncovered, but the said Webb and
the other Independents would not uncover, whereupon M. Skinner being over the
said Webs head, took off his hat gently, desiring him to remember about what a
holy duty he was, upon which Web in a fury cried out, my soldiers and
Constable pull him down, cast him in hold till to morrow, and then bring him
before me, at which command two fellows went to pull him down with violence,
but some of the neighbors laying hold on them whilst they were drawing their
swords, by Gods
good providence this old Minister of 70. years of age with much ado escaped
their hands, and after his departure Webb preached, and in his Sermon compared
our Church of England to that of Laodicea, that was neither hot nor cold, but
lukewarm For that in Queen Mary's days, her Proclamation made them all
Papists. In Queen Elizabeth's days her Proclamation made them Protestants, but
now an Ordinance of Parliament makes
them for Presbytery; and he was very confident that shortly he should see
Presbytery laid as low as Prelacy, or to that effect.

On the first of November, 1646. Colonel Hewson came into Aston Church,
accompanied and guarded with his Soldiers, contemned the Ordinance of
Parliament read that day against Laymens preaching, and did preach whether M.
Skinner would or no both forenoone and afternoon, he bid M. Skinner be silent,
and threatened him, that in case he would not let him preach, he would lay him
by the heels, he said Mr. Skinner was
no Minister but a false Prophet, an Antichrist, and he would prove him so to
be in the afternoon by 13. marks of a false Prophet, which he laid down in
the afternoon. In June last diverse Sectaries of Mr. Skinners Pari^h joining
and combining with the soldiers, did interrupt him as he was preaching in the
Pulpit and would not be entreated to forbear till he had ended, though he
desired them and told them the penalty of the Statute in that case; And among
others, a Woman one Margeret North cried to him with a loud voice, M. Skinner,
M. Skinner, you take great pains with us in preaching twice every Sabbath and
Catechizing, but all comes but to one Sermon in the end of the year. On the
25. of October, Colonel Hewson came into Wallington Church, and there
interrupted the Minister one M. Price, as he was at Prayer, and then
afterward as he was reading the first chapter of the Proverbs, and also as he
did expound the foresaid chapter. The Church was made a prison for the
Soldiers seven or eight days and nights, there they made a fire in the
Chancell, and took Tobacco in the time of Prayer and Preaching. In the
foresaid Church did Colonel Hewson, and Major Axston preach,
the one in the forenoon, the other in the afternoon being the 18. day of
October. In May last one M. Rastell of Sydnam preaching on the 5. of Math. 20.
Except your righteousness, etc. one Captain Nevill a Captain of a Troop of
horse in Col. Rich his Regiment, being then and there present started up and
said, This is fine stuff, this is gross, who can endure it, I will hear no
more of this, he deserves to be pulled down, and many words to that effect, and
so departed out of the Church, and walked without under the wall, where with a
loud voice he uttered many contumelious words against the Minister. I have seen
diverse Letters out of Oxfordshiere, that speak of one M. Potter of Lutenor
about a mile from Aston, leaving his Church, being driven from thence by the
Lay-preaching Soldiers, who have for certain days made a prison of that
Church, and have burnt up the seats and boords in the Church, so that it now
lies wast and destitute of a Minister; and these preaching soldiers refuse to
preach now in that Church they have laid wast, but come to Churches where there
are Ministers who preach constantly, as at Aston, and diverse other places, and
trouble them in their preaching and performing of other services of God.

A Reverend Minister in Oxfordshiere having lately occasion to admonish his
Parishioners to take heed of Anabaptisme, for tha they denied the Lord Christ
that bought them by his blood shed signi^ied in Baptism by water; For in
Baptism we put on Christ, Gal. 3* 27. but if we be baptized again we deny him,
and put him of as the Anabaptist does, upon which Sermon an Independent
neighbor desired to hear the Minister again on that point, which accordingly
the Minister did on the Lords day November. (...). taking that text Math. 28. 19.
v. And used Arguments to dissuade from Anabaptisme, for it was a denying and
putting off of Christ, whom by oath they put on in their Baptism: Now
Lieutenant Webb hearing of this Sermon, did in the afternoon preach on the
same Text Math. 28. 19. bragging that he could by the spirit do as much ex
tempore, as that Minister
by study. The Minister has sent to entreat a Copy of his Sermon, with a
promise of giving him a Copy of his, that so the world may judge, considering
all their boastings, who comes nearest to the spirit of God.

I have received some Letters of late written to me out of the Country,
bewailing the great oppressions and sufferings some of Gods Ministers undergo
both in their own houses by soldiers laid upon them, and in Gods house by
being disturbed and affronted in their Ministry, wherein I am stirred up not to
faint in prosecuting the good cause of Gods Ministers oppressed, and his
Churches in these parts laid wast, and the Ministers case is thus represented
to me. The Roman Clergy have been Solomon's flagellum on us many years. I but
now the Lay-Clergy, these preaching Soldiers are worse, they be Rehoboams
whips of Scorpions, worse then Solomon's and Rehoboams, yea then the Spanish
whip in 88. The Lord give us all grace that are under Gods rod, the wicked the
sword of his hand, that our (...) may be our (...), our Nocumenta our
Documenta, our Destructions our Instructions, our Corrections our Directions to
Heaven and happiness. And then there being diverse sad stories related in the
body of the Letters, all is concluded after this manner: O scelus
Independentium, come Lord Jesus come quickly, and whip out all these
Independent worshippers out of thy Church with a dog-whip.

A godly Citizen of good quality and a Common Council man, being in company
with another Common Council man, and a young Scholar, Chaplain to one of the
late Sheriffs of London, and some other company, they being in discourse about
many passages of these times, he told them this story (which within a day or
two after the Common Council man and the young Chaplain told me with all the
names of the persons and circumstances of it) that a great Independent, I will
not say a Member of the House of Commons, being desirous to get another great
Independent to be a Burgess of Parliament for a place of note within less
then 60. miles of London, spoke to this Citizen about it to further it, as
having some chapmen in that Town, and the Mayor also his great friend,
whereupon this Citizen did stir in it to make the Mayor and others for this
Independents Independent friend, and means were used to get voices: but after
some trial of getting voices the Mayor of the Town signified that he thought
another man who s^ood would carry it, most inclining to him, and that they
should not have voices equal for this man, which this Citizen being certified
of, acquainted this Independent how the case stood, and that it would be in
vain for his friend to stand, but he made little of that, entreating him that
the Mayor and those who were for him would go on to give their voices, and
though he had the fewer voices, yet get him but returned by the Mayor, that it
may
come to the Committee of Privileges, and then we shall do well enough with
it, at which speech this Citizen stood amazed, and wondered to hear such words
come from such a man's mouth, and would have no hand to meddle further in it;
And I am of the mind upon good grounds (which if there be not a redress, I am
likely to publish in print to the end the whole House of Commons may come to
know and so remedy it) that there is great need of an effectual review of
diverse Elections of new Members, some sitting and voting in the Horse of
Commons who have no right at all, and other men whose the undoubted right is
are kept out by tricks and devices, which in this juncture of time wherein so
many great affairs of Church and
State have been and are in agitation, and votes of greatest concernment
sometimes carried but by two or three voices, yea by one voice, cannot but be a
mighty prejudice both to Church and State, every voice of such a man being two,
his own voice going according to that interest he judges will keep him in, and
in the interim hindering another voice which according to all reason may be
judged would vote contrary.

Some Corollaries and Consectaries drawn from the Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies and Insolent proceedings of the Sectaries laid down in this third
part.
HAving made fourteen Corollaries in my first part of Gangraena and six other
in my second part, I had thought of fourteen or fifteen more for this third
part, with many enlargements in most of them, but because I see if I should
give that liberty to my invention upon every one of those heads as I at first
intended, the Corollaries would take up diverse sheets, I shall therefore (this
Book being already almost forty sheets) give the Reader but 6. or 7. of them
now, and that in as contracted a way as I may, referring the rest, with all
further enlargements to the fourth part of Gangraena.

1. Corollarie. Hence then from what I have laid down in this third part of
the Errors, Heresies, Insolent proceedings of the Sectaries of our times, we
may see those places of Scripture in 2. Tim. 3. chap. from 1. v. to the 10. 4.
chap. 3. 4. v. 2. Epistle of Pet. 2. and 3. chapters, and Epistle of Jude made
good and fulfilled in our Sectaries; and that in all particulars as if they had
been written and prophesied a purpose of them* As face answers face in glass,
so do our Sectaries these Scriptures, they being the full accomplishment of
those places and those Scriptures; the express and lively characters of our
Sectaries: I do not know any one particular among those many set down by Paul,
Peter and Jude, in those forenamed places our Sectaries fail in, but are in
all points as like to those as one egg is like another; and therefore though
diverse other places of Scripture in the Epistles of Paul and the Revelation of
St. John do speak of the Papacy, as the 2. Thessal. 2. chapter, 1. Tim. 4.
chap. 3. first verses, 11. chapt. of Revel. 17. and 18. chap. of Revel. yet
these do point out the Anabaptists, Antinomians, Libertines, and Separatists,
as distinguished from Papists; and if I should but barely transcribe those
places of Scripture, without any application, as men shall be lovers of their
own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, heady, high minded, lovers
of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying
the power thereof: For of this sort are they which creep into Houses, and lead
captive silly women laden with sins, etc. as through Covetuousnesse shall
they with fained words make Merchandise of you, as that there shall come in the
last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, there should be mockers in
the last time who should walk after their own ungodly lusts, as likewise also
these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of
dignities, as there are certain men crept in unawares, ungodly men, turning
the grace of our God into lasciviousness, as these are murmurers, complainers,
walking after their own lusts, and their mouth speaks great swelling words,
having men's persons in admiration because of advantage, These be they who
separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit, with many other passages
in those Scriptures, yet they that run might presently read them as written
in great Letters in the foreheads of the Sectaries: For was there ever in our
times a generation of greater selfe-seekers, boasters, proud, blasphemers,
Covenant-breakers, unthankful, make-bates, heady, despisers of those who are
good, mockers and scoffers walking after their own ungodly lusts, despisers of
Dominions and speakers evil of dignities, having a form of godliness, but
denying the power thereof, and so in the rest, then our Sectaries: let the
indifferent Reader but remember what I have written upon most of these heads in
this and my other Books, what spirit breathes daily in many of their own
Books, as Arraignment of persecution, Martins Echo, Englands Birthright,
Thirty eight Quaeries upon the Ordinance against Heresies, Toleration
Justified, a Demur to the Bill against Heresies, Lilburnes and Overtons Books,
the English Scottish game and what they have done and do daily against our
Brethren of Scotland, the godly Ministers, the City of London, etc. and then I
believe he will confess there never was a more desperate, ungodly, false,
hypocritical, unthankful, proud, ambitious, covetuous, unclean, cruel,
atheistical generation then many of our Sectaries in England are. It would be
too long now to paraphrase upon all those Scriptures quoted, to compare our
Sectaries with every character of those Scriptures, and to give proofs in
diverse instances and facts. I shall conclude this Corollary, that they are
scoffers and ungodly men, walking after their own lusts, by relating a passage
or two of some Sectarian Soldiers belonging to Colonel Whaleyes Regiment. A
chief Disputant of the Sectaries said that he would not keep out of Alehouses
for five hundred pound a year for the good wits that he met there, yet
objecting himself by way of scorn, that if it offended his weak Brother he
must not do it: Being by way of reproof told of one that said it was best
going to Hell, for the brave wits were there, he replied that if that were
true, he would go thither for then God was there, saying that God was as much
in hell as in heaven: answer being returned him, that God would be found in
Hell in power; he replied that his presence in power and in grace could not be
distinguished. A Woman being occasionally spoken of in the company of some of
these Sectaries that she was said to be a whore, they said God had so ordered
it, and if
she were a whore it was as well with her as if she were honest.

2. Coroll. Hence then from all that Libertinisme and looseness of life in our
Sectaries, we may see what unsound and corrupt Doctrine will produce and bring
forth sooner or later, viz. wicked life and looseness of manners, and though
many of the first Broachers of Heresies and Schisms, at first have been
outwardly holy and strict in their lives, as Pelagius, Schwenckfeldius, Thomas
Muntzerus, and their first Disciples too, some Pelagians, Ana baptists, etc.
because else their opinion; would not so well take; and indeed upon pretenses
of holiness and greater strictness many well meaning and weak people,
especially women fall to them, yet after a time Errors in life and corrupt
manners generally attends errors in Doctrine, and that both as a punishment
and just Judgment of God upon men for not receiving the truth in love, and in
the nature of the thing: for as a foul moist head causes distillations of
corrupt matter upon the lungs and stomach, so loose corrupt principles dispose
men to a loose and corrupt conversation; It Is impossible (says Luther) but
that a bad life will follow false Doctrine; for if men make Shipwreck of faith
they will of a good conscience; and therefore the Scripture, History of times
and our own experience shows us the truth of this, Peter and Jude speaking of
false Teachers and false Doctrines set down at large their wicked and
abominable lives, their uncleanness, filthiness, covetuousnesse, walking
after their own ungodly lusts, having eyes full of Adultery and that cannot
cease from sin, alluring through the lusts of the flesh, promising liberty,
ungodly men turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, trees whose fruit
withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, so Paul speaking
of the seducers and the Teachers of false Doctrine, 2. Tim. 3. that shall
resist the truth as Jannes and Jambres did Moses, describes them to be (...)
profane and wicked men, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, men of
corrupt minds, evil mon, etc. Donatus and his followers who would not
acknowledge Caecilianus and his company for a true Church of God because they
were not pure and holy enough, but thereupon fell into schism and diverse
errors, yet he and his followers fell to all wicked manners, as Augustine
shows in many of his writings against the Donatists, yea in time they grew so*
insolent as to commit many rapes, robberies and murders, and to proceed so far
in offering violence to the Orthodox, that Honorius the Emperor was forced to
send Dulcitius with an Army of soldiers to restrain their injury and
violence. Augustine in his third Book against Cresconius Grammat. cap. 42. etc.
shows that the facts and courses of the greatest robbers and Thieves were far
less and lighter then of the Circumcelliones among the Donatists. Danaeus in
August. de haeresibus. c. 70.
Priscillianus a Bishop who held many opinions of seeming holiness, condemning
all sort of flesh, and their eating as polluted and unlawful, condemning
Marriages, and persuading his followers to divorce from their wives, this man
confessed before his death that in his conventicles he had often committed
filthiness, and violated the chastity of women of his Sect, among whom one was
Euchrotia the wife of Delphidius the Rhetoritian. The Span^emii Diatribe
Historica de Origin: Progress. Sectis and nom. Anabapt. page 4. 5. Hinc. and
publicarum concionum and privatorum congressuum themata ordinaria erant,
detestandum esse peccatum, carnem macerandum, ex^ltandum spiritum, Charitatis
officia exercenda, crucem Domini feren dum, je juniis vacandum, etc.
Anabaptists of Germany at their first springing up were full of seeming
holiness, mortification, full of devotions, fasting, prayer, so that they were
offended with the Evangelicall Churches, because many wicked livers were in
their Assemblies, and because their preaching had no more power to make those
good who heard it, which made Luther and some other worthy men of those times
at first to favor them, write in their behalf when questioned, pity their
mistakes, but within a few years they fell into all kind of uncleanness,
murders and wickednesses, as Sleidan, Bullinger and diverse other learned
Authors have laid down. Danae. Prolegom. cap. 5. (...) vero morum and omnis
disciplinae contemptus est etiam haereseon per^etua comes. Qui enim doctrinam
De^spernit, idem fac^le and discipl(...)m.
Danaeus in his Commentaries upon Augustine de Haeresibus shows what sins
accompany heresies, and how a loose life follows always upon errors, The
disorder of manners and contempt of all Discipline being the perpetual
companion of heresies. For he who despises the Doctrine of God, will also
easily contemn the Discipline. Danaeus enlarges upon this subject, quoting
places out of Tertullian, Theodoret, Bernard, that prove the wickednesses of
the lives of Heretics and Sectaries, as their familiarity with conjurers,
starregazers, their uncleanness, hypocrisy, which from their common Master
Simon Magus, whose Disciples they are, they have all learned. And as Scripture
and History shows us this, so our own expetience plentifully proves it, many
men who before they were Sectaries, or upon their first entrance that were
famous for the power of godliness, being now Libertines and licentious, making
no conscience of the Sabbath, Family duties, etc. It Is evident that with the
errors of the times a flood of ungodliness is come in upon us, iniquity
abounding and the love of many waxing cold, and I have in diverse places of this
Book given many pregnant examples of the Atheism, Uncleanness, Drunkenness,
profaneness of the Sectaries. There Is no question, but many of those
Sectaries who heretofore were outwardly holy and strict, having some secret
lusts and sins which they were no longer willing to forbear, (however new
light, free grace Christian-liberty, Spirituality were pretended) fell to those
opinions and entertained those Doctrines of Antinomianisme, Anabaptisme,
Independency, as a way wherein they might freelier enjoy those lusts, and cast
off
that yoke of strictness they had so long taken upon them: The Apostle Paul
shows the reason how those who creep into houses, prevail to lead captive
silly women, because they are laden with sins, the opinions and errors
vented are suitable to the lusts of their heart, and so carried captive by
them: many in our times who professed Religion were lustful silthy persons,
though this was covered under a profession of Religion, and therefore so soon
as they heard of an opinion of baptizing grown persons, and that by dipping of
naked women, they presently fell to it, as the best way to enjoy their lusts
by, as the fairest opportunity (and that held out now as a matter of greater
perfection in Religion) to feed their wanton eyes, by looking upon young women
naked, to satisfy their unchaste touching, by handling young women naked. It
were easy to demonstrate how the love of some lust or other in men's hearts
(though at first not perceived) has been a great cause of so many in our times
falling into the errors of Antinomianisme, Anabaptisme, Libertinisme,
Independency, and so indeed in all times some wickedness or other has been
the spring and mother of Error and heresy, as pride and vain glory,
covetuousnesse and filthy lucre, a desire of contention, an evil conscience,
and when some lust (though secret) has brought forth an error, this and that
false doctrine, then those Doctrines fully received daily strengthen and
nourish those lusts, yea daily increase unto more ungodliness, as the not
being liable to be questioned by superior Assemblies as Classes Synods,
emboldens men to broach and spread such errors, as holding that God sees no
sin in his Children, that all our sins cannot hurt us, nor all our good
works further our salvation, encourages men to sin more freely, as believing
that the souls dye with the bodies, or else sleep till the resurrection, yea
that there is no resurrection, makes men say let us eat and drink for to
morrow we shall dye, that is since the soul dies with the body, and the body
shall rise no more, therefore let us take what we find here, enjoy our
pleasures and satisfy our lusts whilst we may.

3. Coroll. Hence then we may clearly see from many of the
principles and practices laid open in this book, that many of the Sectaries
of our times, Anabaptists, Libertines, Independents, are not only against
Government in the Church, all Authoritative * 2 Pet. 2. 12. Jude.
power of Classes, Synods, but against Civil Government too. Monarchy and
Aristocracie, both Kings and Lords have been cried down in many Books,
Speeches, yea and in Sermons of the Sectaries; and for Democracie, though in
diverse Pamphlets they seem to contend for that, as in opposition to all Kingly
and Lordly Government, yet in pleading for it, they have laid down such
positions, as are not consistent with any Civil Government at all, but what
necessarily would bring any Common wealth (the most popular) into a chaos and
confusion: and had they any reason or wisdom, they could not but see the
weakness of their own Principles, and the dreadful consequences that must
necessarily follow thereupon, but as the Thomas Muntzer boasted of himself and
his Doctrine as spiritual, but styled Luther as carnal, earthly, and that had
published only a carnal Gospel, savouring nothing but the flesh, and (...) as
worse then the Pope. vid. Span^e(...) Diatri^. Hist. p. 5. Melch. Adam. vit.
Luther. p. 128. Liber adversus Lutherum a Munccro scriptus, dedicatus est
Christo principi illustrissimo, Lutherum flagellat, quod enthusiastic^ Spiritu
carcat and nihil nisi carnalia sapiat. So Mr. Dell in his Sermon called Right
Reformation, in the Epistle Dedicatory and the Reply to M. Love, vapors of
himself and his Doctrine as spiritual, in the power of the Spirit, etc. but
makes the Assembly, Mr. Love, and all Presbyterians carnal, worldly, worse
the^ Papists and Prelates
Apostles Peter and Jude speak of the Heretics of their times, upon occasion
of speaking evil of Dignities, and despising Dominion, so may we of ours,
These as natural bruit beasts made to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of
the things they understand not: In a word nothing pleases them, not the
Government nor any part of it; not the Laws, their design is to have all
pulled down, to have a total change made, that being abrasa tabula they might
write in it what they pleased, and might come to have the new modelling of
Church and* Commonwealth. O how like are our Sectaries to the old Anabaptists
of Munster and Germany! their very spirit having entered into our men: O how
like is John Lilburne to John of Leyden, as if he had been spit out of his
mouth, M. Dell to Thomas Muntzer! and so others of them to several great
Sectaries that I could name! I dare be bold to say, and can prove it, that the
old Anabaptists never delivered or held principles more destructive to humane
society to all kind of Government, both Political, Ecclestasticall and O
economicall, to all godliness and Religion, then many of our Sectaries; nay I
believe no instance can be given of them whilst they were under command, and in
the hands and power of the civil Magistrate, that ever they carried themselves
so scornfully and contemptuously to the supremest Courts and Judicatures of
Kingdoms and States, and committed such outrageous actions publicly even in
the worship of God against the Religion established, the faithful friends of
the States, as our have done.

4. Corol. Hence then we may plainly see, by what is laid down in this Book,
our evils are not taken away but only changed, or rather some persons and
instruments removed, not the evils. There are other men now under other habits
and names, do the same things, and far worse; for instance, one of the great
complaints against some Bishops was the One of the main things against the
Bishops in the Ministers Remonstrance presented to the House of Commons in the
beginning of the Parliament was that.
putting men into the Ministry and to preach, who had been Serving-men,
Barbers, and such like; behold it is now in fashion, worse are now suffered,
and that in such a way as the Bishops Lay-preachers never attempted, viz. to
put by painful Orthodox men from their places, whilst they with their
ignorance and errors starve and poison the peoples souls. Another great evil
under the Biships was the corrupting of Religion, and destroying it in time by
countenancing corrupt men, and discountenancing the zealous Orthodox under the
name of turbulent violent men, who made divisions, etc. and is no^ the same in
use among us now? Is it not more apparent by many Books written, Speeches, and
Actions, which hundreds and thousands are witnesses of, that a Toleration and
the ruin of the Protestant Religion is intended and designed now, then that
the Bishops intended to bring in Popery? Another great evil was the speaking
against and reproaching the Reformed Churches, and speaking evil of some of
the great Reformers, as Calvin, Beza, Knox, etc. which some of the Prelates and
their Chaplains in some of their Books, Sermons, Discourses, or Disputations in
the Universities, as Canterbury, Wren, Pocklington, Martin, Cosens, Duncombe,
Mountague had done, and O how were these cried out on for so doing, but alas,
now the Reformed Churches, particularly Scotland, whom we have covenanted to
defend, and according to the example of the best of them to reform, yet after
such a Covenant, both Churches and the prime Reformers, as Calvin, Knox, etc.
have been a thousand times worse reproached. And so I could go over all the
rest, and that not only in Religion, but in the matters of Justice, and the
Liberty of the Subject: but I must take off manum de tabula.

5. Coroll. Hence we may see by all the Errors, Heresies, strange Practices
discovered in this book, into what a condition we are fallen, and from what
fallen, that we can do and suffer such things as we do: I knew the time when it
might have been said of us as of the Angel in the 2. Revel. 2. we could not
have borne them that were evil, and this we had when we were at
worst, we hated the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, but now we have left our
first love zeal, are become a people that can suffer any thing, the twentieth
part of what we now make nothing of, but have pretenses, excuses and pleas for,
seven years ago would have made us cry out bitterly, kept days of fasting
and prayer for (though with the hazard of our lives and Liberties) made
complaints and spoken one to another, looked for the judgments of God to have
come upon us, but now we bear all; nay what was most evil in the Bishops and
their Chaplains, for which they (wicked men as they were commonly called) have
been cast out, as Popery, Arminianisme, profaning the Lords day, countenancing
Papists, Arminians, etc. is new light and new truth in Sectaries and
Independents, profaneness ahd ungodliness in them, is now become conscience,
godliness, Saintship. Now the grossest Arminianisme without making mince meat
of it can go down, we can swallow without any trouble Popish Arminian Pills,
and that without being wrapped in gold, yea Arrian Socinian Tenets, and what not:
We
hear of no Remonstrances, famous Speeches, plain home Sermons now against
errors in doctrine as heretofore, no Committees sitting upon Books, to deal
with Mr. Dens, Mr. John Goodwins, M. Burtons, and diverse others, as with
Mountagues, Dr. Jacksons, and Cosens Books: Magistrates, Ministers too silent,
the people also too contented and quiet, yea many instead of crying out and
being pained at heart love to have it so, will prefer a man and give a great
deal for some to preach errors among
them and disturb their faith, when as they will give nothing for an able man
every way qualified to preach the truth: God may take up that complaint of our
present times which he does by Jeremie; My people have committed two evils,
they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed to themselves
broken Cisternes that can hold no water, hew and be at a great deal of cost
and pains for puddle poisonous water, but reject and slieght a fountain of
pure and living waters.

6. Coroll. Hence then we may see from all the Errors, Heresies, Insolences of
many Sectaries in our Armies and among the Soldiers laid down in Gangr^na,
what a great plague and judgment of God to this Land some of our Armies and
Soldiery have been, and are now more then ever; namely in that so many
Commanders and Soldiers diffused throughout the Body of the whole Army, yea
some whole Troops and Regiments should be desperate Sectaries and Heretics. We
must needs be under a great plague to have those who should be the Instruments
of our safety, and have the sword in their hands, to be such kind of men, and
to do as they do: Heresies and Errors in any men are a great evil upon a Land,
a sad matter, but in the Soldiery it is armed impiety, who by power and force
may propagate and spread all kind of errors and opinions without control, and
by marching from Country to Country, have opportunity of infecting all parts
of a Land: Certainly the Sectaries in the Armies (I speak now as a Minister of
the Gospel, judging of things according to Scripture, and not according to
carnal policy and outward appearance) are the greatest plague and judgment of
God that has been upon this Kingdom this hundred years: when I hear daily of
the errors they scatter, the insolences they commit, and see what great evils
they are the cause of in Church and State, I often think of a passage in a
famous Speech, made by Sir Edward Deering in the beginning of this Parliament,
speaking of the corruptions in Religion among us, to be first remedied before
the Scots Army then in the Land to be considered of, used these words, or to
this effect: Let the sword rage from North to South, or it is better it should
rage from North to South, rather then the corruptions in Religion not be taken
away; so say(...), it had been better the Sword of the Enemy had raged from
North to South, then this Sword of Heresy, and Plague of Error like a Gangrene
should overrun the Kingdom as it does: T(...)is destroys the precious
souls, and I am fully assured, the Sectaries in the Armies have destroyed more
souls, and overthrown the faith of more with their heresies and wicked
opinions, then they have killed the bodies of their enemies with their Swords.
The constitution of our soldiery, so many Sectaries being in our Militia,
besides, that it is a great and fearful plague of it self, it is a great cause
of all other evils, it is that which emboldens the Sectaries all the Kingdom
over, and encourages that party to do so many
wicked things as they do daily, affront the House of Peers, abuse Scotland*
the City of London, Ministry, publicly print preach all kind of abominable
errors. It Is that which awes the good party, o^ at least out of policy makes
them not so zealnus and o^solute against the errors of the t(...). It Is that
keeps the Church Government from going on a pace, that is a great remora to the
punishing of Heretics, etc. it is that indeed which has infested and infected
the Kingdom so generally. There are few of our E^issaries and not (...)*
Sectaries but are o^ have been Soldiers, belonged to the Armies as Chaplains,
or one way or other have followed the Camp, they all smell of the Army, Hich,
Knollys, Erbury, Dell S^ltmars(...) Peter's, (...)cheler, etc. we (...)ay truly
say (...) a B(...): Our Ar(...) the N(...) of all (...) and a (...) evils, and
(...) we may see the true cause why all the Sectaries are so (...) war and
keeping up the Armies, can not abide to he (...) of (...)ing because their
Kingdom is in larged and maintained thereby* but certainly it will never be
well with the Kingdom* till the Armies be disb(...)ded, or at least (...)
(...)delled, the Sectaries put (...) God be me(...)ifull unto (...) we (...) in
strange hand^, and things are come to a strange pass, and all wise men who
have read Hi^ stories understand any thing, and by together many of the
Sectaries Speeches and Practices, conceive it cann^^ but be very perilous to
have the sword in so many ma(...)men's hands, and scare a new Tiragedy to be
acted like that in G(...) and at M(...)ster by the old Anabaptists, yea worse
(...) The godly Orth(...) Ministers and Christians, and all true hearted
English men may (...) out and say as in 10. Psalm. Help Lord, (...) wicked
walks ^n every fid^, when the vi(...), and with the Prophet* M(...)lachie (...)
Mal* 15. (...) the proud happy, y^^ they th(...), yea they that (...) God are
(...) delivered. The Sectaries of our Armies invading the Pulpits, abasing the
godly Ministers, laying wast and profaning the public places (...) apart for
Gods worship are like (...), and like (...) (...) (...) the Houses of God in
possession, nay they are like to those husbandmen in the 20. of Luke, that
reasoned among themselves saying; This is the heir, come, let us kill him,
that the inheritance may be ours: So they cast him out of the vineyard, and
killed him: The Sectaries knowing that so long as the godly Ministers and such
a Ministry continues in the Kingdom, they shall never do their work bring in
all heresy and confusion, the inheritance shall not be theirs, therefore they
set themselves to destroy the Ministry and Ministers, that the inheritance may
be theirs. The Apostle Paul 2. Tim. 3. bids Timothy know this that the
perilousnesse of times stands in false Teachers, seducers creeping into houses
to lead captive silly women, and in men reprobate concerning the faith
resisting the truth, and not in so much in Calvin. in 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2. Notandum
in quo asperitate^ vel duritiem temporum constituat, no^ in bello scilicet, nec
fame, nec ^orbis, nec aliis calamitatibus, vel incommodis quae corpor^
accidunt, sed in malis and pravis hominum moribus. Vide ibid. plura.
war, famine, nor other calamities which happens to the body, and therefore
makes this preface before it; this know also, implying it was not so well
known, and stirring up Timothy the better to attend to what he should ^ay and
now to know it. Now if those times be of all others the most perilous where
there are false teachers venting errors and here^ies but in a way of creeping
into houses, how perilous and dangerous are those times where there are false
Teachers and seducers (holding all sort of errors) armed, being Commanders and
Officers of Regiments and Companies, who creep not into houses, but openly
command houses and abide in them, and by their power can and do drive away the
faithful shepherds that should defend the sheep, that so the Wolves and Foxes
may the more freely devoute them; and that when they have ^avened and made
havoc in one place can march to another, and so go into all places by their
power, forcing and commandi^g what they please. All which clearly shows us we
are in a far worse condition then when the enemy was in the height of his
successes and victories at the taking of Bristow, or ever since the Parliament
began: God is more dishono^ed, precious souls more destroyed, all things
tending to Anarchy, Confusion and new Broils worse then before; Certainly in
God have any delight in this Kingdom, or purpose to do it good, he will
deliver us from this wicked generation of Sectaries one way or other: They
have, these three last years been increasing and growing very bad, but this
last year they have been outrageous: I am confidently persuaded if a
Commission were issued out from both Houses to faithful godly men (and they
backed with such power not to fear the Sectarian soldiers) to sit in the
several Counties to examine and enquire out the insolences and enormities of
the Sectarian soldiers and Chaplains that were in the noble Earl of
Manchesters Army, and now in Sir Thomas Fairfax'es Army, with assurance of
protection to the complainants and witnesses; there would be the dreadfullest
and abominablest things found out both in opinions and practices that ever were
heard of in any Army of Christendom, and most of the Cavaliers would be found
Saints to them, so that it is evident there is more need of disbanding and
cashi^ring the Companies and Regiments consisting most of Antinomians,
Anabaptists, Seekers, Antiscripturists, etc. then of Vand^^sks Regiment, of
which there were so many outcryes; and that justly too as I believe.

7. Corollar. Hence then by what is laid down in this Book of the. Errors,
Heresies, Practices, insolences of the Sectaries we may see that never in any
age or in any Christian State or Kingdom, whether Orthodox or Hetrodox
Protestant or Popish has there been such a sufferance and Toleration of those
who have been contrary minded to the Religion established by civil Authority,
as has been and is in our Kingdom. The Sectaries talk much upon all
occasions of Toleration and liberty of conscience in Holland, Poland,
Transylvania, France, Switzerland, Turkey but let any man look into those
Countries and but understand aright what is allowed in those places, and then
consider what is daily practiced in England and suffered without all
questioning, and he must needs confess there is no such liberty nor Toleration
in any of those places: enquire and ask after Holland, France, Poland, etc.
where there are Tolerations, whether, Sectaries, or Dissenters from what is
settled by the civil Sanction, do come into public Churches, causing tumults
and riots, and by violence put by the Ministers from preaching, pulling them
out of their Pulpits, abusing them grossly, and preach openly with all kind of
reproaches against the established Religion? whether Books are suffered to be
printed with license and sold openly, ^enting all kind of errors, blasphemies,
yea branding with most odions names the Religion established, and the supreme
Authority who settles it? yea daring to present into the hands of, and at the
doors of the houses where the supreme Judicatories sit, Books and Cornewells
vindication of (...)ng Jesus his Commission, Conf^ssion of Faith of the
Anabaptists.
Pamphlets, with A Protestation attested before Anthony Luther Justice of Peace.
Protestations against what themselves have enacted? whether great numbers of
Emissaries, Mechanics of all sorts are suffered to be daily sent forth into
all parts of their Countries and Kingdoms to draw away the people from their
Religion? and if any man in authority dare be so bold to molest them, though
they abuse Magistrates to their faces, yet they are one way or other delivered,
and presently fall the faster to their work again, whether the way to
preferment and places of honor, profit, trust, command be in those Countries
to oppose and to be most active against the Religion and Government
established? and the ready way to be kept out of all such places, and by one
device or other to be turned out, yea to be brought in trouble be for a man to
be zealous for the Religion and way of worship settled in that Country? whether
in any of those Countries if those who be Heretics and Schismatics, or
Dissenters only from what the Magistrates of the Countries have established
being called in question by those in highest place for writing against and
reproaching their Ordinances and Laws, and thereupon affronting them to their
faces and writing Books publicly against them, have they notwithstanding
continuing in all contempt escaped without punishment? and received those
favors and privileges which none before them (though never so conformable to
the Laws and State) have received, and so I might instance in many other like
particulars: Now I challenge any man in all his reading or traveling, to give
me any such instances in Holland, France, Transylvania, Turkey, etc. but I can
give many proofs in all these kinds within these three last years in England.
In the Bishops times before this Parliament there was great favor showed
toward Papists and persons Popishly affected, but did they come into our
Churches established by Law and bringing their Priests put by our Ministers
from preaching and celebrating the Lords Supper, and set up against the will of
the Ministers and Parishioners their own Priests to preach points of
Doctrines, and to say Mass; or did the Bishops when Popery was most
countenanced, suffer Popish Books railing against our Ministry, Church, etc.
to be licensed by their Chaplains and sold openly: In the Kings late Armies
where (as it has been reported) there have been many Papists and Popish
Commanders, yea and Priests, did they ever where they were quartered drive away
by force the Protestant Ministers, and in the midst of the public exercises on
Lords days come with their soldiers and disturb them in Prayers, preaching,
and put up their Priests in their rooms* I never heard of any one such example
in this kind; O what outcryes would these things have made if done either by
Bishops or Papists, but these things are ordinarily and daily practiced by the
Sectaries; Indeed the liberty the Sectaries now have in England is rather a
Domination then a Toleration, a Reign rather then a sufferance, yea their
Reign and Domination is swelled so high that the godly Ministers and Christians
who are for the Church Government and way established by Parliament have much a
do to be tolerated and suffered, nay in many places they cannot serve God
quietly, nor live in peace but are affronted, molested, thereatned, yea their
lives hazarded: The Dommation and Insolences of the Sectaries in England both
in City and Country are unsufferable, and beyond all example; and let but all
things be considered, the nature of the Laws and civil Government of England
that all the people are subject to the same Laws, and all the Countries of
this Kingdom under the obedience of King and Parliament, none exempt, not some
parts under one, and some under another, as in the Cantons and some other
Countries, as also that great and solemn Covenant taken for the nearest
uniformity in Doctrine, Government, etc. and the extirpation of all heresy,
schism, etc. with some other such like considerations, I am ready upon my life
to make it good at the Bar of both Houses, that there is in England the
greatest sufferance and countenance of a Dissenting party from what is held out
and established by Authority, that ever was in any age where there was a
Christian Magistrate, or that is in any part of the world whatsoever at this
day: the Toleration in Holland, France, Transylvania, etc. in many things
falling short of that liberty the Sectaries here enjoy. I had thought upon and
drawn up twelve pregnant particulars with the proofs wherein the Toleration
here is greater then in those Countries, but I must defer them till the fourth
part of Gangraena, having enlarged this part already so much beyond the former
parts, and my intentions, and shall conclude this seventh Corollarie, that if
the Sectaries shall be still suffered to go on and all kind of errors and
opinions vented for the future, as they have been for these three or four last
years, this will be such a thing as never was read or heard of in any age, or
among any people, that the end and issue of a solemn National Covenant made
with God another Kingdom
and one another for Reformation, should end in a universal Toleration and
Confusion both in Church and State.

8. Corollar. Hence then we may plainly see by many speeches, passages in
Letters, facts, insolences of the Sectaries related in this Book, that the
Sectaries hold not to their principles of Toleration and Liberty of Conscience,
but only in receiving it, they will not give it (when and where they have the
power of giving it) unto others: The Sectaries in all their Books, Sermons,
Speeches, Discourses contend for liberty of Conscience, and that no man should
suffer any thing from another for his differing in opinions from him, or be
hindered in printing and speaking his conscience, and yet if the Reader do but
remember the several passages I have laid down of the Sectaries dealings with
godly Presbyterians in City and Country, Army and Ministry, and in all places,
he must necessarily conclude when they are grown strong enough, and where they
can they will suffer none but themselves. In all ages Heretics and Sectaries
at their first rising, when but a few and weak have cried for Toleration,
liberty of Conscience, but when by being let alone they have grown to great
numbers, and by their industry, subtilty and activity have got power in their
hands, then they have been the greatest persecutors of all others, denying all
liberty to the Orthodox, and this the Ecclesiastical Histories of all times
both ancient and modern show. Thus the Donatists, Arrians, Anabaptists of
(...), (...) in Holland with other such like maintained and pleaded for a
Toleration ^anquam pr^ aris and focis, and yet after a time that either they
got Princes and Magistrates (...) their (...), or being increased in number got
the sword into their (...), they killed, banished, spoiled of their goods,
threw out of offices and places all those who were not of their opinions.
Socrates Scholastic. lib. 2. c. 21. 22. 23. relates at large the Arrians, and
Sebastianus a Manichee fearful persecutions and unheard of cruelties against
the Orthodox Bishops and people: The violence truly was no less then that of
old, practiced toward the Christians, when they were compelled and drawn to
sacrifice unto Idols. For many endured sundry kinds of torment, men racking and
dismembring of their joints, confiscating of their substance: Some bereaved of
their native soil, other so(...)e departed this life under the hands of the
tormentor; some dyed in banishment, and never saw their Country again, They
banished diverse Bishops, and being bereaved of their native soil they handled
so roughly, that some of them dyed by the way, some other in exile never
returning again. They put to death above 30. Bishops. They followed the steps
of wicked Ahab, employing all their care and industry for the rooting out of
the truth from of the face of the earth. Danaeus in August. de Haeresib. cap.
69. shows, when the Donatists were increased in number, and head infected all
Africa, so that many whole Cities fell to that way, they then grew insolent
and offered violence to the Orthodox till Dulcitius a Tribune of Soldiers
being sent against them by Honorius the Emperor restrained their violence and
injuries against the Christians. Thomas Muntzer preached that all things should
be in common according to the example of the Primitive Church* and those of the
richer sort who would not be persuaded by Arguments, he by force and fear of
worse compelled them thereunto: At Munster community of all goods is commanded
by the Anabaptists John of Leyden, Knipperdolling, etc. upon pain of death:
John of Leyden rages against those that dissented, and by the slaughter of a
great many strengthens his Tyranny; so that upon the pleasure of this man
depended not only the estates, but even the lives of every one of the Citizens.
Whosoever durst but speak a word in jest of the Prophets, was accused of
Treason, and made a sacrifice to the lu^^s of those miscreants; and all divine
and humane right trodden under foot. Spanh. Diatr. Histori. Hence it is an
observation of Vedelius in his Arcan. Armin. par. 4. lib. 2. cap. 8. that the
disposition of Heretics is such, that it is impossible for them when they have
got strength, to moderate themselves from persecuting of the Orthodox.


And thus our present Independents and Anabaptists notwithstanding all their
pretenses of liberty and conscience have and do (where they are in power and
can by any way or means suppress) prosecute Presbyterians to the utmost, and
indeed for this very end plead for liberty, and work night and day too get
into all places of power and command both military and (...).

It were too long to relate all the instances of godly Ministers and other
worthy men troubled and complain^d of by them to Committees, of honest
Christians troubled by the^ means for discharging their consciences in
petitioning the Parliament, and Common Council, of all the godly Ministers put
by from preaching in their own Churches by Sectaries, and of their retusing to
let godly Ministers of the Presbyterian judgment preach in any Chapels and
Churches where they have power, of the many threatening speeches spoken by them
against the godly Ministers, that they would leave never a Priest in England,
that the Presbyterians should be dealt with as Malignants, sequestered ere long,
and such like, of their not licensing any books or matters of Intelligence, but
stopping the Press all they can to men not of their judgment, of their
incensing and strring up the Parliament in printed books to punish godly
Ministers for laying open the Errors of the times, of their laboring to keep
out of all places in Parliament, Armies, Livings, etc. Orthodox godly men, of
their putting affronts upon, hindering of pay, turning out of places by one
trick or other the faithfullest and worthiest men, if Presbyterians, yea going
against all principles of Justice, Honor, Rules of War, Gallantry: What
should I speak of all the affronts,
neglects, complaints of, troubles, vexations, which have happened to many
gallant, valiant, faithful Commanders, and all because Anti-Independents, by
means of the Sectaries, as Sir Willam Waller, Major General Massey, Major
General Skippon, Colonel Harvey, Colonel King, Colonel Whaley, Major Fincher,
Adjutant General Gray, Lieutenant Colonel Kempson, Lieutenant Colonel Jackson,
etc. besides the putting by of some from their places; what gallant man almost
is there, but has been heaved at, complained of some way or other, affronted
by some Sectaries, and neglected by having men put over their heads into
commands, and they unpreferd, though places void: There are strange, but true
stories in the Army in this ^ind, and some keep a Register of them, and when
time shall serve, may make them known, though for the present, because they
see how strong the stream runs, and for the quietness of the Army they are
silent, though they cannot but speak to their friends of these things. I have
been told from a good hand upon the occasion of Adjutant General Grayes being
questioned at a Council of War for reading the City Remonstrance, that a
great Commander of that Army writ a letter to another great Commander to this
effect, that he wondered that they who were so much for liberty of conscience,
and a Toleration for themselves, would not afford the same to other men; but
that Adjutant General Gray, because he was a Presbyterian, and that according
to his conscience should have Articles put in against him, and be so violently
prosecuted: And if the Sectaries dare do thus whilst they are a laboring for a
Toleration (as they say) before they know whether they shall prevail and have
the upper hand, when it is evident the House of Peers, the Kingdom of Scotland,
the City of London, the Ministry of the Kingdom and the body of the people
are against them, yea and whatever they vapor the greater part of the House of
Commons too, what will they do if ever they should get their way established by
a law, and come to have all the strength of the Kingdom in their hands, what
will they do when they are masters of the Presbyterians, that thus persecute
them whilst they are Probationers? Q^id facient Domini, a^dent cum tali^ fures?
and therefore by these beginnings of Persecution, these Kingdoms of England
and Scotland may judge what to trust to, and look to find, if ever these men
come to have power in their hands: they will be as bad as the Circumcelliones
among the Donatists, as those Anabaptists to the Citizens of Munster, they will
be desperate persecutors of the faithful Ministers of Christ, thinking they
shall do God good service in killing them. The Lords may know what to trust to
if ever the Sectaries prevail, The Scots had best look to it also, they will
find them worse neighbors a hundred times then ever the
Bishops were, all the reformed Churches had need contribute their help against
them, for if they prevail, they will all suffer and be much disturbed in their
place. The Assembly of Divines shall feel their liberty of conscience, The
City of London and Citizens shall be reckoned with, and paid for their
Petitions and late Remonstrance; The House of Commons also may assure
themselves, they shall feel their power when they are grown strong enough, as
is evident by many threatening passages in Pamphlets of the Sectaries,
especially those Members of the House who are not theirs, but have vigorously
appeared against them, they will
pull them out by the head and ears, and kick them out of the House: Certainly
the House of Commons so great and understanding a body, notwithstanding many
flattering Petitions of late to them, crying them up in late Pamphlets above
the House of Peers, and protesting deeply to be at their service and command
against all the world, cannot be so weak as to believe them, and to think if
the Sectaries get power into their hands, and overthrow the House of Peers,
Ministers, City, that they shall escape and not follow after: they have
written, spoken, done as much against them as the House of Peers, Ministers,
City, and no question will again as they see their advantage, or are
discontented, or upon some new light that they were not chosen by all the
freemen
of England, but only by the Prerogative men the Freeholders: No man knows
where these Sectaries will stop or stay, or to what Principles they will keep,
and is there any safety then in adhering to such a party, and caring to please
them who are off and on: It Is evident even in those Books made against the House
of Peers, and in which the Commons and their Power are so cried up, that many
things are laid down destructive to that House, and in the midst of flattering
the House of Commons, they brand them with in justice, meddling with what they
have nothing to do with, as matters of Religion: As the fit takes them they now
will cry crucify them, crucify them, but what may they expect from that party
if once all the Militia and strength should be in their hands? To conclude this
Corallary, I say, God keep me and all true Presbyterians from that liberty of
conscience the Sectaries would give us if we lay at their mercy, and liberty of
conscience were theirs to give.

9. Coral. Hence then from what I have laid down of the Sectaries, as in a
Mirror and Crystal Glass we may with open face behold the true bottom
cause of all our evils and mischeifs both in Church and State, the maine reason
of the obstructions of all good things, why Religion and Church Government not
yet settled, why Ireland not releived, peace not attained, and the great ground
of all the miseries upon us, why such jealosies and differences have been
between England and Scotland, such discontents taken at London, why the
Assembly and godly Ministers of the Kingdom slighted, many well-affected
Counties offended, Petitions not regarded, the well-affected discouraged, many
great greivances not remedied, many Delinquents protected and not called to an
account, strange Articles given to some in Arms at some places contrary to
Ordinances of Parliament, illegal elections of Members of the House of Commons
taking place, so many scandalous pamphlets against Monarchy, the House of
Peers and House of Commons sold openly, such high insolences committed against
the House of Peers as never were in any age, with many more, namely that great
love and favor of Sectarisme and Errors in too many persons of our times: This
is the spring that feeds all our evils, the primum mobile, or great wheel that
turns all the rest about: Hence it is no matter though Ireland be lost, England
and Scotland embroyled, Parliament and London at a distance, the godly
Ministers hearts lost, the Kingdom offended, Armies and great Taxes continued,
etc. rather then any thing be done against Sectaries: Sectaries must not be
dis-eased or displeased what ever come of it, they must be nourished and
increase, Erastian principles must be maintained and cried up, profaneness let
alone, open wicked men joined with, and all to further Sectarisme and Liberty
of Conscience so called. Whosoever knows and has observed the present affairs
and state of things cannot but see the truth of what I now say; and I challenge
any man to instance in any one thing at least for these last twelve months,
wherein so many evils have been and are upon us, but I will rationally resolve
into that, and though other pretenses have been held out, as sometimes
privileges, sometimes the liberty and safety of the subject, sometimes
godliness, sometimes unseasonablesse an unfit time, etc. many things folded
together, and indeed the love of Sectarisme sometimes so wrapped up in them that
not discerned by all, as in all ages men have not wanted pretenses, yet ^is
apparent to all wise men that this is the very cause. Is it not evident
whatever has been pretended, the true cause of all the jealosies, differences
and faults found with the S^ots, to be a great love and care of Sectaries whom
we know the Scots so hate, and therefore have done it out of revenge? Is it not
evident the true and only reason of the Cities being so slighted, reviled, such
a change of carriage toward them to arise from their appearing against the
Sects and Errors of the times, and striking in with the Ministers to join for
a thorough Presbyteriall Government? have not all the alterations toward the
City been since that time, and began at that time? Is it not evident whatever
is pretended, as want of time, the fear of the Tyranny of Ministers, etc. the
cause why Religion and the Church Government is no better settled to be the
love of Error and Heresy which they know the Government would destroy? And so
I might go thorough the rest, and therefore we may see to whom, and to what to
attribute all the mischeifs and evils that are upon us, and further hang over
us. Canterbury, Strafford, or whom else you will name, out of designs of
Popery or absolute greatness, or what else you will imagine, were never
greater causes of all the evils and mischeifs in their times, of differences
with the Scots, of invading the liberties of the subject, etc. then some men
among us are of our present evils, and all to uphold the faction of Sectaries
and Opinionists and to make way for a Toleration, which to advance and bring
about and themselves by that to greatness of place and estate, and to
licentiousness of living, they are so madly set upon it, that they care not
to run the hazard of ruining three Kingdoms, and reducing all into a Chaos of
confusion in Church and State, that so they man have the creating of all new,
and erect their Babell. But it may be some will say, it is wonder there should be
so great a party loving and favoring Sectarisme and Error, as to be able to
hinder things thus, and to disturb the Kingdoms, and if there should be so,
what may be the true reason of the exceeding great favoring of all kind of
Sectaries and Libertines. 1. I answer, there are some men who have been and
are but mean in outward estate, birth, and place, and others though richer in
the world, yet below in the valleys in comparison, and being exceeding
ambitious, proud, covetous, and withal subtle, apprehending also by reason of
these deep distractions and troubles in the State, an opportunity of becoming
great and raising themselves by being the heads of a great party, and getting
an interest and great power in many people, and knowing
the corruption of men's hearts, how pleasing liberty and to have a man's swinge
is, and observing which way the pulse of the present times beat, thereupon have
set themselves to stand for, countenance all kind of Errors and all kind of men
whatever they be that do walk in irregular ways: These men being Politicians
know that the appearing for any one Sect two or three, and restraining the rest
will not do their work, make them the heads of such a considerable party as be
able to deal with the
opposition they may likely meet with in their ambitious designs, but if they
would do good upon it, they must let loose the rains to all Errors whatsoever,
Errors against the Scriptures, against denying a God, the Trinity, etc. they
must prefer all sorts of men of those principles one as well as another,
constantly stand by, and appear for all that are questioned in that way let
their opinions be what they will, their carriages never so insolent in the
spreading of them, and their persons never so unworthy and contemptible, on the
contrary opposing, undermining and breaking all those who are active against
their party, and by thus doing, proclaiming as it were open liberty to all men
according to their several ways and lusts, Papists, Atheists, Libertines,
etc. they are in a fair way in some convenient time (keeping off any thing too
from being settled) to have so many friends as to be able to help them into the
saddle, especially at a time when others are justled out. Jeroboam to keep the
people to him, and to strengthen the Kingdom, fearing least they should
return from him to Rehoboam, took counsel and made two golden Calves, and
said to the people it is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, and instead of
the sons of Levi made Priests of the people, for the Calves which he had
made, and whosoever would might become one of the Priests: So there are too
many in our days that they may get the people to them, and strengthen their
power have made golden Calves, set up the Doctrine of Toleration of all
Religions, a worshipping of Calves, and give liberty to whosoever will the
lowest of the people to be Priests, Cobblers, Shoe-makers, Tinkers, Tailors, to
preach, administer Sacraments, etc. and that because it is too much for the
people, as Jeroboam said, too much slavery, subjection to depend upon
Ministers, too much for the people to pay Tyths and part with so much of their
means, they shall enjoy all freely, and thus by prophesying ^alse Doctrine,
and allowing whoever will to prophecy they may come to bear rule by that
means, as Jeremie speaks. 2. Though there seem not Sectaries, viz. formal
Sectaries, so many as to be able to carry things thus to the disturbance of the
Kingdom, yet if we consider whom they make use of, and strike in with, and by
their policies and activities, pretenses have drawn in to their party; no
wonder Sectarisme has such a power and influence upon affairs, for with the
Sectaries are joined the loosest and wickedest men, whom they tell they will
let enjoy their lusts, not force them to go to Church, or any Government, the
men who have got good offices and places of profit, who before they had such
were
known (diverse of them) to go contrary, but now stick close to them to keep
their places, needy mean men, that so they may get something by fishing in
troubled waters, guilty obnoxious men, that they be kept from being called to
account, men unduly and illegally chosen into places, that so they may not be
turned out, some simple weak men who are by the Sectaries cunning, putting fair
glosses upon soul things, and jumbling other things of interest of the
Kingdom, public sa^ety, liberty, etc. merely cheated: Now all these joining
with them, and they to gain and keep them, applying themselves in suitable
ways to every one of these sorts, every wise man may easily conceive how
Sectaries may prevail as they do, here is a chain
consisting of so many links as may draw a great weight after it, though all
this while the first link is the love of Sectarisme and errors unto which all
the other are fastened, and that which draws all the rest, this is the Head
Faction, the others only subservient, this first raised and now upholds all the
rest to uphold it self, and these others without that could not stop all the
good, and be the cause of so many mischiefs and evils that are upon this
Kingdom.

10. Coral. Hence then from all this Discovery of the Sectaries laid down in
this Book, their Errors, strange ways, insolent proceedings, many middle men
well-meaning people drawn in by them, merely co^oned by their fair pretenses
and specious shows, should upon this making them so naked, and pulling the
Sheeps skins over the Wolves years, come out from them, and instead of siding
any longer with them, turn to the Ortho ^ox godly party, to help the Lord
against them; as also such Presbyterians who know the Sectaries well, should
from all this be stirred up to shake off their dullness, laziness, and become
active, vigilant, diligent, naturally caring for the state of things,
contending and striving earnestly for the truth of God against the Sectaries of
these times; and now in the conclusion of this Third Part I will hint a few
things both to those who have been deceived by the Sectaries, and to the
Presbyterians who well know them. To the first sort, consider, have you not
been too long cheated and carried along with fair pretenses almost to the
utter ruin of Religion and the Kingdom? have you not, and do you not see in
many affairs one thing pretended and another intended? do you not see
evidently that their godliness is gain and great places, that their zeal for
preaching and spreading the Gospel,
is to have all Errors and Heresies of a sudden spread over the Kingdom, and
so in other things, and will you still suffer your selves to be deceived by
them? there are some who were courted and complemented with, and do confess
they were deceived by them, and have left them, do you so likewise, and
deliver your selves and the Kingdom thereby out of this Babell. Secondly,
consider you had as good leave them at first as at last, for either you must
resolve to go thorough with them in all their designs, and to the highest,
which I suppose midling well meaning men intend not, but abhor to think of, or
else if not, then when they have by your help effected and brought about their
ends, they will cast you off, and you shall be served with the same sauce as
the zealous Presbyterians, thus the Prelates served diverse whom they made use
of, and would not go on with them in every thing, and so will the Sectaries
serve many well-meaning men who know not the depths of Satan, therefore it is
better for you to leave them, then that they being made strong by your means
should in the end ruin and destroy you; and let such moderate well-meaning men
know, that if they will still adhere to that party after all these discoveries
of them, God will look upon them as partakers of all their sins, will destroy
them with the Sectaries, and they are like to perish in the gainsaying of
Core; and therefore I bespeak* them in the words of Moses, Numb. 16. 26. Depart
I pray you from the Tents of these wicked men, touch nothing of theirs, least
ye be consumed in all their sins; fear, suspect every motion that comes
from that party, though it seem never so good, though propounded by others not
of their way, and if it be not a thing exceeding clear and certain to thee,
take heed of closing in with it, rather suspend and advise upon it: for these
Sectaries often act by other men, get good men who see not their depths to
promote their cause, hiding always the hook of their designs under the bait
of privilege, liberty, safety, godliness, all which are not regarded by them,
but the doing of their work, the increase of Sectarisme and Error. For the
other sort the Presbyterians, consider, what a shame it is that a handful of
men in comparison should by their activity, diligence, minding their work,
bring things to that pass they are, in our Armies, Councels, City, Country,
and the Presbyterians of both Kingdoms ten times as many ^it still (as it
were) and suffer them? Oh if so few have done so much, and that in a
bad cause, what might not we do in a good cause, if courageous, zealous, and
intent upon it? certainly we might in a short time break the hearts and the
neck of that faction; and in special, if the City of London and the Government
of it would appear as
they might, and when they have begun, follow and prosecute it in beginning to
put the Laws in execution against those who come not to Church, in punishing
those Sectaries who live under their jurisdiction and government for abusing
them in print, in taking care that no Sectarie have any office or place of
government in the City, in petitioning the Parliament again and again, they
might by the blessing of God quickly remedy all: If I should but mind the City
of the solemn Covenant they have taken to endeavor in their places the
extirpation of Heresy and S^hisme, of what the Kingdom, all good and honest
men expect from them in this kind, of all the affronts and injuries they have
suffered from that party, and by means of that party, and of all they shall
surely suffer from that party if they prevail, be trampled upon
and made slave^, used as the poor Citizens of Munster were by the
Anabaptists; these and many such other would make them take heart, arise and be
doing; but I shall conclude all with turning my self to Christ, and that in
the words of Ve^elius in alike case against the Arminians of Holland, V^d^l.
Arcan. Armin. Par. 4. page 260.
Arise O Lord Jesus, have mercy upon these Kingdoms, vindicate thy own glory.
To thee who with the Father and the holy Spirit art that one and only true God,
be honor, glory and praise for ever,

Amen.
Postscript.
GOod Reader, I conceive before this time thou have expected my larger and
fuller Reply to Cretensis, promised in the Second Part of Gangraena; as also
some Answers from me to several Pamphlets put out against some Parts and
pieces of my Gangraenaes, as to Master Burrowes Vindication, Gangraena plays
Rex, Lancesters-La^ce, Gangraena-chrestum, A Discovery of a Beam in Master
Edwards his eye, A Prediction of Master Edwards conversion, A Parable or
Consultation of Physicians upon Master Edwards, Some passages of S^^tmarsh
against me, printed in a Pamphlet against Master Gataker, Master Ley and some
others: Now of all these or most of these, I shall give so good an account and
reason at this time, as I question not will very well satisfy the Reader: For
my fuller Reply unto Cretensis (some part whereof was printed before the Second
Part of Gangraena came forth) I proceeded no further upon these Reasons: Many
judicious and learned friends told me I had given such a satisfactory Answer
already to Cretensis, that they thought the Second needless, and desired me
rather to set forth some other Tractates; as also upon the coming out of my
Second Part of Gangraena I was assured from some who at the press and from the
press had seen diverse sheets and read some part, that an Answer of Cretensis
to my Antapologie was printing, and would come abroad ^re long; whereupon I
thought best to deal with Master Goodwin once for all, to take that in, make
it all one work, and not to trouble my self any more with him till the man
should come to write matter and Reason, and not only words and mere flourishes.
Now before his Anapologesi^t^s Antapologias came forth, I was resolved upon
writing this Third Part, and had entered upon it, and so till I had finished
that, and another that is to follow upon it, viz. A Treatise against
Toleration, I purposed to let Cretensis alone; only I have among other great
Sectaries spoken something of him in this Book, and that upon occasion of his
38. Queries upon the Ordinance against Heresies, and other things that have
come to my knowledge concerning him. As for his pretended Reply to my
Antapologie besides the censure given of it in page 120. of this Book, I
affirm, it is an Answer unworthy a Scholar or an ingenuous man, and such a one
as I am confident never any man who had the name of a Divine, and in
Controversies of Divinity ever gave the like, instead of answering Arguments,
Reasons, matters of fact, to fill up many sheets with finding and making faults
in words and phrases, playing the part of a Grammaticastor, a Paedantical
usher, and a sub-corrector of the press, rather then of a learned Answerer:
for suppose all those Grammatical literal exceptions raked together were faults
indeed, and let passed by me (all he says in that kind true) which I deny, and
shall prove the contrary (some of them being the faults of the Printer, and by
me put in among Errata, others of them good Grammar, yea Elegancies and
Proverbiall sayings) yet what is all that to my Antapologie? though there be
many Grammatical and litterall faults, improper phrases, harsh and hard
expressions, how do these Answer Reasons, disprove matters of fact, vindicate
and set right the Apologetical Narration, which must be done to satisfy any
judicious and impartial Reader? I appeal to any man who has common sense or
reason, whether matters of fact charged, be proved false, or reasons made weak,
or they be answered, by saying there was a verb left out, the nominative case
and verb were no^ well put together, the antecedent and the relative not
rightly placed, such a phrase was harsh or improper, and whether such a kind of
Answer be not ridiculous to Scholars and learned men? It has been the course
of many men who have had a bad cause, and knew not how to maintain it with
Arguments, to slight the men who have wounded their cause, as no scholar^, and
to brand their books as wanting learning; thus some Papists have done in Answer
to Protestants, Prelates to Non-conformists, and Arminians to the Orthodox, but
Master Goodwin is gone a note beyond all, further then ever any Author did, to
spend his time and abuse the reader with giving him Grammatical faults; what
Book is there writ by any man (especially one who has much other work) of
forty sheets, that if a Reader will set himself to find faults and to wyer-draw
every word and phrase, may not find such faults enough between the Author whose
mind is intent upon the matter and scope of his work, and the Printer at the
press? I could give many instances of greater Errata in this kind, in Books of
the most learned men, then any Cretensis has observed in mine, and that both
in Latin and English, but I shall instance only in two, Voe^ius his Book
entitled Desperata causa Papatus, and Rivets Catholicus Orthodoxus; nay, I
will undertake Master Goodwins Answer to the Antapologie (though it consists of
fewer sheets has the largest Errata of any such English book I have seen this
last five years, the design of the book being also to disparage me by observing
false English, improper Phrases, etc. and therefore cannot be but in reason
expected he would be more specially careful and exact in that kind then in
other of his Books) to find and prove more faults in all those kinds, yea
grosser then any are in mine; and indeed the man trips in all tongues he makes
use of in his Book, both Greek Latin and English, as I shall hereafter show,
nay the man stumbles in Limine, the first word of his Title page and Book being
false Greek, using a word viz. Anapologesiates, there being none such in the
Greek tongue; and if he say he meant it not one word, but two, (...) having
relation to Antapologias, I Reply, it is strange that in the Title page he who is
such a severe Critic upon other men's words should have no greater care of his
own then to let them so pass, as to let two words be put in one: but 2ly
granting Master Goodwin this Salvo, yet it is false Greek, for it should be (...)
with an Eta, not with an Epsilon as he makes it.

And I suppose were there no other proofs of the strength and weight of my
Antapologie, Master Goodwins Reply to it would be a sufficient and
demonstrative testimony, that he after two years and upwards for want of
substantial objections and material exceptions against it, should fall upon
words and phras^s, Grammatical mistakes, and not Theological, show himself
such a T^ifler and Scribler as he has done, for which learned work (I assure
him) he will never be reckoned among the Schoolmen, however
he may and has been among the Schoolboyes. That man who has a Lordship a
Manor propounded to him, and after a full view of, and enquiry into it, can find
no fault with the Tenure, Title, dweling house, water, wooding, situation of
it, etc. but cavils that some strawes are upon the ground, some sticks are
broken in a hedge, a pane or two of glass is cracked, the Evidences for the
Land are not so fairly written, nor in so good language as they might possibly
have bin, it is a good sign and clear Argument it is an excellent Manor and
Lordship that nothing else is objected against it. So when a Book has passed
the test and trial of a cruel adversary who dares say any thing so it will
serve his turn, and yet can find nothing to except against it, but what is
common to all men's Books, some mistakes in words and phrases, Errata of the
Press, (there being no Book without such) such a man instead of weakening the
Authority of that Book, has among all wise men with a high hand confirmed it
and accquitted it from all the aspersions and imputations of weakness,
falsenesse; all men concluding had there been any great matters of exceptions,
they would have been produced, and not the time spent in picking of strawes,
and catching of flies, catching at words and phrases, and letting the matter
alone. And for conclusion of this, I would have this Trifler and great Rabbi of
the English tongue know, that though in his conceit I cannot put the Nominative
case and Verb together, etc. yet by the help of God, I can put such sense and
reason together, such matters of fact and truth together, that in the
controversies of the times of the Church, Government, Toleration, mixed
Communion, Laymens preaching, etc. I can put Cretensis and the Apologists
together, answer them; and offer to deal with any of them, or all of them upon
any of the points controverted, and I can put forth an Answer to their new
Model and shake their Babel; and if God spare me life and h^al^h but a few
years, they shall find by Gods gracious help, that by my pen and preaching
(not with swords and armed men as they propagate their cause) I shall make
Independencie, Anabaptisme, all kind of Sectarisme and a Toleration as vild and
cheap as ever L^tther made the Popes Supremacy, Indulgences and Pardons,
Purgatory, and the Doctrine of merit; and however Master Goodwin pu^s a bold
face upon it, writing thus to cast a scorn, jeare, and a blur upon my writings,
which he cannot tell how to Answer yet I know and can prove it, he and his
party fear my writings, and are more troubled at them then at any other man's
who has yet appeared. As for Mr Buroughs Vindication, presently after it came
forth I drew up an Answer to it of about some ten sheets, an Answer so full,
that hardly a line escaped without some Animadversion; and had I thought his
time had been so short, it had come forth in his life, that he might have
confidered what he had done in that Answer (which I had in a plain home way
charged on his Conscience) and how unlike the spirit that breathed in that Book
was to what Master Buroughs had written of a gracious spirit, of
Self-denial, of Love and brotherly agreement (being a book made up of great
passion, horrible pride, scornfulnesse, equivocations, many un truths as I have
fully showed) but being more careful and zealous of Gods name and truth, then
mine own, and seeing that so deeply suffer in the Errors, Heresies,
Blasphemies, Insolent practices of the Sectaries, I laid my Answer by, from
fully perfecting it till I had put forth a Third Part of Gangraena, and a
Treatise against Toleration, then resolving to reassume my Answer to Master
Buroughs, Master Goodwin, and some others of them: but it has pleased God
(before my Third Part of Gangraena could be printed) to take Master Buroughs
out of this life (for which I am heartily sorry, and the more, besides that I
should have bin glad he might have read my book, because I do conceive the
putting it forth after his death may be liable to more mis-constructions then
it could have been in his life time) so that now whether I should publish it I
or no, or rather let it dye with Master Buroughs, I am in suspense, and shall
advise upon it what may be best in that case; however I am fully satisfied it is
lawful for a man in several cases to put out Answers to Books though the
Authors of them be dead; and in regard Master Buroughs dealt so uuworthily
with me, I might be well excused if I should put it forth; but whether I do or
no, I desire the Reader to take notice of my Answer to two or three
particulars, I for his excusing himself about that objected, he gave under his
hand concerning the story of Nichols, by saying the story of Nichols page 79.
is all false (all of it being proved true, and a mistake only in a
Circumstance) that he meant only that part of it in that page, not meddling with
that in another page: I Answer, This is a new equivocation brought to salve the
other; for as the first was an equivocation upon the word such a meeting, so
this is upon the page 79. and if he intended not to deceive the Reader by
possessing him against me, why did he not say, that part of the story of one
Nichols page 79. was false, but that story Master Edwards has, which implies
the whole, and it is apparent Mr Goodwin, and all Mr Buroughs friends took it
so, viz. of the whole; and if Master Buroughs had been alive, I had provided
an Appeal to his Conscience to have put him to answer me as in the presence of
God, whether in writing that paper sent to Cretensis, he did not think men
would not, or could not find it out, but would take it as conceiving all that
story of Nichols false; and if Master Buroughs had meant fairly, why did he
not acknowledge what was true in the story, as the first part now confessed
true, and for the Second Part of it, why did he not confess at a meeting
Master Greenhill told him such and such things, and that he answered Mr
Greenhill so and so, and have denied it was a set meeting upon that occasion?
If Mr Buroughs had done thus, he had dealt fairly, but this would not have
made good Mr Buroughs his end to breed a belief in the Reader of the
falsenesse of matters related in my book, I had then bin rendered to the Reader
only mistaken in a circumstance of a story which would have been accounted no
great matter, and the truth of the story for the substance and the several
particulars in it would have weighed down all misprision in the minds of men
against me by reason of that circumstance. 2. For that Master Buroughs charges
me with page 2, and 3. that when I have heard vild reproachful things against
such as I owned to be godly, and they living near me in the City have sent to
me to offer to satisfy me if I would confer with them, and clearly convince me
of the falsenesse of such reports, how the men were traduced and I abused in
such reports, yet that I should refuse to confer with them and fall a laying
on, etc. I do utterly deny that ever there was any such thing, or any ever sent
to me, and cannot imagine any reason in the world Master Buroughs should writ
so, and whoever told him any such thing, abused him, and I could by many
reasons prove the contrary, if I were giving a formal Answer to Master
Buroughs Book. Is it likely that I who have gone on purpose to so many, and do
daily upon all occasions, that have write so many Letters even to remote places
to know the certainty of things reported, that employ others to inquire out the
truth where I cannot so well do it my self, that entreat persons who relate
things to me, to send the ear witnesses and proofs to me, that reject many
reports of things which may be true, and are reported with much confidence
because I cannot see a full proof of them, that I should decline to speak with
those who send to me to satisfy me in the truth of things, and whom I own to
be godly? No, this is utterly false, a very legend, against my genius and
constant course of proceeding in this work, I taking much content, in searching
all ways to be satisfied in the truth of things related me, or in their
falsenesse, that so I may not by printing any thing mistaken, give an occasion
to the questioning of the truth of those things that are undoubtedly true; and
for further satisfacttou to the Reader there was no such thing, why could not
the parties themselves come to speak with me, but must send others, I am easily
enough to be spoken with, refusing none (as all know who come to me) besides,
how did Master Buroughs know any such had been with me to make me such offers,
and that I refused; and what if some reported to him that which was false,
might not he be easier abused by a report (for he speaks not this of his own
knowledge, he never came to me, nor was the man ever desired to confer with me
about any of these particulars) then I can be mistaken in this business, to
whom these offers of conferences and satisfactions should have been made. 3.
For that Master Buroughs page 18. taxes me with concerning what I related
about his going out of the Kingdom in my Antapologie, that had I been willing
to have conferred with him about it as he desired before I printed he should
have so fully satisfied me, that I could never have stumbled at this; I Answer,
I never was unwilling to confer with Mastet Buroughs about this or any other
thing that he should have desired, and I can say it truly, if he had sent the
least boy at any time to me to have desired a conference with me, and appointed
me where to meet him I should have waited on him: but for what is here written,
I neither know nor remember any such thing that Master Buroughs either by
writing, or word of mouth ever desired to have spoken with me about his going
out of the Kingdom; and certainly at that time when I was writing my
Antapologie there was no such great distance between Master Buroughs and me,
but that he might either have come to me, or spoke to me of it when he met me
occasionally, or I should have come to him: none of which ever were moved to
me, and I cannot but wonder at Master Buroughs writing of this and diverse
other passages. 2 As for that he said he should have satisfied me upon
conference, that he went out of the Kingdom not upon the ground I allege, but
upon another, a call from the Church of Roterdam, which he relates page 19, 20,
21, 22. I must confess I am unsatisfied in it now, and so I believe are all
rational men, and let the Reader but ask Master Marshall and Master Calamie
who knew the business well and Master Buroughs at that time, whether they do
not believe he went over to Roterdam upon a complaint made of some words spoken
about the Scottish War: and if I should have given the Reader all that I have
drawn up by way of Answer to this, it would abundantly clear me, and lay open
Master Buroughs weakness very much, but I shall only hint this, Suppose the
King had in this War prevailed over the Parliament, and taken the City; and
just upon that time Master Peter's and Master Wels had gotten away in all haste
to New England; and suppose after this, some man writing of Master Wels and
Master Peter's departure from England should have expressed this as the ground,
the danger they were in upon the Kings taking London; now if Master Peter's and
Master Wels should by way of Answer have denied this to be any cause, and have
alleged their solemn call to their Churches in New England, being s^nt for
again and again, and their purposes of going expressed, yea and that in the
Pulpit before ever the King was in a way of taking London, would not all men
laugh at such an Answer? For
is not the contrary evident by the experience of their staying in England, now
they may stay safely, notwithstanding all their call and being sent for, they
stir not; and just so it was with Master Buroughs, and I am confident, that
had it not been for the danger of those words, he would no more have gone to
Roterdam
then Master Peter's and Master Wels go to New England, and as himself tells the
story, his putting of giving his resolution of going, defering from time to
time, and from place to place to make any conclusion, ^ill the business of
words grew to a height, declares plainly as much; besides Master Buroughs at
that time was not of the Independent judgment, as appears by his Book put out
in the year 38. writing, By Jeremiah Buroughs Minister of the Gospel, which
was not long before his going over, whereas all his Books he has put forth
since he went to Roterdam, are By Jeremiah Buroughs, without Minister of the
Gospel, which to them who know the Controversy is a clear proof he was in the
year 38. no Independent, though afterward in the writing his other Books he
was, and therefore declined that Title Minister of the Gospel. And whereas in
the body of this Third Part, in two or three several places I take occasion to
relate some things of Master Buroughs, which may by some be ill taken because
he cannot answer for himself, and may be interpreted a speaking evil of the
dead, I desire to let the Reader know, they were both written and printed off
long before Master Buroughs sickness and death: and indeed no understanding
man will once imagine a Book of above Forty sheets could be made, written out,
and printed in a month, especially by one who Preaches often, and has many
irons in the fi^e at the same time, and to put it out of all question besides
my own testimony, the Bookseller and Printer can testify this Third Part has
been above this quarter of a year in the Press a printing. A^ for that
Pamphlet written against my Second Part, Entitled Gangraena plays Rex, I
Answer briefly, Gangraena plays the Parliament, that is, conforms to what the
Parliament has expressed in the four or five first years of their sitting,
against the Sectaries; and I do offer to make good what I have written in
Gangraena against the Sects, out of the Declarations, Remonstrances,
Ordinances, Covenant, Messages and Transactions of the Parliament
with Scotland, and their Instructions to the Assembly upon diverse occasions,
and could make a better Parallel between the passages in Gangraena and the
passages in Declarations, Remonstances, etc. against the Sectaries, then the
Author of that Pamphlet has done, and am likely to do it, though a Postscript
is not the proper place for it; only I say this, would to God there had not
been some men among us, and that in place too, to have so carried things and
brought matters to that pass, as to give too great occasion unto many to say,
The King was a true Prophet in what he spoke in his Declarations concerning
Anabaptists, Brownists, and Sectaries. As for that Pamphlet called, Lanceters
Lance for Edwards Gangraena, I have lately received from two godly Ministers in
Suffolk a large relation by way of justification and proof of what in my
Second Part of Gangraena was written of Lanceter, as also some other passages
related in those papers concerning Lanceter, one Chidly, and Barrowe, but they
containing a whole sheet of paper are too much to put in a Postscript, and must
be reserved for the Fourth Part; and I am of the mind when Lanceter shall come
to read them, he will wish he had been opening his Pack when he was writing
his Pamphlet. As for Drapes his ^illy Pamphlet called A B^am^ in Master Edwards
his eye, Master Edwards has the Beam in his hand and could easily so handle
it, as to knock Drapes and Captain Paul Hobson on the heads and dash out their
brains with it; but I must not be put out of my way of writing more useful
Tractates by every little bauling curr^. As for Gangraena-chrestum written by
Master Pi^nel and Maddocks against some passages in a Letter written by a godly
Minister and printed by me in the First Part of Gangraena, the Authors shall
receive a full answer from some of the Ministers of those parts, who having
been upon the place know all particulars, for proof of which I have been
written unto as follows; I have lighted upon a Libell of Master Pinnels and
Maddocks, which however it cast scorn enough on you, Master Gower, and Master
Ford, I know you will scorn, and I shall take care in what is material to see
it Answered in a Book by it self, which if you will let me know when the Third
Part of Gangraena is likely to be ready, I would put out before it, that you
may the better make use of it. And in another Letter upon my Answer to this,
that I thought my Third Part would have come out much sooner then now it does,
I am thus written to;

I am sorry in reference to my self that your Third Part comes out so
suddenly, I had thought an answer to Pools relation should have preceded it.
But however if you have occasion to speak any thing in reference to it, you may
bid the Reader expect an Answer from these parts shortly. And you may your
self take notice how our opposites Pinnel and Maddocks do equivocate, and
deny not the things charged, as in the point of Pinnels strange Doctrine and
the Revelation woman. As for Walwins Prediction of Master Edwards Conversion
and the Consultation upon Master* Edwards, both from the same hand (as I judge)
I would have Master Walwyn and his companions know, that Mr. Edwards goes upon
surer grounds in what he does against the Sectaries then to be so soon
removed: he has not been so long in the School of Christ, had experience so
many years of the ways of God in trialls of many temptations, diverse
afflictions, conflicts with all sorts of wicked men and Errors both in the
Prelates times and now, searchings and shiftings out the truths of God in the
Controversies both of the former and present times, as to be taken off from the
Doctrines of truth and according to godliness, and to be turned unto fables by
the foolish weak Pamphlets of the times. If Mr. Walwin and his fellows have
any ^opes in this kind they are much deceived; For as Luther sometimes writ in
an Epistle of his to Spalatinus concerning his writing against the Papists,
that he should presume any thing of him praeter Palinodiam and fugam, so may
the Sectaries imagine any thing of me rather then a Recantation, and repenting
of writing those Books wherein I have discovered the Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies of the times. As for Mr. Salmarshes Answer in few words to the
Second Part of Gangraena, a part of his shadows flying away, I shall reckon
with him for every line in it in that Answer to other Pamphlets of his; only I
desire the Reader for the present to observe these things: First, that Master
Gataker in his Reply to him, has proved him to be a shadow without substance,
has taken off the shadows and veil he had cast on many truths of the Gospel,
and showed this new light with his dawnings of light to be nothing else but a
shadow of death and darkness, and has caused this great light to go out in a
smoke and snu^^e. Secondly, that he calls one leaf and less then a half, an
Answer to my Second Part of Gangraena consisting almost of thirty sheets, and
to another Book called An after Reckoning of about ten sheets. Thirdly, in that
little he says (though he call it an Answer) he does not so much as offer to
disprove any one particular in the Book, he says not one word to disprove or
deny the Woman Preacher: which in my Second Part I had made good against his
bold denial of it in a former Pamphlet, but declaimes in general against me
and my Book, railing fearfully, and cursing me. Fourthly, the great hypocrisy
and dissimulation of Master Saltmarsh, pretending in all his writings, love,
peace, sweetness among Christians, and in this Pamphlet where his Answer to
the Second Part of Gangraena is inserted, it is called Reasons for Unity, Love,
and Peace, and charging me with bitterness, uncharitableness, want of the
sweet Spirit of Christ, whereas himself has the bitterest, uncharitablest
and most railing censorious passages against me, and a godly reverend Minister
he joins with me, that a man shall hardly ever meet with the like in any Book
in a man's life time, applying those words of Christ to the Devil, unto me, the
Lord rebuke thee, even the Lord, charging me with sinning aganst the holy
Ghost, with being in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, telling me
of gnawings, flashings, of having a burnt and withered spirit, threatening they
will pray me either into repentance, or shame, or judgment ere they have done
with me; and putting the other Minister and me together, he styles us
Pensioners to the g^^at Acouser of the Brethron, bids us fill up the measure of
our iniquities if we will needs perish whether he will or no, and says, all
the powers of hell set us on work, with many such like passages; So that I may
justly say to Master Saltmarsh as Paul in Romans 2. 21, 22, 23. Thou therefore
that teach another, Teach thou not thy self? Thou that teach a man
should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that ^aiest a man should not commit
adul^ery, do thou commit adultery? etc. Or as Christ in Matthew 7. 3, 4. 5.
And why beholdest thou the mot^* that is in thy brothers eye, but considerest
not the beam that is in thine own eye? or how can^^ thou say to thy brother,
lot me pull out the mot^ out of thine eye, and behold a beam in thine own
eye? Th(...) hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and
then shall thou see clearly to cast out the m^te out of thy brothers eye.
Master Saltmarsh charges me with bitterness, uncharitableness, and is ten
times worse himself, and I challenge Master Saltmarsh and all his party in all
the Books that I have written put together, to produce (if they can) so many
unchristian passages as are vented by him against me in o^e leaf: Where and in
what part of my books have I charged Master Saltmarsh with sinning against the
holy Ghost, hating the light once known, blaspheming the work of the Spirit?
and so I might instance in the rest, though I believe I could give better
grounds why Master Saltmarsh should a great deal more probably be guilty in
that kind, then he can upon any pretense of me (though I profess I do not
charge him with that sin) but* the charging godly* Presbyterians for writing
against Errors and* Heresies, with committing the sin against the holy Ghost,
and despighting the Spirit, and sinning wilfully is the great charity and
brotherly love of Sectaries, diverse of them having done thus, Master Price
charging M. B^ll(...)ie, Master Goodwin Master Brinne, and M. Saltmarsh, me:
But I would have Master Saltmarsh* know, ti(...) not his bugbar of charging me
with the sin against the holy Ghost, and threatening me with flashings,
lightnings, and praying against me for contending earnestly for the Faith once
delivered unto the Saint^ against certain men crept in, turning the Grace of
God into las^iviousnesse, can scare me to make me go out of my way, and I find
this branding with the sin against the holy Ghost of Orthodox men by
Sectaries to be no new thing, but very old, used by the Donatists in Saint
Austins time, who as Augustine shows in his writings, accused the Orthodox of
being guilty of the sin against
the holy Ghost. Fifthly, for his two stories he relates of discourse with me
upon two several times speaking together, they are deceitfully and falsely
related, the greatest part concealed, and what is related not justly set down:
I writ them both down in my Diary, esp^cially the last immediately after I left
Master Saltmarsh, and so can give a just and good account of them, but they are
too long to be inserted in a Postscript, and of the first, that being at Master
Vicars his house and in his hearing, he has given the Reader already a good
part of it in his Schi^^^atick sifted, little (I think) to M. Saltmarshes
credit. And now good Reader the next Tractate thou shall expect from me shall
be a Tractate against a Toleration, which I hope by the end of the next month,
or the beginning of February, may be in thy hands, and nothing by Gods help
shall divert me, or re(...)d that: I am resolved, if twenty Pamphlets should be
written against this Third Part, to let them all lie till I have put forth a
Treatise against Toleration and pretended liberty of Conscience. And now
finally Brethren, pray for me that God would be in a special manner with me in
the setting forth of that Tractate at this time, and that the word of the Lord
may run and be glorified, and that I may be delivered from unreasonable and
wicked men, and that my service which I have for this Kingdom, may be accepted
of the King, Parliament, and all that are in authority, of the City of London,
the Ministers of the Kingdom; and of all Saints.

Amen.
FINIS.

