VOTES OF BOTH Houses of Parliament: With sundry Articles, or Acts of
Parliament to confirm the same.

Taken out of the Records of the Tower.

Also, Two Orders of both Houses of PARLIAMENT: The one, To all High Sheriffs,
Justices of the peace, and other Officers, within 150. Miles of the City of
YORK: The other, In particular to the high Sheriffs, Justices of the peace,
and other Officers within the County of Lancaster. In general, to all the
Counties of England, and Dominion of Wales.

Die Sabbathi 28. Maii 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that these Votes with the Articles be
forthwith printed and published.

Io. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin, for Cristopher Latham. 1642

Die Veneris 20. Maii, 1642.
Resolved upon the Question, by the Lords and Commons, etc.
THat it appears that the King (seduced by wicked Counsel) intends to make
war against the Parliament, who (in all their consultations and actions) have
proposed no other end unto themselves but the care of his Kingdoms, and the
performance of all duty and loyalty to his person.

Resolved, etc.

Resolved, etc.

Out of the Roll of the Parliament held at Westminster, 11 R. 2.
ITem, by the said encroachment, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York,
Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, Robert
Tressilian false Justice, and Nichol. Brembre false Knight of London, have done
that* whereas at the last Parliament, all the Lords and other Wise men and
Commons there assembled, seeing the loss of the King and his kingdom eminent,
as well for the perils and mischiess aforesaid, as that the King was departed
from the Counsel of the Kingdom, and hearkened wholly to the Counsel of the
aforesaid maletactors and traitors, as also because the French King with his
Royal power was shipped upon the Sea, ready to have come into England to destroy
the Kingdom, and the English tongue, and that no ordinance nor government was
then established for the safety of the King nor of the kingdom, they knew not
other remedy thereupon, but remonstrated unto the King at full, how that he was
ill governed, counseled, and carried away, by the aforesaid traitors and
malefactors, declaring unto him their wicked conditions, and required him most
humbly as his loyal subjects for the safety of him, and of his whole kingdom,
and for the avoiding of the perils aforesaid, to let go and put from him the
aforesaid malefactors and traitors out of his presence and company, and that
he would not do hereafter according to their wicked counsels, but that he would
follow the wise, loyal, and discreet men of the kingdom, and thereupon the
said traitors and malefactors, seeing this good and honorable opinion of the
Parliament, and to disturb their good purpose therein, by their false counsel
caused our Lord the King to command the Major of London to cause a great power
of the people of London to be suddenly levied, for to kill and put to death all
the said Lords and Commons, excepting only such as were of their party, at the
doing of which wicked act, the said great malefactors, and traitors should have
been parties, and present to the destruction of the King and all his Realm.

Article 29. Item, For to accomplish this high treason aforesaid by their
council, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert Veere Duke of
Ireland, and Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, caused the King to send his
Letters of Credence to his adversary the French King: some by one Nicholas
Southwell, Groom of his Chamber, and some by other persons of mean fortune,
as well Aliens as Denizent, requiring and praying the said French King, that
with his power and Counsel he would be aiding and assisting to our Lord the
King to destroy and put to death the said Lords, and other English, which the
King then held his enemies and traitors, as before, to the great disquiet and
trouble of his whole kingdom.

Article 30. Item, The aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Veere
Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, encroaching unto
themselves Royal Power, caused the King to promise unto the French King, by
his said Letters and Messages, for to obtain aid and assistance from the
French King, and his power, for to accomplish that high treason, prodition, and
murder, to give and surrender unto the said French King the Town and Castle of
Calis, and all other Castles and Forts in the March of Picardy and Artoys, the
Castles and Towns of Chirlurge, and of Brerte, to the great dishonor,
trouble, and damage of the King and of his Kingdom.

Article 37. Item, the asoresaid Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert de Vere
Duke of Ireland, Michael de la poole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Trelsillian
false Justice, and Nicholas Brenbre false Knight of London, malefactors and
Traitors, during the time of the said protection, to the overthrowing of the
said appeal, falsely Counseled, and caused the King to command by his
letters, diverse Knights, Esquires, his Sheriffs, and others his officers of
diverse Counties, to raise and assemble all the power that they could to come
with the said Duke of Ireland, against the aforesaid other Lords Appellants,
suddenly to make war against them and destroy them.

Article 38. Item, During the time of the said protection, the aforesaid Robert
de veere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la poole. Earel of Suffolk, Alexander
Archbishop of York, Nicholas Brenbre false Knight of London, caused the King
by his Letters, to signify to the said Duke of Ireland, how that he and others
were appealed of treason by the said Thomas Duke of Gloucester Constable of
England, Richard Earl of Arundell and Surry, and Thomas Earl of Warwick. and
how that the King had thereupon given day to the said parties, until the next
Parliament, and how he had taken both parties, with their men, goods and
Chattells, into his special protection, and besides it was contained in the
said letters of the King, that if the said Duke had sufficient power he should
not fail to come on with all his aforesaid power, and to come to the King; and
soon after they procured the King, to write unto the said Duke of Ireland,
that he should take the field, with all his power, which he could gather
together, and that the King would meet him withal his power, and that the King
would with him put in hazard his Royal person; and that the King was in great
danger himself and his whole kingdom if he were not helped and succored by
thesaid Duke of Ireland, And that the Duke of Ireland should make known this
unto all the men that were assembled unto him; and that the King would pay all
the wages, and charges of the said Duke of Ireland, and of all the men
assembled by him, by virtue of which letters, and the malicious and Traiterous
exitations as well of the said Duke, as of his Adherents and all the other
malefactors and Traytos, the said Duke of Ireland assembled a great number of
men at Arms and Archers, as well the Connties of Lancaster, Chester, and
Wales, as of other places of the Kingdom, to destroy, and to put to death the
aforesaid Lords, and all others which were assenting to the making of the said
Ordinance, Statute and Commission, unto the destruction of the King, and his
Kingdom.

Article 39. Jtem the said Robert de veere Duke of Ireland, false traytore to
the King and kingdom, assembled a great power of men at Arms, and Archers of
the Counties of Lancaster, Chester, and Wales, and of diverse other places, to
the intent to have traitorously destroyed so far as in him lay, the Lords
Thomas Duke of Gloucester Constable of England, Henry Earl of Derby, Richard
Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Thomas Earl of Warwick, and Thomas Earl
Marshall, and other Loyal Subjects of our Lord the King, as well to the
destruction and annihilation of our Lord the King and of his whole kingdom;
and so he rid with great power and force of men at Arms, and Archers, from the
County of Chester through the kingdom, till he came near to a cerraine place,
which place is called Rotcotbridge, near to Cotswold, inchroaching to himself
Royal power, caused the banner of the King to be displayed in his company,
contrary to the dignity of the King and of his Crown, at which time the said
Duke of Ireland and his company, were by the grace of God, disappointed of
their wicked purpose.

Memorand. That the same Roll containing the Petition of the aforesaid appeal
distinguished by Articles as above by quotation is marked, was delivered in the
present Parliament, by the aforesaid Duke, and Earls appellants; and Memorand,
that afterward in the same Parliament, the 1. 2. 11. 15. 17. Articles foresaid
are declared, and adjudged treason, and every one of them is declared and
adjudged treason, And that that which is contained in the 22. Article of the
aforesaid Articles concerning the levying of men, to make war and destroy the
Lords and Lieges of the King is likewised declared and adjudged treason. And
that the 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 37. 38. 39. Articles aforesaid are also declared
and adjudged treason, and every one of them is declared and adjudged treason,
as is set down in the Record and the process annexed and affixed to this Roll
on the back side of the said Roll by these words quelle petition levee in
presence du Roy ure dit Sr. etc.

This judgment was confirmed by act of Parliament. 11. R. 2. Cap. 3.1 H. 4.
cap. 3. and 4. of the old printed statutes, and the said statute 1. H. 4.
repeales and makes void the Parliament of 21. R. 2. and all the proceedings
thereof, in which forced and tumultuary Parliament, the Acts of the Parliament
of 11. R. 2. had been reversed.

Rot. Parl. 11. R. 2.
MEmorandum quod iste idem Rotulus continens petitionem appelli supradictiper
articulos distinct pro ut superius per quotationem annotatur liberatus fuit in
prasenti Parliamento per praedict. Ducem and Comites appellantes; Et mem. quod
postea in code^ Parliamento primus, secundus, undecimus, quintus decimus, and
decimus septimus articuli praedicti declarantur and adjudicantur Proditio; and
eorum quilibet declaratur and adjudicatur proditio; and quod illud quod
continetur in vicessimo secundo articulo praedictorum articulorum tangens
levationem gentium ad guerrand. and destruend. dominos and legeos legis
similiter declaratur and adjudicatur proditie: Et quod vicessimus octavus,
vicessimus nonus, tricessimus, tricessimus primus, tricessimus secundus,
tricessimus septimus, tricessimus octavus, and tricessimus nonus articuli
predicti declarantur etiam and adjudicantur Proditio, and little quilibet
declaratur and adjudicatur Proditio; prout annotatur in Recordo and processu
huic Rotul. consutis and annexis. In dorso Ejusdem Rotuli per haec verba. Quel
le petition lui in presence du roy nostre dit Henneres and etc.

Crom at. per statut. 1. H. 4. cap. 3. and 4. in the old printed statutes.

Die Veneris 27 Maii. 1642.
WHereas it appears to the Lords and Commons, that the King seduced by wicked
Counsel, intends to make war upon his Parliament. It is therefore Ordered by
the Lords and Commons, that the High Sheriffs, and Justices of the Peace, and
other Officers, within the same Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, situate
within 150 Miles of the City of York, shall forthwith take special care for
to make stay of all Arms, and Ammunition carrying toward York, until they
have given notice thereof unto the Lords and Commons, and shall have received
their further direction. And for the better affecting hereof, the said High
Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, and other officers, are further to take
special Care, that strict watches be kept within their several limits, and
jurisdictions, for the searching for, and seizing of, all such Arms and
Ammunition, as likewise for the apprehending all persons going with the same.

Die Sabbathi 28. May, 1642.
WHereas it appears, that the King seduced by wicked-Counsell, intends to make
war against the Parliament, and under the color of a guard to secure his royal
Person, does command troops both of Horse and Foot to assemble at York; All
which is against the Laws of the Kingdom, tending to the dissolution of the
Parliament, and destruction of his people. It is therefore ordered by the
Lords, and Commons in Parliament, that the Sheriffs of the County of
Lancaster, and all other Sheriff of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, shall by the power of that County, and of their several Counties,
respectively, suppress the raising, and coming together of any Soldiers,
Horse or Foot, by any warrant, commission, or order from his Majesty, without
the advice and consent of the Lords, and Commons in Parliament; And that all
persons whatsoever do forbear to execute any such commission, or warrant for
levying Soldiers, or gathering them together without consent of Parliament;
And these who shall execute, or obey any such Commission, or warrant, are
hereby declared to be disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom. And the Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Lancaster, and all Lords Lievtenants of all other
Counties in the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales respectively, as
likewise all deputy Lievtenants, Captains and officers of the Trained Bands,
and all Majors, Justices of peace, and other his Majesty's loving Subjects, are
hereby commanded, and required to be ayding, and assisting to the said Sheriff
of the County of Lancaster, and to the other Sheriffs of the other Counties of
this Kingdom, and of the Dominion of Wales; And that his Majesty's loving
Subjects may the better understand what the Law, and their own duty is in this
behalf, the said Sheriff of Lancashire, and other Sheriffs of the other
Counties of this Kingdom respectively, shall cause this present Order,
forthwith to be published in the several Market Towns within their said
Counties.

Sabbathi 28. Maii. 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that these shall be forthwith Printed and
published.

IO. BROWN, Cler. Parliamentorum:

FINIS.

