THE VOTES AND PROCEEDINGS IN PARLIAMENT, FOR Bringing the King out of the Isle
of WIGHT, within ten Miles of LONDON.

The taking of the Isle of AXOM by Colonel Overton, and two Letters of the
whole proceedings at the Leaguer before Colchester, a Leiutenant Colonel, and
many other Prisoners taken, and a great present sent to the Lord General.

Also, The proceedings against Major Rolfe, who is detected for a design to
make away the King, and the vindication of Major General Skippon.

July.3.d

LONDON: Printed by B. A. MDCXLVIII.

C R
royal insignia
The last NEWS From COULCHESTER.
SIR,
ACcording to my promise, I shall continue to give you the certain intelligence
from hence: in my last I acquainted you of the Enemies quitting Sir Harbottle
Grimstons house and of our firing the Court of Guard by the Almshouses, which
was on Tuesday last. On Wednesday the enemy lay very still in the town, the
Suffolk Forces went on to entrench and put themselves as fast as they could out
of danger, some of the Lord Generals horse and foot do assist them for that it
is thought those in the town will rather fall upon their quarters then of the
old soldiers; and by this means we hold a good correspondency together, and
keep the enemy in awe, they having made but one fally forth that way as yet,
and then were well beaten in again. Wednesday night about 600. of our men in
the dead of the night, cast up another Work near the town, the besieged
perceived it, yet made not any salley forth, nor gave the assaylants one shot
till about six in the morning, at which time they sent out some great shot, but
our men were then in a good condition, and not much to be annoyed, and all the
execution which was then made, was the killing of two horses on our side, and
one man; so we have made good the Work, and have also plained and made even
the highway, for the more facile bringing up our train, which before for the
roughness and narrowness of the passage threatened difficulty, and
disadvantage to us. Our horseguard at Chelmford have brought in some persons
which are suspected to be going with intelligence from London to Goring, and
confessed going back, that they had a purpose to go into the town, but could
not find an opportunity, far it was besieged close on all sides: Many escape
out of the town to us, which protest they are in great straights, and that they
cannot hold out long, their hay is spent, and corn grows scarce, our Mortar
piece is coming up to us, and then we want not necessaries whereby to make
them yield, if famine does not compel them to it shortly, The Lord General is
exceeding desirous to save the town, there being a great many well-affected
godly persons that have estates there, come out to him, and others in the town
which cannot get out, And indeed it could not be imagined (considering the
former report that this whole County was against us) that we should have found
so much friendship amongst them, as we must acknowledge we find from them, who
voluntarily assist us with three Regiments of the County, and their hearts
ready to bring provisions to our quarters upon all occasions.

The town of Chelmsford sent a Present to the Lord General, of two Kegs of
Sturgeon, two fresh Salmond, a Venison, a dozen of Pullets, with great store of
Foul, a Vessel of Wine, with other Necessaries, so much a Vinegar to make
sauce.

From the Leaguer before Colchester, 29. June, 1648.
Another Letter from before the Leaguer at Colchester
SIR,
SInce my last of the 29 of June being Thursday last, there has happened these
ensuing passages between us, and the forces in the Town: On Thursday in the
afternoon was expected that they would make a sally forth as they use to do
(like Birds in a Cage they struggle the more) whereupon we laid an ambuscado in
the hedges, and faced the town with a party of horse, at length there was a
party sallied forth, which was said to be commanded by the Lo. Digby, upon this
approach our horse retreated, as if they had feared by reason of their number,
to give them a charge, hereupon the Enemy pursued, and after our horse had
retreated behind their Ambuscapo, they faced about in a body, standing as if
they were resolved to rec^eie a charge, which the salliers forth were resolved
to give, and to that end came on with great violence; but when they came where
we had placed our ambushment, our men galled them very sore, and our horse came
up and charged them repulsed the enemy, killed diverse of them on the place,
took a Leiu. Col. and diverse others Prisoners, and pursued the Enemy to the
Walls of the City

We have almost finished our new work near the Almes-houses, and have placed a
Garrison in Grimston. and in another house near the subburbs: In the town they
are making of hand-mills, and boast that they are victualled for a month, yet
confess their allowances are very short already, and are in want of Horse
meat, when our great pieces and the Mortar-peice comes from Windsore, which we
daily expect, you will hear for more action. Sir, I remain,

Your humble servant.
From the Leaguer before Colchester, June 1. 1648.
Westminster the 2 of July, 1648.
A Letter from Westminster, to the Army before Colchester.
SIR,
I Have received daily intellegence of your proceedings at the Leaguer, and
shall take an occasion to communicate unto you such news ar we have here, and
that which is remarkable in the first place is, that the Parl. referred the
business concerning the K. and a personal treaty, to a Committee to consider of,
and report, about which business the said Committee met on Thursday last, and
drew up certain particulars to be recommended to the Houses; one of the
particulars thought fit by them to be represented to the approbation of the
House was, That forthwith there might be a personal trerty with his Majesty,
2 That the Bills formerly in debate to be presented to his Majesty for the
royal assent before a treaty were began, might not be tendered to his Majesty
before the treaty begun

These and some other things were reported to the house by the said Committee
on Friday, and after some debate thereon, the further consideration of some
particulers thereofy was referred to another day, viz his Majesty's coming out
of the Isle of Wight, and to which of his houses he should comewithin ten or
twelve miles of London, of which you will hear more shortly.

By Letters out of Lincolnshire it is advertized that that Col: Overton having
notice that the Enemy from Pomfret castle had gotten into the Isle of Axom he
sent 200 of his men in boats over the water at Eyres mouth and upon their
approach the Enemy al fled and made what shift they could to get awar, so that
that place is regained without the loss of any blood which we hereof.

Upon M^* Osburns testimony in that business concerning the King the Lords
ordered, Maj. Rolfe to be committed to safe custody, but the messenger, which
had the order could, not at present light on him, and yesterday it was
certified that he was at his lodging in Bishopsgate-street, and some testimony
was given that he was not well in health, and the removing his person to a
close place might endanger his life, whereupon their Lordships, ordered that
three or four able Chirurgians, go to him, and take a view of his grief and
certify concerning the same which they did accordingly, and came this day to
the house to make report thereof, which was to this purpose, that the said
Major Rolf had been long ill of an ague, and had a humor fallen down into one
of his: hips, which caused a humor and swelling there, but thought it no
danger of death, leaving the disposal of his person to their Lordships
considerations, he already being in custody.

Before I leave this subject, I cannot but inform you of a great abuse and
scandale, which is put upon Maj. Genesis Skippon, and having been openly reported,
and some Libells printed, that this Major Rolf is his Son in Law, and
endeavors are thereby to cast an aspersion upon that Gent. where as in truth
this man, though of the name, is not the person, neither as I heard, was he
ever a member of this Army, but was a shoemaker in Blackfriars; which is all
at the present from,

2 July 1648. Your affectionate Friend, S. T.

Imprimatur

G. M.

FINIS.

