To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Answer and Petition of the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, to the Kings last Message, bearing Date the fifth of September.
1642.
May it please your Majesty.
IF we the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, should repeat all the
ways we have taken, the endeavors we have used, and the expressions we have
made unto your Majesty to prevent those distractions and dangers your Majesty
speaks of, likely to fall upon this Kingdom, we should too much enlarge this
reply: therefore as we humbly, so shall we only let your Majesty know, that we
cannot recede from our former Answer, for the reasons therein expressed; for
that your Majesty has not taken down your Standard, recalled your
Proclamations and Declarations, whereby you have declared the Actions of both
Houses of Parliament to be treasonable, and their persons Traitors: and you
have published this same since your Message of the 25 of August, by your late
Instructions sent to your Commissioners of Array: Which Standard being taken
down, and the Declarations, Proclamations, and Instructions recalled, if your
Majesty shall then, upon this our humble Petition, leaving your Forces, return
unto your Parliament, and receive their faithful advice, your Majesty will
find such expressions of our fidelity and duties, as shall assure you that
your safety, honor, and Greatness can only be found in the affections of
your people, and the sincere Counsels of your Parliament, whose constant and
undiscouraged endeavors and consultations have passed through difficulties
unheard of, only to secure your Kingdoms from the violent mischiefs and
dangers now ready to fall upon them, and every part of them; who deserve better
of your Majesty, and can never allow themselves (representing likewise your
whole Kingdom) to be balanced with those persons whose desperate dispositions
and counsels prevayle still so to interrupt all our endeavors for the
relieving of bleeding Ireland, as we may fear our labors and vast expenses
will be fruitless to that distressed Kingdom. As your presence is thus
desired by us, so is it in our hopes your Majesty will in your reason believe
there is no other way than this to make your self happy, and your Kingdoms
safe.

John Brown Cleric. Parliament.

London, printed for Hugh Perry, September 8. 1642.


