REASONS against the INDEPENDENT GOVERNMENT of Particular CONGREGATIONS: As
also against the Toleration of such Churches to be erected in this KINGDOM.
Together with an Answer to such Reasons as are commonly alleged for such a
Toleration. Presented in all humility to the Honorable House of Commons, now
Assembled in Parliament. By THO. EDWARD'S, Minister of the Gospel.

1 Cor. 12. 21. And the eye cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee,
nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you. Romans 16. 17. Now I
beseech you Brethren mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to
the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. LONDON, Printed by Richard
Cotes for Jo. Bellamie, and Ralph Smith, dwelling at the sign of the three
Golden Lions, in Corne-hill near the Royal Exchange. 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE THE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS, and BVRGESSES Of the Commons House OF
PARLIAMENT.
It Is not unknown to You, Right Noble and Worthy Senators, that the Great and
Present Controversy of these Times is about the Church, and Church Government.
In the days of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Bucer, and the rest of those
Worthies, the controversy of that age, was concerning the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, being generally styled Bellum Sacramentarium, and the
Sacramentary Controversy, the contention about it (even amongst the Servants
of God) being so sharp, that it produced most sad and wosull effects. The e
was not any one thing more hindered Melch. Adam. vita Oecolamp. page 53. Melch.
Adam vit Bucer p. 213. Melch. Ad. vit Tosan. page 702. Melc. Ad vita Brent. page
441.
the cause of God, or the free passage of the Word, or the progress of the
work of God begun in the Church then this. This weakened and wounded the
Protestant party, their weapons being turned each against other, this made them
a grateful spectacle to their enemies, this strengthened the Popish side, they
placing more confidence in their cause by these differences than in all other
ways besides. This Sacramentarie controversy kindled such a fire in many
Reformed Churches, that it even burnt them up, and turned them much a side from
that true edification which is in Christ, and in the practice of godliness:
And has proved such a lasting fire, that it is not quenched till this day
(although those Churches have had sword, famine, and Pestilence, to put it
out.) Now in our days in this Kingdom, the chief question is about the
Church and the discipline of the Church, and our Controversy may fitly be
termed the Disciplinary Controversy, which however it differs from the
Sacramentary Quid? nonne vident dissidia nostra esse amicorum dispendia,
hostium compendia, and publica irae divinae incendia.
in the subject matter, yet it is too like it in the manner, and way of it,
being likely to bring forth as sad births and fruits as did that? What? Is it
not so, that we do see already (that I may speak with Hierome) that our
differences about the Church and Discipline are the loss of friends, the gain
Junius Bi^enu. Epist. land Has.
of enemies, and the public flames of Divine wrath? The great differences in
this Kingdom about the Church and Discipline, are one of the saddest and
greatest symptoms of Gods displeasure against us. These contentions and
opinions make us forget the proper causes of God, and that maine building up of
one another, which is in faith and love, so crastily does that old Serpent Adeo
vetera^^ie hic antiqu^s d^aco imprudentiae nostrae ne vit illudere.
know how to delude our ignorance; (as Iurius speaks upon a like case.) Oh
there is such a fire kindled in this Kingdom about these points, that unless
the Lord look down from Heaven, and graciously be pleased to quench it
timely, it may hazard the burning and consuming all. Now it is the duty of all
the Sons of Sion to endeavor in their places, the putting out this fire,
before it go too far, as by povring out buckets of tears and prayers before
the Lord, so by all other good ways, but especially of the Ministers of the
Gospel by all mean, both by themselves and by stirring up of others to do
it. The serious consideration of which has stirred up in me strong
resolutions, to lay out my self (according to that measure of the gist of
Christ bestowed upon me) for the healing of this schism, and quenching this
fire. Now the first borne of this kind (though not the first conceived) is this
present Treatise against Independent Government, and the Toleration of it,
which I here humbly present to this Honorable House, submitting it to your
grave Judgments, and serious Considerations, humbly desiring your Acceptance
of it: Now the Reasons moving me to take this boldness, to Dedicate this Book
to your Honors, are these. First, that great and general liberty you grant of
free access to your Honorable House, unto all ranks of persons, in this
Kingdom, both by Petitions and Books. Secondly, that hereby I might take an
occasion to testify my humble duty and thankefullnesse unto, together with my
high thoughts and estimation of this Honorable House for all the Indefatigable
pains and care bestowed on the Public; Seeing that by You (under God, and
the Kings most Excellent Majesty) I, and hundreds of my Brethren, enjoy so
great quietness and freedom in our Ministeries, Estates, Persons, (after so
great a storm) and that very worthy deeds are done, both to us, and to this
Nation by your Providence, we accept it always, and in all places, most Noble
Patriots, with all thankfulness, and here I offer to you the first fruits of
my labors, as a lasting Monument of Gratitude. Thirdly, that by presenting it
to You, both my self and Book might here take Sanctuary, and have your
Protection against the many Calumnies and Reproaches which will be cast upon us
from that spirit of Separation. Neither fly I to this Honorable House, as if
I were conscious to my self of any crimes or just grounds of such revilings
(for had I not Innocence and Integrity in my actions, and intentions, I durst
not present this Book to this Just and Honorable House, as knowing well you
are a refuge only for Innocent and oppressed persons, and persons who seek
the Public good) Or, as if I were not fore-armed to bear them; I know whom I
serve in this work, and Quisquis volens detrabir fama meae, iste nob^^ addit
mercedi meae. Augustirus Regium est male audire cum been feceris.
that therefore, whoever does willingly detract from my name, does but add to
my reward; I know also it is a Royal privilege for a man to bear ill when he
has done well, and I have long ago given my back to the smiters, and by the
grace of Christ hope to bear all calumnies with much quietness of spirit,
having in part learned that lesson to go through bad report (even amongst good
men) as well as amongst evil men, and to be counted an enemy (as Paul was) for
telling the Truth; but I therefore present it to your Honors, and put it under
your shadow, that so your Countenance and Acceptance of it (according as you
find it) may counter-ballance and weigh down with all sorts of men, the
calumnies and censures cast upon it, to hinder that good intended by it, and
may the more commend the Work to make it take with many for their
satisfaction. Fourthly, I take this boldness, that so I might have an
opportunity, to move and stir you up, most Noble Worthies, to put to your
hands for the early and timely compounding of this great Controversy about
the Church, and Church Government: When fires are begun in great Cities and
Towns, or Tumults raised, the Fathers of Families, and the Citizens run to the
Magistrates and Governors to acquaint them with the case, and to desire their
help, who having power to command both Men, Arms, Waters, Engines, buckets
from every quarter, the fire is quickly out, and the peace settled. Now be
pleased to suffer me to mind you of that which few or none do, namely of our
danger from errors on the right hand, the growing and spreading evil of this
present time. Every one minds you by Petitions, Sermous, Books, concerning the
Reformation of this Church, in Government, Ministry, Ceremonies, and worship;
and God forbid that a word should ever fall from my mouth, or my pen draw a
line, to call you off from it. Go on strongly and fully in the work of
Reformation to purge this Church thoroughly, and purely to take away all our
dross and tin; cast out of the way all stumbling blocks, and gather out all
things that offend, let nothing be left to hurt or to destroy in Gods holy
mountain; Break down all Images and Crucifixes, throw down all Altars,
remove the High Places, break to pieces the brazen Serpents, which have been
so abused to Idolatry and superstition, put out the unpreaching and scandalous
Ministers, take a course for setting up good Pastors and Ministers in every
Congregation, and in your great Wisdoms, and zeal be pleased to consider of
ways to provide oil for all the Lamps of the Sanctuary; Go on Comfortably
(for God is with you, and the Ministers with sounding Trumpets of Ministry of
Word and Prayer; and the people of God with you, covering you all over with
earnest prayers, and and tears, as also with praises to God for you) and be
pleased to remember not to do the work of God by halves, or negligently.
Perfect and through Reformation, will be your praise both with God and all good
men, at home and abroad; and your zeal may provoke other Kingdoms, and
States, and many will arise up and call you blessed, for the good Pastors, and
pure Ordinances that they shall enjoy. It Is the blemish of some of the good
Kings that were reformers, as Asa and Iehosaphat; But nevertheless 2 King. c.
ult. v. 43. 2 Chronicles. 15. v. 17. 2 King 18. v. 4.
the high places were not taken away. It was the praise of other Kings, that
they were taken away, as of King Hezekiah. Perfect Reformation takes away all
possibility and hopes from men, of bringing things back again; but an
imperfect leaves both a groundwork, and fair possibility upon any advantage
or opportunity to return: Theodoret in his Eccle. history relates that
Theodosius that most faithful Emperor, being fully set Theod. hist. Eccle. l.
5. cap. 20.
to overthrow the errors of the Gentiles, he made Laws, by which he commanded
that the Temples of the Images should be pulled down. Constantine the great,
with some other Emperors, who succeeded Constantine, forbad all Sacrifices and
worships to the heathen gods, and their Images, and forbad any to come to their
temples, but they did not demolish the temples and places wherein they were
worshipped; so that Julian and Valens, Emperors who came after, did renew the
impiety of the Gentiles, so that fire was kindled again upon the Altars, and
Sacrifices were offered to the Images: All which things when Theodosius
understood for certain, he did not only shut up the Idols houses, forbidding
all to come to the Temples, but he did extirpate them by the roots, and took
care to have them buried in eternal oblivion. It was the saying of Zisca the
famous leader of the Thaborites, That the very nests of the Storkes are to be
pulled down, lest Diruendi sunt etiam ipsi ciconiarum nidi ne redeant. Lavat. in
Deurer.
they return again. And may it please this Honorable House to purge us
thoroughly, and the rather for this, because the more perfect our Reformation
is, according to the will of God, you shall by this lay the better and surer
groundwork, for healing and composing the great schism, and divisions risen
about the Church, and Church Government. But amidst all your care and pains in
this kind, I beseech you cast an eye upon the errors and evils of the other
hand, as Anabaptisme, Brownisme, etc. and be pleased to take into your serious
considerations the means and ways how to hinder their growth, and so much the
rather, in regard there is not now in this Kingdom (things standing as they
do) so much danger of errors on the left hand. Popery, superstition,
profaneness, have been so discountenanced of late, so discovered, and their
nakedness laid so open, as that Altars, Images, pressing of Ceremonies, and
profane Ministers are falling of themselves. Satan for this time has even
done with errors on the left hand, and their time is going out, growing like an
Almanacke out of date. Any man who has but half an Eye in his head, and
observes the course of things may see that errors on the right hand are now
coming on the stage to take their turn also and to act their part; the Devil
seeing he cannot effect his ends in the former ways he went, he will now try
others, as Theodoret speaks in the case of Nestorius, that Satan Theod. Heret.
Fab. lib. 4. de Nest.
gave over moving against the Church by outward and manifest enemies, but came
under the show of the Orthodox, and in the habit of great strictness
bewitching many and drawing the injudicious common people to a desire after
him. Satan is now transforming himself from an Angel of darkness into an
Angel of light, and though he must use other kind of instruments, and go
other ways, yet it is to bring about the same things, the upholding of his
kingdom and the hindering of Gods, so that he will now labor to do that by
correcting and building up, which he did before by persecuting and pulling
down (as Luther speaks.) In a word plainly to express my meaning, one
extremity (as many examples both ancient and modern testify) Nestorius
speaking against the personal union of the divine and humane nature of Christ:
Extiches fell into an error contrary, confounding the natures, that he would
have the humane nature so swallowed up by the immensitie of the divine nature
in Christ, that there was not two natures in Christ, but one only, to wit, the
divine nature, Evag. lib. 1. cap. 9. So Ofiander broaching that error, that
Christ was our mediator only according to the divine nature, Stancarus
opposing that fell into another error that Christ was mediator only according
to the humane Schlussels de Stancar. page 37. so Flacius Illyricus opposing
Strigelius who made original sin to be but a light kind of accident, he to
aggravate the monstruousnesse of original sin, fell into that error, that
original sin was the substance of a man, Schlussels de secta Manic: page 4.
has caused another, the Tyranny of Episcopal government in some Bishops
has brought forth the Democracie and Independencie, the violent pressing of
some pretended orders has set many against all order, and Satan seeing he
cannot do as he did, the times not favoring those things, they being grown
old, and even antiquated that every man is ready to hiss at them, he now goes
about by other ways, and if he can but effect what he is in a fair way for
and what he has begun in a great measure, he has enough. It Is reported of the
Fish called Polypus petrae cui adhaesit colorem referens. Nazianz: de se ipso.
Polypus, that it will be of the color of that stone to which it cleaves,
whether white or black, or any other: so will Satan be of that color and that
temper just that the men are of with whom he deals, and the times are of. (For
besides this that Satan has more ways to kill Souls and advance his designs
then one, as Oreg. Naz ad episcop.
when he cannot have his will by persecution, then he will attempt it by
schism and sowing division amongst ministers (as Nazianzen shows:) Satan
will in time bring about the same things though in another way, for
Independancie will bring again what now it would cast out, namely
libertinisme, profaneness, errors, and will by some removes bring many men to
be of no religion at all. Be pleased most worthy Senators to let me tell you
that the greatest sort of erroneous spirits with all unstable and wanton witted
men, will be much for Independent Government and Tolerations, and be to their
uttermost against Synods and settled Government: Socinians, Arminians,
Anabaptists, Separatists, how different soever in other principles, yet will
agree in this; Independancie will both breed them, and being bred will foster
them. And however in many men who be principal actors in this way of
Independancie, the dangers and evils may not so appear for the present, there
being many things in most of the Ministers lovely, which the more commends this
way, yet wise men, such as this Honorable house consists of, look upon things
and judge of them not only as they are for the present, but as they may be
hereafter, and accordingly setle things; that being the great principle
Legislators go by, to presume that men may degenerate, and things will be
abused, and therefore so to provide that they may not. All errors commonly be
best at first, most modest then, and the first Authors of errors be commonly
the best and fairest. Ecclesiastical History mentions that the Novatian errors
did more hurt in the fourth Centurie then in the third wherein it was first
broached. The followers of Novatus did add many other errors to his, as
Theodoret relates. Arminius was more candid, and less erroneous then his
Theod. lib. 3. Haeret: Fabul. Parvus error in initio fit magnus in fine,
negligenda non sunt parva initia, ex quibus paulatim majores fiunt accessiones.
followers, they having much improved the points, as some Divines have showed.
Be pleased therefore to give me leave to stir you up to lay these schisms
and divisions to heart, (the divisions of Reuben being great thoughts of heart)
and in your great wisdoms early to find out means and remedies to heal the
great rents about the Church and Church Government, and to hinder the further
increase of this way: God has called you together, and continued you for this
work amongst the rest; Noble Patriots do your parts, and what in you lies to
conclude of some speedy way and course for settling these differences. It Is the
praise of Cyprian and Cornelius that by the help of a Council they did
endeavor timely to suppress the errors of Novatus. And in the mean while
till Church Government be settled, whether it be not necessary to provide by
some means against the spreading of this sect, and the meetings of these
separated Assemblies, I leave it to your great wisdoms to consider, lest
otherwise we be overgrowne with Anabaptisme, Brownisme and such like. And I
humbly crave leave to tell you, that delays in this kind will prove very
dangerous, many falling to that way daily, and others by continuance will be so
accustomed to it, that it will be harder to regaine them: Besides the
Independants ly at the catch and advantage of delays, all their hopes and
strength standing in this, that it will be long before there be a Synod, or
before the Church Government be settled, hoping that in the interim whilst
things stand between two, and are unsettled, they may both gather and increase
their Churches, and make their party more considerable; and there is just
ground to think they are not wanting to endeavor by some instruments how to
effect it: The hand of Ioab is sometimes where it is not dreamt of. I could
present this Honorable House with a sad relation of the state of things both
in the City and Country in respect of errors on the right hand, as also
bespeake You by the tears and fears of all the godly and painful Ministers
of this Church of England: But I know I speak to the wise, and to them who are
deeply sensible; and it is time for me to take off my hand lest the porch be too
large for the house. Now the good will of him that dwelt in the bush rest upon
your heads; The Lord hide you from the counsels and plots of wicked men, and
from the raging diseases of the time, making you more and more his hidden ones;
He make you more and more his chosen and sanctified ones to fulfill all his
mind and to do his whole work both against all heresy and schism, both
errors on the left hand and right; He double and treble upon you all that
spirit of wisdom, counsel, might, and unanimitie, which former Parliaments
ever had. The Lord set your feet upon a rock, and establish your goings; He
give you an unwearied spirit to go on without fainting, till there be a
perfect settling of peace in Church and Commonwealth, and till the work of
reformation so happily begun be finished. And the Lord recompense into your
bosoms sevenfold in blessings both temporal, spiritual, and eternal, all
your work and labor of love which ye have showed toward his name, and
toward this Kingdom. And so humbly laying my self, and these poor
endeavors at your feet, I rest

Your Honors most devoted servant

The Printer to the Reader.
Good Reader some sheets not being seen by the Author till they were Printed
off, has caused more Errata, both in words and points, than otherwise would
have been. The most material are here Corrected, be thou pleased to mend the
rest as thou read.

Page 1. line 18. for elections read election, p. 2. l. 6. for v. 24. r. v. 21.
p. 5. l. 10. r. much. p. 7. in the margent for quod r. Ad, p. 7. l. 29. for had
r. have, p. 8. l. 2, for offices r. officers, p. 9. l. 6. dele comma at
Teacher, p. 14. l. 8. r. commanded, p. 16 l. 22. r. broken, p. 17 l. 17. read
gestures, p. 22. l. 36. add as, p. 25. l. 12. dele comma after power, p. 29.
l. 8. r. combine. p 30. l. 4. dele out of his hands, for put r. given, l. 9.
for so as it may not, r. so as if it might not p. 32. l. 29. dele the, p. 34.
for Reas. 10. r. Reas. 11. p. 35. l. 13. r. spring. p. 37. l. 26. dele full
point at Reasons, p. 39. l. 25. read ordinances, p. 41. l. 23. r. being for is.
p. 45. l. 17, after Church, r. as many Scriptures show. p. 45. l. 22.
parenthesis after it, and not yet, p. 45. l. 24. one r. some, p. 48. l. 6. for
hear r. heard, p. 49. l. 1. for charge r. change, l. 3. for seldom r.
seldomer, p. 50. l. 23. after body dele comma p 52. l. 28. dele the, p. 54. l.
4. r. apprehensions, l. 6. r. then, l. 17. for what, r. which in the margent r.
postremum, p, 54. l. 24. for three Reasons, r. third Reason.

The Introduction.
INtending fully by the help of God, (with all possible speed) to publish
several Tractates against the whole way of the Separation, for the healing of
that great Schism, sprung up of late in this Church, I thought good for the
present necessity, to set forth these few and short Reasons, (more time being
required to review, transcribe, and Print larger Treatises.) Now that which
first moved me to the drawing up of these Reasons, both against Independent
Government, and against the Toleration of it, was the credible information
given me of some Petitions drawn, to be presented to the Honorable House of
Commons, for a Toleration of some Congregations, to enjoy an Independent
Government, and to be exempt from the Government which shall be established by
Law: Now though, I believe, hope, and pray daily, that God will keep that
Honorable House from ever giving any Countenance, much less granting any such
Petitions, yet considering how many there are of that way, some Inhabiting in
this Kingdom, others, who are come over into England on purpose, being sent as
Messengers of their Charibes to negotiate in that behalf; and observing how
diligently and close they follow it, by daily attending at Westminster, by
insinuating themselves into the company of sundry Members of the House of
Commons, by Preaching often at Westminster, the more to ingratiate themselves
and their cause; Printing also their desire of a Toleration for Independent
Government, and that with casting of dirt upon the Reformation and Government
of this National Church, what ever it may be (as witness the Protestation
Protested:) I, a Minister of the Gospel, and a Sufferer for it these many
years last past, being one who desires as free a passage of the Gospel, and as
through a Reformation, according to the will of God, as any of them; have
thought it my duty, that I might discharge a good Conscience to God, and to the
Kingdom, to Print these Reasons at this time, that so when any of those
Petitions come to be propounded in the House of Commons, under specious
pretenses and fair pretexts, there may by these Reasons appear a Snake under
the green grass: Neither speak I this as if I would intimate, that that
Honorable House could be taken with colors, and fair glosses; I know that
great Body is so full of wisdom, and so Eagle eyed, that they can both see
into, and foresee a far off, the many evils and mischiefs of Independancy
and Tolerations. But I suppose these Reasons may have their use among some, to
furnish them the more with grounds against such Petitions, for satisfying also
scruples instilled by the Independent men into some others; as also to
demonstrate to the Petitioners, the unreasonablenesse of their demands: My aim
therefore is, by this following discourse, l. humbl^ to crave leave to enter in
the Honorable House of Commons a Caveat, both against Independent Government
of Particular Congregations, and against their Toleration; and to present to
the House a Writ of Ne admittas, fetched out from the Court of Heaven, and from
the Records of Holy Scripture.

Reasons Against THE Independent government OF Particular Congregations.
Reason. I.
THE Churches gathered and constituted by the Apostles, watered by Evangelists
and Prophets, and after planting and watering, having Pastors and Teachers,
with all other Officers, as they say, set over them by the Apostles and their
own Elections: Yet it is evident these Churches could not well stand nor
subsist of themselves with all these Officers, but many of them had been much
endangered, and subject to have been ruined, if some others besides these
Churches and Officers had not upon occasions interposed and that
authorotatively, as the Apostles, Evangelists, and Elders of other Churches, as
does appear by the Acts of the Apostles, and by many Epistles, as to Corinth,
Galatia, Colossians, Timothy, Titus: 15. Acts: 2. Cor. 12. Chap. 20. ver. 24.
2. Cor. 13. Chap. 1. 2. 10. ver. The particulars whereof I shall evince more
largely hereafter. Now if these Primitive Churches who had all the officers,
and were settled by the Apostles in all points according to Christ's order, yet
in those times could not do well Independently, how can we think that any
particular congregation in these times (which cannot be so settled having no
Apostles nor any infallible men to direct them) can do well without
dependancie? And though it will be said these extraordinary Officers be now
ceased, yet let them consider whether there is not need of some way to supply
this want to the particular Churches now: But if it be said that the ordinary
Officers of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, with the body of the Congregation will
suffice for the governing every particular congregation Independantly; To that
I answer according to their Principles, In the Apostles times there were all
these Officers in particular Congregations, and settled in a perfect way, and
yet for all this, particular Churches needed a dependancy upon Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, and Presbyters of other Churches, and Timothy, and
Titus are set over the Church of Ephesus and Crete: now though some of these be
ceased, and so this power may be ceased, as it was in particular men, yet that
the Congregations should not need it now in these times as well as then, no
solid Reason can be given, but there is much more reason for it now, which
therefore must be in some other way, be it Synods and Councels, to supply the
defects of each particular, by the Conjunction of the whole, the whole helping
every part, and supplying what is lacking to it; and this reason has the more
strength in it, if we consider that the Churches in the Apostles times were
Churches in Cities, it being all one to say in every City, or in every Church,
1 Tit. 5. 14. Act. 23. which Churches also had good store of Preaching
Ministers amongst them, as appears by Acts 13. v. 1. Act. 20. v. 36, 37.
Compared with ver. 28. So that in all cases of Doctrine and Discipline, having
many Ministers to resolve and determine matters, and to have carried them with
the more gravity and authority, they might have subsisted the better
Independantly, whereas most particular Congregations now have but few
Ministers, one or two, nay, according to their Principles there may be none,
nor no Officer at all, and yet these Congregations must be Independent, having
all power and government Independantly, before Officers as well as after.

Reason. II.
THat Government and power which causes men to run upon the manifest
violation of the constant practice and example of the Churches during all the
time of the Apostles, and puts Churches upon practices that are absurd,
unreasonable and prejudicial to the good of their Souls, that government is
not of divine Institution, nor to be received: but such is the Independent
power, and government of particular Congregations: The major is of undoubted
Truth, and will be denied by none, for the minor I will prove it in these
following Instances.

First, their Independancy forces them either to have Ministers and Officers
without being ordained, contrary to the practice and examples of the Churches
all along in the New Testament, as the 6. Acts v. 6. 14. Act. 23. No man ever
being an ordinary Officer in the Church, without Ordination, let them produce
one instance if they can: hence the most learned Divines in reformed Churches
tell us, that no man ought to be admitted Zanch. in. 4. pr. p. 777. 778. Calv.
Instit. lib. 4. c. 3. Sect. 11. 16.
to an ordinary function in the Church unless they be lawfully called, and
that lawful calling stands in Ordination as well as Election: But because
these may be rejected by them, let us hear one of their own, namely Master
Robinson, speaking, Thou art not a Pastor Rob. Apol. ca. 1. 18.
but by a lawful Calling: Thou art called a Pastor (that is elected, and
ordained) or else if their Officers be ordained, it is by the people, even by
such who are not in office, which is expressly against the constant practice of
all the Churches in the New Testament, as appears by the 6. Acts 6. 14. Acts
23. 1 Timothy 4. 14. 1 Timothy 5. 22. 1 Tit. 5. and it can never be shown in all the
New Testament, that the people ever attempted any such thing; thus Zanchius
shows that this is to be observed in Scriptures, although election of
Ministers was made by the whole Church, yet hands were never imposed but by the
Ministry and Presbytery, this is Zanch. in 4. pr. 786.
clear in the Acts and Epistles of Paul: and the people cannot do it, because
the less is blessed of the greater, and they who lay hands on and make
Ministers, should be greater in place and Authority and not less, as the
common People be: and though it be granted (as Cameron speaks) that an equal
may make and ordain an equal, yet he who is Calv. lib. 4. c. 3. sect. 16.
an Inferior, cannot a Superior. And thus to maintain Independancy they break
the Ordinance of God, and violate that Order and constant way of the calling of
Ministers Recorded in the Word. And I desire them but to consider in the fear
of God, what Master Robinson writes Cameron dic eccle. p. 27.
in the fourth Chapter of his Apology, and I know they must forsake their
Helena of Independancy upon this reason, (and all the shifts they have under
Heaven about Ordination cannot help them) It Is Religion in me (says Robinson)
to depart though but a little from the practice and Institutions of the
Apostles (excepting always Robinson Apol. c. 4. de presb. eccles. p. 47.
extraordinary things) in any thing that is truly Ecclesiastical, though
never so small, what things soever, by whom soever, or under what color soever
they be invented: Now Ordination cannot be held extraordinary and temporary,
neither is it by them, and it is held to be an Ecclesiastical thing also, and
certainly none of the least among Ecclesiasticalls, in matter of order and
decorum, there being not any one thing concerning matters of Order, that has
so clear and constant practice as this; I am sure all their whole frame of
Church and Discipline, has not so much ground in the Word for it as this,
namely, that Ministers ought to be Ordained, Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 3.
sect, 16.
and that by Ministers of the Word. So Calvin, although there be no express
precept concerning the imposition of hands, yet because we see it was in
perpetual use by the Apostles, the so accurate observation of it by them ought
to be to us instead of a command. So Zanchius speaking of Imposition of hands
in ordination, says thus, that this in many places is rejected, together with
Zanch. in 4. pr. 786, 787. p.
other ceremonies, I never approved nor can approve. I know there is no
express precept concerning this thing but notwithstanding I would have the
examples of the Apostles, and the ancient Church more to be esteemed of, yea
they ought to be to us instead of a command: and in another place he speaks,
it is certain, it is not a vain ceremony but the holy Spirit is present, and to
perform those things inwardly, which are signified by this outward Rite: And
yet if Ordination were but a very Ames. lib. 1. cap. 49.
little thing, but a Ceremony, the essence of calling, standing in Election,
and that but the consummation of it, nothing but the solemn introduction of
the Minister into the free execution of his calling, yet if Master Robinson may
be believed, and your selves in other little things, we must not depart from
Christ's way, or go any other way, in things concerning his house and Officers
than he has directed, and yet behold in this either Ministers are not called
according to the scripture wanting that part of their calling, namely
Ordination, or else, if they be, it is in another way than the Apostles or
Churches of Christ ever practiced, behold how this Independancy causes men to
depart far from the practice of the Apostles. And I desire they would show
for what reason Paul left Titus at Crete, to make Ministers in every City, if
Ordination were not necessary for all Ministers of the Gospel under the New
Testament, or if being necessary, it might be performed to Ministers by the
people without Officers: Titus might have been employed better to have gone
along with Paul, Preaching and helping to convert others, and might have well
left the Churches in Crete, either to have had Ministers without Ordination, or
else left the People to Ordain them.

Secondly, this Independancy causes them to fall upon practices absurd and
unreasonable, as namely either their Ministers must not first be examined tried
and known for their gifts and abilities before they be made, which is contrary
to the Scriptures, 1 Timothy 3. v. 10. they must first be proved, and if it hold
in Deacons, much Zanchius in 4. Praecept. p. 784. Amesius lib. pr. medul. cap.
39.
more in the Ministers of the Word, and of this they may read Zanchius, Calvin,
Amesius, and generally all Divines, or they must be judged of by the people.
Now how can the people three or four visible Saints, or more, joined into a
Church, examine and try the learning, gifts, soundness of men for the
Ministry, who are themselves ignorant in all kind of Learning, and may be weak
and injudicious? it is against the light of Nature and right reason that
learned men should be examined and discovered for their abilities by them who
skill not those things, and are far below them in knowledge: we see in all Arts
and Sciences, men are examined and tried by them of their own Arts and
callings, and not by others, who have no knowledge in them: So Zanchius giving
reasons of the necessity of examination before ordination, comes Question.
to propound by whom this examination is to be, to which he answers; By him who
is judged to be endued with the greatest measure of the Spirit, having also
other Presbyters present, who are learned and pious: Paul Zanch. in 4. pr. p.
784. quod peritiores igitur pertinet examinatio and qui plus habeant
authoritatis.
would therefore have Timothy to know them well who are to be ordained, for
examination belongs to the most skillful, and they who are of most Authority.
But these visible Saints, the Church being often times weak, injudicious, mean,
for parts and education, apt to be turned quickly, and taken with fair shows
and good expressions, may and do choose, weak, ignorant, unfit men for
Pastors and Elders, whereby the Church may be led into errors, kept in a low
estate, so as they cannot grow up in grace and knowledge, as becomes a Church
of Christ; there may be also all barbarousnesse and disorder for want of gifts
in government in these weak Officers, all which tends to the prejudice and
hazard of the Souls; hence this is given as the great reason by Divines of the
examination of Ministers before Ordination and that to be by learned and able
men, because as there is nothing more profitable to the Church then good
Pastors, so nothing more pernicious then bad and unlearned Ministers. Secondly,
suppose they might choose well, namely able men both for parts and soundness
Zanch in 4 pr. p. 784.
in the faith, and it were lawful also for the people to ordain, yet it may
so fall out (according to their principles of a Church) that these visible
Saints cannot Ordain Officers, as having no gifts of prayer for public,
especially not able to conceive prayers, concerning the action in hand, namely,
the Ordination of a Minister, neither had they any gifts to make public
exhortations and admonitions to the Pastor of his duty, nor be able to know
what to say to him, at the admission of him into his Office: What shall be done
now? shall the work be staid, and the Church want a Minister till she be able
to do these works and duties? They may for ought can be said, be long, nay
ever without Ministers, and so without Preaching of the Word and Sacraments,
which cannot but be very prejudicial to their Salvation: But to grant them
that which needs not be granted according to their principles, that this
Church shall have some Offices, as suppose a ruling Elder, yet when a Pastor is
to be chosen, these Elders who have a gift in government, may not be able nor
competent to try and examine the gifts and parts of a Pastor: nay yield them to
have a Pastor, and the Church would now choose a Teacher, one single Pastor
though able in his gift of Exhortation and application may not be so able to
try the gifts requisite to a Teacher, whose gifts must be for exposition and
controversies to preserve pure Doctrine: Hence Amesius speaking of calling of
Ministers to a Church, says that here is need of direction and help Ames.
lib. pr^. cap. 39.
of Presbyters both of the same Church, and for the most part of the Neighbor
Churches. But if he were able to try and examine, yet how shall this Teacher be
ordained, there being but one Minister, if Ministers of Neighbor Churches may
not join also? consider if they do not fall into that which they complain
against in the Episcopacy, namely for one man to have the sole power of
Ordination: So that by all these particulars you may see the Assumption proved.

Reason. III.
It Is not to be thought that Christ would institute such a government of his
Church which affords no help, nor allows no way or remedy, no not for one
time or prima vice, for innocent persons that are wronged, but where being no
place for appeals the parties oppressing must be the sole Judges of the cause.
It is counted an unequal, unreasonable thing, in governements, that parties
should be judges at all, much less the sole, and that there should be no way
for persons oppressed to be righted. But now in this Independent Church
Government, there is no relief, no not at first, for injured persons, nor way
of appeal to others who be not parties to hear their cause and determine;
here only parties are Judges and no others may be admitted: As for instance,
in one of their congregations, the greatest number of that Church (as it does
and may often fall out) is against the Pastor or Teacher, and some other members
upon a difference in some points of doctrine, and being the greater number, the
Elders also taking part with them, they proceed most unjustly to censures of
deprivation and excommunication; Now if all the power lie independantly in this
particular Church, so as there may be no other as Synods to appeal unto, to
hear the cause and right them, this Minister and brethren thus censured must
lie under these oppressions without all remedy, and be debarred from the
ordinances of Christ without help; what remedy there is in such cases as this
we desire them to show us, and that such cases as this may not, and do fall
out, cannot be denied: Now that Christ should institute such a government in
his Church, where it is unlawful for any but parties properly so termed to be
sole Judges, and where there is no possibility of redress for the innocent in
cases of injury which may and do ordinarily fall out, is not a thing to be
imagined by reasonable men; it is spoken of by these men for a strange practice
in the Bishops that they should be Judges in their own cause and give votes in
it (though yet there be besides them, three times their number of voices in the
house of Lords) how much more unreasonable may they judge it in their way of
Church government, where parties who are Judges be greater in number, so that
I may speak of the Independancy of their Congregations as Cameron speaks of
the popular government of their Congregations Cameron. Non est credibile
dominum nostrum Jesum Christum (qui non est perturbationis and confusionis
author sed ordinis) voluisse Judicia esse penes plebem, quae vel ob imperitiam
rerum vel ob affectuu^ perturbationem accipere debet; non dare leges, and
judicium subire, non far. Dic Ecelesi page 21.
. It is not credible that our Lord Jesus Christ, who is both King of
Righteousness and King of Peace would have government to be in this way, which
has no means nor way for Righteousness nor peace in his Church; besides the
practice of the Church of Antioch (recorded in Scripture for our example) is
against it, and gives us ground for appeal to others out of that Church, and
not to have the parties the Judges, Acts 15. 1, 2. because the dissension and
disputation was between Paul and Barnabas, and them of Judaea, who taught
Circumcision; therefore, the Church of Antioch thought it not fit that Paul and
Barnabas should determine and end it, but sent to others, Apostles and Elders,
who were not parties against them of Judaea, and they shall determine for them
all: Else had not the dissension and disputation been between Paul and
Barnabas, and certain of Judaea, and that in the particular Church of Antioch,
they were able to have determined it without sending to Jerusalem, but the
Church judged it unequal, that they who were the parties in the controversy
should be the Judges.

Reason. IV.
THe light and Law of Nature with right reason is against the Independancy of
particular Churches, dictating and leading us to dependancy, a subordination
and a consociation in government. In all societies and bodies it is thus by the
dictates of Nature, and it is found necessary amongst bodies natural, and
bodies politic, that the several parts and particular members do join in
one for the good of the whole, and that the whole being greater then a part,
the several parts should be subject to, and ordered by the whole: as in a man's
body, the foot, though it has its proper use and operation, is dressed,
lanched and ordered, not by it self, but by the hands and eyes: In Cities and
great Towns, though there be several Companies who have Orders and Government
among themselves in some particulars, yet they are in subordination, and in a
consociation with greater assemblies, in more high and difficult cases for the
preservation of the whole: In Common wealths and Kingdoms, though several
Cities, Towns, Counties, have Courts, and their particular governments, yet
all these Courts are subordinated to higher, and all these join and are
consociated together in some chosen out of all, as in Parliaments: In Schools
of learning there be several Colleges and Houses who have Masters and
Officers of their own, yet there is a consociation of the chief of all these,
for the government of the whole: In armies there be several Companies and
Regiments who have their distinct Captains and Officers, and yet upon great
assaults, exploits, they are conjoined all in one, and have a council of war
out of several Regiments, to advise and determine upon weighty occasions:
Particular Ships have their own Masters, and Pilots, and provisions, and yet
all join into one Navy, for the safety of the whole: At first Families had all
power and government within their own walls, but when they increased (though
Families have power still of correction, food) yet they joined to be governed
by Magistrates, and ruled in greater cases of life and death and goods: Why
should not this hold then, and be lawful in the Church, in greater and
waightier matters? especially seeing themselves affirm that their Churches are
Bodies, Spiritual Corporations, Cities, Families, Armies. The Church is a most
free Corporation Spiritual: See Syons prerog. p. 21. Robinsons Catechism.
and do infer many of their practices from this, that their Churches are
bodies and societies, and therefore it must be, as it is with Corporations, and
bodies Politic, they must choose their own Ministers, the Ministers can
only Preach authoritatively in their own Congregation, as the Magistrate of
Leyden Rob. Apol. cap. 1. p. 10.
can only administer his public Office at Leyden, and not at Delph. Every
particular member must enter into covenant with the Church, when admitted a
member, because when men are admitted into a body, or society civil, they make
not only a Covenant, but do often add thereto an Oath. Themselves teach
also, that as Church Discipline is to be learned from the plain Manus of
Covent. sent from Holland.
and perfect Word of God: so in such particulars as are common to the Church
with other societies, it is to be directed by the light of Nature, the Church
observing always the general Rules of the Word, and so this is brought as the
maine ground for their Church covenant (though there be neither precept not
practice Examination of Prelates petition, p 31. Manus. of Coven sent from
Holland.
of it, in the Word) namely the Laws and rules of Nature which do run along
with, and are alike common to things Spiritual and Humane, so far as both
are found to agree in one common nature together, for as when God made speaking
to men in a public assembly (as is that of preaching or prophesying) a sacred
Ordinance instantly did all the Laws of Nature, and right reason that serve to
regulate and conveniently concur to all orderly speeches and Orations of men
in public made, they did all fall upon this Ordinance also, as to speak
aloud, not to speak two or three at once, etc. So say I in this point, when
God required government and Discipline in his Church, those rules and
practices of governments, which according to the light of Nature and right
reason are in commonwealths and societies were warranted for the Discipline
of the Church, especially the Church observing the general rules of
edification, order, peace, etc. which Synods, and Counsels apparently tend to,
so that I may affirm of dependancy (as is said by them of their Church
covenant) it is so far from being any thing above that which is written, that
it rather comes within the compass of the Apostle, it needed not at all to
have been written 1 These. 4. 9. Ye are taught of God in a Law Spiritualized,
who also has full roundly taught us to acknowledge, if we be spiritual, yea
but reasonable, such dictates of Nature, and right reason in things wherein
Divine Ordinances and Humane do alike partake in common, to be no less then
the commands of God. It is asserted by some Divines of Scotland, that in all
such things as are alike common to the Vide Assert. of the Church of scotland,
p. 154, 155, 156.
Church, and to the Commonwealth, and have the same use in both, whatsoever
Natures light directs the one, it cannot but direct the other also; for as
the Church is a company of Christians subject to the Law of God, so is it a
company of men and women, who are not the outlawes of Nature, but followers of
the same. Lib pr^med. Theol. cap. 39.
And hence it is Amesius shows that the light of Nature requires, that
particular Churches may and ought to combine in Synods, for things of greater
moment: So then to conclude this reason, and that ex concessis, the God of
Nature and Reason has not left in his Word a government against the light of
Nature and right reason, but such is the Independent Government, as has been
shown at large.

Reason. V.
THere be many Rules and Commands in the Scripture, besides the equity and
Analogy of some practices Med. Theolo. lib. 1. cap. 39.
and examples which do require the combination of Churches in Synods, so
Amesius confesses: The rules and commands be such as these, Let all things be
done to edification, let all things be done decently, and in Order, 1 Cor. 14.
26. 40. ver. Follow after the things which make for Peace, Romans 14. 19. So
Philip. 4. 8. verse. Now if all things in the Churches must be done to
edification, comely, and in order, and for peace, then certainly Church
government must. But Synods are found to be for edification, for Peace, and
order, as things of good report and just, as a special remedy for preventing,
and healing divisions, which is not, nor cannot be in the Independent
Government, but many cases fall out where there is no other remedy but
separation, separation being indeed the remedy of Separation. It is confessed
by themselves that this is a safe and prudentiall way. Now a thing may be
commanded by God two ways, either by virtue of a general command, or by
virtue of a particular command, and that is commanded, and ought to be
practiced, which is required by a general precept as well as what is command
by a particular, and there are many particulars to be practiced by virtue of a
general precept, having no other foundation, especially when they are found by
common experience to be so. The practices and examples following, are such as
these, 1 Cor. 14. 32. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets:
Now if the spirits of the Prophets in a particular Congregation, must be
subject to the censure of the rest in that Church, then by way of equity and
Analogy, they are to be subjected to a greater company, namely, to the
judgment of all the Prophets, in a Province or Nation: Thus Paul, though an
Apostle, seeks to win credit and obedience, even to those Orders, which he
established by the example and judgment of other Churches, 1 Cor. 14. 33. 1
Cor. 11. 16. The equity of which is, that the Orders agreed upon by the consent
of many Churches, are of great force and authority to bind: so Paul, though an
Apostle, submitted to the practice of what was agreed upon by the common
consent of James, and all the Elders of Jerusalem, (though in the practice of
Jewish and legal ceremonies) Acts 21. from the 18. ver. to the 27. ver. Thus
in a case of great dissension, and disputation in the Church of Antioch, Acts
15. 1, 2. ver. Why did that Church send to Jerusalem for resolution in that
difficult case to be determined, and bound by the decrees and Orders of the
Apostles and Elders in that Synod, and were not bound, nor determined by their
own Church only? (especially having two such excellent men with them as
Barnabas and Paul, whose judgment they might have rested upon) Surely this was
done for this end, to teach us that diverse Churches in difficult cases ought to
meet by their Ministers and some choice men to determine of matters for those
Churches, according to the Word, to which all those Churches should submit.
Neither will it help them to say this was extraordinary (for what Synod can
say, it seems good to us and the holy Ghost? and those decrees bound them who
were not present) Not to answer these exceptions now, but reserving the answer
to a larger Tractate upon this subject; grant it that something in this Synod
was singular and extraordinary, yet this was not for one Church to send to
another, and that to their ordinary Officers the Elders, Acts 15. 2. ver. to
this end that by common consent difficult cases might be determined and
enjoined upon particular Churches by more than their own Church, for this must
needs be Ordinary, and so binding, being an example founded upon rules of
common equity, reason, and communion of Churches, and not upon temporary or
extraordinary grounds, and that appears thus (for unless it were to teach the
succeeding Churches this, and to be a ground for Synods, and Dependancy in
Government, in cases of difference and difficulty, there could be no other
great use nor end of it, for as for the satisfying of the question, and
resolving the case, Paul alone being at Antioch, one who was immediately and
infallibly inspired by the Spirit, was able of himself to have satisfied that
controversy about Circumcision, much more Barnabas being with him and others
in that Church.

Reason. VI.
THe Government of the Church by Synods, is no where forbidden by God in the
New Testament, nor spoken against, either directly, or by consequence (as they
say) is for one man to have the power, Luke 22. 25. 26. ver. For though no one
Minister, as some say, be greater than another, yet all are greater than one or
a few. In Synods here is no erecting or appointing of an Officer or office in
the Church, which Christ has not appointed (which is the exception made
against Episcopacy) but here are only the Officers appointed by Christ and
that form of government, which is appointed by Christ in his Church, namely,
Aristocraticall, here is no varying of the form of Church government from
Aristocraticall to Monarchical; (as they speak of Episcopacy) but the
government by Synods is most Aristocraticall, whereas the Independent way for
the most part is but only Oligarchicall, having but a few Officers in a
Church, or else Democraticall, if put into the body of the Congregation: now
where there is no Law forbidding, there is no transgression, for sin is a
transgression of the Law, 1 John 3. 4. And such actions the Church may lawfully
do, wherein no Law of God is broken, as is confessed by themselves, in the
fifth Argument of Syons Prerogative. But here is no Law broke, page 11.
this never being spoken against, nor liable to those exceptions put in by them
against Episcopacy, but found agreeable to the Law and light of Nature
concerning societies, to general rules in the word of edification, order,
peace, pureness, loveliness, etc. to examples also and practices in
Scripture; and what though there be not an express precept or a command in
terminis for it, yet not being against Scriptures but so agreeable to it (as
appears by all before said) no sober godly Minister or Christian should refuse
Communion with a Church or submission to it, and go and set up a Church,
against a Church, and foment a schism for that: for if they will do so, and
will not go upon general rules, equity of Examples, light of Nature and
reason, they must forsake being fixed members of any particular congregation,
and forsake all Churches in the Independent way, and professedly join
themselves to no Assembly in the exercise of Instituted worship, because they
must practice as great matters concerning external government and worship of
what ever Church or government they be of, as this is; namely the Association
of Churches. Let them produce a particular word for the order of Gods Worship,
what must be performed first, what second, what third, what fourth, and so of
the rest, and that no ordinance nor part of Worship may be in another Order;
Let them (if they can) show a particular Word or rule in the New Testament for
their Church covenant (which yet is an essential point, namely, the form of
the Church) let them produce what is required in the word particularly, as the
form of excommunication, or as the form of Ordination, let them set down the
outward worship and gesture of the external reverence which must be used, and
no other way, in the several Ordinances of God, as Word, Prayer, singing of
Psalms, reading Scriptures, Baptism, Lords Supper, Excommunication, which if
they cannot (as we know they are not able, neither in these nor many other
things which may be named) let them then learn that many things in government
and Discipline, have but general rules with equity of practices, and if they
will not join, nor have to do in Church Government, and Discipline, till they
have particular commands to walk thus and no otherwise, they shall stay long
enough, and be of no Church.

Reason. VII.
THis consociation and combination in way of Synods is granted by themselves,
as lawful and expedient in sundry cases and particulars. As that one Church
being required, ought to give an account to others, and to be content that
matters of difference and importance should be heard by other Churches, as also
to be advised and counseled by other Churches, to have also doctrines that are
questionable, tried, and judged of by Synods, to be admonished, and to be
reproved also in case they deserve it; and in case they will not amend, and
reform, upon admonitions and reproves of Synods and Assemblies, then they are
to be complained of to the Civil Magistrate, that he may do his duty: For
this see Christ on his Throne, vid. page 32. examine. of Prelat. petition. Sions
Prerog. page 63. Protest. protested. Now I desire them to satisfy me in their
answers they give to these Reasons, what grounds they have in Scriptures for
these Practices; for Ministers and Elders of several Churches to meet together
in greater Assemblies, to hear the matters of a particular Church, to try and
judge Doctrines, to admonish and reprove, and to complain, and that matters
may with common advise and consent, be agreed upon, for those Churches,
excepting only general rules and commands with the equity and Analogy of
examples; so that if these Acts and Works may be done lawfully, then the
judging and determining of censures and the imposition of Orders and Decrees,
may be warrantable, especially considering that the example of the Synod at
Jerusalem, ordained those decrees for to be kept of the Churches, Act. 16. ver.
4. So that there was not only discussion, disputation, common agreement, but
imposition of them, besides these acts (which you grant) some of them be Acts
of Power and government, other of these Acts are Church censures, as public
reproving and admonition upon complaint, and accusations; as appears by the 1 Timothy 5. 20. Mat. 18. ver. 15, 16, 17. So Amesius tells us, that the parts of
Discipline are brotherly correction and excommunication: neither does
Discipline consist only, or chiefly in the thunderbolt of excommunications,
Amesi. lib. pr. ca. 37. de Discipl. Eccl.
but chiefly in Christian correction, and full excomunication is not to be
exercised, unless to the sin there be added contumacy. And so admonitions
and reproves upon complaints, are held Church censures, by themselves. Now
then if Officers of other Congregations with their own Officers may exercise
these censures, and that which is the chief part of Discipline, and if members
of other Churches ought by the Law of Communion of Churches to seek advise,
help, and to submit to admonitions and reproves, so as there may be good by
them, then also may they submit to the decreeing of Excommunications by Synods:
for if discipline may be lawfully exercised in that wherein it chiefly
consists, as admonitions and reproves by Officers of other Churches, toward
members of such a congregation, then may it also be exercised in that wherein
it less consists, and in this you are no more subject in conscience to a
humane Ordinance, then you are in public admonitions and reproves.

Reason. VIII.
THey do grant and confess that Churches of such a Communion and association,
if upon complaints of false Doctrines, and evil Discipline, made to Synods and
Classes, the Synods and classes convincing a Church of their errors,
admonishing, and councelling them to reform and to censure the obstinate
persons among them; if after all this they shall persist and go on, that then
all these Churches ought to withdraw from them, renounce communion and
fellowship with them, cast them off, and declare so much to their several
Congregations; Now I would know of them (avoiding strife about names, words,
and forms of Excommunication) what is excommunication, but this? what is it to
excommunicate, or to be excommunicated; but to reject persons, and not to have
communion with them, neither in holy nor civil things familiarly? for proof
of which, see these places. Matthew. 18. v. 17. If he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen or Publican. Which words are
understood by all men that would found Discipline upon this place, to be meant
of excommunication. So 2 These. 3. v. 6. 14, and 15. They are both understood of
excommunication, and they are expressed by keeping no company with them, and by
withdrawing communion from them; So that if Officers and Churches may do this
lawfully, then they may excommunicate members of other Congregations. So Tit.
3. v. 10. Excommunication is expressed under rejecting: so that our Independent
Brethren should not upon word or names, make so great a stir in the Church,
and maintain a controversy, even to separated Assemblies* when they do yield
the substance; hence it is, that one of them in that late Protestation
Protested (meaning, I suppose, no other than his fellows) plainly uses the
word Excommunicate, which was not without a providence to make them yield to
the Truth, not only in the thing, but in the very name and term.

Many other Reasons against Independancy I could subjoyne to these, as that
this overthrowes Communion of Saints, as the impossibility of this Government
to any Christian Commonwealth or Nation, etc. Besides the taking of all their
evasions to these Reasons, (which I easily know and foresee) as also, an answer
to all their arguments and reasons for Independancy: But intending this only
for a light skirmish, before I draw up my Forces to the maine Battle, and
sending this forth but (as a Scout) to discover the strength or weakness of
the other side, I will add no more, only that I do not fear but that these
few Soldiers will be able to return again alive, and unwounded, and be able
to do more service when they shall be joined with others, and formed into
Battalio.

Reasons Against A Toleration of some Independent CHVRCHES IN ENGLAND.
Reason. I.
THough the Scriptures speak much for tolerating and bearing one with another
in many things, both in matters of opinion and practice, as these places
testify, Romans 14. 1, 2, 3. 5. and 13, 14. verses. Romans 15. 1, 2. 7. ver.
Ephesians. 4. 2, 3. ver. Phil. 3. 15, 16. ver. yet when differences come either to
heresy or schisms, and points be maintained by men, so as to trouble and
disturb the Church, then the Scriptures are express against their Toleration
and sufferance, requiring them who have power, to hinder it, as may be seen,
Rev. 2. 20. I have a few things against thee, because thou suffer that Woman
Jesabel, which calls her self a Prophetess to teach, and to seduce my
Servants. 1 Timothy 1. 3. Timothy must charge some in Ephesus to teach no other
Doctrine. Tit. 1. 10. Men who are unruly, and subvert whole Houses, teaching
things that they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, their mouths must be
stopped. Tit. 3. 10. Titus must reject a man that is an Heretic after the
first and second admonition. Rom, 16. ver. 17. Paul presses upon the Romans by
earnest beseeching to Mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary
to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, (which is far from
tolerating them.) So Paul writes to the Galathians of some who troubled their
Church, affirming Galath. 5. 10. 12. That he who troubles you shall bear his
judgment whosoever he be: And I would they were even cut off which trouble
you. On which words Pareus gives the Exposition, That to bear judgment, is to
be punished, that is, Pareus in Gal. 5. v. 10. 12.
troublers and disturbers of a Church and people, shall be punished first of
God, and then of the Church, as also of the Magistrate; and on the 12. verse:
Paul wishes they were cut off from the Church, which rend the Church about
circumcision, who trouble and disturb both the outward peace of the So Calvin
in Gal 5. v. 10. 12. I entreat the Independent men in the fear of God to read
and consider what is more fully set down in those two verses by Calvin and
Pareus.
Church, as also your faith and consciences: So Calvin, on these two verses,
10. and 12. speaks thus: But let them hear whoever give occasion of troubles
to the Churches, who loosen the unity of the Faith, who break peace, and if
they have any right understanding, let them tremble at this, for God does
pronounce by the mouth of Paul, that no Authors of such offenses shall be
unpunished. They tear and rend the Church about Circumcision, I would have
them to be cut off* neither can this be condemned of cruelty, as if it were
against Charity, for if we compare the Church with one man, or a few, how far
does that outwaigh? for it is cruel mercy, which preferres one man, or a few,
before the Church, etc. Now the Toleration desired, to set up Churches
independent, and separated from the Churches in the Kingdom, it is in it self
a schism, a rent, and a troubling, disturbing of the Church, so it will prove
more and more, (and cannot be avoided, according to their principles and
practices hitherto) a daily schism and rent in this Church, and an infinite
disturbance, both to the outward peace, and to the faith and consciences of the
people in this Kingdom. The Church of England will be as much troubled by it,
as ever was the Church of Galatia, which will appear more fully in the
following Reasons. And therefore there ought to be no Toleration; every one in
their place ought to be against it, the Magistrates, Ministers, and People. The
permitting and suffering of evil, with the giving of any countenance to it,
when men have power to hinder it, is to be partakers of their sin, 1 Timothy 5.
22. the second Epistle of John, the 11. verse. Qui non prohibet, quando
protest, jubet. He that does not forbid when he has power, commands. And let
me ask the Independent Ministers a question or two; Is it fitting that well
meaning Christians should be suffered to go and make Churches, and then
proceed to choose whom they will for Ministers, as some Tailor, Felt-maker,
Button-maker, men ignorant, and low in parts, by whom they shall be led into
sin and errors, and to forsake the public assemblies, where they may enjoy
worthy and precious Pastors, after Gods own heart, who would feed them with
knowledge and understanding? If once there be a Toleration of Churches, it will
be thus, but if they be hindered of all meetings, this would be prevented. So
heresies also may take and spread in those separated assemblies, before they
can be known to the Magistrates and Ministers of other Churches. Do not your
hearts bleed within you to see and hear of this for the present in several
places, and to think what will be hereafter? O mine does, and thus if once
there were a Toleration, how many weak Brethren would perish for whom Christ
dyed?

Reason. II.
THe toleration desired will not help to heal the Schisms and tents of this
Church, (which is one special thing ought to be looked unto in this present
reformation of the Church) but will much foment and increase it. For whilst
some congregations, and they accounted of note both for ministers and people,
will not submit to the reformation and government settled by Law, this will
breed in the peoples minds many thoughts Ex natura rei, that this Church and
government is not ordered according to the Word of God, but is unlawful; else
why should such men most eminent for gifts and graces, (as many people account
them) refuse to conform to it? and this will prove as great and as continued a
division between the ministers and people of the Churches established by Law,
and the Churches tolerated, as ever was between Conformists and
Non-conformists about Ceremonies; nay greater, because these are of different
Churches and Congregations, whereas Conformists and non-conformists held
communion together in one Church, though contending about these matters; and
that this will certainly be, may be easily believed and foreseen upon these
grounds.

1. Because many of the people who yet be not in this Church way for their
practice, are yet much possessed with these principles of the Independent way,
as the only way of God, and are much looking toward it.

2. The minds of multitudes of the professors in England, and especially in
this City, are upon all occasions very apt to fall to any way in Doctrine or
Discipline that is not commonly received by the Church, as accounting some
singular perfection to be in that which is new, and held but by a few.

3. Though the Ministers of the Congregations tolerated, would promise not to
preach of these points in public, nor in private to speak of them, (which
yet they will not be tied unto) yet their people many of them both men and
women, are so strangely bold, pragmaticall, and so highly conceited of their
way (as the Kingdom of Christ and the only way of Christ) that what out of
those principles, and what by virtue of their relations in friendship, kindred,
etc. there would be continual drawing of many, and many falling to them.

4. The prime principles of this Church way, as namely independancie, liberty,
power, of government and rule to be in the people, are mighty pleasing to flesh
and blood; people generally, chiefly mean persons, and such who have been
kept under, affecting Independancie, Liberty, Power, and Rule.

5. The grant of a toleration will be made use of by them for the strengthening
of their way to be the truth; and will be interpreted in this sense, that they
had such grounds and reasons, as the ablest Ministers in the Kingdom could not
answer, and therefore were content they should have a toleration, (else if they
could have satisfied them, what needed a toleration?) only though they could
not answer their Reasons, and had nothing to say, yet they would not come to
them, and this will be spoken of by their followers, that we would not be
convinced, though we could say nothing against it: all which will (as a means
to increase their side) occasion continual strifes, divisions, heart-burnings
both of Ministers against Ministers, and people against people, so that in
stead of Union and peace in the Kingdom and Church, we shall have
notwithstanding all reformation, a greater division and rent succeed than ever
before.

Reason. III.
THis toleration will not only breed Divisions and Schisms, disturbing the
peace and quiet of Churches and Towns, by setting them who are of different
families, and in more remote relations one against another, but it will
undoubtedly cause much disturbance, discontent, and divisions in the same
families even between the nearest relations of husbands and wives, Fathers and
children, brothers and sisters, Masters and Servants: The husband being of one
Church, and the wife of another; the father of one, and the child of another;
the master of the Church established by Law, the servant of the tolerated; one
brother of one Church, and another brother of another; and so all Oeconomicall
relations and duties will be much disturbed, when as they of one house, and
they in one bed shall be so divided, as that they shall not be of one Church,
nor worship God together in Word, Sacraments, Prayer, but apart. O how will
this overthrow all peace and quiet in families, filling husbands and wives with
discontents, and setting at variance Fathers and children, each against other,
weakening that fervent love in those relations! O how will this occasion
disobedience, contempt, neglects of Governors from the inferiors of the
family, whilst the Governors be looked upon by them, as not in a true Church!
O how will this toleration take away (for every Saint must be free to join
himself voluntarily to what congregation he please) that power, authority,
which God has given the husbands, fathers, and masters, overwives, children,
servants; whilst that they shall join against their wills to such Churches,
and be stolen from them against their pleasure: neither can the Governors be
able to judge of their pro^^ in the Word, nor be certain they sanctify the
Lords day (according as God has laid the charge upon them in the fourth
Commandment) when as the children and servants are of other Churches; so that
by these and many other things which will be found in experience, this
toleration will pervert, disturb, that Order of Gods own appointing, namely
the relations, duties, and works of families, which were there nothing else to
be said against it, this were enough, God certainly appointing no such Church
way^^s is cross to the good and peace of families (one orcer of God certainly
not destroying another.) Now how strong this Reason is against this toleration,
I submit to the Judgment of that Court, which has the Legislative power, they
knowing well that both Churches and Commonwealths are made of families all
issuing out from thence, they being the Seminaries and Nurseries for both, and
if there be a groundwork laid for disturbances, divisions, and disorders
there, what can be firm, peaceable, or sure?

Reason. IIII.
THere will be great danger of continual Divisions, distractions, disputes
amongst us, not only from the different form of government and worship in
their Churches and ours; but from other Doctrines and practices held by some of
them for the present (as for instance that Saints when they dye, go not to
heaven where Christ is, but they go to a third place; the sitting with their
Hats on at the receiving of the Lords Supper, etc.) and others that will be
daily broached, and then their Churches being Independent and not under the
government of any out of themselves, they will go on without being hindered;
and whereas we have now too many new and strange doctrines, we shall have
nothing but errors and novelties broached, and so greater contentions and
breaches amongst us.

Reason. V.
THe most eminent Ministers in this Kingdom for parts, grace, and Labors, can
have little assurance of the continuance of their flocks to them, if such a
toleration be granted, for they will draw away their people, and admit them
into their Churches, and even gather and increase their Churches out of the
labors of the best Ministers, the Ministers shall do little else but spend,
and be spent, for to fit men for them; when Ministers have traveled in birth
of children, and should have comfort and joy in them, then they will be stolen
away. This toleration upon any discontent taken or any light occasion of
demanding dues, or preaching against any thing they like not, opens a wide door
and will invite them to desert their Ministers; and what a sadding of the heart
and discouragement in the work of the Lord, this must be to the Ministers of
the Kingdom, let all judge.

Reason. VI.
A Toleration of Churches to be erected as Independent, to enjoy liberty and
exemption from the estabilshed, will be undoubtedly a means and way of their
infinite multiplication and increase, even to increase them 30. fold, so that
if the Parliament could like to have more of the breed, and have a delight to
have multitudes to be exempted from the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Land,
(which Parliaments never did) no way like this: for we see within this nine
months (though there be no toleration of their way) yet having not been looked
after, how are they increased and multiplied? and that there will be a mighty
increase upon a toleration (to say nothing of casting a snare upon the people,
by this to make doubts, nor nothing of the wantonness and instability of many
professors, nor of the activenesse of many to spread these principles that
their party may be considerable) this may evince it: In many, if not in most
Towns and Parishes it cannot be helped, but that there are and will be for
many years, men of no great popular gifts for preaching, who also according to
their principles, not having been brought up to it, cannot so comply with
their people: now many that live in these Parishes (seeing they may keep their
houses and places of abode) upon the news of a toleration, will for the
benefit of more powerful, practical, and zealous Preaching, betake themselves
to go to their Churches, (which liberty they cannot have in the Churches
established, for the Law (it is likely) will provide for men to keep to their
own Ministers, where there is sufficient preaching) and so will fall to their
principles, and so we shall have upon this grouud swarms of them.

Reason. VI.
THe Prime and fundamental principles of this Independent way, upon which they
erect their Church way and independancy, are very prejudicial, dangerous, and
unsufferable, to this Kingdom, as for instances, Saints qua Saints, two or
three of them or more, they only have an immediate independent power Manus. of
a^^ Treatise of the Church.
from Christ their immediate head, to gather and combinde themselves into
visible Churches, without expecting warrant from any Governors whatsoever upon
earth, as also being thus gathered and joined into a Church, to choose all
officers among themselves, and to exercise all Discipline and Ecclesiastical
Government, even to Excomunication, without and against the good will and
consent of the Christian Magistrates, but the Magistrates whether Kings and
Princes, or States, they have no power, but in all things of the Visible Church
Christ is an Immediate Governor to the Saints, having put none of his power
out of his hands to any Magistrate whatsoever, but though he has given much
power to Magistrates over goods, liberties, and lives of his Saints, yet this
Spiritual power of gathering and making Churches, and of the power of
exercising censures and Discipline so as it may not be exercised without their
power and leave, he has not given them; so that I desire them to consider and
enquire whether this denying to Kings and Princes power and authority in causes
Ecclesiastical in the Church, and giving all Spiritual, Ecclesiastical power
immediately, and independantly under Christ to the particular Congregations,
and not to the King, be not against these Laws and Statutes of the Land, made
in 26. Henry the 8. cap. 1. 25. year of Henry the 8. cap. 19. and the 1. year
of Elizabeth cap. 1. where it will be found that all Jurisdiction, Superiority,
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power
or authority has been, or may lawfully be exercised, for the visitation of
the Ecclesiastical state and persons, and for reformation, order and
correction of the same, and of all manner of Errors, Heresies, Schisms,
abuses, offenses, etc. shall for ever by authority of this present Parliament,
be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. As also that no
orders nor constitutions may be enacted in the Church without the Kings assent,
and hence the oath of Supremacy was appointed by Law for every Ecclesiastical
person to take: hence I ask the Independent men, seeing they give that
immediate Ecclesiastical power to their particular Churches, which the Papists
do to the Pope, whether they will take the oath of Supremacy, or do
acknowledge in their prayers that title of the King, Defendor of the Faith,
etc. Secondly, they hold that things lawful in themselves (as for instance,
set forms of Prayer acknowledged by them to be lawful) yet being enjoined A
Liturgy imposed is Popery says the Protestation Protested.
by Authority are now unlawful, so that though a Form of Prayer be lawful,
yet being imposed for order, uniformity, that alters the case (a strange
paradox that things lawful in themselves tending to Order and Peace, should
become unlawful when commanded.) 3 They affirm that Christian Manus Treatis.
of a Church.
Princes and Magistrates who are defenders of the Faith, have no more to do in
and about the Church then Heathen Princes. Some of them deny also and question
Robins. Apol. c. 11.
that received axiom, that the Magistrate is custos utriusque tabulae; Saying
of those Kings of Judah and Israel who meddled in the Church with reformation
and establishment of Religion, that they did it not as Kings, but as types of
Christ: so that I leave it to better judgment whether it be safe for a
Kingdom to tolerate such Churches who maintain and vent upon all occasions
such kind of principles; and as the principles, so the people for a great part
of them be dangerous and insufferable, heady, refractory, proud, bitter,
scornful, despisers of Authority, who though but a few comparatively and the
Laws standing, have attempted not to suffer the public prayers to be prayed,
but what with singing, what with clapping on of Hats in times of prayer, what
with reviling and threatening of Ministers, have labored to hinder their use:
Now if they dare attempt such practices and things being but a few, the Laws
being point blanke against them, and the Laws establishing the other, what
will they not do when they shall be multiplied and tolerated, if they come
once to a great head? we may fear they will not tolerate the Churches, and
Government established by Law: but what insolences and mischiefs will follow
upon their toleration, not only in Ecclesiastical government, but in Civil,
I leave such who are experienced men in matters of Government to foresee and
Judge of, but hereafter too late to remedy, but I desire rather to pray
against a toleration, than to Prophecy of the woeful effects of it.

Reason. VIII.
THese independent men where they have power (as in new England) will not give
a toleration for any other Ecclesiastical Government or Churches but in their
own way, they would not suffer men of other opinions in doctrine and
government to live within the bounds of their patent, though at the furthest
bounds, but have banished them. They were sent to from England by some godly
Ministers their brethren, men otherwise approved by them, as being against
Ceremonies, who being in danger of leaving the Land, sent Vide Ans. from new
England to the 32. quest. sent by some Lancashire Ministers.
to know if they might have liberty according to their Consciences to go in a
Church way, something differing from theirs, and not in this Independent
Popular Government; to which question you may read the answer, they could not
grant any other form of government but one, seeing there is but one way of
Church government laid down in the Word, and that unchangeable, and therefore
they cannot yield to it. So others of them will nottolerate, or admit into
fellowship the godliest Christians, unless they will enter into Covenant,
profess their faith, submit to their Church Orders, though they would be of
their Church; so that these men who now would feign have a toleration in this
great Kingdom will not allow any in a remote Plantation, nor in one of their
small particular Congregations, for fear of disturbing the peace of their
Church, and yet would have a toleration in this Kingdom, never caring to
disturb the peace, and good of the three Kingdoms which would be much
hazarded by it, but thus partial men are (and you may observe it) it is ordinary
for men when they are not in place nor have no power in Church or
Commonwealth, and hold also Doctrines and principles contrary to what is held,
and established, then to plead for tolerations, when as the same parsons
coming to be in place and to have power, will not tolerate others to set up any
way different from theirs. And I believe those present men, who here are
endeavoring a toleration for their Churches had they the power in their hands
to settle a Government, we should have no Government tolerated, nor Church but
the Independent way, and for this see The Protestation Protested, what he
thinks of our Church, and of what ever Government shall be established.

Reason. IX.
AToleration may be demanded upon the same grounds for all the rigid Brownists
of the Kingdom and for all the Anabaptists, Familists, and other Sectaries, who
profess it is conscience in them, and in some respects upon better grounds it
may be moved by them, as being persuaded we are no true Church, then for these
Semi-Separatists; nay whether may not the Papists petition to, and hope to have
a toleration of Religion, seeing it is Conscience in many of them as well as
you, and if once an exemption be given from the Religion established by Law to
one sort, why may not others think to have the same privilege? and therefore
if ever the door of Tolerations should be but a little opened, there would be
great crouding by all sorts to enter in at it.

Reason. X.
THe granting a Toleration of this Independent way whose first and fundamental
principle is, that two or three Saints, where ever or by what means soever
they Rob. Justific. 221.
do arise, separating themselves from the world into the fellowship of the
Gospel, are a Church truly gathered and that they only have an immediate and
independent power from Christ their immediate head to gather and combine
themselves without expecting warrant from any Governors whatsoever upon earth
to make a Church, does make way for any thing for Libertinism or for any Manus
Treatis. of a Church.
opinion in the world, that so all who fall into any Doctrine, or any who like
not their own Ministers and Church Government, either because they restrain
them from sin or keep them to Gods Ordinances, they may go three or four
of them, and enter into Covenant among themselves, and be a Church and live
without Ministers and Sacraments along time upon pretense that they can find
none fit for them yet (as these Independent men do) and when they do choose,
then choose such of their own opinions and ways, and so they may live together
at liberty in ways pleasing themselves: neither can this help it, to say this
belongs only to Saints, it is their Prerogative Royal and not others, for all
Heretics, Sectaries, or Libertines will count themselves Saints as well as
our Independent men: they may be their own Judges, and will say that they are
Saints as well as you say, for the Ministers and Magistrates of the Kingdom
shall not have the power to determine who be Saints and who not, so that if the
State should tolerate the Independancie, they know not what they tolerate, but
in the belly of this Independancie they tolerate and make way for Libertinisme,
Heresy, and what ever Satan and the corrupt hearts of men have a pleasure to
broach and fall into.

Reason. X.
I Propound this question what these men would have in this toleration, whether
the number of these Independent Congregations, that they would have tolerated,
should be five or six Congregations only, and no more, or shall the number be
left undetermined; to be free to multiply into as many Churches as they
please: if the number must be determined, this will overthrow their principles
and Churches quickly, as when one Church breaks into two or three, as upon
their principles it must, and often times does, as at Amsterdam into two, at
Roterdam also, and at London, and when one of the Tolerated Churches breaks
into two or three, which shall be reckoned, that that is the Church allowed of
by the State, for each part will pretend to it: but now if they say the number
must be left undetermined, then we may quickly have half a dozen of their
Churches in some one Parish of a City or Town, nay two or three Churches in a
place, sprung out of one of their own, and we may have every where three or
four men of an opinion, differing from others to go make a different Church,
and so they will increase in infinitum, and there will be no end of divisions,
and subdivisions.

But before I conclude, I will answer five or six Reasons, that be commonly
alleged by them, for their Toleration in this Kingdom.
Reason. I.
THis is no more than what is granted to the French, and Dutch, who live
amongst us, and have Churches and Government of their own way, exempt from the
Government established.

Answer. The case is quite different, and that will appear by these
particulars.

First, Those French and Dutch Protestants have nothing, nor desire nothing,
but that which is Originally according to the Church and people they were borne
and brought up in, they enjoy nothing as Contra-distinct to the Protestants of
France and Holland, but the Independent men move for that which is
Contra-distinct to their own Church and Nation; Yea, and to all reformed
Churches.

Secondly, This liberty was granted by our pious Princes in times of
persecution to the Protestants, that so they might have here the exercise of
their Religion in their own tongue, when they could not enjoy it at home, and
it has been of great use upon occasions in this way ever since, for a refuge
to the persecuted Protestants, but what is your case to this? you may enjoy the
Protestant Religion in this Land, and that by the Law and Authority of King and
Parliament, what color then, that you should move for an exemption of your
Churches?

Thirdly, these French and Dutch Churches will willingly be joined in
Government, and in one way of Discipline with the Kingdom, if there be a
reformation, which you will not.

Fourthly, These Churches are not in an Independent government, neither do
they hold your Principles of the Church, but be as much against them (as we)
they do admit of appeals, and in all business of greater moment have Synods.

Fifthly, They being strangers amongst us of different Nations and Tongues, not
having those relations of Kindred and acquaintance with us, but keeping
themselves, for the most part, among themselves, there is not that danger of
drawing away the people, nor of causing Schisms, as from you that are of our
Nation, and tongue; neither have they, or do ever vent principles against our
Church and Government, (as you do) but content themselves with their own way,
they neither can, nor will admit ours to be members of their Congregations, in
respect our people understand not their language, so that the people are so
far from leaving our Churches, and becoming members of theirs, as that our
people cannot so much as resort to their Congregations to hear them Preach,
they Preaching in a language the people understand not, all which is quite
contrary with you.

Sixthly, there is a great reason and necessity of allowing them Churches and
places to Preach, and be by themselves, because many of them understand not
English at all, and for the benefit of strangers of their Religion who come
over, who else could not enjoy the public exercise of their Religion at all,
and they may well be allowed some Discipline among themselves in respect they
maintain al their own poor, not charging the Parishes where they live with
them: all which will not hold as a ground for Toleration of Independancy: Their
meetings by themselves, are not upon your principles of a Church, or Church
government, but because of different language, etc.

Reason. II.
WE seek no more then what is granted us in Holland, and what we may enjoy
there in a Country where we be strangers.

1. Answer. If your toleration in Holland, be a good ground for a toleration
here, that we should do so because Holland does it, then there should be a
Toleration for all Religions amongst us, as Jews, Anabaptists, etc. And if you
would have it so, speak out plainly, there are some of you have whispered it,
and often spoke of it in private, in the answer you give to these reasons.
Speak your mind, and if you justify a Toleration of all Religions, I will
discuss that question with you, and take it up against you as not fit, neither
in Divinity nor policy, as both against Rules of Conscience and Policy.

Secondly, There may be a Toleration of you in Holland, with much more safety
to the government established and peace of that Church, then can be here in
this Kingdom, the people of that Country not understanding your language,
having little or no relation to you, nor you to them, of kindred, friendship,
where as it is quite otherwise here.

Thirdly, That people of the Hollanders generally are an industrious people
minding their businesses, profits, and keeping to what is established by their
Laws, not troubling their heads so much with other points of Religion, but
here in England and especially in the City of London, and great Towns, many
Professors are more idle and busy bodies, tatlers also, as it is said, 1 Timothy
5. 13. ver. Very wanton also in their Wits, affecting novelties in Religion,
and liking of points that are not established nor commonly held.

Fourthly, Holland tolerates you and many others, but it is more upon grounds
and necessity of worldly respects, because of that benefit of excise toward
the maintenance of wars which they have from them who live amongst them, so
that they are paid well for it, so that in this they measure things rather Vina
Mercatoria, than by the rule of Scriptures; and were it not for that and such
respects which the state of that State has put them upon, they would never
grant tolerations, but there is not the same reason here in any respect, our
riches and strength standing in one way of Religion and not in tolerations.

Reason. III.
IF we may not have a toleration and a liberty of erecting some congregations
among you, this will force us to leave the Kingdom that we may have the
liberty of our consciences, and if you do, what cruelty is this.

1. Answer. There is no need of a Toleration for you, and yet no need of
forcing you to leave the Kingdom that you may enjoy your Consciences, and that
will appear if you calmely and meekely be content to hear Reasons and
Principles which you your selves agree to, as namely, you hold that our
Churches be true Churches, our Ministers true Ministers, Ordinances of word,
Sacraments true, and that you can partake with us in our Congregations in all
Ordinances even in coming to the Lords supper, provided that scandalous and
ignorant persons be kept back, and ceremonies removed; why then should you
desire to set up other Churches, as different from ours? you can have but Word,
Prayer, Sacraments, and Discipline in your own, that you may enjoy in ours, is
this any good reason for you to leave the Kingdom? I pray consider well, some
of your Ministers at first coming over said (as I have been told from good
hands) they could take the charge of Parochial Churches amongst us upon the
reformation hoped for, and they could yield to Presbyteriall government, by
Classes and Synods, so not enjoined to submit to it, as Jure divino, but since
they have gotten some more hopes (I know not upon what grounds) they are now
very hot for a Toleration, and will not hear of growing into one body with us.

Secondly, Seeing our Churches, Ministers, and Ordinance, be true, for you to
erect new, and to withdraw from such Churches (though suppose they were in some
things defective and not every way so rightly ordered as were to be desired) I
know can never be answered to God, especially you having not the power and
authority from God to order those Churches otherwise, and I desire you again
and again to weigh whether you may not live in the Communion of such Churches,
where some thing may be yet desired that is not, where it is not in your power
to help, but that you are bound by the Command of God in such cases either to
leave the Kingdom for that liberty, or else being private men in a Land where
true Churches, Ministers, and Ordinances are, to go and set up divided
Churches in that Land, both against the Laws of the Land, and to the scandal
of all the Churches, I beseech you think upon it what is become of Fraterna
toleratio, and of giving scandal, not to one Brother, but to thousands of
Congregations of Christ. And whether nothing wanting in matter of Order, may be
Tolerated so long as a man is not put upon the practice of that which is
unlawful. As for those Brownists whose Principles and Consciences (though very
erroneous) hold that we have no true Church, Ministry, Ordinances, but all is
Antichristian, they have a better warrant to set up new Assemblies, or to leave
the Kingdom to enjoy their way; but as for you to withdraw and set up
separated assemblies upon no greater grounds, or causes, can never be
justified, and I shall be ready upon that point to deal with any of you, and
for your better satisfaction for the present, I wish the conscientious and
sober Ministers to read two pages in Master Robinsons Apology, Chap. 12. De
Eccle. Anglic. page 86, 87. Wherein he grants that Churches may not be departed
from for circumstantiall corruptions, nor for many inconveniences, affirming
that it is neither Christian prudence nor charity to do so; he shows it is
not an intolerable evil (though an evil to be lamented) for evil men to be
suffered in the Church, nor that Discipline as it is called, or that
Ecclesiastical government instituted by Christ, is neglected, or violated, but
that's it, that the plain contrary to it should be established by Law, and so
he goes on: Now supposing our reformation, it will be otherwise with England
then when he writ and the most that can be said (supposing your principles the
Truth, (though that's denied by us) there will be but evil men suffered, and
not men of the most profligate life, and Discipline instituted willbe but
neglected or violated, not that which is quite contrary as established by Law,
take place.

Thirdly, You your selves live in, and are members of such Churches, and think
it unlawful to forsake them, where, for many years together you bear with
defects, and want some parts of government, and Officers appointed by Christ,
more material then will be in ours, upon a reformation, as namely, without
Pastors, Elders, Widows, many years together, without Sacraments a long time,
without censures especially unless you allow people to be the instruments and
exercise Excommunication without having Ordination of Officers, without
prophesying also many years; Why can you not bear with some defects in our
Churches, and be content to wait some years, till God either give you light
to see your mistakes, or else till we have more light to perfect what is
wanting? You tell us that some things may be omitted for a time, as
Circumcision was in the Wilderness, and that affirmatives do not bind too
always, and that exercise of Discipline may be forborne for a time, when it is
evident, it will not be for edification to the Church, but destruction; what
shall hinder then, but that you ought to incorporate into our Assemblies,
though something yet were to be desired? there is nothing contrary that will be
put upon you (nor quite another thing.) If you may publicly protest against
such as you know should not be admitted, and declare against the Churches
faultiness in not proceeding against them, you may communicate with them,
because you have done all you can in this case.


Fourthly, You may safely be members of our congregations in the reformation of
us, and in these times, because you may without danger show your dislike and
speak against scandalous persons, and against the fault of the Church, if they
admit such to the Sacrament, which being done, your selves grant you may
communicate with them, so a Letter sent from Roterdam grants. And I have heard
this alleged, as the reason why you first left our Churches, but that reason
now ceases, seeing either such persons will be wholly kept away, or else you
may protest against them (though I must tell you, that practice you judge your
selves tied to, is founded upon a false principle) namely that the power of
government is given by Christ to the body of the Congregation.

Fifthly, There is a medium between persecution (as you term it) and a
public Toleration, a middle way between not suffering men to live in the
Land, and the granting them a liberty of separated Assemblies, so that there is
no necessity either of leaving the Land, or of enjoying exempt Congregations
(for there is a third datur tertium) as for Instance, Persons may be tolerated
to inhabit in a Land, to enjoy their Lands, and liberties, and not be compelled
to profess and practice things which are against their consciences; It is one
thing to be forced and compelled positively to do things against conscience,
and another thing, not to be suffered the public practice of some things in
separated Congregations, as to illustrate it thus, suppose the Papists upon
their petitions to the Parliament should have those statutes repealed, which
enjoynes them to come to our Churches, (which they say is against their
consciences) though indeed they are bound by the command of God to come, and
ought by the Magistrate to be compelled to come (as Doctor Davenant has
clearly showed) yet the granting the Papists a Toleration of the public
Daven. determ. quest. 2 7.
exercise of their Religion, to the scandal of the Reformed Churches and
dishonor of God, were quite another thing, insomuch as the Papists though they
petition the first, (upon deep Protestation of living peaceably, and according
to the Laws of the Land) yet they move not for the last: so I judge you may
live in the Land freely, and enjoy your liberties and estates, coming to our
Churches, enjoying the ordinances, and are like never to be compelled to
profess or practice what is against your judgments, the greatest
inconvenience is but the forbearing of something you would have, which
considering the questionablenesse of the thing, and the many other evils which
would attend it, if you should enjoy it, you may in point of conscience be well
satisfied without it; so that consider well, and you may find a medium between
leaving the Land and enjoying a Toleration of exempt Congregations.

Sixthly, If all these former answers satisfy you not fully, because (though
these things be true) yet besides these Ordinances and Ministers, you must be
in a Church way and Fellowship, as now you are, then know, according to your
Principles of a visible Church, laid down by Master Robinson, and by your
selves in all your Manuscripts, you may enjoy your way in having several
visible Churches, and that without that offense and scandal to Magistrates and
Churches, and yet neither leave the Kingdom, nor have a Toleration, and Reb.
Catechis. Ans. to 2. quest. Reb. Justific. page 221.
that I will demonstrate thus; two or three Saints joining together in a
Covenant make a Church, a greater number is not required, neither Officers to
the essence of a Church; a greater addition of company to this two or three,
though they may make for the well being and flourishing of the Church, yet they
are not of the essence of the Church. Now then every one of you Manus. Treat.
of a church. I propound these things as being according to their principles,
but not as mine.
in your own Families, as the Husband, Wife, Children of age, and Servants,
who are visible Saints, may be joined in covenant to walk in Gods ways, and
to watch over one another, so that here is a Church, and every Master in his
Family may set up holy exercises, and exercise Discipline among themselves for
their Families, and thus in the Church that is in their house, they may
exercise what Discipline they judge is wanting in ours, so that coming to our
Churches to the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, they may serve God in their own
Families among themselves in a Church way, in ways of admonition, reproof,
and other censures; nay every Church Family, or most of them may have Officers
also amongst them, the Ministers Families may have a Pastor or Teacher, each
Minister being made Pastor of his own Family, chosen also he may be by his
Family, who also may Preach and instruct his Family, and exercise Discipline
amongst them; great Families, as Gentlemen or Citizens may themselves be
teachers of their Families, according to your Principles, or may have some in
their Families fit to be chosen Elders and Teachers to them, especially such of
them who keep Scholars in their houses, and still chosen by the Church of
this Family: But if there be some Church Families who have none fit for
Officers to their Church (which can hardly be in these kinds of Churches) yet
this is not of the essence of the Church. But as for single persons, as Young
men and Mayds, who are of your judgment, if you ask what they shall do,
seeing they have no Families, and cannot join two or three in a Family to make
a Church. I answer, they may be Servants unto men of their own judgment, and
live in the Families of their own way, and so may be in a Church: And thus you
may enjoy your own way without scandal or division, the Laws not forbidding
or meddling what men do in this kind, as how often men pray in their own
Families, or catechize them, or whom they shut out from their Prayers and holy
duties: But if it be said, how shall such (as are bred Scholars, the Ministers
of this way) be maintained? it is not being Ministers to their own Family will
maintain them? I answer, I have taken care to show them a way for maintenance
also, how they may enjoy their Country, their Consciences, and maintenance,
that so they need not be forced to seek a Toleration of Churches, that they
may be maintained, and that is thus; Supposing they will not take Pastoral
charges of Parishes, but only be Pastors of the Church in their house, yet
holding it lawful (as they do) to Preach in our Congregations, they may take
Lectures amongst us, and so be maintained, there will be want of many men for
Lectures settled by gifts of the dead, and then no question but the government
of the Church, which shall be established by Law, will be so moderate, that if
men hold the maine points of Doctrine with the Church, be pious in life and
peaceable, so as not to Preach nor speak against what is established by Law, nor
do not make Schisms to go and set up separated Assemblies (which practices
caused troubles in the Church) they may enjoy all liberty and (as many
Scriptures show) freedom, though in point of opinion and judgment there may
be some difference from things established by Law (for I suppose we shall not
have subscriptions enjoined to forms of government and Discipline) but only
to Doctrines, and that also in maine and clear points, so that by all this you
may apprehend how without a Toleration, you may in a secret and peaceable way
enjoy your Church fellowship with maintenance also. What ever else you seek
for by a Toleration of many Families to make a Church, is but for the more
comfort and flourishing of your way, but not as that which is necessary to your
way, now in a business which is but of convenience, and not of necessity,
according to your principles, (though you had a liberty and privilege to enjoy
it, yet) where so muchscandal may come of your liberty, and it cannot be
avoided (for though one of the more sober and conscientious Ministers and
people could use it better, yet most would abuse it; as the rigid Brownists,
Anabaptists, and many weak Christians) you should not use it but forbear, so
the Apostle teaches us, 1 Cor. 8. v. 9. So Gal. 5. v. 13. 14. 15. Now a
scandal is some word or action, giving an occasion of ruin to a weak
brother, which practice of yours would certainly do; now to the avoiding the
scandal of the weak, All those things are to be done or omitted, which may be
done or omitted without sin, as Amesius grants, lib. 5. de Cons. cap. 11. So
Gerson speaks, part 2. Reg. moral. A man is bound to desist from every act, to
which be is not necessarily tied, where upon good grounds the scandal of the
weak is feared. Now the setting up of separated Assemblies in this Church, may
be omitted without sin, neither are ye necessarily tied to it, as will
appear by this sixth Answer. Besides, considering all the former answers,
wherein you see what you may enjoy in this Kingdom in liberty of Ordinances
and Consciences, you are not tied for some matter of convenience, which you
might enjoy in another Kingdom, to withdraw from this Church, and to leave
your own Country, for your satisfaction in which point, I had rather Doctor
Amesius should speak then I, to whom I refer you, who in his cases of
Conscience about this point, says thus. A man may keep Communion with a
Church Ames. lib. 4. de cons. cap. 24. de (...).
wherein wicked men are suffered, and good men depressed, and that upon
several reasons, amongst others, upon this ground; Because from such a Church
to a purer, there is often times no removing without great damages and
hinderance, which ought to be avoided always (as much as may be) without
sin: yea such damages and losses do sometimes cause that an affirmative
precept ceases to bind. A man may join himself and live in such a Church, in
which many defects are necessarily to be tolerated, yea, and join to that
Church, where the power of removing scandalls, and casting out wicked men is
taken away, if he cannot without great prejudice and hurt, go to a freer
Church, and men sin not either in joining to such a Church, or continuing in
it. But yet further he grants, a man may be a member of such a Church in which
some things instituted by Christ are wanting; and where some things appointed
by men are introduced. So that I beseech you Brethren, lay all these six
answers together, and consider sadly whether God requires of you, unless you
may have a Toleration, to leave the Kingdom: to run many hazards and dangers
for Churches after your way, when as you may enjoy so much at home without a
Toleration of exempt Assemblies, as I have opened in these six answers.

Seventhly, If notwithstanding all that is said to you you will not be
satisfied, without setting up Churches against the Church, it were better for
you to leave the Kingdom, and to return back to your charges, and families
into Holland, and others of your mind, who cannot be satisfied, to leave the
Land, and to go to New England, or else where, rather then by erecting of
Churches by Toleration or without it to disturb the good and peace of three
Kingdoms; and this will be no great harm to many of you, for you may easily
return, being able to live and subsist there comfortably (as you say your
selves:) and for my own part were I of your way (so far as I know my own
heart) I had rather go to the uttermost parts of the Earth, though to live in
a hard and mean condition, than to disturb the peace or good of three
Kingdoms, as you would do by a Toleration. Look what is commonly said,
praestat ut pereat unus quam unit as, It is better that one perish than unity,
so I say it is far better a few Ministers and people wanted some outward
accommodations of their own Country than that the good of the whole should be
so in danger, neither is there any cruelty or persecution in it, (as they will
be apt to phrase it) for if the purity of Doctrine, holiness of life, peace of
the Church cannot be preserved by such a Toleration (as I have in part showed,
and can make it plain) then it ought not to be, and I will speak for my
self, and in the behalf of hundreds of my Brethren, painful in the
Ministry, who have borne the brunt of the times, that we profess we will
submit to the reformation and government established by Law, which we doubt not
but will be very blessed and glorious, but however things should fall out, we
would either patiently tolerate what is not in our sphere to reform, or
quietly sit down in the Kingdom, or else with leave betake our selves to some
other Countries, being fully resolved in our Consciences, that circumstances in
and about external forms of Government in matter of order can never be
sufficient grounds to us, to set up Churches against a Church where true
Churches are, and so to prove means of eternal divisions and heart-burnings
between Ministers and people.

Reason. IIII.
I But if these Ministers, and some such Churches be not tolerated, they are
afraid that in time they shall draw most of the good people out of the Land
after them.

First Answer. I hear one of them say so, but I suppose they rather hope then
fear it, and this plainly shows they have a good conceit of themselves, and
of their own way.

Secondly, For their fear, we fear too (but not as they do) but this, that
if they have a toleration, they may draw away many good people, especially if
the ceremonies and the Liturgy stand in full force, and their Churches
tolerated, they will make brave work in a short time (though I am confident
God will preserve many judicious, advised Christians from their way
notwithstanding:) but let there be no Toleration granted, and they once well
shipped, and a reformation amongst us in government, and Ministers, that fear is
over with me, we fear it not, that many will follow them, for when that which
first bred these men, the violent pressing of ceremonies, the casting out of
good Ministers, the many notorious persons suffered in the Church without all
censure, shall be removed, many will not be bred, and others will be satisfied,
and I doubt it not but that the godly and painful Ministers of the Church of
England, may and will, both out-Preach them, and outlive them, and may be
compared with them for all excellencies, and abilities: for my part I shall
speak as I find, I knew many of them long before they fell to this way, and
know them since, and have not seen any of them better, or more profitable in
life and Ministry, for their charge; only this I am sure of, for some of them,
whereas whilst of the Church of England they Preached often, now seldom, they
go looser in their apparel and hair, they take less care for the public
in things that concern the glory of God and Salvation of men's souls, their
principles and spirits grow very narrow like their Churches, they grow more
strange, reserved, subtle, in a word, they mind little else but the
propagation of their Independent way, (as The Protestation Protested witnesses
abundantly) and I shall speak my Conscience And what ever Liturgy or
Ceremonies or Discipline are left to accompany this National Church
Government, it is indifferent with us, so as we may enjoy our Christian liberty
in the true use of such Ordinances, and of such Independent Government as
Christ the only Lawgiver of his Church, and Lord of the conscience, has left
unto us in his Word.
from the experience I have had of many of them having studied and observed
them and their writings and never saw nor heard of any men who fell fully to
that way, that ever had so large a spirit for good, afterward to take that
care of propagating the Gospel and preaching the Word to men without; I never
knew any man that ever God honored so much, after he fell to those principles
as before, though the same persons before have been active for God, doing
famously and worthily, yet when they fall to this way, they either blemish
themselves, or do little; and the truth is, those principles of separation be
such as God did never honor much the men who held them: look what is said by
them of Episcopacie, that the very calling of it has such a malignity in it,
that it hurts the best men that are placed in those chaires, that I may say
truly, of this way, there is a malignity cleaves to it, hurting the men that
fall to it, by altering their spirits and contracting their hearts, (though
many of them continue good in the maine.)

Reason. V.
THis is no other but envy in the Ministers that makes them against a
toleration, because they fear their people will desert them and come to us,
being so pure in Ordinances and Churches; and thus The Protestation Protested
speaks, and it is frequently in some of their mouths.

Answ. 1. It is not out of envy to their ministers and Christians; for first I
hold their practice sinful and unwarrantable to separate from our Churches and
to erect such Congregations, and therefore I speak against it, and that by the
help of God I shall make good in a following discourse.

2. It cannot be counted envy in Ministers to be unwilling to have their
flocks and people fall from them, is it envy in a father to be unwilling to
have his children stolen from him and tempted away by strangers? I ask such
of you who be fathers if you would be willing to have your Children forsake you
and that with renouncing the womb that bare them, and the paps that gave them
suck, throwing dirt into the face of Father and Mother? Now this is the case
for Ministers, to have their spiritual children whom they have begotten to
God, who are their comfort and the fruit of all their Labors to fall from
them and to despite them afterward cannot be pleasing, neither ought it: look
what the Jews gave out falsely concerning the natural body of Christ that his
Disciples came by night and stole it away, that may be said truly of his
Mystical body, Believers you by your tolerations would have your Disciples
come by night and steal them away, and therefore we ought not to sleep, but
to watch against you.

Answ. 3. I envy you not, but pity and love you, and would not have you have
such a sword as a Toleration put into your hands (though some amongst you
perhaps might use it better) to hurt your selves with, and to have such an
occasion to run upon the rock of Schism, and to go out of the way daily
turning into errors on the right hand.

Answ. 4. This Author would intimate and make the world believe, as if only the
honest souls were with them, and would be for their way, but as for them who
be against their way and toleration, they are not such honest souls: but let
them know honest souls are not only with them, for in the Church of England
there ever have been, and are as honest ministers and people that have
rejected your way, as ever any that fell to it, nay the greatest
Non-conformists and most able in that way, have writ the most against you, and
labored upon all occasions to preserve people from falling to you, as Mr
Cartwright, Mr Brightman, Mr Parker, Mr Hildersham, Dr Ames, Mr Bradshawe, Mr
Ball, Mr Dod, Mr Baines, with many others.

Reason. VI.
I But they be good men, and men of great gifts, and therefore they should be
tolerated to have such Churches, it is pity they should leave the land, and we
lose their prayers.

Answ. 1. The better men they be, and the more able, the worse to set up
separated Churches, for they will the more endanger the peace of the Kingdom,
and make the Schisms greater.

2. For their prayers we may have the benefit of them as well when they are
absent as present, and some of them have said, they prayed more for England,
when out of it than when in it.

3. They left the Kingdom when it was in greatest danger and in most need of
help, and provided for themselves to keep in a whole skin, and without them
we stood here in the gap, and prevailed with God, and rather than to buy their
company at such a rate as a Toleration, it is better to want it, as I showed
before, and I question not but the Kingdom will do well enough though they
return, and the better unless they cease sowing of their principles.

4. For this objection of being good men, I shall answer it at large in
another Tractate, wherein I shall mind men of many dangers that may arise to
them from good and eminent men, and fully show what little strength there is in
that Reason; clearing also many things in reference to that Objection.

Quest. I, but may not conscientious men who agree with us in the maine in
points of Doctrine and Practice, be tolerated and spared in some things wherein
they differ from what is commonly received?

Answ. Yes, I do in my judgment much allow of bearing and forbearing one
another in many differences of opinions and practices, so as Christians ought
Romans 14. 3.
not to judge nor censure one another, nor refuse communion and fellowship by
not admitting men into their Churches and to the Ordinances upon such points
(which is the great fault of the Independent Churches, denying communion to
many Saints for some differences in Judgment about Church government and
Orders; which practice of theirs is express against the 15. Romans 7.) neither
to force men to change their minds and opinions by casting them violently out
of the ministry and Church (which was the practice of many in these late times,
and has caused so many Schisms and stirs amongst us:) I approve not such
practices, but desire to be a follower and lover of all the ways of peace and
Communion, with any who agree in the maine, and have something of God and
Christ in them: The practice of Anicetus and Polycarpus, with that of Cyprian,
are infinitely pleasing to me (and I wish they were more imitated) Polycarpus
and Anicetus in the difference about keeping of days, though neither of them
could persuade the other to change their custom, yet they kept fast the bond
of Christian fellowship; Anicetus admitting Polycarpus to the Communion of the
Roman Church, and departing in peace one from the other. Cyprian (though he
erred in the point of rebaptization) yet he would not condemn them rashly who
were of a contrary opinion, nor refuse Communion with them, professing that for
the difference of opinions, he would not break the Lords peace with his
Colleagues, nor remove any that was of a different mind from him, from the
right of Communion: So that men may be tolerated in their differences of
opinions, so long as they keep Communion with a Church, and submit to the
Discipline and Orders so as to be peaceable and not to speak against what is
established by common consent, nor practice to the scandal and contempt of the
Magistrates and Church: But if a few men, half a dozen or half a score
Ministers, refuse Communion with a Church, rending from the body, by setting up
of a Church against a Church, Preaching and venting their opinions every where,
to the disturbance of a Kingdom, and the drawing of Disciples after them,
though they were Ministers of gold, and had the tongue of men and Angels, yet
they should not have a Toleration; upon which subject they may read Call. Farel.
Epist. 397. Quod si pervicaciter recusare institerit, denuncient sibi non esse
loco fratris, qui communem disciplinam contumacia sua perturbet: semper hoc in
Ecclesia valuit, quod veteribus synodis suit decretum, ut qui subjici communis
disciplinae legibus noluerit munere abdi^^^^^neque hic quaerenda est hominum
authoritas, cum Spiritus Sanctus de talibus pronunciaverit, Ecclesiam non
habere morem contendendi, valere ergo ipsum jubeant, qui communis societatis
jura respuit.
Calvin's last Epistle to Farellus, wherein Calvin's counsel concerning Farellus
Colleague is this; That if he will not be reduced to Order, the Ministers
should tell him that he is not to be reckoned of as a brother, who does
disturb the common Discipline by his contumacie: This was ever a custom in
the Church which was decreed in ancient Synods, that who would not subject to
the Laws of common Discipline should be put by his place. Neither is the
authority of men here to be sought after, when as the Spirit of God pronounces
of such, 1 Cor. 11. 16. That the Church has no custom of contending. So that
in all this discourse against a Toleration, I have not written out of violence
of Spirit, cruelty, or ill will to the men, for I love and respect them,
(though for the present in an error) but from a zeal to the Glory of God, and
the good of this Church for the preservation of purity of doctrine, holiness
of life and peace, (which cannot stand with a Toleration) and though I be
earnest in this cause, it is not from sudden apprehension or passion, for I
have had long thoughts of this Church way, and I do apprehend more evil in
it, than men do see at first, or than the Independants can see, it being their
own cause, and they many ways engaged in it: O that the Independent Ministers
would with an impartial desire of satisfaction, consider what has been
written, and be persuaded to lay aside all thoughts of setting up separated
assemblies, and come and grow into one body, joining in one way with us! For
which end I will commend to them the Council of Fratrem vero illum qui
hactenus a vobis dissensit, obsecramus in Domino ne ulterius pertinacia
contendat ad repugnandum. Meminerit inter alia, quae Paulus in Pastore
requirit, hoc esse non postren (...), nesit (...), hoc est proprio judicio
addictus. Et cene haec una est ex praecipuis virtutibus boni pastoris, sic
exhorrere toto pectore contentiones ut nunquam a fratribus nisi ob causas
maxim necessarias, dissideat, Call. Epi. 55.
Calvin, given in a like case concerning a Minister, who dissented from the the
rest of his fellows. Let him remember amongst other things what Paul requires
in a Pastor, this is not the last, that he ought not to be self willed, that
is, addicted to his own proper judgment; and certainly this is one of the
chief virtues of a good Pastor, so from the whole heart to fear contentions,
that he may never dissent from his brethren, unless it be for causes greatly
necessary. Now considering what they may enjoy in this Church (as I have before
showed at large in the Answers to the three Reasons) some circumstances about
the manner and form of Discipline (as the exercising of it Independantly)
cannot be a cause greatly necessary, especially if we will believe Calvin
Substantiam Ecclesiasticae disciplinae exprimit di sertis verbis Scriptura:
forma autem ejus exercendae, quoniam a Domino praescript non est, a ministris
constitui debet pro aedificatione, Call. Epist. 55.
who affirms that the Scriptures express the substance of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, but the form of exercising it, because it is not prescribed by the
Lord, it ought to be ordered and appointed by the Ministers for edification.
Please not your selves in your opinions, be not so addicted to your own
judgment (for it is certain says Calvin Et certe omni, (...), simulac se
occasio dederit, itarim ^et Schismaticus. Cai in Tit. 1. v. 7.
that every mar who is addicted and wedded to his own judgment, so soon as
ever an occasion offers it self, will be a Schismaticke: of which read more
in that place.

And thus I have delivered my own soul, hoping that either our brethren will
withdraw their Petitions so as they shall never be read in the Honorable House
of Commons, or if they should, I hope the House will cast them out, for I am
persuaded it shall never be said of this Parliament in the ages to come, that
they were the first that opened a door for Tolerations, and for setting up of
Churches against the Church; which if ever that door should be opened (which
God of his mercy keep shut) I leave it to their great wisdoms to foresee
what infinite evils would in process of time come upon this Kingdom, and
whether the succeeding generations would not write in their Chronicles and
Histories (as is written of Naaman, 2 King. 5. 1. Now Naaman was a great man
with his Master, and honorable, because by him the Lord had given deliverance
unto Syria: He was also a mighty man in valor, but he was a Leper) Such a
Parliament was great and Honorable because by them the Lord gave deliverance
unto England, it was also a mighty Parliament for executing justice, and for
making such and such excellent Laws, but it granted a Toleration; whether this
would not cast a dark shadow upon their glorious light, and be as a dead fly
in the Ointment of the Apothecary; I humbly submit to their judgment. But to
conclude this discourse both against Independancie, and against Tolerations,
the day is shortly coming will try all, and I rejoice in the thoughts of it,
in regard of the accounts I shall give about this controversy of Separation,
nothing doubting but in that great day (Christ of his rich grace pardoning the
weaknesses that have, may, and do cleave to me in the manner of managing it)
will own my whole work, and endeavors against that way of Separation, as
stirred up by his own Spirit, and followed all along by his Spirit, enabling
me in it and to it above my own strength; and though I expect many censures
and reproaches from that sort of men yet then I shall have praise with God, and
the reward of all my labor, for truth, love, peace, and holiness, which I
aim at in this and all other Discourses about this Controversy.

FINIS.

