UOTES OF BOTH Houses of Parliament: With sundry Articles, or Acts of
Parliament to confirm the same. Taken out of the Records of the Tower.

Also, Two Orders of both Houses of PARLIAMENT: The one, To all High Sheriffs,
Justices of the peace, and other Officers, within 150. Miles of the City of
YORK.

The other, In particular to the High Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, and
other Officers within the the County of Lancaster. In general, to all the
Counties of England and Dominion of Wales.

Die Sabbati 28. Maii. 1642.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that these Votes with the Articles be
forthwith printed and published.

Io. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

London, Printed for John Thomas. 1642.

Die Veneris 20. Maii, 1642.
Resolved upon the Question, by the Lords and Commons, etc

THat it appears that the King (seduced by wicked counsel) intends to make
war against the Parliament, who (in all their consultions and actions) have
proposed no other end unto themselves but the care of his Kingdomse, and the
performance of all duty and loyalty to his person

Resolved, etc.

That whenever the King makes war upon the Parliament, it is a breach of
the trust reposed in him by his people, contrary to his oath, and tending to
the dissolution of this government.

Resolved, etc.

That whosoever shall serve or assist him in such wars, are Traitors, by the
the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; and have been so adjudged by two Acts
of Parliament.

Out of the Roll of the Parliament held Westminster, 11 R. 2.
ITem, by the said encroachment, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York,
Robert de Vere Dnke of Ireland, Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk Robert
Tresilian false Justice, and Nichol Brembre false Knight of London, have done
that whereas at the last Parliament, all the Lords and other wise men and
Commons there assembled, seeing the loss of the King and his Kingdom eminent,
as well for the perils and mischiefs aforesaid, as that the King was departed
from the Council of the Kingdom, and harkened wholly to the Council of the
aforesaid malefactors and traitors, as also because the French King with his
Royal power was shipped upon the Sea* ready to have come into England to destroy
the Kingdom, and the English tongue, and that no ordinance nor government was
then established for the safety of the King nor of the Kingdom, they knew not
other remedy thereupon, but remonstrated unto the King at f^ll, how that he
was ill governed, counseled and carried away, by the aforesaid traitors and
malefactors declaring unto him their wicked conditions, and required him most
humbly as his loyal subjects for the safety of him, and of his whole kingdom,
and for the avoiding of the perils aforesaid, to let go and put from him the
aforesaid malefactors and traitors out of his presence and company, and that
he would not do hereafter according to their wicked counsels, but that he would
follow the wise, loyal and discreet men of the kingdom, and thereupon the
said traitors and malefactors, seeing this good and honorable opinion of the
Parliament, and to disturb their good purpose therein; by their false counsel
caused our Lord the King to command the Major of London to cause a great power
of the people of London to be suddenly levied, for to kill and to put to death
all the said Lords and Commons excepting only such as were of their party, at
the doing of which wicked act, the said great malefactors* and traitors should
have been parties and present to the destruction of the King and all his Realm.

Article. 29. Item. For to accomplish this high treason aforesaid by their
counsel, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York, Robert Veare Duke of
Ireland, and Michael de la poole Earl of Suffolk, caused the King to send his
Letters of Gredence to his adversary the French King: some by one Nicholas
Southwell, Groom of his Chamber and some by other persons of mean fortune, as
well Aliens as Denizens, requiring and praying the said French King, that with
his power and Counsel he would be aiding and assisting to our Lord the King to
destroy and put to death the said Lords, and other English which the King then
held his enemies and traitors; as before, to the great disquit and trouble of
his whole Kingdom.

Article 30. Item, The aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York, Rohert de veere
Duke of Ireland, Michael de la Poole Earl of Suffolk encroaching unto
themselves Royal Power, caused the King to promise unto the French King, by
his said Letters and Messages, for to obtain aid and assistance from the
French King, and his power, for to accomplish that high treason, prodition, and
murder, to give and surrender unto the said French King the Town and Castle of
Calis, and all other Castles and Forts in the March of Picardy and Artoys, the
Castles and Towns of Chirlurge, and of Brerte, to the great dishonor, trouble
and damage of the King and of his Kingdom.

Article 37. Item, the aforesaid Alexander Archbishop of York Robert de Vere
Duke of Ireland Michael de la poole Earl of Suffolk, Robert Trelsillian false
Justice, and Nicholas Brenbre false Knight of London, malefactors and Traitors,
during the time of the said protection, to the overthrowing of the said
appeal, falsely Couselled, and caused the King to command by his Letters,
diverse Knights, Esquires, his Sheriffs, and others his officers of diverse
Counties, to raise and assemble all the power that they could to come with the
said Duke of Ireland, against the aforesaid other Lords Appellants, suddenly
to make War against them and destroy them.

Article 38. Item, During the time of the said protection, the aforesaid Robert
de veere Duke of Ireland, Michael de la poole Earl of Suffolk, Alexander
Archbishop of York, Nicholas Brenbre false Knight of London, caused the King
by his Letters, to signify to the said Duke of Ireland, how that he and others
were appealed of treason by the said Thomas Duke of Gloucester counstable of
England, Ric. Earl of Arundell and Sury, and Thomas Earl of Warwick and how
that the King had thereupon given day to the said parties, until the next
Parliament, and how he had taken both parties, with their men, goods and
Chattells, into his special protection, and besides it was contained in the
said letters of the King* that if the said Duke had sufficient power he should
not fail to come on with all his aforesaid power, and to come the King; and
soon after they procuted the King, to write unto the said Duke of Ireland,
that he should take the field, with all his power, which he could gather
together, and that the King would meet him withal his power, and that the King
would with him put in hazard his Royal person; and that the King was in great
danger himself and his whole kingdom if he were not helped and succored by
the said Duke of Ireland, And that the Duke of Ireland should make known this
unto all the men that were assembled unto him; and that the King would pay all
the wages and charges of the said Duke of Ireland, and of all the men assembled
by him, by virtue of which letters and the malicious and Traiterous exitations
as well of the said Duke, as of his Adherents and all the other malefactors and
Traitors, the said Duke of Ireland assembled a great number of men at Arms and
Archers as well the Counties of Lancaster, Chester, and Wales as of other
places of the Kingdom, to destroy, and to put to death the aforesaid Lords,
and all others which were assenting to the making of the said Ordinance Statute
and Commission unto the destruction of the King, and his Kingdom.

Artickle 39. Item the said Robert de veere Duke of Ireland, false tray tore to
the King and Kingdom, assembled a great power of men at Arms, and Archers of
the Counties of Lancaster, Chester, and wales, and of diverse other places, to
the intent to have traitorously destroyed so far as in him lay; the Lords
Thomas Duke of Gloucester Constable of England Henry Earl of derby, Richard
Earl of Arundell and Surrey, Thomas Earl of Warwick and Thomas Earl Marchall
and other Loyal Subjects of our Lord the King, as well to the destruction and
annihiIation of our Lord the King and of his whole Kingdom; and so he rid with
great power and force of men at Arms, and Archers, from the County of Chester
through the Kingdom, till he came near to a certain place, which place is
caled Rotcotbridge, near to Cotswold, inchroaching to him self Royal power
caused the banner of the King to be displayed in his company contrary to the
dignity of the King and of his Crown, at which time the said Duke of Ireland
and his company were by the grace of God, disappointed of their wicked purpose.

Memorand. That the same Roll containing the Petition of the aforesaid appeal
distinguished by Articles as above by quotation is marked was delivered in the
present Parliament, by the aforesaid Duke, and Earls appellants; and Memorand,
that after wards in the same Parliment, the 1. 2. 11. 15. 17 Articles aforesaid
are declared, and adjudged treason, and every one of them is declared and
adjudged treason, And that which is contained in the 22. Article of the
aforesaid Articles concerning the levying of men, to make war and destroy the
Lords Lords and Lieges of the King is likewise declared and adjudged treason.
And that the 28. 29. 30. 31. 32. 37. 38. 39. Articles aforesaid are also
declared and adjudged treason, and every one of them is declared and adjudged
treason* as is set down in the Record and the process annexed and affixed to
this Roll on the backside of the said Roll by these words, quelle petition
levee in presence du Roy ure dit Sr. etc.

This judgment was confirmed by act of Parliament. 11. R. 2. Cap. 3. 1. H. 4.
cap. 3. and 4, of the old printed statutes, and the said sttatute 1. H. 4.
repeales and makes void the Parliament of 21. R. 2. and all the proceedings
thereof, in which forced and tumultuary Parliament, the Acts of the Parliament
of 11. R. 2. had been reversed.

Rot. Parl. 11. R. 2.
MEmorandum quod iste idem Rotulus continens petionem appellisupradicti per
articulos distinct pro ut superius per quotationem annotatur liberatus fuit in
praesenti Parliamento per praedict Ducem and Comites appellantes; Et mem quod
postea in eodm Parliamento primms, secundus, undecimus, quintus, and decimus
septimus articuli praedicti declarantur and adjudicantur Proditio; and eorum
quilibet declaratur and adjudicatur proditio; and quod illud quod continetur in
vicessimo secundo articulo praedictorum articulorum tangens levationem gentium
ad guerrand. and dedestruend. dominos and lege^s legissimiliter declatur and
adjudicatur proditio Et quod vicessimus octavus, vicessimus nonus, tricessmus,
tricessimusprimus, tricessimus secunuds, tricessimus septimus, tricessmus
octavus and tricessimus nonus articulipredicti declarantur etiam and
adjudicantur Proditio; prou^ annotatur in Recordo and processu huic Rotul.
consutis and annexis. Indorsa Ejusdem Rotuli per haec verba. Quel le petition
lui in presence du roy nostre dit Henneris etc.

Crom at. perstatut. 1. H. 4. cap. 3. and 4. in the old printed Statutes.

Die Veneris 27 Maii. 1642.
Whereas it appears to the Lords and Commons, that the King, seduced by
wicked council, intends to make War upon his Parliament: It is therefore
Ordered by the Lords and Commons, that the High Sheriffs and Justices of the
peace and other officers within the same Counties, Cities, and Towns
Corporate, si uate within 150 Miles of the City of York^, shall forthwith take
special care, to make stay of all Arms and Ammunition carring toward York,
until they have given notice thereof unto the Lords and Commons, and shall
have received their further direction. And for the berter effecting hereof, the
said High Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, and other Officers, are further to
take special care, that strict watches be kept within their several limits
and jurisdictions, for the searching for, and seazing of all such Arms and
Ammunition, as likewise for the apprehending all Persons going with the same.

Die Sabbathi, 28. Maii 1642.
Whereas it appears, that the King seduced by wicked counsel, intends to
make war against the Parliament, and under the color of a gaurd to secure his
royal Person, does command troops both of Horse and Foot to assemble at
York; All which is against the Laws of the Kingdom, tending to the
dissolution of the Parliament, and destruction of the People: It is therefore
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Shreiffe of the
County of Lancaster, and a^l other Shreiffes, of the Ringdome of England, and
Dominion of Wales, shall by the power of that County, and of their several
Counties respectively suppress the raising, and coming together of any
Soldiers Horse or Foot, by any warrant, commission, or Order from His
Majesty, without the advice, and consent of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament; And that all Persons whatsoever, do forbear to execute any such
Commission, or warrant for levying Soldiers, or gathering them together,
without consent of Parliament; And those who shall execute or obey any such
Commission, or warrant, are hereby declared to be disturbers of the peace of
the Kingdom. And the Lord Lieutenant of the County of Lancaster, and all Lord
Lievtenants of all other Counties in the Kingdom of England, or dominion of
Wales, respectively, as likewise all deputy Lievtenants, Capraines, and
Officers of the Trained-Bands, and all Majors, Justices of peace, and other His
Majesty's loving Subjects, are hereby commanded, and required to be ayding and
assisting to the said Sheriff of the County of Lancaster, and to the other
Sheriffs of the other Counties of this Kingdom, and of the Dominion of Wales;
And that His Majesty's loving Subjects, may the better understand what the Law,
And their own duty is in this behalf? The said Sheriff of Lancaster, and
other Sheriffs of the other Counties of this Kingdom respectively, shall
cause this present Order forthwith to be published, in the several Market
Towns within their said Counties.

Sabbathi 28. Maii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That these Orders be forthwith printed and
published.

John Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

