The Effect of all LETTERS Read in the House of PARLIAMENT.

From the 14. to the 23. of November from all places of the Kingdom.

VIZ.

Surrey. Shropshire Berkshire York Sussex. Holland Cornwall. Middlesex
Leicester Ireland Sea Worcester Wales.
November. 23.

London, Printed for JOHN CAVE. 1642.

The effect of all Letters read in the House from the 14. of November to the 22.
1. Surrey.

ON Monday the 14. of November there was a Letter read from Kingstone, setting
forth that his Majesty was carried over to Kingston by one Anthony Brown a
Courtier, by whose means his Majesty's Army plundered all the Town as well
Malignants as others, and that the Church was made a Stable or Oxe-stall, and a
place of filth, where all the Kings Army emptied their filthy panches, as also
the filth of 500. Irish and Welsh women running after the Army, which are more
cruel to those which lie on their mercy then any foreign Enemy whatsoever.

Shropshire.

A Letter was read from Shrewesbury, intimating that the Kings Mint and
Printing Press, are still at Shrewesbury. The High Sheriff of that County and
the Mayor of Shrewesbury have Commission from the King to open all Letters
before they be either carried out or brought into that County.

Berkshire.

A Letter from Colonel Venne, that he has taken 4. or 5. of the Kings
Carriages as they passed by Windsore, full of clothes and atmes.

York.

A Letter from Captain Hotham, Sir Hugh Cholmley, and Sir J. Gill is joined
with the Lord Fairefax in the besieging of York, further declaring, that
Captain Hotham escaped pistolling very narrowly at Leeds, by a Drummer, and by
Gods great providence his Pistol would not not suddenly go off. The Lord and
Sir William Savill proffereth to give 10000 pound to be admitted into the
Parliament house, but will not be accepted of, for that they have been the
only Ringleaders of this disturbance in that County of York.

Sussex.

A Letter from Captain Chitworth at Chichester, that the Bishop of the City
invited him to dinner, where in discourse the Bishop told him that his Majesty
had a Proclamation to proclaim a Traitor for the seeking to oppose his
Commission of Array, yet nevertheless if he will leave off, and assist his
Majesty, he will give him a free pardon and employ him in his service: The
Captain replied, that what he had done, is not the half part of what he
intends to do, for he hoped to have some Eorces in the City under his command,
and then he will sift all those that are Malignants against the Parliament, and
bisarme them all, not leaving them a weapon to hurt a dog withal.

Holland.

There was a Letter from the States of Holland, intimating that the French King
has a great Army near Colen, whereof his General has discharged 10000. of
them, hoping to have them transported for England, but the States have utterly
refused, that they should either pass through their Country, or take any
shipping there for England.

Cornwall.

A Letter from Cornwall, setting forth the number of the Cavaleers there, which
is near upon 10000. who intends forthwith to advance their forces toward His
Majesty at Salisbury.

Middlesex.

A Letter from the Parson of Chersey, setting forth what company of Horse and
Foot are come there, being upon 1000. and no great spoil as yet they have done,
saving to their poultrey and such like.

Leicester.

Another from the Mayor of Leicester, wherein his Majesty has commanded him to
pay the moni^s that have bin raised in that Town upon the Bill of Subsedies to
Mr. Hastings, and if he shall refuse the payment thereof, that then to be
apprehended, and brough to his Majesty, and be punished for his contempt.

Ireland.

A Letter from the Council at Dublin wherein is set down that Oneal is
dangerously wounded at the last Fight at Feelers, and that the Soldiers dies
in abundance, as though some infection or other sickness were amongst them.

Sea.

A Letter from the Vice Admiral Batten wherein he declares, that he has taken
a Ship and a Ba^k full of horse coming out of Flanders, and have brought them
to Portsmouth, where they now remain till order from the Parliament.

Worcester.

A letter from Worcester declaring that Colonel Sands is dead, as also a plot
which was l^tely discovered by Mr. Stanhop, concerning the blowing up of the
Goal and the prisoners that have bin taken by the Parliaments forces to be on
such a time in the garden and as soon as the Goal is opened to make their
escapes and this has bin practiced by some of the Chief of the inhabitants
there.

Wales.

There was this day a letter which was intercepted at Basingstoke, entitled To
the high and Mighty Prince Charles K of England etc. dated from Anglesey the 16
of November from Marquis of Hartford, wherein he writes that he did wait on
his Majesty with all convenience, at Salisbury within 10. days with his Horse
and foot, which is near 8000. Welsh Soldiers.

FINIS.

