THE TRUE ANSWER OF THE PARLIAMENT TO The Petition of the Lord Major, and
Common Council, for removing the Army, securing the Tower, putting the City
into a posture of defense, and to have Major General Skippon Commander in
chief.

ALSO, The Oath and Information of Mr. John Everet, Discovering to the Lord
Major and Common Council, the intents of the Army against the City of London.

LIKEWISE, A Letter from Norwich of the manner of blowing up of the Magazine
there, the killing of above 100. persons and other sad accidents, which
happened at the same time.

April 27. 1648.
Imprimatur

Gilb. Mabbot.



LONDON: Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.

A LETTER FROM NORWICH.
SIR,
I Am sorry that this opportunity should meet with the occasion of sending you
ill news from hence: for, on Monday last, here fell out a very sad accident;
the manner thereof, and the occasion was briefly thus. I believe that you have
heard that this town, as well as other places, was much divided, some against
the Parliament and Army, and others for them, which caused a difference betwixt
not only the meaner sort of people, but even amongst those which were in
chiefest place in the City, and the disaffected party did so increase, that the
rest were oftentimes openly scorned and divided by them: the Major acting in
some things otherwise then was expected was sent for up to the Parliament,
which the malignant party were exceedingly vexed at, and said he should not be
subject to that command, nor be carried out of the city: the well-affected
labored to have the Parl orders obeyed and here the business began to grow
high, and came to an open quarrel, many hundreds of people being gathered
together, and the malignant party thinking to expunge the rest, and possess
themselves of all the arms and ammunition in the city, they ran with one
accord, to the Magazine, which was furnished with a great quantity of powder
and ammunition. Here they began to arm themselves, and threatened ruin to all
that bad or durst oppose them; but before they became formidable, the Magazeen
(amongst them) was fired, and at least 40 houses was blown up and spoiled by
powder, the blow whereof did shake the whole City, threw down part of some
churches, wounded and killed a great many of the Inhabitants, the certain
number not being yet known, nor many of them that were killed, as yet found, or
can be known, for many were torn in pieces, and carried limb from limb,
several legs, arms, etc. being found in the streets, but we already find
missing and mortally wounded at least 120. persons; besides as many more which
received slight wounds and hurts. Yet was not this great mischief a sufficient
terror to those that escaped, and had gotten arms, for they continued and
persisted in their course, and would quit the City of all that joined not with
them, and take their goods for a prey: so that this combustion and distraction
lasted diverse hours, till 3. Troops of Col. Fleetwoods horse, which were sent
for, came into the City, and appeased the matter, and secured some of the chief
Matiniers: so that we hope all things will be now quiet. And I wish, that
according to the Proverb, others may be warned by our harms, and that when
there is no enemy abroad, we may not find him at home, and by private
dissentions, bring inevitable ruin and distractions upon our selves; which is
all for the present, he has to write, that is

Your humble servant, T. S.
Norwich 25. April 1648.
Die Jovis 27. April. 1648.
REport was made of the transaction of the late business in the City of London,
in relation to the information lately given, that the Army had some intentions
against the City, which was grounded on a single affidavit made by one Mr.
Everet, an Excize-man for the County of Bedford, of estate 220. li. per annum.
This man went to the Headquarters at Winsor, to get assistance for gathering
the Excize at Bedford, and taking his Lodging at an Inn, he overheard some in
another room to say to others of their acquaintance with them, that they had
acquainted an eminent Commander with what they had to propose, and that he
seemed to approve well of the design, which he said he heard them explain to be
the securing of the city, disarming of disaffected persons, the demanding of a
million of money, etc. But that any such thing was the sense of the Army, or
had bin debated by a Council, as some have reported, is utterly false; However,
M. Everet thought himself bound in duty to discover to the city what he had
heard, and thereupon came and acquainted the Lord Major, who caused him to
find sufficient sureties, and then took his examination upon oath, the effect
whereof I have already set down. Hereupon a Common Counsel was called on
Monday night last, where the said Mr. Everet appeared, and affirmed what he
had before declared to the Lord Major. And after a long sitting of the
Common Counsel, they came to this result, That some particulars should be drawn
up, and presented to the Parl. in relation to the peace and safety of the city,
and the two Sheriffs Alderman Gibs, Alderman Fouk, and 8 Commoners were
appointed, as a Committee to draw up the same, Tuesday night was another
Common Council at Guild-Hal about this business, where they concluded, and made
an Act in these words.

BY THE MAJOR.
FOrasmuch, as it is conceived and apprehended by the Common Council, that the
City at the present is in great danger; These are therefore, according to the
Desire and Direction of the said Court to will and require you in his Majesty's
Name, That presently upon sight hereof, you respectively, with the Constables
of your several Precincts, do repair to every Householder within the same, and
give them strict charge and command, that at their perils, they do so order
and dispose of their Servants, and all others under their charge, that they be
not only kept from committing any outrage or misdemeanour; But that they and
their servants from time to time be in readiness, according to their several
capacities, with Arms, Weapons, and Ammunitions for preservation of the Peace,
defense of themselves, the City, and the Magistrates thereof: And also, that
all Persons who are of the Trained Bands of this City, Do from time to time
upon the beat of the Drum, repair with all speed to their Colors: And therein
demeasn themselves as may conduce to the safety and welfare of this City.

And that you do from time to time certify unto me, or some other of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace, the Names of such Constables, and others, as
you shall find to be remiss or negligent in the performance of their
respective Duties in this behalf, to the intent, that they may be punished
according to the same. And hereof fail you not, as you tender the safety of
your selves and the City, and will answer the contrary at your peril.

This 25. of April, 1648. MICHEL.

To the Deputy, Common-Councell-men, and Constables in the Ward of (...)
The 27. of this instant, diverse. Aldermen and Common Counsel men of the city
of London, presented a Petition to both Houses of Parl. setting forth the good
affection of the city to the Parl. and that they will venture their lives and
fortune, for the preservation thereof, according to their Covenant, desiring
that the city might be put into a posture of defense, the Tower in their hands,
the Army removed further, their chains put up, and Maj. Genesis Skippon Commander
in chief of their Forces, that they might not be disarmed, plundered, etc.

To which Petition, the E. of Manchester returned the answer of the Lords,
which was to this effect.

1. I am commanded to let you know, that the Lords do return hearty thanks to
the Lord Major of London, Aldermen, and Common Counsel, for expressing their
good affections to the Parliament. 2. And that it never entered into the
thoughts of the Parl. to disarm the city, and know not that any others had any
such intent, and that the Parl. are and ever shall be very careful for the
good and safety of the city. 3. As for the information brought to the city by
one Jo: Everet, the House would take it into special examination to find out
the truth or falsehood thereof; in the mean time, they see not any cause why such
a slight information should be any blemish or scandal to the Army, which have
approved themselves in many things faithful. 4. As for that concerning Major
General Skippon, he is a member of the House of Commons, and so it did not
belong to their Lordships to meddle therein before the Commons had debated that
business. 5. And as for the putting up of the chains for their own safety,
they left it to their own discretion.

FINIS.

