THREE ORDINANCES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: 1 For
defraying the Sallaries and Charges of the Committee, and Sub-Committees of
Accounts. 2 Appointing the Committees of Sequestrations in the several
Counties of England and Wales, speedily to deliver in an Account of all the
sequestrated Lands and Goods, and how they have been disposed of. 3 Of the
names of the Peers added to the Committee of the Navy and Customs.


Die Veneris, 17 December. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That these Ordinances be
forthwith printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Veneris, 17 December. 1647. An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled
in Parliament, for defraying the Salaries of the Officers, and necessary
incident charges of the Committee, and Sub-Committees for taking the Accounts
of the whole Kingdom.
Whereas the Arrears due unto the State upon several Accounts out of which
the salaries of the several Registers, Accomptants, and other Officers of the
Committee, and Sub-Committees for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, and
the necessary incident Charges of the said Committee, and Sub-Committees for
House Rent where they fit for that Service, Books, Paper, and the like, should
be defrayed, have been by diverse late Ordinances of Parliament disposed of in
most Counties to the use of the said Counties, or otherwise, or else are
payable to proper Treasurers formerly appointed by Order or Ordinance of
Parliament, whereby the taking of the said Accounts is much obstructed; and
like to fall to the ground for want of Moneys to defray the Officers salaries,
and the necessary incident charges of the said Committee, and Sub-Committees;
Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That
the Chamberlain of London for the time being, shall have power to receive
Arrears due upon any Account taken before the Committee for taking the Accounts
of the whole Kingdom. And that the several Treasurers appointed by the
Committee, and Sub-Committees of Accounts in any County, to receive the Arrears
due upon Accounts within the said County, shall have power and authority by
virtue of this present Ordinance to receive all Arrears, discovered, and found
by them to be due upon any Account taken by them in those respective Counties,
notwithstanding any former Ordinance, or Ordinances to the contrary. And the
said Chamberlain of London, and the said Treasurers, shall from time to time
out of the said Arrears pay unto the several Officers, and other persons
employed by the said Committee, and respective Sub-Committees, such sum or
sums of money for their Salary and pains, as have or shall be allowed them
according to the Ordinance of the 26. of June, 1645. and to defray the
necessary incident Charges of the said Committee, and Sub-Committees for House
Rent where they sit for that Service, Books, Paper, etc. and shall pay all the
overplus of the said arrears (if any be) unto the proper Treasurers appointed
by any Act or Ordinance yet in force to the uses therein limited.

And that in case the Arreares due upon Accounts payable to the Chamberlain of
London, shall not be sufficient to defray the said Salaries and necessary
incident charges of the Officers of the Committee for taking the Accounts of
the whole Kingdom; That then the fifteen hundred pounds formerly appointed to
be paid unto them out of the Excise, by an Ordinance of the fifth day of June
last past, shall be paid to them accordingly, otherwise the said Ordinance for
the said fifteen hundred pounds shall be void and null.

Provided that the several sums of money to be issued out for the payment of
the Salaries of the Officers of the Committee and Sub-Committees for taking the
Accounts and the incident Charges aforesaid, shall be from time to time issued
out by the said Chamberlain of London, and the several respective Treasurers
aforesaid, by Warrant under the hands of the Committee for taking the Accounts
of the whole Kingdom, or any five of them, to such person or persons as shall
be comprised in the said Warrants; And that the said Warrant or Warrants,
together with the Acquittances of the said person or persons therein comprised,
shall be a sufficient discharge unto the said Chamberlain and Treasurers for
the several sums so issued.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, 17 December. 1647.
IT is Ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the Earl
of Northumberland, Earl of Kent, Earl of Rutland, Earl of Pembrook, Earl of
Nottingham, Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Warwick, Earl of Denbigh, Earl of
Manchester, Earl of Mulgrave, Earl of Stanford, Lord Viscount Say and Seal,
Lord Dacres, Lord La-Warr, Lord Wharton, Lord North, Lord Montigue, Lord Gray
de Warke, Lord Howard of Estrick, Lord Herbert, and Lord Bruce, and the
Committee for the Navy and Customs, already constituted and appointed, or any
five or more of them, shall be a Committee for the Navy and Customs, and are
hereby authorized to do all such Act or Acts, and execute all such power as
is, or has been formerly granted to the Committee of the Navy and Customs, by
any Order or Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Veneris, 17 December. 1647.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That all Committees
of Sequestrations in the several Counties of England and Wales, do take care
that all sequestrated Lands in the said several Counties be improved to the
utmost values, and that they put in execution the former Orders made by both or
either of the Houses of Parliament concerning the same, and that they speedily
deliver in an Account of all the sequestered Lands and Goods within the said
Counties, and what has been made thereof, and how the same have been disposed,
according to the Ordinances made for Accounts unto the several Sub-Committees
of Accounts in the said several Counties, before the first day of March next
ensuing, or otherwise deliver in all their Accounts aforesaid unto the
Committee for taking the Accounts of the whole Kingdom, before the five and
twenty day of March next coming.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliament.

FINIS.

