TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLIAMENT.

A DILEMMA, FROM A PARALLEL.

HUMBLY PRESENTED.

2 TIMOTHY 3. 1. Perilous times shall come; for men shall be, etc.

Multi Christum osculantur, pauci amant. Bucocl.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at
his Shop in Pope's Head Alley, 1646.

THE PARALLEL.
Gangraena plays REX.
(2d par. Cor. 4. p. 201.) FOr a conclusion of this Corallory, O that any
particular members of Parliament who are for pretended liberty of Conscience, a
Toleration of Sects, favorers of Sectaries, and out of those principles hinder
all they can the settling of Religion and Government by civil sanction, would
often and sadly meditate upon this Scripture, and be wise now (whilst there is
time) thus to serve the Lord, lest suddenly, when they least think of it, they
perish from the way, and God make them examples, for adhering so pertinaciously
to the Sectaries, and that party. They may read in Ecclesiastical Stories,
what has befallen Princes for not serving the Lord in fear, and kissing his
Son; and they see before their eyes the many evils that has befallen the
King, and the great straights to which he has been reduced for favoring too
much the Popish, and Prelaticall party against the mind and humble desires of
both his Kingdoms: and can particular persons think (who are not Kings, but
under that title of Judges) that they can prosper long in standing for a
Sectarian faction against the mind of both Kingdoms, and that the Kingdoms
will not see and desire to understand how it comes about? and by whose means
it is, that we having taken a Covenant for uniformity in Doctrine, Government,
etc. and for extirpating of Heresy, Schism, and the Parliament, having
declared in some Declarations and Remonstrances against Anabaptists, Brownists,
preaching of men not ordained, and against leaving particular persons and
Congregations to their own Liberty; that yet all things should be done quite
contrary, with an high hand? For may not now who ever will both preach and
gather Separated Churches, print and act against Presbyteriall Government, and
for all sorts of Sectaries? Yea, such persons are countenanced, preferred in
all places, and to all kinds of Offices and employments (which makes many turn
Independents,) and the most zealous cordial men against Sectaries are
displaced, or discountenanced, or obstructed, etc. These things do seem
strange and against all reason, that the Parliament, professing and declaring
one thing, yet the quite contrary in all things of this nature should be done
daily in City and Country. In the worst times, when the King was most misled
by the Counsels of Prelates and evil men about him, there were not actions
more contrary in many Ministers of State and other persons to Proclamations and
Declarations, then are now to Ordinances, Declarations, and votes of
Parliament; and yet we hear of few censured or made examples. Now the people
every where say, these things could not be, persons durst be thus bold to do
these things but that they know they have some great ones to back them, and
stand by them; and the people enquire after, and speak who they be, and
questionless will represent these things as unsufferable, and most
dishonorable to the Parliament, and they will humbly desire these things may
be remedied by the power and wisdom of the Parliament: and therefore O that
all such would be wise in time, be wise now, desert the Sectaries, further the
work so much the more as before they have hindered it, for there is an emphasis
and weight in that Adverb now, signifying they should do it speedily, because
the same opportunity will not be always given, and the Psalmist hints they
may yet do it profitably, if they make have; but if any do persist and go on,
working day and night, rolling every stone to uphold that party, he that
strikes through Kings in the day of his wrath, will not spare them, and they
shall find by sad experience: when his wrath is kindled but a little, Blessed
are all they that put their trust in him.

In the Kings Declaration concerning the Militia.
WE have been told that we must not be jealous of our great Counsel of both
Houses of Parliament. We are not, -- but of some turbulent, seditious, and
ambitious natures, which (being not so clearly discerned) may have an influence
upon the actions of both Houses.

In the Kings Answer to the Decla: of the Lords and Com: of the 19 of May, 1642.

And we call Almighty God to witness, all our complaints and jealousies, which
have never been causless, nor of our Houses of Parliament: (but of some few
Schismatic, Factious, and Ambitious Spirits, --

In the Kings Answ: to the 19 Propositions.

We would not be understood, that we intend to fix this Design upon both or
either Houses of Parliament, we utterly profess against it, -- But we do
believe, and accordingly profess to all the world, that the malignity of this
Design -- has proceeded from the subtle informations, mischievous practices,
and evil Counsels of ambitious turbulent Spirits, disaffected to Gods true
Religion, and the unity of the Professors thereof.

In the Kings Answ: to the 19 Propositions.

But that without any shadow of a fault objected, only perhaps because they
follow their Conscience, and preserve the established Laws, and agree not in
such Votes, or assent not to such Bills, as some persons, who have now too
great an influence even upon both Houses, judge or seem to judge to be for the
public good, and as are agreeable to that Utopia of Religion and Government,
into which they endeavor to transform this Kingdom.

In the Kings Declar: of Aug. 2. 1642.

We well know the combination entered into by several persons for an alteration
in the government of the Church -- and observed that those men had greatest
interest, and power of persuading of both Houses, who had entered into such
Combination, yet -- we believed, even those men would either have been
converted in their Consciences, by the cleernesse and justness of our actions,
or would have appeared so unseasonable, or been discovered so seditious, that
their malice and fury would not have been able to have done mischief;
[Afterward] When such license is given to Brownists, Anabaptists, Sectaries,
and whilst Coach-men, Feltmakers, and such Mechanic persons are allowed and
entertained to preach by those who think themselves the principal members of
either House; when such barbarous outrages in Churches, and heathenish
irreverence and uproares even in the time of Divine Service, and the
Administration of the blessed means of advancing Religion, the preaching of
the word of God, is turned into a license of libelling, and reviling both
Church and State, and venting such seditious positions, as by the Laws of the
Land are no less then Treason, and scarce a man in reputation and credit with
these Grand Reformers, who is not notoriously guilty of this, whilst those
Learned, reverend, painful, and pious Preachers, who have been and are the
most eminent and able assertours of Protestant Religion, are (to the
unspeakable joy of the Adversaries to our Religion) disregarded and oppressed.

In the Kings Answer to the Declar: of the Lords and Com: of the 21 of June,
1642.

This all men are bound to believe, though they see the Protestant Religion,
and the Professors thereof miserably reproached, and in danger of being
destroyed by a vicious and malignant party of Brownists, Anabaptists, and other
Sectaries, (the principal Ringleaders of whom, have too great a power, even
with some Members in both our Houses of Parliament) our Authority despised, and
as much as in them lies, taken from us, and reviled in Pulpits and presses by
persons immediately in their protection, and recommendation.

In the Kings Answer to the Declaration of the Lor: and Com: of 19 of May, 1642.

What a strange time are we in, that a few impudent malicious (to give them no
worse term) men should cast such a strange mist of error before the eyes of
both Houses of Parliament, as that they either cannot, or will not see how
manifestly they injure themselves, by maintaining these visible untruths?

In the Kings Declar: of August. 12. 1642.

We were able to discover that -- there was, still a faction of a few
ambitious, discontented and seditious persons, who under pretense of being
enemies to Arbitrary power, and of compassion toward those, who out of
tenderness of Conscience could not submit to some things enjoined, or
commended in the Government of the Church, had in truth a desire (and had
entered into a Combination to that purpose) to alter the Government both of
Church and State.

The former Declaration begins thus.

It Is more then time now after so many injuries and indignities offered to our
Royal person -- to vindicate our Self from those wicked and damnable
Combinations and Conspiracies which the implacable malice and insatiable
ambition of some persons have contrived against us.

In the Conclusion of that Declaration.

Our quarrel is not against the Parliament, but against particular men, who
first made the wounds, and will not now suffer them to be healed, but make them
deeper, and wider, by contriving, fostering, and fomenting mistakes and
jealousies betwixt body and head, us and our two Houses of Parliament; whom we
name, and are ready to prove them guilty of high Treason.

We desire that the Lord Kimbolton, Mr Hollis, Mr Pim, Mr Hampden, Sir Arthur
Haslerigge, Mr Stroud, Mr Martin, Sir Henry Ludlow, Alderman Pennington, and
Capt. Venne, may be delivered into the hands of Justice to be tried by their
Peers, according to the known Laws of the Land.

In the Kings Answer to the Declaration of the 26 of May, 1642.

But we doubt not all our good Subjects do now plainly discern through the
mask and vizard of their Hypocrisy, what their Design is, and will no more
look upon the Framers, and Contrivers of that Declaration, as upon both Houses
of Parliament; (whose freedom and just Privileges we will always maintain,
and in whose behalf we are as much slandred as for our Self) but so a
Faction of Malignant, Schismatic, and ambitious persons, whose design is
and always has been to alter the whole frame of Government, both of Church
and State, and to subject both King and people to their own lawless arbitrary
power and government.

In the Kings Answer to the Declaration of the Lords and Com: of 26 of May 1642.

For the Contrivers of that Declaration, (though they have no mind to be
Slaves) they are not unwilling to be Tyrants: (what is Tyranny, but to admit no
rule to Govern by but their own wills?) and we know the misery of Athens was
at the highest, when it suffered under the Thirty Tyrants.

From the foregoing Parallel, arises the DILEMMA: That either the HIGH COURT
OF PARLIAMENT is chargeable with Obstinacy and Hypocrisy against God and the
public Good: (a thing horrid to apprehend) or, The Author of the Pamphlet
forementioned, is as guilty of the breach of Parliamentary Privilege, and
sedition against the Kingdom, as the Contrivers of the Kings papers have been
by the Parliament declared to be.

TO THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT; A POSTSCRIPT.
NOW the Adversary of yours and this Kingdoms welfare (Right Honorable) sees
he cannot keep the field against you any longer, he finds it best to recruit
himself, by working his broken Swords into Pen-knives, and betake himself to
his Study. He remembers how keen the Royal Style was, and how near it came to
the heart of the Parliament; when He expressed greatest confidence in the
Parliament, and only struck at some particular Members; thus in Answer to your
Declaration of the 19 of May, 1642. We shall never [and we hope our people will
never] account the contrivance of a few factious, seditious persons, (a
Malignant party who would consecrate the Commonwealth to their own fury and
ambition) the wisdom of Parliamen. The Honorable House of Commons in their
late famous Declaration, of the 17. of April, have discovered that there are
still the same spirits stirring, and humors working though under other
disguises and upon other grounds. Since this discovery, these spirits do not
blush to proceed according to the first beginnings, and to reflect the like
crimes on the Parliament, under the persons of some particular Members, and
this done by men professing great Zeal for you, and that now after you have
almost brought this Kingdom (by the good hand of God upon you) to feast upon
the remembrance of the fore-passed gall and wormwood, and to satiate it self
with the fat of security, Truth and Peace. But (as Solomon speaks) a Fool is
never so troublesome as when he is filled with meat; even so now, Ingratitude
has taken the Balance into her hand, and Fancy sits upon the beam, and
judges that the Talents of precious mercies which by you (Noble Senators) we
enjoy, are light in respect of some still wanting: neither can all you have
done be pawn enough of adding them hereafter; no nor any thing you can say
though never so solemnly, and therefore cannot obtain the Credit, much less
the Obedience: as to have your Declaration in that kind published; and because
they despair in a way of duty to obtain their desires, have now borrowed the
pen of Insolency out of the hands of Malignity, and as these formerly styled
you Rebels, Traitors, Schismatiques, etc. and another Party acted to a frenzy
of zeal, wrote you, Antichristian, Popish, tyrannous: So these here spoken of
express themselves of you, as Fautors of Error, Sectaries, Anarchy,
intolerable Toleration: unless you put life into, and take it from what they
point you to.

Now this sheet of paper has humbly presented to your Honors, the Design and
Language of these in Parallel with the former, aspersing the Honor and
enervating the Authority of Parliament under the Notion of accusing some
particular Members; and that done with expressions so high and dangerous,
whether respect be had to the Consciences of the people over awed, or to the
safety of the State at this time, especially, thereby imperilled: that hence
there seems naturally to issue (by your Wisdoms to be considered) the
forementioned DILEMMA.

For though he lay it on some Members only, and grants that The proof of the
result of the Dilemma from the Premises.
the Parliament has ordained, etc. yet whilst he adds, that all things are
carried with a high hand contrary, and persons dangerous to Church and State,
Sectaries, etc. countenanced, and preferred in All places and to All kind of
Offices, and that the Parliament professes one thing, yet the quite contrary
in all things, in City and Country, seeing this could not be done but by the
Authority or connivence of the Parliament, what does he but plainly insinuate
what before he labored covertly to hide? That this is the Authors true
meaning, you may please to reflect on his Epistle before the first part of his
Gangraena to both Houses of the Parliament; particularly, in the fifth page,
where what he here charge upon particular Members, he there lays upon both
Houses, as in these words; You have most Noble Senators done worthily against
Papists, Prelates, scandalous Ministers, Images, Altars, Crucifixes,
Ceremonies, etc. But what have you done against other kinds of growing evils,
Heresy, Schism, disorder, Seekers, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Brownists,
Libertines, and other Sects? in the seventh page thus. Now Right Honorable,
though you have made Ordinances against Anabaptists, Brownists, other Sects,
etc. and upon complaint have troubled some Sectaries, etc. yet notwithstanding
there is a strange and unheard of bearing with them, as I believe all things
considered never was the like under any Orthodox, Christian Magistrate and
State; p. 9. Yet I do not say your Honors have done these things, for there
are matters of this nature you hear not of: and upon complaints that have come
immediately to your Houses, there has been some redress; yet such things are
done by Committees, or persons under your power and Government, and no
effectual ways taken to prevent, discover or remedy these things. Now I
humbly submit to your deep Judgment, whether God account not men guilty of
that which is committed by others under them. [Nay to take off all scruple
touching his meaning, his next words fasten the charge upon your selves] as
also whether it will not be interpreted by men, that there is certainly great
countenance and favor above, or else persons below durst not do as they do.
So page 10. Reformed Churches abroad say, why may not the King as lawfully
tolerate Papists one false Religion, as the Parliament suffer all Sects to
grow? And lastly, page 11. Know God is a righteous God, and will require it at
your hands, visit and be avenged for these things. Let no man flatter you with
your great prosperity and success, etc. where the very charge and threatening
that he denounces in his second part against some particular Members, is
charged upon both Houses jointly. And why now he should endeavor to cast that
odium upon particular Members which he before charged upon the whole, (though
this also fall upon the whole) the Reason may be to make the Design at once
both more dangerous and more feeble; for whilst it was in general the
reverence of so great a Court might justly awe the People, whereas now some
particulars being singled out, he might with more color and possibility
excite, and stir up the people to appear against them. Now for this to be done
not by any considerable number of men by way of humble Petition, upon
indispensable necessity, but by a private person, and that not in a Petition
first presented unto you, that your Wisdoms might have judged whether it were
fit for public view, but in a Book written purposely for the branding of
Sectaries, Heretics, and the worst of men; and that without sufficient proof
in a thing of so high a nature. There seems necessarily to arise from hence the
double evil expressed in the latter member of the Argument, viz. an unlawful
breach of Parliamentary Privilege; and a most perilous Introduction to the
ruin of the Parliament it self by raising the people to sedition against it.
For as the King upon the like distinction of some Members from the rest,
demanded six of your Honorable Members to Justice, as a Prologue to the
Tragedy. If now the People should by such a pestilent Book, be Alarmed on
groundless misprisions to declare against certain of your Members as
insufferable in their practices; though under notion of Petitioning against
them, it may be doubted whether afterward first six, and then sixteen, and
after that sixty shall not be demanded, yet with pretense held out before the
people of all honor and obedience to the Parliament.

The Lord, whose work you do, teach your understandings, comfort your hearts,
strengthen your hands, and cover your Heads in this day of Battle.
FINIS.

