To the Kings Most Excellent Majesty: The humble Petition of the Lords and
Commons now assembled in. PARLIAMENT Delivered at Colebrook, 10 Nov. 1642. by
the Earls of Pembrooke and Northumberland, Lord Wainman, M. Perpoint, and Sir
Jo. Hippesley.
WE Your Majesty's most loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in Parliament
assembled, being affected with a deep and piercing sense of the Miseries of
this Kingdom, and of the Dangers to Your Majesty's Person, as the present
Affairs now stand, And much quickened therein with the sad Consideration of the
great effusion of Blood at the late Battle, and of the loss of so many
eminent Persons; And farther weighing the addition of Loss, Misery, and Danger
to Your Majesty and Your Kingdom which must ensue, if both Armies should again
join in another Battle, as without Gods special Blessing, and Your Majesty's
Concurrence with Your Houses of Parliament, will not probably be avoided.

We cannot but believe that a suitable Impression of Tenderness and Compassion
is wrought in Your Majesty's Royal Heart, being Your Self an Eyewitness of
the bloody and sorrowful Destruction of so many of Your Subjects; And that
Your Majesty does apprehend what diminution of Your Own Power and Greatness
will follow; And that all Your Kingdoms will thereby be so weakened, as to
become subject to the Attempts of any ill affected to this State. In all which
Respects we assure our selves, That Your Majesty will be inclined graciously to
accept this our humble Petition, that the Misery and Desolation of this Kingdom
may be speedily removed and prevented: For the effecting whereof, we most
humbly beseech Your Majesty to appoint some convenient Place, not far from the
City of London, where Your Majesty will be pleased to reside, until Committees
of both Houses of Parliament may attend Your Majesty with some Propositions for
the removal of these bloody Distempers and Distractions, and settling the state
of the Kingdom, in such a Manner as may conduce to the preservation of Gods
true Religion, Your Majesty's Honor, Safety, and Prosperity, and to the Peace,
Comfort, and Security of all Your People.

His Majesty's Answer To the foresaid Petition, given to the Committee at
Colebrooke, Nov. 11. 1642.
WE take God to witness how deeply We are affected with the Miseries of this
Kingdom, which heretofore We have stroven (as much as in Us lay) to prevent; It
being sufficiently known to all the world, That as We were not the first that
took up Arms, so We professed Our readiness of composing all things in a
fairway, by Our several offers of Treaty; And shall be glad (now at length) to
find any such Inclinations in others. The same tenderness to avoid
destruction of Our Subjects (whom we know to be Our greatest Strength) which
would always make Our greatest Victories bitter to Us, shall make us willingly
hearken to such Propositions, whereby these bloody Distempers may be stopped,
and the great Distractions of this Kingdom settled, To Gods Glory, Our Honor,
and the Welfare and Flourishing of Our People. And to that end shall reside
at Our Own Castle at Windsor (if the Forces shall be removed) till Committees
may have time to attend Us with the same (which, to prevent the inconveniences
that may intervene, We wish may be hastened) and shall be ready there, or (if
that be refused us) at any place where we shall be, to receive such
Propositions as aforesaid, from both Our Houses of Parliament. Do you your
Duty, We will not be wanting to Ours. God of his mercy give a Blessing.


