Two ORDINANCES OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For Thirty
thousand pounds with Interest, to be paid out of the Excize, to the Committee
of Lords and Commons for the Eastern Association.

For the Forces of that Association, employed in reducing of Newarke, and other
Services.

Jo. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Imprinted at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Martis, 22 Februarii, 1647.
WHereas by an Ordinance of the twenty eighth of February, one thousand six
hundred forty five, there was charged upon the Excise in course the sum of
twenty thousand pounds with interest, after the rate of eight, pounds per
centum, payable for the use of the three Regiments of Horse, date under the
several commands of Major Haynes Major Le-Hunt, and Major Gibb, and of
Captain Wayletts Company of Dragoones raised, sent out, and maintained by the
Eastern Association. And whereas the Committee of Lords and Commons for the
Eastern Association was contented, and did agree that the same should be
issued forth, and disposed of for the present supply of the Army; And by an
Ordinance of the eighth day of December last, it was thereupon Ordained and
Declared, That in satisfaction of the said Agreement, the said twenty thousand
pounds with interest, due on the first of March next, shall be repaid by Sir
John Wollaston, and the rest of the Treasurers at War out of the Receipts and
Assessements for the Army upon the first of March next, to such Treasurers as
the said Committee shall appoint. And whereas the present necessities of the
Navy are so pressing that the same require a speedy supply of Moneys, without
which those affairs cannot be carried on; And the said Committee for the
Eastern Association is contented, and do agree, That the said twenty thousand
pounds shall be forborne, and be paid and employed for the use of the Navy:

Be it Ordained by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the said
Treasurers of War shall have hereby power to pay the said twenty thousand
pounds unto Sir Henry Vane junior, Knight, Treasurer of the Navy for the use
of the Navy, upon Warrant from the Committee of the Army, or any five of them
directed to the Treasurers at Wars; the which Committee of the Army is hereby
required to issue their VVarrant to the same purpose accordingly, and that the
Receipt or Receipts of the said Sir Henry Vane shall be to the said Treasurers
at War their sufficient discharge. And the said Treasurers at War are
hereby Ordered and required without any further or other VVarrant then as
aforesaid, to pay the interest due for the said twenty thousand pounds to the
first of March next, unto the Committee for the Eastern Association, or to
such Treasurer as they shall appoint to receive the same, whose Receipt or
Receipts shall be to the said Treasurer at War their sufficient discharge.

And whereas both Houses of Parliament did by their Order of the twenty eighth
of May, 1647. charge upon the Receipt of the Grand Excise in course, the sum
of one hundred and fifty thousand pounds payable to the said Treasurers at
War, for payment of the Arreares due to the inferior Officers, and
Soldiers of the Army, under the Command of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, for which the
said Houses of Parliament having since made other provision, did thereupon
Order the first of February last, That the first seventy thousand pounds, part
of the said one hundred and fifty thousand pounds as the same shall grow due in
course, be paid unto the said Treasurer of the Navy, for the use of the Navy.

Be it therefore further Ordained, and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,
That in satisfaction of the said Agreement of the Committee for the Eastern
Association, and for their security the said twenty thousand pounds which was
payable to them upon the first of March next as aforesaid, shall be repaid by
the Commissioners of Excise out of the first Moneys of the said seventy
thousand pounds assigned to the Navy, part of the said one hundred and fifty
thousand pounds charged upon the Excise in course, and formerly assigned to the
Army as aforesaid, and that interest for the said twenty thousand pounds after
the rate of eight pounds per centum, be paid every six Months, and do begin
from the first of March next, and be continued for so long time as the said
twenty thousand pounds shall be forborne, and till the same shall fall due and
be paid in course as aforesaid; And the Commissioners of Excise for the time
being shall have power, and are hereby authorized and required, to make payment
of the said twenty thousand pounds, and the interest thereof as abovesaid, unto
the said Committee of Lords and Commons for the Eastern Association, or to
such Treasurer as they shall appoint to receive the same; whose Receipt or
Receipts shall be to the Commissioners of Excise their full and sufficient
discharge in that behalf.

And it is likewise Ordained by the Authority aforesaid; That the said twenty
thousand pounds, and the interest thereof due to the first of March next, and
payable by the Treasurers at War as aforesaid, and likewise the interest
thereof to begin from the first of March next, and payable by the Commissioners
of Excise as aforesaid, shall be issued and paid out by VVarrant from the said
Committee of Lords and Commons for the Eastern Association, or of any five, or
more of them, who have hereby a power to grant forth their Warrants
accordingly for payment thereof, as well for the re-imbursment of all such
sums of moneys with interest for the same, as shall appear to the said
Committee to have been advanced and lent, or paid for maintaining of the said
three Regiments of Horse, and Company of Dragoones in the service against
Newarke, upon the Ordinance of 28. February 1645. first above mentioned, and
for satisfaction of such damages as shall also appear to the said Committee
to have been sustained by the Committees of the several Counties of the
Eastern Association, or by any of them in the loss of Horses, Arms, and
Furniture by them provided, for the furnishing of the said Horse and Dragoones
for the said service, as also for payment and satisfaction of the Arreares
which shall appear to the said Committee to be due for the pay of such
Officers and Soldiers of the said Regiments of Horse, and Company of Dragoones
as have served in reducing of Newarke, and that the said twenty thousand pounds
and interest may be issued and paid according to the true intent and meaning of
this Ordinance.

It is also Ordained, That the said Committee for the Eastern Association, or
any five of them shall have power and authority, and are hereby authorized and
enabled by themselves, and such as they have or shall appoint, and by such
ways and means as they, or any five of them shall think fit to take; state,
audit, and determine as well the Accounts of all the said Officers and
Soldiers for their pay, as well due upon the public Faith, as for their
present pay during the time of their said service; as also the Accounts of all
Treasurers, and others that are to receive any proportion of the said sum of
twenty thousand pounds, and interest by the appointment of the Committees of
the Counties in the said Association as aforesaid.

And it is further Ordained, That the said Committee for the Eastern
Association may reward, and pay such person or persons as they have or shall
employ for the better execution of this service for their pains and charges
out of the said sums, or of any other Treasure in their dispose as they shall
think fit.

And further it is Ordained; That the said Committee shall administer an Oath,
which they have hereby power for to do, as well to such persons as are to
pass their Accounts before them as aforesaid; as also to all other persons
upon all other Accounts within survey of the said Committee for the better
clearing the truth thereof.

Provided always, That neither this present Ordinance, nor any thing therein
contained shall extend to the prejudice of the making void of an Order of the
House of Commons, made the three and twentieth of December last past, for the
payment of sixteen hundred sixty three pounds unto Captain Edward Wingate,
which said Order is hereby confirmed.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
Hen. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Martis 22 Februarii 1647.
WHereas the Committees of the several Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex,
Huntington, Herts, Cambridge, and the Isle of Ely, and the City and County of
Norwich, have by themselves and others advanced, paid, and lent great sums
of Money for payment of the Regiments of Horse and other Forces lately employed
under the several commands of Major Heynes, Major Le-Hunt, and Major Gibb, and
of Captain Wayletts company of Dragoones, and no satisfaction or security as
yet has been given for the same, the charge thereof being computed to amount
to ten thousand pounds:

Be it Ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That the sum
of ten thousand pounds with interest for the same, after the rate of eight
pounds per Cent. payable ever six months, be charged upon the grand Excise in
course, and the Commissioners of Excise for the time being are hereby
authorized and required to make payment of the said ten thousand pounds as the
same shall grow due in Course and Interest for the same after the rate of eight
pounds per Cent. payable every six months, and to begin from the first of
March next for so long as the same shall be forborne unto the said Committee of
Lords and Commons for the Eastern Association or to such Treasurer as they
shall appoint to receive the same, whose Receipt or Receipts shall be to the
said Commissioners of Excise their full and sufficient discharge, which
Committee for the Eastern Association, or any five or more of them have hereby
a power to grant forth their Warrants for payment of the said ten thousand
pounds and Interests for the uses above mentioned.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

FINIS.

