THE VOTE OF Both Houses of Parliament; Upon the Discovering of the late
Design.

OR, A NARRATIVE OF A Seditious and Jesuitical Practice UPON The Parliament,
and City of London, Lately discovered; And some Observations upon it by Mr.
SOLICITER.

Die Sabbathi, 20 Jan. 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons, That the 21. day of this
instant January, being the Lords day, be kept as a day of Public.
Thanksgiving, for the great Deliverances which God has given to the Parliament
and City, from the several Plots and Designs against them; and more
particularly, in discovering the late Design: And that the Vote of both Houses
upon the late Design be printed, and read in the Churches.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Peter Cole. January 22. 1643

A Narrative of a Design and Practice upon the City of London, lately
discovered, and some Observation upon it by Mr. Soliciter.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God, out of his good esse within these
few days to make a discovery to both the Houses of an intended practice upon
the Parliament and City, and so by consequence upon the whole Kingdom. And in
respect, that the Stage whereupon this design was to have been acted, were the
Houses of Parliament, and principally this City, and that some of the Actors in
that Tragedy (for so I may call it) were members of this City: And likewise in
respect of that near Conjunction between the Houses and you, That as
Hypocritus twins, they are like to live and dye together, Therefore they have
commanded me and diverse other Gentlemen of the House of Commons to make known
unto you, what this design and practice was.

But before I tell you either what it was, or the dangerous consequence of it,
I think it will not be amiss, that you should hear it from one of themselves
who was an Actor and projector of it, that is, from the Lord Digby, who in a
letter writ to Sir Basil Brook concerning this business does profess, That
since these troubles did begin, There was no design, nor no practice that was
so likely to have taken, that was so likely to have produced that good effect
(as they style it) as this.

You may very well remember the bloody Design upon the Parliament and this
City discovered about half a year since: he himself said, That this is above
all that hitherto has been in agitation. This is their sense upon it, that
were the Projectors, and were to have been the Actors in it.

The Vote.
The thing in brief is thus: It was a seditious and Jesuitical Practice and
Design, under the specious pretense of Peace, to have rent the Parliament from
the City, and the City from the Parliament; To have severed and disjoined the
Parliament within it self, the City within it self, Thereby to render up both
Parliament and City to the Designs of the Enemy, which is not all; for the
destruction and nulling of this present Parliament was intended; as likewise
the engaging our selves in a Treaty of Peace without the advice or consent of
our Brethren of Scotland, contrary to the late Articles solemnly agreed upon by
both Kingdoms, to the perpetual dishonor of this Nation, by breach of our
public Faith, engaged therein to that Nation, thereby not only utterly to
frustrate our expectation of assistance from Scotland, but which is worse (in
all likelihood) to engage the two Nations in broils, if not in a war.

This in brief was the design, the particulars whereupon it was framed, and
the parties that were Actors in it, I shall likewise discover to you.

There was one Read, who called himself Colonel Read, a man I suppose well
known by name to this City: He had been heretofore many years since, a common
Agent for the Papists, he was a principal person to whom the Packets and
addresses from Rome were made; it was he that did disperse them abroad in the
Kingdom, with whom for the advancing of the Popish Cause, continued
consultations were held, who for advancing of the Catholic Cause (as they
call it) went over into Ireland, there fomented the Rebellion, having been one
of the Plotters of it, and was taken Prisoner there and sent hither; This was
the man, who was the principal contriver and Actor in the present business.

Who together with Sir Basil Brook (a known Jesuited Papist, a great Stickler
in all the Popish transactions, and Treasurer of the moneys lately contributed
by the Papists in the War against Scotland) both prisoners having laid the
design here, Mr Reads enlargement must be procured that he might act his part
at Oxford; Sir Basil Brook must lie ledger here.

But because so great a business required more mannagers, therefore one Violet
a broken Goldsmith, and a Protestant in show, must be brought in as a fit
person to go between these Papists and the parties in the City; Mr Ryley by
reason of his place of Scoutmaster of the City, and his reputation amongst the
Commoners must be gained, who in these respects might be very useful, both in
the way of Intelligence between Oxford and them, as likewise by promoting it
with the Citizens; others in the City of principal note amongst the people are
dealt withal.

The first thing Mr Ryley must act, is the exchange of Read (a prisoner for the
Treason and Rebellion in Ireland) ardor the name of Captain Read, taken
prisoner at Burleigh Ho^^^ in this Kingdom, for one of no greater rank than a
Quartermaster. That being done a Character of Intelligence was agreed on
between Read, Ryley, and Violet, Read to be known by the name of Colonel Lee,
Ryley by the name of The Man in the Moon, and Violet by the name of James
Morton.

After Reads going to Oxford, the Queen, the Duchess of Buckingham, and the
Lord Digby are consulted with; These are the Managers at Oxford with his
Majesty's knowledge: Read from Oxford, by Letters to Master Rily by the name
of the Man in the Moon assures him, The business goes on well at Oxford;
Promises of reward are made to Ryley and Violet: Peace being the pretense;
Therefore Propositions are framed and agreed on, six in number, by Read Sir
Basil Brook, Ryley, and Violet, and seen by others, and afterward sent to
Oxford. A Petiton for Peace being intended, the better to induce that, It was
agreed that his Majesty must write a powerful and promising letter to the
Lord Major and Citizens, to be read at a Common Hall, and fit Instruments
thought upon to be employed to prepare my Lord Major before hand: The Letter
was written and agreed upon here by Sir Basil Brook, Master Ryley and Violet
and sent to Oxford, Violet a prisoner by Master Ryleys means was procured to be
exchanged, that he might from Oxford bring the letter and advises, for the
carrying on of the business: At Oxford the business was so diligently
solicited by Read, that at Violets coming, all things were ready, and after
three hours discourse in his Majesty's presence, with the Queen, the Duchess
of Buckingham, and the Lord Digby, Violet the same day, (being the Monday
before the discovery) dispatched from Oxford with his Majesty's Letter, altered
in nothing save the Title, and with another Letter from the Lord Digby to Sir
Basil Brook, whereby the whole managing of the business is entrusted to Sir
Basil Brook, and it is wholly left to his Wisdom and Discretion, whither the
letter to the City shall be delivered or not.

Violet brought both the Letters to Sir Basil Brook the Wednesday after, and
one Wood having formerly brought a Letter from Oxford to the City, the same in
matter with this that Violet brought, which will be read unto you; Sir Basil
Brook delivered the Letter that came last from Oxford to Wood to be delivered
to my Lord Major: the next day after which was Thursday, and with direction,
That it should have been published on the Friday; The delivery of it to my Lord
Major, by the discovery of it the same day was prevented, and Sir Basil Brook,
Ryley and Violet that night were examined.

Before the Reading of the Examinations, Letters, and Propositions unto you at
large, That the main design to be made out by them, as they are conjoined and
have relation to the precedent narrative, may be the better understood, I shall
in brief touch upon the matter of them, as likewise upon such Conclusions as
may necessarily be deduced from them.

As first, That no Peace was really intended, appears throughout the whole
transaction: The propositions, which upon the Supposition that this is no
Parliament, if anything, were to have been the groundwork and foundation of
it, which upon the reading you will find so slight and frivolous, that no man
can conceive that our Peace could have been built upon such a foundation;
Nothing so much as spoken of concerning Ireland, or the disengaging of of our
selves from the Articles of Agreement with our Brethren of Scotland; No
provision for Reformation of Religion, or preservation of that we have, or of
our Laws and Liberties: But in stead thereof there are quaedam iniqua, the
Excise must be continued beyond the war, that out of it the King might have a
benefit, and the debts of the Enemies to the Parliament repayed: and the City
immediately to be Treated with.

That no Peace was intended, appears further from the L: Digbies Letter
(written within a day or two of that to the City) to the Ki: Agent at Brussels,
who writes that the French Treaty was at an end, because the Parliament must
not be acknowledged to be a Parliament, that as the King for a long time had
taken that for a ground, so he held the same resolution still, being thereunto
advised by all his Lords at Oxford; and by his resolution of holding a Great
Counsel in the nature of a Parliament at Oxford the 22. of this Month. And
when his Majesty's Letter shall be read, you will find no particulars
whereupon a Peace should have been built, save only kind words in generals.

This further appears from the persons who were the first Designers and
Contrivers, and were to have been the chief managers from first to last of the
business, Read and Sir Basil Brook known Iesuited Papists, and always active
in promoting Popish practizes; This Peace must have been such as these persons
shall contrive; The prayer for our deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason
agreed upon in Parliament, says, That the Faith of such Papists is faction,
Their practices, the murdering of the souls and bodies of men; Read he has
been a Contriver and prosecuter of of the bloody Tragedies of the Protestants
in Ireland; the other not without suspicion to have had his hand in it; what is
said concerning the Queen in that particular, is set forth by the Declaration
of both or one of the Houses, and the Articles of her Impeachment, the
Countess of Buckingham (beside that her husband has appeared visibly in that
Rebellion) is not free of other cause of suspicion: These as was said before,
assisted with the Lord Digby, must be the Instruments of this Peace; which as
it is set forth in his Majesty's Letter, must be such as that whereby the true
Protestant Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom must be maintained.

These Papists you see, who had done so good service for the Protestant
Religion in Ireland, must lay the foundation for the preservation of it here.

Sir Basil Brook, and Read, well knew that the Pope and and Popery have been
banished this Kingdom by the Parliaments of England, and that the succeeding
Parliaments to this time have always endeavored the suppression of popery, and
therefore Degenerating from their Predecessors, who in the Gunpowder Treason
endeavored for that cause to have blown up the parliament, They must now
endeavor the Preservation of the Parliament, and the Laws and the Liberties
of the Kingdom.

The things which from this brief Narrative, the reading of the Examinations,
Propositions, and Letters, will appear to have been designed, are these;

First the dividing the Parliament from the City, and the Parliament and the
City within themselves.

First in respect that this Treaty of Peace was to have been immediately
between the King and the City, and that whereupon the Peace of the whole
Kingdom should have been settled, as appears by his Majesty's Letter, what
wide rents such a Treaty must have produced between the City and Parliament is
obvious. Again, for the prosecution of the Treaty when entertained by the City;
safe conducts were to have been granted, not only to those of the City, but to
such of the Members of either House, as would have repaired to Oxford for that
purpose; Every man sees by this, what division and confusion would have
followed both in City and Parliament. The Projectors were well acquainted with
Machivels maxim, divide and Impera.

The second was no less then the utter destruction, the nulling and making
void of this present Parliament, as will appear by the Lord Digbyes letter to
De vic, and the summoning of the great Council or Parliament at Oxford
compared with the third of these Propositions. By the letter to De vic this
Parliament, as the resolution then was at Oxford, must not be acknowledged; and
by this third Proposition for that very cause, the Parliament must be waved,
and the Treaty must be immediately between the King and City. The consequence
whereof had been no less then the rendering of the Kingdom for ever incapable
of having any more Parliaments; This Parliament, It was called and continued
according to the known Laws and Usages of the Kingdom, was afterward by an
Act of Parliament, assented unto by his Majesty, so acknowledged, and made
indissolvable without its own consent; (a greater Testimony of the validity of
this Parliament, then I think was ever given to any:) If neither the Common
Laws and usages of this Kingdom, nor the concurrent Authority of an Act
Parliament be able to support this Parliament, when his Majesty shall declare
the contrary, I shall without more words leave to your judgments, whether this
doctrine does not at once blow up the fundamentalls of all Parliaments, Laws of
the Kingdom, Liberty of the Subjects, and of the whole policy and
Government of this Kingdom, which being destroyed, what security you could
have devised for the maintaining of the Religon, Laws, and Liberties of the
Kingdom, as is promised you in his Majesty's letter, I know not.

3. The third was not only the preventing of the assistance of our Brethren in
Scotland; But that which is worse, and must have necessarily followed
thereupon, the embroiling of both the Nations in divisions, in all likelihood
fat all unto both; this will appear by putting together what has been done
by the Parliament, those at Oxford, and the transactions in this design.

The Parliament long since have invited that Nation to our assistance in this
common cause upon weighty considerations.

As first, conceiving that by this means through Gods blessing, this great
cause which concerns our Religion, Laws, Liberties, and all we have, would be
assured, and the event of the War, otherwise doubtful, made more certain.

2. Secondly, that by their assistance the war might be the sooner ended, and
so by consequence the calamities which of necessity must accompany it, their
assistance adding so considerable a strength to our party, besides the
reputation which the concurrence of a whole Nation with us, will add to the
justness of the cause.

3. And thirdly, that as in likelihood by their joint concurrence, a better
Peace for present might be procured, so in all probability what shall be agreed
upon would be the more lasting and durable, both Nations being equally
interested in what should be agreed upon.

Besides the Covenant maturely sworn and agreed upon by both Nations for the
maintenance and defense of Religion, and of the mutual Laws and Liberties of
each Kingdom, a solemn league and Treaty has likewise been mutually agreed
upon between the Parliament here and that Kingdom, concerning the manner of
their assistance (and great sums of money have been thereupon sent unto them.)
In which Treaty one Article is, That neither Nation shall entertain any Treaty
of Peace, without the advice and consent of the other. This in brief contains
the transactions between that Nation and the Parliament. At Oxford by papers in
the form of Proclamations, they have styled this assistance, an Invasion of
the Kingdom, and one end of the calling of that great Council or Parliament
is for opposing of the same.

In the carriage of the present design, by one of Reads letters to Pyley he
says, That a door is open by the coming in of the Scots for the destruction
of this Kingdom; That therefore this Peace must presently be concluded. That
all is lost unless it be done speedily. The maine intent of the letter is for
the speeding of it to that end. The Lord Digbyes letter to Sir Basil Brook,
referring the delivering of his Majesty's letter to my Lord Mayor to his
discretion, he forthwith delivers it to Wood, to be the next day delivered to
my Lord Mayor, and the next day after the delivery to be by him published; He
saw it necessary, and so resolved at Oxford, That we must speedily break with
the Scots.

Their assistance, how necessary, and by Gods blessing how beneficial it is
like to be unto us, I think you see, but this must be prevented; The honor and
public faith of Nations how Sacred it is, and from the rules of Religion and
common policy, how tenderly to be preserved each man knows, But this design
must violate and stain our honor in the highest: For contrary to the Article
before mentioned, this Treaty must presently be set on foot without them; such
violations are always deeply resented by the parties injured: how dangerous
therefore the consequence must needs have been, he that runs may read.

This was the Design: It was too Ugly, It was too Black, Bare faced, to have
been presented to your view, and therefore it must be masqu't; This hook must
be baited with the sweet word Peace; It has been long since observed from the
Ecclesiastical proceedings of the Romish Church, That in nomine Domini Incipit
omne malum, The Holy Name of God must bear out all their Spiritual
wickednesses: The end of all Civil Policy is the preserving of just and
Honorable Peace; and therefore these men when Divisions, Violence, and what is
most contrary to Peace is intended, yet for the compassaing of these ends,
Peace must be pretended. So was it by many of them about this time
twelve-moneth Designed in their Petition to the Parliament for a Peace, and so
was it in the bloody plot upon the City, and diverse Members of both Houses
discovered the last Summer. For upon the examinations of diverse of them, It
appeared that the ground of that plot was laid in the first Petition, and that
the second was to have been gilded over with a Petition for Peace.

These men, (I speak of these designs) they cry Peace, Peace, that destruction
might have come upon you as an armed man: You shall now hear the examinations
and other things read at large unto you.

FJNJS.

