THE VOTES AGREED ON BY The LORDS and COMMONS Concerning a Treaty; AND Their
desire of a safe Conduct for a Committee named by them, contained in a Letter
of the 28. of February from the Earl of Manchester to the Lord Viscount of
Falkland.

WITH HIS MAJESTY'S Gracious Answer thereunto, and a Copy of His safe Conduct.

ALSO The Articles concerning a Cessation proposed by both Houses of
PARLIAMEMT, and a Letter of the 28. of Feb. from the said Earl of Manchester,
to the said L. of Falkland, in which they were enclosed.

With His MAJESTY'S gracious Answer to the Same.

Printed, by His MAJESTY'S Command, AT OXFORD, March 7.

By LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord Viscount FALKLAND, Principal Secretary to
His MAJESTY.
Manchester. My Lord,
I Am commanded by the Lords in Parliament, to desire your Lordship to acquaint
His Majesty, that both Houses of Parliament, having appointed a Committee to
treat with His Majesty, they desire that a safe Conduct may be granted unto
them by His Majesty. The number and the Names of the Committee Your Lordship
shall receive here enclosed. My Lord I am

Your Lordships humble servant MANCHESTER, Speaker of the House of Peers pro
tempore.
Feb. 28.
The Number and Names of the Committee.
Earl of Northumberland. Lord Vic. Say and Seal. Mr William Perpoint. Sir
William Ermyne. Sir John Holland. Mr Bulstrode Whitlocke.
AGREED ON BY THE LORDS and COMMONS in Parliament.
THat there shall be a Treaty upon the Propositions, before the disbanding. In
which Treaty, so much of His Majesty's Proposition as concerns the Magazines,
Forts and Ships, and the Proposition of both Houses for the disbanding of the
Armies, shall be first Treated of, and concluded on, before the proceeding to
Treat upon any of the other Propositions.

And that this Treaty shall begin the fourth of March, or sooner if it may be.
And that from the beginning of the Treaty, the time may not exceed Twenty days.

Jo. BROWN, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

HIS MAJESTY'S ANSWER TO THE VOTES OF BOTH HOUSES, and to their desire of a
safe Conduct.
HIS Majesty has sent a safe Conduct for the Earl of Northumberland, Mr
Perpoint, Sir William Ermine, Sir John Holland, and Mr Whitlocke, but has not
admitted the Lord Say to attend Him, as being excepted against by name in His
Proclamation at Oxford, of the third of November, and by Writ to the Sheriff
Proclaimed then in that County, in which His Majesty's intention is declared,
to proceed against him as a Person guilty of high Treason, and so falling to be
within the case of Sir John Evelin, who upon the same exception was not
admitted to attend His Majesty with the rest of the Committee at Colebroke, in
November last. But His Majesty does signify, that in case the House shall think
fit to send any other Person in the place of the Lord Say, that is not included
in the like exception, His Majesty has commanded all His Officers, Soldiers
and other Subjects, to suffer him as freely to pass and repasse, as if his
name had been particularly comprised in this safe. Conduct. His Majesty is
content that His Proposition concerning the Magazines, Forts, Ships, and
Revenue, and the Proposition of both Houses for the disbanding of the Armies,
shall be first Treated of, and agreed of, before the Proceeding to Treat upon
any of the other Propositions. And that after the second of His Majesty's, and
the second of theirs be treated on, and agreed of, and so on in the same order.
And that from the beginning of the Treaty, the time may not exceed twenty
days, in which He hopes a full peace and right understanding may be
established throughout the Kingdom.

His Majesty's safe Conduct.
OUR Will and Pleasure is, And We do hereby straightly Charge and Command all
the Officers and Soldiers of Our present Army, and all Our Ministers and
Subjects whatsoever, to permit and suffer Our Right trusty and Right
wellbeloved Couzin and Counselor Algernon Earl of Northumberland, and Our
Trusty and Welbeloved William Perpoint Esquire Sir William Ermyne, and Sir John
Holland Knights, and Bulstrode Whitlock Esquire (together with their Servants) to
pass and repasse to and from Us, without any Let or Hinderance, they being now
sent to attend Us from Our two Houses of Parliament. This Our safe Conduct
under Our Sign Manual and Royal Signet, We Charge and Command them, and
every of them, punctually to observe and obey, as they will answer the contrary
at their uttermost perils.

Given at Our Court at OXFORD, the third of MARCH. 1642.

