To the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, THE HVMBLE ANSWER OF THE Lords and
Commons Assembled in Parliament, To His Majesty's last Message the 11.
September, 1642.

With a true Copy of the Message.

16. September. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Message with the Answer shall be
forthwith printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.



LONDON, Printed for J. Wright. 17. September. 1642.

TO THE KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY The humble Answer of the Lords and Commons
in Parliament Assembled.
May it please Your Majesty,
WE the Lords and Commons in Parliament Assembled, do present this our humble
Answer to your Majesty's message of the 11. of this instant month of September.
When we consider the oppressions, rapines, firing of houses, murders, (even at
this time whilst your Majesty propounds a Treaty) Committed upon your good
Subjects by your Soldiers, in the presence, and by the authority of their
commanders, being of the number of those, whom your Majesty holds your self
bound in honor and conscience to protect as persons doing their duties; we
cannot think your Majesty has done all that in you lies to prevent or remove
the present distractions, nor so long as your Majesty will admit no peace
without securing the Authors and Instruments of these mischiefs from the
justice of the Parliament, which yet shall be ever dispensed with all requisite
moderation, and distinction of offenses, although some of those persons be such
in whose preservation your Kingdom cannot be safe, nor the unquestionable
rights and privileges of Parliament be maintained: without which, the power
and dignity thereof will fall into contempt: We beseech your Majesty therefore
to consider your expressions, That God shall deal with you and your posterity
as your Majesty desires the preservation of the just rights of Parliament,
which being undeniable in the trying of such as we have declared to be
Delinquents, we shall believe your Majesty, both toward your selte and
Parliament, will not in this privilege we are most sensible of, deny us that
which belongs unto the meanest Court of Justice in this Kingdom: neither has
your Majesty cause to complain that you are denied a Treaty, when we offer all
that a Treaty can produce, or your Majesty expect, security, honor, service,
obedience, support, and all other effects of an humble loyal and faithful
subjection; and seek nothing, but that our Religion, Liberty, Peace of the
Kingdom, sa^ty of the Parliament, may be secured from the open violence, and
cunning practices of a wicked party, who have long plotted our ruin and
destruction: And if there were any cause of Treaty, we know no competent
persons to Treat betwixt the King and Parliament: And if both cause and
persons were such as to invite Treaty, The season is altogether unfit, whilst
your Majesty's Standard is up, and your Proclamations and Declarations
^^^^^^lled, whereby your Parliament is ch^^^^^ with Treason.

If Your Majesty shall persist to make Your self a shield and defense to those
instruments, and shall continue to reject our faithful and necessary advice,
for securing and maintaining Religion and Liberty, with the peace of the
Kingdom, and safety of the Parliament, we doubt not but to indifferent
judgments it will easily appear who ismost tender of that innocent Blood which
is like to be spilt in this cause, Your Majesty, who by such persisting, does
endanger your self, and your Kingdoms, or we who are willing to hazard our
selves to preserve both. We humbly beseech Your Majesty to consider (...) ^^w
impossible it is, that any Protestation, though published in Your Majesty's
Name, of Your tenderness of the miseries of your Protestant Subjects in
Ireland, of your resolution to maintain the protestant Religion, and Laws of
this Kingdom, can give satisfaction to reasonable and indifferent men, when at
the same time diverse of the Irish Traitors and Rebels, the known favorers of
them, and agents for them are admitted to Your Majesty's presence with grace
and favor, and some of them employed in Your service: when the Clothes,
Munition, Horses, and other necessaries bought by Your Parliament, and sent for
the supply of the Army against the Rebels there, are violently taken away, some
by Your Majesty's command, others by Your ministers, and applied to the
maintenance of an unnatural war against Your people here.

All this notwithstanding, as we never gave your Majesty any just cause of
withdrawing Your self from your great Council, so it has ever been and shall
ever be far from us to give any impediment to your return, or to neglect any
proper means of curing the distempers of the Kingdom, and closing the
dangerous breaches betwixt your Majesty and your Parliament, according to the
great trust which lies upon us. And if your Majesty shall now be pleased to
come back to Your Parliament, without Your Forces, we shall be ready to secure
your Royal Person, your Crown and Dignity with our lives and fortunes; your
presence in this your great Council being the only means of any Treaty
betwixt your Majesty and them, with hope of success.

And in none of our desires to your Majesty shall we be swayed by any
particular man's advantage, but shall give a clear testimony to your Majesty
and the whole World, that in all things done by us, we faithfully intend the
good of your Majesty, and of your Kingdoms. And that we will not be diverted
from this end by any private or selferespects whatsoever.

Tudor rose Scottish thistle French fleur-de-lis Irish harp emblem
To Our Right Trusty and Wellbeloved, The SPEAKER of the House of PEERS.
WE have taken most w^ies, used most endeavors, and made most real
expressions to prevent the present distractions and dangers; let all the World
judge, as well by former passages as by Our two last Messages, which have been
so fruitless, that though we have descended to desire and press it, not so
much as a treaty can be obtained, unless we would denude our self of all
force to desend us from a visible strength marching against us, and admit those
persons as Traitors to Us who according to their duty, their paths of
Allegiance, and the Law, have appeared in defense of Us their King and
Liege-Lord, whom We are bound in Conscience and Honor to p^^serve, though We
disclaimed all Our Proclamations and Declarations, and erecting of Our Standard
as against Our Parliament: All We have now left in Our power is to express the
deep sense We have of the public misery of this Kingdom, in which we
involved that of our distressed protestants of Ireland, and to apply our self
to our necessary defense, wherein we wholly rely upon the providence of God, and
the Justice of our cause, and the affection of our good people, so far We are
from putting them out of Our protection, when you shall desire a treaty of Vs^
We shall piously remember whose blood is to be spilt in t^^^ quarrel, and
cheerfully embrace it. And as no other reason induced Us to leave our City of
London, but that with honor and safety We could not stay there nor raise any
force, but for the necessary defense of Our Person, and the Law, against levies
in opposition to both, so we shall suddenly and most willingly return to the
one and disband the other as soon as those causes shall be removed. The God of
Heaven direct you and in mercy divert those judgments which hang over this
Nation, And so ^eale with Us and our Posterity as we desire the preservation,
and advancement of the true Protestant Religion, the Law and liberty of the
Subject, the just rights of Parliament, and the peace of the Kingdom.

FINIS.

