TWO ORDERS; THE ONE, To all High Sheriffs, Justices of the peace, and other
Officers, within 150. Miles of the City YORK. THE OTHER, In particular, to the
high Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, within the County of
Lancaster. In general, to all the Counties of England and Dominion of Wales.
Die Veneris 27. Maii. 1642.
WHereas it appears to the Lords and Commons, that the King, seduced by wicked
counsel, intends to make war upon his Parliament: It is therefore Ordered by
the Lords and Commons, that the High Sheriff and Justices of the Peace and
other Officers within the same Counties, Cities, and Towns Corporate, situate
within 150 Miles of the City of York, shall forthwith take special care, for
to make stay of all Arms and Ammunition carrying toward York, until they
have given notice thereof unto the Lords and Commons, and shall have received
their further direction. And for the better effecting hereof, the said High
Sheriff, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, are further to take
special care, that strict watches be kept within their several limits and
jurisdictions for the searching for and seizing of all such Arms and
Ammunition, as likewise for the apprehending all persons going with the same.

Die Sabbathi, 28. Maii 1642.
WHereas it appears, that the King seduced by wicked counsel, intends to
make war against the Parliament, and under the color of a guard to secure his
royal Person, does command troops both of Horse and Foot to assemble at
York; All which is against the Laws of the Kingdom, tending to the
dissolution of the Parliament, and destruction of the people: It is therefore
Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Sheriff of the County
of Lancaster, and all other Sheriffs, of the Kingdom of England, and Dominion
of Wales, shall by the power of that County, and of their several Counties
respectively suppress the raising, and coming together of any Soldiers Horse
or Foot, by any warrant, commission, or Order from his Majesty, without the
advice, and consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament; And that all
persons whatsoever do forbear to execute any such Commission, or warrant for
levying Soldiers, or gathering them together, without consent of parliament;
And those who shall execute or obey any such Commission, or warrant, are hereby
declared to be disturbers of the peace of the Kingdom. And the Lord Lieutenant
of the County of Lancaster, and all Lord Lievtenants of all other Counties in
the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales respectively, as likewise all
deputy Lievtenants, Captains, and Officers of the Trained-Bands, and all
Majors, Justices of peaceand other his Majesty's loving subjects, are hereby
commanded, and required to be ayding and assisting to the said Sheriff of the
County of Lancaster, and to the other Sheriffs of the other Counties of this
Kingdom, and of the Dominion of Wales; And that his Majesty's loving Subjects
may the better understand what the Law, and their own duty is in this behalf,
the said Sheriff of Lancaster, and other Sheriffs of the other Counties of
this Kingdom respectively, shall cause this present Order forthwith to be
published, in the several Market Towns within their said Counties.

Sabbathi 28. Maii. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords in Parliament, That these Orders be forthwith printed and
published.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London by E. Griffin, for Christopher Latham. 1642.


