A DECLARATION Of the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT; Concerning the Rise and
Progress of The Grand Rebellion IN IRELAND TOGETHER With a multitude of
Examinations of Persons of quality, whereby it may easily appear to all the
World, who were, and still are the Promoters of that cruel and unheard of
REBELLION. With some Letters and Papers of great consequence of the Earl of
Antrims, which were intercepted. Also some Letters of MART, which were granted
by the Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton, etc. And likewise another from the Rebels
in Ireland, who term themselves, The SUPREME COUNCIL for the Catholique-Cause.

ORdered by the Commons in Parl. That this Declaration, Examinations, and
Letters, be forthwith printed and published:

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold in the Middle Temple.
July 1643.

Die Martis, 25 Julii, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons, That the Ministers of every
Parish within the Kingdom, shall read this Declaration in their several
Churches and Chapels, on the next Fast day the same shall come to their hands,
after the ending of the first Sermon, and before the beginning of the next.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

A Declaration of the Commons assembled in Parliament, etc.
THe COMMONS in Parliament do observe, that the grand Design of altering
Religion throughout His Majesty's Dominions, had a more special influence in
Ireland, as being more remote from view, and more propence to receive such
impression, and therefore they think fit to call to mind (as introductive to
that which follows) some particular footsteps, by which Popery has been
advanced, and true Religion discountenanced in that Kingdom, since the access
of His Majesty to the Crown of England.

In the second year of His Majesty's Reign, certain Propositions were set on
foot in Ireland, the scope whereof was to fautour and indulge Popery in that
Kingdom, as namely, to suspend all proceedings against the Papists, for being
married, or for procuring their children to be christened by popish Priests, to
allow the suing out of Liveries and Outre Les-mains by the Papists, without
taking the Oath of Supremacy; with many like Privileges to the Papists. The
Design being to bring in a more public Tolleration of the popish Religion in
that Kingdom, for a sum of Money to be paid to His Majesty for the same. These
Propositions and Design were so gross and scandalous, that even the then
Bishops of Ireland, by a writing under their hands bearing date the 26 of
November, 1626. did make a Protestation, setting forth how grievous a sin it
was to consent to such Tolleration of Popery, and that to grant it in respect
of any Money to be given, were to set Religion to sale, and withal, the souls
of the people whom Christ has redeemed with his precious blood. And that, as
it was a great sin, so they did conceive it of most dangerous consequence, as
by the said Protestation herewith printed may appear: And although the House of
Commons in their Remonstrance made in the third Year of His Majesty's Reign,
did truly inform See Folio 24.
that even then the Popish Religion was openly professed in every part of that
Kingdom, that Monasteries and Nunneries were then newly erected and
replenished, with men and women of several Orders, that this might prove of
evil consequence, if not seasonably repressed, therefore most humbly besought
His Majesty, to lay the serious consideration thereof to His Royal and pious
heart, and that some speedy course might be taken for redress therein; Yet how
this faithful and timely advice of the Bishops of Ireland, and the Commons of
England was followed, and what speedy course was taken for redress therein,
will appear by this which insues. For,

IN the beginning of the Fourth year of His Majesty's Reign, upon the
agreement of certain Agents sent from Ireland to His Majesty (all or most part
of them being professed Papists) these Propositions and Graces, with many like
Additions, were granted and confirmed by His Majesty, in consideration of One
hundred and twenty thousand pounds, to be levied in three years upon the
Kingdom in general, as well upon the Protestants as upon the Papists: How
great an encouragement to the Papists this was, and what an insufferable
pressure to the Protestants, that besides the illegal imposing it upon them,
without their consent in Parliament, they must be compelled to purchase with
their money, Tollerations and Immunities for the Papists, let even those men
judge who will be styled the moderate and honest Protestants, whiles with all
their faculties of body and mind, they strive to advance Popery, and to root
up the Protestant Religion, and the Liberty of the Subject.

Many potent and notorious Papists have been created Peers by His Majesty,
whereby the Votes of the Popish party in the Lords House (too many before) are
much increased, and those Papists become more powerful and more exemplary in
their respective countries, to the great encouragement and growth of Popery,
and discouragement to the good people of that Kingdom.

That when by direction of the Lord Chancellor Loftus, and the Earl of Cork,
then Lords Justices, proceedings were begun against the Papists, upon the
Statute of 2 Eliz. for not coming to Church, and the Judges in their circuits
gave that Statute in charge, and Indictments were framed thereupon; directions
were sent from England, to suspend and stay all proceedings upon that Statute,
when by taking the penalty imposed by that Statute being Nine pence, for
absenting from Church Sundays and Holy Days, the poor Protestants there might
have been eased of many heavy payments and Taxes which were after imposed upon
them, and the Papists either brought to conformity, or else kept so under, that
this Rebellion; if not wholly prevented, yet could not have proved so
Universal, and so bloody as now it is.

That the late Earl of Strafford being the Kings Lieutenant there, did by his
great Favorite Sir George Ratcliff, one of His Majesty's Privie-Couneell of
that Kingdom, hold correspondencie with the Popish Clergy, and particularly
with Paul Harris a known Priest, who had both public and private access to
Sir George Ratcliff at all times, as well by night as by day.

That in March, 1639. the Earl of Strafford, carried with him into Ireland, Sir
Toby Matthews, a notorious, pernicious English Iesuited Priest, (banished at
the beginning of this Parliament upon the importunity of both Houses) lodged
this Priest over against the Castle of Dublin, the house where the Earl did
himself reside, and from whence this Priest daily rode to the public
Masse-houses in Dublin, and negotiated the engaging of the Papists of Ireland
in the war against Scotland.

When the late Lo: Chanc: Loftus and the E. of Cork were Lords Justices, they
endeavored to suppress the Masse-houses in Dublin, and to convert them to
pious uses; one which was in the street called the Back-lane, they disposed of
to the University of Dublin, who placed a Rector, and Scholars in it, and
maintained a weekly Lecture there; to which Lecture the Lords Justices and
State of Ireland did usually resort, to the great countenancing of the
Protestant Religion there; But after the Earl of Strafford came to the
Government, the Lecture was put down, the Scholars displaced, and the house
became a Masse-house, as formerly it had been.

That diverse Monasteries and Nunneries were newly erected immediately before
the Rebellion brake forth in diverse parts of that Kingdom: That at the Naas
where the Earl of Strafford had his chief seat and resort, Convents of Friars,
namely, Augustines, Franciscans, Dominicans, were not only permitted, but also
an house built there by the said Earl, for an other purpose (as he pretended)
soon after the building was converted to a Friery, by the connivence of the
said Earl.

That the Popish Irish Army was kept on foot there for a long time after the
beginning of this Parliament, contrary to the advice and frequent desires of
both Houses of Parliament, and to the great furtherance of this Rebellion, by
teaching those barbarous villains the knowledge of Arms under the notion of
fighting against Scotland, but now made use of to extirpate both English and
Scots from the Kingdom of Ireland.

And that Lead might not be wanting to the completing of this intended
Rebellion (as it had bin in the last great Rebellion there, to the great
disadvantage of the then Rebels) the Silver Mines of that Kingdom (which do
afford great store of Lead, and therefore fit only to be in the hands of
Protestants of known integrity) were farmed out by His Majesty to most
pernicious Papists, namely, Sir George Hamilton, Sir Basil Brook, and the like;
and upon the discovery of the Plot for the surprising of the City and Castle of
Dublin, diverse barrels of Musquet-bullet were found (upon search) in the house
of the said Sir George Hamilton in Dublin.

Before this Rebellion brake forth, the Earl of Strafford (well knowing the
ready way to endear his Prince, was to promote his profit) had by a violent
endeavor entitled His Majesty by Office to the whole counties of Roscommon,
Mayo, Slego, Galloway and Clare, and to a great part of the counties of
Limerick and Tipperary; by which means a door was opened, not only to increase
His Majesty's revenue in a very great proportion, but therewith to settle a
Plantation of English Protestants, to the advancement of Religion, and safety
of that Kingdom; And however the proceedings of the Earl herein were not to be
justified in all points, yet when the Committee was sent from Ireland, at the
beginning of this Parliament, to complain of diverse grievances, they had no
particular directions to mention this for one; neither did that Committee ever
attend His Majesty to complain thereof, or desire a red resse therein,
(conceiving the mentioning thereof wouldexceedingly distaste His Majesty)
until His Majesty freely offered to depart with His Title to the former
proprietors; But on the contrary, the Lords Justices, and Council of Ireland
apprehending the great advantage of this service, did by their Letters
exceedingly importune His Majesty, that he would not part with His Title to
those counties and lands; and that the Plantation of English Protestants might
proceed as was formerly intended: But when those mischievous Counsels, (now
only prevalent with His Majesty) found that the Parliament had both
discovered and interrupted them in some measure, and that their Design could
be no longer carried on by fraud and subtilties, as before; and had therefore
projected this hideous Rebellion, then the Lord Gormanstown, Sir Donnaugh Mac
Carthy Knight, now Lord Viscount Muskerry. Nicholas Plunket, Uncle to the Earl
of Fingal, Sir Roe-buck Lynch, and Jeffery Brown a Lawyer (all principal and
active Rebels now in Ireland,) and Thomas Bourke (who was named a Commssioner
in the late Commission to Treat with the Rebels, and whose father, brothers,
and kindred are all now in Rebellion, being the chief of the Popish part of
that Irish Committee: were consulted and caressed at Whitehall, and they or
some of them without the privity of the rest of that Committee, had diverse
private conferrences with the King in the Queens presence: and what Clandestine
agreement was made with those Rebels may easily be imagined, when upon their
private mediation His Majesty was induced to give away these five whole
Counties, with a great part of the Counties of Limerick and Tipperary; after so
great an endeavor had bin used for diverse years together, to entitle His
Majesty to the same; and all this for a rent of 2000. l. or thereabouts, when
as in finding the Offices, searching Records and admeasuring these Counties,
and Lands the King had expended out of His Own Coffers ten thousand pounds and
upwards. And this service of entitling the King was before that time esteemed
such a Masterpiece of the said Earl, that some persons who came over to
complain against the Earl for the same were imprisoned here, and after sent
into Ireland to be further dealt with as the said Earl should think fit.

Neither is it improper to observe upon this occasion, the extreme difference
between this Superlative Indulgence to the Irish Papists, by this unusual
bounty, and that exquisite piece of injustice offered to the City of London, in
the case of London Derry and Collerane; which shows the Land of Ireland is
worth the owning, where no greater compensation is proposed for the parting
therewith: And His Majesty was drawn to tell the Committee for Ireland, that
now since he was content to part with so much of His Right, He expected they
would recompense Him some other way.

Immediately after, (namely in August before the Rebellion) they returned into
Ireland, where how they bestir'd themselves by seconding their Letters and
Messages, with their personal solicitations, did appear by the Sequel for
that the 23. of October following, this Rebellion brake forth in Vlster.

To these violent presumptions may be added, that which is expressly proved by
Archdeacon Maxwell, a Learned Divine, who testifies in his Examinations taken
in Ireland, that he heard Tirlagh Oge O Neile, brother to Sir Phelim O Neale,
the arch Rebel of Vlster confess; That this business (meaning the Rebellion)
was communicated by the Popish Irish Committee to the Papists in England, who
promised their assistance, and that by their advice, something formerly
resolved on were altered; saying, it was a good omen and undoubted sign of
divine approbation, that the Parliament of Ireland should send over a Committee
into England, the major part whereof were Papists. And Mac Mahoun who was to
join with the Lord MacGuire for the surprising the Castle of Dublin: being
taken and examined at the Rack, confessed that the original of that Rebellion
was brought to them out of England by the Irish Committee employed to His
Majesty for redress of Grievances, as by the Examination See Fol. 2
of James Piesly Gentleman, herewith Printed may appear.

And as these Irish Papists did negotiate in both Kingdoms, so the Earl of
Castlehaven, a Peer of this Realm; (that sat here in Parliament at the
beginning thereof, but now a notorious Rebel in Ireland) Mr. Porter, son to
Endimion Porter, who declared himself a Papist in Ireland, Sir Bazill Brook,
the Popish Treasurer for the moneys raised by the Queens solicitation for the
War against the Scots; Mr. Andrew Brown a Lawyer of Lincolns-Inne, heretofore
expelled thence for being a known Papist, with diverse other dangerous English
Papists went out of England into Ireland, the Summer before the Rebellion brake
forth, and were very active there.

If these Circumstances preceding the Rebellion, and diverse other of the like
nature, be not enough of themselves to open the eyes of the world, It has
pleased God to discover such subsequent evidence of this kind, that may serve
to convince the greatest unbeliever. Therefore (not repeating any of the proofs
set forth in that Answer to His Majesty's Message of the 13th. of August, 1642.
but referring to the same herewith printed to which no Reply has yet been
made;) they think fit to add to that evidence this which follows, namely the
general profession of the Rebels in all parts of that Kingdom, that the
cause of their rising was to preserve His Majesty and the Queen, from being
oppressed by the Puritan-Parliament, and that it was by their consent. That they
knew well the best in England would Colonel Mervin's Examination. See Folio
33. William Stuart Esq's; Examination. See Folio 36. Hen: Steuart's
Examination. See Fol. 37.
side with them, that they had good Warrant in black and white for what they
did. Their calling the English Army Parliament-Rogues, and Traitors to the
Queen: and telling them at the beginning of the Rebellion before any appearance
of War here, that ere long they should see England as much in blood as Ireland
then was. That they had their party in England and Scotland, which should keep
both Kingdoms so busy at home, that they should not send any aid against
them, with a multitude of such like expressions from the Irish of the best
quality and degree; as may appear by the Examinations of Colonel Audley
Mervin, William Steuart, Esquire, William-Steuart, Cent' herewith printed, and
by diverse other proofs. And although these expressions proceed from Rebels, yet
concurring with a multitude of other proofs, and found true in a great part by
sad experience are not inconsiderable.

In the same Month of October wherein the Rebellion of Ireland brake forth;
the Lord Dillon of Costelough, (an Irish Peer, now in arms against the
Parliament and Kingdom of England) went out of Scotland from His Majesty into
Ireland, bringing His Majesty's Letters (which he obtained by mediation of the
Queeen) to be presently sworn a Privie-Councellor of Ireland, who when he had
taken the Oath of a Privy. Councellor, endeavors to be useful to the
Rebels, presents to the Lords, Justices, and Council, from many of the Centry
and Inhabitants of the County of Longford, (all in Rebellion) a rebellious and
scandalous Letter in the nature of a Remonstrance, full of pretended grievances
and unreasonable demands: As namely, to have freedom of Religion, a repeall of
all Laws made to the contrary, and the like; as by the said Letter herewith
printed may appear.

In December after the Rebellion, the same Lord Dillon, together with his
brother in Law, the now Lord Taaffe, (a notorious Papist) repaired into
England, bringing with them several Papers and Instructions in writing from
the Lord Gormanston, and other Lords and Gentlemen of the Pale, all now in
Rebellion, to negotiate for them to His Majesty, and as they solicit with His
Majesty here on the behalf of the Rebels, so do they solicit the Rebels from
hence in the Name of His Majesty, to persist in their wicked Rebellion, as
appears by the Testimony of Mr. Jephson, a Member of the House of Commons,
lately delivered at a Conference before both Houses in these words. viz.

AT my late being at Oxford, finding the Lord Dillon and the Lord Taaffe in
favor at Court, I acquainted the Lord Faulkland, His Majesty's Secretary, that
there were two Lords about the King, who to His Majesty's great dishonor, and
the great discouragement of His good Subjects, did make use of His Majesty's
Name to encourage the Rebels; to make this appear, I informed that I had seen
two Letters sent by the Lord Dillon and the Lord Taaffe, to the Lord of
Muskerie, the chief man in Rebellion in Munster, and one of the Irish Committee
sent into England; intimating that though it did not stand with the convenience
of His Majesty's Affairs to give him public countenance, yet that his
Majesty was well pleased with what he did, and would in time give him thanks
for it; (or near to that purpose) That these Letters were seen by the Lord
Inchiquine, the chief Commander of the English Forces in Mounster, and by his
Secretary who had kept Copies of them; and that I was ready to justify as
much. Whereupon the Lo: Faulkland, was pleased to say, that they deserved to be
hanged. But though I stayed there at Oxford about a week after this discovery
made; I never was called to any farther account, nor any prejudice done to
these two Lords, but they had the same freedom in Court as before for ought I
could observe or hear to the contrary, Thus far in Mr. Jephsons own language,
a man of known honor and integrity.

That since this discovery made to the Lord Faulkland by Mr. Jephson, the same
Lord Taaffe, one Roche, and William Brent, a Lawyer, active Papists, with
Letters from His Majesty went from Oxford to Dublin: And upon Thursday before
Whitsuntide 1643. in the Evening (taking with them one Colonel Barry, a
protest Papist) and pretending for Connaught slipped away to Kilkenny, where the
Tuesday following was a general assembly of all the chief Rebels. When they
had done their Errand, Barry was left Lieger at KILKENNY among the Rebels; the
Lord Taaffe returned to DUBLIN, and upon Friday the 9. of June, 1643. the Lord
Taaffe with diverse of the Privie-Councell of Ireland, that favor the Rebels,
met at the Marquess of Ormond's house, where the Propositions which the Lord
Taaffe brought from the Rebels were debated. The Lord Taaffe is since gone into
Cannaught, Brent is come back to Oxford to give an account of this employment.

By this which has bin thus truly related, every man may construe what was
meant by His Majesty's not consenting that the Parliament should send a
Co^mittee into Ireland the last year, to endeavor the carrying on the War
against the Rebels, upon pretense that the Earl of Liecester was presently to
go over thither, who is yet remaining at Oxford. That when that Committee had
prevailed with the Lords-Iustices and Council, and with many of the prime
Commanders and other Officers of the Army in Leinster, to subscribe by way of
Adventure for Land in Ireland to be settled by a new Bill, very considerable
sums which were to be deducted out of their respective entertainments, and were
in a fair and hopeful way to induce most of the Officers of that Kingdom to
do the like, which would have been a principal means under God to have
quickened the mannaging of that War, when the Officers that must do the work
should have bin engaged in interest, as well as honor to prosecute the same
with vigor and effect and would have lessened the insupportable charge of that
War, and in all probability would have encouraged the Adventurers in London and
elsewhere, to have proceeded cheerfully to a second Subscription. Then to
render this endeavor fruitless, one Captain Yarner did confidently affirm,
that those which had or should subscribe, were enemies to the King, a thing so
incredible, that few could believe it, till the same man went to Oxford, and
upon his return to Dublin, assured the Lord Marquess of Ormond and the
Officers, that he had discoursed with His Majesty about this way of
Subscription, and that His Majesty did not approve of the same: Whereupon those
who had subscribed did withdraw their hands, and the rest were wholly
discouraged, finding His Majesty to dislike of that way, which he had formerly
approved of, by His Assent to the Propositions presented to Him at Dover; and
by His Royal Assent to four Acts of Parliament, all made in pursuance of
these Propositions.

That about this time a Commission was sent over, to meet with the Rebels, and
to hear what they could say or propound for themselves, which Commission was
directed to the Lord Marquess Ormond, the Commander in chief of the English
Armies there, (whose duty was to fight, and not to treat with the Rebels;) and
to some other Commissioners, among whom the said Thomas Bourk that had an hand
in contriving this Rebellion, was one, and who brought the said Commission into
Ireland, and confidently delivered the same at the Council Table, to the
amazement of all the Council then present that were not acquainted with the
Plot.

And whereas by an Act of Parliament it is provided, That all the Moneys paid
in upon that Act, shall be employed for the speedy and effectual subduing of
the said Rebels, by sending over into the said Realm of Ireland, and disposing
there such forces of foot and horse, Moneys, Ammunition, Victual, and all
other things necessary for a war, in such manner as the Lords and Commons in
Parliament shall from time to time direct.

And whereas the Lords and Commons finding that from the Battle of Kilrush,
which was fought in April, 1642. till October following, the Army in Leinster
had not been so active as was expected; and therefore to quicken the War, to
inform themselves of the wants and defects of the Army, and of all other things
that might enable them the better, To send thither, and dispose of there,
(according to that Statute) such Forces, Moneys, Ammunition and Necessaries, as
were requisite for that service, thought it very expedient to send into Ireland
a Committee for that purpose, Members of the House of Commons, but authorized
from both Houses, who carrying with them above Twenty thousand pounds in ready
Money, besides great store of Powder, Match, and other Ammunition, and
hazarding their lives in the Winter season, merely for the good of that
Kingdom, might justly have expected a cordial welcome there. But when those
that now appear too evidently to favor the Rebels, saw that during the abode
of the Committee there, Parties were continually sent forth to destroy the
Enemy: That the Committee engaged their own particular credits, to take up
Moneys for the relief, and setting forth of the Army; That the Commission sent
over to treat with the Rebels, was not like to have so good success as was
wished by them, so long as the Committee were present at the Councell-Table,
where all the proceedings against the Rebels were promoted and concluded; A
Letter was sent from His Majesty to the Lords Justices and Council to this
effect, that His Majesty took notice, that without His consent or privity,
they had admitted of one Master Robert Goodwyn, and one Master Reynolds, to be
present at their debates, who thereupon were become so bold, as to Vote with
them, a thing of such presumption, as none of their predecessors would have
done or suffered: And therefore His Majesty did require the Lords Justices and
Council, not to admit them any more; That He knew of no business those men
had in His Kingdom of Ireland; but if they had any, they should make their
addresses like other of His Subjects; and did upon their Allegiance charge the
Lords Justices and Council to take care that those persons did not sow
Sedition among His good Subjects. And it is observable that this Letter (like
that which accompanied the Commission to treat with the Rebels) was only
signed with His Majesty's hand, without any Secretaries hand to avow the same.
That it was brought over by the Marquess of Ormond his own Secretary, who was
sent very secretly to Oxford a little before. That although both Houses before
the sending over of their Committee had acquainted His Majesty therewith by
Letter, and sent him a Copy of the Instructions, which they had given to their
Committees, to which Letter and Instructions, an Answer was returned by Sir
Edward Nicholas as from His Majesty acknowledging thereby that the Instructions
were the same in effect which His Majesty had given to the Earl of Liecester;
Yet after all this, His Majesty was pleased to say in that Letter, that He knew
of no business those men had in His Kingdom of Ireland.

And it is further observable that a Committee sent by the authority of both
Houses of Parliament, (who had both the charge and mannaging of the War
referred unto them;) to negotiate and consult with a State in distress for
their own good, where every Privy-Councellor sat covered in Counsel, there
such a Committee so qualified should make their addresses like other of His
Majesty's Subjects: That is to say, should stand bare-headed at the back of the
Council day by day, from morning to night, and humbly beseech them to save the
Kingdom of Ireland, and consequently their own estates, at the proper cost and
charges of the Parliament and Kingdom of England, who sent them thither.
Lastly, the Commons cannot conceive what is meant that the Justices and
Council, are straightly charged in that Letter upon their Allegiance, not to
suffer the Committee to sow Sedition among His Majesty's good Subjects, unless
to stir up and incite the English Soldiers in the pay of the Parliament, to
proceed vigorously against those bloody Irish Rebels; be construed as a sowing
of Sedition among His Majesty's good Subjects; for that the Irish Rebels should
be now esteemed his Majesty's good subjects, is more then probable by that
which follows. Sir William Brereton Knight of the Shire for the County of
Chester, a man of honor and Religion, by his Letter to the Speaker of the
House of Commons, dated from Liverpoole in Lancashire the 7. of June, 1643. and
herewith likewise printed. After some account given of his happy proceedings in
those parts, writes in this manner. Within few days after this Victory there
landed out of two Barques many Irish Rebels, in Werrall in Cheshire, some
whereof acknowledged in the presence of diverse sufficient men, who affirmed the
same unto me; that they had washed their hands in the blood of diverse English
and Scots in Ireland, and now hoped to wash their hands in the blood of English
men in England; which Rebels being brought unto Chester, were accused by
several of those poor English who fled from Ireland to Chester for refuge, to
be the persons who cut their husbands throats, others that they ripped up
their childrens bowels. The Country wherein they first arrived did apprehend so
much distaste, that they did all rise with their best weapons, and apprehended
diverse of the Irish Rebels, but being unarmed, not having past seven or eight
Musketteers they could not make good their prisoners, who were rescued out of
their hands by a Troop of Horse which came from the Commissioners of Array, who
also seized about 28 of our honest Country men prisoners. These Irish
acknowledge they caome from Strangford, and that there are Sir Willi Breretons
(...). Fol. 41
1200. some speak of 1000. more to follow after, as by the said Letter
herewich printed may appear.

So these Irish Rebels were taken for good Subjects, and set at liberty, and
the honest men that had taken them imprisoned in their stead.

And that the Counsels now predominant at Oxford, and the supreme Council of
Rebels at Kilkenny are equally His Majesty's good Subjects, and do aim at one
and the same thing, and are concurring and ayding one another as well by Sea as
by Land, is apparent by that which follows.

The Commissioners authorized to command the Kings Forces in the West, ( viz.)
The Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton, and others, by an authority derived unto them
under the Great Seal of England, as they express themselves; do grant
Commissions or Letters of Mart, for the apprehending, seizing, and taking for
His Majesty's Service, all Ships and Vessels, belonging to the Cities, Towns,
and Ports of London, Exeter, Hull, Portsmouth, Dartmouth, Barnstable, Biddeford
and Plymouth, or belonging to any other Cities, Towns, or Ports of England,
etc. As by a Commission; or Letters of Mart, bearing date the first of June,
1643. (...) the Letter Mart. Fol. 44.
under the hands and seals of the Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton, and Sir John
Barklay, herewith likewise printed may appear.

On the other side the Rebels of Ireland, by the name of the supreme Council
of the confederate Catholics of Ireland, do grant Commissions or Letters of
Mart, for the taking of all His Majesty's Enemies, and the enemies of the
general Catholic cause now in hand in that Kingdom of Ireland, as by a
Commission dated the 5. of March, 1642. granted by the said Supreme Council,
to one Francis Oliver a Flemming, herewith likewise (...) another ^^^^er of
Mart. ^^^^0. 46.
printed may appear.

And as the Ships in His Majesty's service do gratify the Rebels of Ireland,
in seizing the Ships that bring provision for the relief of the English Army in
Ireland, as appears by the Examination of John Davice, Esquire, Commissary of
Victual for the Province of ULSTER; Who testifies as follows

That a Ship called The Michael of London, whereof Sydrake Pope was Master, was
sent for France by the said John Davice, with 648 Hydes, which were to be sold,
and converted into Corn, for the relief of the Army in Vlster: This Ship, by
foul weather in December, 1642. was forced into Falmouth in Cornwall, where she
was seized on by Sir Nich. Slanning, and by him sent into France, and the
proceed of the Hydes returned to him in the said Ship, in Powder, Match, and
Ammunition. That about the 20 of April, 1643. a Ship belonging to See the
Examination of M. Davice, Fol. 48.
William King of Dover, laden with Wines and Salt from France, and bound for
Carrigfergus in Vlster, upon the Account of the said John Davice, was taken at
Sea by one Rich. Jones, Captain of a Ship set out from Falmouth by His
Majesty's Warrant; and as well the Ship, as the Goods, were sold at Breast in
France by the said Jones. So the Rebels of Ireland do in like manner gratify
His Majesty, by commanding the Ships set forth by them to examine all English
ships at Sea, Whether they be for the King or Parliament: and if they be for
the King, to let them go; but if for the Parliament, to take and pillage them;
as may appear by the Examinations of See their Examinations, fol. 49, and 50.
Christopher Hassall, and Mark Roche, two Irish Seamen of Wixford in Ireland,
who were taken upon the Coast of Yarmouth in Norfolk, and June 12, 1643.
examined before the head Officers of Yarmouth, and authentic Copies of those
Examinations sent up to the House of Commons, and herewith Printed.

The Earl of Antrim, a notorious Rebel, was taken by the Scots Army in Vlster,
and imprisoned there, upon suspicion of High Treason: to avoid his Trial, he
brake Prison, and fled into the North parts of England, and has been with the
Queen at York a long time; from whence he was sent to the Rebels of Vlster,
with secret Instructions, and had Ammunition assigned him by the Queens
directions: And what care was taken of his Ammunition, will appear by a Letter
dated at York the 8 of May, 1643. written by Serjeant-Major Rosse, to that
Apostata Sir Hugh Cholmley, Governor of Scarborough, intercepted by the Lord
Fairfax, and sent up to the House of Commons; wherein Cholmley is entreated to
have such care of the Ammunition appertaining to the Lord of Aboyn, as he shall
have of the Lord of Antrims Ammunition, for M. Jermin has desired him to write
these lines; as by the Letter herewith also Printed may appear; and what
relation M. See the Letter, Fol. 51.
Jermin has to the Qu: is well known to the world. Since this care taken of
the Ammunition of the Earl of Antrim, and the L. of Aboyn, the Earl of Antrim
is taken the second time by General Major Monroe, in the County of Down in
Ireland, as he was returning from the Queen to the Rebels of Vlster, with
diverse Letters, Instructions, and Papers: and the Confession and Deposition of
the Earl of Antrim's own servant (who was taken with his Master, and since
condemned and executed) it is evident that there was, and doubtless yet is, an
impious Design on foot to reconcile the English and Irish in Ireland, and that
by their joint power having expelled the Scots, the Irish Forces there might be
sent against the Parliament of England. The Earl of Antrim, and the Lord of
Aboyn, (whose Arms assigned them by the Queen for this purpose were taken care
of by M. Jermyn) as appears by the said Letter from Sergeant Major Rosse) and
the Earl of Niddisdale, were three principal Agents employed in this horrid
Plot: And that it may clearly appear to the whole world from whence all our
miseries and calamities do proceed, the same Lord of Aboyn, by his Letter
directed to the Earl of Antrim then with the Queen, See the Letter of the 8 of
May, 1643. Fol. 54.
bearing Date at Caerlisle the 8 of May, 1643. and taken in the Earl of Antrim
his pockets, among the rest of the Letters and Papers, writes in these words;
My Lord, being certainly informed by Niddisdale's servant, That there is a new
Order since we parted, for stopping of the Ammunition, I have taken occasion to
entreat your Lordship by this Bearer, that I may know the particulars of it. I
must confess, it surprizeth me, that any distance should alter so seasonable a
conclusion: and certainly I shall never deserve to be made the Instrument of
frustrating the hopes of their parts which should have been enabled by this
Supply; I am persuaded there is scarce another mean to make our fidelity
useless for Her Majesty's Service: And lastly, desires the Earl of Antrim in
that Letter, to acquaint the Queen with these effects of his ingenuity, as by
the said Letter herewith likewise Printed may appear. And that it might appear
to the Rebels of Ireland that the Earl of Antrim was accounted His Majesty's
good Subject, and had His Majesty's approbation for what he was to act there,
he was furnished with a Pass from the Earl of Newcastle, in these words;

WILLIAM Earl of Newcastle, Governor of the Town and County of Newcastle, and
General of all His Majesty's Forces raised in the Northern parts of this
Kingdom, for defense of the same: To all Coloncls, Lievtenant-Coloncls,
Sergeant Majors, Captains, and all other His Majesty's loving Subjects of
England and Ireland. For as much as the Right Honorable the Earl of Antrim is
to travel to Dublin in Ireland, and other parts of that Kingdom, These are
therefore to desire and require you, and every of you, to whom this shall come
to be seen, to permit him and his servants quietly and peaceably to pass and
repasse into those parts, and back again, without any molestation or
interruption: And further I do hereby require all Post-masters, Constables, and
other Officers, to furnish the said Earl and his servants with so many
Posthorses as they shall have need of from place to place, and stage to stage
for all the said Journey, See this Pass, Fol. 55.
he and they paying the usual Rates for the sam. And hereof you, or any of you
may not fail at your peril.

Given under mine Hand and Seal, the 4 day of May, 1643. Signed, William
Newcastle.

Neither can it be imagined that the Earl of Newcastle, a Privy Councellor, and
a great Commander under His Majesty, durst have adventured to have given such a
Pass to so notorious a Rebel, without express Warrant so to do: which Pass,
together with the said Letters, were found in the Earl of Antrim, pockets, and
were sent by Major General Monroe into Scotland, from whence authentic
Copies are sent hither, which are likewise herewith Printed, together See the
Declaration from Scotland of the 9 of June, 1643. Fol. 56.
with a Declaration of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council in Scotland,
and Commissioners, for conserving the Articles of the Treaty, dated at
Edingburgh the 9 of June 1643, concerning the apprehending and employment of
the Earl of Antrim, with their sense upon the same; As also a Letter sent from
Major General Monroe (who took the said Earl of Antrim) to the Committee
appointed by the House of Commons for the affairs of Ireland, bearing date at
Carrick fergus the 23 See General Major Monroe his Letter. Fol. 60.
of May, 1643: To which may be added the Earl of Antrim's own confession, who
was examined before Major General Monroe and a Counsel of War, the 12. of
June 1643. and in his examination confesses that he came into Ireland with the
Lord of Newcastles Pass, and with private Instructions for making of Peace;
and Master Steuart another servant of the said Earl of Antrim, and taken with
him, being likewise examined the said 12. of June 1643. before the said
General Monroc and Council of War, and threatened with torture except he would
declare by whose Warrant and direction the said Earl of Antrim had undertaken
that employment, says, That as the Ammunition and Arms was to be furnished by
the Queens Order and Command; So that he doubts not but the Earl of Antrims
employment and others was directed by her Majesty.

But yet to come nearer home, The House of Commons among a numerous company of
Proofs of this kind, too many to be all related, shall conclude with the
testimony of John Dod, late Minister of Gods Word at Annegilliffe, in the
County of Cavan, in the Province of Vlster in Ireland, who was examined at the
Bar of the House of Commons, and after before a select Committee of the said
House, and testifies that after he had suffered many miseries in this
Rebellion of Ireland, he repaired into this Kingdom, and some occasions
carrying him to Oxford, he stayed there seven weeks, and came out of Oxford the
13 of June 1643. That during his stay there he saw a great number of Irish
Rebels, whom he very well knew to have had an hand in the most barbarous
actions of that Rebellion, as the dashing of small Infants in pieces, the
ripping up of women with child, and the like, among whom was one Thomas
Bradye, who at Turbet in Ireland within 7 miles where the said Dod lived; as 36
old men, women, and children, not able to flee, were passing over a Bridge,
caused them all to be thrown into the water, where they were all drowned; that
this Brady is now at Oxford in great favor, and Sergeant Major to Colonel
Piercie his Regiment; that he saw there 3 Franciscan Friars, namely, Bryan o
Gormuly, Anthony mac Geochagan, and Thomus Nugent; and 3 Jesuits, namely,
Lawrence Sutton, Philip Roch, and Edmund o Rely, who were all very earnest for
the Cause, and daily encouraging the Soldiers to sight against the
Roundheads, and for that purpose have listed themselves in the Lord Dillons
Troop, as was affirmed by diverse; they go very brave and are called Cornetts;
That there are daily and public meetings at Mass, in almost every street
there, and verily believes in his conscience, that for one Sermon Preached
there, are 4 Masses said now at Oxford; That he saw Sir John Dungan there, a
man accused of high Treason in Ireland, for being in the Rebellion, and fled
into England, who has a Commission for a Troop of Horse; The Lord Barnewall of
Trimlestowne, and his son, who has a Commission for a Troop of Horse, and is
now gone into Wales to raise them; A son of the Lord Newterfield, who has
gotten a Command likewise; that as near as he can possibly compute, there was
then at Oxford above 3000 Rebels; and that most of the Kings Lifeguard are
Irish; by all which it may appear that the Irish Rebels are not only esteemed
His See the examination of Mr Dod. fol. 62.
Majesty's good Subjects, but even the best of His Subjects, when they are thus
admitted so near His Majesty's own person.

Upon the whole matter, no man can think that this Rebellion in Ireland, so
barbarous and bloody, that one hundred and fifty four thousand Protestants,
men, women, and children, English and Scotch, were Massacred in that Kingdom,
between the 23 of October, when the Rebellion brake forth, and the first of
March following, by the computation of the Priests themselves that were
present, and principal Actors in all those Tragedies, and were directed by
some chief Rebels of Ireland to take this computation, lest they should be
reported to be more bloody then in truth there was cause, all which appears by
the examination of the said Archdeacon Maxwell, who lived as a Prisoner a long
time with St Phelmi O Neils mother, and was there when this Computation was
brought in.

No man can believe that this horrid and unparareld Rebellion should be the
undertaking of the Rebels alone, being set on foot when a Parliament was
sitting in England that could not dissolve without its own consent, when all
Nations professing the Romish Religion were at peace with England, and so
engaged at home, that the Rebels in reason could not expect any considerable
assistance from them, nor could think themselves able to encounter England, or
Scotland either; much less both together, being so concerned and engaged by
Religion, and the common interest of both Kingdoms, to suppress by all means
possible, so insufferable an insurrection: So that to imagine the Nobility,
Gentry, and in a manner, the whole Kingdom of Ireland, who at that time enjoyed
more freedom of Religion, then they had done for many years before; should thus
desperately engage their lives and estates in so wicked, so rash an enterprise,
without being encouraged, incited, nay commanded from England, with an
assurance both of connivence and assistance too, were to deny them to be
reasonable Creatures.

And therefore the House of Commons abundantly satisfied in their own
consciences and judgments of the truth hereof, (though with deep sorrow and
amazement) cannot but declare to the world, That by all these concurring
circumstances and convincing Proofs, (to which nothing can be added, save a
witness, to confess that he was present at the making of the bargain, which
no man will expect in a conspiracy of this horrid and high importance) that
this unheard of and monstrous Rebellion of Ireland, was projected, incited, and
assisted, by those Counsels now only prevalent with His Majesty. That the
Queen with her Romish Priests, the Papists of all His Majesty's three Kingdoms,
have been principal Actours and Sticklers herein. That now those bloody Rebels
have, in a manner, rooted out the Protestant Religion in Ireland, there is a
Design to pardon them, and to bring them into England to do the like. That no
earthly power is likely in humane reason to withstand this damnable Plot, but
the power of the Parliament of England, which is now declared by a late
Proclamation to be no free Parliament, to be null, and of none effect: and all
possible endeavor used by strength and stratagem to destroy the same. So that
unless the Royal blood of King James, and the innocent blood of the
Protestants of Ireland, do lie as a crying and stupendous guilt upon this
Nation; which God has determined at this time to revenge and retalliate: the
House of Commons do conceive it impossible, that so many of those which would
be thought the honest and moderate English Protestants, should any longer be
blinded and led on, to join with German, French, Wallon, English, Scotch, and
Irish Papists; and thereby to surrender up at once, The Protestant Religion,
The Parliament, Liberties and Laws of England, into the hands of Papists and
Strangers; that so this Renowned Kingdom may be no more a Nation.

The Protestation of the Archbishops and Bishops of Ireland, against the
toleration of Popery, agreed upon, and subscribed by them at Dublin November
26. 1626.
THe Religion of the Papists is Superstitious and Idolatrous, their Faith and
Doctrine erroneous and Heretical; Their Church, in respect of both,
Apostaticall. To give them therefore a Toleration, or to consent that they may
freely exercise their Religion, and confess their Faith and Doctrine, is a
grievous sin: and that in two respects.

First, It is to make our selves accessory, not only to their Superstitions,
Idolatries, Heresies; and in a word, to all the abominations of Popery; but
also (which is a consequence of the former) to the Perdition of the seduced
people, which perish in the deluge of their Catholic Apostasy.

Secondly, To grant them a Toleration in respect of any Money to be given, or
contribution to be made by them, is to set Religion to sale, and withal, the
souls of the people, whom Christ our Savior has redeemed with his most
precious blood.

And as it is a great Sin, so it is a matter of most dangerous consequence; the
consideration whereof we leave to the wise and judicious: beseeching the
jealous God of Truth to make all those who are in Authority zealous of Gods
glory, and the advancement of true Religion, and resolute and courageous
against all Popery, Superstition, and Idolatry.

The Examination of James Peisley, late of Dublin, in the Kingdom of Ireland.
Says,
THat about the month of March 1641. it was his fortune to be present when
Mackmaghon, one of the grand Rebels of Ireland, was Wracked, and his
Examination taken by Sir Charles Coot, senior: in the presence of Sir Francis
Willowby, Sir Arthur Losters, the Constable of the Castle, and some others, the
said Mackmohon confessed that the Original of that Rebellion was brought over
to them by their Committee, who were employed by the Irish Parliament to His
Majesty, for redress of their Grievances in that Kingdom, and that they
having often solicited His Majesty for that purpose, was answered, That he was
willing to grant them their desire, and that he did confess they were His good
Subjects; but that He was so oppressed by his Parliament in England, that he knew
not how to relieve them; wishing he knew how to be revenged on them, or words
to that purpose; which occasioned Sir Charles Coot to take him up, calling him
Rogue and Rascal, for offering to lay such a charge upon the King, whom he
said would assist them in things honest and just, but not give them Commission
to cut our Throats. This Narration was not incerted in the Examination read to
Mackmaghon after Sr Charles Coot had finished it: The Reason, as this Examinate
then conceived, was, That it being a matter of great consequence, they would
take some other time to examine that point more privately, which whether they
did or no, this Examinae knows not.

A Declaration of the Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT: In Answer to His
Majesty's Message of the 13 of August, 1642. showing the obstructions of the
relief of Ireland.
THe House of Commons having received a Message from His Majesty of the 13 of
August last, whereby they are required to retract an Order made by them for the
borrowing of One hundred thousand pounds of the Adventurers money for Ireland,
supposing that Order very prejudicial to the affairs of Ireland, and contrary
to an Act of Parliament made this present Session; Do in the first place
Declare, That these directions given by His Majesty for the retracting of this
Order, is an high breach of privilege of Parliament; And they cannot, without
a deep sense of sorrow, call to mind how Popish and Prelaticall Counsels did
so far prevail with his Majesty, that two Armies were brought within the bowels
of this Kingdom, and two Protestant Nations ready to welter in each others
blood; that when both those Armies had been a long time defrayed at the charge
of the poor Commons of England, and at length, by Gods blessing upon the
endeavors of the Parliament, quietly disbanded, the same wicked Counsels
(prevented of that design) did soon after raise this bloody and barbarous
Rebellion in Ireland: The suppressing whereof (for the better color) was
recommended to the care of the Parliament; who, out of a fellow-feeling of the
unspeakable miseries of their Protestant brethren there (not suspecting this
horrid Plot, now too apparent) did cheerfully undertake that great work, and do
really intend and endeavor to settle the Protestant Religion, and a permanent
Peace in that Realm, to the glory of God, and the great honor and profit of
His Majesty, and security of His three Kingdoms: But how they have been
discouraged, retarded, and diverted in and from this pious and glorious Work,
by those Traiterous counsels about His Majesty, will appear by many
particulars, some whereof they shall, upon this just occasion, call to
remembrance.

That when the Lords and Commons had upon the first breaking out of the
Rebellion, immediately provided and sent over twenty thousand pounds, and
engaged themselves and the whole Kingdom for the reducing of the Rebels; Yet
His Majesty, after His return from Scotland to London, was not either pleased
by Word or Message to take notice of it, until after some in the House of
Commons had truly observed how forward those mischievous Counselors were to
incite His Majesty against His Protestant Subjects of Scotland, and how slow to
recent the proceeding of His Papist Traitors in Ireland.

That although the Rebels had most impudently styled themselves, The Queens
Army, and professed that the cause of their rising was, To maintain the Kings
Prerogative, and the Queens Religion, against the Puritan Parliament of
England; And that thereupon both Houses of Parliament did humbly and earnestly
advise His Majesty to wipe away this dangerous scandal, by proclaiming them
Rebels and Traitors to His Majesty, and the Crown of England, which then would
have mated and weakened the Conspirators in the beginning, and have encouraged
both the Parliament here, and good people there, the more vigorously to have
opposed their proceedings: Yet such was the power of those Counsels, that no
Proclamation was set forth to that purpose, till almost three months after the
breaking out of this Rebellion, and then Command given, That but 40 should be
Printed, nor they published, till further directions should be given by His
Majesty.

That after both Houses of Parliament had found out a probable way to reduce
the Kingdom of Ireland, by the Adventure of private men, without any charge to
the Subject in general, and which they are very confident would have brought
in a Million of money (had His Majesty continued in or near London) those
malicious whisperers, that durst not hinder the passing of the Bill, which was
so specious in it self, and so generally approved: Yet have by practice, by
drawing His Majesty, from His Parliament, by keeping Him at this distance, and
advising him to make War upon His People, so intimidated and discouraged the
Adventurers, and others that would have adventured, that they have rendered that
good Bill in a manner ineffectuall.

That the Parliament and Adventurers had long since designed five thousand
Foot, and five hundred Horse for the relief of Munster, to be sent as a
Brigade, under the command of the Lord Wharton; had made choice of, and listed
all the Commanders, and prepared Money, Arms, and other Provision for that
Expedition, and all to be at the charge of the Adventurers: And when nothing
was wanting, but a Commission to the Lord Wharton, to enable him for that
service, such was the power of those Counsels, that no Commission could be
obtained from His Majesty; by reason whereof, Lymbrick was wholly lost, and the
Province of Munster is now in very great distress.

That when diverse pious and well-affected persons had prepared twelve Ships,
and six Pinnaces, with a thousand or more Landforces, at their own charge, by
way of Adventure for the service of Ireland, and desired nothing but a
Commission from His Majesty to enable them thereunto; that Commission, after
twice sending to York for the same, and the Ships lying ready to set Sail for
three weeks together, at the charge of near three hundred pound a day, was
likewise denied; and those Adventurers (rather then to lose their Expedition)
were constrained to go by virtue of an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament.

That although the Lords Justices of Ireland have three months since earnestly
desired to have two Pieces of Battery sent over, as very necessary for that
service, yet such commands are given to the Officers of the Tower, That none of
His Majesty's Ordnance must be sent to save his Majesty's Kingdom.

That although whilst the Earl of Leicester stayed here in the Service of the
Parliament, and in providing for his long-expected Voyage into Ireland, a
Message was sent to the Parliament from His Majesty to hasten him away, and
Letters were written to the said Earl from His Majesty, that he should make no
stay at York for his dispatch, but that his Instructions should be ready for
him against he came: And although it is notoriously known, That the Affairs of
Ireland do exceedingly suffer by wanting the personal assistance of a
Commander in chief, to give both life and motion to the Army there; yet the
said Earl has been stayed with His Majesty in the North a month and more, and
as yet can get no dispatch.

That notwithstanding the bleeding condition of Ireland, yet diverse Commanders
and Officers in pay, and in actual employment there against the Rebels, have
been called away from that important Service, by the express Command of His
Majesty, as Charles Floyd, Engineer and Quartermaster General of the Army in
Ireland, and diverse others.

That Captain Green, Comptroller of the Artillery, a man in pay, and
principally employed and trusted here by the Lord-Lievtenant of Ireland, for
the providing and odering the Train of Artillery which was to be sent to
Dublin, and who had received great Sums of money for that purpose, was
commanded from that employment and trust, to serve His Majesty in this most
unnatural War against His loyal and best-affected people.

That the Parliament having made great provision of clothes for the poor
Soldiers in Ireland, for their present succor, and sending six hundred suits,
part thereof toward Chester the last week; the man that undertook the carriage
of them, one William Whitaker by name, was assaulted by His Majesty's
Cavaliers, then lying about Coventry, who took away these six hundred suits of
clothes, and the Wagon and horses of the poor man, although they were told
that the six hundred suits of clothes were for the Soldiers in Ireland; and
notwithstanding the poor Carryer was five times with the Earl of Northampton,
to beg a release of his Wagon.

That three hundred suits of clothes, with a Chirurgions Chest of Medicaments,
being likewise sent for Ireland by one Richard Owefield, who was employed by
the Parliament to carry them to Chester, a Troop of His Majesty's Cavaliers,
under command of one Captain Middleton, met with them upon the Road, and took
away the clothes, and Surgeons Chest, together with the poor Carryers horses
and Wagon, for His Majesty's pretended service here.

That a great number of Draught-horses prepared by the Parliament for the
Artillery and Baggage of the Irish Army, were sent to Chester for that purpose;
and being there, attending a Passage, are now required by His Majesty, for His
said present service in England.

That His Majesty's Forces are so Quartered in and about the common Roads to
Ireland, that neither Money, Clothes, Victuals, or other Provision can pass
thither by Land with any safety.

That Captain Kettleby the Admiral, and Sir Henry Stradling the Vice Admiral
of the Ships which were directed to lie upon the Coast of Ireland to annoy the
Rebels, and to prevent the bringing to them Ammunition and relief from
foreign Parts, are both called away from that employment by His Majesty's
Command; and by reason of their departure from the Coast of Munster, to which
they were designed, the Rebels there have received Powder, Ammunition, and
other relief from foreign parts; by which, and many other particulars, too
long to relate, it may seem as if those barbarous Irish Rebels are kept on
foot and countenanced there, of design to assist the Northern Cavaliers, and
according to the Earl of Strafords unheard of advice, to have an Army in
Ireland, with which His Majesty may reduce this Kingdom, especially considering
those confident Rebels have presumed, very lately, to send a Petition to His
Majesty, intituling themselves His Majesty's Catholic Subjects of Ireland, and
complaining of the Puritan Parliament of England, and desiring, That since His
Majesty comes not thither, according to their expectation, that they may come
into England to His Majesty; Which Petition, we may justly fear, is but a
Prologue to that Tragedy they have designed to act here, in case their coming
over be not prevented by the care and vigilance of the Parliament and good
people of England. But lest the House of Commons might seem to excuse the
making of this Order by a way of Recrimination, They, for satisfaction to the
world, do protest before Almighty God (the searcher of all hearts) That they
have as great compassion and sorrow for the present sufferings of their
distressed brethren in Ireland, as if themselves were in their case (into which
they are confident those horrid Traitors, those monsters of men about His
Majesty do labor to bring this Kingdom) That they have, and shall ever really
endeavor by all means possible (with a due regard to the present estate of
this Kingdom) to supply and support them in this their great affliction,
notwithstanding the malice and obstructions of all opposers.

That the House of Commons lively apprehending the imminent danger of this
Kingdom, and finding that whilst they were active here to subdue the Rebels of
Ireland, there were Papists, Traitors and Delinquents more active in the North,
to conquer and destroy the Parliament and good people of England, Thought it
necessary to provide for the safety of both, by preparing a competent Army for
the defense of King and Kingdom. And although multitudes of well-affected
persons had cheerfully brought in great store of Plate for that purpose, yet in
regard the Plate could not be coined with such expedition as the Importance of
the Service did require, and well knowing that One hundred thousand pounds
might for a short time be borrowed out of the Adventurers Money for Ireland,
without any prejudice to the Affairs of that Kingdom, whose subsistence depends
upon the welfare of this, and resolving to make a real and speedy re-payment
of what Money should be so borrowed, did make this Order; which, that it may
appear to all the world to be neither mischievous, illegal, nor unjust (as His
Majesty by the instigation of those Malignant whisperers is pleased to term
it) the House of Commons thought fit to recite it, in haec verba; and in stead
of retracting the Order, to re-pay the Money with all possible speed.

The 30 of July, 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That the Treasurers
appointed to receive the Moneys come in upon the Subscriptions for Ireland, do
forthwith furnish by way of Loan, unto the Committee of the Lords and Commons,
for the defense of the Kingdom, the sum of One hundred thousand pounds, for the
supply of the public necessity, for the defense of the King, Parliament, and
Kingdom, upon the public Faith, to be re-paid duly and carefully within so
short a time, that it shall not be diverted from the purpose for, which it was
intended, or any way frustrate the Acts already made in the behalf of that
Adventure.

BY which Order, and that which has been here truly set down, it will easily
appear to all the indifferent people of His Majesty's three Kingdoms, whether
the King and His Cavaliers, or the King and His Parliament do most affect and
endeavor the settling of true Religion, and a firm and constant Peace within
that bleeding and distressed Kingdom.

The examination of Collonell Audley Mervin given in the fifth day of July
1643. unto a select Committee of the House of Commons, and attested under his
hand.
THis Examinate says that about the 27 of October 1641. Rory Maguire, brother
to the Lord Maguire, came unto Castle Trelick, in the County of Tyrone, being
this Examinates then house, who amongst other discourse told this Examinate,
that it was resolved amongst themselves, to employ him into England, to
represent unto his Majesty, upon what grounds they had taken up Arms, and
what desires being granted, they would lay them down: the reasons Rory Maguire
acquainted this examinate withal for the present were, that the Parliament in
England was fully bent to the extirpation of the Catholic Religion, as was
apparent in the execution of some of their priests, and that they invaded the
Kings prerogative in which their greatest security reposed. To the first, I
answered him, the power of the Parliament in England extended only to that
Kingdom, their statutes obliged not us until confirmed it being found
agreeable to the constitution, of this Kingdom, by our own Parliament. As to
the second, we were no competent Judges of the Parliaments proceedings, and it
were seasonable enough to vindicate the Kings prerogative, when his Majesty
had declared it wounded, and had commanded his assistance, and desired further
to know, in what high point, those poor protestant souls already murdered,
had offended his Majesty's prerogative. He replied, that when he came next
with the heads of their Remonstrance unto me, he would satisfy me in every
scruple. Upon his departure, this examinate called him aside, advising him (in
respect the said Rory Maguire had married his sister, and by her got 900 pounds
per annum inheritance, that he would desist from further prosecuting so
barbarous, and treasonable a design, and that it were feizable to procure his
pardon, if he would bestow his endeavors in appeasing this Rebellion; but
howsoever he assuming at the present the power to send Proclamations into the
Country) except he would repress the fury of the fire, and sword, and such
other acts of hostility, by public notice given to the Country, that I durst
not address my self unto his Majesty, since the subject, I feared, would
receive but a cold welcome at the best, but especially when it should be dyed
in so much innocent blood: which he accordingly did, and this examinate gave
notice to the Protestants about him, to dispose of themselves toward Derrey
and that he would adventure himself the last man, and so by the blessing of
God many were saved, and this examinate, his wife, two sisters, and his
children escaped in the night, saving nothing but their lives: such as remained
being deluded by the Rebels promises, and wedded to their own habitations
were massacred. This examinate further says, that amongst other dehortatorie
reasons used to Rory Maguire he alleged, that admit the Papists could for
the present root the Protestants out, yet they, nor their posterity, could
never enjoy a peaceable setlement, whilst England, or Scotland survived. To
this he replied, that the Catholic Princes would assist them viz. France,
and Spain. I answered if it were so, they would be well paid for their pains,
and that it were better to rest with their peaceable government in their hand,
then to dream after a fained, and uncertain privilege in the bush; and that
I could assure him, those Princes were in a condition of borrowing supplies,
not lending any. This examinate remembers well his Reply, viz. Come, come
brother, deceive not your self, in being too wise, all Ireland is at this
instant in our hands, I will show you all the places of strength to what
persons their suprisall was assigned, this great undertaking was never the Act
of one or two giddy fellows, we have our party in England, we have our party
in Scotland, that shall keep them busy for sending you any aid, I assure you
it is well if they can save themselves, and before you can get thither, you will
find them, (if they be not already) as deep in blood as our selves. He
further added, if you will resolve to go, I will come within three or four
days, and then you shall know all; if you will not, I will convoy you, and
yours safe to the next port, and see you imbarqued, Provided you swear, never
to come over to fight against us. But I fearing this was to sound me, and that
so many lives depended upon my demeasner; I replied, bring your heads, the
sooner the better; but unwilling to trust to any further courtesies escaped
before his return; He told me this plot had been of ancient date, and many
times discontinued, but it had been lively revived, and prosecuted from
Candlemas last past, before the Rebellion, both in England, and Scotland. All
which I have heard from many more of very considerable quality.

Audley Mervin.

William Stewart Esquire, examined July 8. 1643. by a select Committee of the
House of Commons, says,
THat he being a Prisoner six Months among the Rebels in Vlster, from the
midst of November 1641. he heard Tyrlagh o Neale, and Roger o More, and the
principal men in Vlster say, that Religion, the lands escheated, and the Kings
Prerogative, were the prime causes of their rising in Arms; that they knew
well the best of England would side with them; that they had good warrant in
black and white for what they did: that when he objected, the power of England
and Scotland would be brought against them, they replied that there was little
fear of that; For the troubles of England were but then in beginning, and
would not end in have; That he should see the King ere long in Ireland.

William Stewart.

Henry Stewart Gentleman Examined 8 July 1643. before a select Committee of the
House of Commons says,
THat at Michaelmas 1642. at the surrender up of the Castle of Dungannon to the
Rebels, Sir Philemon o Neale was desirous to know of this Examinate what
forces General Lesley had with him, and what authority he had, whether from
King or Parliament, or both, he told Sir Philemon from both, which he would not
believe, but said, That ere long the troubles of England would call Lesley away
to assist them, and that he did not believe he had the Kings Commission, but
he hoped ere long to kiss the Kings hand, before those that were his greatest
enemies.

Henry Stewart.

10 November 1641. A Copy of a Letter directed to the Lord Viceco. Costiloe,
from the Rebels of the County of Longford in Ireland, which he presented to
the State in their behalf.
Our very good Lord,
OUr alliance unto your Lordships Ancestors and your self, and the trial of
your and their performance of trust unto their friends in their greatest
adversity encourages us, and engages your honor to our fruition of your
future favors; the fixion of our confidence in you before any other of the
Peers, and Privy Counselors of the Kingdom doubleth this obligation. Your
Lordship may be therefore pleased to acquaint the Lords, Justices, and
Council, (to be imparted unto his Sacred Majesty) with our grievances, and
the causes thereof, the redress which we most humbly pray, and the manner of
it; First, the Papists in neighboring Countries are severely punished, and
their misery might serve for Beacons unto us, to look unto our own, when our
neighbors houses are afire, and we and other Papists are, and ever will be as
loyal subjects, as any in the King his Dominions: for manifestation whereof,
we send herein enclosed an oath solemnly taken by us, which as it received
indeleble impression in our hearts shall be signed with our hands, and sealed
with our blood. Secondly, there is an incapacitie in the Papists of honor,
Offices, and the immunities of true subjects, the royal marks of distributive
Justice, and a disfavour in the commutative, which raised strangers and
forrainers, whose valor and virtue was invisible, when the old families of the
English, and the major part of us, the mere Irish, did swim in blood to serve
the Crown of England, and when Offices should call for men of worth, men
without worth, or merit obtained them. Thirdly, the Statute of 2 Eliz. of force
in this Kingdom against us and others of our Religion, does not a little
disanimate us and the rest. Fourthly, the avoydance of grants of our Lands and
liberties by quirkes and quiddities of law, without reflecting upon the King
his Royal and real intention for confirming our estates, his broad Seal
being the pawn between his Majesty and his people. Fifthly, the restraint of
purchase in the mere Irish of lands in the escheated Counties, and the taint
and blemish of them and their posterities, does more discontent them then that
Plantation rule, for they are brought to that exigent of poverty in these late
times, that they must be sellers, and not buyers of lands. And we conceive, and
humbly offer to your Lordships consideration ( Principiis obsta) that in the
beginning of this Commotion, your Lordship as it is hereditarie for you, will
be a Physician to cure this disease in us, and by our examples it will
doubtless beget the like auspicious success in all other parts of the
Kingdom, for we are of opinion it is one sickness, and one Pharmack will
suffice; sublata causa tollitur effectus. And it will be recorded, that you
will do service unto God, King and Country, and for salving every the
forementioned soars, your Lordship to be an humble suitor in our behalf, and
of the rest of the Papists, that out of the abundance of his Majesty's
Clemency, there may be an Act of oblivion, and general pardon without
restitution, or account of goods taken in the time of this Commotion, a
liberty of our Religion, a repeal of all Statutes formerly made to the
contrary, and not by Proclamation, but Parliamentary way; A Charter of free
Denizen in ample manner for the mere Irish, which in all succeeding ages will
prove an union in all his Majesty's Dominions in stead of division, a comfort
for desolations, and a happiness in perpetuity for an imminent calamity; and
this being granted, there will be all things, quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, and
quae sunt Dei Deo. And as it was by the Poet written, though he be profane in
other matters, yet in this Prophetical, Divisum Imperium cum love Caesar
habet. All which for this present we leave to your Honorable care; And we
will, as ever we did, and do, remain

Decimo Novembr. 1641. Your very humble and assured ever to be commanded, Hugh
mas Gillernow Farrall. James Farrall. Bryan Farrall. Readagh Farrall. Edmund
mac Cahell Farrall. John Farrall in Carbuy. Garret Farrall. Lisagh mac Conell
Farrall. Brian mac William Farrall. John mac Edmond Farral. John Farral. Roger
mac Bryne Farrall. Barnaby Farrall James mac Teig Far. his mark Morgan mac
Carbry Farral. Donagh mac Carbry Farrall. Richard mac Conel Farrall. William
mac James Farrall. James Farrall. Taghna mac Rory Farrall. Cormack mac Rory
Farrall. Conock mac Bryne Farrall. Readagh mac Lisagh Farrall. Connor Oge mac
Conor Farrall. Edmond mac Connor Farrall. Cahell mac Bryne Farrall.


To the Honorable William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the House of Commons
present these.
Worthy Sir,
THese Lines are sent to give you this further account of our proceedings since
my last from Stafford upon Thursday May 30. that God who delivered the Town of
Namptwich from three attempts of our Enemies of Whitchurch, did notwithstanding
upon the first attempt made against Whitchurch, deliverd the same into our
hands, and four pieces of Ordnance, some Powder, Arms, Horses, and much
Treasure which was taken, but concealed by some of the common Soldiers and
others; All their Carriages, clothes, provisions, and some horses taken; Two of
their Captains and other persons of worth slain, and one Captain, and some
other persons of quality taken Prisoners; The Lord was pleased much to appear
in this days success; and to assist our men with invincible and indefatigable
courage, so far as to enable them to make their entrance upon the mouth of
their Cannon; There were twenty of theirs slain out right, and not above two
or three of ours, Colonel Win, Colonel Crow, Sergeant Major General
VVoodhouse, and the most of their prime Commanders escaped; Their Cannonier was
killled by a shot made by our Cannoniere: we were not possessed of one Piece of
Cannon at our entrance into this County, yet now God has pleased plentifully
to furnish us with six pieces at Namptwich, and two at Stafford, so as we now
want Cannoniors to order and manage the same. Within a few days after this
victory there landed in two Barks many Irish Rebels in Worrall in Cheshire,
some whereof acknowledged in the Presence of diverse sufficient men, who
affirmed the same unto me, that they had washed their hands in the blood of
diverse English and Scots in Ireland, and now hoped to wash their hands in the
blood of English men in England; Which Rebels being brought into Chester, were
accused by several of those perons who came to Chester for refuge, to be the
persons who cut their husbands throats; others that they ripped up their
childrens bowels. The Country wherein they first arrived, did apprehend so
much distaste, that they did all rise with their best weapons, and apprehended
diverse of the Irish Rebles; but being unarmed, not having above seven or 8
Musketeers, they could not make good their Prisoners, who were rescued out of
their hands by a troop of horse, which came from the Commissioners of Array,
who also seized about 28 of our honest Contrymen prisoners. These Irish
acknowledge they came from Strongforth, and that there are 1200. some speak of
10000 more to follow after.

Sir, Your most humble servant, Will. Brereton.
Liverpoole June 1643. We have placed a Garrison in this Town, which (I hope)
may be of great Advantage, being the only Haven Town in these parts of the
Kingdom.


Post.

SInce I writ the lines above, two of our Long Boats which were manned and sent
out are returned, and have brought in the Boats which carried the Rebels, and
have taken three or four of the Rebels, who confess they came from
Strangford, and that they were sent by one Master Savage: they have also seized
some Barques laden with Wine, part whereof belonges to those who are well
affected to you, and have suffered in your cause; But the greatest part to
those who are engaged against you, which is reserved here to be disposed of as
you shall please to order and direct.


Read in the House of Commons January 14.
A letter of Mart
( Warwick, Lord Mohun, Baron of Okehampton, Sir) Ralph Hopton, knight of the
Bath; Sir John Barkeley, knight; and William Ashbourneham Esquire, or any two
of them Commissioners authorized under the great seal of England, in the
absence of William Marquis, of Hertford; to command all his Majesty's forces in
the West.
To George Chapel of Topesham Merchant.
WE do hereby nominate, authorice, and appoint, you George Chapel to be
Captain and chief commander of a ship called the Hope of Topesham, requiring
you with all diligence, and expedition, to endeavor the furnishing and
completing of her with men, victual, and ammunition, as also with tackell,
and furniture, fit for a voyage to sea, commanding all inferior officers,
soldiers, mariners, and seamen, under your command in the said ship, and
vessel to obey you as their Captain, according to this Commission,
authorizing you to set to sea at any time, and as often as you in your
discretion shall think fit, for the space of six months next ensuing. And
during the said time to apprehend seize, and take for his Majesty's service all
such Ships, barques, and vessels, as do belong to the Cities, towns, and
ports of London, Exeter, Hull, Portmouth, Dartmouth, Barnestable, Bideford, and
Plimmouth, or to any of them, or to any other Cities, Towns, or Ports of this
Kingdom of England now in Rebellion against his Majesty, or to the
inhabitants of the same or any of them: And the same to carry or bring into any
of his Majesty's Ports, or harbors, within the County of Cornwall. That the
said shipp, or goods so taken by you, together with the Merchants, Officers,
masters and Seamen may be proceeded against according to the laws of this
Land; giving you also full power and authority in case of resistance to kill,
and slay all such as shall resist you in the execution of this your commission.
And you are likewise to observe, and follow such orders, and directions, as
from time to time you shall receive from us.

Given under our hands, and seals at Honyton the first day of June Anno Domini
1643. Warwick Mohum, Ralph Hopton, John Berkeley.


By the Supreme Council of the confederate Catholics of Ireland.
TO all men, to whom this present shall come we the supreme Council, of the
confederate Catholics of this Realm send greeting; Know ye that we having
taken into our serious consideration the great and necessary use, we have of
ships of war, for the defense of the coasts of this Realm, and advancement,
and furtherance of commerce with foreign Nations, and for opposing of his
Majesty's Enemies, who daily hinder and annoy his Majesty's good Subjects of
this Kingdom by Sea, and stop all the Free trade in this Realm and abroad.
Have therefore constituted, and appointed, and do hereby ordain constitute,
and appoint Our wellbeloved Friend Captain Francis Oliver, native of Flanders
having received good testimony of his sufficiency, and integritiy to be Captain
of the ship called Saint Michaell the Archangell of burden an hundred and
twenty Lasts or Tuns, or thereabouts Hereby giving and granting, unto the
said, Captain full and absolute power, Commission and, authority to furnish
the said ship, with all necessaries fit for sea, and war, and with the same
to cross the seas, and take hinder and prejudice all such as he shall find or
meet of his Majestics enemies, the enemies of the general Catholic cause now
in hand in this Kingdom, their ships and goods whatsoever, either by sea or
Land, by what means soever, and the said shipping or Goods to set to sale, and
dispose of as lawful prizes, and open enemies goods, saving unto his Majcstie
and his lawful officers, and to all other person or persons bodies politic
and corporate, all rights, requisites, and duties due or usually answered out
of all prizes. And we hereby command all officers of all Ports, and Harbors,
and Havens, within our Jurisdiction, throughout this Realm to admit the said
Captain Francis Oliver, and his Companies, ships and goods from time to time
to pass, and repasse, come and go without molestation or trouble; and that
all Commanders of forts, and all other officers of his Majesty's loving
subjects to be aiding and assisting unto him in execution, and furtherance of
the premises whatsoever and as often as occasion shall require.

And lastly we pray all foreign Princes States, and Potentates to defend,
protect, assist, and favor the said Captain his ships and goods, when and as
often as he shall come into their respective coasts and harbors.

This our Commission to continue during our pleasure. Given at Kilkennie the
last of December. 1642. Was signed, Mountgarret, Hugo Ardmachanus, Gormanston.
Ioannes Episcop: Clonfertensis, N. Plunket, Patr. Darcy, James Cusack Geffr.
Brown.

Sealed At a Labell in parchment with a seal of yellow wax bearing the mark
of a long cross, on the right side whereof a Crown; and a harp on the left,
with a dove above, and a flaming heart below the cross, and round about this
inscription. Pro Deo, pro Rege and patria Hibernia unanimis.
And Endorsed thus, Memorandum this Patent is enrolled in the Admiraltie Court
of Ireland, and that the whithin Captain has sworn and given security of his
fidelity according to the usual form,
Witness my hand the 5 March 1642. James Cusack Judge Admiralty.

The Examination of John Davice Esquire, taken before a select Committee of the
House of Commons 13. July 1643.
Says, that two Ships, the one called the Michael of London, Mr. Sydrach Pope
being sent therein for France with 648 Hydes to relade corn for the relief of
the Protestant Army in Vlster, was by foul weather in December last forced
into Falmouth, and there seized on by Sir Nich. Slaney, and manned with some
Musquettiers of his sent unto Saint Mallo in France, where the Hides were sold,
and the proceed returned unto him in the said Ship in powder, match, Ammunition
etc. And further says, that about the 20 of April last one William King of
Dover his Ship being laden with 90 tons of Wine and salt from France, and
bound for Carrickfergus in Ireland upon the examinaets account, was upon the
Coast of France, taken by one Rich. Jones, Captain of a ship set out from
Falmouth with his Majesty's Warrant, and the ship and goods were sold by him at
Breast in France.

JOHN DAVICE.

Great-Yarmouth. The Examination of Christopher Hassall of Washford in Ireland
Sayler, taken this 12 of July, 1643. as follows.
WHo says, that he was pressed by the Major of Washford, Mr. Nicholas Hayes,
about ten days since, into a Dunkirke Frigot called the Patricke, to serve the
King of England at Sea, in taking and pillaging such Ships and Vessels as were
not for the King; of which Frigot one George Pruncas a Dunkirker was chief
Commander and Captain, and Walter Hayes an Irishman was Captain under him,
and had about an hundred men in the Ship, and eleven pieces of Ordinance, and
came out to the Sea the fourth of this instant June, and took and pillaged
since they came out: First, an Apsome Bark, which after she was pillaged they
sunk in the Sea, having taken out of her eleven packs of Cloth; and after that
took a Fisherboat of Yarmouth upon Saturday last, and took out of her an
hundred Northsea Cod-fish, and fourteen pieces of eight, and a double Pistol,
and pillaged the Vessel of all they could get, and of the men's Clothes; and
then put in the Apsome men taken out of the sunk ship, and so let them go.
And after that took a Scottish Bark, and a Dover bark, and a Pram or Hute,
and a Catch; and took seven men out of the Pram, and two men out of the Scot,
besides the Master, and three men out of the Catch, and carried them away in
the Frigot, and put other men of their own aboard; And afterward two of these
Vessels so taken being rescued by Captain Wild, Commander of the ship, the
Cygnet, in service for King and Parliament, were brought into Yarmouth rode
this day, with this examinate being in one of them.

The mark of Christopher Hassall is subscribed.
Capt. per Giles Call John Symond Bailiffs.

Great-Yarmouth. The Examination of Mark Roch of Washford in Ireland Mariner,
taken this twelfth day of June, 1643.
THis examinate says, that he is one of the Quarter Masters of the Dunkirke
Frigot, and was shipped by the Major of Washford to serve in the said Frigot
under two Captains, whereof the one was a Dunkirker called Capraine George
Pruncas, the other an Irishman called Captain Walter Hayes, who had Commission
to examine all they should meet withal, whether they were for the King or
Parliament; and if they were for the King to let them go, and if for the
Parlirment to take and pillage them; and did take first an Apsome man upon
friday at night last, and pillaged the Ship, and took out of her diverse packs
of Cloth, being as he supposes six or seven packs, and took the men also
aboard and sunk the Ship: and next day after took a Yarmouth Fisher-boat at
Ortford Nesse: and took out of her certain Fish, and pillaged Clothes, and
put the Apsome men aboard her, and so let them go. And after that they took
an English Hoy or Catch yesterday morning, and what they did with her, he, this
examinate knows not (it not being in his quarter;) and then took a Scottish
Bark, and pillaged the men, and committed the Vessel to Hugh Kelley another
Quartermaster. And then took a Dover Ship laden with Coals, and pillaged
her, which was after taken by Captain Wild, and is now coming into
Yarmouth-rode. And also he says that they took yesterday a Foreign laden with
deals, and took out the Master and seven of the Company, and the rest got
away with their vessels and are gone to London. And yesterday in the after noone
this examinate being in the Dover-barke, which was committed to his charge,
Captain Wild Commander of the Ship, the Cygnet, in service for the King and
Parliament, fell upon the said Frigoe, and shot at her, and was in fight with
her about two hours, but could not take her, because she fled away, and was
more swift in sail then he, but took this examinate with the Dover-barke, and
sent them into this road of Yarmouth. And also he says, that there are half
a dozen more Ships at Washford, fitted and made ready to come forth upon the
like service that the said Frigot came out for.

Mark Roch his name is subscribed.
Capt. per Giles Call Bailiffs. John Symond Bailiffs. John Carter. Robert Gower.


For his Noble friend Sir Hugh Cholmley, Knight, Governor of Scharborough,
these:
Noble Sir,
THese are showing your honor, that my Lord of Aboyne was gone from York
before my here coming, therefore I will entreat your honor to have such a
care of the Ammunition appertaining to my Lord of Aboyne, as your honor shall
have of my Lord of Antrim his Ammunition, till such time as I either come my
self, or write to your honor; For Mr. Jermyn has desired me to write these
lines to your Honor, for I am commanded to go for Scotland for that effect,
to which time, I shall continue,

Your Honors humble servant, Serjeant-major Rosse.
York, May 8. 1643.
For my Noble Lord the Earl of Antrim, at York.
My Noble Lord,
MAtters are fallen out quite contrary to my expectation, so as I should not
advise you to make such have of your journey as we resolved. I have sent this
bearer of purpose, who is the man I did send to Montrosse, who will
particularly show you how matters go, and how great folly it were to look for
any assistance from Scotland. Good Sir Richard Grahame, and a number of
roundheads in these parts, upon your servants remaining here, and your
Lordships other servants coming post, have spread a report that you and I,
were upon a plot, to bring Forces from Ireland, to take in this Country; in so
much as I have been forced to affirm the contrary with oaths, as I might
justly do. Thus much is given out by him, one Dalston, and others as in
acquittall to your Lady, for raising him out of the dunghill, which my Lord her
husband did. He will be at York within two or three days, he will shift it
off upon the Puritans of this Country, whereof he is the head: but upon my
word your Lordship is little beholding to him. To my knowledge your Lordships
servant will more particularly show what passed; Nor shall any be more ready to
do you service, then

Carlisle, May 2. 1643. Your Lordships humble servant, Nithisdaill.
I did say that your Lordships Lady having some Hangings and other Furniture in
Knock fergus was desirous to have them brought away, but I had now advised you
rather to let them alone for the present.



For my Noble Lord, the Earl of Antrim, at York.
My Noble Lord,
I Have daily expected these days past to have writ, which you desired, from
the party you know, I do look for it each hour. Hamilton, I do fear, has
done bad offices to the King since his return. My Lord I am very confident
Montros will not flinch from what he professed at York. I think much, I have
heard nothing from my Lord Aboyne, but before I shall see you, I look with
confidence to give you a better account how matters are resolved in Scotland,
and shall never leave off to give full testimony that I am

Your Lordships faithful servant, Nithisdail.
My Lord, blame not your servant who has been so long here. I would not suffer
him to part till I had some greater assurance (from the Earl of Montros, and
thereof who are for the K.) then as yet, and till my servants return I can give



For the Right Honorable, my Noble Lord, the Earl of Antrim at York.
My noble Lord,
IT should have been a blemish upon me, if I had not truly given you notice how
matters go. I am not altogether desperate of Montros; but say he were changed,
I am in good hope you shall not lack well-affected Subjects in Scotland to
prosecute that point we resolved on. One thing I think strange, that the
Ammunition granted to your Lordship and Aboyne should be stopped. My Lord,
without that, neither can the Marquess of Huntley do service, nor can your
friends in the Isles and Hilands be useful for you. So do your best to have
it quickly sent away, and be confident you shall have assistance, though it
must take a longer time, of the which I shall give your Lordship notice. So let
no alteration be thought upon, though a little it must be deferred. And be
confident of the respects of

Your Lordships faithful servant, Nithisdail.
Carlisle the 8. of May. 1643. I entreat these may present my bounden service to
my Lady Duchess, your Lady. Till I get advertisement from your Lordship, I
shall have a Boat ready at your service.



For my Noble Lord, the Earl of Antrim at York.
My Lord;
THis Gentleman can so well inform you of the particulars you expected from
Scotland, as I must only assure your Lordship, I dare not conclude with him;
therefore if it please you to expect a second advertisement, it shall certainly
be sent to you by the first occasion. For I should be sorry, that what may so
concern your service should be subject to any scruple. And I assure your
Lordship their future shall ratify this opinion of

Your Lordships most humble servant Aboyne.
Burroughbridge in haste the 3. of May. 1643.
For the Right Honorable, the Earl of Antrim, these.
My Lord,
BEing certainly informed by Nithisdails servant, That there is
a new Order since we parted for stopping of the Ammunition, I have taken
occasion to entreat your Lordship by this bearer, that I may know the
particulars of it. I must confess it surpriseth me, that any distance should
alter so reasonable a conclusion. And certainly, I shall never deserve to be
made the instrument of frustrating the hopes of these parts, which should have
bin enabled by this supply. I am confident, there is scarce another mean to
make our fidelity useless for her Majesty's service. And if it please your
Lordship to acquaint the Queen with these effects of my ingenuitie, you will
thereby multiply your favors you have already conferred upon

My Lord, Your Lordships most affectionate and obliged servant, Aboyne.
Carlisle the 8. of May. 1643.
To the Right Honorable, the Earl of Antrim, these.
WIlliam Earl of Neweastle, Governor of the Town and County of Newcastle,
and General of all His Majesty's Forces raised in the Northern parts of this
Kingdom for defense of the same.

To all Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Serjeant-Majors, Captains, and all other
his Majesty's loving Subjects of England and Ireland.

For as much as the Right Honorable, the Earl of Antrim is to travel to
Dublyn in Ireland, and other parts of that Kingdom, these are therefore to
desire and require you, and every of you to whom this shall come to be seen, to
permit and suffer him and his servants quietly and peaceably to pass and
repasse into these parts, and back again without any molestation or
interruption. And further, I do hereby require all Post-masters, Constables,
and other Officers, to furnish the said Earl and his servants with so many
Posthorses as they shall have need of from place to place, and Stage to Stage
for all the said journey, he and they paying the usual rates for the same. And
hereof you or any of you may not fail at your peril: Given under my hand and
seal the fourth day of May. 1643.

signed Will. Neweastle,

June 9. 1643. A Declaration of the Lords of His MAJESTY'S Privie-Councell in
SCOTLAND.
THe Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy-Councel, and the
Commissioners for conserving of the Peace, according to the great trust reposed
on them by his Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, whereof they are to make
account to God and his Majesty the next ensuing Parliament, taking to their
deepest and most serious consideration the the best ways of preserving the
peace of this Kingdom, That all his Majesty's good and dutiful Subjects may
enjoy their Religion, Liberties, and Laws, which God in a singular and
wonderful providence, in the time of his Majesty's reign has vouchsafed them,
and of the peace betwixt the two Kingdoms so unanimously and happily
established in the late Treaty of peace, and in the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms, Have faithfully endeavored by all good means to reduce Ireland to
his Majesty's obedience, which through the unnatural, barbarous, and
Antichristian cruelty of Papists, is from a peaceable Kingdom turned into a
stage of unexampled and unexpressible miseries, to be looked upon as an horrid
and dangerous example by this Kingdom, and by their nearest supplications to
his Majesty, and their Declarations to the Parliament of England, but
especially by their earnest desires for establishing Unity of Religion, and
Uniformity of Kirk-government, and for disbanding all Papists in Arms within
their Dominions, and by the humble offer of their meditation to remove the
unhappy differences, and quench the fire of a wasting War, begun betwixt his
Majesty and his Subjects of England, wherein his Majesty's sacred Person is
exposed to so great danger, and so many thousands of his Subjects have already
perished: But finding to their great grief the success no way answerable to
their endeavors and expectation, and the trouble of the neighboring Kingdoms,
and the dangers of this Kingdom daily arising to a greater height, then they
by their care, counsel, and diligence, were able to remeid or obviate, they
did resolve for this and other causes, which exercise and heavily press the
Kingdom at this time, to call a covention of the Estates, as the only mean
(his Majesty not thinking fit to hearken unto their motion of calling a
Parliament) which might by common Counsel, consent and resolution, take the
best course for representing yet more sensibly these manifold evils and dangers
and for overcomming by greater wisdom the difficulties which were above their
power.

In the mean while (which they cannot but attribute to the merciful and
mavelous providence of God, and which is a confirmation to them of their
resolution in calling a convention, and lays the greater necessity upon the
Estates, to meet the more willingly and frequently) A treacherous and damnable
Plot of the Irish, English, and Scottish Papists, is begun to be discovered by
the unexpected apprehending of the Earl of Antrim coming from York, where he
had kept his meetings and correspondence by Letters, with certain Popish Lords
his Confederates, and amongst others, with the Earl of Nithisdail and Viscount
of Aloyne, their devilish designs and devices are come to light, and brought
to our knowledge, partly by Letters from Ireland, showing the deposition and
confession of a servant of the Earl of Antrims, and partly by Letters which
were found in the Earl his own pockets, all sent to them from Ireland: His
servant, who was hanged at Carrick-Fergus, the day of May, deponed (as the
Letters bear) before and at the time of his death, That the design was to
reconcile the English and Irish in Ireland, that they by their joint power,
having expelled the Scots, the Irish Forces there might be sent against the
Parliament of England, to deal with some fit instrument there, by all their
strength to surprise the Isles and the High-Lands, and to depopulate and waste
so much of this Kingdom as their power could extend unto, being assured of the
like dealing in the North, by the Papists and their assistance there. And to
have a Magazine at Carlisle for twenty thousand men, to fall in with an
hostility upon the south parts of this Kingdom. The Letters sent from
Nithisdail and Aboyne, all written and subscribed by their hands to the Earl
of Antrim, and found with him, although in some things covertly written, do
carry thus much expressly, that for furtherance of the design and point
resolved on, there was assistance assured from the Isles, and from the North
and South of Scotland, that Ammunition and Arms, without which they think
their service useless, were appointed to be sent to the North, and other parts
of this Kingdom, and that Popish Officers were commanded, and had undertaken to
go into Scotland; of which we are informed, some are already gone to the
North, for stopping and disappointing so far as may be for the present (till
the same divine providence make a more full discovery) the attempts and devices
of this unnatural and bloody confederacy and conjuration. As the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council have given order that Nithisdail and Aboyne be cited,
and criminally pursued of high Treason, and have made the same as a matter of
public and most high importance known to his Majesty, and to the Parliament
of England: so they and the Commissioners of Peace also, for acquitting
themselves in their trust, and for the safety of the Kingdom, do make the
same publicly known to all his Majesty's good Subjects, that being forewarned
of their danger, they may be upon their guards, and prepared against foreign
invasion, and intestine plots and insurrection: And especially, that the Noble
men, Commissioners of Shires, and Borroughs, perceiving greater and more
apparent necessity of the approaching convention then they could have wished or
expected, may at the day formerly appointed, meet in such celerity, and with
such public affection and disposition of heart, as the present condition of
affairs does require, and call for at their hands, and as beseems the lovers
of their Religion, King, and Country, which are in so great danger, from
Papists, Atheists, and other degenerated Contrymen, who are no less enraged
against this Kingdom, even since the late Reformation of this Kirk, then were
their Predecessors at the first reformation of Religion, when their
negotiating was so restless, and their attempts so many, and malicious against
the work of God in this Land: nor is it to be past without observation, that
while His Majesty is making a public Declaration of His intentions to defend
and maintain the Religion, Rights, and Liberties of this Kingdom, according
to the Laws Civil and Ecclesiastic, the Papists are conspiring, plotting,
and practicing against the Religion, Rights, and Liberties established, and
against the lives of his Majesty's good Subjects; whereby they do really
manifest to the world what the Kings Majesty against his Declarations, and his
Subjects against their confidence grounded thereupon, may look for from their
malice and power, if they shall continue in Arms, and, (which God forbid) if
they shall prevail in the end. And whereas the Lords of Council are informed,
That the late Act of Council for publishing his Majesty's Declaration is
mistaken by sundry, as a Declaration of their own judgment, concerning the
proceedings of another Kingdom; For preventing of this mistake, they think fit
to remember and declare, according to the act of Council in January last,
showing that their Lordships giving Warrant to print any Paper coming from his
Majesty, or Parliament of England, did not import their approbation of the
contents thereof: That they did on the first of June, both remember the samine,
and express their intention in this publication to be far from taking on them
to judge of the proceedings of the Parliament of another Kingdom; but only to
thank his Majesty for his gracious expressions toward the preservation of the
Rights and Liberties of this Kingdom: And ordain this to be printed and
published at the Market-Crosse of Edinburgh, and all other Burghs within this
Kingdom, for the information of his Majesty's Subjects within the same.

At Edinburgh the ninth day of June 1643.
THe Lords of his Majesty's Privy-Councell and Commissioners for conserving the
Articles of the Treaty, ordain this following Declaration to be printed and
published at the Market-Crosse of Edinburgh, and other Burghs of this Kingdom,
for the information of all his Majesty's good Subjects within the same.

Arch. Primrose, Cler. S. Cons. and Commis.

To the Right Honorable, my very Noble friends, these, On the Irish Committee
of the Parliament of England, present these with due respect.
Right Honorable,
EXpect nothing from your honors real and faithful servant in this adverse
time, but what brings comfort; In my last expedition against the Rebels,
occasioned by sudden intelligence, I went forth with two thousand foot, and
three hundred horse, being provided for ten days, at no greater allowance then
seven ounces of meal a day for a soldier, our scarcity being so great, that
for want of victuals and shoes we were unable to do the service we wish, or
your honors expect from us; Nevertheless our fortune was such that with this
small party, without Cannon, for want of carriage horses, we beat Owen Mc art
Oneale, Sir Philome Oneale, and Owen Mc art the General his son, being all
joined together with their Forces, and forced them to return upon Charlemount;
after quitting the Generals house to be spoiled and burus by us, with the whole
houses in Lochgall, being the best Plantation in Vlster, and straitest for
defense of the Rebels; At the same time Colonel Hoome with a party of five
hundred men was busied in beleaguering the Castle of Newcastle: the receipt of
all the Intelligence comes from England to the Rebels in Vlster, where it was
my good fortune in time of treaty there, to trist a Bark come from the Isle of
Man, with that treacherous Papist the Earl of Antrim, whose brother Alexander
was sent before by the Queens Majesty from York, to make way for the Earl,
in negotiating betwixt her Majesty's Army in the North of England, and the
Papists on the borders of Scotland, in the Isles of Scotland, and the North
parts thereof, and with the Rebels in Ireland, Their plot being set down by
the Queens Majesty's consent, for the ruin of Religion, and overthrew of His
Majesty's loyal Subjects in all the three Dominions, as evidently does appear
by the Letters, Characters, Passes, and Papers found with the Earl, directed
by me to the Council of Scotland, and the General. It becomes me as the
servant of the public, entrusted with your Commission under the great Seal
of England, to inform truly your honors of the great prejudice the cause in
hand suffers by your honors neglect of this Army, being unable to do service
as might be expected from them, if they received the half of the allowance
your Soldiers receive at Dublyn, and had allowance for some horses for
carriage; in my opinion, in six weeks time we could settle Garrisons in
Vlster, and thereafter oversway your enemies elsewhere in any part within his
Majesty's Dominions, where your enemies prevailed most. Therefore my weak
opinion is, this Army not be neglected, wherein consists so much of your peace
and safety, having no friends you can repose into more then in us, who are
desirous to see Religion flourish, Rebels subjected to obedience, and his
Majesty's Throne established in despite of Papists, and of wicked Council,
mis-leading his Majesty, to the ruin of his Dominions, who would be the
happiest Prince in the World, if the Lord would move his heart to hearken to
the Counsel of those, sheds their blood for his honor. The Earl of Antrim
shall God willing be kept close in the Castle of Carrickfergus, till I be
acquainted from your honors concerning him, what course shall be taken with
him: and the Traitor conveyed him last away, is to be executed, since we can
extort no discovery from him then is contained in the Papers sent to Scotland,
so recommending your honors, and your weighty affairs to the direction and
protection of the Almighty, desirous to hear from you, I remain,

Yourr most humble, truly affectionate, and real servant, ROBERT MONRO,
General Major.
Carrikfergus, May 23, 1642.
The Examination of John Dod Clerk, taken by a select Committee of the House
of Commons, July 8. 1643.
Says, that after he had suffered many miseries i^ this rebellion of Ireland,
he repaired into this Kingdom, and some occasions carrying him to Oxford, he
stayed there seven weeks, and came out of Oxford, June 13. 1643. That during
his stay there, he saw a great number of Irish rebels whom he very well knew to
have had an hand in the most barbarous actions of that rebellion, as the
dashing of small infants in pieces, the ripping up of women with child, and the
like: among whom was one Thomas Brady, who at Turbet in the County of Cavan in
the Province of Vlster in Ireland, within seven miles where this said examinat
lived, as 36 old men, women, and children, not able to fly, were passing over
a bridge, caused them all to be thrown into the water, where they were all
drowned. That this Brady is now at Oxford, in great favor, and Serjeant-major
to Colonel Percy his Regiment: That he saw there three Franciscan Friars,
namely, Bryan o Gormuti, Anthony mac Geoghagan, and Thomas Nuegent; and three
Jesuits, namely, Laurence Sutton, Philip Roche, and Edmund o Rely, who were all
very earnest for the cause and daily encouraging the soldiers to fight against
the Roundheads; and for that purpose have lysted themselves in the Lord Dillons
Troop (as was affirmed by diverse;) they go very brave and are called Cornets.
That there are daily and public meetings at Mass, in almost every street
there; and verily believes in his conscience, that for one Sermon preached
there are four Masses said now at Oxford. That he saw Sir John Dungan there (a
man accused of high treason in Ireland, for partaking in that rebellion, and
fled into England) who had a Commission for a Troop of horse. The Lord
Barnewall of Trimlettstowne, and his son, who has a Commission for a Troop
of horse, and is now gone into Wales to raise them; a son of the Lord
Neutervills, who has gotten a command likewise. That as near as he can
possibly compute, there was then at Oxford about 3000 Irish rebels; and that
most of the Kings lifeguard are Irish.

John Dod.

FINIS.

