Die Martis, 11. Iulii, 1648.
WHereas the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, have been necessitated
to take up and anticipate several great sums of money for the service of the
Parliament, upon the credit of the receipts of the Excise established and still
in force by several Ordinances of Parliament, And upon occasion of such loanes
made unto them, have declared that they would continue the same Receipts of the
Excise; until Principal and Interest were fully discharged, which cannot be
yet compassed, by reason that the Receipts of the Excise have for many Months
past been very much obstructed, and so fallen very much short of what was
expected, if the same could have been duly levied; And foreseeing, that besides
the satisfying of those Engagements, it will be necessary to continue the same
Receipts of the Excise the better to enable them to go through the great work
of establishing the Peace of the Kingdom, upon which they are at present
engaged; And for the better easing of the People, upon whom the Charge of so
great a Work must otherwise lie, and be raised with much difficulty and
inconvenience, and in a far more burdensome manner; The Lords and Commons in
Parliament assembled do hereby Ordain, That the several Receipts of the
Excise and New-Impost now in force, formerly appointed by Ordinance of the 11.
of September, 1643. commonly called the Grand Excise; so much of the Ordinance
dated the Ninth of January, 1643. concerning Forain made Salt imported; the
Additionall Excise and New-Impost appointed by Ordinance dated the Eighth of
July, 1644. And the last Additionall Ordinance for the levying Excise upon
Lead, Gold, Silver, and Copper thread, Gold, Silver, and Copper wire, etc.
dated the Four and twentieth of November, 1645. And all other Orders,
Declarations and Ordinances of Parliament now in force, made in Explanation, or
for the better Regulating all and every the said Receipts, be yet continued,
from, and after the Nine and twentyeth day of September in the year of our
Lord 1648 until the Nine and twentyeth day of September, which shall be in the
year of our Lord God 1650. to be managed by such Persons, and in such manner as
both Houses of Parliament shall think fit; whereof, as all persons whatsoever
are hereby required to take due notice and yield obedience thereunto
accordingly, so, the said Lords and Commons do Declare, That whenever they
shall find the Affairs of this Kingdom to be in such a condition (which they
shall especially and earnestly endeavor) as may admit of the utter abolishing
or lessening thereof, they will upon all occasions embrace the same, and show
how ready they are to give all possible ease unto the people.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.
H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed by R. Cotes, and R. Raworth, 1648.


