A DECLARATION TO THE KINGDOM OF ENGLAND, CONCERNING The poisoning of King
JAMES of happy memory, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN.

Wherein is contained, Several remarkable Passages, touching the Kings
Majesty, and the Duke of Buckingham; With the manner, how the old Countess of
Buckingham, and the Duke her Son, applied a Plaster to the KINGS heart and
breast, and administered a white Powder in a cup of Wine, which caused the KINGS
body and head to swell above measure, his hair with the skin of his head stuck
to the pillow, and his nails became loose upon his fingers and toes.

Together with King JAMES His Protestation concerning our Sovereign Lord the
King that now is. And His Majesty's last Speech upon His Deathbed.

Written by George Eglisham, Dector of Physic, and one of the Physicians to
King JAMES of happy memory, for His Majesty's Person above ten years space.

LONDON, Printed for GEO; HORTON., 1648.

A DECLARATION To the Kingdom of ENGLAND Concerning The poisoning of King
James (of happy memory) King of Great Britain.
WHereas the chief human care of Kings, and Courts of Parliament, is, the
preservation and protection of the subjects lives, liberties, and estates, from
private and public injuries; to the end, that all things may be carried in the
equal balance of Justice, without which, no Monarchy, no Commonwealth, no
Society, no Family, yea no man's life or estate can consist, albeit never so
little: It cannot be thought unjust to demand of Kings, the censure of wrongs;
the consideration whereof was so great in our Monarch of happy memory King
James, That He has often publikly protested even in the presence of his
apparent Heir, That if His own son should commit Murder, or any such
execrable act of inj^ry, he would not spare him, but would have him dye for it,
and would have him more severely punished then any other: For he very well
observed, no greater injustice, no injury more intolerable can be done to man
by man, then murder. And therefore, for a more further discovery of the Actors
and Conspirators, in the late business touching the death of the most high and
mighty Monarch King JAMES; this particular discourse does fully remonstrate,
and herein is exactly set down both the actors and their actions in this
ensuing Declaration

THE Duke of Buckingham being in Spain, advertised by Letters, how that the
King began to censure him in his absence freely, and that many spoke boldly to
the King against him, and how the King had intelligence from Spain, of his
unworchy carriage in Spain; and (how the Marquess of Hamilton (upon the sudden
news of the Princes departure) had nobly reprehended the King for sending the
Prince with such a young man without experience, and in such a private and
sudden manner, without acquainting the Nobility or Council therewith, wrote a
very bitter letter to the Marquis of Hamilton, conceived new ambitious courses
of his own, and used all the devises he could to disgust the Princes mind of
the match with Spain, so far intended by the King, made have home; where* when
he came, he so carried himself, that what the King commanded in his
Bedchamber, he controlled in the next: yea, received Packets to the King from
foreign Princes, and dispatched answers, without acquainting the King
therewith in a long time after.

Whereat, perceiving the King highly offended, and that the Kings mind was
beginning to alter toward him, suffering him to be quarrelled and affronted in
his Majesty's presence; and observing, that the King reserved my Lord of
Bristoll to be a rod for him, urging daily his dispatch for France, and
expecting the Earl of Gondomor, who as it seemed, was greatly esteemed, and
wonderfully credited by the King, and would second my Lord of Bristol his
accusations against him. He knew also that the King had vowed, that in despite
of all the Devils in Hell, he would bring the Spanish match about again, and
that the Marquess of Inicosa had given the King bad impressions of him, by
whose Articles of Accusation, the King himself had examined some of the
Nobility and Privy Council, and found out in the examination, that Buckingham
had said after his coming from Spain, That the King was now an old man, it was
now time for him to be at rest, and to be confined to some Park, and to pass
the rest of his time in hunting, and the Prince to be crowned.

The more the King urged him to be gone to France, the more shifts he made to
stay, for he did evidently see that the King was fully resolved to rid himself
of the oppression wherein he held him.

The King b^ing sick of a certain ague, and that in the spring was of it self
never found deadly; the Duke took opportunity when all the Kings Doctors of
physic were at dinner upon the monday before the King dyed, without their
knowledge or consent offered to him a white powder to take the which he a long
time resused, but overcome with his flattering importunity, at length took it
in wine, and immediately became worse and worse, falling into many swounings
and pains, and violent fluxes of the belly; and was so grievously tormented,
that His Majesty cried out aloud of this white powder, saying; Would to God I
had never taken it, it will cost me my life: with diverse other speeches to that
effect.

In like manner also the Countess of Buckingham, my Lord of Buckingham's
mother, upon the Friday after, the Physicians being also absent, and at dinner,
and not made acquainted with her doings, applied a plaster to the Kings heart
and breast; whereupon he grew faint, short breathed, and in a great agony. Some
of the Physicians after dinner returning to see the King, by the offensive
smell of the plaster, perceived something to be about him hurtful unto him,
and searching what it should be, found it out, and exclaimed that the King was
poisoned.

Then Buckingham entering, commanded the Physicians out of the room, caused one
of them to be committed prisoner to his own chamber, and another to be removed
from Court; quarrelling with others of the Kings servants in his Majesty's own
presence, so far that he offered to draw his sword against them in His
Majesty's presence. And Buckinghams mother kneeling down before His Majesty,
cried out with a brazen face, justice, justice; Sir, I demand justice of your
Majesty. His Majesty asked her for what? For that which their lives are no
ways sufficient to satisfy; for saying that my son and I have poisoned your
Majesty. Poisoned me! said he; with that turning himself swouned, and she was
removed.

The Sunday after, His Majesty died; and Buckingham desired the Physicians who
attended His Majesty, to sign with their hands a writ of testimony, that the
powder which he gave him was a good and safe medicine; which they refused.

Buckinghams creatures did spread abroad a rumor in London, that Buckingham
was so sorry for His Majesty's death, that he would have died, that he would
have killed himself if they had not hindered him; concerning which, I purposely
enquired after it, of them that were near him at that time, who said; That
neither in the time of His Majesty's sickness, nor after His death, he was
more moved, then if there had never happened either sickness or death to His
Majesty.

One day when his Majesty was in great extremity, he rod post to London to
pursue his sister in law to have her stand in sackcloth in S. Paul's for
adultery. And another time in his Majesty's agony he was busy in contriving
and concluding a marriage for one of his cosens.

Immediately after his Majesty's death, the Physician who was commanded to his
chamber was set at liberty with a Caveat to hold his peace, the others
threatened if they kept not good tongues in their heads.

But in the mean time the Kings body and head swelled above measure, his hair
with th the skin of his head stuck to the pillow, his nails became loose upon
his fingers, and toes.

Thus ends the Declaration, concerning the most potent Monarch, JAMES King of
Great Britain.
Concerning the poisoning of the Lord Marquess Hamelton.
The Marquis of Hamilton being also poisoned, he was no sooner dead, but the
force of the poison overcame the force of his body, and it began to swell in
such sort, That his Thighs were swollen six times as big as their natural
proportion: his belly became as big as the belly of an Ox, his arms as the
natural quantity of his Thighs his neck so broad as his shoulders, his Cheeks
over the top of his Nose, that his Nose could not be seen or distinquished,
the skin of his forehead, two fingers high swelled, the hair of his beard
eyebrows and Head, so far distant one from mother, as if an hundred had
been taken out between each one, and when one did touch the hair it came away
with the skin as easily, as if one had pulled hay out of an heap of hay he was
all over his neck, breast, shoulders, arms, and brows I say of diverse colors
full of water of the same color, some white, some black, some red, some
yellow, some green some blew, and that as well within his body as without.

Also the concavities of his liver green, his stomach in some places, a little
purpvrated with a blew clammy water adhering to the sides of it, his mouth and
nose foming blood mixed with froth mightly, of diverse colors a yard high.

FINIS.

