ARTICLES OF THE COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT, IN Maintenance of their
Accusation, against WILLIAM LAUD Archbishop of Canterbury, whereby he stands
charged with high Treason.

ALSO, Further Articles of Impeachment by the Commons in Parliament, against
the said Archbishop of Canterbury, of high Treason, and diverse high Crimes and
misdemeanors.

Die Mercurii, 17 Jan. 1643.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That these Articles and
Impeachment, be forthwith Printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentor.

Jan. 19. Printed for John Wright, in the Old-bailey. 1643.

Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, in maintenance of the
Accusation against William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, whereby he stands
charged with high Treason.
1. THat he has Traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws, and
Government of the Kingdom of England, and in stead thereof to introduce an
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government against Law, and to that end has wickedly
and Traitorously advised his Majesty, that he might at his own will and
pleasure leavy and take money of his subjects, without their consent in
Parliament, and this he affirmed, was warrantable by the Law of God.

2. He has for the better accomplishment of that his Traitorous design,
advised and proeured diverse Sermons and other discourses, to be preached,
Printed, and published, in which the authority of Parliaments, and the force of
the Laws of the Kingdom are denied, and an absolute and unlimited power over
the Persons and Estates of his Majesty's Subjects, is maintained and defended,
not only in the King, but also in himself and other Bishops, above and
against the Law, and he has bin a great protector, favourer, and promoter of
the publishers of such false and pernicious opinions.

3. He has by Letters, Messages, Threats, promises, and diverse other ways to
Judges and other Ministers of Justice; interrupted and perverted, and at other
times by the means aforesaid, has endeavored to interrupt and pervert the
course of Justice, in his Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and other Courts, to
the subversion of the Laws of this Kingdom, whereby sundry of his Majesty's
Subjects have been stopped in their just suits, and deprived of their lawful
rights, and subjected to his Tyrannical will, to their utter ruin and
destruction.

4. That the said Archbishop, has Traitorously and corruptly sold justice to
those that have had causes depending before him, by color of his
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as Archbishop, High Commissioner, Refaree or
otherwise, and has taken unlawful Gifts and Bribes of his Majesty's Subjects,
and has as much as in him lies, endeavored to coreupt other Courts of
Justice, by advising his Majesty to sell places of judicature and other
Offices, and procuring the sale of them contrary to the Laws and Statutes in
that behalf.

5. He has Traitorously caused a Book of Canons to be composed and
published, and these Canons to be put in execution, without any lawful warrant
and authority in that behalf; In which pretended Canons, many matters are
contained, contrary to the kings Prerogative, to the Fundamental Laws and
Statutes of this Realm, to the right of Parliament, to the propriety and
liberty of the Subjects, and matters tending to sedition, and of dangerous
consequence, and to the Establishment of a vast unlawful, and presumptuous
power in himself, and his Successors; many of which Canons, by the practice of
the said Archbishop, were surreptitiously passed in the late Convocation,
without due consideration and debate, others by fear and compulsion were
subscribed to by the Prelates and Clerks there assembled, which had never been
voted and passed in the convocation as they ought to have been, and the said,
Archbishop has contrived and endeavored, to assure and confirm the unlawful
and exorbitant power, which he has usurped and exercised over his Majesty's
Subjects, by a wicked and ungodly Oath in one of the said pretended Canons,
enjoined to be taken by all the Clergy, and many of the Laity of this Kingdom.

6. He has Traitorously assumed to himself, a Papal and Tyrannical power,
both in Ecclesiastical and Temporal matters, over his Majesty's Subjects in
this Realm of England, and in other places, to the disherrison of the Crown,
dishonor of his Majesty, and derogation of his supreme Authority in
Ecclesiastical matters.

And the said Archbishop claims the Kings Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, as
incident to his Episcopal and Archi-episcopall Office in this Kingdom, and
does deny the same to be derived from the crown of England, which he has
accordingly exercised to the high contempt of his Royal Majesty, and to the
destruction of diverse of the Kings Liege-people, in their persons and Estates.

7. That he has Traitorously endeavored to alter and subvert Gods true
Religion, by Law established in this Realm, and in stead thereof to set up
Popish superstition and Idolatry: And to that end, has declared and maintained
in speeches and printed, Books, diverse Popish doctrines and opinions, contrary
to the Articles of Religion established. He has urged and enjoined diverse
Popish and superstitious Ceremonies without any warrant of Law, and has
cruelly persecuted those who have opposed the same, by corporal, punishment
and imprisonment, and most unjustly vexed others who refused to comforme
thereunto, by Ecclesiastical Censures of Excommunication, Suspension,
Deprivation, and Derogation, contrary to the Law of, this Kingdom.

8. That for the better advancing of his Traitorous purpose and design, he did
abuse the great power and trust his Majesty reposed in him, and did, intrude
upon the places of diverse great Offcers, and upon the right of other his
Majesty's Subjects, whereby he did procure to himself nomination of sundry
persons, to Ecclesiastical Dignities, Pro^^tions, and Benefices, belonging to
his Majesty, and diverse of the Nobility, Clergy, and others, and has taken
upon him the commendation of Chaplains to the King, by which means he has
preferred to his Majesty service, and to other great promotions in the Church,
such as have bin Popishly affected, or otherwise unsound and corrupt both in
Doctrine and Manners.

9. He has for the same Traitorous and wicked intent, chosen and employed such
men to be his Chaplains, whom he knew to be notoriously disaffected to the
reformed Religion, grossly addicted to Popish superstition, and Erroneous and
unsound both in judgment and practice, and to them or some of them, he has
committed the Lycensing of Books to be printed, by which means, diverse false
and Superstitious Books have been published, to the great scandal of
Religion, and to the seducing of many of his Majesty's Subjects.

10. He has Traitorously and wickedly endeavored to reconcile the Church of
England, with the Church of Rome, and for the effecting thereof, has consorted
and confederated with diverse popish Priests and Jesuits, and has kept secret
intelligence with the Pope of Rome, and by himself his Agents or Instruments
treated with such as have from thence received authority and instruction, he
has permitted and countenanted a Popish Hierarchy or Ecclesiastical
Government, to be established, in this Kingdom, by all which Traitorous and
malicious practices, this Church and Kingdom has been exceedingly endangered
and like to fall under the tyranny of the Roman See.

11. He in his own person and his Suffragans, Visiters, Surrogates,
Chancellors, or other Officers, by his command, have caused diverse learned,
pious, and Orthodox Preachers of Gods Word, to be Silenced, Suspended,
Deprived, Degraded, Excommunicated, or otherwise grieved and vexed without any
just and lawful cause, whereby, and by diverse other means he has hindered the
preaching of Gods Word, caused diverse of his Majesty's loyal Subjects to
forsake the Kingdom, and increased and cherished ignorance and profaneness
amongst the people, that so he might the better facilitate the way to the
effecting of his own wicked and Traitorous design of altering and corrupting
the true Religion here established.

12. He has Traitorously endeavored to cause division and discord between
the Church of England and other Reformed Churches, and to that end has
suppressed and abrogated the privileges and immunities which have been by His
Majesty and His Royal Ancestors granted to the French and Dutch Churches in
this Kingdom, and diverse other ways has expressed his malice and
disaffection to those Churches, that so by such disunion, the Papists might
have more advantage for the overthrow and extirpation of both.

13. He has maliciously and Traitorously plotted and endeavored to stir up
war and enmity betwixt His Majesty's two Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and
to that purpose has labored to introduce into the Kingdom of Scotland,
diverse innovations both in Religion and Government, all or the most part
tending to Popery and Superstition, to the great grievance and discontent of
His Majesty's Subjects of that Nation, and for their refusing to submit to such
innovations, he did Traitorously advise His Majesty to subdue them by force of
Arms, and by his own Authority and Power contrary to law, did procure sundry
of His Majesty's Subjects, and enforced the Clergy of this Kingdom to
contribute toward the maintenance of that war, and when his Majesty with much
wisdom and justice had made a pacification betwixt the two Kingdoms, the said
Archbishop by his council and endeavors did presumptuously censure that
pacification as dishonorable to His Majesty, and incense His Majesty against
his said Subjects of Scotland, that he did thereupon by advice of the said
Archbishop enter into an offensive war against them, to the great hazard of
His Majesty's Person, and Subjects of both Kingdoms.

14. That to preserve himself from being questioned for these and other his
Traitorous courses, he has labored to subvert the rights of Parliaments, and
the Ancient course of Parliamentary proceedings, and by false and malicious
slanders to incense His Majesty against Parliaments.

By which words, Counsels, and Actions, he has Traitorously and contrary to
his Allegiance, labored to alienate the hearts of the Kings Liege people from
His Majesty, (...) set a division between them, and to ruin and destroy His
Majesty's Kingdoms, for which they do impeach him of high Treason, against
Our Sovereign Lord the King, His Crown and Dignity.

The said Commons do further aver, That the said William, Archbishop of
Canterbury, during the time in which the Treasons and Offenses aforementioned
were committed, has been a Bishop or Archbishop in this Realm of England,
one of the Kings Commissioners for Ecclesiastical matters, and of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and that he has taken an Oath for
his faithful discharge of the said Office of a Counselor, and has likewise
taken the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance. And the said Commons by
Protestation, saving to themselves the liberty of Exhibiting at any time
hereafter, any other Accusation or Impeachment against the said Archbishop, and
also of replying to the answers that the said Archbishop shall make unto the
said Articles, or to any of them, and of offering further proof also of the
premises, or any of them, as the case shall according to the course of
Parliaments require, do pray, that the said Archbishop may be put to answer to
all and every the premises, and that such proceedings, Examination, Trial, and
Judgment, may be upon every of them, had, and used, as is agreeable to Law and
Justice.

Further Articles of Impeachment by the Commons assembled in Parliament against
William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, of high Treason and diverse high crimes
and misdemeanors, as follows.
1. THat the said Archbishop of Canterbury to introduce an Arbitrary government
within this Realm, and to destroy Parliaments in the third and fourth years
of his Majesty's reign that now is, a Parliament being then called, and
sitting at Westminster, traitorously and maliciously caused the said Parliament
to be dissolved, to the great grievance of his Majesty's subjects, and
prejudice of this Commonwealth: And soon after the dissolution thereof, gave
diverse Propositions under his hand, to George then Buke of Buckingham, casting
therein many false aspersions upon the said Parliament, calling it a factious
Parliament, and falsely affirming that it had cast many scandals upon his
Majesty, and had used him like a child in his minority, stiling them Puritans,
and commending the Papists for harmless and peaceable subjects.

2. That within the space of ten years last past, the said Archbishop has
treacherously endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws of this Realm, and
to that end has in like manner endeavored to advance the power of the
Council Table, the Canons of the Church, and the Kings Prerogative, above the
Laws and Statutes of the Realm. And for manifestation thereof, about six
years last past, being then a Privy Councellor to his Majesty, and sitting at
the Council Table, he said, that as long as he sat there they should know
that an Order of that Board should be of equal force with a law or Act of
Parliam. And at another time used these words, That he hoped ere long that the
Canons of the Church, and the Kings Prerogative, should be of as great power
as an Act of Parliament. And at another time said, that those that would not
yield to the Kings power, he would crush them to pieces.

3. That the said Archbishop, to advance the Canons of the Church, and power
Ecclesiastical above the law of the Land, and to pervert and hinder the course
of Justice, has at diverse times within the said time, by his Letters and other
undue means and solicitations used to Judges, opposed and stopped the
granting of his Majesty's Writs of Prohibition, where the same ought to have
been granted for stay of proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Court, whereby
justice has been delayed and hindered, and the Judges diverted from doing
their duties.

4. That for the end and purpose aforesaid, about seven years last past, a
Judgment being given in his Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, against one Burley
a Parson, being a man of bad life and conversation, in an information upon the
Statute of 21. Hen. 8. for wilful Non-residency, the said Archbishop by
solicitations and other undue means used to the Judges of that Court, caused
Execution upon the said Judgment to be stayed: And being moved therein, and
made acquainted with the bad life and conversation of the said parson, he said,
that he had spoken to the Judges for him, and that he would never suffer a
Judgment to pass against a Clergyman by nihil dicit.

5. That the said Archbishop about eight years last past being then also a
privy Counsel or to his Majesty, for the end and purpose aforesaid, caused Sir
John Corbet of Stoake in the County of Salop Baronet, then a Justice of peace
of the said County, to be committed to the prison of the Fleet, where he
continued prisoner for the space of half a year, or more, for no other cause,
but for calling for the Petition of Right, and causing it to be read at the
Sessions of the peace for that County, upon a just and necessary occasion. And
during the time of his said imprisonment the said Archbishop, without any
color of right, by a writing under the Seal of his Archbishopricke, granted
away parcel of the Glebe land of the Church of Adderley in the said County,
whereof the said Sir John Corbet was then patron, unto Robert Viscouns
Kilmurrey, without the consent of the said Sir John, or the then Incumbent of
the said Church, which said Viscount Kilmurrey built a Chapel upon the said
parcel of Gleve land, to the great prejudice of the said sir John Corbet,
which dath caused great suits and dissentions between them. And whereas the
said Sir John Corbet had a Judgment against Sir James Stonehouse Knight, in an
action of Waste, in his Majesty's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, which
was after wards affirmed in a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench, and Execution
thereupon awarded: yet the said Sir John, by means of the said Archbishop
could not have the effect thereof, but was committed to prison by the caid
Archbishop and others at the Council Table, until he had submitted himself
unto the Order of the said Table, whereby he lost the benefit of the said
Judgment and Execution.

6. That whereas diverse gifts and dispositions of diverse sums of money were
heretofore made by diverse charitable and well disposed persons, for the buying
in of diverse Impropriatrons for the maintenance of preaching the word of God in
several Churches, the said Archbishop about eight years last past, wilfully
and maliciously caused the said gifts, feoffements, and conveyances made to the
uses aforesaid, to be overthrown in his Majesty's Court of Exchequer,
contrary to Law, as things dangerous to the Church and State, under the
specious pretense of buying in Appropriations, whereby that pious work was
suppressed and trodden down, to the great dishonor of God, and scandal of
Religion.

7. That the said Archbishop at several times, within these ten years last
past, at Westminster and elsewhere within this Realm, contrary to the known
Laws of this Land, has endeavored to advance Popery and Superstition within
the Realm: And for that end and purpose has wittingly and willingly received,
harbored and relieved diverse Popish Priests and Jesuits, namely one called
Sancta Clara, alias Damport, a dangerous Person, and Franciscan Friar, who
having written a Popish and seditious Book, entitled Deus natura gratia,
wherein the thirty nine Articles of the Church of England, established by Act of
Parliament, were much traduced and scandalized: The said Archbishop had diverse
conferences with him, while he was in writing the said Book; and did also
provide maintenance and entertainment for one Mouns^er St. Giles a Popish
Priest at Oxford knowing him to be a Popish Priest.

That the said Archbishop about four years last past at Westminster aforesaid;
said, that there must be a blow given to the Church, such as has not bin yet
given, before it could be brought to conformity; declaring thereby his
intention to be, to shake and after the true Protestant Religion established in
the Church of England.

9. That in, or about the month of May, 1641. presently after the dissolution
of the last Parliament, the said Archbishop for the ends and purposes
aforesaid, caused a Synod or Convocation of the Clergy to be held for the
sever all Provinces of Canterbury and York; wherein were made and established
by his means and procurement, diverse Canons and Constitntions Ecclesiastical;
contrary to the Laws of this Realm, the Rights and Privileges or Parliament,
the Liberty and property of the Subject, tending also to sedition, and of
dangerous consequence: And amongst other things, the said Archbishop caused a
most dangerous and illegail Oath to be therein made and contrived, the tenor
whereof follows in these words. That I A. B. do swear that I do approve
the Doctrine and Discipline or Government established in the Church of England;
as containing all things accessory to Salvation; And that I will not endeavor
by my self or any other, directly or indirectly to bring in any Popish
Doctrine, contrary to that which Is so established: Nor will I ever give my
consent to alter the Government of this Church by Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes,
and Archdeacons, etc. as it stands now established, and as by right it ought
to stand: Nor yet ever to subject it to the usurpations and superstitions of
the Sea of Rome. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge
and swear, according to the plain and common sense, and understanding of the
same words, without any equivocation or mental evasion, or secret reservation
whatsoever. And this I do heartily, willingly and truly, upon the faith of a
Christian: So help me God in Jesus Christ. Which Oath the said Archbishop
himself did take, and caused diverse other Ministers of the Church to take the
same, upon pain of suspension and deprivation of their Lviings, and other
severe penalties: And did also cause Godfrey, then Bishop of Gloucester, to be
committed to prison for refusing to Subscribe to the said Canons, and to take
the said Oath: And afterward the said Bishop submitting himself to take the
said Oath, he was set at liberty.

10. That a little before the calling of the last Parliament, anno 1640. a Vote
being then passed, and a resolution taken at the Council Table by the advice
of the said Archbishop, for assisting of the King in extraordinary ways if the
said Parliament should prove peevish, and refuse to supply his Majesty: The
said Archbishop wickedly and maliciously advised his Majesty to dissolve the
said Parliament, and accordingly the same was dissolved: And presently after
the said Archbishop told his Majesty, that now he was absolved from all rules
of Government, and left free to use extraordinary ways for his supply.

For all which matters and things the said Commons assembled in Parliament in
the name of the ^^^^^es and of all the Commons of England, do impeach the said
Archbishop of Canterbury of high Treason, and other crimes and misdemeanors
tending to the subversion of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and to the
utter ruin of this Church and Commonwealth.

And the said Commons by protestation saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter, any further or other Accusation or
Impeachment against the said William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, and also of
replying to the answer that he shall make unto the said articles, or any of
them: Or of offering proof of the premises, or any other Impeachment or
accusations that shall be exhibited by them as the cause shall (according to the
course of Parliaments) require; Do pray that he the said William Laud
Archbishop of Canterbury may be called to answer the said several crimes and
misdemeanors, and receive such condign punishment as the same shall deserve
and that such further proceedings may be upon every of them had, and used
against him as is agreeable to Law and Justice.

FINIS.

