Die Mercurii, 4. Ian 1642.
WHereas many of the Trained Bands and others* listed under several Colonells
and Captains, inhabiting within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the
County of Middlesex, have neglected to make their appearance in Arms, to do
such service by day or night, within the Cities and Liberties aforesaid, and in
the Tower of London as of them has been required, being lawfully summoned
thereunto by the beat of Drum, or otherwise, for the defense of King and
Parliament; the safety of the Cities and Tower of London, with the adjacent
parts in the County of Middlesex: for the Reformation of so great a neglect,
and for the avoiding of so emminent evils in these dangerous times, that might
ensue thereupon; It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons now assembled
in Parliament, That the Colonells, Captains, and Lieutenants, of the Trained*
Bands or others in the Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs thereof,
and the County of Middlesex, may inflict the punishment of two days
Imprisonment without Bail, or Maine-prise, or the Mulct of five shillings for
supply of the service, upon such Soldiers under their Commands, as shall not
repair to their Colors at the time appointed, and do their duties there,
when, and as often as they shall be thereunto required* unless they be
reasonably excused; And that made known to the Captain or other chief
Officers, or being come to their Colors, shall depart, before they be lodged,
or being to find Arms for others, shall refuse to provide them, or to deliver
them, when, and as often as they shall be thereunto required.

John Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.
April 6. London Printed for John Wright, in the Old Bailey. 1643.
BY virtue of an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament, of the fourth day of
January last past, for the committing to Prison, all such Persons as have
neglected to make their appearance in Arms, within the City of London and
liberties thereof, being lawfully summoned by the beat of the Drum or
otherwise; These are in His Majesty's name, strictly to will and require you to
take into your custody the bodies of (...) Citizens of London, of the company
of the Trained Bands of the said City of London, under the command of (...) who
have been lawfully summoned to make their appearance in Arms, the (...) of
this instant (...) to do service for the defense of King and Parliament, and
the safety of the said City of London, neglected so to do; and being demanded
five shilings for supply of the said Service, refused to pay the same, and them
safely to convey and deliver to the Keeper of the Compter, together with a
Warrant bearing date even with these Presents: And herein you are not to fail
as you will answer the contrary at your peril.

Given under my hand this (...) Day of (...)
To the Constables of (...) and to all and every of the Constables of the City
of London and Liberties thereof.

