Eight and Thirty QUERIES PROPOUNDED By One that is setting forth Sail, and
desires to steer his Course aright, that escaping the Gulphs he may arrive at
SAFETY.

TOUCHING Things Past, Present, and to Come.

Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5.

If thou criest after knowledge and liftest up thy voice for understanding.

If thou seek her as silver and searchest for her as for hid Treasures.

Then shall thou understand.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Andrews, 1659.

Thirty Eight QUERIES Touching Things Past, Present, and to Come.
I. WHether Salus populi be not the end of the Law of all Nations?

II. Whether the peoples Representatives are not the proper Judges of what is
for the welfare of the Nation?

III. Whether our Parliament be not the same in nature, as the Counsel at the
time of Englands first becoming Tributary to the Romans, who by their Power
chose, Theemantius the younger Son of Lud to be King, rather then Androgeus the
Elder: And whether the restoring the Parliament by Henry the first, were not a
committer of the People to their right, though he abridged their Authority by
keeping himself the head?

IV. Whether Kings now in any Place have the like right to rule as Abram had
over his family being his Children and Servants?

V. Whether then the Right to rule now be not from the Election of the People?

VI. Whether the Election of al Kings be not either from Compulsion or from the
Trust, the People reside in them?

VII. Whether the Kings since the Conquest have reigned by Usurpation, or by
Right?

VIII. Whether (if by Usurpation) their Confirming has not been by Compulsion?

IX. Whether Prescription gives any more Right to a Crown then to Land?

X. Whether a Parliament having Power may not Lawfully repulse an Usurper?

XI. Whether (if by right) a King being Elected, Established or Confirmed by
Parliament, breaking his Oath and trust reposed in him may not by the same
Authority be taken down, as Edward the second and Richard the second were?

XII. Whether the first Provocation and Preparation, or the first blow make a
War invafive?

XIII. Whether every Man of what degree or quality soever ought not in all
Cases to-have and receive Justice.

XIV. Whether it be not more probable that a Parliament wherein every one as a
private person and his posterities well being, consists in the Nations well
doing, both persons and Estates sharing a like with the whole people, will be
so likely to oppress the Nation as a single person, whose Gavestons and
Favorites may be preferred before the good of the Nation. And having the Power
can neither be bounded not limited longer then his pleasure.

XV. Whether wise and Righteous men are not manifested by their actions.

XVI. Whether the welfare of the People consists not in the Enjoyment of
Wealth, Peace and Godliness?

XVII. Whether the giving liberty to private Meetings on the Sabbath days be
not more for the advancement of Iudaisme, Papisme, and Quakism^, then the truth
of Christianity?

XVIII. Whether these do not beget Divisions, which is the cause of Wars and
poverty, and are not likely to produce Athiesme and all ungodliness in the next
Generation.

XIX. Whether the Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry, as its now Established
in England, be according to truth and Righteousness or Antichristian.

XX Whether the despisers and Contemners thereof, or revilers against, ought
not to be restrained.

XXI. Whether it be not Lawful for the good people being weary of sitting in
Churches, their souls loathing such ligh^ meat, to change their food and hear
J^suits in houses?

XXII. Whether it be not Evident, that, that book (lately put forth, entitled
Light out of Darkness, or Occasional Quere's, so much for the tenants of
Quakers, and any Lay man's public Preaching,) is the Work of a Jesuit?

XXIII. Whether the Soldiers would be content to do the work of God in their
places, for what good people should freely give them without a certain
Allowance, as too many of them presume the Minister ought?

XXIIII. Whether it be not more meet for every man to pay the tenth of his
profit to the Ministers (or some one for his use) then to pay the tenth in Money
whether he raise profit or no, according to the value of the Land?

XXV. Whether it be not almost Time for those Commanders that have gotten great
Estates, and now settled in England to serve the Commonwealth, freely as well
Gentlemen in the Country in Commisions do?

XXVI. Whether any thing were ever yet done by Man but i^ wanted refining in
time?

XXVII. Whether the Judiciary part of the Law as it wants refining, so
wants refining only, and not a to tall Subversion.

XXVIII. Whether the young men of South-wark understood what they Petitioned
when they spoke of having the Law in a Volume.

XXIX. Whether the Gentlemen that in the last Parliament, first voted for the
Protector, and were always before Cavalerishly aff^cted, but at last joined in
some votes with Commonwealths men were converts out of Integrety or Subtilty.

XXX. Whether the Soldiers have not manifested their ends in former actions to
be the publiq^e good, by their taking their Comissions from Parliament, and
whether if they continne obedient, they will not beget everlasting renown, as
well for faithfullness as Valor.

XXXI. Whether it be not partiality to allow Mr. Cromwell and his Mother, more
then Mr. Steward and his Mother.

XXXII. Whether if all Compliers be saved harmeless by this intended Act of
Indemnity, it may not be an encouragement for the future for men to Act
irregular and r^bellious things, in hopes that pretending providence, or
affirming necessity, if their d^sign should fall to the ground, will hold them
guiltless.

XXXIII. Whether those venerable Gentlemen that stood for Justice on the King,
settling a Commonwealth then fl^ttered Oliver, were great promoters of Addresses
to Richa^d, and now forward to bless the Armies actions, and court the members
of Parliament, deserve not to have liberty to quarter their Goat of Arms, with
a Windmill, or a Weather Cock.

XXXIV. Whether it be fit to continue such in Places of Trust when faithful
Real men are not wanting in the Nation?

XXXV. Whether it be not absolutely necessary to have Astraea blindsold, limbed
both in Parliament House and Counsel Chamber for a Memento?

XXXVI. Whether the next good service the Soldiers can do as to Reformation,
will not be to take up and secure the Whores of London, the ruin of so many
persons?

XXXVII. Whether the best place to transport them be not to Jamaica, where they
may Lust and not be satisfied?

XXXVIII. Whether it be not requisite that James Harrington and his follo wers
be desired to take their Clubs out of England, and wait upon these virtuous
Gentlewomen, with whom they may be sure to live as Tenants in Common and not
fail to Establish Levelisme and A^h^isme?

FINIS.

