A DECLARATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE HONORABLE COMMITTEE Of the House of
COMMONS, AT Merchant-Taylors Hall, For Raising the People of the Land as one
MAN.

Under the command of Sir William Waller. August 3. 1643.

Ordered by the Committee to be printed.

LONDON, Printed by T. Pain and M. Simons. 1643.

A DECLARATION OF the Honorable Committee of the House of COMMONS at
Merchant-Taylors Hall,
August 3d. 1643.
THousands of judicious well minded men being thoroughly sensible of the
miserable condition of the Commonwealth, seeing their most faithful Friends
Commanders, and Soldiers destroyed in small parties against strong and
treacherous Enemies; and finding by long and sad experience, that all
endeavors of Parliament whether by gentle or forcible means, availed not to
prevent or subdue their implacable malice, but as they increased in numbers, so
they continued to spoil and murder honest religious people in all places
where they came. And being thoroughly sensible of the distressed estate of our
brethren in Ireland, and the wants and necessities of the poor through decay
of Trade, and want of Fuel, and foreseeing that famine and destruction, were
even seizing upon the whole Nation, if not speedily, and by extraordinary
means prevented, did propose unto themselves the general raising of the whole
people (as one Man) as the only means to give a speedy end to this
destructive war. To effect which, they presented a Petition to the Commons of
ENGLAND in Parliament assembled the 20th. day of July ^643. wherein they
manifested, that they rightly understood the condition of their Enemies, and
were no whit blinded by their delusions: and in most earnest, and humble manner
desired, that that Honorable House would be pleased to appoint a Committee to
manage that great affair of Raising the whole people. The Petition was
received with great expressions of affection; and a Committee of worthy
Members of the House appointed for advance of that Service.

This Honorable Committee with great resolution and confidence undertook this
burdensome and great employment, as conceiving the same to be the last refuge
of the people: in pursuance whereof they proceeded with great caution, to lay a
sound Foundation and good method: which being agreed upon both for the City of
London, and all other Counties; they then su^moned all sorts of well-affected
persons of London, Westminster, Southwark, and parts adjacent, to appear at
Marchant-Taylers Hall on Thursday the 27th of July, there to subscribe for
Moneys, Ammunition, Arms, Horse, etc. and to list their persons.

The people appeared in great numbers, the Right Honorable the Lord Major, and
many worthy Aldermen and Gentlemen were there to countenance the Work, which
went on with great alacrity and cheerfulness; Amidst these proceedings, the
people were very desirous that Sir William Waller might be appointed Commander
in Chief. The peoples desire therein was presented to the Committee by Mr.
Sheriff Langham; which was immediately taken into debate, and upon mature
deliberation agreed upon to be presented to the Honorable House of Commons for
approbation, which succeeded according to the peoples earnest desire and
expectation. Sir Will. Waller, upon motion of the Committee, being voted
Commander in Chief of the Forces to be Raised by this Committee, and was also
made a Member of this Committee: all which was effected in few hours, and the
Order of the House sent unto the people to cheer their hearts, and gratify
their willingness to preserve the Kingdom; The Committee in short time
returned to the Hall, and after them Sir William Waller, and sat with the
Committee; and after some discourse, they all with him went out unto the
people, where he entertained their loves with a brief, but most pertinent
Speech, which they requited with loud, acclamations of joy and thankfulness,
so as they seemed to be mutually engaged one unto the other, with the greatest
solemnity that affection could express, to the great contentment and joy of
all good men; especially the Commitee, who returned to their consultations full
of confidence, that nothing would be too difficult to a Commander, and a people
so united.

They found by that days proceedings, that it would be most convenient that
subscriptions should be taken, and men listed, by chosen men, and none escape
from being demanded to subscribe according to ability: Or if any should, that
their answers might be known, being determined to proceed in the same method
in all Counties. There came unto them diverse Citizens, manifesting defires to
further the work of the general raising of the people, as the only means to
preserve the Kingdom; but differed in their opinions from the judgment of the
Committee, about the method intended for the advance of Men and Moneys, utterly
disliking all endeavors for voluntary subscriptions and listings, and
earnestly pressing, that without a compulsive power, by which all men should be
compelled to go in person, or to contribute Moneys, the work would be
retarded, and nothing done; and desired that my Lord Mayor might be moved to
call a Common Hall for the furthering of the work. The Committee remained firm
in their judgments, that the voluntary way was first to be proved, as not
doubting, but that the people being now sensible of their approaching miseries,
and upon the general raising for a speedy end of all their fears and
troubles, they would not be backward, but liberally disburse their moneys, and
adventure their persons; which if contrary to their expectations should prove
defective, would soon appear, and did not doubt, but in such a case to be
supplied by a coercive power from the House.

Nevertheless they agreed that my Lord Mayor should be desired to call a
Common Hall, where the promoting of the work of this Committee should be
commended to the generality of the Citizens; which was done accordingly by
Colonel Martin, and exceeding joyfully approved of, to the great encouragement
of the Committee to proceed in their endeavors and intentions, and thereupon
have issued forth their Warrants, and particular instructions to the Alderman
and his Deputy of every Ward, to call unto them the Ministers, the
Common Council men, and other fit persons to promote the said work, according
to the method and instructions sent unto them.

The like course is taken in Westminster, Southwarke, and the places adjacent,
whereof it is most necessary, that every good man should take notice, lay to
heart, and endeavor to promote the same, as the greatness and necessity of
the work does require; there having been no other way proposed by them for
listing of men, or taking subscriptions. And therefore what ever other good
works or designs are on foot, let none be wanting unto this, the greatest of
all, and last refuge of the people. Care will be taken that your Moneys shall
be faithfully and frugally disbursed, and that no bad Officer be admitted, and
the common Soldier carefully provided for: And experience will prove, that
this is no vain bait or allurement; may the people be but as faithful to
themselves, as these Gentlemen will be unto them, and as liberal to the work
as they are ready to spend themselves in behalf of the plainest and poorest
people in the Commonwealth. And then our enemies will soon feel the smart, and
our friends the comfort of their endeavors. Therefore let no man stand to see
what others will do; let no man's evil suggestions upon fair pretenses
prevail: who ever endeavors to disturb or divert this work by never so fair a
show, will be found no friend to the Commonwealth: What you do, do with all
your might: the work is Gods, to deliver the captive, and set the oppressed
free. Let none therefore incur that curse, which is due unto those that do
the work of the Lord negligently; nor that bitter curse that will suddenly fall
upon those that come not forth to help the Lord against the mighty.

FINIS.

