A Declaration of the house of Commons touching the breach of their
Privileges, and for the vindication thereof, and of diverse members of the said
house, etc.

Wherein is likewise contained, First, A remonstrance of the present State of
diverse things in, and about, the City of London, Westminster and
Parliament House, since the King and Queens departure from White Hall to
Hampton Court. 2. The examination of his Majesty's Attourny General by the
House of Commons, about the Articles against the six Parliament men; with his
answer to every particular. 3. Seven articles of high Treason against
Coronell Lunsford: Together with an order of both Houses for the speedy
apprehension of the Lord Digby, and the aforesaid Lunsford, for raising arms
and forces near Kingston upon Thames, to the terror of his Majesty's subjects.
4. The wonderful deliverance of four honorable Peers of this Land, which
should have bin poisoned at a Supper, by a French Cook. 5. The votes of both
Houses of Parliament against those eleven Bishops which were accused of high
Treason, etc. 6. The advice sent from his Majesty's Commissioners in Scotland,
to both the honorable houses of Parliament in England, January the 15. 1641.
for composing the present differences and late distractions in this Kingdom,
etc. 7. The Sea-mens Protestation. Lastly, how two Boats laden with great
Saddles to be carried down unto Kingston, were staid, and those that should
have transported them, examined by the Parliament. Also how that Coronell
Lunsford was taken at Sir John Thorowgoods house near Windsor, in the County
of Berks,


Published this 19. of January. 1641.

London Printed for Fr. Coules, and T. Banks. 1641.

A Declaration of the House of Commons, touching a late Breach of their
Privileges; and for the Vindication thereof, and of diverse Members of the said
House.
WHereas the Chambers, Studies, and Trunkes, of Master Denzill Hollis, Sir
Arthur Haslerigg, Master John Pym, Master John Hampden, and Master William
Strode Esquires, Members of the House of Commons, upon Monday the 3. of this
instant January, by color of His Majesty's Warrant have bin sealed up by Sir
William Killigrew, and Sir William Flemen, and others, which is not only
against the Privilege of Parliament, but the Common Liberty of every Subject:
Which said Members afterward, the same day were under the like color, by
Sergeant Francis, one of His Majesty's Sergeants at Arms, contrary to all
former Presidents demanded of the Speaker sitting in the House of Commons, to
be delivered unto him, that he might Arrest them of high Treason. And whereas,
afterward the next day His Majesty in His Royal Person came to the said House
attended with a great multitude of men armed in warlike manner, with Halberts,
Swords, and Pistolls, who came up to the very door of the House, and placed
themselves there, and in other places, and passages near to the said House, to
the great terror and disturbance of the Members then sitting; and according to
their duty in a peaceable, and orderly manner, treating of the great affairs
of England, and Ireland. And his Majesty having placed himself in the Speakers
Chair, demanded of them the Persons of the said Members to be delivered unto
him, which is a high Breach of the Rights and Privileges of Parliament and
Inconsistent with the Liberties and Freedom thereof. And whereas afterward
his Majesty did issue forth several Warrants to diverse Officers under his own
hand, for the apprehension of the Persons of the said Members, which by Law he
cannot do; there being not all this time, any Legal charge or accusation or
due Process of Law issued against them, nor any pretense of charge made known
to that House; all which are against the Fundamental Liberties of the Subject,
and the Rights of Parliament. Whereupon we are necessitated, according to our
duty to declare? And We do hereby declare that if any Person shall Arrest M.
Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, M. Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, or any of
them, or any other Member of Parliament, by pretense or color of any Warrant
issuing out from the King only, is guilty of the Breach of the Liberties of
the Subject, and of the Privileges of Parliament, and a publibke enemy to the
Commonwealth. And that the Arresting of the said Members, or any of them, or
of any other Member of Parliament, by any Warrant whatsoever, without a legal
Proceeding against them, and without consent of that House, whereof such such
Person is a Member, is against the liberty of the Subject, and a Breach of
Privilege of Parliament; And the Person which shall Arrest any of these
Persons, or any Member of the Parliament, is declared a public enemy of the
Commonwealth. Notwithstanding all which we think fit, further to declare that
we are so far from any endeavors to protect any of our Members, that shall be
in due manner prosecuted according to the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Rights
and Privileges of Parliament for Treason, or any other misdemeanors, That
none shall be more ready and willing then we our selves, to bring them to a
speedy, and due trial, being sensible that it equally imports us, as well to
see Justice done against them that are Criminous, as to defend the Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects, and Parliament of England.

And whereas upon several examinations taken the 7. day of this instant
January, before the Committee appointed by the House of Commons of sit in
London, it did fully appear, that many soldiers, Papists, and others, to the
number of about 500. came with his Majesty on Tuesday last, to the said House
of Commons, armed with Swords, Pistolls, and other Weapons; and diverse of them
pressed to the door of the said House, thrust away the door Keepers, and
placed themselves, between the said door and the ordinary attendants of his
Majesty; holding up their Swords, and some holding up their Pistolls ready
cocked near the said door; and saying, I am a good Marksman, I can hit right
I warrant you, and they not suffering the said door, according to the custom
of Parliament to be shut, but said they would have the door open, and if any
opposition were against them, they made no question, but they should make their
party good, and that they would maintain their party; and when several
Members of the House of Commons were coming into the House, their attendants
desiring that Room might be made for them, some of the said Soldiers
answered, A Pox of God confound them and others said, A Pox take the house of
Commons, let them come and be hanged, what a do is here with the house of
Commons; and some of the said Soldiers did likewise violently assault, and by
force disarme some of the Attendants, and servants of the Members of the house
of Commons, waiting in the Room next the said house, and upon the Kings
return out of the said house, many of them by wicked Oaths, and otherwise,
expressed much discontent, that some Members of the said House, for whom they
came were not there, and others of them said, when comes the word, and no word
being given at his Majesty's coming out, they cried a Lane, a Lane; afterward
some of them being demanded, what they thought the said company intended to
have done, answered, That questionless in the posture they were set if the
word had been given, they should have fallen upon the House of Commons, and
have cut all their throats. Upon all which we are of opinion, that it is
sufficiently proved, that the coming of the said Soldiers, Papists, and
others with his Majesty to the House of Commons on Tuesday last, being the
fourth of this instant January, in the manner aforesaid, was to take away some
of the Members of the said house; and if they should have found opposition, or
denial, then to have fallen upon the said house in a hostile manner, And we
do hereby declare that the same was a traitorous design against the King and
Parliament. And whereas the said Master Hollis, Sir Arthur Hasterigg, Master
Pym, M. Hampden, and M. Strode, upon report of the coming of the said
Soldiers, Papists, and other in the warlike and hostile manner, aforesaid, did
with the approbation of the house absent themselves from the service of the
house, for avoiding the great, and many inconveniences, which otherwise
apparently might have happened: Since which time a printed paper in the form
of a Proclamation, bearing date the sixth day of this instant January, has
issued out for the apprehending, and imprisoning of them, Therein suggesting
that through the conscience of their own guilt, they were absent and fled not
willing to submit themselves to Justice; We do further declare that the said
printed paper is false, scandalous and illegal, and that notwithstanding the
said printed paper, or any warrant issued out, or any other matter yet
appearing against them; or any of them, they may and ought to attend the
service of the said house of Commons, and the several Committees now on foot.
And that it is lawful for all persons whatsoever to lodge, harbor or converse
with them or any of them; And whosoever shall be questioned for the same, shall
be under the protection and privilege of Parliament.

And we do further declare, That the publishing of several Articles
purporting a form of a charge of high Treason against the L. Kimbolton, one of
the Members of the Lords house, and against the said M. Hollis. Sir Arthur
Hasterigg, M. Pym. M. Hampden, and M. Strode, by Sir William Killigrew, Sir
William Flemen, and others in the Innes of Court, and elsewhere in the Kings
Name, was a high Breach of the Privilege of Parliament, a great scandal to
his Majesty and his Government: A seditious Act manifestly tending to the
subversion of the Peace of the Kingdom, and an injury, and dishonor to the
said Members, there being no legal charge or accusation against them.

That the privileges of Parliaments, and the liberties of the Subject so
violated and broken, cannot be fully and sufficiently vindicated, unless his
Majesty will be graciously pleased to discover the names of those persons who
advised his Majesty to issue out Warrants, for the seling of the Chambers, and
Studies of the said Members, to send a Sergeant at Arms to the house of
Commons, to demand their said Members, to issue out several Warrants under his
Majesty's own hand, to apprehend the said members. His Majesty's coming
thither, in his own Royal Person. The publishing of the said Articles, and
printed paper in the form of a Proclamation against the said Members in such
manner as is before declared, To the end that such persons may receive condign
punishmnt,

And this house does further declare, That all such persons as have given any
Council, or endeavored to set or maintain division or dislike, between the
King and Parliament, or have listed their names, or otherwise entered into any
combination or agreement, to be ayding, or assicting, to any such counsel or
endeavor, or have persuaded any other so to do, or that shall do any the
things above mentioned; And shall not forthwith discover the same to either
house of Parliament: Or the Speaker of either of the said houses respectively,
and disclaim it, are declared public enemies of the State and Peace of this
Kingdom, and shall be inquired of, and proceeded against accordingly.

Die Lunae 17. Ianuarii 1641. It is this day ordered, By the Commons Assembled
in Parliament, that this Declaration shall be forthwith published in print.

Hen. Elsing. Cler. Parl. De Com.

The Seamens protestation, etc.
I A. B. Do Protest before Almighty God, to maintain with my dearest Life and
blood, the Protestant Religion as was established in the days of Queen
Elizabeth; To acknowledge Charles, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain,
France and Ireland: To stand for the Privileges of Parliament; utterly from my
heart to abhor all Popery and Popish innovations. So help me God.

The votes of both houses of Parliament, that passed, upon a Conference,
concerning the accused Bishops.
ALL the Articles and inditements against the Bishops, wherein they were highly
impeached being publicly read, both Houses gave many votes against them, they
being found so vehement peccant, and intolerable delinquent. First, for
contra^cting and striving to extenuate the Privileges of Parliament. Secondly
for denying the liberty of the Subject. And lastly, for endeavoring to
alienate the King from the Parliament, the one oppositely to the other; and
many other impeachments being objected against them; the Parliament determined
they should be voted from the House, degraded and suspended from their
Episcopal government, with an at cetera.

A true Relation of a treacherous plot practiced by a French Cook, for the
poisoning of four noble men of this Land, at the Earl of Leicesters house in
St. Martins lane, 11. Ianu.
THe Earl of Leicester having invited four Honorable Lords, and Peers of
this Kingdom, with some other great Personages, to a Supper, which was
performed at his house in St. Martins Lane near the Strand on Tuesday, Ianu.
11. 1641.

And being all set at Supper, there came in a Hellish bloody minded fellow, a
Frenchman, (and is conceived) backed unto that wicked intention by some of the
Popish faction, which may well be conjectured by the sequel which follows.

This Frenchman being come into place where these Noble Peers did sup that
night, he privately whispered with the Cook of the Earl of Leicester, who
also was a Frenchman, and could not speak a word of English, and told him in
his own Language, that if he would undertake to poison the second course that
was to be set before those worthy and Honorable Personages, he would for his
reward and secrecy therein, give him 3000. pound in ready gold; The Cook
perceiving this his wicked and bloody intentions, told him that if it might
gain him 1000. worlds, he would not attempt an Act so wicked, and withal told
him that his Treacherous Designs he would immediately discover, the which the
Frenchman perceiving (when he saw his opportunity) stole out of doors, for no
man there present could understand French, and this French Cook understanding
no English, whereby to discover this advice of his Country man, was the reason
why he did escape, who if he had been as avaricious of lucre as the other of
blood, they had dispached out of this world these Noble Pillars of our Realm,
this was not discovered till after Supper, the Cook meeting one of the Earl
of Leicesters Chaplains which understood French, who told him the manner and
form of it as is before related, yet was this French Cook apprehended and
sent for to be examined before the Lords in Parliament, and as yet not
acquitted.

Let every Christian Reader judge what Diabolical, and unparalled intentions
are continually practiced by the Papists in England, against the Pillars of our
Church and Commonwealth:

Five Articles preferred by the House of Commons in Parliament against Mr.
Herbert the Kings Attorney General.
WHether he contrived, framed, or advised the Articles exhibited against the
Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerigg, Mr. Pym, Mr. Hampden, and Mr.
Stroud, or whether he knew or had heard who did contrive, frame, or advise the
same. To which he answered That he did none of those three, and if he was
proved so to do, he would be contented to dye for it.

2. Whether he knew the truth of those Articles; To which he answered, That he
knew nothing but what was said to him by his Master the King.

3. Whether he will make them good when he shall be called thereto, To which he
answered, he was no way able to make them good farther then his Master should
enable him.

4. From whom he had received them, or by whose advice he did exhibit them.
To which he answered, That from his Masters hands he received them, and by his
command did exhibit them.

5. What proof and testimony he had to maintain those Articles, To which he
answered, That he received the Command from his Master, and had no other proof
or testimony but such as his Master should enable him with. And being pressed
to deal clearly, what testimony that was, He said he was of his Majesty's
Counsel, and therefore desired further time to consider what answer to make,

Upon all which it was resolved upon the question, that the exhibiting of those
Articles in the Lords House against Members of the Commons House, was illegal
and a high crime. It was likewise ordered, that a Message should be sent to
the Lords, to desire them to join with the House of Commons, to move the King,
that by Thursday next his Majesty will be pleased to appoint such as have
given information against the foresaid Members, may bring in their charge, or
else they to be freed by such a way as the Parliament shall think fit.

An Order was entered, that in regard there was a high breach of the privileges
of Parliament by Mr, Herbert Mr. Attorney in exhibiting the Articles
aforesaid, in the sealing up their papers and Trunkes, in the demand of the
foresaid Members in the Commons House, that a Messige be sent to the Lords to
make a Committee of Lords to meet with a Committee of the Commons House, to
consider how and in what manner reparation may be made for the breach of
privileges.

Then the Black Rod came to call the Speaker and the Commons House into the
Lords House, where the King by Commission passed the two Acts, 1. For pressing
of Mariners for the ships. 2. For the Captives taken by the Pirates of Argiere.

ON Wednesday the 12. of January, upon the report of the great Hurly-Burly,
raised at Kingstone, by Colonel Lunsford, and the Lord George Digby, who with
300, Troopers, and diverse other desparate and suspicious persons, appearing in
arms much affrighted the Country people thereabout, and bred great fears in
the City.

There were warrants granted out to the Sergtant, to stay two Boots laden with
grert saddles, to be carried down to Kingstonn, and to bring them that
transported them to be examined which was accordingly performed,

It is this day ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the
Sheriffs of the several Counties of England and Wales, calling to their
assistance the justices of the Peace, and the trained Bands of those several
Counties (or so many of them as shall be necessary for the Service) shall
suppress all unlawful Assemblies gathered together to the disturbance of the
public Peace of the Kingdom in their several Counties respectively: and that
they take care to secure the said Counties, and all the Magazines in them.

Advice sent from his Majesty's Commissioners in Scotland, to both Houses of
Parliament, January 15. 1641.
Our Treaty concerning the Irish affairs, being so often interrupted by the
emergent distractions, gives us occasion earnestly to desire your Lordships,
and these Noble Gentlemen of the House of Commons; for to present to the
Honorable Houses of Parliament.

We do in name of the Parliament and Kingdom of Scotland acknowledge
ourselves next to the providence of God, and in his Majesty's justice and
goodness most beholding to the meditation and Brotherly kindness of the
Kingdom of England in many respects, and Especially in Condescending to the
Kings Majesty's down coming to Scotland in the midst of their greatest
affairs whereof we have tasted the sweet and comfortable fruits, and do
heartily wish the happiness to this Kingdom.

And as we are hearty sorry to find our hopes thereof deferred, by the present
distractions daily growing here to greater height, and out of the sense
thereof, have taken the boldness to send our humble and faithful advice to
the Kings most Excellent Majesty for the remedying of the same, to the just
fatisfaction of his people; So out of our duty to his Majesty and to testify
our brotherly affection to this Kingdom, and acquit themselves of the trust
imposed upon us.

We do most earnestly beseech the Honorable Houses in the Depth of their
wisdom, to think timously upon the fairest and fittest ways of composing all
present difference; To the glory of God, the good of the Church and State of
both Kingdoms, and to his Majesty's honor and Contentment wherein if our
faithful endeavors may be any ways useful, we shall be most ready at all
occasions to contribute the same.

FINIS.

