Die Martis, 16 Januarii, 1648.
AN ACT OF THE COMMONS of ENGLAND Assembled in PARLIAMENT, For the Adjourning
of part of The Term of Hilary, 1648.
THe Commons assembled in Parliament, holding it convenient and necessary, for
diverse weighty Reasons and occasions, to Adjourn part of the next Term of
Hilary; that is to say, From the first Return thereof, called Octabis Hilarii,
until the Return of Crastino Purificationis next ensuing: Be it therefore
Ordained and Enacted by the Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the
Authority aforesaid, That the said Term of Hilary be Adjourned, that is to say,
From the Return of Octabis Hilarii, unto the said Return of Crastino
Purificationis: And all and every person or persons which has Cause or
Commandment to appear in any of the Courts at Westminster, in or at the said
Return of Octabis Hilarii, or in or at any day or time from and after the said
Return of Octabis Hilarii, and before the said Return of Crastino
Purificationis, may tarry at their dwellings, or where their businesses
otherwise shall lie, without resorting to any of the said Courts for that
cause, before the said return of Crastino Purificationis next coming, and that
without danger or forfeiture, penalty or contempt to be in that behalf. And be
it also Ordained and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Writs of
Adjournment shall be directed to the Justices of the said Courts, giving them
Authority to Adjourn the said Term of Hilary; that is to say, From Octabis
Hilarii, until the said Return of Crastino Purificationis, as before is said;
And the said Adjournment shall be made in the first day of the said Octabis
Hilarii. And be it further Enacted and Ordained, That all Matters, Causes and
Suits depending in any of the said Courts shall have continuance, and the
parties shall have day from the date of these presents unto Crastino
Purificationis, as before is said: And the Commissioners of the Great-Seal are
required to issue forth Writs accordingly. And be it further Ordained, That
the Sheriffs of London, and all other Sheriffs of the several Counties in
England and Wales, do forthwith proclaim and publish this Act in the chief
Market Towns within their several and respective Counties.

H: Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Act be forthwith
Printed and Published; And that the Members of this House do take care for
speedy sending it down to the Sheriffs of the respective Counties within the
Kingdom of England and Dominion of Wales.

H: Scobel, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
Jan. 16. 1648.


