Die Sabbathi 13 November* 1647
WHereas by an Ordinance of this present Parliament bearing date the fourteenth
day of July 1643. It was Granted, Ordained, and Declared, That all those who
should advance one full fourth part of their former Adventures for Lands in
Ireland, or that should de novo, become Adventurers by advancing any sum or
sums of Money, should have a double proportion of Land; that is, twice so
much as was granted by any of the preceding Acts or Ordinances of Parliament to
Adventurers in that behalf. Now for as much as the said Ordinance being
without limitation of time for such Advances to be made, may much disadvange
the State, The Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled taking the same into
consideration, and to the end that thirty thousand pounds, and no more money,
may be advanced by paying in one full fourth part upon the said Ordinance, to
have a double proportion of Land, as is therein expressed, Do Ordain, and it
is Ordained by the said Lords and Commons, That the time limited for the coming
in Subscription and payment of any sum of money for a full fourth part of any
the former Adventures for Lands in Ireland, or otherwise upon the said
Ordinance of 14. July 1643. shall be within twenty days next after the passing
and printing of this present Ordinance by all such persons, Corporations, or
Bodies politic as are in London, or within ten miles thereof; and the time
limited shall be within forty days after the passing and printing of this
Ordinance for the coming in Subscription and payment of any Money for a full
fourth part, as aforesaid, by all other persons, Corporations, or Bodies
politic of the first Adventurers for Land in Ireland, that will advance and
pay one full fourth part thereupon or otherways. And it is further Ordained by
the Authority aforesaid, That in case the said thirty thousand pounds shall not
be advanced and paid within the said forty days, as is before declared, That
then it shall and may be lawful for any person or persons whatsoever, within
seven days next after the expiration of the said forty days to advance and
pay the full fourth part of any the said first Adventures whereunto the said
fourth part is, or shall not be then added, and upon payment thereof shall have
and take that advantage to himself which the said first Adventurer should or
might have had by payment of the said full fourth part by virtue of the said
Ordinance of Parliament of the fourteenth of July 1643. before mentioned. And
whereas many of the first Adventurers intended to have paid in their whole
Money according to their Subscription within the times limited for payment, but
were hindered by reason of the then great troubles, and of the War in this
Kingdom; It is therefore Ordained and Declared by the said Lords and Commons
in Parliament assembled, That all such Adventurers shall be admitted to make
payment of their full Adventure and Subscription of Money, and to add a full
fourth part thereunto of their said full Adventure and Subscription, according
to the said Ordinance of the 14 July 1643. and upon payment thereof, according
to the several and respective limitation of Lives before mentioned, and not
otherwise, shall have and take the like benefit of the said Ordinance of the
14. July 1643. for a double proportion of Land in Ireland as is therein
declared, any Act or Ordinance of Parliament to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding. And it is also Ordained by the said Lords and Commons in
Parliament, That all such coming in Subscriptions, or payment of any Money,
and the benefit or profit that may or should accrue thereupon as shall be made
in pursuance of the said Ordinance of Parliament of the 14 of July 1643. by any
person or persons, or for any Corporations or Bodies politic whatsoever after
the end and expiration of the said seven days next coming after the forty
days before mentioned, are and shall be by virtue of this present Ordinance
void and of none effect, and from thenceforth shall be accounted null and void,
and to be so interpreted to all intents and purposes, any thing in the said
Ordinance to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And it is hereby further
Ordained, That the said thirty thousand pounds, or so much thereof as shall be
advanced, shall be paid in unto Master Thomas Andrews, Master Thomas Foot,
Master John Kendricke, and Master Samuel Avery, Aldermen of the City of London,
who are hereby appointed Treasurers for the said service, and to issue forth
the said Money as they shall be ordered by both Houses of Parliament.

Printed December the first 1647.
Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily. 1647.


