THE VOTES OF THE PARLIAMENT Die Iovis xij Maij 1642.
Resolved upon the Question.
THat this House does declare that if any person whatsoever shall arrest, or
imprison the persons of the Lords and Gentlemen, or any of them: or any other
of the Members of either House of Parliament that shall be employed in the
Service of both Houses of Parliament, or shall offer violence to them, or any
of them for doing any thing in pursuance of the Commands or Instructions of
both Houses shall be held disturbers of the proceedings of Parliament, and
public enemies of the Sat: And that all persons are bound by their
protestation to endeavor to bring them to condign Punishment.

Resolved etc.

That this house does declare that those of the City of London and all other
persons that have obeyed the Ordinance for the Militia, and done any thing in
execution thereof, have done according to the Law of the Land and in pursuance
of what they were commanded by both Houses of Parliament, and for the defense
and safety of the King and Kingdom, and shall have the assistance of both
Houses of Parliament against any that shall presume to question them for
yiedling their obedience unto the said Commands in this necessary and important
service. And that whosoever shall obey the said Ordinance for the time to come
shall receave the same approbation and assistance from both Houses of
Parliament.

Resolved etc.

That this House does declare that they are resolved to maintain those Lords,
and Gentlemen in those things they have done and shall further do in the
obedience of their Commands, for the preserving the peace of the Kingdom.

Ordered that a Message be sent to the Lords to desire them that the Committees
may meet and prepare a speedy answer to this Message of his Majesty's, and
perfect the answer to his Maiestyes last Messages, and to prepare a Letter of
thanks to the Committees at York and to let them know therein that they will
make their case their own, and mayntaine them in what they shall do in
obedience of their Comands, and that a letter to the same purpose be sent to
the Committes at Hull, and the votes agreed upon by the Lords and Commons
enclosed, and to acquaint them with the agreement of this House in the votes
sent from their Lordships, and to desire that the Lords would forthwith issue
their Comissions into all parts of the Kingdom, and appoint a day ceartaine
when the Trained Bands of the Counties adjacent may be exercised according to
the Ordinance of Parliament, and an other day for the Counties more remote, and
that some Members may be sent into the several Counties to see the Ordinance
performed.

London Printed for I. F. 1642.


