A BRIEF COLLECTJON, OF SOME FORGOTTEN VOTES of the Commons alone; of the Lords
and Commons Jointly, and Ordinances of both Houses, reprinted to refresh their
Memories, and prevent all dishonorable and unjust Actions, repugnant to all,
or any of them.
An exact Colection of all Remonstrances etc P. 190. 191.
The Uotes of the Commons in Parliament Die Iovis 12. Maii 1642.
Resolved upon the Question,
THat this House does declare, that if any person whatsoever shall arrest or
imprison the persons of the Lords and Gentlemen, or any of them, or any other
of the Members of either House of Parliament, that shall be employed in the
service of both Houses of Parliament, or, shall offer violence to them, or any
of them for doing any thing in pursuance of the Commands or Instructions of
both Houses, shall be held disturbers of the proceedings of Parliament, and
public Enemies of the State. And that all persons are bound by their
protestation to endeavor to bring them to condign punishment.

RESOLVED etc. That this House does declare, that those of the City of London,
and all other persons that have obeyed the Ordinance for the Militia, and done
any thing in execution thereof, have done according to the Law of the Land, and
in pursuance of what they were commanded by both Houses of Parliament, And for
the defense of the King and Kingdom, and shall have the Assistance of both
Houses of Parliament against any that shall presume to question them for
yiedling their obedience unto the said Commands in this necessary and important
service. And that whosoever shall obey the said Ordinance for the time to come,
shall receive the same approbation and Assistance from both Houses of
Parliament.

6 Junii* 1642.
Ibid. P. 335.
The Message of the Lords to the House of Commons, upon the Lord Willoughby of
Parham, his letter and service in the execution of the Ordinance concerning the
Militia.
THe Lords have thought fit to let you know, how much they value and approve
the endeavors of this Lord in a service so much importing the safety of this
Kingdom, and they doubt not of your readiness to concur with them upon all
occasions to manifest the sense they have, and shall retain of his deservings,
which appears the greater, by how much the difficulties (by those
Circumstances you have heard read;) have bin greater And as my Lords resolve to
make his Interest their own, in this service for the public good and safety
of this Kingdom, so they desire you to join with them, in so good and
necessary a work.

Resolved by the House of Commons to join with the Lords in this vote.

A Collection of all the public orders etc. Land. 1646. P. 38.
Die Martis 18* Aprilis 1643.
REsolved upon the Question by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament,
that the said Houses do declare, that they do take it a an acceptable service
in those Citizens, or others who shall list themselves under the Command of
Sheriff Langham, or such as he shall appoint, for the better security of the
City of London, and the Counties adjacent. And the said Sheriff is hereby
desired, to improve his interest and authority for the speedy advancing of so
necessery a Service.

Ibid. P. 34.
Die Mercurii 12* Aprilis 1643.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That the
Committee for the Militia of London, shall have full power and Authority to
raise new Regiments of Volunteers, as well with in the said Liberties, as
without.
WHereas for better defense and safety of the City of London, WHEREON THE
SAFETY AND WELFARE OF THIS PRESENT PARLIAMENT, and therein OF OUR RELIGION,
LAWS, AND LIBERTIES, DO SO MVCH DEPEND, diverse well affected Persons by
approbation of the Committee for the Militia there, have with great care and
industry; as well within the City and Liberties, as without in the Neighbor
Parishes, obtained diverse subscriptions for considerable numbers of honest and
trusty Persons not employed in the Militia or Trained Bands, as also for Horse
and Arms, to intard the same might as necessary materials be in readiness to
help forwards the preparations for A public defense, in this time of eminent
danger, etc. It is further ordered, declared and ordained; that as the good
endeavors of the said Committee of the Militia, the Persons trusted by them,
and those whom they have employed in procuring the said Subscriptions, as also
of the Subscribers, and others who have contributed, or shall concur with
them in forwarding and profiting of the said work, are and shall taken
acceptable testimonies of their public Spirits and real good intentions for
the Common good and safety, and the execution of the same, a good service to
the Commonwealth. So the said parties shall be by the power of Parliament
saved harmless, both for what according to the true meaning of the premises
they have done, and shall do herein for time to come.

Ibid. P. 23 in the Appendix.
Die Lunae 2 Martii 1645
Resolved, etc* by the House of Commons,
THat the Actions of the City of London, or of any other Person whatsoever for
the defense of the Parliament or the Privileges thereof or the preservation of
the Members thereof, are according to their duty, and to their late
Protestation, and the Laws of the Kingdom; and if any person shall arrest or
trouble any of them for so doing, he is declared to be a public Enemy of the
Common wealth.

Resolved etc. That this Vote shall be made known to the Common Council of
the City of London.

Romans 14. 22. Happy is he that condemns not himself, in that thing which he
allows
LONDON, Printed in the year Anno Dom. 1647.


