Primo die Novembris, 1648.
At the Committee of the House of Commons appointed for the consideration of
the Petition of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Commons of the City of London, in
Common Council assembled; presented to the House of Commons, for addition of
maintenance within the Province of London.

IT is the oppinion of this Committee that the Aldermen and others of the
Common Council, appointed to confer with this Committee, be desired to
inform themselves, what Lands, Houses, or Impropriations are within the
Province of London, belonging to Deanes and Chapters, and are to acquaint this
Committee therewith, this day seavennight, to which day this Committee does
adjourn the further consideration of this business.

It is further declared by this Committee, That the several Receivers,
Treasurers, Sequestrators, and all others whom it may concern, are desired to
contribute their best assistance; to the end this Committee may be fully
informed, what Lands, Houses, and Impropriations lie within the several
Precincts of London, Middlesex, and Surrey, within the Province of London.

Ri. Knightly.

Secundo die Novembris, 1648.
At a meeting of the Committee appointed by the Common Council of London, to
confer with the Honorable Committee of Parliament, for the obtaining of an
addition for the maintenance of the Ministers within the Province of London.

IT is Ordered by this Committee, That the late Order of the First of this
instant November, made by the said Honorable Committee of Parliament, shall be
printed, and sent to the Ministers, Common-councell-men, and Churchwardens of
the several Parishes within the City of London, and Liberties thereof: And
they are thereupon desired by this Committee, in pursuance of the said Order
made by the Committee of Parliament, to make return to this Committee at the
Guild Hall, on Monday next, by two of the clock in the afternoon; of the
particulars of all Lands, Houses, and Impropriations belonging to Deans and
Chapters, lying within their several Parishes; whereby to enable this Commitee
to give satisfaction to the Committee of Parliament, as by their said Order is
desired.

Tho. Lathum Cleric.

London, Printed by Rich. Cotes, 1648.


