THE DEBATES OF THE House of Commons Assembled in Parliament, touching His
Majesty's Concessions and Answers upon the TREATY.

With their VOTES concerning their Instructions given to Col. Hamond Governor
of the Isle of Wight, for security of his Majesty's PERSON:

As also A LETTER of the Commons to the Lord General Fairfax, acquainting him
with the contradiction of his Orders to Col Ewers, to their Instructions and
Resolutions.

Together with His Majesty's last SPEECH to the Lords-Commissioners at their
departure from the Isle of Wight.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for R. Smithurst. 1648.

THE VOTES OF THE House of Commons assembled at Westminster, concerning their
late Instructions given to Col. HAMMOND Governor of the Isle of VVIGHT.
THis day the House of Commons received a Letter from Colonel Hammond,
Governor of the Isle of Wight, brought by Major Cromwell, and one enclosed from
the General, requiring him to attend his Excellency at the Headquarters; And
that Colonel Ewer was appointed to take the command of His Majesty there.

The Commons had debate hereupon, and Voted that Colonel Hammond should be
(...) stay in the Isle of Wight, and attend his Ch^rge there till further
Order: And that his Excellency should be acquainted with this Vote. They
likewise Voted to send a Letter to the Lord Admiral, to require him to send
some Ships for security of the Isle of Wight, with Orders that they obey the
Commands of Colonel Hammond.

A Messenger came last night to Windsor from the Isle of Wight, who brought
word that Colonel Ewer had the custody of his Majesty, and that Col. Hammond
was on his way to Windsor.

A Letter this day came from Colonel Hammond from Farnham Castle, with a Copy
of the Orders from the General Council of the Army; and their Letter to Col.
Ewers and others, for securing His Majesty's person in the Isle of Wight.

Ordered, That a Letter should be forthwith sent to his Excellency, to acquaint
him that these Orders and Instructions from him to Colonel Ewers, for securing
His Majesty's person in the Isle of Wight, are contrary to their Resolutions
and Instructions given to Colonel Hammond, and that it is the pleasure of the
House, That his Excellency recall the said Orders, and that Colonel Hammond be
set at liberty to attend his Charge in the Isle of Wight.

A Letter from his Excellency, was reported from the Committee of the Army,
wherein his Excellency takes notice, that they intend not to furnish him with
any Moneys for contingencies, which of necessity must be had for pay of
Messengers, and other daily incident Charges to the Army, and therefore his
Excellency must be forced thereby to receive moneys for this purpose out of the
Collectors and Receivers hands, where he can find, if speedy course be not
taken to supply him.

The House Ordered hereupon, That it should be referred to the Committee of the
Army to take such course as they shall think fit, for pay of the Arrea^s o^ the
Army.

Major Cromwell returned this day with Letters further from Colonel Hammond,
acquainting the House of his being come to Windsor, and there detained, and so
cannot act as to the Order of Parliament: That Colonel Ewers has the command
of His Majesty in the Isle of Wight. The Houses had a Conference hereupon, the
Lords pressing the business to be taken into speedy consideration.

The House this day heard the Report of the Commissioners from the Isle of
Wight, of His Majesty's several Concessions, as you have had them formerly in
Order, which was read twice over, and the greatest part of the day spent in
debate thereof.

A bout two of the Clock in the afternoon they came to the question, whether
they should now debate, whether His Majesty's Answers and Concessions reported
by them are satisfactory, or unsatisfactory, and it was resolved in the
Negative, That they would not then debate it further, or the question be put,
but that the debate thereof should be resumed to morrow morning at nine of the
Clock

Mr. Speaker according to the Order of the House, gave the Lord Wenman, Mr.
Hollis, and Mr. Pierepoint, three of the Commissioners, who came last from the
Treaty, thanks for their great pains and care in managing of the Treaty.

This day the House resumed the debate, according to Order, of the Kings
Concessions and Answers upon the Treaty; the debate was very high, and took up
the whole day, yet they came to no conclusion, or any Vote passed, but put off
the further debate until Monday morning.

His Majesty's last Speech to the Lords-Commissioners at their departure from
the Isle of Wight.
MY LORDS, You are come to take your leave of me, and I believe we shall scarce
ever see each other again: but Gods will be done; I thank God, I have made my
peace with him, and shall without fear, undergo what he shall be pleased to
suffer men to do unto me.

My Lords, you cannot but know, that in my fall and ruin you see your own, and
that also near to you; I pray God send you better friends then I have found.

I am fully informed of the whole carriage of the Plot against Me and Mine; and
nothing so much afflicts me, as the sense and feeling I have of the sufferings
of my Subjects, and the miseries that hang over my three Kingdoms, drawn upon
them by those who (upon pretenses of good) violently pursue their own Interests
and ends.

These words his Majesty delivered with much alacrity and cheerfulness, with a
serene Countenance, and a carriage free from all disturbance.

Thus he parted with the Lords, leaving many tender Impressions (if not in
them) in the standers by.

FINIS.

