A DECLARATION Of the Commons assembled in Parliament, UPON Two Letters sent by
Sir John Brooks, (sometimes a Member of the Commons House this Parliament, till
he was disabled, being a Projector, Monopolist, and Fomentor of the present
bloody and unnatural War; for bearing of Arms actually against the Parliament)
to Sir William Killegrew at Oxford (intercepted near Coventrey) giving his
advice how the King should proceed in the Treaty upon the Propositions for
Peace, presented unto Him by the PARLIAMENT.

With the NAMES of the Lords, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Ministers
and Freeholders, indicted the last Sessions at Grantham, of High Treason, by
Sir Peregrine Bartue and the said Sir John Brooks, before themselves, and other
their fellow-Cavaliers, Rebels and Traitors, Commissioners, appointed (as they
say) for that purpose.

Who, contrary to the known Laws of this Kingdom, seize all the Estates of the
persons indicted, require their Tenants to pay in all their Rents of the said
Lords and others, unto themselves, being Commissioners and sharers therein.

Also, the Ordinance of both Houses, made the 17 of December. 1642. that the
pretended Commissioners, and all others, Sheriffs, Officers, Jurors, and any
whom it may concern, may know what to expect, that shall presume to molest the
Persons or Estates of any for their service to the Parliament and Kingdom.

With some Abstracts of credible Letters from Exceter, who give a further
Relation concerning the late Expedition under the command of Sergeant Major
James Chudleigh against the Cornish.

Ordered by the Commons in Parl. That this Declaration and Letters be forthwith
Printed and published:

H: ELSYNGE, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



May 10. London, Printed for Edw. Husbands in the Middle Temple. 1643.

A DECLARATION OF THE COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, etc.
THe Commons in Parliament having received two several Letters (which were
intercepted) written and sent by Sir John Brooks (sometimes a Member of that
House this Parliament, till he was disabled, being a great Projector and
Monopolist, and not only a deserter of the service, wherewith he was entrusted
for the public, but also a Fomentor of the present, bloody and unnatural
War, and actually bearing of arms against the Parliament) unto Sir William
Killegrew knight, a great and principal Factor for the Cavaliers in this
Rebellion and Design, residing at Oxford, during the late Treaty upon the
Propositions for an Accommodation presented unto His Majesty by both Houses;
whereby, as a further concurrent Testimony, the good people of this Kingdom,
and all others that wilfully have not blinded themselves, (holding the Truth
in unrighteousness, not suffering that to appear; which in their judgments
they cannot gainsay) may clearly discern by whose and what Counsels His
Majesty is swayed, and is and has of late bin seduced; that the meanest of
those that have engaged themselves in this hellish and Tyrannical Rebellion,
do adventure to cast in their Mites, their Counsels being as various as their
Designs; some endeavoring the promoting of the Popish Religion; others, their
own lucre and advancement, to make up again their desperate and broken
Fortunes, by the ruin and destruction of the faithful of the Land; some,
ambitiously seeking Honor, that they may insult over the Lords heritage; some,
to protect themselves from the hand of public Justice, to which they are
obnoxious; and others, hunting for revenge; Each of them striving to be the
most lying spirit in the mouths of all them that encompasse the Royal Throne,
who have not only persuaded, but have prevailed also; and have made the Nobles
and great Men of England, for the most part, of those that have withdrawn
themselves, as the Nobles of Israel, Destroyers of the work, and hinderers of a
Reformation; the Evidences of which Truths are daily so clearly discovered, by
extraordinary and special Acts of divine Providence, so visible, as he that
runs may read.

By these Letters it appears, That the Lords and Commons of both Houses, who
have not lost their first love, nor deserted their Trust, but have appropriated
themselves to the Lords work; that have given sufficient Testimony of their
Affections to the service and safety of the King and Kingdom, are vilified and
traduced, and that in the highest places, by these wicked and seducing
Counselors, who not only work them out of the good opinion of His Majesty,
but by their wiles are encompassing their Ruin and Destruction; have advised,
that no pardon may be given to the Lords and others, that have taken up Arms,
though in their own defense, against them that are declared by the greatest
Counsel of the Land, to be public Enemies to the State; and that in every
County inquisition may be made by such Instruments as the King may best trust;
and a special care taken, that none of them may escape that are rich, and have
good Estates; whose Names must be certified speedily to His Majesty, that they
may be exempted out of the general Pardon.

And whereas, according to the known Laws of the Land, as both the Houses of
Parliament by their Declarations of the Seventeenth of January, and Second of
February, 1641. have declared, That where there is no Charge against any Member
of either House, made known to that House of which he is a Member; and he is
Arrested, Attached, Indicted or Accused; or where their Estates are seized or
sequestered, which is not made known to such House whereof he is a Member, That
it is against the Fundamental Liberties of the Subject, the Rights of
Parliament; and that those that did or should offend therein, were guilty of
the breach of the Privileges of the Parliament, of the Liberties of the
Subjects, and public Enemies to the Commonwealth; and thereupon the King
himself, as appears by His Message of the Twelfth of January following, waved
His proceedings against the Lord Kimbolton and the Five Members of the House of
Commons accused of High Treason; And in his Message of the Twenty fourth of the
same Month, sent to both Houses, confesses His mistake in the way: And
whereas afterward both the Houses of Parliament declaring in their Petition to
His Majesty, That it is the undoubted Right and Privilege of Parliament, that
no Member of either House of Parliament can be proceeded against without
consent of Parliament; His Majesty returned in answer the Second of February,
1641. That he did find good cause wholly to desert His prosecution against the
Lord Kimbolton and five Members.

Yet the said Sir John Brooks, as it appears by his letters hereafter
mentioned, and as it is most evident, the rest of his fellow Traitors and
Rebels that are the pretenders of peace, and of governing the Subject according
to the known Laws, have not only broken through and violated these known Laws
so lately declared in Parliament, and confessed and consented unto on all
hands, but contrary to all Law and justice, by color of a Regal power and the
Kings Prerogative, above the Law, presumptuously against all the Rules and
Presidents of Law, under pretense of a Commission of their own procuring to
them directed, have caused diverse members of both Houses, and diverse Gentlemen
of Lincolnshire (whose names are hereafter recited) to be Indicted of
High Treason before themselves, and have caused their estates to be seized as
forfeited, requiring the Tenants of all and every the said persons so Indicted,
forthwith, and from time to time as they shall grow due, to pay in all the
Rents of the said Lords and others, unto themselves being Commissioners and
sharers, which is according to the advice given by the said Sir John Brooks in
his Letter against the Pardon, whose words are, How else shall the King pay His
debts now made for this War, and recompense those that have adventured their
lives, and spent their fortunes, and have been undone? and if the King will not
punish the one, and reward his faithful servants, He will be in a worse estate
by such a peace, than He was at the beginning of this War. These pretended
Commissioners make it criminal to such Tenants as shall refuse to pay in the
Rents unto them, threatening them with severe punishments for their neglect and
contempt.

These Letters further inform us, what advise the Author has commended to
His Majesty concerning the Members of both Houses, That He should not allow of
a Treaty with His Parliament, before they were all restored; That the two
Houses may be full of the same Members, as at the first; insinuating, That if
the two Houses were so filled, the King need not doubt but all things would
proceed from them to His Honor and Greatness, and that the King cannot
receive Honor nor Right from the rest that have Traitorously plotted His ruin
and overthrow, and our Religion, Laws, and Liberties; As he is the first that
so bold-fac'dly charge the whole Parliament with Treason in the highest
degree, so it were to be wished he were the only man that has put conditions
upon the King, threatening Him with a new War against the King, Kingdom, and
Parliament, if His Majesty should conclude a Peace contrary to their advise,
and would not gratify them with the estates of such as had borne Arms against
them; and if the King would permit all those that were for Him to be thrust
out, He will find hereafter none to stand for Him. The Author of these
Letters, boasts and glories in that his advise is followed, which appears to be
most true in this particular; for by His Majesty's Message to both Houses of
the 12 of April, 1643. the King Declares, That before He would disbandon the
Armies (which was to precede the Treaty upon the other Propositions) He would
have all the Members of both Houses to be restored, who have been Voted from
them (as the Message says) for adhering to His Majesty in these distractions.
Let the world judge what these men merit, instead of a restitution to their
places in Parliament, who have not only withdrawn themselves from the service,
but Traitorously have endeavored to subvert the same, our Religion, and
Liberties, and by force to destroy the good people of the Kingdom: what a
wonderment would it be to restore again a power to them over the lives,
estates, and liberties of those who first sent them to serve in Parliament,
that already threaten to turn their power against them to their ruin and
destruction, being confident they shall carry things as they list, if the
Houses were filled as at first.

The Author in his last letter tells us, That His Majesty's last Message to the
Houses of Parliament was according to his heart, and for the most part the same
which he formerly sent to Sir Will. Killegrew, which was read unto the King.
These evil Counselors have discovered themselves, Let the whole Kingdom judge
how pleasing it is, and what peace was to be expected.

The Author concludes with a lamentable story from his wife, every man can
quickly tell what he deserves; it is true, his house was searched, there being
good cause; but it is as true, That although his Lady discovered her self an
enemy to the Parliament, there was not, nor yet is there any thing carried
away, to the bigness of a Nutt, but all left where it was then found.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Declaration, the Letters, the
List of the names, and the Ordinance of the 17 of December, 1642. be Printed
and published.

Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

SIR,
I Should be very glad to hear the King should have his Navy, Revenue, his
Forts and Magazins restored, but I hope the King will not finish the Treaty,
but with his two Houses of Parliament, being full with the same Members as at
the first; for if the King permit all those that were for him to be thrust out,
then I believe he will find hereafter none to stand for him. But it is against
the Law and right of the Subject, that any being legally elected, should be put
out of the house, but for some offenses against the known Laws of the Kingdom.
And the two Houses being so filled as at the first the King need not doubt, but
all things will proceed from them to his Honor and greatness. And other ways
from the sixth or seventh part of the House, who as all the World knows, have
traitorously plotted his ruin, and our overthrow, our Religion, Laws and
Liberties. Can it be thought possible, that from that faction; the King can
ever receive honor and right? And I pray let me say some thing to you
concerning a general pardon, the which I know they will in the end much press
for: First, all those that have served the King, will desire none, nor need
any: And if the King should grant to all the Lords and others that have taken
up and born arms, and made war against his own person and his Forces, I verily
believe you will quickly see another war again: and besides, how will the King
pay his debts now made for this war, and recompense those that have adventured
their lives, and have spent their fortunes, and have bin undone by their
plundrings? And if the King will not punish the one, and reward his faithful
Servants, I do believe the King will be in worse estate by such a Peace, then
he was at the beginning of this war. I am far from dissuading a pardon to be
given to the poor common people, that have bin seduced, and some for fear,
and by force have been constrained to this unnatural and unlawful war. But
all those in every County that have good estates, that have contributed, and
have in person taken arms against the King to be excepted, in which inquiry,
there must be great care taken, other ways many rich notorious Traitors may
escape. And therefore the King, as I conceive, must send to those he most
trusts in every Shire, to certify the names of those that ought to be exempted
out of the general pardon, as we have now done by Sir Peregrine Bartue, for
our County of Lincoln: I will say nothing to you of the taking of Grantham,
for the news is by this stale, but he can declare all the business: only your
brother Fines got away, on whom they lay all the fault of the loss of the
Town. But I hope you shall hear better news ere long from us, then that my
Lord of Newcastle has mustered 18000 horse and foot, and has taken an entire
Troop of Dragoneers from Hotham, since Sir Hugh Cholmley's coming in: I pray
God send the King an honorable an happy peace:

Your Servant, John Brooks.
Newark 27, of March, 1643.
Postscript.
MY Lord of Newcastle has promised to let us have 500 Muskets for our money,
the which if we can get, we will lose all our lives, but we will reduce
Lincolnshire to the Kings obedience, and be able to serve him with 5000 horse
and foot, and to secure the County besides, without any charge to the King. And
if the King would send us a draught of an association to be made between us and
Nottingham-shire, Rutland-shire, and Leichestershire, if he think such a
course would be for his service, I believe it would utterly overthrow all the
Parliaments hopes and supplies from these four Counties, and make them all for
him. And I doubt not but Darby-shire will come in, and many more will follow
the example. All men now being cleere-sighted and weary of these oppressions,
as hateful to God and man.

SIR,
ACcording to my promise in my last Letter, I do send you here enclosed the
names of those that were indicted of high Treason at our last Sessions at
Grantham, I can add no more news but that this day I received from my wife the
Copy of the Kings last Message to the Houses of Parliament, which was according
to my heart, and the most part of it the same I formerly writ to you, which you
were pleased to read to the King. My wife writes that the Commons in Parliament
will not suffer it to be printed, but I have sent it to my Lord of Newcastle,
to be printed at York, if he think fit. By my wifes Letter, you may perceive,
that my house in London is plundered from the Garrets to the Celler, and all
taken away to the bigness of a Nut: And I am sure you know, how it was
furnished. And this act done by a particular Warrant from the Committee: I will
die but I will revenge it, and that ere long: God in Heaven deliver the King,
and all that love him, from these base traitorous Devils.

Your faithful Servant, John Brook.
Newark 21 of April, 1643.
All the Tenants and Farmers of any Lands, Tithes, or other Hereditaments, are
to take notice that the Persons here-under-written by due course of Law, stand
indicted of high Treason, for which offense all their estates ought to be
forfeited unto, and seized by the King. His Majesty's Commissioners, therefore
require all such Tenants and Farmers to pay their Rents last due, and to be due
unto the Kings Commissioners for the County of Lincoln for his Majesty's use.
In default whereof the Tenants themselves to be charged therewith, and receive
due punishment for their neglect and contempt. The Rents already due to be paid
within five days after the date hereof, and the Rents to grow due within five
days after the same shall be due.
Members of the Lords House this present Parlia.
THeophilus Earl of Lincoln, Francis Lord Willoughby of Parham,
Members of the House of Commons this Parliament.
John Hotham of Beverley, Esquire. Sir Christopher Wray of Barkings, Knight.
Sir Anthony Irby of Boston, Knight. William Ellis of Grantham Esquire. Sir
Edward Ayscough of South Kelsey, Knight Thomas Hatcher of Careby, Esquire.
John Wray of Glentworth, Esquire. Sir Thomas Trollop of Caswick Baronet. Sir
John Brownloe of Belton, Baronet. William Brown of Sleeford, Gentleman. Thomas
Savill of Neiwton, Esquire. Henry Massingberd of Bratoft, Gentleman. Drayner
Massinberg, of the same, Gentleman. John Archer of Panton, Esquire. Thomas
Lister of Colby, Esquire. Thomas Grantham of Goltho, Esquire. Edward King of
Martin, Esquire. Edward Rosseter of Somerole, Esquire. Thomas Welby of Boston,
Gentleman, Francis Fines of Threckingham, gent. William Welbie of Dentongent.
Edward Whichcot of Bishop Norton, Esquire. Mullineux Disney of Norton Disney,
gem. Edward Ayscough of North Kelsey, Esquire John Bolland of Gosberkirke
husbandman. John Darrell of Grantham, Gent. William Thompson of Roxholme Gent.
Nicholas Norwood of Preiston, gent. Thomas Bristow of Grantham Gent. Thomas
Blundell of the same Esquire. William Toller of Billingborow, Yeoman. Richard
Shepperdson of Grantham, Mercer. Robert Kelham of Grantham Tanner. John
Griffith of the Bail of Lincoln, Gent. Robert Be of Sleeford woollen Draper.
William Fearing of Grantham Cordwayner. Samuel Askew of Harlaxton, yeoman.
Thomas Silon of Boston gent. William Cole of Boston Cordwayner. John Brown of
Billingburgh gent. Matthias Brown of Horbling gent. Richard Toller of
Billingburgh gent. Thomas Wallis of Swaton Clerk. Andrew Thornton of South
Kine, Clerk. Thomas Scochey of great Hale Clerk. George Foster of great Hale
yeoman. Nicholas Timberland of Threckingham yeoman. John Seagrave of Stow
green, yeoman. Clement Benson of North Kelsey Gent. Edward Tilson of Boston
woollen Draper. Edward Skipwith of Grantham Gent. William Clarke of Grantham
Apothecarie. Richard Cony of the same, gent. William Berrie of the same, Gent.
Robert Ram of Spalding, Clerk. Robert Alford of Sleford Clerk. Francis
Manbie, of Lincoln Gent. William Savill of Newton gent. Thomas Hall of
Donington yeoman. Samuel Lee of Burton Pedwerdine, Clerk. Thomas Ballard late
of Sleeford, gent. Willam Ballard of Brant Broughton gent. John Harrington of
Spalding the elder Esquire. John Harrington of the same, the younger gent.
Robert Cawdron of great Hale Esquire. Matthew Briggs of Sunflet, yeoman.
Zacharias Briggs of the same yeoman. John Burton of the same gent. Peter
Dickenson of Gain brough gent. Joseph Lark of the same gent. Thomas Ogle of
Pinchbecke, Esquire. John Pedder of Surstet gent. John Plummer of Gosborkirke,
yeoman. John Good year of Heckington yeoman. Thomas Eastcoate alias Escoath of
Algarkirke Gent. Sir Edward Hartupp the younger of Grantham Knight. Thomas
Garthwaite of Harmston gent. Ephraim Garthwaite of Barkeston Clerk. Sir Hamond
Whichcot of Sleford Knight. Matthew Read of Grantham gent. Daniel North of the
same, Gent. Henry Blestet of the same Gent. Wyat Perkins of Pinchbecke Gent.
Thomas Pell of Cosberkirke, yeoman.

May 3. 1643. Ordered to be forthwith printed and published with the Letters.
H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Sabbathi 17 December 1642.
Whereas information has been given to the Lords and commons assembled in
Parliament, that Clifton Catesby, John Lilburne, and Robert Vivers Captains in
the Army, raised by Authority of both Houses of Parliament for the necessary
defense of the true Protestant, Religion the King, Parliament, and Kingdom,
under the Command of Robert Earl of Essex, Captain General thereof were
taken Prisoners by the forces raised against the Parliament, in executing their
several duties and services according to the Ordinances of both the said
Houses, and after carried Prisoners to Oxford Jail, and having been most
barbarously used, are now questioned, and proceeded against by way of
Indictment before Sir Robert Heath Knight. one of his Majesty's Justices of the
Kings Bench, and others (by color of some Commission or other Authority from
his Majesty) for high Treason, and other supposed misdemeanors; whereas many
have been taken Prisoners by the Parliament forces in the act of War against
the Parliament, which by the Laws and statutes of this Realm is Rebellion,
and high Treason against the King and Kingdom, and the Actors herein Traitors;
and yet none of them have hitherto been put to death, or otherwise severely
dealt with by the Parliament. It is therefore Ordered and declared by the said
Lords and Commons that all such Indictments and other proceedings against the
said Capt. Catesby, Capt. Lilbourne, and Cap. Vivers, or against Capt. Wingate,
who have done faithful and good service to the Commonwealth, or against any
other person or persons, who have done or shall do any service in the said
Army; or for the raising of any moneys, Plate, horse, or Arms, for the
mainetenance thereof, or otherwise in the execution or Pursuance of any Order
or ordinance of both or either of the said Houses of Parliament for the defense
of the public safety, are unjust and illegal, and the said Sir Robert Heath
and all other Commissioners, Justices, Sheriffs, Jurors, and other officers
and Ministers of Justice, and other Persons whatsoever are hereby required and
enjoined to surcease any further proceedings against the said persons before
named or any other for any the causes aforesaid upon the said Indictments or
otherwise. And the said Lords and Commons do further declare, that if the said
persons before mentioned or any of them or any other shall be put to death or
other hurt or violence offered to their or any of their persons for or by
reason of any such service done or to be done by or according to any order or
Ordinance of both or either of the said Houses, the like punishment shall be
inflicted by death or otherwise upon such prisoners as have been or shall be
taken by the forces raised by Authority of both Houses of Parliament; And if
the said Sir Robert Heath, or any other Commissioner, Justice, Sheriff, Iuror
of other Officer or minister of Justice or other person shall do contrary to
this Ordinance in any the premises they and every of them for so doing shall
be proceeded against and dealt with as enemies to the King and Kingdom.

A further Relation of what happened in the late expedition under the Command
of Sergeant major James Chudley with his 108 horse against Sir Ralph Hopton
with his 500 horse, and 5000 foot.
Diverse of the Cavaliers which then were present and since taken Prisoners tell
us, and we have it from better hands, that God did show himself that day,
which was Tuesday, the 25 of April last, more wonderful in his Judgments,
then has been yet related, for when the Cavaliers were past two miles beyond
the place we pursued or chased them, they fell upon and destroyed one another,
for we having got their word (which was Lanceston) and they ours, which was
(Religion) coming amongst their own friends, and into their own quarters, but
conceiving it to be ours, and being demanded the word, and saying (Religion)
they fought and killed many of themselves.

That some men well affected to the Parliament, who were enforced to serve in
Hoptons Army, inform us, that immediately upon the fight, there was such a
terrible Thunder and Lightning, that the Lightning fired many of the Cavaliers
Bandaleeres, which burnt their clothes, faces and hair that many of the
wounded and scall'd men dyed daily in Lanceston.

FINIS.

