THE SAINTS SACRED LAVER.

By James Eglesfield, Master of Arts, Minister of Gods Word at Knightsbridge.

Preached at Padington, September the first, 1645.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, 1646.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir William Belfore.
AS Christ himself said sometime to a multitude, the like may I, taking
occasion from this my presumption, What came ye out to see? a Reed shaken with
the wind? it may be so: but what came ye out for to see? a Prophet? here I
must change the note, nay less then a Prophet, for as among the sons of
women, there was not a greater then He of whom Christ spoke; so among the
sons of women is there not a less then he whose pen now presents that
service which his tongue ought, in its proper place, did not the cloud of a
darkenned fortun^ eclipse his apparition. Less in maturity and ripenes for so
weighty a business, as touching my self; less in opinion of fitnes, as
touching the esteem of many who it may be have seen me sweating in the
pursuit of my Recreation, (fishing) but never in serving at the Alter of my
God, Notwithstanding, oh my God, I am sent as a messenger before thy face, and
shall prepare the way before thee.

For by a fit Metaphor drawn from the art and practice of fishing, our Savior
Christ has shaddowed forth both the calling and employment, both of his first
choice Apostles, and all other Apostolical succeeding Preachers, saying, I
will make you fishers of men. Mat. 4, 19. Such you shall be, because such I
will make you to be, and quorum pars parva fui, full twenty years exercising
this holy function: who although with Peter may say, I have toyled all the
night and caught nothing, (for my self) yet with John Baptist Luc. 3.10. I
have some reason to believe that my labors have not been altogether
unprofitable, among the Mennoes and meaner sort I fished for, which were the
crowd of common people publicans and sinners, very slippery Eeles, that had
long lien in the mud of their misdoings, and sanguinary soldiers, the Pike and
Water-wolves of the Ocean of this world, a people naturally diseased with the
bloody issue. Encouraged therefore by that inabling spirit of grace which of
Priscilla and Aquila, poor Tent makers, were able to pose that great Clerk
Apollos: with Jeremy I presume to go to the great ones: and with Peter will
once more let down my Evangelicall sweep-net, which was not composed by the
wisdom of man, or woven with the deceitful words of Sophisters, but with the
words of the Gospel, according to that of St: Paul, 1. Cor. 2.4. Neither is it
any material net, like that in Suidas which one cast over another, while they
were in single combat together, and when he had ensnared him, he slew him; nor
such a cruel, barbarous, and bloody spiritual net, as the Prophet Micah
speaks of, Micah 7. All lie in wait for blood, every man bunteth his brother
with a net. But it is that Sagena, that sweep net which our Savior brought
down from heaven, even the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ preached, that will
dragg and draw out all those that are plunged in the darkesome holes of
ignorance, and in the muddy cares of this World, to the light of Truth, and
love of supernall things. Et faelices illi quos haec sagena de profundo
criminum et errorum pertrahit ad lucem. Amb. Happy, oh thrice happy they, if
this draw net fasten on them, and bring them from darkness to light from
death to life; a faeculo, from the sea of this World, ad faecula saeculorum to
the shore of a better life, even the land of the living, which as I wish to
your Worship specially for my bounden duties sake, and to your virtuous Lady,
the field of whose loving sincerity in the remaining course of your lives,
being fully charged with deeds of charity, cannot but be accomplished with a
Crest of Glory: So even from my soul I wish it to all that love to Bathe in
Innocence, and expect the coming of the Lord Jesus.

Sir, I am your humblest servant, JAMES EGLESFIELD.

THE SAINTS SACRED LAVER.
Psalm. 26. verse. 6. I will wash my hands in innocence, O Lord, and so will I
go to thine Altar.
THis verse contains a holy Preparation, a holy Presence, and a holy Place.
The holy preparation is in these words, I will wash my hands in innocence. The
holy presence in this word o Lord: And the holy place, in this word, Altar, and
so will I go to thine Altar.

In the holy preparation note two things:

1 Quis praeparat, in this word, I, David.

2 Quo modo, in this word, wash, I David ^ash.

In the Quo modo, note two things, 1. The Bath, Innocence. 2. The parts
bathed, Hands.

In the holy presence note two things: 1. The Majesty Domine. 2. The Mirror in
this particle, o!

In the holy place note two things. 1. The Reverence of his Progress in this
word, So, not presumptuously, but humbly, like his Servant.

2. The reference of the place, in these words, Thine Altar, And so will I go
to thine Altar.

This is the resolution of the Text, which I mean by Gods goodness to treat
of: and first, Quis, that is David, a King by place, a Prophet in Spirit, and a
Saint by calling. I will wash. A King by place: as the image of God is more
expressed in Kings, then in Grooms and vassalles, their power being a
resemblance of his divine power, and their Majesty a Character of his divine
Majesty; so ought the flames of this Image to be more conspicuous in them, then
in the inferior or darker sons of God.

It is not the beauty of his Throne, the riches of his Diadem, the guard of his
person, or any the like Dalilah can cut the hair of David, or blow him big
with a Tympany of self righteousness, he being fully bent for his own
salvation, and his peoples instruction to bath in the Laver of Holiness. In
Innocence will I wash my self says he, I, a God by name will do it for so the
Scriptures title Kings, that when I come before the God of nature my sacrifice
may be well accepted.

What David does here in person must be the president of Magistracy, or rather
of Magistrates, then any of mean or perfunctorie calling; such a level has
the shaft of Iniquity, against the breast of the great Ones, so many are their
pit falls, so dangerous their examples, so contractive of Sin their
consciences; Therefore whisper not in their ears the Magnificency of their
places, it is a temptation; nor the solemnity of their worships, it is a
Temptation, for David knew by woeful experience, that all the power of worldly
dignity was temptation, for he abused his power in the murder of Vriah: 2 Samuel 11. he stained his beauty in the deffowry of Bethsheba, he wronged his
Throne, in the numbering his people; And flatter not, then the Great Ones with
telling them of their Greatness, puff them not up, with the power of their
places, they are all but baits for their Innocence. So the higher men be in
place, the more frequent they ought to be at Prayer: so slippery is the
condition of greatness. For who sooner fell then Lucifer, who more debased
then Nebuchadnezar? Dan. 4.24. Who offend God oftener then great Ones? A Lecture
to the Vermillian robes of Magistracy; that their souls be not of the color
of their scarlet, their consciences of the same grain with their Coapes, is to
wash in Innocence. Take heed ye great Ones, Authority is a glewy and pitchey
adjunct, maivelously contractive of Sin, and therefore should ever be necrest
the poole of Bethesda, when the Angel (...) it, so quickly does it take the
soil, so easily does it catch the stain.

Wherefore as ye are eminent in place, so must you be righteous in person.
You must be as Christ himself, Cant. 8. not only Rubicundi but Candidi, as
white per innocentiam cordis, as you are ruddy per ruttlatio, nem vestis the
brightness of your garments. Your hairs must be like the Ancient of days, or
like wool, or like Snow, to signify your wisdom; your eyes like a flame of
fire, to signify your search and might, your feet like fine brass, to
signify the perfectnes of your ways; and your voice like the sound of many
waters, fearful and terrible. You must put on the glorious apparel of
Innocence, and trans figure your selves, like Christ himself upon the mount,
that your righteousness may break forth as the light, and the beauty of it, as
the burning lamp: for so says, holy David I will wash my hands in innocence,
a King by place.

Now follows I will wash my hands in Innocence, a Prophet in Spirit.

As I rang in the ears of Magistracy, in the former point, so ring I now in
the ears of Priesthood, arraigning mine own spirit, in the presence of God,
and with mine the Spirit of every Levite in this Temple, the Soul of every
Prophet in this house, acknowledging the required innocence of our Condition.
We are the Cherubims and Seraphims of the lower house of God. We of the
Ministry are Gods by a more peculiar sequestration, then the ordinary Sons
of men; Wherefore we must wash our hands in Innocence, who are Prophets in
Spirit: I will says David, a King, then must we, if we will follow the
example of the righteous, I will says he, a Prophet in Spirit, a party
conversant with the religious service of God. This is a preface unto us, this
teaches us who are of the Tribe of Levi, to gird our loins strait with the
girdle of Innocence when we enter into the Sanctuary of God. For we serve at
the Altar, we preach the Law, we keep the book of Covenant, we are of Gods
privy chamber as it were, we lodge with Moses in the Mount, we peruse the
Tables of Stone, we bear the Arc, we bow at the Mercy seat, we are
dedicated to God, we are consecrated to the Temple, we are tied to have Vrim
and Thummim upon our hearts, we wear the white linen Ephod, in which should
shine the Sardin, Topaz, and Carbuncle, A ga^e and Amatist, of a holy
conversation. Exodus 28.17. The Signet engraven upon Aarons forehead, is
holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28.36. so that the Bill of our report, must be
pure mettle, no tinckling or hollow Cymball: in a word we are forbidden any,
the least blemish; for faith the Scripture, cleanse the Levites, purify, fetch
the Laver of brass for the Levite, All their clothes must smell of Myrrh,
Allows, and Cass^^a, of a good conscience, out of the Ivory palaces, their
Innocent and spotless hearts whereby they should make themselves glad. Let my
Priests be clothed with righteousness says the Spirit of God; It is the Livery
of Aaron, the cloth of Levi, the mark of distinction, the seal of our
vocation, the Ensign of the Prophets of God; which holy David held out as a
Banner of defiance against the Devil, though the snailes of our times pull in
these horns of salvation, we being lights which shine not, salt which season
not clouds which drop not, tapers which burn not, unsanctified vessels which
purify not, Censors which perfume not, Ethiops which wash not, this was not
David's security, this was not his unhallowed precipitation: No, I will wash, a
King by place, there is a Caution for great Ones, I will wash, a Prophet in
Spirit, there is a caution for Prophets.

And as I have hitherto spurred on the Magistrate and the Minister, to a
provident and watchful superintendency, whiles they stand in the gates of
Sion; So come I now to the meanest and shallowest proselite in this assembly. I
will wash my hands in Innoncency, not only as I am a King, and so may be
dangerously disposed to do evil; neither as I am a Prophet, and so strictly
tied to do well, but also as I am a Saint by calling, an Israelite, a
professor, within the Arc, within the Covenant, within the Church: for without
are none but unhallowed Caitifes, profane adulterers, outcasts from Heaven. As
I am therefore thine, and through thy mercy admitted into the family of Saints,
enrowled in the parchment of heaven, registered among the blessed ones, as I am
thus regenerated by the spirit, adopted by grace, confirmed by the Sacraments,
united to the Church, and out of thy mercy made a lively member of the same (as
every person under this holy roof, in all seeming appearance, is) why, even
for this, will I wash my hands in Innocence, says David, seeing my Calling is
holy, my God, his Altar, my vow holy, my inheritance holy, I therefore thus
inhabited thus adopted, though my Scepter had lickt the dust, and so I had been
no King, though the gift of prediction had failed me, and so I had been no
Prophet, yet for the grace showed me in the benefit of my calling as being
called to serve for the greater praise of thy Name, I who am thus sequestered
from the world, and sanctified from my infancy to thy service, will wash my
hands in Innocence. And in this respect the poorest person in this
Congregation, is tied to an holy preparation: for though we be not all Kings
by place, nor Prophets in Spirit with David, yet we are all Saints by calling
with David. I therefore when I come into the house of God, will wash my hands
in Innocence, must be the general resolution of all men. For Innocence is
as well the Sacrifice of Tradesmen as Prophets, if they once be inaugurated to
the name of Christians, baptized to the death of Sin. For then as punishable
shall Alexander the copper-smith be, for opposing the spirit of God, as Balaam
for taking the wages of iniquity. So then, we sons of Aaron, must not so
urge David's holy preparation, as he is a King by place, as that we neglect it,
as he is a Prophet in Spirit, neither must you Mechanics so press our
Innocence who are of the Priesthood, and so Prophets by spirit, as that you
neglect your own, who are of the Church, and so Saints by calling. The bright
sun of our righteousness must not quite eclipse the Star of yours, but we
are all to shine, though one exceed another in glory.

Wherefore to conclude this point, when David says I will wash my hands in
Innocence, as I am a King he satisfies the Magistrate, as he is a prophet, he
sanctifies the Minister, as a Saint by calling, he sanctifies the people. Thus
you see he speaks to all sorts of people, all trades of life, to every
condition of persons, to every Mammonist, none are exempted from holiness,
whether Demetrius the silver-smith, Act. 19.24. or Andrew the fisherman,
Matthew. 4.24. or Gamaliel the Lawyer, Act. 22.3. or Lydia the purple seller,
16.14. or Dorcas the Semster, 9.36. or Simon the Tanner, 6.43.20.9. or to be
short, the meanest of all, the Congregation is mixed, and therefore I pray and
request you all, to leave your dissimulation, and to wash your hands in
Innocence.

Thus much for Quis, now follows Quo modo praeparat, and that is by washing,
I David Wash.

Now me thinks I hear a voice which tells me we are all, a leprous
generation, a viperous and infectious brood, full of sores, ulcers and botches,
scarlet souls, crimson consciences, ramish unsavory loathsome sins: if so;
then let us see the remedy and that induces two things, the Bath, and the
Parts bathed: and first of the Bath, Innocence.

See but the ingredients, and you shall easily see the virtue.

This Bath is made of Holiness, righteousness, charity, hope, faith, joy,
humility, peace, prayer, thanksgiving, meditation, vigilance, equity, sanctity,
chastity, contrition, repentance, perseverance, with many other heautious
ornaments of the house of God. All holiness of mind, righteousness of soul,
charity toward thy neighbor, hope in thy Jesus, Faith in his merits, Joy in
the Holy Ghost, peace of conscience, humility of carriage, serventnesse of
prayer, meditation of Gods mercies, delight in his word, vigilance over our
affections, sanctity of heart, equity toward all men, chastity of thought,
repentance for sin, heat of devotion; and perseverance, the Crown of holy
and virtuous actions.

Lo here is a holy water for the Church of Rome to wash in, here is a Jordan for
all leprous Naamans to cleanse in, it is no river of Damascus, but of Israel,
here is a poole of Bethesda, for our lame and creeple conditions, here is a river
of life, as clear as cristal, proceeding out of the throne of God and the
Lamb, in midst of which; grows the tree of life. Revel. ult.

Who so enters into the Temple of God without these, who so offers to set foot
within the porch which is called Beautiful without these, does but only peep
through a craney of the mount Horeb, but shall never with Moses ascend up his
holy hill: they only sound forth harsh melody into the ears of God; through the
untuneablenesse of their spirits, which should sing Gorapically as the
Coristers of heaven, for holiness becomes thy house for ever.

Nazianzen is so religiously scrupulous, and conscionably timorous of his
unworthy approach into the house of prayer, that it has often affrighted me
(says he) from the Mercy feat of God; not that I shund the beauty of his
Altar, but that I feared mine own unhallowed presence; and so consequently the
sudden vengeance of Heaven: I am ashamed (says he) of those that come with
unwashen hands, and unsanctified hearts, to such holy mysteries as these are; I
feared to draw near, said he, and yet my hands were innocent, mine eyes
clear, my heart single, mine ear erect, and attentive, my speech savoury, and
my members were weapons of righteousness, and like so many Instruments to tune
forth the praise of my Creator. Here was an innocent and virtuous Churchman,
well known, squared and cut out of a spiritual building, of a holy and
heavenly tincture; and yet he fears his own weakness. But is there the like
devotion found among us?

No, For were it, as it is not, it would draw many a brinish tear from the
eyes of these marble and Stone witnesses, to see our irreverent and hallowed
approaches: for we come with our hands filthy, our feet polluted, with sleepy
eyes, with drowsy heads, with full stomachs, with quails in our mouths, and
our bellies full of bread. Some sleep with Euticus, Act. 20.9. some are
offended with the Scribes and Pharisees Joh. 7.48. some are angry with Herod,
Mat. 2.16. some seoffe with Ahab, 1 Reg. 22.8. some glance laciviously with
Iesabel, some are only lukewarm with Agrippa, Act. 26.28 and some make
bargains with Judas, Matthew. 26.15.

Few here with a chaste and dove-like simplicity, few with patience, few with
Faith, scarce one, with a good conscience. No, our eyes are playing the
harlots, our hearts are gone a whoring, our ears are stopped with the adder, our
tongues broaching vanity, our hands in our counting-houses, our feet pricked
with thorns, never at ease, ever strait at the instep, till we can whip forth
of the holy congregation and make it the house of folly: So that it is Gods
great goodness we are not stricken dead with Nadah and Abihu, Numb, 3.4. for
offering strange fire upon his Altar. It is his infinite mercy that we are not
burnt down with the men of Sodom. Lev. 10.1.2. or swallowed up quick with
Corah, Dathan and Abyram, Numb. 16.1. for coming thus rashly and unprepared
into his holy Sanctuary, our hearts being full of evil intentions, which is to
play the hypocrite. But David says I will wash, and so must it be with all
those that approach the face of God. Thou must arise oh Sion, thou must put on
the garments of thy beauty oh Jerusalem thou must shake the dust of thy feet
and unloose the yoke from thy neck, when thou drawest near unto the presence
of the most high: Nay, ye ought to use all reverence with fervency of Prayer,
with fire of devotion, with sanctity of life, with purity of Spirit, with
contrition of heart, and the like acceptable offices in the eye of heaven. Then
shall thy righteousness break forth before God, as the light, and thy just
dealing as the nooneday. Therefore bath thy heart often in sorrow full sighs,
and desire the Lord, saying; O Lord grant, I beseech thee, an equity toward
all men; piety toward thee my God, honesty of mind, and a heart seasoned with
the leaven of Religion, that is, a Soul ever prepared to come into the house
of my God and visit toward his holy Temple.

And thus much of the Bath, Innocence.

Now for the parts bathed, Hands. I will wash my hands. etc.

There is a glorious stipend set down in Scripture for such as have clean
hands; who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? Even he that has clean
hands, Ps. 24.4.18.20. Again, God shall recompense me according to the
cleanness of my hands. So then we must know, that as innocence showed the
virtue of the Bath, so Hands the wisdom of the party Bathing.

Jezabel anointed her face when David washed his hands, and threw ashes upon
his head, a great disfiguring to his person; yet was he cleaner in the sight of
God then the slippery singing Queen of Israel. Ezekiah cleansed his hands, and
Job made a covenant with his eyes, precious parts both; yet none so pure, so
entire, so holy, as the bathing of our Hands in Innocence.

I mean not that Pharisaicall cleaning of the hands, for that is not
comparable to the cleaning sincerity of the heart, if you parallel the parts:
but I mean the hands, by way of a symbolicall and figurative resemblance; the
phrase not being so much to be ^^cand, as it is an external washing, and so
^roper to hypocrites, but as it is a symbol of internal purification, and so
proper to the Saints.

Now some washing their hands only will rashly salute the Altar of God, being
colored with seeming appearance: this is Hypocrisy. Others will wash their
hands as a testimony of the purity of their hearts and so reverently approach
the Mercy seat of God, being beautified with real integrity. This is
Innocence.

But why did David say his hands more then his feet, or any other part of his
body: Because the principal Organs of all external Actions, are the hands,
and so Symbolycally the truest resemblance of all hearty and spiritual
ablution. When therefore it is said David washed his hands, etc. We must not
understand only an outward and visible cleansing of his carnal body, but a
general cleansing of his soul and Spirit; Hands being the Executioners of all
external Actions, and so the Figure of a total and general, both exterior
and interior Sanctification. Wherefore when thou look into the house of
God, look to thine Eye least that grow wanton, take heed to thy Tongue, that
it speak no guile, look to thy feet, that they slip not, but especially wash
thy Hands, that they miscary not, let not those be rough like Esau's, but
smooth as Jacobs, set with gold, Cant. 5.14. Then may thou put thy finger in
thing eye, if it trouble thee, then may thou nipp thy self by the Ear, to
keep them from sleep in security, strike thy self on the feet, if they
stumble or tripp, beat thy self on the heart, if that prevaricate or play the
whore, smite thy self on the mouth, if it talk idlesy, rubb thy self on the
Temples, if they grow dull, in a word, then may thou do all things decently
as befitts the house of prayer. So that the washing of the hands in Innocence
is the true resemblance of all Spiritual ablution.

Now many will wash, but few in Innocence. Some with Pilate before blood
publicly, Mat. 27.24. Some with the Pharisee before dinner hypocritically,
and some with the Gentiles before an oath superstitiously. But let us with the
religious Levite and Christian professor, purify and purge not only the
visible flesh of our hands, but also the invisible taints of our Spirit. For
the former sanctification is but only a figur^ of that which follows, as you
may read^ Heb. 9. but the latter is a model of that true and lively sacrifice
of Christ himself, who through the eternal Spirit of God, offered himself
without spot to God, purging our consciences from dead works to serve the
everliving God.

Wherefore, O Lord, sprinkle with thine hysope, the blood of thy Son, that
the water of thy Spirit may never cease to purify our hands, till they be as
white through Innocence, as thy Throne above is beautified with Ivery:
Especially we of the seed of Aaron, that every action of ours may be
acceptable: our hands with which we hold the T^ble of the Covenant, our hands
with which we slay the Sacrifice, our hands with which we bless the
Congregation, with which we gird about the linen Ephod of an holy
conversation, with which we lift up the sacred Challice, with which we
distribute thy holy Body, our hands by the continual intention of which in our
Prayers, we lift up the hinges of the everlasting doors, that the King of
glory may receive us. Let all these be made clean and pure from all
filthynes; let us wash our hands in all our Actions, that being thus prepared
we may go to his Altar. Thus much for the Quo modo: now follows the holy
presence, (...) Lord.

In which, note two things, first the Maesty, Domine. Secondly the Mirror in
this article o!

First of his Majesty, Domine.

Some writers divide the Names which ^re common to the Trinity by a four fold
^ifference, some only point at the Essence, (...) Jehovah, some at the
distinction of per^^ns as Elohim, some at the essential proper^^^s of his
Diety, as only wife, only just etc. ^^d some at the Relation which God has
(...) his creatures, as Lord of Lords, King of ^^ngs: And of this last order is
the name u^^d in my Text. For power and authority ^^ve a certain habitude and
respect unto the by which he is subjugated and tied to a^ awful obedience:
for we have as Aquina^ says, a certain real relation unto God, a^ our
Creator, without whom we had had n^ Being, and God to us a Rational, because
he did humble himself to exalt us. Where fore this name Domine, in my Text, is
neither a Symbol of his infinite essence, neither of any personal
distinction, but only o^ a powerful, dreadful, and vindicatory relation he
has to Man; which ought to caus^ a reverent and fearful approach, into hi^
presence. Therefore if we refuse his Mercy as he is Deus, and so can crown us,
yet le^ us not despise his power as he is Dominus and so can crush us. For as
he is Deus, he is a God of bowels and compassion, an^ carries the rod and
staff of comfort, P^^ 23.4. but as he is Dominus, he is a God (...)
vengeance, that can scourge us with a rod (...) iron, Ps. 2. for our iniquities.

Wherefore when David in the awful resolution of his soul, and cristall
sincerity (...) his Spirit, commends the Sacrifice of his clevotion to heaven,
he proposes such a pr^sence of God, as is most extimulatory of fear and
reverence: I will wash my hands in Innocence O Lord. This Name showing the
Majesty and power of God over man. By virtue of his name he punished the
Sacrifice of Cain. Genesis 4.5. The rebellion of Corah, Numb. 16. The bleating and
Hypocritical Sacrifice of Saul. By virtue of this he threatens the Israelites,
I am the Lord, by virtue of this he bids battle to the Nations, I am the Lord,
What shook the Wilderness? The voice of the Lord. What brake the Cedars of
Lebanon? The voice of the Lord: by virtue of this Name he ratifies his
purposes, the voice of the Lord has spoken it. By virtue of this Name he rides
upon the heavens, the Chariots of the Lord. By virtue of this Name his wrath is
published, how long will thou be angry O Lord? By virtue of this Name he
summons the quarters of the earth, the day of the Lord. When shook the Earth?
at the presence of the Lord. When melted the Heavens? at the presence of the
Lord. When were the waters dried up? At the presence of the mighty God of
Jacob: the least falme of this bush dashed Moses out of countenance. This fiery
pillar burnt Jobs goods and cattle. This burning heat made the children of
Israel stand a far off. Wherefore with St. Jeromes Marcella, we are to desire
the proper interpretation of all the Names of God; every one ministering
occasion of spiritual growth; yet are we most to desire it, when we approach
the Sanctuary of God, to prefixe this Name before our eyes, the name of the
Lord: It being the Ensign of his power, and the tempest going before his face,
the Emblem of his Majesty, the thunder of Mount Sinai, where Gods seat is, by
virtue of which he breaths hailestones and coals of fire.

This holy meditation of his Majesty turned Abraham into dust and ashes: This
stripped Job of all humane and vain conceits, this clothed David in Sackcloath,
this made him a worm and no man, a thing of naught. And I doubt not, but if we
seriously entertained it, this would burn down the stubble of humane opinions
in us, and lay us prostrate, yea, even breathless before the face of God, with
the very thought of our wretched unworthiness.

Wherefore (Beloved) let the reverent opinion of the presence of the Lord be
evermore our curb when we come to the propitiatory of his Mercy seat. Let this
calm the Sea of our affections, and work in us an awful and religious
Obedience. Let us know the presence of God is not the presence of Dagon that
has no eyes, nor of Nisroch which has no ears, but the glorious and present
beauty of Syon, the al-seeing Eye of God, the discovery of Heaven. This Memento
will cause us to wash, to cleanse our hearts, and search the very concavity of
our spirits; This will beget not only an holy preparation before we come, but a
cautelous and strong attention after we are come, and the expectation of an
happy benediction, ere we go: fearing each moment the arrow of his
displeasure, the merit of our own presumption, and the doom of Heaven.

Thus much for the Majesty, now follows the Mirror, O: And so will I go to
thine Altar O Lord.

This interjection howsoever smothered in the Latin and Greek Syntaxe, yet
has it in the English an Emphaticall use, and speciality, it being the
flood-gate of man's ecstasy, and the dilatation of his Spirit, when he is
transported with the high and sublime speculation of the presence of God.
Neither is it only vented when we think of his presence, but when we speak
of his Attributes, or any the extraordinary or transcendent works of his
Diety: O the depth and riches of his Mercies! cries Paul in one place, O the
inscrutabilitie of his Judgments! in another place. O his wonderful works in
the deep! cries David in one place, O how amiable are thy dwellings! in
another. Thus wonders Mortality, when it droopes and hangs the wing, being
struck with the Majesty of God.

This should cause humble dejection in our spirits, a poor and lowly esteem
in our selves, when we enter into conference with God. Now there is nothing
will sooner draw us to this practice, then the paralelling of our estate with
Gods, our condition challenging the wonderment of Lamentation, and Gods of
Praise and Exaltation. For in this, Gods O of Mercy, will answer to Man's O of
misery: See it in the wrestling of Paul, O miserable man that I am! cries he
when he took Survey of his fleshes rebellion, O the riches of the Mercies of
God! when he weighs the depth of Christ's Propitiation. See it likewise in the
method o^ David, O remember not my sins and offenses; cries he, when he
scanned the measure of his own misery; O call to mind thy loving kindness o
Lord, when he recollects the Balm of Gods mercy. O how short is my time! when
he spann'd the life of Man* O God thy seat endures for ever, when he would
fathom the Ancient of days. The like meditation will drive us to the same,
to the same astonishment, when we shall conscionably think of our own
unworthyness^ with an O how inferior are we! by reason of our many pollutions,
to stand before the face of God; and it will make us say as David does here, I
will wash my hands in Innocence etc. Thus much of the holy presence, I come now
to the holy place, in this word, Altar.

Where note two things first the Reverence of his Progress, So. Secondly the
Reference of the place, Thine. And so will I go to thine Altar.

So, not otherwise though the Devil upon the pinnacle, should promise me the
Kingdom of the world, for why should we presume to come to the marriage of the
Lamb without a wedding garment, or Samuels Ephod? So will I go says David,
adorned with these unto thine Altar. And if ever ^his So, was dedicated to the
obtaining of Eternity, if ever to the joy of Angels, and ^omfort of the Elect,
it was then done, when David renounced the whole body of Sin, and turned to
his Creator that made him.

Lastly if ever this So, did procure the An^els of Heaven to rejoice, then may
it now ^^use us, to shed tears of gladness since the ^eauty of Holiness, the
Lamb of God, Inno^^ncy, has offered himself upon the Cross, and become an
advocate to the father for our sins.

Here was a So worthy to be remembered for ever; for he dying turned our death
into Life, that is, our sins to righteousness. Thus much for the Reverence,
now follows the Reference, Thine:

The Pronoune Thine, is a partition wall, twixt God and Dagon, and sanctifies
the edifices of the Temple. For this seperates all Idolatrous places of
worship: Not any Altar, but the Altar of God, and not any place, but the place
where his honor dwells. So that by this word, Thine, is meant the habitation
of his Glory, and the holy Temple of the eternal and ever living God: To which
whosoever comes thus washed and prepared, shall enjoy the mount of Syon, and
the hill of the new Jerusalem, Montem pinguem, being a fat mountain, in
respect of the multitude of spiritual grace, Montem Dei, because God himself
dwells there, and Montem coagmentatum, so strongly congealed and knit together,
as that it is impossible it should ever be removed.

Thus by Gods assistance and your gentle patience I have cleared my hand of my
Text.

Now the God of mercy and compassion, which opened the heart of Lydia to
conceive, opened the eyes of Elisha to see, and opened the lips of David to
speak, say Ephata to your hearts, ears, and eyes, that you may ever hunger
and thirst after righteousness, that you may ever seek the Lord, and serve
him in faith, and in the revealed mysteries of his word, Washing your hearts
and hands in Innocence, that so you may for ever obtain Grace here in this
world, and eternal glory in the world to come; which God grant unto you all,
Amen.

Soli Dei Gloria.

