

The Copy of an Order agreed upon in the House of Commons, Upon Friday the
eighteenth of June, wherein every man is rated according to his estate for the
Kings use.
DVkes, 100 pounds.
Marquesses 80 pounds.
Earls 60 pounds.
Viscounts 50 pounds.
Lords, 40 pounds.
Baronets and Knights of the Bath, thirty pounds.
Knights, 20 pounds.
Esquires ten pounds.
Gentlemen of 100 pounds per annum, five pounds.
Recusants of all degrees to double Protestants.
Lord Mayor, 40 pounds.
Aldermen Knights, 20 pounds.
Citizens fined for Sheriffs, 20 pounds.
Deputy Aldermen, 15 pounds.
Merchant strangers, Knights, 40 pounds.
Common counsel men, five pounds.
Livery men of the first twelve Companies, and those that fined for it, ten
pounds.
Livery men of other companies, 50 shil.
Masters and Wardens of those other companies, five pounds.
Every one free of those Companies, one pound.
Every freeman of other Companies, ten shillings.
Every Merchant that trades by Sea, inhabiting in London, ten pound.
Every Merchant stranger that trades within Land, five pounds.
Every English Merchant residing in the City of London, and not free, five
pound.
Every English factor that dwells in London, and is not free of the City, forty
shillings.
Every stranger Protestant, handy-crafts, trade and Artificer two shillings.
Every Papist stranger, and handy-crafts, four shillings.
Every widow a third part, according to her husbands degree.
Every Judge a Knight, 20 pounds.
Every Kings Sergeant 25 pounds.
Every Sergeant at Law, 20 pounds.
Every one of the Kings, Queens, and Princes Counsel, 20 pounds.
Every Doctor of Civil Law, and Doctor of Physic, 10 pounds.
Every Bishop 60 pounds.
Every Deane 40 pounds.
Every Cannon 20 pounds.
Every Prebend 20 pounds.
Every Archdeacon 15 pounds.
Every Chancellor and every Commissary, 15 pounds.
Every Parson or Vicar at 100. pound per Annum, five pounds.
Every office worth above 100 pound per Annum, to be referred to a Committee,
to be rated every man that may spend 50 pounds per Annum, thirty shillings.
Every man that may spend 20. pound per Annum, 5 shillings.
Every person that is above 16 years of age and does not receive alms, and is
not formerly rated, shall pay 6 pence per Pole.
Printed in the year 1641.


