The Forerunner OF REVENGE. Being two Petitions: THE ONE To the KINGS most
Excellent Majesty. THE OTHER, To the most Honorable Houses of Parliament.

Wherein is expressed diverse actions of the late Earl of Buckingham;
especially concerning the death of King James, and the Marquess Hamelton,
supposed by poison.

Also may be observed the inconveniences befalling a State where the Noble
disposition of the Prince is misled by a Favorite.

By George Eglisham Doctor of Physic, and one of the Pysicians to King James
of happy memory, for his Majesty's person above ten years space.

Printed at London, in the year, 1642.

To the most Potent Monarch CHARLES King of great Britain.
The humble Petition of George Eglisham, Doctor of Physic, lately one of King
JAMES his Physicians for his Majesty's person, above the space of ten years.
SIR,
NO better motive there is for a safe government then the safe meditation of
death, (equalling Kings with Beggars) and the exact justice of God requiring of
them, that the good suffering inmisery this life, should receive joy in the
other; and the wicked flourishing securely in this, might be punished in the
other. That which pleases, lasts but a moment; which tormenteth, is
everlasting. Many things we see unrewarded or unpunished in this inferior
World, which in the universal weight of Gods justice, must be counterpoised
elsewhere. But wilful and secret murder has seldom been observed to
undiscovered or unpunished even in this life, such a particular and notable
revenge perpetually follows it, to the end that they who are either Atheists
or Matchiavelists, may not trust too much to their wits in doing so horrible
injustice. Would to God your Majesty would well consider what I have often said
to my Master, King James, the greatest policy is honesty; and howsoever any man
seem to himself wise in compassing his desires by tricks, yet in the end he
will prove a fool: for falsehood ever deceives her own master at length, as
the Devil (author of all falsehood) always does, leaving his adherents
desolate, when they have the greatest need of his help; No falsehood without
injustice, no injustice without falsehood, albeit it were in the person of a
King.

There is no Judge in the World more tied to do justice then a King, whose
coronation tyeth him unto it by solemn oath, which if he violate, he is false
and perjured.

It is justice that makes Kings, justice that mayntains Kings, and injustice
that brings Kings and Kingdoms to destruction to fall into misery, to die like
Asses in ditches, or a more beastly death, eternal infamy after death, as all
Histories from time to time do clearly manifest.

What need has mankind of Kings but for justice? Men are not born for them,
but they for men: what greater, what more royal occasion in the World could be
offered to your Ma. to show your impartial disposition in matters of justice
at the first entry of your Reign, then this which I offer in my just complaint
against Buckingham, by whom your Majesty suffers your self so far to be led,
that your best subjects are in doubt whether he is your King, or you his. If
your Majesty know and consider how he has tyrannized over his Lord and Master
King James, (the worldly Creator of his fortunes) how insolent, how ingrate an
Oppressor, what a murderer and traitor he has proved himself toward him, how
treacherous to his upholding friends the Marquess of Hamelton, and others, your
Majesty may think (giving way to the Laws demanded against him) to yield a most
glorious field for your Majesty to walk in, and display the banner of your
Royal virtues.

Your Majesty may perhaps demand, what interest I have therein, what have I to
do therewith, that I should stir, all others being quiet? Sir, the quietness
or stirring of others, expects only a beginning from me, whom they know so
much obliged to stir, as none can be more, both in respect of knowledge of
passages, and in regard of humane obligation, and of my independancy from the
accused, or any other that his power or credit can reach unto, many know not
what I know therein, others are little or nothing beholding to the dead; others
albeit they know it as well as I, and are obliged as deep as I, yet dare not
complain so safely as I, being out of their reach, who are inseparable from him
by his enchantments, and all to obscure my self, until the power of just
revenge upon him be obtained from God.

What I know sufficient against him, I have set down in my petition against
him to the Parliament; to which if your Majesty dismiss him, sequestered from
your Majesty chiefly in an accusation of treason, you shall do what is just,
and deliver your self and your Kingdom from the captivity in which he holds
them, and your Majesty oppressed. How easily I may eclipse my self from his
power to do me harm, unless he has legions of infernal spirits at his
command to pursue me, your Majesty may well know, I being ultra mare, to these
Dominions where he rules and rages.

How far I am obliged to complain more then others, I will in few words
express, that neither your Majesty nor any man may think otherwise but that I
have most just reason not to be silent in a wrong so intolerable, the interest
of blood which I have to any of them, of whose death I complain either by the
House of Balgony, Lunday or Silverton-Hill, albeit it is easy to be made
manifest and sufficient to move me, yet it is not the sole motive of my breach
of silence, but the interest of received courtesy, and the heap of infallible
tokens of true affection, is more then suffient to stir me thereto, unless I
would prove the most ingrate in the World, and senseless of the greatest
injuries that can be done unto my self; for who killed King James and Marquess
Hamelton, in that part of the injury which is done unto me therein, he has
done as much as robbed me of my life, and all my fortunes and friends.

With such constant and loving impressions of me as are neither to be recovered
not duly valued: for his Majesty from the third year of my age, did practice
honorable tokens of singular favor toward me, daily augmented them in word,
in writ, in deed, accompanied them with gifts, patents, offices,
recommendations both in private and public, at home and abroad graced so far,
that I could scarce ask any thing, but I could have obtained it.

How much honor he has done unto me there needs no witness unto your
Majesty, who is sufficient for many; no less is my Lord Marquess Hameltons
friendship established by mutual obligation of most acceptable offices
continued by our ancesto^ these three generations, engraven in the tender minds
and years of the Marquess and me in the presence of our Sovereigne King James.
For when the Marquess his Father, who with the right hand on his head and the
left on mine, did offer us (young in years) so joined, to kiss his Majesty's
hand, recommending me to his Majesty's favor, said, I take God to witness,
that this young man's father was the best friend that ever I had, or shall have
in this World. Whereupon the young Lord resolved to put trust in me, and I
fully to addict my self to him, to deserve of him as much commendations as my
father did of his father.

This Royal celebration of our friends rooted it self so deep in my mind,
that to my self I purposed this remembrance, giving it to my young Lord, and to
my famillar friends, and set it upon the books of my study, Semper Hameltonium,
etc.

Always the King and Hamelton
Within thy breast conserve,
What ever be thy actions,
Let Princes two deserve.
Neither was it in vain, for both our loves increased with our age, the
Marquess promising to engage his life and whole estate for me, if need were
and so share his fortunes with me; and not only promising, but also performing
when ever there was occasion: yea, for my sake offering to hazard his life in
combat, whose mind in wishing me well, whose tongue in honoring of me, and
whose hands and means in defending me (both absent and present unto the last
period of his life) has ever assisted me.

I should be more tedious then were fit, if I should rehearse every particular
favor so manifestly known to the whole Court, and to the friends of us both:
who then can justly blame me, demanding justice as well for the slaughter of
the Marquess of Hamelton, as of my most gracious Sovereigne King James, seeing
I know whom to accuse; My profession of Physic, nor my education to letters,
cannot serve to hinder me from undertaking the hardest enterprise that ever any
Roman undertook, so far as the Law of conscience will give way.

Why should I stay at the decay
Of Hameltons the hope,
Why shall I see thy foe so free,
Unto this joy give scope?
Rather I pray a doleful day
Set me in cruel fate:
Then thy death strange without revenge,
Or him in safe estate.
This soul to heavens, hand to the dead I vow,
No fraudfull mind, nor trembling hand I have:
If pen it shun, the sword revenge shall follow,
Soul, Pen and Sword, what thing but just do crave.
What affection I bore to the living, the same shall accompany the dead: for
when (whose truth and sincerity was well known unto me) told me that it was
better that the chiefest of my friends the Marquess of Hamelton, to be quiet
at home in Scotland, then eminent in Court of England; to whom by the opinion
of the wiser sort, his being at Court will cost him no less then his life,
since that I stretching forth mine arm (apprehending some plots laid against
him) answered, if no man dare to revenge his death, I vow to God this hand of
mine shall revenge it, scarcely any other cause to be found, then the bond of
our close friendship, why in the scrowle of Noble men's names who were to be
killed, I should be set down next to the Marquess of Hamelton and under these
words, viz. (the Marquess and Doctor Eglisham to embalme him) to wit, to the
end that no discoverer or revenger should be left, this roll of names, I know
not by what destiny, was found near to Westminster, about the time of the Duke
of Richmond his death, and brought to the Lord Marquess by his cozen the
daughter of the Lord Oldbarre, one of the privy Council of Scotland, did cause
no terror in me until I did see the Marquess poisoned, and remembered that
the rest therein noted, were dead, and my self next pointed at only surviving:
why stay I any more, the cause requires no more the pen but the sword?

I do not write so boldly, because I am amongst the Dukes enemies, but I have
retired my self to his enemies, because I was resolved to write and do
earnestly against him, as may very well appear: for since the Marquess of
Hameltons death, the most noble Marquess de Fiatta; Ambassador for the most
Christian King of France, and also Buckingham his mother sent on every side to
seek me, inviting me to them, but I did forsake them, knowing certainly the
falsehood of Buckingham would suffer the Ambassador rather to receive an affront
then to be unsatisfied of his blood-thirsty desire of my blood, to silence me
with death, (for according to the proverb The dead cannot bite) if he could
have found me: for my Lord Duke of Lenox, who was often crossed by Buckingham,
with his brother; and the Earl of Southampton now dead was one of the roll
found of those that were to be murdered, well assured me, that where
Buckingham once misliked, no apology, no submission, no reconciliation could
keep him from doing mischief.

Neither do I write this in this fashion so freely for any entertainment here
present, which I have not, nor for any future which I have no ground to look
for, seeing Buckingham has so much mislead your Majesty, that he has caused
not only here, but also in all Nations, all Britain Natives to be disgraced
and mistrusted, your Majesty's most royal word, which should be inviolable,
your hand and seal which should be uninfringeable, to be most shamefully
violated, and your self to be most ingrate for your kind usage in Spain,
which Buckingham makes to be requited with injuries in a most base manner;
under protestation of friendship, a bloody war being kindled on both sides,
whereby he has buried with King James, the glorious name of Peacemaking King,
who had done much more justly and advisedly if he had procured peace unto
Christendom, whereby small hope I have of obtaining justice on my most just
complaint, unto which my dear affection unto my dear friends murdered, and
extreme detestation of Buckingham his violent proceedings has brought me. Your
Ma: may find most just causes to accuse him in my Petition to the Parliament
which shall serve for a touchstone to your Majesty, and a whetstone to me and
many other Scotsmen; and which if it be neglected, will make your Majesty to
incur a censure amongst all virtuous men in the world, that your Majesty will
be loath to hear of, and I am astonished to express at this time, A Serpent
lurketh in the grass.

No other way there is to be found to save your honor, but to give way to
Justice against that traitor Buckingham, by whom manifest danger approaches to
your Majesty, no otherwise then death approached to King James.

If your Majesty will therefore take any course therein, the examination upon
oath of all those that were about the King and the Marquess of Hamelton in
their sickness, or at their deaths, or after their deaths, before indifferent
Judges (no dependants on Buckingham) will serve for sufficient proof of
Buckingham his guiltiness. In the mean time, until I see what will be the
issue of my complaint, without any more speech I rest,

Your Majesty's daily Suppliant, George Eglisham.

To the most Honorable the Nobility, Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament
of ENGLAND.
The humble Petition of George Eglisham Doctor of Physic, and one of the
Physicians to K. James of happy memory, for his Majesty's person above the
space of ten years.
WHereas the chief humane care of Kings, and Courts of Parliament, is the
preservation and protection of the subjects lives, liberties and estates, from
private and public injuries, to the end that all things may be carried in the
equal balance of Justice, without which no monarchy, no Commonwealth no
society, no family, yea no man's life or estate can consist, albeit never so
little: It cannot be thought unjust to demand of Kings and Parliaments the
censure of wrongs, the consideration whereof was so great in our Monarch of
happy memory King JAMES, that he has often publicly protested, even in the
presence of his apparent heir, that if his own son should commit murder,
or any such execrable act of injury, he would not spare him, but would have him
dye for it, and would have him more severely punished then any other: For he
very well observed, no greater injustice, no injury more intolerable can be
done by man to man, then murder. In all other wrongs fortune has recourse,
the loss of honor or goods may be repaired, satisfaction may be made,
reconciliation may be procured, so long as the party injured is alive. But when
the party murdered is bereft of his life, what can restore it? what
satisfaction can be given him? where shall the murderer meet with him to be
reconciled to him, unless he be sent out of this world to follow the spirit,
which by his wickedness he has separated from his body? Therefore of all
injuries, of all the acts of injustice, of all things most to be looked into,
murder is the greatest: And of all murders, the poisoning under trust and
profession of friendship, is the most hey, nous. which if you suffer to go
unpunished, let no man think himself so secure to live amongst you, as
amongst the wildest and most furious beasts in the world: for by vigilance and
industry means may be had to resist of evict the most violent beast that ever
nature bred, but from false and treacherous hearts, from poisoning murders,
what wit of wisdom can defend?

This concerns your Lordships every one in particular, as well as my self.
They (of whose poisoning your Petitioner complains) viz. King JAMES, the
Marquess of HAMELTON, and others whose names after shall be expressed, have
been the most eminent in the Kingdom and sat on these Benches whereon your
Honors do now sit. The party whom your Petitioner accuses is the Duke of
Buckingham, woo is so powerful, that unless the whole body of a Parliament
lay hold on him, no justice can be had of him: For what place is there of
Justice, what office of the Crown, what degree of honor in the Kingdom,
which he has not sold? And sold in such craft that he can shake the buyer out
of them, and intrude others at his pleasure.

All the Judges of the Kingdom, all the Officers of State, are his bound
vassals, or allies are afraid to become his outcasts, as it is notorious to
all his Majesty's true and loving subjects; yea, so far has his ambitious
practice gone, that what the King would have done, could not be done if he
opposed it, whereof many instances may be given, whenever they shall be
required: Neither are they unknown to this Honorable assembly, howsoever the
means he uses be, whether lawful or unlawful, whether humane or diabolique,
so he tortureth the Kingdom, that he procures the calling, breaking, or
continuing of the Parliament, at his pleasure, placing and displacing the
Officers of Justice, of the Council of the Kings Court, of the Courts of
Justice, to his violent pleasure, and as his ambitious villainy moves him: What
hope then can your Petitioner have, that his complaint should be heard; or
being heard, should take effect? To obtain justice he may despair; to provoke
the Duke to send forth a poysoner or murthere to dispatch him, and send him
after his dead friends already murdered, he may be sure this to be the event.
Let the event be what it will, come whatsoever can come, the loss of his own
life your Petitioner valueth not, having suffered the loss of the lives of
such eminent friends, esteeming his life cannot be better bestowed, then upon
discovery of so heinous murders, yea the justness of the cause, the dearnesse
and neernesse of his friends murdered, shall prevail so far with him, that
he shall unfold unto your Honors, and unto the whole world, against the
accused, and name him the author of so great murders, George Villers, Duke of
Buckingham, which against any private man, are sufficient for his apprehension
and torture. And to make his complaint not very tedious, he will only for the
present, declare unto your Honors, the two eminent murders committed by
Buckingham, to wit of the Kings Majesty, and of the Lord Marquess Hamelton,
which for all the subtility of his poisoning Art could not be so cunningly
conveyed as the murderer thought, but that God has discovered manifestly the
author. And to observe the order of the time of their death, because the Lord
Marquess Hamelton died first, his death shall be first related, even from the
root of his first quarrel with Buckingham, albeit many other jarres have
proceeded from time to time betwixt them.

Concerning the poisoning of the Lord Marquess HAMELTON.
BVCKINGHAM once raised from the bottom of Fortunes wheel to the top, by what
desert, by what right or wrong, no matter it is, (by his carriage the proverb
is verified) Nothing more proud then basest blood, when it does rise aloft. He
suffered his ambition to carry himself so far, as to aspire to match his
blood with the Blood-Royall both of England and Scotland. And well knowing,
that the Marquess of Hamelton was acknowledged by King James to be the prime
man in his Dominions, who next to his own line, in his proper season might
claim an hereditary Title to his Crown of Scotland, by the Daughter of King
James the second, and to the Crown of England by Ioane of Sommerset, wife to
King James the first, declared by an Act of Parliament Heretrix of England to
be in her due rank, never suffered the King to be at rest, but urged him
always to send some of his Privy Council to solicit the Marquess to match
his eldest son with Buckinghams Niece, making great promises of conditions,
which the mean family of the Bride could not perform, without the Kings
liberality, to wit, fifty thousand pound Sterling, valuing five hundred
thousand Florens with the Earldome of Orkney, under the title of Duke,
whatsoever the Marquess would accept, even to the first Duke of Britain.

The glorious Title of a Duke the Marquess refused twice, upon special
reasons reserved to himself.

The matter of money was no motive to cause the Marquess to match his son so
unequal to his degree, seeing Buckingham himself, the chief of her kindred
was but a novice in Nobility, his father obscure amongst Gentlemen, his mother
a Serving-woman: and he being infamous for his frequent consultation with the
Ringleader of Witches, principally that false Doctor Lamb, publicly condemned
for witchcraft* whereby the Marquess knowing that the King was so far
bewitched to Buckingham thrt if he refused the match demanded, he should find
the kings deadly hatred agains him; And seeing that Buckinghams Niece was not
yet Nubile in years, and that before the marriage should be consirmed, a way
might be found out to annull it, unto which he was forced by deceitful
importunity: therefore he yielded unto the King desire of the match; whereupon
Buckingham and his faction fearing that delays would bring lets, urged my Lord
Marquess to send for his son upon a Sunday morning be times in all haste
from London to Court at Greenwich, where never a word was spoken of marriage to
the young Lord, till a little before Supper, and the marriage mad^ before the
King after Supper, And to make it more authenticke, Buckingham cause his Niece
to be lard in bed with the Marquess his son, for a short time in the King
Chamber, and in his Majesty's presence, albeit the Bride was yet innubile. Many
were astonished at the sudden news thereof; all the Marquess his friends
fretting thereat an some writing unto him very scornful letters for the same.

The Marquess having satisfied the Kings demands, did what he could to
preve^^ the confirmation of the marriage, and intended to send his son beyond
the seas travel through France, and so to pass his time a broad, until that
means were fou^ to unty that knot which Buckingham had urged the King to tie
upon his son.

But Bucking ham to countermand the Marquess his design, causes the King and
Prince to make the Marquess his son to be sworn Gent: to the Princes
Bedchamber, and so to be detained with him within the Kingdom, until that
the Bride was at years ripe for marriage.

The time expired that Buckinghams niece became marriageable, Buckingham sent
to the Marquis to desire him to make the marriage, to be co^pleatly confirmed.

The marquess (not willing to hear of any such matter) answered briefly he
scorned the motion.

This answer reported to Buckingham, and seeing himself like to be frust ated
of his ambitious matching of his niece, and perceiving that the Lord Marquess
was able to raise a great faction against him, whether King James did live or
die, was mightily incensed against the Marquess: At the first encounter with
him, did challange him for speaking disdainfully of him and his house.

The Marquess replied, he did not remember any offensive words uttered by
himself against Buckingham. Buckingham then proudly said unto him, out of the
words of thy mouth I will judge thee: for you have said, you scorn the motion
of matching with my house, which I made unto you. The marquess answered, that
if he had said so, it became not the Duke to speak unto him in that fashion.
So Buckingham threatened to be revenged: The Marquess uttered his defiance; and
thus the quarrel began, which four or five times was reiterated, and as often
reconciled by Marquess de Fietta, alittle before the Marquess of Hamelton
fell sick, wherein it is very evident that the quarrel has been very violent,
that needed so many reconciliations, The Dukes fire of his anger, being
unextinguishable, as K. James did often censure him in his absence, albeit that
a favorite, that he was wonderful vindicative, whose malice was insatiable
toward my Lo: Marquess of Hamelton, did well show it self as shall appear
hereafter.

Hardly can any man tell whether by the Marquess in his sickness, Buckingham
was more suspected then accused of the poison given or to be given him: for he
would not taste of any thing that was sent him by any of Buckinghams friends;
but he would have some of his servants taste of it before: and for the love
that was mutual between him and your Petitioner (whom he would never suffer
to go out of his sight during his sickness) your Petitioner cast off all that
he took in that time, unto whom his suspicion of Buckingham he expressed by
name before sufficient witness, who will testify upon oath, if there be any
course taken therein for the search thereof, all the time of his sickness he
entreated your petitioner not to suffer my Lo: of Buckingham to come near him,
and your Petitioner having often sent word, and also sometimes fignified
himself to Buckingham, that there was no sit opportunity to see the Marquess,
pretending something to be ministered to him. But when your petitioner could
find no more excuses, he told my Lo: Marquis that he had put away my Lo: of
Buckingham so often, that he could not keep him away any longer, but that he
must needs see him.

Then he knowing Buckinghams visitation to proceed of disimulation, requested
your petitioner at last to find the means to get him away quiekly: which your
Petitioner did, interrupting. Buckingham his discourse, and entreating him to
suffer my Lord Marquess to be quiet.

This did evidently show my Lord Marquess his disliking and distrusting of
Buckingham, whereas he was pleased with other Noblemens Company. All the time
of his sickness, the Duke and my Lord Denbigh would not suffer his own son to
come to him, pretending that he was also sick; which was false for the time
that my Lord Marquess called for him. After this your Petitioner advised his
Lordship to dispose of his estate, and of his conscience, his sickness was not
without danger, which your Petitioner four days before my Lords death, did in
such manner perceive, that he had cause to commit all the care of his health
to God and his Physicians, assuring howsoever he had gotten wrong abroad, he
should get none in the cure of his disease.

At length his Lordship burst out in these words to my Lord Denbigh, It is a
great cruelty in you, that you will not suffer my son to come to me when I am
dying that I may see him, and speak to him before I dye. So they delayed his
coming with excuses, until my Lord his agony of death was near, to the end
that he should not have time to give his son private instructions to shun the
marriage of Buckinghams Niece, or to signify unto him the fuspition of poison:
for they had rather his son should know any thing, then either of these; yet
many did suspect his poison before he died: for two days before his death, two
of his servants died with manifest signs and suspicion, of poison, the one
belonging to the Wine-celler, the other to the Kitchen.

The Fatal hour being come, that my Lord Marquess deceased, your Petitioner
entreated all were present, to suffer no man to touch his body, until that he
returned to see it opened. For then he protested earnestly, that all the time
of his sickness, he judged it to be poison; but this poison was such, and so
far gone, that none could help it: Nevertheles, to have the matter concealed,
Buckingham would have him buried that same night in Westminster Church, and the
Ceremonies of his burial to be kept afterward, saying, that such delicate
bodies as his could not be kept.

But his friends taking hold of the cavet before given by your Petitioner,
refused so to do, and replied, that they would have him, as became him to be
buried in Scotland in his own Chapel, where all his Ancesters have been
butied for more then these four hundred years; and that his body mustbee
visited by his Physicians.

No sooner was he dead, when the force of the poysou had overcome the force of
his body, but it began to swell in such sort, that his Thighs were swollen six
times as big as their natural proportion: his Belly became as the belly of
an Ox, his Arins as the natural quantity of Thighs, his Neck so broad as his
Shoulders, his Cheeks over the top of his Nose, that his Nose could not be
seen or distinguished, the skin of his forehead two fingers high swolled, the
hair of his beard, eyebrows and head, so far distant one from another, as
if an hundred had been taken oat bet ween each one; and when one did touch the
hair, it came away with the skin as easily, as if one had pulled hay out of an
heap of hay. He was all over his neck, breast, shoulders, arms, and brows I
say of diverse colors, full of waters of the same color, some white, some
black, some red, some yellow, some green, some blew, and that as well within
the body as without.

Also the concavities of his Liver green his ftomach in some places a little
purpurated with a blew clammy water, adhering to the sides of it. His Mouth and
Nose foaming blood mixed with froth mightily, of diverse colors a yard high.
Your Petitioner being sent for to visit his body, and his servants flocking
about him, saying, See, see, presently weeping, said he was poisoned, and that
it was a thing not be suffered.

Moreover, he said, that albeit his speech might cost him his life, yet seeing
his sorrow had extorted that speech out, he would make it manifest, and would
have a Jury of Physicians. Presently, some of my Lord Marquess of Hameltons
friends said, we must send to my Lord Duke, that he may send his Physitlans:
but your Petitioner replied, what have we to do with the Dukes Physicians? Let
us have indifferent men. Captain Hamelton hearing your Petitioner so boldly
take exceptions at Buckingham, and juding that he had good reason for what he
had spoken, said, for all that let us send to the Duke, and signify, that they
all who have seen the Marquess his body, both Physicians, Chyrurgeons, and
others, may see that he is poisoned, and that his friends desire more
Physicians out of the College of London, besides the Dukes Physicians, to
bear witness in what case the Marquess his body is in; and then if the Dukes
conscience be guilty (said the Captain,) it will show it self, as indeed it
did: for the Duke being advertised hereof, sent for his own Physicians, and
others out of London, whom he caused first to be brought unto him, before they
went to see the Marquess his body, giving them his directions in these words,
viz.

My Masters, there is a bruit spread abroad, that the Marquess of Hamelton is
poisoned; Go see, but beware what you speak of poison (which he said in a
hreatning form of delivery) for every Noble man that dies must be poisoned.

If his conscience had not been guilty, should not he have commanded the
Phy^itians to enquire by all means possible, and made it known rather then to
uppresse the speech of poisoning so worthy a man.

These Physicians being come, your Petitioner with one hand leading Doctor More
to the Table where the Marquess his body was laid, and with the oher hand
throwing off the cloth from the body said to him, Look you here upon his
spectacle.

At the sight whereof Doctor More lifting up both his hands, heart and eyes ^o
the Heavens, agonished, said, Jesus bless me, I never saw the like, I cannot
^istinguish a face upon him; and in like manner all the rest of the Doctors,
and so the Chirurgjons affirmed, that they never saw the like, albeit that they
have ^availed and practiced through the greatest part of Eorope: only one that
said, ^y Lo: of Southampton was blistered all within the breast as my Lo:
marquesses was. Doctor Leicester, one of Buckinghams creature, seeing Doctor
More and others so amazed at the sight of my Lords body, drew first him aside,
and then the others, one after another, and whispered them in the ear to
silence them.

Whereupon many went away without speaking one word, the other who remained,
acknowledged that those accidents of the dead body, could not be without
poison; but they said, they could not know how such a subtle art of poisoning
could be brought into England; your Petitioner replied that money would bring
both the Art and the Artist from the furthest part of the World into England,
from whence since your Petitioners departure, he has conferred with the
skilfullest Pestmasters that could be found, who visit the bodies of those
that die of the venom of the pest.

They all admired the description of my Lo: Marquis his body, and testify that
never any of the pest have such accidents, but Carbuncles, Rubons, or Spots, no
such huge blisters with waters, and such a huge uniforme swelling to such
dimentions, above six times the natural proportion. But he has met with some
who have practiced the poisoning of dogs, to try the forces of some Antidotes,
and they have round that some poisons have made the dogs sick for a fortnight
or more, without any swelling until they were dead, and then they swelled
above measure, and became blistered with waters of diverse colors, and the
hair came away with the skin when it was touched.

The Physicians then who remained, were willing to certify under their hands,
that my Lo: Marquess was poisoned. But your petitioner told them it was not
needful, seeing we must needs attend Gods leisure to discover the author,
the manner being so apparent, and so many hundreds having seen the body to
witness it, for the doors were kept open for every man to behold and to be
witness who would.

The Duke of Buckingham making some counterfeit show of sorrow, two men of
great quality, found no other shift to divert the suspicion of the poisoning of
the Marquess from him, but to lay it upon his master the King, saying, that
the marquess for his person, spirit and carriage, was such as he was born
worthy to reign; but the King his Master hated him to death, because he had a
spirit too much for the commonwealth; whereby the Duke did show himself no
good subject to the King, who made the Kings honor to be tyranicall, and the
King a blood-thirsty murderer, and a most vile dissembler, having heaped so
many honors daily upon the Marquess even to the very last, making him Lord
high Steward of his Majesty's house, and Judge of the very Court, whom he had
made before Viceroy of Scotland, for the time of the Parliament in Scotland,
Earl of Cambridge, privy Councellor in England, and Knight of the Garter, as
if he had raised him to all these honors, that the murdering of him might be
the less suspected to proceed from him.

The Kings nature has always been observed, to have been so gracious and so
free-hearted toward every one, that he would never have wished the Marquess
any harm, unless that Buckingham had put great jealousies and fea^s into as
mind: for if any other had done it, he would have acquainted his favorite
therewith. And then was it Buckinghams duty to remove from the King such
smistrous conceits of the Marquess, as the marquess has often done of
Buckingham, upholding him upon all occasions, and keeping the King from giving
way to introduce any other favorite: wherefore Buckingham in that diversion of
the crime from him, has not only made the King but also himself guilty of
the Marquesses death

But Buckinghams falsehood and ill intention, was long before rightly
discovered, when he did what he could to make the E. of Nethersdale and my Lord
Gordan (both near kinsmen of my Lord Marquess) so incensed at him, that they
had like all three to have killed one another, if it had not been that my Lord
Marquess by his wisdom, did let them all know, how they were abused.

If any dissimulation be greater then Buckingams, let any man judge: For when
my Lord Marquess his body was to be transported from White Hall to his house
at Bishops-gate, Buckingham came out muffed and furred in his Coach giving out
that he was sick for sorrow of my Lord Marquess his death; but as soon as he
went to his house out of London, before his coming to the King, he triumphed
and domineered with his faction so excessively, as if he had gained some great
victory. And the next day coming to the King, put on a most lamentable and
mournful countenance for the death of the Marquess. No greater victory could
he have gotten in his mind, then to have destroyed that man who would have
fetched his head off his shoulders if he had out lived King James, to have
known his carriage in the poisoning of him in his sickness; wherefore he
thought it necessary to remove the Marquess beforehand.

The same day that my Lord Marquess died, Buckingham sent my Lord Marquess
his son out of Town, keeping him as prisoner, none could have private
conference with him, until his marriage of Buckinghams Niece was complete; but
either my Lord of Denbigh or my lady of Denbigh, or my Lord Duke of Buckingham,
or the Countess of Buckingham was present, that none could let him understand
how his father was murdered. Even your petitioner himself when he went to see
him, was entreated not to speak to him of the poisoning of his father, which
he did conceal at his first meeting, because their sorrow was too recent. But
he was prevented of a second meeting, neither would Buckingham suffer the young
Lord to go to Scotland to see his Fathers Funerals, and to take order with his
friends concerning his fathers estate, for fear that their intended marriage
should be overthrown.

This Captivity of the young Lord Marquess lasted so long, until that
Buckingham caused his Majesty, King CHARLES, to take the young Lord, with
himself and Buckingham, into St. James his Park, discharging all others from
following them; and there to persuade and urge the young Lord, without any more
delay to accomplish the marriage with Buckingham his Niece, which instantly was
performed: so that Buckingham trusts and presumes, that albeit the young
Lord should understand how his father was poisoned by his means, yet being
married to his Niece, he would not stir to revenge it, but comport with it.

To all that is observed before, it is wothy to be added, that the bruit went
through London long before the Lord Duke of Richmonds death, or his brothers,
or my Lord of Southamptons, or of the Marquess, that all the Noble men that
were not of the Dukes faction, should be poisoned, and so removed out of his
way.

Also a Paper was found in Kings Street, about the time of the Duke of
Richmonds death, wherein the Names of all those Noblemen who have dyed since,
were expressed; and your Petitioners Name also set next to my Lord Marquess of
Hameltons Name, with these words (to embalme him) This Paper was brought by my
Lord Oldbarrs Daughter, Cousin german to the Lord Marquess: Likewise a
Mountebanke about that time, was greatly countenanced by the Duke of
Buckingham, and by his means procured Letters Patents, and Recommendations from
the King, to practice his skill in Physic through all England: who coming to
London, to sell Poison, to kill man or beast within a year, or half a year,
or two years, or a month or two, or what time prefixed any man desired, in
such sort that they could not be helped nor discovered. Moreover, the Christmas
before my Lord Marquess his death, one of the Prince his footmen said, That
some of the great ones at Court had gotten, Poison in these belly, but he could
not tell who it was.

Here your Honors considering the premises, of my Lord Duke of Buckingham his
ambitious and most vindicative nature, his frequent quarrels with my Lord
Marquess, after so many reconciliations; his threatening of the Physicians, not
to speak of the poison; his triumphing after my Lord Marquess his death; his
detaining of his son almost prisoner, until the Marriage was complete with his
Niece; the preceding bruit of poisoning Buckingham his Adversaries; the Paper
of their Names found, with sufficient intimation of their death, by the
conclusion of the word (embalming) the Poyson-monger, Mountebank, graced by
Buckingham, may suffice for ground to take him and torture him, if he were a
private man: And herein your Petitioner most earnestly demands Justice
against that Traitor, seeing by Act of Parliament it is made Treason to
conspire the death of a Privy Councellor. Out of this Declaration,
Interrogatories may be drawn for Examination of Witnesses; wherein more is
discovered to begin withal, then was laid open at the beginning of the
Discovery of the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury.

Concerning the poisoning of King JAMES of happy memory, KING of GREAT BRITAIN.
THe Duke of Buckingham being in Spain, advertised by Letters, how that the
King began to censure him in his absence freely, and that many spoke boldly to
the King against him, and how the King had intelligence from Spain of his
unworthy carryage in Spain; and how the Marquess Hamelton (upon the sudden
news of the Princes departure) had nobly reprehended the King for sending the
Prince with such a young man, without experience, and in such a private and
sudden manner, without acquainting the Nobility or Council therewith, wrote a
very kitter letter to the Marquess of Hamelton, conceived new ambitious
courses of his own, and used all the devices he could to disgust the Princes
mind of the match with Spain, so far intended by the King, made haste home;
where, when he came, he so carried himself, that whatsoever the King commanded
in his Bedchamber, he controlled in the next; yea, received Packets to the
King from foreign Princes, and dispatched Answers without acquainting the
King therewith, in a long time after. Whereat perceiving the King highly
offended, and that the Kings mind was beginning to alter toward him, suffering
him to be quarrelled and affronted in His Majesty's presence; and observing
that the King reserved my Lord of Bristol to be a rod for him, urging daily his
dispatch for France, and expecting the Earl of Gond^mor, who as it seemed was
greatly esteemed and wonderfully credited by the King, and would second my Lord
of Bristol his accusations against him. He knew also the King had vowed, that
in spite of all the Devils in hell, he would bring the Spanish match about
again, and that the Marquess of Inicosa had given the King bad impressions of
him, by whose articles of accusation, the King himself had examined some of
the Nobility and Privy Council, and found out in the examination, that
Buckingham had said after his coming from Spain, that the King was now an old
man, it was now time for him to be at rest, and to be confined to some Park,
to pass the rest of his time in hunting, and the Prince to be crowned.

The more the King urged him to be gone to France, the more shifts he made to
stay: for he did evidently see that the King was fully resolved to rid himself
of the oppression wherein he held him.

The King being sick of a certain Ague, and that in the Spring, was of it
self never found deadly; the Duke took his opportunity when all the Kings
Doctors of Physic were at dinner, upon the Monday before the King dyed,
without their knowledge or consent, offered to him a white powder to take: the
which he a long time refused; but overcome with his flattering importunity, at
length took it in wine, and immediately became worse and worse, falling into
many swounings and pains, and violent fluxes of the belly, so tormented, that
His Majesty cried out aloud of this white powder, Would to God I had never
taken it, it will cost me my life.

In like manner also the Countess of Buckingham, my Lord of Buckinghams
mother, upon the Friday after, the Physicians also being absent, and at Dinner,
not made acquainted with her doings applied a plaster to the Kings heart and
brea^ whereupon he grew faint, short breathed, and in a great Agony. Some of
the Physicians after dinner returning to see the King, by the offensive smell
of the plaster, perc^ved something to be about him hurtful unto him and
searched what it should be, fou^ it out, and exclaimed, that the King was
poisoned. Then Buckingham entering, commanded the Physicians out of the room,
caused one of them to be committed prisoner his own house, and another to be
removed from Court, quarrelled with others of Kings servants in his sick
Majesty's own presence, so far that he offered to draw sword against them in
his Majesty's sight. And Buckinghams mother kneeling do^ before His Majesty,
cried out with a brazen face, Justice, Justice; Sir, I demand-stice of your
Majesty. His Majesty asked her for what? For that which their li^ are no ways
sufficient to satisfy, for saying that my son and I have poisoned y^
Majesty. Poisoned me? said he; with that turning himself, swounded, and she
(...) removed.

The Sunday after His Majesty dyed, and Buckingham desired the Physicians
(...) attended his Majesty, to sign with their hands a writ of testimony,
that the pow^ which he gave him, was a good and safe medicine; which they
refused.

Buckinghams creatures did spread abroad a rumor in London, that Buckingham was
so srrry for his Majesty's death, that he would have dyed, that he would have
led himself if they had not hindered him; which your Petitioner purposely
enqui^ after of them that were near him at that time, who said, that neither
in the tim^ His Majesty's sickness, nor after his death, he was more moved,
then if there happened either sickness or death to His Majesty.

One day when his Majesty was in great extremity, he rode post to London to
p^sue his sister in law to have her stand in sackcloth in S. Paul's for
adultery. And other time in his Majesty's Agony, he was busy in contriving
and concluding a m^riage for one of his cousins.

Immediately after his Majesty's death, the Physician who was commanded to
chamber, was set at liberty with a caveat to hold his peace; the others
threatn^ they kept not good tongues in their heads.

But in the mean time the Kings body and head swelled above measure, his h^
with the skin of his head stuck to the pillow, his nails became loose upon his
fin and toes.

Your Petitioner needs to say no more to understanding men, only one thing
beseeches, That taking the Traitor who ought to be taken without any fear of
greatness, the other waters may be examined, and the Accessaries with the G^
punished.

FINIS.

