An Order concerning the price of Coals, and the disposing thereof, within the
City of London, and the Suburbs, etc.
Die Jovis 8. Junii. 1643. Committee Navy.
WHEREAS by an Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament dated the foureteenth day
of January 1642. all persons are prohibited to fetch Coals at Newcastle,
Sunderland, and Blyth, upon pain of the forfeiture of their Ships and Coals;
Notwithstanding which Ordinance, some pretending ignorance, others, that in
their voyage for Scotland, they were forced in by foul weather; have presumed
to lade Coals at the aforesaid places: The consideration of whose several
cases, The Commons House of Parliament, having referred to the Committee of the
Navy, whose want of time to examine the truth of the said Allegations, have in
favor to the several persons offending in this kind, taken bond of the
Masters and Owners of the ships and coals, with condition that they should be
responsible to the Parliament, for the true value of their ships and Coals,
when they should be thereunto required, and not to sell their coals above the
rate appointed by the said Ordinance: Notwithstanding which care of the said
Committee, It is informed, That the said Masters and Owners, taking advantage
of the times, and coveting excessive gains, have sold their coals at far
greater prices; For avoiding which abuse in time to come; It is ordered, That
the Lord Mayor of London for the time being, be desired to appoint Officers of
trust, who be commanded to attend on board the ships, and take care that the
said several Masters and Owners, who shall upon bond given to this Committee,
and upon their order, have leave to sell off their coals, receive for a
Chaldron of the said coals, not above the sum of twenty three shillings. And
that the said coals be not sold to any Woodmonger, Chandler, or others who
sell the same again, but unto the poor, and unto Housekeepers, and those of
the meaner sort, not sparing to any one person above the quantity of one
Chaldron; And it is further ordered, That Mr. Solomon Smith Marshall of the
Admiraltie do not permit any Master or Owner to sell off their said coals,
but in the presence of some persons deputed by the Lord Mayor of London, under
his Lordships hand in writing, to see the due execution of this Order.
Provided, That it shall be lawful for the Over* seers of the poor of any
Parish within the City of London and the Suburbs thereof, to make provisions of
coal for the use of the poor of such Parishes against the Winter in some such
indifferent proportion as shall be thought fit by the Lord Mayor of the said
City for the time being, signified under his hand in writing.

Giles Grene.

THe same order and rule to be observed in all other parts where New Castle
coals are imported, to be sold to the poor by the direction and oversight of
the chief Officers of the said Ports.

This order being this day presented from the Committee of the Navy, to the
House of Commons; It was approved of and assented unto, and ordered to be
Printed and sent unto the Lord Mayor.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Printed at London by Richard Cotes. 1643*


