Die Mercurii 5 Maii 1641*
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament,
That the Preamble, together with the Protestation, which the Members of this
House made the third of May, shall be forthwith Printed, and the Copies Printed
brought to the Clark of the said House, to attest under his hand, to the end
that the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses may send them down to the Sheriffs
and Justices of Peace of the several Shires, and to the Citizens and Burgesses
of the several Cities, Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, respectively. And the
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are to intimate unto the Shires, Cities,
Boroughs, and Cinque Ports, with what willingness all the Members of this
House made this Protestation: And further to signify, that as they justify
the taking of it in themselves, so they cannot but approve it in all such as
shall take it.

WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the Commons house in Parliament,
finding, to the great grief of our hearts, that the designs of the Priests and
Jesuits, and other Adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more boldly
and frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and danger of
the ruin of the true reformed Protestant Religion in His Majesty's Dominions
established: And finding also that there have been, and having just cause to
suspect that there still are, even during this sitting in Parliament,
endeavors to subvert the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to
introduce the exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most
pernicious and wicked Councels, Practices, Plots, and Conspiracies: And that
the long intermission, and unhappy breach of Parliaments, has occasioned many
illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and grieved: And
that diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church;
multitudes driven out of His Majesty's Dominions; Jealousies raised and
fomented betwixt the King and His People; a Popish Army leavied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of His
Majesty's Royal Person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown, and
Treasure of this Kingdom: And lastly, finding great cause of Jealousy, that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a
misunderstanding of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army, with force
to bring to pass those wicked Councels, Have therefore thought good to join
our selves in a Declaration of our united Affections and Resolutions, and to
make this ensuing Protestation.

I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate,
the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate; As also the Power and Privileges
of Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every
person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Councels, Plots,
Conspiracies or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and
Honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

WHereas some doubts have been raised by several persons out of this House,
concerning the meaning of these words contained in the Protestation lately made
by the Members of this House, (viz.) The true reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England against all Popery and
Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same doctrine; This House
does declare, That by those words, was and is meant, only the public Doctrine
professed in the said Church, so far as it is opposite to Popery and Popish
Innovations; And that the said words are not to be extended to the maintaining
of any form of Worship, Discipline, or Government, nor of any Rites or
Ceremonies of the said Church of England.

Die Veneris 30. Iulii* 1641.
Resolved upon the Question.

Resolved upon the Question.

Resolved upon the Question.

Die Sabbati 8. Ianuarii, 1641.
At the Committee of the House of Commons appointed to sit in London to
consider of the safety of the Kingdom, and of the City of London, and of
vindicating the Privileges of Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question. London, or of any other person whatsoever, for the
defense of the Parliament, or the Privileges thereof, or the preservation of
the Members thereof, are according to their duty, and to their late
Protestation, and the Laws of this Kingdom. And if any person shall arrest or
trouble any of them, for so loing, he is declared to be a public enemy of the
Commonwealth.

Resolved upon the Question. London.

John Wild Sergeant at Law sitting in the Chair of that Committee.

London, Printed by R. Oulton and G. Dexter, 1641.


