An Order of the Right Honorable the Commons in high Court of Parliament
assembled, For appointing a Committee of the House, to treat with a Committee
of the Common Council of the City of London, and of the Commanders of the
Soldiers, and Commission Officers in the said City; Concerning their
Engagement for the safety and security of His Majesty's Person, and the
Parliament, during the time of the intended Personal Treaty; with the Results
of the Committee and Common Council thereupon.
Die Mercurii, 5. Julii, 1648.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That it be referred to a
Committee to conferr with the Common Council of the City of London, and such
as they shall appoint, and with the Commanders of the Soldiers in London,
concerning their engagement for the safety of the King and Parliament, during
the intended Treaty, and touching the manner of the security, (viz.) unto

Mr. Whitlock Mr. Swinfen Mr. Hungerford Mr. Sam Brown Mr. John Ash Sir Martyn
Lumley Mr. Bait Mr. John Stephens Sir Dudley North Sir Walter Earl Col. Copley
Mr. Salloway Mr. Prideaux Sir Hen. Vain sen. Mr. Reynolds Major Genesis Brown Sir
Robert Harley Sir Tho Withrington Sir James Harringt^n Mr. Crew. Sir Ioh.
Evelyn of Wilts Col. Ven Mr. Drake Mr. Doddridge Mr. Edward Stephens Mr. Ellis
Mr. Sergeant Wild Mr. Strode Mr. Gell Col. Wilson Mr. Wheeler Mr. Green Col.
Edwards, And the Citizens and Burgesses of the City of London.
This Committee it to confer with the Common Council of the City of London,
and such as they shall appoint, and with the Commanders of the Soldiers in
London, concerning their engagement for the safety of the King and Parliament,
during the intended Treaty, and touching the manner of their Security.

H. Essyng Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Commune Concilium tent. sexto die Julii, Anno Dom. 1648. Annoque regni Regis
Caroli Angliae, etc. Vicesimo quarto.
TO this Common Council came diverse Members of the honorable House of Commons,
as a Committee appointed by that House; And after some short preamble made by
Sir Robert Harley Knight, and Giles Green Esquire, they presented an Order of
the said House, made the Fifth day of this instant July; whereby the said
Committee are authorized to conferr with this Common Council, and such as they
shall appoint, and with the Commanders of the Soldiers in London, concerning
their Engagement for the safety of the King and Parliament during the intended
Treaty, and touching the manner of their security; The which Order was here
openly read, and the same Committee having withdrawn themselves, this Court
took this business, being of great concernment, into debate and consideration;
and do declare, That if His Majesty shall come up to the City of London, there
to Treat with His Parliament for the settling of a safe and wel-grounded Peace,
this Court (as much as in them lies) will (by the blessing of God; defend His
Majesty's Royal person, and the Parliament, in honor and safety, against all
violence whatsoever, with their lives and estates during this Treaty according
to the Covenant. And further in pursuance of the said Order, it is ordered by
this Court, That Mr. Alderman Langham, Mr. Alderman Bunce, Mr. Alderman Avery,
Mr. Alderman Bide, Mr. Alderman Pack, and Mr. Alderman Brown, or any three of
them; Mr. Vincent, Mr. Edwin Brown, Mr. Archer, Mr. Nathaniel Hall, Mr. Dep.
Chamberlain, Mr. William Bateman, Major Chamberlain, Mr. Peter Jones, Mr. Dep.
Clowes, Mr. Dep. Glyd, Mr. Chetwin, and Mr. Milles, or any Six of them, shall
be, and they are by this Court appointed a Committee to confer with the said
Committee of Parliament: As namely, with Mr. Whitlock, Mr. Swinfen, etc.
touching the manner of the security for the safety of the King and Parliament,
during the Treaty; And to consider what things are fit to be propounded for
the better enabling of this Court to perform their said engagement, and all
things conducing thereunto; and to this purpose, they are also to conferr with
the Commanders of the Soldiers in the city touching the same: And the said
Committee appointed by this Commoncouncell, re to acquaint this Court from time
to time of their proceedings and opinions therein.

Michel.
Commune Concilium tentum in Camera Guildhald' Civit' London' undecimo die
Iulii, 1648. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
Vicesimo quarto.
AT this Common Council the Committee appointed by the Order of this Court
made the Sixth day of this instant July, to conferr with the Committee assigned
by Order of the honorable House of Commons, concerning the Engagement of this
City for the safety of the King and Parliament during the intended Treaty,
and touching the manner of their security; did now present unto this Court a
Paper expressing their progress and proceedings therein; The which was here
openly read, and every particular therein considered of, and some alteration
was made in the Answers given to the Propositions made by the said honorable
Committee: The tenor whereof is as follows; Viz.

The said honorable Committee did desire that the Military Forces, and the
Court of Common Council, would satisfy them what they intend and mean by
those words in the Petition of the Military-Officers wherein the Petition of
the Common Council to the Parliament do concur; Viz. [That the King and
Parliament may meet and Treat with Freedom, Honor, and Safety, according to
the ancient Fundamental Constitutions of this Kingdom.

To this the Committee of Common Council made answer as follows; Viz. By
these words [The King and Parliament may meet and Treat with Honor, Freedom,
and Safety, according to the ancient Fundamental constitutions of this
Kingdom] we mean, That the King and Parliament may meet and Treat free from
force or violence, which we conceive to be according to the ancient
Fundamental constitutions of this Kingdom.

The said honorable Committee did further desire, that the Committee of
Common Council would satisfy them, what is meant by these words; viz. [That
they will defend His Majesty's royal Person, and the Parliament, during the
Treaty, according to their Covenant.]

The Committee of Common Council did give answer thereunto as follows; Viz.
By those words [To defend the King and Parliament according to the Covenant] we
mean, That during the Treaty, we will defend the King and Parliament (as much
as in us lies) free from all force and violence.

The said honorable Committee did further desire, that the Committee of
Common Council should satisfy them, what they intend and mean in the
Petition of the Military Officers, wherein the Petition of the Common Council
concur) by the word [Freedome] in the last clause; and likewise what they mean
by these words [otherwise interrupt.]

To this the Committee of the Common Council gave the several answers
following, Viz. By the word [Freedome] we understand free from force and
violence; and by the words [otherwise interrupt] we mean all hostile forces
whatsoever; the which answers were approved of by this Court.

The said honorable Committee did further propound, that in case the Parliament
shall make choice of this City to be the place of the Treaty, and that the
Common Council on the behalf of the City, do engage themselves to defend
both King and Parliament from violence during the Treaty, [whether the City
will maintain their guards at their own charge.]

To which the Committee of Common Council did answer, That the same being a
matter of charge, must be resolved by Common Council, and that they would
acquaint the Common Council therewith; Concerning this question, this Court
did take the same into their serious consideration, and after some debate had
thereupon, this Court declared, That if the said intended Treaty be in London,
that then the City will for the present defray the charge for the maintaining
of the Military Guards, for the purpose aforesaid, during the Treaty, and
afterward refer themselves to the King and Parliament for satisfaction
thereof.

The said honorable Committee did further propose, that in case the King shall
not consent and agree to such things as shall be propounded and insisted on by
both Houses of Parliament, in this Treaty for a safe and well-grounded Peace,
[whether they will undertake and engage that the Person of the King shall be
disposed of as both Houses of Parliament shall think fit.]

To which the said Committee of Common Council did answer as follows, viz.
Under the favor of this honorable Committee, we cannot understand by the Order
of the honorable House of Commons, which was delivered unto us for this
Treaty, That there is any thing therein mentioned, tending to that which is by
this honorable Committee propounded, concerning the delivery up of the King in
case the King and Parliament did not agree.

And the said honorable Committee did further declare, [that they were not
satisfied with this answer, concerning the disposing of the Kings Person, in
case the King and Parliament did not agree; and did expect a further answer.

To which the Committee of Common Council did answer and say, That they would
acquaint the Common Council therewith; Concerning which proposition this Court
did take the same into their serious consideration, and upon a full and large
debate thereupon, did declare, That in case the said intended Treaty shall be in
London, and that His Majesty and His Parliament should not agree (which God
forbid) then they conceive themselves bound to submit to the wisdom of both
Houses of Parliament.

The said Honorable Committee did likewise desire [that the Committee of
Common Council, and the Military Officers, should satisfy them in what
manner, and by what means, they will make good their engagement, by defending
the King and Parliament against all violence.]

To which the Committee of Common Council made answer and propounded as
follows, viz. We do declare, and we are ready according to our engagement,
(as much as in us lies) by the Trained-Bands of the City, and the late Lines
of Communication, to guard and defend the King and Parliament from all force
and violence. And to the end that we may be enabled to perform the same, we do
humbly offer, That the Ordinance for the uniting of the Military Forces within
the late Lines of Communication, and the Parishes of the weekly Bills of
Mortality, to the Forces of the City, to be one entire Militia, may be speedily
passed.

That the Militia may be enabled to raise such other Forces as they shall find
needful, to carry them through this service; And that no other Forces may be
raised, or made use of within this City and late Lines of Communication, but by
authority of the said Militia by consent of Common Council.

To consider that our dangers are either from without or from within, and
therefore propounded, Viz. For those without, that for our better security in
garding the King and Parliament, we desire that some course may be taken as
shall be thought fit by Wisdom of Parliament, that no Forces, in Arms may
come within 30. miles of London during the time of the Treaty; And for those
within, that what person or persons soever shall make any Tumult, Insurrection
or disturbance, during the time of this Treaty, after Proclamation made, it
shall be death.

That if the Wisdom of Parliament shall think fit, that none that have born
Arms against the Parliament, or have or shall contribute thereunto shall be
permitted during the said Treaty to come within 30. miles of London, without
leave of the Parliament had or to be had.

Concerning this desire or proposition of the said honorable Committee, this
Court does approve of the Answers thereunto and Propositions made touching the
same. And this Court does order that the said Committee of Common Council
shall communicate unto the said Honorable Committee, the aforesaid Answers and
Propositions of this Court to be by them presented unto both Houses of
Parliament. And also to declare unto them, that it is the humble desire of this
Court, that the said Treaty may be with all expedition, for the preventing of
further inconveniences. And likewise that this Court will do their endeavors
(if the said Treaty be in London) for the finding out of some convenient place
within the City for that purpose, and such other accommodations as shall be
fitting.

It is Ordered by this Common Council, That the Common-councell-men and
Commanders, or such as they shall appoint, shall within their several
Precincts, either by calling all the Inhabitants before them, or by their going
from house to house receive their concurrence to the said Engagement by
subscription of their names.

Michel.
Commune Concilium tent' in camera Guilhald' civit' London, duo decimo die
Iulii, 1648. Annoque regni Domini nostri Caroli nunc Regis Angliae, etc.
Vicesimo quarto.
IT is Ordered by this Court, that the Committee appointed by the
Common Council the sixthday of this instant July, to conferr with the
Committee assigned by Order of the Honorable House of Commons, concerning the
engagement of this City for the safety of the King and Parliament, during the
intended Treaty, shall forthwith take care to disperse unto the Aldermen,
Deputies, Common-councell-men, and Commanders in the respective Wards within
this City, the Acts and resolutions of this Court, touching the same Engagement
passed the 11. day of this month, and that under the same, these words be
written, viz.

We whose names are hereunto subscribed, do Engage with the Common Council,
Commanders and Commission Officers of the City of London in their Engagement
above mentioned, and promise with our lives and fortunes by the blessing of God
to perform the same.

It is Ordered that all Masters of Families be desired to subscribe in one
column, and their sons, and menservants and Inhabitants above sixteen years of
age to subscribe in another column.

It is Ordered that the said Committee shall take an account of the
Common-councell-men and Commanders of their proccedings herein, in writing, and
return the same unto this Court with all expedition.

Michel.
Printed by Richard Cotes, Printer to the Honorable City of London.


