THE HVMBLE ANSWER OF the Honorable House of Commons to the Kings Majesty's
last message, 7th of Feb. 1641. in defense of the Speech lately spoken by M.
Pym.
YOur Majesty's most Loyal and faithful Subjects, the Commons now assembled
in Parliament, have taken into their serious consideration the message received
from your Majesty the 7th of this instant February, And do acknowledge that
the speech therein mentioned to be delivered by Mr. Pym in a Conference, was
printed by their Order, and that what was therein delivered, was agreeable to
the sense of the House: And touching that passage wherein it is affirmed, that
since the stop upon the Ports against all Jrish Papists, by both Houses, many
of the chief Commanders now in the head of the Rebels, have been suffered to
pass by your Majesty's immediate warrants. They present your Majesty with
this their humble Answer.

THat they have received diverse advertisements concerning several persons,
Irish, and other Papists, which have obtained your Majesty's immediate warrants
for their passing into Jreland, since the order of restraint of both Houses;
Some of which, as they have been informed, (since their coming into Ireland,)
have joined with the Rebels, and been Commanders amongst them, and some
others have been stayed, and are yet in safe custody: Particularly the Lord
Delvin and four other persons in his Company, whereof one is thought to be a
Priest. One Collonell Butler brother to the Lord Montgarat now in rebellion,
and Sir George Hamilton, all which are papists, and one other (as is reported)
being son of the Lord Nettersfeild, whose Father and brother are both in
rebellion. The particular names of others we have not yet received, but doubt
not but upon examination they may be discovered.

And your Majesty's most faithful Subjects are very sorry, that the extreme
caution which your Majesty has used, has been so ill seconded with the
diligence and faithfulness of your Ministers. And that your Royal Authority
should be so highly abused, although (as it was expressed in that Speech by
Master Pym) we believe, it was by the procurement of some evil instruments too
near your Royal person, without your Majesty's knowledge and intention. And
we beseech your Majesty to take such course, that not only your Honor may
be vindicated for the time past, but your Kingdom may be secured from the
like mischeife for the time to come.

Read, and by Vote upon the Question, assented unto.

London Printed for John Frank. 1641.


