Eighteen PROPOSITIONS by way of Questions from the high Court of Parliament
concerning the multitude of Popish Recusants now in England by their continual
Treachery to the State, and welfare of the Kingdom, being enemies to the good
of the Commonwealth.

Directed to the Judges of the Land, with their learned Resolutions unto the
said Questions according to the Laws of England.

Printed at London for John Watson, 1642.

Questions From the High Court of Parliament to the Judges concerning Popish
Recusants, together with the Judges Resolutions to the same.
1 Question.
IF a Popish Recusant dwell in a liberty, as in the Cinque Ports, what course
shall be taken for his Indictment?

Resolution.
Such a one may be indicted in the Kings Bench but upon such an indictment
there can be no Proclamation; he may also be indicted at the Quarter or
general Sessions, but at the Assizes, for the County is the best where the
general Goal delivery is, if there be any quarter Sessions held within the
liberty, he may be indicted there also.

2 Question.
If he dwell in a place out of all Parishes, or in a decayed parish?

In this Case he ought to resort to the next Parish, or some other Parish
Church, he may be indicted of any Parish within their County.

3 Question.
If the Officers of the Parish cannot learn the Christian name, or sur-name of
any Recusant, what is to be done?

Resol.
If the Master of the Family will not discover the Christian, or sur-name of
those of his or their family as is fit, the Master or Mistress shall be bound to
their good behavior, and it is fit the next Justice of Peace to the place
suspected do resort thither to know the true names, and they may be indicted
by such names as they are known by, if other names be not found?

4. Quest.
If any be indicted of Recusancy, whether after indictment or before committing
the Justices of Assize or Justices of the Peace in their Sessions cannot take
knowledge of any conformity otherwise than upon their submission in open Court.

Resol.
By the Statute of 23. Eliz. a Popish Recusant may submit himself before the
Bishop before the Indictment, but after the indictment there can be no
knowledge taken of any conformity, but by submission in person in open Court.

5 Quest.
If any man happen to be indicted of Popish Recusancy, which is in truth a
Brownist or Seperatist, what is to be done in such a Case, or whether the
Record do bind till conformity?

Resolution.
If such be indicted as a Popish Recusant there is no avoiding it but by
conformity, but if the indictment be general and Contra formam statuti, the
statute of 29. Eliz. or denies several punishments for them.

6. Question.
If a Recusant indicted and proclaimed would traverse the Indictment whether
must he not first yield his body to the Sher^ffe and tender his traverse in
person and tender it in custody?

Resolution.
No traverse ought to be admitted unless the party indicted yield his or her
body to the Sheriff and appear in person in custody.

7. Quest.
If for absence for a month and he traverse for that time, if the traverse
pass for the King whether that be not a conviction whereupon the King shall
have twenty pound the month, or two parts of the Recusants lands, as well as
if the Recusant be proclaimed and make default?

Resolution.
If the traverse pass for the King upon evidence or by default, or if upon
appearance he will not plead and see judgment be given by nihil dicit. This
is conviction as if it had been upon proclamation.

8. Question.
Whether upon the traverse if it come to a trial, it shall be sufficient
evidence to prove that the Recusant went once or twice to Church, or whether
he must not prove he has gone to his Parish Church, and has gone every
Sunday according to the statute of Prion Elizabeth, all the latter statutes
referring to that Statute?

Resolution.
The coming to Church must be to his Parish Church, etc. and it must be once
in every month to save the 20. pound the month or 2. parts of the Lands but
it must be every Sunday to save them 12. pence the Sunday.

9. Question.
Whether if a Recusant be once convicted, and conform himself and his
conformity be pleaded and judgment be given for that Recusant, and after he
fall into the rel^pse by for bearing to go to Church, there need not any new
indictment of conviction?

Reason.
He may be newly indicted at the assine; or Sessions, and then best to be
special recyting the conformity and the relapse, and it may be also by
pleasing in the Exchequer, whereupon issue may be joined.

10. Quest.
Whether if such a Recusant convicted and relapsing dye before any questioning
of him before his death, the forfeiture incurring in his life time be not wholly
ruined, and that the arrearages may not wholly be put into charge, and levied
upon his lands or goods or both, who dyed in relapse, or whether there must be
a Scire Fac. against the Executors and Tenants?

Resolution.
This is left to the course of the Exchequer, but an heir may conform and
avoid it.

11. Quest.
If one obtain a grant under the great Seal, of any Recusants lands or goods,
and that the Recusant buy in that grant to himself or to his use, though
originally it was granted to his use, whether this grant be void, specially
after a new conviction of the same party?

Resolution.
If a Recusant purchase in such a grant upon a new inquisition, or by a Bill in
the Exchequer Chamber these are made subject to a new seizure, as of lands
newly purchased by a Recusant.

12. Quest.
If a Recusant be indicted and proclaimed, and before conviction he yield up
his body and plead not; what shall be done; and whether a nihil dicit may not
be entered?

Resolution.
In this case a nihil dicit shall be entered if he will not plead after
appearance, and that will be a conviction at the common Law.

13. Quest.
Whether if after proclamation a Recusant yield his body to the Sheriff and
plead what time the traverse ought to be tried.

Resolution.
It ought to be tried presently if the time we will permit, otherwise as soon
as possibly can be.

14. Quest.
When a Recusant is convicted, and he imbeazeleth his goods before the
commission be sent forth; or before it be set upon to enquire of his goods,
what course may be taken to prevent it?

Resolution.
To prevent this, the Sheriff shall do well by himself or his Bayliffe to put
the owners out of possession to seize the goods of keeping them safely, and
enquire of them after.

15. Quest.
If a married woman be convicted and her husband dye, whether she be not liable
to all the arrearages from the conviction.

Resolution
She is liable to the whole arrearages if her husband, did not pay any part of
the penalty for her during the coverture.

16. Quest.
Whether if she after become covert and marry again, the second husband be not
liable to the payment of all the arrearages, and his own goods liable thereunto?

Resolution.
If her estate be not seized before her second husbands marriage, the second
husband is liable to pay all the arrearages of 20. pound the month before his
second marriage.

17. Quest.
If a Recusant sell, give, or devise Lands, whether the Conformity of Heir
shall priviledhe the Lands of any?

Resolution.
The words of the Statute extend only to the Heir, and the p^rchaser is not
discharged unless he pay all the Arrearages.

18. Quest.
Whether a feme Covert convicted which by the Statute of 17. 1. ^obi is to be
committed without Bail, unles her husband pay 20. l. a month may by warrant
be taken out of her house and carried to prison, or what course is to be taken
for her commitment?

Resol.
She may be taken out of her house, and if the Sheriff or other officer knock
at the door, it being shut, and they will not open it, they may break it open.

The Papists that are lurking in this Commonwealth can never be too much
discovered, for as they walk in the mists of ignorance, so likewise they are
allwaies contriving some secret dark plotts, Hell and they conspire to plant
again their superstition, or else they cherish a hope by engaging this
Kingdom into a civil war, to reduce a Monarchy into an Antipathy against
the Protestant Religion, their plotts are sufficient witnesses of their
intentions continued since eighty eight, and now breaking forth into many
places, especially inthe Northern parts. Murder and bloody designs against
the Protestants are Canonized by them as meritorious Acts. It behooves
therefore all well affected persons not only to know their persons, and to
discover their abiding, but also to be informed how and in what manner they may
by legal proceedings attach and bring them to deserved punishment, which by
these questions propounded from the high Court of Parliament, and resolved by
the Judges may evidently appear, as being grounded upon Law and giving
satisfaction in several cases against Popish Recusants, and necessary to
inform the Judgment of all well affected persons in such points.

FINIS.

