EIGHT REASONS FOR BAPTIZING INFANTS BORN OF BELIEVING PARENTS.

DEUTERONOMY. 30.6. I will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1649.

Infants born of believing Parents are to be baptized.
Reasons. I. THE Covenant of Grace, which God made with Abram and his seed, is
everlasting ( Genesis 17.1.) And extends to all believers, and to their children
(Act. 2.39.) hence, whereas the children of unbelievers are unclean, the
children of believers are holy (1 Cor. 7.14.) (i.) set apart from those others,
and taken into Covenant with God, and belonging to the Church of Christ.

But being within the Covenant and the Church, they have right to the Seal, and
Ordinance of Baptism. Ergo, They are to be baptized.

II. In the 18^h of Matthew, Christ speaking of little children, tells us;

That the Son of man is come to save what is lost, v. 11. That it is not the
will of God that one of these little ones should perish, verse. 14.

But God preordaining to the end, preordaineth to the means also.

And we are saved by the means of Baptism, Tit. 3.5. compared with Act. 22.16.
Erge, Little children who are to be saved, are to be baptized.

III. In the 19th of Matthew, They brought little children, or Infants (Luke
18.15.) to Christ, that he should put his hands upon them, and pray: And the
Disciples rebuked them.

But Jesus said, Suffer little children, and forbid them not to come unto me;
for of such is the kingdom of heaven, v. 13, 14.

But except they be born again of water and of the Spirit ( i. unless they be
baptized) they cannot enter into the kingdom of God, Joh. 3.5. Ergo, That they
may enter into the kingdom of heaven, they must be baptized.

IV. In the 28th of Matthew, Christ gives an universal Commission to his
Apostles.

Go, and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe al things, whatsoever I
have commanded you: And lo I am with you to the end of the world, ver. 19, 20.

The Apostles were to baptize all Nations, Ergo, Children; especially upon
supposition of the premises.

That they are within the Covenant of grace; and that Baptism is the Seal of
the Covenant.

That they are of the Church of Christ, and that Baptism is a Privilege of the
Church.

That they are to be saved; And that we are saved by Baptism, in via ordinaria.

That they belong to the kingdom of heaven, and that Baptism is the entrance
thereto.

And as Christ commanded his Disciples, so does he us, to suffer little
children to come unto him; giving us in charge to observe whatsoever he
commanded them; And lo he it with us in his Ordinances to the end of the
world. And as when they brought little children unto him, he took them into his
arms, laid his hands upon them, and blessed them ( Mar. 10.16.) so does he now
at Baptism: for, It is he that baptizeth with the holy Ghost, Joh. 1.33.

V. The Apostles baptized whole families, Lydiabs and the Jaylers, Act.
16.15.33. Ergo, Their children; especially upon supposition of the premises.

VI. Since Christ time there was never any Church which did not teach the
baptizing of Infants and practice it. And the Apostle himself argues from the
Authority and custom of the Church, upon another occasion, 1 Cor. 11.16.

Besides from the doctrine and practice of the Church in this case, do we best
understand the doctrine and practice of Christ and his Apostles, and the sense
of that Commission, given them for baptizing all Nations, etc. The Church being
the Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. (i.) the Church holding out Gods Truths, as a
Pillar does the Kings Proclamation, to be read and understood by us.

VII. For many hundred years the Catholic Church has consisted almost only
of those that were baptized in their Infancy, Ergo, The Baptism of Infants
must be maintained, or the Catholic Church for many hundred years has
failed, and so art Article of our faith will be overthrown.

VIII. Under the Law, Infants were circumcised; Ergo, Under the Gospel are they
to be baptized: Baptism succeeding circumcision, 2 Cor. 11.12.

And that Baptism was appointed to be the Sacrament of Initiation in the Church
of Christ, as Circumcision was in the Church of the Jews, appears by the
Commission, Teach al Nations baptizing them, etc. And by the practice of the
Apostles thorowout the whole Book of Acts, where we find that new converts were
ever initiated, and incorporated into the Church by Baptism.

And, according to the known, manifest and ordinary course of divine
Dispensation, the grace of the Covenant is first applied, and the Promises of
God in Christ, touching Remission of sins, Adoption, etc. are first signed and
sealed to us, in Baptism: And so Baptism is said to be the Instrument of our
Regeneration or new birth, and the necessary previous means of our salvation,
according to the ordinary course of divine dispensation. And accordingly must
we understand those afore-cited places, Joh. 3.5. Tit. 3.5.

The Sum of all the fore going Reasons
The Sum of all is this:

Infants born of believing Parents, are within the Covenant of grace, and
Church of Christ: And Christ tells us, That he came to save them; and that the
kingdom of heaven belongs to them; and when they were brought unto him, he laid
his hands upon them, and blessed them; and commanded his Disciples to suffer
them to come unto him; and when he gave them their Commission for baptizing all
Nations, he gave them and us, in charge the observing of whatsoever he had
commanded them: And the Apostles baptized whole Families, and the universal
Church of Christ has taught the baptizing of Infants, and practiced it: And
the Catholic Church for many hundred years has consisted almost wholly of
those that were baptized in their Infancy, Ergo, Such Infants are to be
baptized.

Object.And as they were circumcised under the Law, so are they to be baptized
under the Gospel, The Covenant being everlasting, and the same in substance,
though of different administrations in the Old Testament and the new.
Circumcision is the seal of the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. And so is
Baptism, that succeeded it; and as the Apostle says, That Abraham believed,
and was circumcised: so said Philip to the Eunuch, If thou beleevest (with all
thine heart) thou may be baptized, Act. 8.37. And accordingly our Savior, He
that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Mar. 16.16. But Infants cannot
believe, Ergo, They may not be baptized. Sol.


That place in the Romans concerns the personal Circumcision of Abraham who
was 99 years old, when he was circumcised ( Genesis 17.24.) and who first believed
the Promise, and then had it sealed unto him by circumcision: And if any that
are grown, and of years shall be converted (as the Eunuch was) they must first
testify their competent understanding of Christianity, and profess their
faith in Christ, and in the Promises made to us by God in Christ, and their
earnest desire to be strengthened in that faith, and then have those Promises
sealed to them in Baptism: And of such must we understand our Savior Christ,
Mat. 16.16. But as Isaac, Abrams son was circumcised the 8th day, Genesis 21.4. So
the sons and daughters of believing Parents may be baptized in their Infancy,
by Reason of the general Promise of God ( Genesis 17.7.) and of the special both
Command and Promise of Christ, Mat. 28.20.

Besides, their being born in the bosom of the Church, is instead of an outward
profession of the Gospel: and their Parents desiring them to be baptized is
instead of their own desire of Baptism. And hereto are Parents graciously
invited by our Savior himself, in the aforesaid places, Mat. 9. Mar. 10. Luke
18.

Nor is actual Faith or belief of absolute necessity either to Baptism or to
salvation, but in those only who are capable of Instruction out of the Word,
Faith coming by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God, To. 10.17. It is the
application of Christ's Righteousness that both justifies and saves us
absolutely, and not our actual apprehending of it: and God does supply the
defect of belief and apprehension in Infants by his Spirit, applying to them
the blood of Christ, in the justifying and sanctifying power (whereof also they
are capable as well as those that are in years) and so saving and glorifying
them.

And hence is it that Christ himself reckons Infants amongst believers, Mat.
18.6.

Who so shall offend one of these little ones which believe in me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were
drowned in the depth of the Sea.

Now they believe, non actu, sed effectu, not having the act of faith, but the
effect thereof; Union with Christ Imputation of his Righteousness,
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, by the special operation of the holy
Ghost.

And Infants being thus capable of the grace, why are they not also of the
seal, of the Covenant.

And who can forbid water, that they should not be baptized? Act. 10.47.

FINIS.

