Die Lunae, 29 November. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That on the next Lords day
being the Fifth day of December, public Thanks be given to Almighty God by
the respective Ministers within the Cities of London and Westminster, and
liberties and parts adjacent within the late Lines of communication, for his
great Blessing upon the Parliament Forces in Munster in Ireland, under the
Command of the Lord Inchiquine, against a force of the Rebels under the Command
of the Lord Taaff* obtained the Thirteenth of this present November* 1647. And
that on the next Lords day come fortnight the Nineteenth day of December,
public Thanks be likewise given in all the Churches and chapels of England
and Dominion of Wales, by the respective Ministers thereof, for the same
Blessing upon the said Forces: It is further Ordered, That upon the said
respective Lords days of the Fifth and Nineteenth of December, there be a
Collection in the said Churches and chapels, for Relief of the poor English
Protestants driven out of Ireland; and that the Moneys that shall now be
collected, be added to the sum formerly collected upon a late Ordinance of
Parliament which directs a collection for relief of such poor English
Protestants; and that the said Moneys now to be collected, be paid in the same
manner to the same Treasurers appointed in that Ordinance, and be disposed by
Order of the same Committee. It is further Ordered, That the Lord Major do give
timely notice of this Order for a Thanksgiving on the next Lords day, to all
the Ministers within the cities of London and Westminster, and late Lines of
communication: And the respective Knights of the Shires, and Burgesses of the
several cities and places, are required to send copies of this Order to the
several counties, cities and places; and the Ministers in the several places
are required to move and stir up the people to a cheerful contribution in
acknowledgement of their thankfulness for this great and seasonable Blessing.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London: Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons.
December. 1. 1647.


