AN IMPEACHMENT OF HIGH TREASON Exhibited in PARLIAMENT, Against James, LORD
STRANGE, Son and Heir apparent of William, Earl of Derby, by the Commons
Assembled in Parliament, in the name of themselves, and all the Commons of
England.

With an Order of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, for the apprehending of
the said Lord, to be published in all Churches, and Chapels, Markets and
Towns, in the County of Lancaster and Chester.

16 September, 1642.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament Assembled, that this Impeachment, with the
Order, shall be forthwith Printed and publishe.

John Brown Cler. Parliament.



September. 17. London Printed for John Wright, 1642.

THE IMPEACHMENT OF James Lord Strange, Son and Heir apparent of William Earl
of Derby, by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, in the name of themselves and
all the Commons of England, of High TRASON.
THat the said James Lord Strange, to the intent and purpose to subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom of England, and the Rights
and Liberties, and the very being of Parliaments, and to set sedition betwixt
the King and his people; did upon the 15 day of July, in this present year of
our Lord God, 1642 at Manchester, in the County of Lancaster, and at several
other times and places, actually, maliciously, rebelliously, traitorously
summoned, and called together, great numbers of his Majesty's Subjects, and in
sight, persuade and encourage them to take up arms and leavie war against the
King, Parliament, and Kingdom.

That the said James Lord Strange, in further prosecution of his foresaid
wicked, traiterous, and malicious purposes, did upon the said 15 day of July,
at Manchester aforesaid, and at several other times and places, actually,
maliciously, rebelliously, and traitorously, raise great forces of men and
horse, and leavie war against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, and in
further prosecution of the aforesaid wicked, traiterous, and malicious
purposes, the said same Lord Strange and diverse other persons, whom he had
drawn into his party and faction, did also upon the said 15 day of July, at
Manchester aforesaid, maliciously, and traitorously, with force and arms, and
in a hostile and warlike manner, kill, murder, and destroy, Richard Parcivall,
of Kirkman-shalme, in the said County of Lancaster, Lynen Webster, and did then
and there, and at several other times and places, in like hostile manner as
aforesaid, shoot, stab, hurt and wound diverse other of his Majesty's good
Subjects, contrary to the Laws and peace of this Kingdom of England, and
contrary to his Majesty's Royal Crown and Dignity; and the said James Lord
Srange, has set sedition betwixt the King and his people, and now is in open
and actual rebellion against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom. For which
matters and things, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the House of
Commons in Parliament Assembled, do in the name of themselves, and of all the
commons of England, Impeach the said James Lord Strange of High Treason, and
the said Commons by protestation, saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other accusation or Impeachment against
the said Lord Strange, and also of replying to the answers of the said James
Lord Strange shall make to the Premises, or any of them, or any Impeachment or
accusation that shall be exhibited by them, as the Cause, according to course
and proceedings of Parliament, shall require; do pray that the said James Lord
Strange, may be put to answer all and every the Premises, that such
proceedings, examinations, trials, and judgments, may be upon them, and every
one of them, had, and used, as shall be agreeable to Law and Justice.

Veneris 16 Septembris 1642.
WHereas the Lord Strange, having continued a long time, and still remaining in
actual Rebellion against his Majesty, and Parliament, is for the same
Impeached of high Treason by the House of Commons, in the name of themselves,
and all the Commons of England. It is therefore Ordered by the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, that publication thereof be made in all Churches and
Chapels, by the Curats and Churchwardens thereof, and in all Markets and
Towns, by the Constables and Officers of the Towns within the Counties of
Lancaster and Chester, to the end that all his Majesty's loving Subjects may
have notice thetof, lest they being deceived by the specious pretenses made by
the Lord Strange, should assist him with men, money, munition, or any other
Provision, and so make themselves guilty of the like Treason and Rebellion, and
all Sheriffs, and other his Majesty's subjects are hereby required to do their
best endeavor for the apprehension of the said Lord, and the bringing him up
to the Parliament, thereto receive condign Punishment according to his
demerits.

FINIS.

