An ANSWER TO A LETTER Written out of the country, to Master John Pym,
Esquire, one of the worthy Members of The House of Commons.

LONDON Printed Anno Dom. 164^.

An answer to a Letter written out of the country, to Master John Pym Esquire.
THough R. E. I am not acquainted with you, yet have I often perused your
Diabolical forgeries, the bitterness of your complaints, the invective poison
couched in your speeches, and the treacherous calumnies written in your
Letters: wondering that a Papist dare be so saucie, to invent such untruths
against the State, knowing the Laws to condemn such Pharisees as treasonable.
My intent at this time is not to search out the rancour of your poison further
then it lies couched in your Letter out of the country (forged as) to Master
John Pym Esquire, which might rather have been justly entitled a calumnious
Pamphlet forged of purpose to abuse him. You may well say it was written out of
the country, 1 because by foreign spirit of the Church of Rome, an abortive
in ours, But 2 because it came from Hell: the Devil is the father of lies, he
presented you a fit instrument for his purpose with it, because of your Popish
education, and you have been obedient herein: you say he is one of the worthy
Members of the House of Commons Herein the Devil appears like an Angel of
truth, you say he is one of the worthy members; is such a one a fit subject for
you to jeare, taunt, and abuse, as if he were so base a vassal as your self, a
right Popish trick, your Letter bears date Feb. 1. a time remarkable, for upon
this very day, L. Sergius Catilina conspired the destruction of Rome, as you
have done of England: but what was the event of it, M. Cicero prevented his
conspiracy, and caused him to receive his due reward. 691 Salust. And so I
doubt not, but God will by some Cicero or other discover yours, and bring you
to the bar of justice for your labor. But to come to the view of your forged
Letter, it self.

I find your Letter, (or rather calumnious Pamphlet) to begin thus, Sir I shall
not need to tell you, with what tenderness of care I have hitherto observed
your commands concerning the dispersing of those books you sent me. It is true
we are too well acquainted how tender you have been and careful to stir for
the Popes honors sake, and to this purpose have perused those books,
Remonstrances and Declarations, which have proceeded from the High Court of
Parliament, which have been too much, and too saucily abused by such turbule^t
factious spirits: neither do I wonder that your own conscience whispers treason
to your self, because you know so well your own guilt, and so lightly condemn
your self with their just censures. You say you find your Arts now to failt, I
hope you will in convenient time, for do not think that you can still veil
your black art of consecrating of traitors to act your desperate designs,
your art of conjuring with Bulls and Breves: your arts of treason, and
treacherous conspiracies which your old men have re^^^^ed, ((...) King James
said once in the Parliament House) By their first drinking i^ liqour upon a
certain shamefastness to bethought curious: and your young men through evil
education that have never been brought up but upon such venom in place of
wholesome nutriment. King James speech March 19. 1603. And indeed the practices
of the Popish Armies in the North at this day, are such that I hope the English
Protestants will have so much understanding to preserve their own security,
that where you were wont to find a willingness, you will be n^w to seek a
receipt.

I^ the next place you seem to dissemble the matter, and indeed to mingle your
poisoned pills with Sugar, that the bait may the better allure us to swallow
it: it is true enough that the malignant party have infused such Principles, as
begin to shake the whole fabric, by which they have labored to divide the
King from his Parliament, to lessen his honor, by vailing his throne there
exalted, by dissolution of Parliaments, by destruction of the Laws, and
Liberties of the subject, and indeed by overthrowing all Religion, and turning
the peace of the Kingdom to a confused Chaos, and so to cross and hinder that
happy building (which the Parliament on their behalf) have endeavored with so
much industry.

In some things you have spoken true (to give the Devil his due.) From a right
understanding always proceeds a right judgment. Therefore is it that the
Parliament rightly understanding the dangerous designs you daily practice does
bind us to assist them, resting satisfied in their judgments, and accordingly
to proceed against you, and your designs. It is our misery that you have those
to deal withal that want the first, and so are ignorant of the misery you
bring them by being so forward in the latter, whose sufferings have paid too
dear already, since your Rhetoric has prevailed above the wholesome
counsel and advice of the Parliament.

You say you are no longer able to restrain their (you would have said your
own) rash judgment of Master Pym, and many other worthy members of the Houses,
accusing them as the prime instruments of your misery: you may well call it
rash judgment indeed, as a Spanish Ambassador once said ( G^ndomor by name)
at his return, declaring what dissaffection he had raised in England against
Parliaments. Whatsoever project we list to attempt (says he) enters safely at
that ear, whilst their policy lies asleep. So have too many at this day been
seduced by such wicked practices to labor that the wise policies of the High
Court of Parliament, may be lulled asleep in a tempest, whilst we and all we
have are drowned in the deluge.

The ordinary or rather extraordinary calumnies you write of are too frequently
used, indeed the more it is to be lamented, for it is easy to be discerned how
the want of right understanding does corrupt such judgments as are so
discerned by you. As 1 to say, Have we at all mended our condition this
Parliament? I answer that it was much bettered by their suppressing of
Monopolies, preventing of injustice in many Courts, and beginning a Reformation
in Religion. Indeed your Popish hopes were not bettered, but our hopes were,
and our condition found it out so till evil counsel stopped their proceedings,
by raising a dissaffection in the Kings Majesty toward them, which has
caused so much distractio^ and bloodshed ever since, so that may we say indeed
2 Are we not fallen almost into terms of absolute ruin, since Papists are
permitted to bear Arms against us? do we not see our estates not only taken
away without, but against Law, by plundering, and pillaging, the daily practice
of the Popish Cavaliers, insulting over the lives of the Protestants in the
North by woeful experience have found. But whereas you tax the proceedings of
the the High Court of Parliament in the raising of money to be illegal, I
answer, that for the Parliament, (into whose hands we have committed our
estates, and trust of the whole Kingdom) to demand part of our estates for the
defense of the Kingdom against a malignant Army of Papists, Delinquents, and
traitors raised up to destroy the Religion, and Laws of the Kingdom, and to
compel the payment by an Ordinance of Parliament, to save our Laws, Religion,
Liberties, and Lives, is not against Law, neither against their promises made
to us, to protect us against all arbitrary power whatsoever. 3 Whereas you say,
had we borne the illegality of the shipmoney, even to the period of ours, and
our childrens days, it had never lain so heavy upon us as this one of the
twentieth. I answer, that for the illegality of the Shipmony, I refer you to
the speeches of Master Saint John, and many other members of the House of
Commons, and the large treaties, votes, and acts of Parliament against it: and
for this twentieth part now cessed for the just cause aforesaid, for which
purpose the Parliament have appointed, honest, sufficient and well affected men
to judge of our estates, the best course to defend the lawful Rights, and
Liberties of the Subjects against the Cavaliers in their traiterous Tyranny. 4
You say there is a guilt that gnawes us, for that it is employed against our
lawful King. To which I answer, that were it employed against H^s Majesty it
would do so. I could heartily wish that Justice might have its course to try
whether the Earl of Newcastle, etc. or the Parliaments forces are employed
against His Majesty, that so all those robbers, plunderers, and spoilers of
this kingdom, and good people may be brought to punishment: and where can this
be done more perfectly, then where the fountain of Law is, in the High Court
of Parliament? 5 Another thing you question is this, as often as any Order has
issued out from either or both Houses since the discerning spirit of our good
King, whom God has set over us has been absent bath not the event been
profaneness murder, and disloyalty in the highest kind, not only not to assist
but to resist the highest powers? To satisfy this your query I answer, that
this profaneness, murder, and disloyalty did then begin when such orders began,
to be slighted, scorned, and neglected, by a malignant party, and Popish Army,
and by working, and increasing a dislike and dissaffection in his Majesty and
the people to the Ordinances of Parliament, and by the scandalizing of their
proceedings, which is the greatest disloyalty of all to the King, who is
greatest, sitting in the High Court of Parliament with those High powers
ordained of God, the resistance of whose Ordinances are justly censured with
just condemnation. You tell us that as often as your impieties have (for your
sins) seemed to prosper, so often has thanks been given to Almighty God. It
seems your thanks to God have been as full of hypocrisy as your Protestations
to us, and surely we cannot but think it great impiety and sin in that party
of Papists, Atheists, and profane wretches, that under pretenses of fighting
for the old Religion established by the Laws of this Kingdom, shall go about
to undermine, kill, and destroy both Religion, and Law, and although such may
prosper sometimes, yet God will undoubtedly find a time for an account hereof.
7 You say that those things which in times past were marks of prosperity, are
now badges of calamities. And the reason of this is, because there was never
any Parliament so abused: indeed Gundomer boasted in Spain, that there are
(quoth he) so many about the King; who blow this coal, fearing their own
stakes, if a Parliament should enquire into their actions, that they use all
their art and industry, to withstand such a council: thus has prosperity to
this day, been veiled from our eyes, since the scorn and reproaches of
malignants against the High Court of Parliament have been made the badges of
our public calamities.

For the Ordinances of Parliament they are not cried up, by new and strange
flatteries of base and abject sufferance: but obeyed according to the orders of
Parliament, and as according to Law, they ought really to be by all noble
spirits, and true hearted Protestants, which no Subject durst ever opose, but
Papists, Priests, and Jesuits, Rebels, and traitors: not as if we tied our
faith to their sleeves neither, but as obediently submitting our selves to the
higher powers, and their lawful Ordinances; but for such who do thus rebel,
their garments are spotted with that filthiness from which we that have obeyed
have been washed.

For the Kings Majesty, I do verily believe that Master Pyms love and honor
to him, does as far transcend yours, as we the Antipodes of the earth, and
for this purpose, he (with the rest of the House) have labored, not like
Basilisks to flatter, but like faithful Counselors to make him truly a mighty
and an happy King: and such hopes have we had, and I doubt not shall have again
when his Majesty returns, that he will by this Parliament bring forth an
unexampled and every where envied happiness to the Kingdom of England, to
muzzle the mouths of all pretenders, and to establish our Peace. All which is
their labor, and study. But you put unto him a strange question. Would we say
you, that there should be brought into the imperial dignity the issue of a
great horse, or some such abortive governors. Abortive governors, indeed, and
miserable ones too, and the Popish co^manders too much swaying the imperial
dignity, in this cruel war, since they like desperate horsemen have been
permitted to trample on us. It is true enough that we are dealt with by cunning
sophistry with their odious treasons: do not the very tenants of Popery teach
us to rid our selves of our allegiance, which the Parliament have labored to
prevent by Protestations, and wholesome Ordinances, and for the par^^ng with
the twentieth part of our estates, I say no more then I have said already,
only I would have you tell me if it be not wickedness in the Earl of
Newcastle, and others, which do assesse men to pay, not the twentieth part of
their estates, but what they please, and do compel them to it by force of
Arms.

You accuse the high court of Parliament to be such clients, who have brought
you into danger of your lives. Indeed such of you as are traytous, and rebels,
your own consciences, it may be smite you to consider your guilt, which though
you have sinothered a long time, yet have you perceived the Parliament in the
way to find you out, and to discover you, who seeing your selves in danger of
your lives break forth to act such desperate designs as you have done. The
Parliament are not clients for themselves, neither do they shadow themselves
under the name of the people by large terms of Religion and Law, whilst in
effect they overthrew both, as you falsely cast an aspertion upon them, for
they are that very substance, the representative body of the Kingdom, neither
is it usual terms to declare that there is the fountain of Law and power for
Reformation of Religion, both which they have and daily do labor to preserve.
And because the advice of both Houses of Parliament has through the suggestion
of evil council been so much undervalued of late, and so absolutely rejected,
and refused, did declare to the Kingdom in their Remonstrance May 26.
sufficiently enough to satisfy any rational man in the world what the
privilege of the great council of Parliament is herein.

You accuse the Parliament for having done that under the name of Peace, which
would hardly have happened in War, which you undertake to prove: well let us see
what you can say herein, 1 (You say) Arms are taken against the King, there
wanted only a captain which in a tumult is easily found. The King now might
easily leave the city, seeing at a beck, (in his presence) such tumults were
raised. Surely I cannot believe the Parliament bear any Arms against his
Majesty, but against a company of known malignants, and traitors to the
Religion, and peace of the Kingdom, that have gathered head to make us slaves
and vassalls for ever, and that without the impeachment of their loyalty to
him: neither has the Parliament given way to any design which has not been
awed by the Laws of the Land, and the lawful power and exercise thereof,
which his Majesty has over them, much less to any unlawful tumults,
especially raised against him.

You put the question what has been his demeanor since: and you answer your
self a continual ^^^ing of us, not to undo our selves for the private ends of
a few, whose deserts have been only, 1. The shedding of the Earl of
Straffords blood. It is true this was his desert, and Justice did require it of
them. This justice they performed in his trial and they as you say had their
desert the justice of their power executed on the malefactor. 2 you tell us it
was followed with an ocean of that of Ireland Herein you say they have had
their deserts too, where you truly appear in your own colors; and what you
are. You go on: and now of England, what of England, England has been too
much troubled with your popish faction: you say there has been bribery from
Papists, and I believe it too, the more is the pity; I make no question but you
speak by experience, but when you are brought before the Parliament, what
availes b^ibes then? though the Pursevants may be stopped with a silver bar,
there you must come to the bar of Justice. 2. You complain of the seperating
of Protestants, countenancing of Anab aptists, and all other sectaries; Surely
to cherish and countenance such, the Parliament gives no way at all, but are
against them: indeed if by these you mean all such as are not Episcopal in
their judgments, formal in their devotions, ceremonial and superstitious in
their worship of God, such as will not swear and lie, and profane the Lords
day, (in a word) if by these be meant all such as desire to be Protestants in
life and conversation, as well as in mere profession, then to countenance and
cherish such, is the way to maintain the true reformed Protestant Religion,
and I know none countenanced but such as these. 3. You complain of their
inhibiting good Preachers, and favoring ill; yea, even Coach-men and Cobblers,
I pray you why do you not nominate the parties, this is nothing but a mere
invective aspertion, except you call your fathers the Priests, Friars and
Jesuits the good Ministers, or diverse popish Priests of our own, that were
almost yours, such as these indeed have been brought to the bar, but for
their countenancing of any without orders I know none, neither do you for all
your great words. 4. You bring in robbing of Orphans, which is the practice of
the popish Cavaliers, the Parliament desire to execute Justice against such
crying vices. 5. You bring in exhorting to all manner of Rebellion, and
leawdnesse, while they themselves have Lorded it, free from all danger, and
care: But surely to fight against those who have actually attempted to destroy
the laws of the land, the liberty of the subject, and indeed the very life of
the Parliament, Religion and Kingdom, is not Rebellion, and leawdnesse, but is
the care to which they are bound to defend his Majesty's Royal person, and
laws by. In the 6. place you reprove the printing of such plausible lies as
might draw things into a further confusion, of which vice; I believe there is
none in the whole Kingdom so guilty as your self, witness those many lines
of lying Rethoricke you have from time to time brought to the press, and
especially, this. Where 7. in the next place I find you ready provided with
about the conveying of money away beyond the sea, gathered for distressed
Irland: To use your own words, it is a plausible printed lie, added to your
other volumes, whereof you have many.

You tell Master Pins, that as for the Propositions he sent by those honorable
Lords, etc. whereas it is well known the Propositions were often debated in
both Houses of Parliament before, and with free consent of both sent to His
Majesty; how lamentable a thing is it that such as you should dare to pollute
the press with such a multitude of lies? I pray what is it that is odious in
those Propositions; indeed they strike a great stroke against Popery, and for
that they are odious to you, but the Lords did not go with their messag
without consideration, as you imagine, or as I may rather say, purposely
slander ^^em; they know their master Jesus Christ whom they serve, whose honor
they esteem above their own: neither do they at all respect the opinion of
such as you, so they may stand right between God and us, in loialty to the
Kings Majesty, of which they are tender and careful, and with how many bitter
taunts and jeares did they all pass throw the Cavaliers before they came to
the Kings presence, calling them Roundheads, Parliament dogs? etc. Neither are
they backward to comply with his Majesty's justice and integity, which is the
laws of the land: thus are they not out of, but raised to the highest spher,
from which they scorn to fly, knowing you cannot avoid that justice of heaven
which will preserve them whilst they move not out of their order.

You conclude putting him in mind of warding those blows that are aimed at
him, whereas he (for such matters) is not like your condition, terrified with a
desperate conscience, he looks up to heaven for protection, not to such
dissembling affections as yours, who whilst you say, Your most affectionate
friend and humble servant, you are indeed a very R. and so you will be E.

An answer to the Postscript.
IN your Postscript you most of all betray your ignorance; for the Parliament
have as carefully looked after and committed the forger and printer of that
declaration, as his Majesty was to burn it by the hand of the hangman at
Oxford, to teach both him and you, and all such libellers to take heed how you
do the like.

FINIS.

