The Humble ADDRESS of the House of Commons to the KING; With His Majesty's
most Gracious ANSWER thereunto.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
WE Your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, do with Unfeigned Zeal to Your Majesty's Person and
Government, (which GOD long Preserve,) most Humbly Represent to Your Majesty.

That the Passing the late Act for Disbanding the Army gave great Satisfaction
to Your Subjects; and the Readiness Your Majesty has expressed by Your Message,
to Comply with the Punctual Execution thereof, will prevent all Occasions of
Distrust or Jealousy between Your Majesty and Your People.

It is, Sir, to Your Loyal Commons an Unspeakable Grief, That Your Majesty
should be Advised to propose any thing in Your Message, to which they cannot
Consent with due Regard to that Constitution Your Majesty came over to Restore,
and have so often Exposed Your Royal Person to Preserve; and did in Your
Gracious Declaration Promise, That all those Foreign Forces which came over
with You, should be sent back.

In Duty therefore to Your Majesty, and to discharge the Trust reposed in us,
we crave Leave to lay before You, That nothing conduces more to the Happiness
and Welfare of this Kingdom, than an Entire Confidence between Your Majesty and
Your People: which can no way be so firmly Established, as by Intrusting Your
Sacred Person with Your own Subjects, who have so eminently Signalized
themselves on all Occasions, during the late Long and Expensive War.

His Majesty's Most Gracious ANSWER.
Gentlemen,
I Came hither to Restore the Ancient Constitution of this Government; I have
had all possible Regard to it since my coming; and I am resolved, through the
Course of my Reign, to endeavor to Preserve it entire in all the Parts of it.

I have a full Confidence in the Affections of My People, and I am Well assured
they have the same in Me, and I will Never give them Just Cause to alter this
Opinion.

As to My Subjects who Served during the War, I am an Eyewitness of their
Bravery, and of their Zeal for My Person and Government; and I have not been
wanting to express My Sense of This to My Parliaments, as well as upon other
Occasions.

I have all the Reason to Trust and Rely upon them that a Prince can have, and
I am satisfied, there is not One Man among them capable of entertaining a
Thought, that what was proposed in My Message, proceeded from any Distrust of
them.

It shall be My Study to the Utmost of My Power to Perform the Part of a Just
and Good King, and as I will ever be Strictly and Nicely Careful of Observing
My Promises to My Subjects, so I will not doubt of their Tender Regards to Me.

BY Virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, I do Appoint Edward Jones, and
Timothy Goodwin, to Print this Address; and that no other Person presume to
Print the same

THO. LITTLETON,
Speaker
LONDON: Printed for Edward Jones in the Savor, and Timothy Goodwin at the
Queen's He (...) 1699.


