EIGHT PROPOSITIONS CONCERNINC The Kings Majesty, and the Crown of ENGLAND;
Presented to the view of all His Majesty's loyal Subjects within his Realms
and Dominions.

Together with several Proposals to the People of England touching their Power
and Authority, both toward their Sovereign the King, the disposal of the
Crown, and His Majesty's Oath and Covenant.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

Imprinted at OXFORD by Leonard Lichfield, And Reprinted at London, MDCXLVI^

EIGHT PROPOSITIONS PRESENTED To the view of all His Majesty's loyal and
faithful Subjects within His Realms and Dominions.
I.
IS it lawful for Kings to do, as Samuel from the Lord told the People Saul
would do?
ANSW. I.
No; for Samuel at the establishing of Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 25. told Saul and all
the people the duty of a King, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before
the Lord, as a witness betwixt King and people, so that all that the Lord does
command, is lawful to be done, and it is a sin not to do it; and all that the
Lord does forbid, is unlawful to be done, and is a sin to do it. The Lord
does not command Kings to take from one, and to give to another, and to do
their own wills: therefore, it is not lawful for Kings to exercise this Regal
power: but the Lord says that they will do so and so, which is not a
sufficient warrant for Kings to do so and so, because the Lord in his Law of
the duty of a King has expressly forbidden the same. Therefore, it is unlawful
for Kings to exercise this regal power.

II.
If it be unlawful for Kings to take from, and to give unto, and to do what
they please, why did, or does the Lord command the people to yield obedience,
and serve their Kings, according to such demands, commands, will and pleasure.
ANSWER.
For two reasons: first, in respect of the Lord himself, because he was King
of Israel, and had that regal power and prerogative-Royal, to do his own will
with man.

Secondly, in respect of man, because Israel would have a man to be their King,
and forsake the Lord their God peremptorily; notwithstanding all before
mentioned, Israel must know that a mor^all man, one of their brethren, to be
exalted to the dignity of the Lords throne of Majesty, unto which belongs such
regal power, and Royal prerogative, that was not fit for any sinful mortal
man, because the ways power, and wisdom of man, cannot (as the Lord) exercise
such a power, but either on the right hand or on the left, they will
transgress against God or man, in disobeying the Commandment of the Lord, and
this is the cause of the Lords anger, and therefore for a punishment, Israel
must yield in obedience, and serve their Kings accordingly.

III.
Touching the true and only right place, office, and power of a King, according
to the Word of God.
ANSWER.
First, the true and only right place and office of a King, is from amongst,
above, and over all the people, alone to sit in the Lords throne of Majesty.

Secondly, The true and only right Office of a King, is to be the Minister of
God for the wealth or good of the people over whom he is set, doing the will
(according unto the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinance) of him in whose throne he
sits.

Therefore, Kings are not to make any Statute, Law, or Ordinance, destructive
or contradictory unto them that were made by God before he made any King.

So that even Kings are to be as subject to the Lord, as men to Kings, and so
as one entrusted by God, as the Lords Vicegerent, or Lieutenant over the Lords
people betwixt God and Man, to see and look unto it, that God may be honored,
glorified, served by himself, and all the people, to see and look to, and
preserve the people from all enemies, perils and dangers, both from abroad and
at home.

Thirdly, the true and only right power of a King, is as the Minister of God,
to bear the sword of Justice, to take vengeance on, or execute justice upon all
evil doers, and to praise, honor, and encourage such as do well.

IIII.
Touching the difference between the Kings of Isreal's power, and the Kings of
Englands power, and the Subjects of both.
ANSWER.
The people of Israel were within the Covenant and promise of Jesus Christ,
unto whom the Lord gave his Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, both Moral and
Ceremonial: unto whom also was given Priests and Prophets to administer unto
them, and to teach and direct them, and Judges to guide and lead them, and the
great God of Heaven and Earth to be their King, to save defend, and deliver
them.

Therefore, the Kingdom and Crown of Israel, was the Gods of Israel, and so of
a greater and higher power and majesty, then any other kingdom of the earth.

V.
Touching the power of the Kings of Israel under the Moral Law, and the power
of the Kings of England under the Gospel Law.
Answ. The Kingdom and Crown of Israel, was the Gods of Israel, who in judgment
to the people for their sins, gave the same to Saul, and confirmed it upon
David and to his Seed. The Lord never gave any Kingdom, nor Crown, neither did
the Lord appoint or anoint any Kings, save only of Israel and Judah.

The Kings of England were not at their beginning appointed nor anointed, as
were the Kings of Israel, but were by the Nation ordained as Kings over this
Nation, according to the custom of this Nation, which is, before they will
admit the Crown to him, they do intend, he must by Covenant and Oath imposed
upon him, yield them their rights and privileges, and that he will rule them
according to the Customs and Laws of the Land* and then they grant unto him the
Crown for his own life: so that power that has power to impose an Oath before
a Grant, has power to detain the thing to be granted, if the Oath be refused
by him to whom the Grant is intended, and every Grauntee is subject to the
Grauntor, according to the Covenant of the Grant, there can be no fee simple
estate in the Grauntee of the thing granted, but the fee-simple estate of the
thing granted is in the Gr^unter, viz. 1. The Kingdom or Commonwealth of
England, is the Graunter. 2. The King of England is the Grauntee. 3. The Crown
of England is the thing granted, So that the fee-simple estate of the Crown of
England is the Common wealths of England to dispose of, according to the
Custom and Laws of the Land, which is by Covenant and Grant to the Prince in
being, and after whose decease by custom, but no^ by right of inheritance to
the next in or of blood, and so from one Generation to another in like manner.
So that this Regal power does not at all belong to a King of England;
therefore, if the Lord was wrath, and did exceedingly punish the Kings of
Israel for exercising this regal power, before the light of the Gospel. How
much more then shall Kings under the light and knowledge of the Gospel, incur
the wrath of God, if they be found guilty of oppression and tyranny against
the believing members of the Lord Christ? themselves drofessing the same faith,
and acknowledging the same knowledge: the Lord is no respecter of persons, but
the soul that sins shall dye.

A King of England may not by this regal power demand and command of and from
the people, as the Kings of Israel, neither by the Laws of God, not by the Laws
of the Land, neither are the people of England bound to that slavish obedience,
as the people of Israel were; but the people of England, both by the Laws of
God, and by the laws of the land, are freed from such a slavish obedience; and
therefore both according to the laws of God and the Land, may lawfully deny,
aod refuse to submit because it is an unlawful imposition, and where the
demand and command unlawful, the denial or refusal is lawful.

6. Props. How shall we know when a King does transgress against his Oath, and
break his Covenant, and what is the remedy?
An. A King does transgress his Oath, and break his Covenant when that his
demands are beyond the National Law, which by virtue of his Oath, as it is a
breach thereof is oppression, and when a King does command of, and from the
people such things as are opposite unto, and against the fundamental Laws of
the Land; which by virtue of of his Oath, as it is a breach thereof, is tyrany:
which lawfully begets in the Common wealth an absolute denial and refusal to
such demands and commands, and so the peace of the land is endangered: the
only remedy to preserve the same, is for the King to preserve a Parliament,
that is, to send out his Writs to the Commons to choose their Knights and
Burgesses, who by virtue of the Kings Writs; and the Commons voices for them,
are Parliament men, and as Arbitrators are to decide all differences in Church
and State, and Commonwealth; whose conclusions and determinations, together
with the Kings assent, consent, and signing, are binding Laws both to King and
people.

7. Propos. How far may or ought a King lawfully to deny to assent or
consent, and sign their d^terminations and conclusions?
Ans. A King as he sits in the Lords throne may, and as he is entrusted by God
over the people, ought to deny to ^ssent, consent and sign their
determinations, if the same shall either be dishonorable to the glory,
worship, and service of the Lord, or injurious to the good of the
Commonwealth, and no further; for it is his office to be as (or more) forward
and careful for both, as any other man, both by the laws of God and the land,
as he is the great Minister^ of the greatest trust for both, by taking the same
charge upon him.

8: Proposition, But if* ^ King shall deny to consent, assent, and sign the
Parliaments determinations, although honorable to the Lord, and good and
beneficial to the Commonwealth; then what is the Kings ^ffence, benifit, or
danger; and their power, as they are Parliament Men, and so the body
representative of the Lord.
Answ. If a King shall deny to assent unto that which is lawful before God and
man, and contend against it; and instead of signing their determinations, to
separate himself from them, and make war against and upon them; he does
thereby break the peace, which as he sits in the Lords throne of Majesty, he
ought to keep, maintain, and preserve; and also thereby he breaks and
wilfully violates his Oath, and National Covenant, by which he enioyes the
Crown, and so is an offender both against God and man, by both, for both, he
is entrusted betwixt both. Genesis 7. 11. Iannes and Iombres, who had the Devils
help, and by him did that they did in their withstanding of Moses? and so such
are all they that do advise the King against the good advice of his grave and
wise Elders the Parliament.

FINIS.

