EIGHTEEN NEW COURT-QUAERIES HUMBLY OFFERED To the serious consideration, and
mature deliberation of all the good honest hearted people of the Three Nations:
of great concernment toward the stopping our Breaches, and the making up of
the Divisions amongst us.

By several well-wishers to our Settlement.

LONDON, Printed in the year MDCLIX.

EIGHTEEN COURT-QUERIES, etc.
I.
WHether this Lord Protectors Patience in letting go his ^old so calmly, and
tamely, were in him a Virtue, or not? and if it were a Virtue, whether
Necessity did not make it so?

II.
Whether eight thousand pounds per annum, and withal free liberty to take the
Country Air, be not very sufficient an reasonable considerations, and stipend,
for the old Protectress; as a very grateful acknowledgment from our
Free State, of the good service which her husband in his life time did for this
Commonwealth? and whether or no she ought in conscience to flight and
undervalue this ample testimony of the Officers good af^ection, and charity to
her?

III.
Whether if the Sky should f^ll there world be any work for a Lark-catcher at
Whitehall?

IV.
Whether the Army ought not to have given to them, new Red Coats, and black
buttons now, to mourn for the Depar ure of this Protector, as well as they had
for the Decease of ^he Old one?

V.
That seeing so it is, and must, and shall be, that the Courtiers must of
necessity repair all of them to their respective dwelling, and habitations, bag
and baggage; whether it would not be a greater expense and burden to the
States (upon whose hands they yet lie) to send for Mules out of Egypt for their
Convoy; than (...) them their next neighbors in James his Park (the Asses) to
perform that piece of drudgery?

VI.
Whether or no Peter Sterry, the Court Confess^ur, when he preached in the
Chapel the very next Lords day after his H^ghuesse cied, and uttered in that
his Sermon there, words, either these, or to this effect, (viz.) [ As certainly
as I hold the word of God in my left hand, so certainly is his late Highness
now at the right hand of God, interceding for the iniquities of this sinful
Nation:] did not commit an high, and most horrid piece of blasphemy? And then,
whether He does not therefore very well deserve to be a fellow-seeler o^ James
Naylour's Sentence, and to be as coarsly used as He, who yet continues at his
expiatory task of pounding hemp in the House of Correction?

VII.
Whether or not, Dr. John Owen, and Dr. Thomas Goodwin, would make it any
(...) of matter of Conscience to accept of the two Archbishopricks of York and
Canterbury if the State could think fit to reward their endeavors with so rich
a profer?

VIII.
Whether it be not very fitting, and necessary, and much tending to the
gladding of the Hearts of many men, that the Banqueting house at Whitehall be
speedily remoov'd from thence, and carried cross the way to Wallingford-house,
for the noble Officers of our invincible, and successful Armies, to triumph
in, after all their encounters, and valiant achievements? And whether the
State would not do well as to that end and purpose, with all expedition
possible, to make all the Citizens Pioneers for the carrying on of that Great
Work.

IX.
Whether these Proverbs following 1. That some man man may better steal a
Goose, than another pluck a feather? 2. That bought wit is best? 3. That
Occasion makes the thief? be all most true and authentic, and confirmed by
modern experience, yea, or no?

X.
Whether it may consist with the tender, and delicate education of our new
Ladies of Honor, to dabble through the Country dew these Summer mornings with
a milking pail on their heads? and consequently, whether it is not likely to be
very much prejudicial to their beauties, to go (after this ^tate) out of God's
blessing, into the Warm Sun?

XI.
Whether illiterate men, partial, covetous, worldly minded, self-ended greedy
of gain, having men's persons in admiration, naughty, an hypocritical, be
competent judges (according to the Cano^ of the ^oly Writ) of Students in both
Universities of our Land, for the discharge of the most sacred Ministerial
Function?

XII.
Whether Mr. Hugh Peter's, when he kept daily and ^ightly correspondence with
the Gentleman's wife in the Low Countries, during the absence of her husband,
upon service in the worres, did punctual y perform that ^readfull threatening of
his, in the hear of his Zeal against Popery, That He would lay the whore of
Babylon upon her back? And whether that mad (...) Spirit wherewith he seems
always possessed, becomes a man of peace, or suits with the meekness, and
humility of the glorious Gospel?

XIII.
Whether Mr. Needham the Curranto-maker, the Court Pamphleteer, being an
impudent fellow, a lye^, and forger of foreign le^ters; a mercenary in^ormer, an
abuser, and base vilifier of worthy and eminent persons; an insulter over
gallant men's afflictions, and miseries; A murderer of men's ^ame, credit and
reputation, to their utter and most inevitable ruin and destruction; does not
very well deserve to forfeit his Ears to the Pillory?

XIV.
Whether all the men of the three Nations that lately made (...) to his
Highness; are dead or alive?

XV.
Whether now, Whitehall be not a place commodious to make a Playhouse of,
having been accustomed for these many years to such alteration of Scaenes? and
the pensioners, etc. well accomplished to turn Stage Players? First, because it
is conceived they have now little else to do. Secondly, because they have been
bred up upon that Stage, and can act any part; and Thirdly, because they never
wear good clothes longer than the Play continues.

XVI.
Whether the old Protector's Cradles standing in Westminster Abbey in the same
place where the High Altar, or Communion Table formerly stood, is not the
setting up of one Superst^tion where another Superstition (as 'twas termed) was
pulled down? and whether the Essigies, when it was there, might not be called,
without any abuse of Scripture, the abomination of desolation in the holy
place?

XVII.
Whether the wainscot Press that is made in Henry the seventh his Chapel,
for reception of the aforementioned Idol, being as yet empty, and thought
unfitting for that Employment, would not serve a great deal better to keep in
it the sacred Relics of VVell-affected Persons in the Commonwealth? as for
example, The Lord Brooks's Eye; The flappets of Mr. William Prynn's Ears; My
Lord of Essex's Prolifick Instrument; Sir John Hotham's Head; Lundsford's
teeth; Mildmaye's Jewels; Dr. Dorislaus's four quarters; Alderman Hoyle's Rope;
the dagger that killed Watt Tyler; The Lord Pride's slings and tallies; the
Lord Hewson's shooing-horn; the Lord Barkstead's thimbles and bodkins; with
many other remarkable things of this nature, which it may be else may happen to
be lost or forgotten?

XVIII.
Whether all these eighteen Queries, are not worthy the perusal of every
sober, melancholy man? and very mainly effectnal (if they may but be answered
according to the earnest longings, gapings, and expectations of the honest
people of this Commonwealth) to remove a great many scurvy, base incommodities,
damages, and inconveniences, which otherwise may chance to fall upon us?

FINIS.

