EIGHT ANTIQUERIES IN ANSWER To the Author of the Eight Quaeries: Proposed to
all true lovers of their Country and Parliaments, and conscientious Soldiers
in the ARMY.

1 THESSALONIANS. 5.21. Try all things, and held fast that which is good.

JER. 5.1. Run to and fro in the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know,
and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any
that executes Judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon it.

LONDON, Printed for GILES CALVERT, 1647.

EIGHT ANTIQUAERIES In Answer To the Author of the Eight Quaeries.
1. Antiquaerie. well-minded and well-meaning Army, who both have and do
hazard their lives for the public good and safety against the enemies
thereof, so as all their carriages from the beginning hitherto, have been so
orderly and uniforme, as all circumstances well-weighed, do not admit of the
least crimination of their worst enemies. And therefore, whether such a
Christian Armies Pretenses, compared with their constant practices, are likely
to prove such, as that of a cursed heathen hypocrite Haza^l, 2 King. 8.12, 13.
And whether no religious and specious pretenses can carry with them real
intentions, as that all Christian profession were mere hypocrisy, and
dissimulation. And whether such in the Army, whose conscience is not persuaded
by clear evidence of Scripture; of the lawfulness of Baptizing of Infants, and
whose conversation has been, and is blameless, and who have adventured their
lives for their Country, as far as any other, are likely to prove such as
those Anabaptists in Germany, in Luthers time, who denied all civil Authority,
which these do not, but sacrifice their lives for it.

2 Antiquaerie. dutifulness, and meritoriousnesse, be not very rash in this
Quaerie, as unreasonable in the first, in charging the Army with such a
distemper, as overruling their General and Officers, touching the removeall
of the Kings Person; and whether this Author ought not to have suspended this
prejudice, unt^l^ the truth of the cause were tried. And whether the Armies
marching up, be against the Parliament, because against a party and faction in
the Parliament; and whether this be a dis-engagement of the People. City, and
Kingdom from the Parliament, any more then the Parliments indevouring to
regulate the Kings evil Counselors, and Ministers, was a dis-engageing of the
People, City, and Kingdom from, or an engageing of them against the Kings
Person, contrary to their Solemn Covenant; and whether the Armies refusal to
disband at this time, was not necessary for the Kingdoms both ease and peace,
if that charge of theirs, against those in the House shall upon just trial
find them such, as are neither for the Kingdoms ease, and peace. And whether
the Army do in this, act by their own mere power and will, when many Counties
in the Kingdom, that (for their neernesse) best understand the carriage of
things above, have Petitioned the General not to disband till things be better
reformed, and whether in all this (for Vox populi, Vox Dei, the Peoples voice
is Gods voice) the righteous God has not put that miraculously unanimous
spirit, into the heart of the whole Army for the good of the whole Nation
(whose Protector and Preserver God is) to stand in the gap, and to call for
justice, the want whereof ruins Kingdoms and States, and provokes the wrath
of Heaven against a land; and whether in this case, all the Counties, and
Countries in the Kingdom, be not bound to manifest their assent herein with
the Army, and to stand by them, if they find their trust betrayed: and whether
it may not be said of this Army in this business, as to Hester of old, Who
knows whether this Army be raised up of God, not only to subdus open
enemies, Hest. 4.14.
but to be instruments of bringing lurking Traito^s and underminers of the
Commonweal to condign punishment, seeing desparate maladies must have
desperate remedies. And whether this Author can devise any means under the San
so probably isntrumental for redressing those Arbitrary proceedings in the
Houses, Committees, and others, now complained of, as this Army now is, and
that with the consent and desire of so many considerable Counties, And
therefore whether their refusal to disband, or to remove further off from
London, be any a sobedience to the Parliaments present just commands, if the
men, whom they charge, do by their power of Votes, overpower those, who
stnding for the public good of their Country, and not their own private
Interests, are to be ^ccounted the Parliament of England, and not any faction
in the House. And whether it be Just, for these, who are so charged, to have a
Vote for the impeding of the prosecution and proof of such a charge so much
concerning the public state. And whether this refusal, be not so far from
conjuring up a Spirit of universal disobedience to Parliaments, Magistrates,
etc. As it rather tends to conjure down all tyranicall usurpations, and
factions, combinations in Parliaments, and Arbitrary power in Magistrates, when
they see that the people of the Kingdom are not so base and slavish, as to put
their necks under such yoaks, and not to vindicate their native liberties, and
birthrights when God puts an opportunity into their hands. And so, whether
those be well-wishers to the weal and tranquillity of Church and State, as do
not dislike, or oppose such opportunities the neglect whereof brings inevitable
ruin both to themselves, with Church and State.

3. Antiquerie. Jack Cades insurrection, or Henry Germines, Percies, and
Gorings Treason, in practicing to bring up the Northern Army toward London, to
overaw and force the Parliament, can in the judgment of any, who are endued
but with common reason, and honesty, be a fit parallel to equalize this Army
with for Rebellion and Treason: seeing Cade was a private Person, the Army
General: Germin, Percie, Goring professed Enemies to the Parliament, the Army a
most faithful preserver of it. And so whether the Author were in his right
wits, and not wholly transported, when he wrote this. And whether this Army,
having first so often with the hazard of their lives delivered this Parliament
from eminent destruction, and now do seek to deliver both Parliament and
Kingdom from evil Members and Instruments, ought to be Voted as Violaters of
the Rights and privileges of Parliament, unless it be a Privilege of
Parliament to be exempted from the peoples complaints for oppression, or that
the Privilege of Parliament be as boundless, as Regal Prerogative, so as not
to be censurable, or corrigible by any, in case the liberties of the Subject be
subverted, and justice denied to have a free course, and Malefactors,
Delinquents, Traitors, maintained with a high hand, when Justice is demanded,
and for want whereof the Commonweal is destroyed, and so, whether this Army
in not disbanding, to have Justice done, be justly censured by this Author, as
justifying the forementioned Traitors, who sought unjustly and tyranically to
oppress those in the Parliament, who at that time were reputed the most
faithful, and the Army on the other side, lays a charge only upon those that
are unfaithful in their trust, and those to be tried by the Parliament it
self, as their lawful Judge.

4. Antiquerie. of absolute necessity, for the Kingdoms necessary preservation
against oppressors, whom they complain of, when there is no other remedy: as
the Author confeseth of the Netherlands in the like case, And whether the Army,
in so charging and prosecuting, for Justice, do thereby any whit blemish their
former reputation and fidelity, seeing by so doing they set a Crown upon all
their former glory. And whether, when the justice desired, is done, either the
Parliament in giving way to justice shall have cause to complain of the breach
of their Privileges, Fiat Justitia ruat Coelum.
or be in danger of adjournment or dissolution, or the City of pillaging, or
the Kingdom of embroyling, or the Malignants to be encouraged, or the
well-affected to be grieved, or more mischieves procured then redressed.

And whether if Justice be not yielded unto by the Parliament, before the
Armies disbanding, there be more hope of it after the disbanding; wherein the
Author is specially desired to give as a sound resolution upon some solid
reasons.

5. Antiquerie. Army discontent, when nothing will serve him, but an equal
Armed force for the Parliaments, Cities, Kingdoms defense, while yet he
confesses all their present demands to be just and reasonable to be granted.
And whether, if granted, it be not superfluity of malice causelessly to surmise
and suggest jealousies of further demands neither honorable, nor reasonable,
and yet dangerous to deny. And whether he is able to produce any one instance
of any Anti-magistraticall Principles holden by such, as he calls Heterodox
Chaplains, Officers and Soldiers in any of their Writings, or Speeches. And
whether those persons in the House charged by the Army, may make it their plea,
that doing and voting as they do, being out of Conscience, (and liberty of
Conscience in speech and vote should be most free in Parliament) they ought to
be further prosecuted, and more then others for their Conscience, so as if they
vote what is unjust and oppressive, cut of conscience, they shall go free.

And whether it is not to be feared, that after the Army has procured the
outing of some evil Members out of the House, they will labor to recruite it
with such as are of their party, as they have done in the Army, to wit, such as
are most godly and have proved themselves most faithful to the Parliament and
Kingdom, and so game a power to change the Laws and Government of Church and
State, and dispose of all Officer, and places to their own Creatures. And,
whether the Laws and Government of Church and Stat^ are ^n all things so
punctually perfect, as they may not ado it in some things some ^lteration
coming nearer to perfection, and the further wel^-be^ng of the Kingdom. And
whether free and impartial Justice pleaced for, may not confist with the
standing of the Army, when, if disbanded, injustice and oppression might prove
too strong both for Parliament and Judges, as is intimated before; and when the
Army is only assistant, and not assaylant, of the freedom and impartinity of
public Justice. And whether Justice may not be free, and not forced, when both
Parliament and Judges are (as they should be) conscientious, so as not to be
biassed by fear or favor. And whether this Author can, out of Perhaps, prove
Members of the Armies party, to be justly impeached of higher crimes, and
misacmenours, then any of their opposites, and yet that the Army will be so
partial, as to lay no impeachment or censure upon them, contrary to their
present pretenses.

6. Antiquerie, all this and much more may not be done without the preseat
disbanding of the Army, till a foundation be laid.

7 Antiquerie. the marching up of the Army be against Parliaments privileges,
when therein they seek nothing of the Parliament but justice, which
extraordinary necessity for the vindicating of the Subjects liberties, from
oppression, and subvertion, has put them upon, and that according the Solemn
Govenant, and their Commission from the Parliament.

8 Antiquerie. Ireland might not have been long ere now, by others, then the
Army provided for. And whether (had the Army disbanded for Ireland) greater
ruins might have fallen upon our own Nation at home, then yet we have seen,
or known. And lastly, whether the Author of this, and of all his other
queries, ought not by the Parliament and City, and the whole Kingdom (all
those evil and sad consequents considered, which these his queries draw along
with them, if not the more wisely prevented) to be convented before the great
Tribunal of the state, there to be tried, whether these his 8 queries be not
most factious, seditious, incendiary, pernicious, and precipitious to the
confounding, and setting the whole Kingdom if not Kingdoms together by the
ears, if Gods great mercy, and the wisdom of the Parliament, City, and
Kingdom providently and prudently prevent not. And whether one chief means of
this prevention be not in a joint giving away of all these for justice to be
done, the refusal or denial whereof might justly bring upon us all, that
fearful judgment of the Benjamites for refusing to do justice upon those
sons of Beliall (Judge. 20.) even an utter extirpation of the whole Tribe: which
the Lord in mercy avert from England, Parliament, London.

FINIS.

