THE COMMONS PETITJON TO THE KING In Defense of Mr. PYM. ANSWERING Those Seven
Articles whereof he was Impeached. Being a Commendable Vindication of those
Seven Articles, wherein Mr. Pym was lately Accused.

Showing how his good Endeavors for the benefit and safety of this Kingdom,
and his affectionate Zeal for the public Prosperity of this Realm have bin
misconstrued.

Expressing the great Love, and singular Affection of the Commons to him, who
have petitioned to the King, in Answer of those Articles against him,
beseeching His Majesty to remit, and excuse him, being not guilty of the same.

London, Printed for William Bond, 1641.

An Answer to the 1. Article against Mr. Pym, etc.
The 1 Article was to this effect, that M. Pym (amongst the other scilicet)
has traitorously endeavored to subvert the fundamental laws, and government
of England: this seems contrary, in regard that he solely did always oppose
any man, whom he either found or could suspect guilty of the same crime, and
has labored rather to ratify, and confirm the fundamental laws, the
either subvert or confound the same. For in his Diurnall Speeches in the
Parliament was always specified his real intent, in the institution, and not
diminution or subversion of any law: which was not detrimentall to the safety,
and prosperity of this Kingdom, In the same Article it is mentioned, that with
all he has endeavored to deprive the King of His Royal power, and to place
in subjects in arbitrary power over the Lives, Liberties, and Estates of His
Majesty's liege people. To this your Petitioners answer, that we have found him
so diligent to advance your Majesty's royal Dignity and Crown, that he has
seemed rather to ad, then in any wise to deprive your Majesty of any power,
appertaining to your royal Self: and for the subsequent conclusion we find,
that otherwise; for he has given his vote in the House of Commons against the
same. We proceed now to the 2. Article, viz. that he has endeavored to lay
many foul aspersions upon His Majesty, and his government to alienate the
affections of his people, and to make his Majesty odious unto them.

The Answer to the second Article.
To this your Petitioners presume to answer thus: as in the former Article we
have specified the integrity of his mind, free from entertaining the least
thought of casting aspersions either on your Majesty's person or government: so
likewise we do signify his innocuous intent herein, that we could never hear,
know, or perceive him at any time minded to alienate the affections of any of
his people, and if any person, or persons will maintain, or prove the same
against him, or them, that he did endeavor to divert their affections from
your Majesty, hewill acknowledge himself guilty thereof, and justly accvsed
for the same. But that he should endeavor to make your Majesty odious unto
any, it seems incredible; for your Petitioners know, that the hearts and
affectionss of your subjects, are so unitely fixed on you both in their
prayers, hopes, and wishes, that we impartially believe, that no man would
become so disloyal, as to substract any respective obedience from your
Majesty, much less that your own royal person should become odious unto them.

We now arrive at the 3. Articles, viz. That he has endeavored to draw your
Majesty's late Army into disobedience to your Majesty's Commands, and to side
with them in their traiterous designs.

The Answer to the third Article.
Your Petitioners have found him always very solicitous, and careful of your
Majesty's Army, striving rather to bring them unto a regular obedience, then to
side with them in any traiterous design.

And we are confident hereof, that none of your Majesty's Army can prove, that
he did ever seduce any of them or suggest them unto any disobedient disorder,
or agree to any design whatsoever.

The Answer to the fourth Article.
We come now to the 4. Article, wherein is declared, that he has traytorously
invited, and encouraged a foreign power to invade his Majesty's kingdom of
England. To this your Petitioners dare boldly say, that this nefarious
invitation, and incouragment of a foreign power was never undertook by him;
for he has bin very vigilant to preserve, and defend this Kingdom in as great
fortification as possibly might be, to the flourishing prosperity of this whole
Realm. And therefore he has oftentimes expressed his affection toward the
safety of this Nation, and of stronger forces that should be raised to keep out
any foreign enemy or power, least peradventure they steal upon us unawares.

In the Fifth Article he is impeached thus: that he has traitorously
endeavored to subvert the Rights, and very Being of Parliaments. To this we
may answer with great facility: he was the chief cause that this Parliament
was assembled, and it seems very incongruous, that he should subvert the same.
Moreover he is the sole man that stands for the ancient Rights, and Liberties
of the Parliaments, and it seems a stupendous thing, that he should confound
the same.

In this respect your Petitioners dare speak with confidence, that there was
not one man in the Parliament house, who did stand more strongly for the Rights
of Parliaments, then Mr. Pym was. In their Article there is demonstrated his
arraignment, that for completing of his treacherous designs, he has
endeavored as far as in him lay by force, and terror to compel the
Parliament, to join with him in his traiterous designs, and to that end has
actually raised, and countenanced tumults against the King, and Parliament. The
Answer to the 6. Article. To this it is answered, that no man in the
Parliament can by coertion be compelled by any man to join with him in his
assertion. And withal we suppose Mr. Pym is more judicious, then to urge and
man's vote, or assent unto his design (if I may so speak.) But for the
tumultuous up rotes made in the City, and Westminster, ^o one particular man
can be suspected to have bin the Author thereof, for the tumult was promiscuous.

And moreover Mr. Pym was the sole cause that did suppresse^ them, therefore he
co^^^ in no regard countenance the ^ind ^^^^ult. The 7. and l^^^ Article is
this, that he has traitorously conspired to ley^^, and fifth actually leavied
power against the King. To this we can answer nothing to (...) ^^^awl^^^ (...)
^^^ly per^^^^ that he was a man of greater fidelity, and greater Loy^^ry to
your Majesty. Your Petitioners will not presume to trespass too far on your
element lenity: but do with all humility, and respective loyalty present their
Petition unto your Majesty, building our hopes on your judicious clemency,
that your Majesty has maturely considered of the perfect integrity of Mr. Pym,
you will remit all: which will give great, and plenary satisfaction to the
whole Commons.

And your Petitioners shall be bound for ever to pray.

FINIS.

