Die Sabbati, 24. December.
An Order for a charitable Contribution for the relief of maimed Soldiers.
WHereas many well affected People, out of Zeal and faithfulness to the
preservation of the true Protestant Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this
Kingdom, have gone forth under the command of his Excellency the Earl of Essex,
in the Army set forth by the Parliament; and diverse of them have in several
Battles, and fights, with the Enemies of the King and Kingdom, lost their
lives; leaving poor Widows, and Fatherless Children unprovided for behind
them: And others of them have received, Wounds and Maymes in their Bodies;
Whereby some of them are dis-enabled to help themselves for getting a
Livelihood hereafter: and all of them having been at charges, expenses, and
losses, in the said service of the Kingdom, and curing of their Mayms and
Wounds.

It is this day Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That a general
Collection by way of contribution, toward the relief, and support of the
aforementioned poor distressed People be made in every Parish Church of London,
As Well within the Walls, as in the Suburbs thereof, And in the City of
Westminster, and Borough of Southwark and the liberties thereof, By the
Churchwardens, Collectors for the Poor, Sidesmen, or Constables of each
Parish, or Ward, within the aforesaid Cities of London and Westminster, and the
Borough of Southwark as aforesaid, on the two next Lords-dayes, both in the
Fore-noon, and Afternoon of the same days. And the Monyes so collected by
them, to pay unto Master Holland, and Master Jennour, Members of the House of
Commons, or such as they shall appoint to receive the same at Gold-Smiths-Hall,
London, on the Thursday next, after the said Lord-dayes respectively, By them
to be disposed of to the uses aforesaid in such manner as the Committee
appointed by the House of Commons, for Maimed Soldiers, shall from time to
time direct. And it is further Ordered, That the Minister of every Parish,
shall publish this Order in their Churches on the said Lords-dayes, both in the
Fore-noon, and Afternoon, And shall exhort the people to a liberal
contribution to this so pious and charitable a Work.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed Edw. Husbands, and Joh. Frank. 1642.


