Eighteen QUERIES, Extreme needful To be Debated and Resolved of, before the
City CANNON be discharged against the ARMY.

With His MAJESTY'S PROPOSITIONS sent to the House of PARLIAMENT.

Wherein is laid down the manner of the Kings proceedings, since the beginning
of this unnatural War, to this present month of August. 1647.

LONDON, Printed for C. H. 1647.

DIVERSE QUERIES Extreme needful to be debated of, before the City Cannon be
discharged upon the ARMY.
I.
THat the Presbyterian Government should be continued for three years, and in
the interim, 20 of his Mties. Chaplians to be aded to the Assembly to consider
what lotthe future. quere

Obj If the Presbyterian Government be lure devi^o, as many godly Divines to
asser^. Then what good alteration can be expected when the Ass^mbly shall be
new modulized for number; and the minds of unstable men tempted by new
preferments offered; the King professing he will sooner be torn in pieces then
part with the Bishops lands, and then how will the 400000 l. to the City be
paid, whic^h those lands stand engaged for.

II.
The Parliament shall have the Militea for ten years, and where will the
Kingdoms safety be after the expiration of that term.

III.
The King will conseut for the raising of money, for the payment of his own and
the Kingdoms debts.

Obj. What sums will both these amount unto, and by whom is it like to be paid,
judge you noble Citizens what Patriots shall approve yourselvs both to
yourselvs, and the whole Kingdom, in bringing in the Kingdom upon those if ye
do assent and hold them, and judge impartially by these consequences following.

The Consequences. Queres,
I.
What may be expected from the King coming in without any relenting for the
bloodshed of his people, and persisting in the same temper he has ever been
in, not assenting to the propositions, and having all power in his hands.

II:
What may be expected from all his party being once in power, the soldiery for
their arreares, and all that have cleaved unto him forreparation, and whether
having brought him in they will not expect the City to make good their losses*

III.
Whether it can stand with the Kings honor not to be isntrumental to it, and
if it be denied whether his parry being drawn together will not enforce it by
strong hands, and measure it out of the shops by swords length, or if by weight
at 240s. the pound.

IIII.
Whether the City having been the main bancke to pay those in arms against
the Kings party, there will not appear a kind of Justice in the Kings patty
to exact their pay also of them.

V.
Whether the King without being capitulated withal will so easily forget the
tumult at White Hall when he came for the five members, which he pretended,
drive him away.

VI.
Whether posterity will not for ever have cause, to curse the day of this
occasion by the City given to the Parliament, when al these oppressing Courts
viz. High Commission, Star Chamber, and Court of Wards, and all Commissaries
Courts, s^all be in power again, and double both the Cities and Kingdoms
bondage upon them again.

VII.
Whether the Church of God and people of England, will not have cause also, for
ever to repent of that days rowte committed upon the Parliament, when the
woeful consequences of it thus prosecuted shall be written in great Characters
of blood, and who can determine what, or how far it may proceed, at the least
to an utter undoing of all that is already done.

VIII.
Whether the Honor of the Nation, and more particularly of this famous City,
which hetherunto has been so isntrumental toward the Kingdoms recovery of
her lost liberties will not be for ever blemished in this act, if it shall
obstuately persist in it, and the Parliament it self make it self infamous by
coworking to undo all that they have done.

IX.
What will become of all the godly patty in the Kingdom, yea even our godly
ministers themselves, who zealously set on the Kingdom to set forward the
work, and what will become of the Public Faith, and how preserved to the
Nation?

X.
Who shall account for all the innocent blood that is like to be shed, the Army
being received as the Parliaments, and coming up in their vindication?

XI.
What if the Army enter the Town and force it? what measure can be expected
but a general plunder, being according to Laws of war, the purchase of
their Swords? Whether it will be in the power of those who would spare it, to
obtain so much or not.

XII.
If the Army be destroyed what benefit to the Kingdoms, or honor to the Ciry to
have destroyed those, wh^ have settled both theirs and the Kingdoms peace?

XIII
Whether will there be found Treasure enough in Gouldsmiths-Hall, to repay unto
the Delinq^ents on the Kings pa^ty their compositions back, if not, where will
they Levey it?

XIIII.
What heads may be cut off, and persons executed for being faithful to the
Parliament and Kingdom; when the King is in power again without capitulating?

XV.
What new guests shall we be enforced to provide entertainment for from France,
and what scores of the Kings must the Kingdom pay for his engagements abroad.

XVI.
Whether any Parliaments in future times are like to be more faithful
vindicators of the subjects Liberties, or to reduce things to more perfection
then is by the platform of this Parliament already modulized.

XVII.
Whether this Parliament thus concluded by the Sword and irregularly dealt
withal, will not make all honest and faithful Patriots to their Country, for
ever refuse to engage themselves, being thus endangered, affronted, and despised

XVIII.
Whether it can ever be hoped for again, that any of our Princes in succeeding
ages, will ever be drawn to grant the like act of continuance; for abridging
the exbitancy of their own power, and making the people so free, all being
returned to Its former Chaos and confusion.

And now I appeal unto the judgment and consciences, of all honest,
impartial, wise, godly and sober-minded men, that either prize Religion,
Estates, Liberty, Peace and freedom, either of the present or future ages to
come to all posterity. If any can be accounted good Patriots to their Country,
that will engage to bring in the King upon the terms by him proposed, or
rather without any terms at all, considering what in all reason must needs be
the fruits and consequences of it.

FINIS.

