A DISCLAIMER AND ANSWER OF THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, Of and unto a Scandalous
Libell, lately published against the PARLIAMENT, and especially the House of
COMMONS and their Proceedings: INTITVLED The Remonstrance of the Commons of
England to the House of Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT, And falsely suggested
to be preferred to them by the hands of the Speaker. WHEREIN The malicious
Cavills and exceptions by the Libeller taken to the Proceedings of PARLIAMENT
are detected and summarily answered, and the sottish ignorance and wicked
falsehood of the Libeller clearly discovered, and the Justice of the
Proceedings of this PARLIAMENT and HOUSE OF COMMONS evinced and manifested

LONDON, Printed by G. M. M.DC.XLIII.

A Disclaimer and Answer of the Commons of England to a scandalous Libell
lately published against the Parliament, and especially the House of Commons
and their proceedings, entitled, The Remonstrance of the COMMONS of ENGLAND.
WE the Commons of England do not prejudge but upon imature deliberation had
of the said Pamphlet, and of the Contents thereof, do righteously judge and
pronounce the Author thereof to be no true son of our mother, but some
bastard of Rome and brat of a Jesuit, his spirit bewrayes him and his
language, which is of Ashdod, and not of our Canaan; belching out the poison of
an envenomed and rotten heart in blasphemies against the Parliament, the
mother, nurse and only preserver of our Religion, Laws, Liberties and
comforts under God, and against the House of Commons, which has ever been the
fastest friend to this Kingdom, and the happinesses thereof, and against this
now House of Commons and Parliament, which has prevented more mischiefs from,
and procured more good to this Kingdom and our neighbor Kingdoms of Scotland
and Ireland then any former: Of which we shall show our selves to be infinitely
unworthy and unthankful for, if we should not vindicate them, and their
fidelity: and might justly expect for such neglect to be delivered over unto
the extreme tyranny, and the miserable effects of it, which first by subtilty
and cunning workings in a clandestine way, and now forcibly by the Sword and
hand of Violence is endeavored to be brought upon us and our posterity, and
which we had been before this overwhelmed in, but that the Lord has made them
his blessed hand to prevent and keep off the same. And when we perceived this
Devil incarnate to hide himself, and vent his impious blasphemies under our
name, of whom we are very confident he never harbored a good or honorable
thought, or regarded us more then the dung of the Earth, but for his own base
and accursed ends we could not be silent least we should betray our innocence,
and be thought to be such as he is.

Object. The first thing we meet withal in this Libell, is, That the Author
counterfeits himself to be a Physician, and pretends a great cure, and
propounds special preparatives unto it. The first speaking in our names to the
House of Commons, he affirms us to be still, the true body of the Commons of
England, and they but the presentative.

Sol. And in this he shows himself to beds grossly ignorant, as he is
wickedly malicious, for the House of Commons is a part of us, and the choice
most excellent and principal part too, and not only our Representative, and
are interessed and sharing in the public good and evil as much as any, and
more then most of us.

Obj. 2. He says, We have not so delegated our power to the House of Commons,
as to make them the Governors of us, and of our Estates, and that in truth
they are but our Procurators to speak for us in that great Council.

Sol. This is a fuller discovery of his sottish ignorance, for he knows nothing
of the nature of Parliaments, that knows not that the House of Commons is
absolutely entrusted with our persons and estates, and by our Laws invested
with a power to dispose of them as they shall think meet, not only by making
new Laws, but also as they are a great Court above all our ordinary Courts, to
govern us, and determine of all things proper to the power and jurisdiction
thereof in all things tending to the conservation of the Commonwealth and of
our Religion, Laws and Liberties, and to be limited to be only Proctors to
speak for us is senseless and ridiculous.

Ob. 3. He says, That in right we ought to have access to those whom we have
chosen as there shall be cause to impart our desires unto them, and that they
ought not to refuse us.

Sol. We never found our selves denied in any matter to impart our desires to
that Honorable House petitioning them in a fitting manner, when our Petitions
have concerned the good, peace or safety of the Kingdom, things belonging to
their jurisdiction: but if any of us have petitioned for matters of a private
nature of right or wrong between particular persons, or in any way or manner
not beseeming, we hold it fit such Petitions should be refused, and they ought
not to be heard, much less accepted that so much forget themselves and their
duties.

Ob. He says, That by involving our Votes in theirs, we had no purpose to make
the Commons House of Parliament perpetual Dictators.

Sol. We ever had a purpose and conceive it necessary to the good of the
Kingdom, That the Parliament continue together and remain undissolved, until
all the Grievances of the Kingdom be redressed and all things in the Kingdom
reformed, and this we believe was and is by the constitution of this Kingdom,
an undoubted Right and Privilege of Parliament, for to that end we chose them,
and are to maintain them; and for that end they are called to do and consent
unto those things, which by them are to be ordained in and concerning the
difficult and urgent businesses that concern the King and the State, and
Defense of the Kingdom, and of the Church of England, as by the Writ of their
Election appears Book of Entries Parliament 1.
. And certainly the late practices of our Kings (among other Encroachments and
Usurpations of theirs) to dissolve Parliaments before they have done what they
are called for, and settled all the business that concern the State and
Defense of the Kingdom, is against the original Constitution and end of
Parliaments and Rights of the Subject, and has induced great Mischiefs, and
almost Destruction and slavery upon this Kingdom, especially when the same
have been dissolved, because according to their duties and the trust reposed in
them by the Kingdom, they have endeavored to reform the oppressions done by
color of the Kings personal Command against Law, and contrary to the Kings
Oath and Office, and have been made use of only to burden us with Subsidies
and Taxes, and not to ease us of any unjust burden or imposition. And if this
work for which the Parliament was called were once perfected, notwithstanding
the Act of continuance of this Parliament (which was made by this Bablers
assent, if he be an English man or Subject of England, and he party to it) we
are confident the Parliament would gladly assent to a dissolution of it, their
attendance upon the public service being extremely burdensome and
prejudicial to their private estates and advantages.

Ob. 5. He says, That we never intended that the House of Commons should have
such a latitude of power, as to imbarke us all in a civil war to the
destruction of us and of our posterity.

Sol. When we chose our Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, we entrusted
them with all the power we could invest them withal, to do whatsoever in
their wisdom they should think meet, and to use all means, even war or
whatsoever should to them seem convenient or necessary for the safety or
preservation of our Religion, Laws and Liberties, and we hold it infinitely
better to endure for a time a civil war, and the effects of it, then to
loose our Laws, Liberties and Religion, and with our posterity to be inslaved
perpetually to the personal wills of our Kings, and to the base spirits of
wicked Counselors that pervert and seduce them from their people. We never
received prejudice from any free Parliament, from the beginning of this Kingdom
hitherto, but we have in all ages suffered from our Princes, when contrary to
their Oath, Office and trust, they have followed their personal wills, and
forced the illegal issues thereof upon us, and forsaken or neglected the Laws
and the counsels of Parliament, and we never found any means to relieve us
against such sufferings, but by our Parliaments, which as we respect the
happiness of our selves and of our posterity, we will love and adhere unto.

Ob. 6. He says, We were further off from having any thoughts, that by any of
their Votes they would or could draw us into any acts of disloyalty or
disobedience against our natural liege Lord, to whom by the laws of God and
man, we owe and will pay allegiance and fidelity.

Sol. We could never hear of -- neither does this false Libeller express any
particular Vote of the House of Commons, by which any man can be justly said to
be drawn into any act of disloyalty or disobedience against the King, if he
had we should have bin able to give our sense of it. But the deceitful are
conversant in Generals.

We have seen and considered his preparatives, and by it we see what Physician
we have, if this Mountebanke should be entertained, that so impudently thrusts
himself into office before he be called. Now let us follow this wild-Goose on
in his chase: Who nextly offers diverse things to the consideration of the House
of Commons.

Object. And first he says, We are resolved with our lives and fortunes to
maintain the true Protestant Religion, established by the laws in our Church,
and to maintain our well settled government under a Monarchy, according to the
Known Laws of this Land, and to maintain the just Privileges of our
Parliament, without which our Laws can hardly be continued, and in asserting
of this, we have the daily Protestation of both Houses, and His Majesty's
Declaration; and we hold our selves bound in Feverence to his Person, and in
Christianity to believe, that he will faithfully perform his word with his
people, and that we have this further assurance thereof, that he has descended
so low from his Throne, as to acknowledge some errors, that have slipped him in
his past government, and to undertake not to give way to the like hereafter,
and that we wish that the House of Commons would with the same Ingenuity
acknowledge their errors and amend them.

Sol. This man though he assume our Name is far from our sense. We dare not
limit the holy one of Israel, the holy Scriptures is the adequate object of our
Faith and Religion and not our Laws, and if any thing concerning Religion be
established by our Laws, which is not warranted by the holy Scriptures, or that
is defective and comes not up to the perfect rule of Gods Word, we desire our
Laws may be amended by the Parliament, and all the Worship of God and
Discipline of the Church, formed in all things according to the pattern given
of God, least the divine Curse lie upon us and our Land, for adding to the Word
or diminishing ought from it; and the Scriptures reject every thing in the
Worship of God merely for this cause, because he has not commanded it,
because it never came into his mind, and countes it vain Worship, vain
Inventions, if it be men's precepts or not part of his Law Ier. 19.5. Lev. 10.1
Mat. 15.9. Psalm 119.113. Deuteronomy. 12.32.
: Secondly, we cannot allow of the Epithet given to our Laws, limiting them
to known Laws; for be they known or unknown to us, we leave the declaring
and determining of them to Courts of Justice, especially the most high Court,
the Parliament, and this is certainly known Law, and has ever been so: The
King has been in all Ages held and pronounced by our Laws ignorant of them,
as we for the most part of us are, and therefore were never by our Laws
entrusted with it. And it is neither Law nor reason; That Delinquents against
the Law should expound or declare the Law, as now adays they presume to do;
for if that shall be permitted, they would be sure to escape: There is
certainly a Snake hid under this green Grass, known Laws; for our parts we
resolve with our lives and fortunes, to maintain our Religion according to the
Word of God, the only rule and judge of it, whatsoever our Laws be concerning
it, for so our God has commanded; and to maintain our Laws as they are or
shall be declared and determined in our Courts of Justice, the only certain
way to know them by, and not to allow of any thing our King or Delinquents
shall pretend to be Law, though the same be ever so much cried up for known.
And we are as covetous to have Real ground to confide in his Majesty's
Protestations as any can be, and are only troubled and shaken, that we cannot
so fix upon them as we would, by the ways of government and actions, that
under these Protestations from the beginning of his Majesty's Reign hitherto
have run and do run clean contrary unto them. Can the admitting of Mass
and Mass Priests against the Law in the Queens Houses and elsewhere, and the
open exercise of that abominable Idolatry now in Redding every day, and in
York, and the permitting of the holy Scriptures to be burnt in contempt of God
under the Gallows and elsewhere in Redding, the Arming of Papists and
confiding in them, and the persecuting of the strictness of Religion under the
Names of Puritans and Roundheads, consist with the maintaining of the true
Protestant Religion. Can the Illegal taxes, Impositions, Contributions,
Pillaging, Plundring, consist with the maintenance of the Laws, Liberties and
Properties of the Subject? Quid verba audio cum sacta videam. We should receive
more satisfaction in our Kings amending his Errors acknowledged, then we can
in his acknowledgement of them, and persisting in them, yea increasing them
notwithstanding his acknowledgements.

And for the supposed Errors of the House of Commons, because the Malice of
this fellow scrapes together all that be can imagine to be Errors of theirs,
and Malice is ever the fullest accuser: We will proceed to consider and
examine them, and if any shall appear, we are confident the House of Commons
will not only ingeniously confess, but speedily amend them, because we have
ever found them really and actively ready and careful to amend Laws passed by
them, and all other things wherein any slip or error has happened.

Object. First he says, that under color of advancing Religion, encouragement
is given to Anabaptists, Brownists and all Sectaries.

Sol. If to accuse so generally and incertainely shall suffice, no Innocent
shall escape this malicious envious tongue: Where, when, or how is this
encouragement given, or by whom? If he mean the House of Commons as he would
insinuate, we cannot receive his accusation; for if by the Apostles rule we be
not to receive an accusation against an Elder under two witnesses, much less
may we receive it against such a Senate of Elders, upon the single testimony of
this fellow, whom we find a liar or deceiver in all he says. Secondly, We are
not ignorant that the Sects he mentions, were fomented and multiplied in this
Kingdom in the time of the reign and late extreme tyranny of the Bishops, to
vex the Puritans (under which Nickname they included all that made any
conscience of their ways) on the one side, as the Papists were cherished and
increased to vex them on the other side; for these Sectaries being taken and
brought from their Illegal Conventicles to the High Commission Court in great
herds and droves, found favor, and were with some slight reproof or
pecuniary Mulct let go, when a conscientious painful Minister, if he could
not swallow a Ceremony themselves proclaimed indifferent, was stripped of all he
had, cast into perpetual prison and destroyed. Thirdly, We know it does not
belong to the Jurisdiction of the House of Commons to meddle with these
Sectaries, there being an ordinary open way in inferior Courts of Justice to
punish such Sectaries, namely in the Kings Bench, and at the Assizes and
Sessions. Fourthly, We know also, that what the House of Commons can do for
the suppressing of these Sects, has been done by them; for first, they have
passed a Bill for a Consultation to be had with Learned Divines, about such a
Church government and discipline, as is agreeable to the Word of God, to the
end that thereby all Sects may be suppressed, and we know where it lies; and in
the mean time they have declared and Voted against them, to express how
hateful they are unto them, and how seriously they desire and intend the
suppressing of them, as Page 659.
appears in the Declarations of both Houses of Parliament.

Ob. Secondly, he says, That under pretense of hatred of Popery, the Book of
Common Prayer, which is established by Law, is cried down by many, and all
decent Orders in Gods outward Worship, and every man left to the dictate of his
private spirit, and he would have the Laws against Papists and Sectaries to be
put in due execution.

Sol. We observe that where the Libeller dares not charge the House of Commons
plainly and directly with so gross a lie as crying down the Book of Common
Prayer, he does maliciously and wickedly insinuate it; Wherefore else does he
mention it among the things which he suggests to be Voted, Ordered and Acted by
them. And the punishment of such as cry it down we know belongs to the
Jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts of Justice, not to them. But in regard that
the Bishops themselves have agreed there are many things in that Book fit to
be reformed, and that tender consciences are to be eased of some Ceremonies
mentioned in it, the House of Commons have thought it to be very unfit that the
severity of the Laws concerning it should be pressed, before the assembly of
Divines have met and settled it in such a manner as may be inoffensive and more
agreeable to holy Scriptures; and the rather, because it cannot be clearly
proved what Book is established by Law, the Book which was established and
annexed to the Act of Parliament of 5. and 6. Ed. 6. to which Book the Statute
of 1. of the Queen referrs, being taken off the File in the first Year of
Queen Mary by Act of Parliament, and destroyed or lost, and so no Book
remaining of Record, and the Books in print so differing among themselves,
that which is the Book established by Law cannot appear.

And for decency in Gods outward Worship, whatsoever is determined to be such
by man, and not by the Spirit of God in his Word, is the dictate of a private
spirit, 2 Pet. 20.
and man's inventions in Gods Worship are abominable unto God, who is not
pleased with the devises of our hearts, but reserves it peculiarly unto
himself, to teach us how to worship him both inwardly and outwardly, and we
desire that all voluntary Religion and will worship and humility, Col 2.23.
not directed by Gods Word (in which only we have his mind made known 1 Cor.
2.16.
unto us by our Prophet Ioh. 1.18. Act. 3.22.
the Lord Jesus) though it have the color of our Law, may be cried down, cast
out and removed according to Gods will, least he say unto us when we present
our worship before him, who required these things at your hands? Esa. 1.12.

Ob. Thirdly, He says, That under the color of regulating the Ecclesiastical
Courts, and taking away the High Commission Court, all spiritual Inrisdiction
for the Coercive part thereof, which is the life of the Law, is taken away, so
as now no heinous crime inquirable by these Courts can be punished, no Heresy
or Schisms reformed, no Church can be enforced to be repaired, no Church
Officers compellable to take upon them their Offices or perform their duties,
no Parsons or Vicars can be enforced to attend their Cures, or give
satisfaction for the pains of them that do; No tithes or other Church duties
can be recovered by their Law.

Sol. Our desire is that the Parliament would be pleased not only to regulate
Ecclesiastical Courts, which were abused to the pillaging of our estates, and
inslaving of our persons, as well as the High Commission Court, though in a
different degree, but that their Jurisdiction in causes Matrimonial and
Testamentary, and concerning Tithes, repairing of Churches, and intermedling
with Church Officers usurped upon the Temporal law, should be wholly taken
away and restored to the Common Law, and that Non-residency, Idleness of
Parsons and Vicars, and neglect of their Cures should by some good Laws to be
made, be made inquirable and punishable in the Common Law Courts, where we
shall find certain and speedy Justice, with ease to our purses, and without
great travel to our persons, and not be consumed and tired out with endless
chargeable suites concerning them as we have been in those Courts, and
notwithstanding remain in the long run uncertain of Justice. And for
matters in their own nature merely and only Spiritual, as Adultery, etc. we
desire some better course should be set for the punishment of them according to
the Word of God, and not by the Popes Canon Law; and we partly perceive by the
Bills that have past both Houses of Parliament, that they not only intend, but
had long before this settled all these things by their wisdoms in the best
way, if they had not been hindered by men that hate to be reformed; the fault
this Libeller would insinuate to be in the Parliament, lies not in them, but in
others that are of the same spirit with this false accuser.

Ob. Fourthly, He says, That under the Name of reforming the Church
government, the Parliament endeavors to take away the function and very
being of Church governors, as Bishops, Deanes, etc. and so to take away at
once the preferments of Learned men and encouragements of Learning: Let the
abuses be taken away, but not the good uses also.

Sol. We believe this may be as well objected by the Pope, his Cardinals and
shavelings, as for Bishops, Deanes, etc. whose temporal honors and
possessions are greater, and by them held the functions and very beings of
Church government, and the preferments of Learned men, and the encouragements
of Learning: but we desire all these functions and beings of government, being
abuses and equally branches of the Man of sin, the Popish Hierarchy and Babell
that must fall, may be taken away root and branch out of the Church, as they
be out of other reformed Churches: And that the Gospell-Bishops, painful
Preachers of the Gospel, that give themselves to prayer, and the
administration of the Word Act. 20.28. and 6.4.
, may be restored to all the parts of their function and office, which these
usurpers have a long time deprived them of; And that the maintenance devoured
by these Idle slow bellies, may be distributed among the Churches officers
ordained by God, worthy of double honor, which will be preferments for Learned
men that shall make use of their Learning for the saving of souls, the highest
and most noble employment of it, and encouragement to all true Learning.

Ob. Fifthly, He says, That for rectifying Church discipline and some things in
Doctrine also, an Assembly of Divines is propounded to be convocated and
consulted with: The matter is right but the manner amiss, for the Divines are
not nominated by Divines, who can best judge of their abilities, which is the
Legal way. The greatest part of those who are Named, are known or justly
suspected to be persons ill disposed to the peace of the Church, and addicted
too much unto Innovations, and the Parliament being all Lay men, are to be the
only Judges of what shall be propounded and determined. The Divines are but
their Assistants, and the King is totally to be excluded from having any voice
or hand in it, and as it is propounded, it is to be a perpetual Convocation if
the Houses of Parliament so please.

Sol. This cavil might have been made to the Reformation of our Doctrine, in
the beginning of the Reign of Qu. Elizabeth, wherein if the consultation had
bin with Divines, named by Divines, there should never have been any
Reformation at all, the legal way had prevented the divine way of Reforming
this Church, the Divines being then universally corrupt in Doctrine, as they
now be in discipline. Have not the ears of our Divines universally been so
filled with Lauds, Whites, Wrens and their accomplices, clamours of Bishops
government by Divine Right, and their hearts corrupted with a hopeful
expectation themselves might climb up into the Chair, as they are scarce
patient to admit a question to be made thereof, and is it in such a time and
cause reasonable to lean the Reformation of Discipline and Church Government
upon such deceitful Reeds? will they not pierce the hand, and deceive and
delude us? And when our fresh experience in the last Convocation, informs us
what a dreadful misery was like to have befallen us, had not this Parliament
by the good providence of our God prevented it, by Divines nominating Divines,
when both the Electors and elected are birds of a feather, like Ieremies bad
figgs, exceeding bad; shall we now again desire such a choice? We conceive it
is better never consult with, never choose Divines then give way to such
elections or nominations. If Divines be chosen, and those godly and learned,
that we hope will by their debates endeavor to search out Truth, and love and
embrace it found out, and not seek themselves, what matters it by whom they be
nominated? And when we find the House of Commons able to judge of and discover
the inabilities, defects and errors of the last Convocation Divines chosen by
Divines, and to convince them of their folly and wickedness, shall we question
their ability to judge of the abilities of Divines, and their fitness to
nominate them to consult of Discipline and Government of the Church? And that
the Divines nominated by the Parliament, are ill-disposed to the peace of the
Church, we verily believe is a false, groundless Accusation, and if this man
know any such, he shall do a very good office to name them, that they may be
put out of this great employment. And for their being addicted to Innovation,
we fear it to be true of such of them, as have given testimony thereof, in
their giving way and yielding unto the tyranny of the Bishops in their late
Innovations, pressed without and against Law upon the Ministers, and we know
there are many such nominated to be of the Assembly. But we conceive the
Parliament have in their nomination and choice done, as those that desire to
have the truth, and the best way of Church Government and Discipline found out,
in that they have named men of very different judgments and opinions
concerning the same, and as near as they can honest men that will submit to
truth discovered and heaten out by debate and dispute among them. And though
this man call the Parliament Laymen, we know though they be not in orders,
they are in the language of the Scriptures, as much Clergymen, viz. the Lords
lot, portion and inheritance (as the word signifies) as those that are in
orders, and we find by experience, they can judge of Church Government and
Discipline, and of the reasons and grounds upon which Divines found their
judgment concerning them, as well as Divines can and better too then our
Convocation Divines, and such as they have been members of the first great
Council at Jerusalem Act. 15.
, and of all great Councels in orthodox times. And the conclusion and results
of the debates concerning Church Government and Discipline, being to be settled
for Law by Act of Parliament, the Houses of Parliament must necessarily be
Judges thereof, and that the King is excluded, without whose Royal assent the
Act cannot be of force, is as senseless an Assertion, as it is groundless, and
so is his Suggestion that this may be a perpetual Convocation, when the
Divines are to consult of a few special matters only, and report their
Conclusions and reasons to the Parliament and then to end, which cannot be a
work of many weeks or months at most.

Ob. Sixthly, He says, That under the color of freedom of preaching, seditious
Sermons are preached daily in the hearing of many of the House of Commons, who
traduce the Kings sacred Person, slander his Government, and in express
terms in courage the maintaining and continuing of this unnatural and
unchristian war, and yet none are punished for it. Which makes him fear that
this is and long has been made by some, to be the principal engine to kindle
this fire of hell to the just scandal of all good men and slander of our
Religion, this Doctrine coming so near to that of the Jesuits.

Sol. If there were any truth in this charge, and this man were guided by any
good spirit, he would rather turn Informer against such Preachers and hearers
in a right way by complaining of it to the Parliament or either House, as well,
yea -- rather then insert it in this Libell, and in such a general manner
without certainty or particularity, and we believe the Sermons thus clamoured
against are printed, for most, if not all, preached before the House of
Commons, or in the Church where many of them usually hear, are published, and
of these we can judge and must conclude, that this report of them is a loud
lie, like the rest of this fellows scandalls. Indeed we know that many wicked
Priests, Malignant against the Parliament, and the good and safety of the
Kingdom have preached sundry seditious Sermons tending to the maintenance and
continuance of this unnatural and unchristian civill-warre against the
Parliament, and excepting such and others of the like spirit, as this Libeller
is, we are confident there is no man, especially if he love the King and
Parliament, but desires there may be an honorable end and burial of these
contentions.

Ob. 7. Diverse worthy and painful Preachers have been committed to prison by
the House of Commons for delivering their consciences freely and religiously,
and preaching obedience to their Sovereign. These things tend mainly against
the maintenance and propagating of the true Protestant Religion.

Sol. If this man had informed himself of the causes for which Preachers have
been committed by the House of Commons, by the Articles exhibited and proved
there against them, he could not be so wicked, as we conceive, as to publish so
notorious a lie, as this is: For we find upon search, that the Ministers by
them committed have publicly preached to stirre-up the Subjects to sedition,
to take up Arms against the Parliament and Kingdom, and to corrupt the King
and us with the leaven of false flattering Doctrine, of absolute Power in the
King, to do what he list with us, our estates and lives, to pusse-up the King
above what is meet, and to draw us into a willing and conscientious slavery;
Doctrines destructive to the Kingdom, and contrary to the constitution thereof
and our Laws, and contrary to Gods command given us, to stand fast in the
liberty whereof he has made us free, Gal. 5.1.

And considering the endeavors of the House of Commons to remove the Papists,
Bishops, and scandalous Ministers and other rubbish that hindered the
prapogating of the true Protestant Religion, and to plant faithful, orthodox,
painful laborers in this Church, which is so notorious to us all: Malice it
self cannot deny, but that their ways tend unto the maintenance and
propagating of our Religion.

Ob. Secondly, touching the maintaining the Laws, he charges the House of
Commons with these particulars. First, That they assume to themselves power by
a bare Vote without Act of Parliament to expound or alter a Known Law, where
that House formerly assumed no such power, but in order toward the making of a
new Law, nor did the House of Peers challenge any such thing, but they having
the power of judicatory as Judges have proceeded according to the Rules of the
Known Laws, and upon their Honors are answerable for the Justice of their
Judgments, as other Courts are upon their Oaths.

Sol. It is plain that this fellow erres through gross ignorance of the
proceedings of Parliament, and of all the Records thereof, in which there is
nothing more frequent and familiar in all Ages, then to find the House of
Commons declaring the Law, and complaining that the King has done things
against the Law. First, Judging and determining by Votes, and then claiming the
Laws and the Rights of the people and of their House, and the Lords in like
manner, and that in general, as well as particular cases, and not to lead the
Reader -- at this time higher; This appears in the Petition of Right, wherein
the Commons first declare, and expound the Laws concerning these Rights
therein claimed and usurped upon by the King. 2. The Lords join with them in
that Declaration. And lastly, the King gives his Assent to this Declaration,
before and without which these things were Law (the Statute being declaratory
of former, not introductive of new Law.) And the Kings Assent was had only to
stop the mouths of cavilling Court, and Innes of Court Sycophants and
Flatterers (the Moth of Kings and Kingdoms) against those Laws, and the rest
of this charge is a gross lie, and groundles imputation.

Ob. 2. He says, That the Parliament makes their own Orders and Ordinances to
be as Law, and compel them to be observed, and with a stricter hand, which may
bind their Members, but not have the force of Laws till by the Kings Assent
they be confirmed.

Sol. Besides the two causes here admitted, that they may make binding Orders.
First in order to making of new Laws. Secondly, To bind their own Members; it
is most evident that the Orders and Ordinances of Parliament are binding and
are to be obeyed; First, where they are in pursuance of the Laws in being, for
to them principally belongs the care of preserving the Laws, and of enforcing
obedience unto them, and of giving strength and vigor unto them by the King
and his ordinary Judges and ministers of Justice neglected or abused. Such was
the late Order of the House of Commons for the pulling down of Crucisixes and
Popish Images, according to 3o. and 4o. Edw. 6ti. Cap. 10. revived 1o. Iac.
Cap. 2. And against Innovations in Religion, imposed upon the Subject against
Law, as bowing at the Name of Jesus, which is idolizing a Name against the Law
of God, and without any Law of man, and they deceive their own souls, and
endeavor to deceive others, that pretend they do it to worship the Person of
Jesus, for if that were a real intention and true, they would worship him
represented by any other name, as Christ, Savior, Messiah, Son of man, etc.
and to say it is in their liberty to worship him under one name and not
another, is as gross a deceit, and pronounces it -- a will worship and
voluntary, an invention of man which God abhorres, as I have showed before, and
so indeed they worship their own fancy and invention, and not the person of
Christ, whose worship must only be according to his own rule. And lastly, they
may make Orders and compel obedience unto them, that are for the safety,
defense and preservation of the King and Kingdom They be chosen ad faciendum
and con^entiendum his quae co^tigerint ordinari super arduis and urgentibus
negotijs regem statum and defensiore^ regni ac ecclefiae con^nent.
; The very words of the Writ by which they be called (not to trouble this short
Treatise with any more) manifests and proves this most clearly.

Ob. Thirdly, He says, The House of Commons takes themselves so far above
the reach of the Laws, that by their Orders and Ordinances, they injoyne the
Judges and ministers of Justice to forbear, contrary to their Oaths, to
proceed in their ordinary courses, when they please.

Sol. We are troubled more with the ignorance and folly of this man, then with
any knotty matter of difficulty to answer his scandalous Pamphlet. We have
observed that for a superior Court to enjoyne and prohibit the proceedings of
an inferior Court, is as common as Ergo in the University Schools, and Judges
and ministers so enjoined or prohibited are bound by their Oaths to surcease
and obey, and the House of Commons have done this in all Ages, and is clearly a
Court Superior to any inferior, and the Judges and Officers of inferior
Courts are under them by Law, and to obey the commands and injunctions of the
House of Commons to them, is that which the Law requires, and their Oaths
oblige them unto.

Ob. Fourthly, He says, The Parliament makes an Ordinance to put the Militia
of the Kingdom into such hands as they please to conside-in, without the King,
and expressly against his Command.

Fifthly, That they possess themselves of the Navy-Royall, and appoint
Admirals, and other Officers by Sea without the King, and use the Ships against
the King himself.

Sixthly, That they take the Castles, Forts and Ports, and places of greatest
strength in the Kingdom, and keep them against the King himself, and this
will appear to have been done by design, for the pretense at first was the
preservation of the Kingdom against some foreign enemies, where none have
appeared for many months, and such in truth never were, and by means hereof,
a war for the Parliament against the King himself was raised for the
preservation of the King.

Sol. Such as have any knowledge of the Constitution of this Kingdom, which is
a Politic, and not an absolute Monarchy, cannot but discern the apparent
ignorance and malice of this Accuser. In this Kingdom Sir John Davies rep
Epist. fol. 2. Consuetudines regni
the people originally agreed Laws, such as they found by experience to be good
for them, which were therefore called the Customs of the Kingdom, Customary
Law, Common Law, not imposed upon them by Charters of Princes, or by Act of
Parliament, but assumed by them upon their experience of the fitnes of them for
them, and are not written as Charter and Parliament Laws be; then they chose
one from among them to be their King for the defense of their Laws, bodies and
goods, and for these purposes only they gave him power to govern them, and he
cannot govern them by any other power or rule Fortes de leg. Ang. (...).
; and for the preservation of the Laws against the Encroachments of the King
and abuse of his power and trust, which through humane frailty or evil and
wicked Councels and flatteries of Court Parasites, he might fall or be drawn
into; and for the making of such new Laws, as should be requisite; And for the
better preservation of the peace and safety of the Kingdom, they ordained a
general and great Council of the whole Kingdom, anciently called Michel
Simoth, Michel Gemot, Wittenage Mote, magna Curia, the great Court, commonly
called the Parliament or the Common Council of the Kingdom, and invested them
with all power for the good of the Kingdom and people, and ordained, that the
making of new Laws by them for honors sake, the Kings Royal assent should be
given unto them; and for this purpose they ordained the King should take an
Oath to preserve the Laws and govern by them, and assent to such new as his
Parliament should find to be for the common good and should tender unto him
Remonstrance of Parl. 2^. May, 1642 and reply of Parliament to the answer
thereof.
. And between an absolute Monarchy and this Politic there are these
differences.

First, In an absolute Monarchy the Kings personal will is the Law, and his
personal Command to be submitted unto to do it or to suffer willingly what
punishment he pleases to impose for not doing it, which is not a power fit for
any but God, whose wisdom is infinite, and will infinitely holy and good, who
cannot err, nor do any wrong, and from whom proceeds no command that is not
for his peoples good, Deuteronomy. 6.24. and 10.13. Sovereign power of Parliament ^
etc.
But the Politic Kings personal Command or will, if it be not according to
the Law ought to be disobeyed and rejected; and if any shall instrumentally
serve such personal will to punish him that so disobeyes, he that is so
offended by such officious servant of the Kings may have his remedy and recover
Recompense for such injury, and the Kings personal illegal command shall not
afford his instrument any protection or defense Hos. 5.10, 11, 12. God will
punish obedience to such illegal commands.
. This is so obvious to any versed in our Laws, or observing the ordinary
practice of the^ in ordinary Courts, as nothing almost can be more.

Secondly, An absolute Monarch cannot be controlled in any thing he does by his
Subjects, but a Politic Monarch may by the Laws distributed in his Courts be
controlled, and his actions, if against Law, defeated, made void, and nothing
more usual in our ordinary Courts of Justice, then to overthrow his Pattents
and Grants, and to discharge Subjects imprisoned by his Command; and for the
Houses of Parliament or either of them, being extraordinary Courts to overthrow
and make void all his illegal Acts that have bin carried-on with abused power,
to the prejudice of the public, with which the ordinary Courts durst not
meddle, or were by base cowardice and fear betrayed to comply withal, as in
the case of Ship-mony, Impositions, Knighting money, etc. And if that Politic
Monarchy should by wicked Councels beseduced to do or attempt things dangerous
to the safety of the Kingdom, the Parliament ought to complain of them unto him
in a mannerly and respective and honorable way, and if that take not effect
they ought to take care that the Laws and peace and safety of the Kingdom be
preserved, not only without, but against his personal will: So Bracton Fol.
34. If the King shall be without a bridle, that is to say, shall not govern
according to his Laws, the great Court of his Parliament ought to bridle him:
And so Parliaments have often done, as both our Histories and Records of
Parliament abundantly testify See the book entitled, The treachery and
disloyalty of Papists, etc.
.

Thirdly, An absolute Monarch chooses what Councillors he will, but the
Politic Monarchs great Council for the weighty affairs and urgent business
of his Kingdom is in greatest part chosen by the people, and the rest have it
annexed to their honors conferred or descended, as the House of Peers, and
these are not his Council only, but the Council of his Kingdom and people.

Fourthly, An absolute Monarch has the Forts, Ports and Ships of the Kingdom,
to use and dispose at his pleasure. But our Politic Monarch has none of
these, but in trust for the use and good of the Kingdom, to take order they be
used, kept and employed for the good peace and safety of the Kingdom according
to Law, and not to the hurt or endangering of the safety or peace of the
Kingdom, as is clearly manifested and proved in the Declaration of Parliament
concerning Hull 25. May, 1642. And in the Reply to the Answer thereof, and more
particularly and largely in M. Prinns Sovereign Power of Parliaments.

5. An Absolute Monarch has the Militia of his Kingdom and Monarch in his
own hand and pleasure, as in truth, the Lives, Estates, and the Whole of his
Subjects are. But a Politic Monarch has no power to compel his Subjects to
find Arms, or serve with Arms, except they be bound thereunto by Tenure or
Contract, and then, but as their Tenures oblige them, and can only compel his
Subjects that have Arms, to show them in Musters before his Commissioners, as
appears clearly in the Declaration of the Parliament concerning the
Commissions of Array lately Illegally granted, so far is our King from having
power over the Militia of the Kingdom without the consent of his Parliament.

And there having been a manifest design to alter Religion and the very
constitution of this our Politic Monarchy, by a Malignant party prevailing
with his Majesty, discovered by the wisdom of the Parliament, and so far
carried on, as in a manner all was become subject to will and power, and the
Laws neither a defense of our persons nor of our rights, and our Judges
enforced against their Oaths and duties to comply with them; and these Vipers
finding the whole mould of their hellish devices to be likely to be broken, and
Laws to be made for the establishing of our Liberties and proprieties, and
vindicating thereof, and a through Reformation of the Church, in Worship,
discipline and government to be set upon and resolved by the Parliament; they
endeavored to get all the strength of the Kingdom into their hands, The Lord
Digbies advice in his Letter to the King.
and to that end persuaded his Majesty to possess himself of the Ports and
Forts, places of strength (as they called them) that they might without fear
of being brought to Justice for their delinquency by the Parliament, have
access unto him to advance their said design; and seduced the Queen out of
the Kingdom, and raised Arms by open force against the Parliament to destroy
it, and therein all our Religion, Laws and Liberties, and drive the King to
own and take all those things upon himself, and forged all the false colors
and glosses upon those hellish proceedings of theirs, that Jesuited devilish
wits can invent to deceive the people, and to draw them to become Felons and
destroyers of themselves. Was there not just cause, and was it not high time
for the Parliament, to take care in such case, that the Kingdom should be set
in a Posture of defense, and that the Ports, Forts, Magazeenes and Ships should
be secured for the Peace, safety and good of the Kingdom? Was this done by
design? surely if this had not been done, we had all ere this been
over-runne with tyranny, and we and our Posterity made slaves. When the King
refuses to do his duty, which by Oath and Office he is bound to do, and
imploys any thing he is entrusted withal by his Kingdom, to the public
prejudice of him, his Posterity and Kingdom: It is necessary, yea just and
Legal, that the Kingdoms representative, the great Court, the Council of the
Kingdom, should seize upon, secure and use the same to the public defense and
for the public good, and prevent the Kings satisfying the base lusts of a few
wicked Councillors and Sycophants, that would raise themselves on the ruins
of the Commonwealth. And though many parts of the Kingdom have been wasted
and grievously spoiled by foreign Enemies, of which there are very many in
the Kings Armies, brought from beyond the Seas in great numbers, and though we
have felt their heathenish and barbarous cruelties, this fellow would persuade
us they never appeared. And though the preservation of the Kingdom against
foreign Enemies were one cause of the Parliaments taking the Forts, Ports and
Ships into their hands, power and disposition, yet that was not the only cause
as appears in their Declaration Declar^ 2o. Martij. 1641. And the Ordinance
for the Militia.
.

Ob. Eighthly, he says, That they who refuse to join in this War with the
Parliament, or to contribute unto it, they plunder as Malignants and ill
affected to the Commonwealth, although he sees not how it can be less then
Treason against the King to join with the Parliament therein.

Sol. We verily believe the ways of the Parliament to be very just, and full
of reason, and Legal, to enforce them that have Estates and will not help to
quench the public fire kindled in the Kingdom by the Enemies thereof, nor to
preserve the Parliament which preserves their Religion, Laws, Liberties and
all from tyranny and violence, with some small part of it; and to judge them
Malignants and Enemies of their Country. Did not the Inhabitants of the County
Palatine of Duresme when the Scots had broken in upon them, to redeem their
Country from plunder and spoil, compound with the Scots for 1600 Marks, and
break open the Chest of William Heburne, and take 70. pound from him by force
in such a necessity, for the public safety, to help make up the sum, when he
would not let them otherwise have it: and was not this judged lawful by all
the Judges of the Kings bench in a Writ of Error brought Mich. 14. Ed. 2d.
Rot. 60. and a Legal plundering: and other plandring the Parliament never
commanded or countenanced. And though this fellow, blinded with Malice, cannot
see it to be less then Treason to join with the Parliament in this War, yet
such as have any understanding in the Laws, know that to join with an
Inferior Court in executing the Process thereof, to bring Delinquents to
Justice with the greatest force and power of men, if it cannot be otherwise
done, is lawful, though the King join with these Delinquents in resisting the
same, and endeavor to protect them against it; and that it is so far from
Treason, as that it is Treason in such as raise Force against such Process,
and to protect such Delinquents from the Courts of Justice, as was judged in
Parliament in the cause of Alexander Bishop of York, Robert de-Leere Duke of
Ireland and others, in the time of Rich. 2d. and confirmed after by Statute in
the first Year of Hen. 4^.

Ob. Ninethly, he says, That to all the Commanders and Officers of their Army,
the Parliament gives large and even profuse entertainment and rewards, but
out of our purses.

Sol. We do not believe, neither can this false accuser prove this charge,
that any other entertainements or rewards have been given by the Parliament,
then were given by the King before this War, nor so much as the King has given
sithence; and what is here imputed to the Parliament falsely, may justly be
said of the Kings Army, who have free booty, and we are delivered over as a
prey unto them, who make the Proverb that goes of the Great Turk true in
England, That where he sets his foot no grass will grow; where the Kings Army
goes, they take away Plow and Cart-horses, cut the Harness, and use all the
wicked cruel means they can to destroy Tillage, and bring in a famine and the
miseries attending it upon us.

Further for the Liberty of our Persons and proprieties of our estates, this
Libeller objects that we have little hope of this.

Ob. First, Because the Parliament takes away the Kings Treasure, intercepteth
his Revenue, possesses his Houses of access, and pretend all is for his own
service; and if any attend or assist him, they are condemned as Malignants,
Popish, Evil Councillors and enemies to the State.

Sol. To this we must answer for the Parliament; That if they had taken any of
the Kings Treasure, the King now upon his Articles of Treaty, wherein he
demands satisfaction for all he has any color or pretense to demand of them,
The King would have demanded it, but he demands no such matter, by which this
seems to us an apparent, gross, lying imputation, and we cannot judge better
of it. But we hear of the Jewels of the Crown, with which the King is but
trusted, and which by our Laws are to go with the Crown in Succession, that
they are imbessel'd and sold away, a dangerous effect of the evil Counsels
given unto his Majesty. Secondly, for his Revenue, it is true they have seized
on some part of that for the necessary maintenance and support of his own
Children, whom he has left in the power of the Parliament, and to them the
same has been disposed, according to the proportions of allowance his Majesty
has always set out for them, and in no other, and without it they might have
starved otherwise; and if they have seized upon any more of his Revenue, it is
not considerable in quantity, nor fit they should let him have that to
maintain his War against his Parliament and people, which is his, only for the
public good, protection and safety of his people, and by our Laws ought to be
so employed. Thirdly, for his Majesty's Houses, we know none the Parliament
has meddled withal but the Castle of Windsor, and that is before answered, in
what has been said concerning the Castles and Forts of this Kingdom.
Fourthly, for condemning such as attend, or assist him, it is not true, that
any one of his attendants, that are bound by special service to be with him,
have been merely for that condemned as Malignants, Popish, Evil Councillors,
or Enemies to the State, but such as having no special oeconomicall obligation
to attend him, or have assisted him in this unnatural War, or are Popish, or
give him wicked and destructive Council, and foment this War, and Viper-like
endeavor to rend out the bowels of the Country that bare and nourished them,
have been and are justly accounted Malignants and Enemies to the State, and
their courses evidence them to be such to all indifferent lookers on, or that
shall hear any true report thereof.

Ob. Secondly, he says, That the House of Commons, have by Messages
endeavored to persuade our Brethren of Scotland to join with them in their
Rebellion against their Sovereign, and that by Votes of their House.

Sol. If this Libeller had once proved by any reason or Law, that any thing
done by the Parliament, in opposition of the Kings present courses against his
Parliament and people were Rebellion; he had laid some foundation whereupon he
might have presumed to build so bold an inference, but neither he nor any other
that we have seen or heard of, has as yet been able to do that: And the
Politic constitution of the Kingdom is clearly against it, and the like
being done by our Brethern the Scots against his Majesty's like proceedings
with them, has been by his Majesty and the Parliament, judged and declared to
the World, in an Act of Parliament made lately, to deserve no such Imputation,
and that Judgment and Declaration this Libeller himself (if he be an
Englishman) is a party to, though now he give himself the lie. If our
Brethren the Scots, in taking up Arms and coming into this Kingdom so armed,
and taking the Fort and Port of New Castle and Timnoth Castle into their
possession, to maintain their Laws, Religion and Liberties against the wicked
Councillors that induced his Majesty to endeavor to infring the same, were
well done, and nothing therein done amiss; let all the world judge of the
proceedings of our Parliament in the same case: De similibus idem iudicium: And
whom have the Parliament called in to their assistance? surely no Forraigners
nor Papists as the King seduced by evil Council has done, but our Brethren,
interessed in the cause as well as we, and of the same Religion.

Ob. Thirdly, he faith, The Parliament did a greater Act of barbarous hostility
against the King in his own Person, and excuses it, by saying it was not their
fault, but the Kings and his Councillors, that he went in Person into the
Battle, which he did with that Kingly courage at will add to his honor and
their shame while the World endures, which action of theirs is become odious to
God and man, and their excuse for it ridiculous.

Sol. If the King should appear in Arms, to hinder the Justice of his
Inferior Courts, were it an act of barbarous hostility, to execute the
Process of such Court notwithstanding, and would it argue Kingly courage, or
add to his honor, or the shame of the Court that awarded that Process? would
it not rather argue a sordid distemper unbecomming the meanest Subject, and be
a blot and reproach to him in all ages? If this be so in case of an Inferior
Court, how can it be an honor to the King, to be found in an Army that resists
the Process of the Highest Court, and Force raised by it, to subdue and bring
to Justice the Delinquents against the same and against the Kingdom which that
Highest Court represents.

Ob. Fourthly, he says, That as if the Parliament has shaken off all
subjection, and they become a State independent, they have treated by their
agents with Foreign States; Such an usurpation upon Sovereignty, was never
yet attempted in this Kingdom.

Sol. We conceive, that if the King desert his Parliament, his Parliament
without him may do any thing, yea every thing conducing to the good and safety
of the Kingdom, and Parliaments have done greater matters then this in such
case, as any versed in the Histories and Records of this Kingdom well knows.
None so bold in asserting lies as this fellow; certainly upon a Machivilian
confidence, that men will believe rather then examine his falsehoods: besides
his partiality is manifest; That he mentions not the Kings usurpation upon the
Sovereign power of the Three Estates from which his power is derived, and to
which it is subordinate, and the immediate issues thereof, our Laws, even from
the beginning of his Reign hitherto, being seduced and misguided thereunto by
wicked Counsels, in good part set forth in the Parliaments Declaration of the
State of this Kingdom; the mischiefs and miseries whereof we have abundantly
felt.

Ob. Fifthly, he says, The House of Commons command their Orders, and
Ordinances, and Declarations to be printed and published with privilege, but
if any thing come from the King, which may truly inform and disabuse the
people, they forbid it to be published, and commit them to prison that do it.

Sol. The House of Commons in such Commands, do nothing but what is just and
fit, being their own Declarations and Acts; and for the things that come from
the King, we find they come to abuse the people; witness the Mercurius
Aulicus. The Relation of Keinton Battle, Mr. Secretary Nicholas his Letters to
Foreign States, stuffed with the grossest and most apparent lies that ever were
heard, As that Colonel Hastings came to Lichfield and drove thence the
Parliaments Forces, and rescued the Earl of Chesterfield, when the Parliaments
Forces yet possess the Town, and the Earl is the Parliaments prisoner: And
that the Lord Brook was Armed (...), throughout with Armor of proof when he
was slain by a shot in the eye, and upon examination of those that were
present with him at his death, it appears that he had no Armor on at all but
his Head-peece: That M. Marshall the Divine was mad, and cried out he was
damned, and M. Case administering the Sacrament, invited such only as had
contributed to the Parliament, and such dunghill stuff, savouring of the
spirit of him that was a liar from the beginning; by their fruits you may know
them. I forbear to instance in many others as groundless as these. And who
do truly inform and disabuse the people? these men that publish these things
for the King, and under his Name, and in abuse thereof, or the Parliament,
which has set forth nothing, but what upon full examination is discovered, let
the World judge. And we are confident, the Parliament has not imprisoned any
for printing any thing but what was dishonorable to his Majesty, and false and
scandalous to the Highest Court, and that is Legal, reasonable and necessary.

Ob. Sixthly, he says, That the Moneys advanced by gift or adventure, or Act
of Parliament, and Soldiers pressed for Ireland to reduce the Rebels there,
the Parliament has diverted to maintain an unnatural War in England, so
they do visibly lose the Kingdom of Ireland, that they may be the better
enabled to lose the Kingdom of England also.

Sol. The War in our Kingdom, we conceive is unnatural in the offending party
that first raised Arms, and not in the party defending, or Parliament; to
defend against unjust violence as the Parliament does is natural, to pursue
and endeavor by force to bring Delinquents to Justice, that resist the
Process of the Courts of Justice, as the Parliament does, is natural and just
by all Laws of God, nature, Nations, and our Municipall Laws, and the
maintenance of War is of like nature as the War is. And if any person or thing
designed for Ireland has been taken and used by the Parliament, it has been
for a time only, and that also enforced by this unnatural War, to save
England, without which Ireland cannot stand, and is repaid and returned to the
use of Ireland again with great advantage, as by the accouts thereof clearly
appears. And who loses Ireland? The Parliament, which continually sends them
all the aid and help they can or can procure, or the Evil Councillors about
the King, that seduce him to take away the Horses and other things prepared for
the Train of Artillery sent thitherward by the Parliament, and diverse loades
of Clothes and suites of Apparel bought by the Parliament, and sent unto the
Soldiers there, for which no color of satisfaction has been given to poor
Ireland to this day? And who also withheld the King from giving his Royal
assent to the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, thereby as much as in them lies, to
hinder all defense of Ireland, and by consequence, laying open all ways of
supplying the Rebels there, with all necessaries for the War, and for their
support from Foreign parts? And who also put the King upon this unnatural
War, whereby England is spoiled and destroyed, and the Parliament disabled to
raise means to preserve and defend that Kingdom? Who have drawn over the
Commanders employed by the Parliament against the Rebels of Ireland, to foment
this unnatural War, and to devour us, and lay wast this goodly Kingdom, as
Captain Boteler, and 14 other with him lately, and others at other times
formerly.

Ob. Seventhly, he says, That the House of Commons have showed themselves
averse from peace, that they have Voted there shall be no C^ssation of Arms,
least by a free Treaty a peace might ensue.

Sol. Our Brethren of Scotland did treat for peace without such Cessation, and
with good success. And though the House of Commons did once Vote there should
be no Cessation of Arms, otherwise then in order to a disbanding, in their
wisdoms foreseeing that it would be abused, and prove full of snares to the
Commonwealth, as it has since proved; yet through our importunity, they were
induced to give way to a Cessation of Arms in order to the Treaty also. And
now we find by experience, the Resolution which when they were their own, and
not drawn aside by our importunity, and by a desire to hold a concurrence with
the Lords, they took up was grounded upon wisdom, and clearly the best, for
after much time spent about it, both the King and they are feign to give it
over, and go on upon the Treaty without it. And we now also discern, that
they desired the best way for us at first, and which would bring on an
effectual Cessation and full peace, namely that all Armies should be
disbanded, and that that should be the first of their Propositions, concluded
and executed before any other. And to facilitate the way thereof, they have
yielded so fully to the Kings desire in his first Proposition about his
Revenue, Navy, Fortes and Ports, as can with any color of reason be desired,
to resign them all unto him, only desiring, That seeing himself cannot in
Person manage them, he will put them into such hands to be named by himself
as his people may confide in. This so evidently discovers and satisfies us of
their desire of peace, as nothing can do it more fully, more clearly, and
after such disbanding, the Treaty may go on concerning all other differences
between the King and his great and faithful Council in a Parliamentary way,
when the Kingdom shall be eased of the intolerable burdens of the many great
Armies that are now on foot in the bowels of it.

Ob. And this Libeller further bequarrels the carriage of the Parliament
toward the Subject, Thus, first he says, They have made an Ordinance that the
twentieth part of men's estates must be paid toward the maintenance of this
war, and appoints who shall value it, and then Collectours to distraine for
it, and sell the distress and imprison the person that will not pay it, if no
distress can be found, and their families banished from their habitation.

Sol. First, This is nothing to what is done in the Kings Name, by them that
seduce him by their evil Council, who enforce many Subjects unto
contribution, far surmounting this, and plunder and destroy them if they pay
it not, and take from others all they have without measure or mercy, and drive
them from their habitation, that if the places under the Parliaments protection
were not a refuge unto them, they must utterly perish with all that depend upon
them, and seize upon the persons of others that never opposed them, and use
them with more cruelty and inhumanity then they do their beasts, merely to make
a bragging show of a great victory by many prisoners; and all against the
Known Laws, to which his Majesty has given quickening by his personal Royal
assent.

Secondly, The Ordinance mentioned is by this lying tongue that cannot speak
truth slandered, as if it enforced the payment of the twentieth part; when in
truth it binds the Assessours not to ascend in their Assessment above the
twentieth part of any man's estate, leaving them power to descend to a less
proportion, and no man that loves his Country will stick upon so small a
contribution for the maintenance of our Religion and Liberties, against the
hand of violence and foot of pride, lift up by the Cavaleers to the destruction
of them all.

Ob. Secondly, He says, That least the Parliament should not have the color
of Law sufficient to blind the world, they have lately made an Ordinance for
the Inhabitants of Northampton, Rutland, Derby, etc. to pay and to be assessed
by Assessours named in their Act, in imitation of the Statute lately made for
the 400000lb. and this as is probable shall be extended to the whole Kingdom.

Sol. We conceive it very fit, just and legal, that all should contribute to
the saving of all. It is necessary the power and privileges of Parliament be
maintained, or else farewell Religion, Liberty, property and all, and we shall
fall into the like misery as the Subjects of France have ever been, sithence
their Kings over-powred their Parliaments, and destroyed them, which Fortescue
in the 35. Chapter of his book of our Laws, sets forth. And the Parliament for
the preservation of the Kingdom may do, and have done greater matters then
this, as our Histories plainly show, and if any be so impious as not to be
willing to save their country, it is fit they should be enforced unto it.

Ob. Thirdly, He says, The Parliament has yet a shorter and asurer way, where
they understand there is any money, plate or goods to be had, they send a party
of Horse or other strength to fetch it, as out of an Enemies Country, because
the owners are good Subjects to the King, or they suspect them to be so, and
that alone is crime sufficient to apprehend them, or judge them, or take
execution upon them, and all this without the Ceremony of Law by their absolute
and omnipotent power, which cannot err.

Sol. If this liar had instanced in any particular, it would have appeared,
that such as have been so used have been so far off from being good Subjects,
as they have bin manifest Traitors to their country, and fomenters of the
present unnatural war: and if any be found and judged to be so in the highest
Court, by that Court it may be legally done without other Ceremonies of Law,
necessary in inferior Courts. And this power is and ever has been in the
Parliament, when the thing is necessary for the public Defense and safety of
the Kingdom, and so judged by them, whose Representatives and trustees they
are, in case where the King is seduced by wicked councels to endeavor the
destruction of the Parliament, which has bin the design of such Counselors
ever since the King came to the Crown, as clearly appears to every judicious
observer of the times and proceedings at Court. Others of inferior power have
done it, as we see in Heburnes case before, and judged lawful, but that the
Parliament cannot err, was never challenged, and is here maliciously and
wickedly added, to render the Parliament odious, which is the main scope of
this Libeller; and for their Omnipotency, though it has been a Proverb among
the learned of our Laws, that Parliamentum omnia potest, yet the Parliament
has never challenged any power, but for the public good of the Kingdom.

Ob. Fourthly, He says, The House of Commons discharges Apprentices and
Servants from their Masters service without the consent of their Masters and
Dames, and either persuades or compels them to serve in their Army against the
King.

Sol. First, It is false that the Parliament has compelled any to serve them
in their Army. Secondly, It is false that the House of Commons alone have done
this, as appears by the Ordinance 7o, November, 1642. And what the Parliament
has persuaded in this is very just; the public Relation of Apprentices to the
safety of the Kingdom, being more to be respected then their private Relation
to their Masters and Dames, who partake in the public benefit of the service
in the wane, which tends to the saving of them and all they have among the rest
interessed with them in the public safety.

Ob. Fifthly, He says, That the Parliament has imprisoned some for
Petitioning, and some for intending to Petition unto them, as if that alone
were a cri^e, if the matter of the Petition do not flatter them in their
present courses.

Sol. We know they have been so sarre from accounting Petitioning a crime, as
they have received multitudes of Petitions from all parts of the Kingdom. This
therefore is a false imputation, but when the matter of the Petition has been
seditious and tending to the disturbance of the public peace, and stuff with
unjust aspersions of the Parliament, in such case only they have imprisoned the
Petitioners, as is most just and necessary.

Ob. Sixthly, He averres, That the House of Commons have imprisoned others for
Petitioning and intending to Petition to the King, and yet the way is open to
Heaven, and GOD will hear in his good time.

Sol. They never imprisoned any for Petitioning the King, except the matter
were, as is abovesaid, to foment division between the King and his people. And
such a malicious Libellers petitioning Heaven, will find no acceptance, for the
prayer of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord: And if such Petitions be
offered to Heaven, as have been to the Parliament or to his Majesty by such
spirits as this Malignant is possessed withal, God will imprison such
Petitioners, except they repent in another-gesse prison then the Parliament
casts them into.

And concerning privileges of Parliament this Libeller proceeds thus.

Ob. First, That the Parliament forbids us to dispute their Privileges, and
assumes the sole judgment of them, when in former ages they might be and have
been judged by the Laws of the Kingdom, but he admits the Parliament to be
Judges of offenses committed by their own members against the Houses, and of
the election of their members.

Sol. We know and have found by late experience; that when any inferior Court
has presumed to dispute and determine the privileges of the Parliament, which
is the highest Court, they have been punished for it by the Parliament. Have
the inferior Courts of London or other places, been ever admitted to judge or
determine the privileges of the King's Bench or Common Pleas, we cannot
conceive it to be reasonable or legal; but this Libellers malice has so
blinded him, as he raves like a madman against the Parliament, publishing any
thing to their prejudice, though never so much against clear reason and common
experience.

Ob. Secondly, He says, Some of the members of the House of Commons have bin
committed or put out of the House for speaking freely against the sense of the
House, or rather of some members thereof.

Sol. This we are very confident is a loud lie, and if he had instanced in any
one, it would have bin as manifest as the Sun, when it shines out in its might
and strength to be a lie. And it is altogether improbable that the whole House
should deal so with any member for speaking against the sense of some members
thereof.

Ob. Thirdly, He says, The privileges of the House of Commons were never
challenged till now, to extend to any member which should commit treason or
felony. But they have now declared, that no member of the House, nor other
employed by them shall be questioned for Treason but in Parliament, or at least
by leave of the House.

Sol. It is true, no privilege of Parliament does extend, or was ever
challenged to extend to exempt any member of Parliament from being questioned
for treason or felony, but it has bin ever challenged, and is an undoubted
privilege of Parliament, that none of their members upon a bare accusation of
these crimes should be left to a legal trial, before the House, whereof he is
a member, be satisfied that there is good ground for the accusation; upon a
mere accusation no man is to loose his privilege of Parliament, but upon
real cause. If to accuse be sufficient, who shall be innocent? and if the Law
were otherwise, every man that speaks his mind legally and according to his
conscience, and the trust reposed in him by his Country for the public good,
if the King like it not he shall be presently accused of treason by the
Attorney General, and thereby taken out of the House, and so freedom of
speech in Parliament will be utterly lost, and all members of Parliament that
are good Patriots and stand for our Religion, Laws, or Liberties may be taken
out of the Parliament, and none left there, but such as will serve the times,
and humor the evil Councillors about the King, a highway to undermine and
blow up, not as the Papists intended in the Powder Plot one Parliament, but all
Parliaments, and overthrow the Kingdom and reduce us and our posterity to
slavery and misery without remedy, for by the same reason, as one man shall
loose his privilege upon such an accusation, twenty, an hundred and more may,
and then farewell the liberty and happiness of England.

The House of Commons have ever proceeded justly and impartially against their
own members, where there has been real cause to put them out of the House,
and deliver them over to the hand of Justice, but if they should do it upon a
mere accusation, yea such an accusation as is ashamed to be tried (as the late
accusation of the five Members, which would never endure the mentioning of an
examination.) Certainly they should do apparent injury and injustice and
betray the trust committed to them, and they that had a hand in this more then
Gunpowder plot, counselling and endeavoring by that devilish design against
the Parliament will remain infamous to all posterity.

Ob. Fourthly, He says, The House of Commons have made a close Committee,
wherein a very few members of that House are privy to their counsels, and what
those few conclude is summarily reported to the House, and that taken up upon
trust by an implicit faith of all the rest.

Sol. This we know to be false in the whole, and in every part of it. First,
The House of Commons alone has not made any such Committee, but that Committee
is made by common consent of both Houses, and consists of Members of both
Houses, and is necessary for the preparing of business for the House, and for
the quicker dispatch of the affairs of the House, as all know that understand
any thing of the proceedings of Parliament.

Secondly, It consists not of a very few, but of a competent and fit number
for such a Committee.

Thirdly, Not only the members of the House of Commons, but of the House of
Peers also are privy to the councels thereof.

Fourthly, The reports from that Committee to either or both Houses are as of
other Committees, nothing in it taken upon implicit faith, but as every member
of either House is at liberty to be at the councels, debates and results
thereof, if they please; so the particular reasons, warrants and grounds of the
Report, are by the Reporter clearly opened, and if not, every member may
require an account thereof before he give his Vote.

Ob. Fifthly, He says, Many of the present members of the House of Commons have
had their elections questioned, and in two years space have had no leisure to
determine them, if they incline to the positions they lay down, least they
should loose such from their party.

Sol. If this Libeller had instanced in particulars, an answer might be
particularly given thereunto, and he convinced of his forged accusation, but to
a general charge we can say thus much in general, That all questions
concerning election that have been brought to the House from the Committee of
Elections have bin presently upon the Report thereof determined. But if the
Committee has not had leisure to sit or opportunity to report, because of the
great obstructions that have been by the enemies of the public good, cast in
the way of the Parliaments proceedings, and the House of Commons enforced to
spend all their time to resist, and to endeavor to remoove the same, it is not
the fault of the Parliament, but the fault of these men of Beliall that are
risen up against the Parliament and Kingdom.

Ob. Sixthly, He says, That when a matter of Importance has been in debate
and put to the question, and thereupon determined, the same question has been
again resumed at another time better prepared for the purpose, and determined
quite contrary.

Sol. First, That any such question has bin received after determination, that
has not come into the House upon some new occasion enforcing it, we do not
believe to be true, but that a great Council upon debate determines one time
one way, and upon better preparation and second thoughts, when it is by some
emergent occasion brought again into debate, conclude another way, and quite
contrary is no news, it being both the privilege and property of wise men to
change their opinions upon better, further and more mature deliberation and
consideration, being better prepared for it, then they could be at first, when
it was suddenly and unexpectedly moved, debated and determined.

Seventhly, he quarrels at the Statute by which this Parliament is fixed so as
it cannot be dissolved without common consent of the King and both Houses,
which in truth is a Statute only declaratory of the Common Law of this
Kingdom, and no Parliament neither can or ought to be dissolved, till they
have redressed all the grievances of the Kingdom. This wretch in this
discovers a heart full of poison against the public good, that like the raging
Sea casts out nothing but mire and dirt, and foming out his own shame. A Law
made by the Supreme power of this Kingdom, the Three Estates, cannot escape
the virulent tongue of this Rabshekah, If this Law may be spoken against or
questioned, all others may. And whereas the King in almost all his
Declarations, protests he likes well of, and will observe and maintain all the
Laws made this Parliament, this Villain forbeares not to say he was
overreached in it.

Lastly, he reckons up the miseries of a Civil War, and says, that the
Parliament is the cause of it, when all men that have observed the History and
Acts of these times, knows well at whose doors that sin and mischiefellies,
and whom it calls Father.

And he desires amendment of what is amiss, without plucking up the foundation
of government intended to be plucked up, except he mean the government by that
Officer whom we call Bishop, which never appeared in holy Scriptures, but in
the person of Diotrephes, which the Parliament desires to remove, that the same
may be changed into the government of the Church by Presbiters, the Officers
and Bishops which the Scriptures approve of, and give the government of the
Church unto, we know not what he means by foundation of government, and we (as
we conceive all good men also do) do for our parts desire to have a Church
government according to the will of God expressed in his word, and not
according to the pattern of his professed Arch Enemy expressed in the Popish
Hierarchy.

And we are confident, that the Parliament had long before this by their
judgment and wisdom, provided for and settled our Religion according to God,
which is the true and indeed only honor of Religion, and the greatest
satisfaction to our consciences, if they might have had their wills, and if it
were obtained, would procure mercy from Heaven, that the Sword should be
sheathed and devour no more flesh, and our Lives, Estates and Liberties be
preserved, which are only secured by our walking according to the Rule, the
only way in which the Angels will attend us, and all happinsse flow upon us
and our Posterity for ever.

And as for burying of bypast Actions in an act of Oblivion, we are confident
the Parliament neither needs nor desires it for themselves nor their friends,
being conscious of nothing done by them for which they have cause to fear the
hand of Justice, and if the honorable peace which they now so sincerely seek
and desire shall not be obtained, we protest to all the world, that with the
utmost hazard of our lives and fortunes and of all we can call ours, we will
endeavor to vindicate them and our selves, from the barbarous, inhumane, and
more then Turkish and Heathenish Tyrannies of the Evil Counselors about the
King, which seduce him, and their Cavaleres, and we doubt not but our God in
whom we trust, who has wrought great salvations and done great things for us
since the beginning of this unhappy War, will be our guide and our strength,
and fight our battles, and go before us as a devouring fire to consume the
enemies of our Peace and his Glory, and perfect the work of Reformation so
happily begun and wonderfully carried on hitherto in spite of all opposition
and in the sight of them that hate him. Amen.

FINIS.

