A MESSAGE SENT TO THE PARLIAMENT FROM The Members of the House of Commons at
Colchester, informing them of the Passages there, how the multitude does daily
increase, and have plundered the Lady Rivers house at Colchester, and taken
from her the value of forty thousand pound in Money, Plate, Jewels, and other
things of great worth; threatening moreover to plunder all the Papists houses in
Essex, conceiving them to be the causers of the present distractions.

Likewise the coming of the Earl of Southampton the Earl of Dorset. and Sr. John
Culpeper to both Houses concerning the withdrawing their present forces.

Also a true Relation of the manner of taking Dover Castle on Wednesday night
Aug. 25. by the Earl of Warwick and M. Dukes.

And the taking of a ship that came from Spain by the Earl of Warwick with
600000 pound, seized upon at Southampton for the use of the Parliament, and
Ordered to be brought up to LONDON.

Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl.

Printed for John Jones. August 27. 1642.

A MESSAGE SENT FROM Colchester to the Parliament, informing them of the
Passages there, and how the multitude does daily increase, and have plundered
the Lady Rivers her house, taking away from her the value of forty thousand
pound in money, plate, jewels, and many other things of great worth,
And how they threaten to plunder all the Papists houses in that Country.
Also a true Relation of the manner of taking Dover Castle on wednesday night
Aug. 24. by the Earl of Warwick and M. Dukes.
THe Houses of Parliament have received information from Sir Thomas Barington
and M. Grimston, that were sent to Colchester in Essex, that the multitude of
people that gathered themselves together by occasion of Sir John Lucas his
providing of horse and ammunition to send to His Majesty, were very much
increased, and that they were so much incensed against the Papists, and others
ill-affected to the Parliament, that they could not appease them, and that they
have plundered the Lady Rivers her house at Colchester, and have spoiled and
taken away from her in money, plate, jewels, and other things of value, to the
sum of forty thousand pound, withal giving out speeches, and threatening to
plunder all the Papists in that County, which (they conceived) were the causers
of all these troubles and distractions in the Kingdom, and were the occasions
that they, their wives and children were brought into great want and extremity,
(by the great decay of trading) and for that they have plotted the ruin and
destruction of this Kingdom. The occasion of this multitudes gathering
together in this manner was as follows.

Upon Friday last being the six and twentieth day of August, the House of
Commons received a Letter from the Mayor of Colchester directed to M. John Pym
of the House of Commons, declaring the fidelity and good affection of the
inhabitants of the said town of Colchester and other towns thereabouts in that
good service they performed for the King and Parliament in taking away the
great store of arms and ammunition that were found in the dwelling house of
Sir John Lucas near Colchester, and how that a great many Muskets, Pistols,
and Carbines were found ready charged; all which was discovered by one Captain
Lumley, who forthwith informed the town thereof; upon whose information the
whole town rose in a great uproare, and within a small time about two thousand
people were gathered together, who forthwith beset the house of the said Sir
John Lucas, but were d^n^ed entrance for a time; whereupon the people were so
enraged, that they demanded entrance without delay: they that were within the
house perceiving the multitude without to be too great for them to make
opposition against, opened the gates, where after they had entered, they found
twelve Horses fitted for war, that should have gone to the King the next day,
and two hundred men: Diverse of them being examined concerning the occasion of
their being there, would confess nothing, but said that they were sworn to
secrecy: the people hearing this answer, were further enraged against Sir John
Lucas, insomuch that the Mayor was enforced to carry him home to his own
house, to keep him from the violence of the people: Herewithall the people were
no whit satisfied, but rather the more enraged (resolving either to have him
out, or else they threatened to pull down the Majors house) until he had sent
him to the common Goal. The people yet are in great fear and amazement, and
continue together in great multitudes, and will not return to their
habitations until they have further satisfaction concerning him. The Mayor not
knowing what course to take with the people, nor how to pacify them, sent with
all speed to know the pleasure of the Parliament concerning the same. After
some debate of it in the House of Commons, they desired a Conference with the
Lords, where the said Letter was read, and thereupon the Lords and Commons
ordered, that Sir Thomas Barrington, and M. Grimstone should go with all speed
down to Colchester to appease the people, and to give them thanks for their
good affection, and forwardness to assist the Parliament, declaring to them,
that the House took it as an acceptable service, desiring them to depart to
their own houses.

Upon wedneseday night last the four and twentieth of August, one ^. Dukes a
Merchant that was entrusted for the securing of the Castle of Dover in Kent,
caused ten men, armed with swords and Muskets ready charged, to climb up a
steep rock (in the dead time of the night) and to draw up scaling ladders after
them, to scale the walls of the Castle, to take it and keep it for the King and
Parliament. After they had scaled the walls and got into the Castle, these ten
Musketeers went to the Court of Guard, consisting but of four men, who at the
sudden appearance of these ten men were so amazed, that they seemed to be in a
trance, and demanding of them who kept the keys of the gate, for fear they
directed them to the Porter who kept the keys, and knocking at his chamber
door, they commanded him to deliver up the keys to them for the service of
the King and Parliament: at first he denied, saying, he would not: whereupon
they would have broke open the door, and withal threatening to shoot him,
unless he would deliver up the keys: at length he gave them the keys, and
presently they went to the gate and sent post to the Earl of Warwick, who lay
nigh Dover with his ships, and immediately sent them threescore Musketeers,
besides forty Musketeers more ready prepared which were sent from the Citizens
of Canterbury, who immediately took the Castle for the use and service of the
King and Parliament, turning out all those whom they suspected to be
ill-affected to the Parliament. Not above two days after, upon friday the 26.
of August, the Parliament received information of a ship coming from Spain
with 600000. pound coming to Portsmouth, and finding no means to arrive there
by reason of the ships which the Earl of Werwick had laid before the town,
and perceiving no possibility of escaping, being descried by the said ships,
they struck in o Southampton, pretending that they came with other merchandise,
but being searched, little was found therein but Bullion, which they said was
to be coined here and so it is thought it shall; for, the Parliament have made
stay thereof, and ordered that it shall be brought to London.

His Majesty was graciously pleased to let the Houses understand that if they
will withdraw their forces, and nominate a Committee to treat with others
chosen by him, he is willing to stand to such a treaty of pacification they
shall agree on.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament declare, That all such persons as shall,
upon any pretense whatsoever, assist His Majesty in this War, with Horse,
Arms, Plate or Money, are Traitors to His Majesty, the Parliament and Kingdom,
and shall be brought to condign punishment for so high an offense.

Ordered to be forthwith printed and published,

Joh. Brown Cleric. Parliament.

FINIS.

