THE ORDER AND FORM FOR CHURCH GOVERNMENT By Bishops and the Clergy of this
Kingdom.

Voted in the House of Commons on Friday, JULY 16, 1641.

Whereunto is added MR. GRIMSTONS and Mr. SELDENS Arguments concerning
EPISCOPACIE.

Printed Anno, 1641.

THE ORDER
For Church Government in the House of COMMONS, Saturday 17, July, 1641.

Imprimis.
Every several Shire of England and Wall(...) to be a several Circuit or
Diocese, f(...) the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction except in Yorkshire which is
to be divided into three.

II.
A Constant Presbytery of Twelve choice Divines to be selected in every Shire
or Diocese.

III.
A Constant President to be established as Bishop over this Presbytery.

IV.
This Bishop in each Diocese to ordain s(...) spend, deprive, degrade,
Excommunicate by: a(...) with the consent and assistance of seven Divines
(...) his Presybyterie then present and not otherwise.

V.
The times or Ordination throughout the land to be four times every year,
viz. 1 May, and 1 August, 1 November. and 1 February.

VI.
6 Every Bishop constantly to reside within his Diocese, in some one prime, or
chief City or Town within his Diocese, as in particular.

VII.
Every Bishop to have one special particular Congregation, to be chosen out of
the most convenient for distance of place, from his chief residence, and the
richest in value that may be had: when he shall duly preach, ulesse he be
lawfully hindered, and then shall take care that his Cure be well suppplyed by
another.

VIII.
No Bishop shall remove or be translated from the Bishopric which he shall
first undertake.

IX.
Upon every death, or other avoidance of a Bishop, the King to grant a Conge
d'elire to the whole Cergie of that Diocese, and they to present three of the
Presbyters aforesaid, and the King to choose and nominate whom he please of
them.

X.
The first resbyters of every shire to be named by the Parliament, and
afterward upon the death, or other avoidance of any Presbyter, the remaining
Presbyters to choose another out of the Parish Ministers of that shire, and
this to be done within one month next after such death or avoidance.

XI.
No Bishop or Clergie-man to exercise or have any Temporal Office, or secular
employment, but only, for the present, to hold and keep the probate of wills,
until the Parliament shall otherwise resolve.

XII.
The Bishop once a year (at Midsummer) to summon a Diocesan Synod, there to
hear, and by general vote, to determine all such matter of scandal in Life
and Doctrine among the Clergymen, as shall be presented unto them.

XIII.
Every three years, a National Synod to be, which for persons shall consist
of all the Bishops in the Land, and of two Presbyters to be chosen by the rest
out of each Presbytery, and of two Clerks to be chosen out of every Diocese,
by the Clergy thereof.

XIV.
This National Synod to make and ordain Canons of the Government of the
Church, but they not to bind until they be confirmed by Parliament.

XV.
Every Bishop to have over and above the Benefice aforesaid, a certain
constant Rent allowed and allotted proportional to the Diocese wherein he is
to Officiate, that is to say, every Presbyter to have a constant yearly profit
above his Benefice.

XVI.
As for the Revenue of the Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters, etc. a strict Survey
to be taken of all their rents and profits, and the same to be represented at
the beginning of our next Convention, and in the mean time no Lease to be
renewed, nor Timber to be felled.

Mr. GRIMSTONS Argument concerning Bishops.
I. THat Bishops Jure Divino, is of question.

II. That Archbishops are not Jure Divino, is out of question.

III. That Ministers are Jure Divino, there is no question.

Now if Bishops which are questioned, whether Jure Divino, and Archbishops
which out of question are not Jure Divino; suspend Ministers that are Jure
Divino, I leave it to you Mr. Speaker.


Mr. SELDENS Answer.
THat the Convocation is Jure Divino, is a question.

II. That Parliament are not Jure Divino, is out of question.

3. That Religion is Jure Divino, there is no question.

Now Mr. Speaker, that the Convocation, which is questioned, whether Jure
Divino, and Parliaments, which out of question are not Jure Divino, should
meddle with Religion, which questionless, is Jure Divino, I leave to you, Mr.
Speaker.


Mr. GRIMSTONS Reply.
But Archbishops are no Bishops.


Mr. SELDENS Answer,
That Is no otherwise true, then that Judges are not Lawyers, and Aldermen not
Citizens.


FINIS.

