A Joyful MESSAGE Sent from the House of COMMONS to ROBERT Earl of WARVVICKE,
Admiral of His Majesty's Navy Royal, concerning the Ships which now lie
ready at the Coast of Holland laden with Ammunition, to be sent to His Majesty
at YORK.

With the MESSAGE which they sent to the Dutch Ambassador, And his Answer to
the said Message.

Likewise the Report which was made to both HOUSES, concerning 8000 men which
are to be sent from France, and Spain, to His Majesty to assist him against
the High Court of Parliament, And the Parliaments Resolution concerning the
same.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons, that this be Printed and published
throughout the Kingdom.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

LONDON, Printed for J. H. and T. Ryder, July 9. 1642.

A Joyful Message sent from the Honorable House of Commons, to Robert, Earl
of Warwick, Admiral of his Majesty's Navy Royal.
THe manifold destractions of this Kingdom are great, and the disturbances of
this Island are manifestly and apparently understood, and by sad experience made
known to the world, insomuch that all Nations do rejoice, which are Enemies
to the Peace of great Britain, but I hope all those that are Enemies to Sion
will have their wages paid by the Devil that set them at work, for their
mallicious spleen against this Kingdom has been long intended, and now of
late it is burst out in abundance, God grant all those that go about, and seek
the destruction of this Kingdom, and of our gracious Sovereign King Charles,
may be utterly confounded, and brought to destruction.

What a sad and lamentable thing it is, for the Subjects of England to think
that a civil War should begin in the Kingdom, who are now at Peace with all
the Princes in the World, no intention to take up Arms, but the malignant
Party separating his Majesty from his great Council, the High Court of
Parliament, and creating a misunderstanding between his Majesty and them, it
is greatly to be feared that the effects will be fatal, for it is a known
maxim, that Jealuosie is the Mother of dissension, dissension that nourishes
distraction, and distraction intestine war, nay a civil War, in comparisoo
of which none is more bloody, and uncivil, and the distractions of this
Kingdom declare that we have great cause to fear that the same effects will
ensue.

For intelligence has been given to the House, of great store of Arms and
Ammunition, to be transported to Newcastle, for his Majesty's defense, likewise
diverse pieces of Ordnance, and many other things belonging to war, likewise
many Captains are ready to be transported over to serve the King, who have
taken an Oath amongst themselves that if they be set upon by the way, they will
fight it out to the last man.

Likewise there was a report made to the House of Commons, that there is great
preparations made both in France, and Spain, for the raising of an Army to be
transported to his Majesty, to asist him against the Parliament, and that the
Popes Nuncio does go about to raise Forces for the same design.

Therefore both Houses of Parliament, had great doubt that his Majesty had some
Design, for the altering his religion.

Likewise the Popes Nuntio has solicited the Kings of France and Spain, to
lend the King of England four thousand men a piece, to help to maintain the
Royalty of the King against the Parliament, but we hope God will direct his
Majesty better.

These are the chief grounds of our Fears.

The House of Commons having taken the aforesaid reports into serious
consideration, gave Order that there should be a speedy Message, sent to to the
Earl of Warwick, intimating unto him the information which they had received,
desiring him to have a special care therein, and to stop the passages of all
those which shall transport Arms or Ammunition, from Rome, Venice, Parris, and
other near adjoining parts, as also from Holland, there having been of late
great preparations of Instruments of war, sent over in several Letters from
thence to the high Court of Parliament.

Likewise they received more intelligence, of certain Ships laden with
Ordnance and other Ammunition, to be sent to his Majesty, and that they are now
upon the Sea.

Which News does increase the forrow of the Parliament, considering the great
misery which is like to fall upon the Kingdom, whereby they are enforced (for
the prevention of which) to apply themselves to the use of that power which by
the Fundamental Laws of the Land resides in them, yet still resolving to
keep themselves within the bounds of faithfulness and allegiance, to his
sacred Majesty.

Likewise the Honorable Houses of Parliament thought it convenient, and
conduceable to the Peace of the Kingdom, for to make further enquiry thereof
wherefore they sent a Message to the Dutch Ambassador, to know of him whither
there were any such thing, or not, the Messenger which carried this Message
returning back, reported to the House the Answer that he had received from the
said Dutch Ambassador, intimating, unto them that he had received no such
intelligence from Holland, neither did he know of any such thing.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons asesmbled in Parliament, that this Letter be
forthwith Printed, and published throughout all the Kingdom.

John Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

