Two special Orders made by the House of Commons in Parliament assembled:
THE ONE Prohibiting that no Carriers, or Waggoners whatsoever shall be
permitted hereafter to go to Oxford or elsewhere without special License from
the PARLIAMENT.
THE OTHER That if any Agent, or Servant to any person that bear Arms against
the Parliament, shall presume to come to Westminster, or recide about London,
shall be forthwith apprehended as a Spy, and proceeded against accordingly.
Die Lunae 16. Ianuarii, 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons House of Parliament, That no Carriers,
VVaggoners, carts, or wagons, or horses laden with any commodities whatsoever,
shall be permitted hereafter to go from hence or elsewhere to Oxford, or any
part of the Kings Army, with any manner of Provisions, without the special
License and Authority of this House first had and obtained; And if they do
presume notwithstanding to go or carry any thing, that then their persons and
goods shall be seized upon, and kept in safe custody, till this House take
further order. And Colonel Moore is to take care, that strict command be given
to all the Courts of Guard to make stay of them accordingly; And to bring the
persons staid, before him, to the intent they may be brought to this House: And
that diligent search be made for any Moneys that may be carried or conveyed by
any person to Oxford.

H: Elsynge, Cler: Parl. D. Com.

Die Lunae 16. Ianuarii, 1642.
IT is this day ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, That if the
Agent or Servant to any person that bear Arms against the Parliament, shall
presume hereafter to come to Westminster, or recide here about London, That he
shall be forthwith apprehended as a Spy, and be proceeded against accordingly;
and all persons are required to do their endeavor for the discovery of such
persons that shall hereafter come to the Parliament House or Westminster, or
any parts about London, that they may be apprehended accordingly.

Ordered that these two Orders be forthwith Printed and published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

London, Printed for JOHN FRANK, and are to be sold at his shop the next door
to the Kings head Tavern in Fleetstreet. Januar. 17. 1642.


