Die Sabbathi, 7. Martii, 1645.
WHereas Thursday next is by former Order appointed for a day of Public
Thanksgiving for the great mercy of God in giving success to the Parliaments
forces against the Enemy at Torrington in Devonshire: And whereas since the
appointment of the said day of Thanksgiving the Parliaments Forces in several
Parts of the Kingdom have given the Enemy diverse defeats, and gained several
strength which are now in the possession of the Parliament: It is thereupon
Ordered, That the respective Ministers within the Limits where the said day of
Thanksgiving is appointed to be observed, and kept; do make mention of these
several mercies and successes, and stir up the People to a due thankfulness
for the same; And to the end the said mercies and successes may be the better
taken notice of, Mr. Rouse, Sir Peter Wentworth, Mr. Gourdon, and Mr. Alderman
Pennington are to collect the same; to the end the Ministers may be acquainted
with the particulars thereof. And the Lord Major of London is desired to take
care that the Ministers may have timely notice of this Order.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

WHereas heretofore it pleased God in the very days of Thankesgiving for
former Mercies, to meet us with new; as if he had taken notice of our
Thankfulness, and encouraged us to it, as a duty that gives him both Honor
and delight: Now, the infinite goodness of the same gracious God has
prevented our day of Thankesgiving (lately appointed for the blessed success
of the Parliaments Army at Torrington,) with many Mercies and Successes in
sundry parts of this Kingdom; and has sent them to us as grounds and
encouragements to give him on this day a larger, fuller, and more zealous
Thankesgiving: For the further advancement whereof, there are many observable
passages of Divine providence.

In the first place we may take notice that Ragland Castle in Wales was long
fortified by the Earl of Worcester a Papist, which of late much increased in
strength, and committed many cruelties upon the County of Monmouth, plundering,
firing, and destroying Towns and Houses; having the whole Country under their
power, except some few Garrisons of the Parliaments, no way able to resist them.
The Ragland Horse drew toward Cardiffe in Glamorgan-shire, a Parliament
Garrison; whereupon the Governor and Committee there, sent to Colonel Kerne
lately appointed High Sheriff by the Parliament, and to the rest of the
Country to rise in a body to oppose the Enemy: but contrary to expectation,
Colonel Kerne and the Malignant Gentry being at their Rendezvouze, prevailed
with the people to besiege Cardiffe, which was done with about 2000 men: they
took the Town in a short time, having the assistance of the Malignant
Townsmen. The Governor, Committee, and Soldiers betook themselves to the
Castle; Gods Providence so cast it, that Major General Laughorne, Sir Trevor
Williams and Collonell Keyrle came in season, (Provision being almost spent in
the Castle,) and fought with the Contrymen and Ragland Forces, (who were
joined on a Heath near the Town,) Routed them, took many Prisoners, and
forced them to fly back to the Town: Major General Laughorne pursued, and
relieved the Castle; the Enemy continued in the Town a while; at last Articles
were agreed, That they should march away with Colors flying, Match lighted,
etc. But having marched some distance from the Town, occasion was given by the
Enemy for breach of Articles, whereupon they engaged in a very hot fight, in
which were slain and drowned of the Enemy near 400, about 500 taken
Prisoners, the rest scattered and fled. We lost very few men in this service,
though many hurt: had this treacherous Plot taken effect, South Wales had been
lost again, which probably would have afforded thousands to the King to join
in a body with Sir Jacob Ashley, who drew his Forces that way. This, if rightly
considered with the circumstances, is none of the least mercies, among many
late successes and Victories which God has vouchsafed us.

The deliverance also of Abbington is an observable Mercy. The Enemy came to
Abbington with a 1000 Horse, and about a 1000 Foot; they drove our men from the
Works, and entered above 300 men, and possessed themselves of sundry Guards,
Works, and the Magazine it self; but our Horse and Foot resisted them
valiantly, routed them, and made them quit their ground, God at that time
raising their Spirits to a great height of Resolution.

After the taking of Torrington in Devon, some Forces advancing toward
Stratton in Cornwall, and the Enemy making resistance, it pleased God to put
them to flight, and there were taken about 300 Horse, and 80 Prisoners.

After this our Army came to Launceston a chief Town in Cornwall, which after
some opposition they took, with the Arms and Magazine in it. And it may be
worthy both of notice and Thankesgiving, that our Soldiers there were so
temperate and obedient, that notwithstanding the opposition made at the Town;
yet they did not plunder so much as one House; which no question was a great
Conquest upon themselves, and advanced much the conquering of that County;
especially since before the Armies coming to Launceston, the people were
possessed with an opinion that there would be no mercy shown to the Cornish.

It is also observable, that God has stricken the Enemy with a terror there;
and diverse persons of quality send for Protections, and daily make their
submissions; and not above 80 Foot appeared upon the calling of their Pose;
whereas heretofore thousands have appeared.

And now our Army advancing toward Bodmin, a Town about twenty miles within
Cornwall, the enemy did quit the Town by night, Hopton himself bringing up the
Rear of them. In those parts six Troopers drove away the Convoy of four Load
of Ammunition; and four Troopers overtaking 42 Musketeers with Matches lighted,
and Muskets laden, made them all lay down their Arms, and brought them back
Prisoners.

The maine body of the Enemies Army, consisting most of Horse is driven far
into Cornwall, and being shut up behind by our Forces, is enclosed both before
and on every side by the Sea, and has little rest, being Alarmed by our
parties.

Beyond all this, God has delivered not only their Forces and Forts, but
their Counsels into our hands; and the delivering up of their Counsels,
delivers also their Cause: For by Gods especial Providence, a Ship coming
into Padstow (a Sea Town in Cornwall,) and bringing in diverse of the native
Irish (most of which, those of the Town destroyed) there came also with them a
Packet of Letters from Ormond, Clamorgan, and Digby, which being cast into the
Sea was recovered again, and contained matters of great consequence, that
concern the bringing in of a multitude of Irish into this Kingdom. Thus their
Counsels being brought to light, their Cause therein appears most abominable,
while there must needs be a likeness between it, and those that support it:
now the supporters of it are Idolatrous and bloody Irish Rebels and Traitors.

London Printed by Richard Cotes, 1645.


