THE SENTENCE OF THE House of Commons, UPON MR. HENRY DARELL, For reporting
that Master PYM A Member of the said House, should take a Bribe of thirty
pounds:

Together, With the said Master Darells acknowledgement of his error therein.

Ordered that this acknowledgment of Master Darells, and the sentence of the
Commons thereupon be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON, Printed for E. Husbands and I. Franck. Oct. 19. 1642.

Die Jovis, 13 October. 1642.
THis Acknowledgement, subscribed by Master Darells own hand, was by himself
this day voluntarily offered to the House of Commons and read, viz.

WHereas I Henry Darell did report, that Master Pym a Bribe of thirty pounds, I
do seriously confess I never had any true ground for it, and am heartily
sorry that I should report so false an untruth, And humbly crave pardon for
this my great folly and offense in reporting the same words: And am so far
from justifying of them, that I am willing to give such satisfaction to this
Honorable House, and to Master Pym in particular, as to this House shall seem
fitting, and refer my self wholly to your mercy, it being my first Offense,
and hope that it shall be hereafter a warning to me ever to commit the like.

Henry Darell.

Master Darell was called in, and demanded by Master Speaker, whether this
Acknowledgment were his own, and under his hand: he did acknowledge it to be
his own, and under his hand: And thereupon the House proceeded to this
Sentence, viz.

Resolved upon the Question, That Master Henry Darell shall make his
Acknowledgment here at the Bar presently, and on the first day of the next
full Term, that he shall make the same Acknowledgment at the Kings Bench
Bar, the Chancery Bar, the Common Pleas Bar, and the Exchequer Bar, the
Courts then sitting.

And then Master Darell kneeling, Master Speaker pronounced the Sentence
aforesaid, and in part of performance thereof, he did upon his knees make this
acknowledgement, and read it upon his knees.

Resolved upon the Question, That Master Darell shall be bailed upon such Bail
as this House shall allow in the mean time till he has performed the rest of
the Sentence, and upon Certificate thereof to be discharged.

FINIS.
Ordered that this acknowledgment of Master Darells, and the Sentence of the
Commons thereupon, be forthwith Printed.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.


