Die Mercurii 5o. Iulii 1648. Resolved, etc.
THat the House does declare it an acceptable service in any Persons that will
List themselves, Horse, or Foot, under the Command of Major General Skippon,
for defense and safety of the Parliament, City, and Kingdom, and that the said
Major General Skippon is hereby Authorized to Inlist all such Persons, and
Command them, and draw them out of the late Lines, into any part, as he shall
see occasion; and to Conduct, and Lead them, and to Fight, Kill, and Slay all
such as shall Oppose, Rise, or make any Insurrection against the Parliament, or
to the disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

In pursuance of an Order from the Honorable House of Commons, bearing Date
the 5. of July, 1648.
THese are to desire you to Inlist all such Persons as shall Voluntarily offer
themselves for the defense and safety of the Parliament, City, and Kingdom, and
to return their names unto me with all convenient speed you may: And for so
doing, this shall be your Warrant.

Dated the 7. day of July, 1648. Ph: Skippon.
To Mr. John Manly, and to such others as he shall desire to further the
Service abovewritten.



In pursuance of the abovesaid Order from the Honorable House of Commons,
bearing date the 5. day of July 1648. Directed to Major Genesis Philip Skippon,
and by virtue of his Warrant to me directed, bearing Date the 7 of the same.
THese are to desire you to Inlist all such persons as shall voluntarily offer
themselves for the defense and safety of the Parliament, City, and Kingdom, and
to return their names unto me with all convenient speed you may, that I may
return them to the Mayor General; and for your so doing this shall be your
Warrant,

Dated the 8 (...), day of July 1648. John Manley
To m^ (...) Brooks, and to such others as he / shall desire to further the
Service above written. /



RIght Dear, and Beloved friends, so many as are resolvedly willing to be
fellow assistants in this so Just and Commendable service, having no less then
the Authority of this Parliament, as by their Order above inserted; appears;
with Major General Skippons special Warrant, to justify this our Practice
and Proceedings: Be pleased therefore freely to subscribe your names, with the
places of your abode, and whether you are most willing to serve with Horse,
Musket, or Pike; as also, whether you are provided with such Arms as you
intend to serve with; and this is expected from you only at such hours and
seasons, as all that is near and dear unto us shall appear to be in eminent
danger: Your names shall be returned, with what speed may be, to the Major
General, that so having distinct knowledge of our numbers, with our
resolutions, he may, as he is resolved, grant us Authority to choose fit
persons from among our selves, to Lead, Order, and Conduct us with security,
when a sudden Alarm, or Confusion shall be in the City, or near adjacent, that
so for future we may not be, as formerly, in an incapacity to preserve our
selves in case of danger. And in thus doing, you shall not only answer the
desires of the Parliament, and of the Major General, but also of us your
faithful friends, who are Jointly resolved in every respect to enjoy the same
measure with you, whether it be life or death, or any other Condition; we being
fully sensible that what, concerning visibilities, is lovely in our eyes, lies
at the stake; thus in the discharge of our duties and places, we shall be
satisfied, quietly waiting, and expecting comfortable success, as it shall by
the God of our strength, be handed out unto us, as the fruits of our labors
and endeavors.


