Reasons of the House of Commons why Bishops ought not to have votes in
Parliament.
1 BEcause it is a very great hinderance to the exercise of their Ministerial
Function.

2 Because they do vow and undertake at their Ordination, when they enter into
holy Orders, that they will give themselves wholly to that Vocation.

3 Because Councels and Canons in several Ages do forbid them to meddle with
Secular affairs.

4 Because the twenty four Bishops have a dependancie on the two Archbishops,
and because of their Canonical Obedience to them.

5 Because they are but for their lives, and therefore are not fit to have
Legislative power over the Honors, Inheritances, Persons, and Liberties of
others.

6 Because of Bishops dependancy and expectancy of Translations to places of
great profit.

7 That several Bishops have of late much encroacht upon the Consciences and
Liberties of the Subjects, and they and their Successors will be much
encouraged still to encroach, and the Subjects will be much discouraged from
complaining against such encouragements, if twenty six of that Order be to
be Judges upon those complaints; the same reason extends to their Legislative
power in any Bill to pass for the regulation of their power upon any emergent
inconvenience by it.

8 Because the whole number of them is interessed to maintain the Jurisdiction
of Bishops, which has been found so grievous to the three Kingdoms, that
Scotland has utterly abolished it, and Multitudes in England and Ireland have
petitioned against it.

9 Because the Bishops being Lords of Parliament, it sets too great a
distance between them and the rest of their Brethren in the Ministry, which
occasioneth pride in them, discontent in others, and disquiet in the Church.

To their having Votes a long time.
Answ. IF in convenient time and usage are not to be considered with Lawmakers.

Some Abbots voted as anciently in Parliament as Bishops, yet are taken away.

That for the Bishops Certificate to plenary of Benefice, and Loyalty of
Marriage the Bill extends not to them.

For the Secular Jurisdictions of the Dean of Westminster, the Bishops of
Durham, and Ely, and Archbishop of York, which they are to execute in their
own persons the former Reasons show the inconveniences therein.

For their temporal Courts and Jurisdictions which are executed by their
temporal Offices, the Bill does not concern them.

FINIS.

