Die Iovis 28 Maii, 1646.
FOr as much as many Writs of Error be now brought, and may hereafter be
brought, and the Records thereupon be removed into this present Parliament: And
the Plaintiffs in the same Writs oftentimes desire to delay Justice rather then
to come to the determination of the right of the cause. It is therefore this
day Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That the Plaintiffs in such
Writs, after the same, and the Records be brought in, shall speedily repair
to the Clarke of the Parliament, and prosecute their Writs of Error, and
satisfy the Officers of this House their Fees justly due unto them by reason
of the prosecution of the said Writs of Error, and the proceedings thereupon:
And further, shall assign their Errors within eight days after the bringing
in of such Writs with the Records. And if the Plaintiffes make default so to
do, then the said Clarke, if the Defendant in such Writs require it, shall
record that the Plaintiff has not prosecuted his Writ of Error: And that this
House does therefore award that such Plaintiff shall lose his Writ, and that
the Defendant shall go without day, and that the Record be remitted. And if
any Plaintiff in any Writ of Error shall allege Diminution and pray a
Cerciorari, the Clarke shall enter an award thereof accordingly. And the
Plaintiff may, before in nullo est erratum pleaded, sue forth such Writ of
Cerciorari in ordinary course, without special Petition or Motion to this
House for the same. And if he shall not prosecute such Writ, and procure it to
be returned within ten days next after his Plea of Diminution put into this
House; then unless he shall show some good cause to this House for the
enlarging of the time for the return of such Writ, he shall lose the benefit
of the same: and the Defendant in the Writ of Error may proceed, as if no such
Writ of Cerciorari were awarded.

Die Iovis 28. Maii 1646.
ORdered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, That this Order be forthwith
printed and published.

Ioh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Bayley. 1646.


