The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
Parliament Assembled, Presented to HIS MAJESTY On Friday the Tenth Day of June,
School.

AND His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS ANSWER THEREUNTO.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased;
Printers to the King's most Excellent Majesty. School.

Die Veneris 10o. Junii, School.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Lord Chancellor do give Order, that the Address of this House
Presented to His Majesty, relating to the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland, and
His Majesty's most Gracious Answer thereunto, be forthwith Printed and
Published.

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
PARLIAMENT Assembled.
Die Jovis 9o. Junii, School.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, Do Humbly
Represent unto Your Majesty, That the Growing Manufacture of Cloth in Ireland,
both by the Cheapness of all Sorts of Necessaries for Life, and Goodness of
Materials for Making of all manner of Cloth, does Invite Your Subjects of
England, with their Families and Servants, to Leave their Habitations to Settle
there, to the Increase of the Woollen Manufacture in Ireland; which makes Your
Loyal Subjects in this Kingdom very Apprehensive, that the further Growth of it
may Greatly Prejudice the said Manufacture here; by which the Trade of this
Nation, and the Value of Lands will very much Decrease, and the Numbers of the
People be much Lessened here: Wherefore We do most Humbly Beseech Your most
Sacred Majesty, That Your Majesty would be Pleased, in the most Public and
Effectual Way that may be, to Declare to all Your Subjects of Ireland, That the
Growth and Increase of the Woollen Manufacture there, has Long and will ever
be Looked upon with great Jealousy by all Your Subjects of this Kingdom; And
if not timely Remedied may Occasion very Strict Laws totally to Prohibit and
Suppress the same; And on the other hand, if they turn their Industry and Skill
to the Settling and Improving the Linen Manufacture, for which generally the
Lands of that Kingdom are very Proper, they shall Receive all Countenance,
Favor and Protection from Your Royal Influence, for the Encouragement and
Promoting of the said Linen Manufacture, to all the Advantage, and Profit that
Kingdom can be Capable of.

Matthew. Johnson. Clerc' Parliamentor'

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Address was to this Effect.
THat His Majesty will take care to do what Their Lordships have desired.

FINIS.

