August 5. 1645.
WHEREAS by special Order of the House of Commons, the Committee for the Army
under the Command of Sir Thomas Fairefax did come to Guild Hall, London, to
receive an Account of the Lord Major and Aldermen appointed as Commissioners by
Ordinance of Parliament of the 15 of February, 1644. For the Assessing and
Levying of 5800 l. per Month, upon London and the Liberties, which is their
proportion according to their divident in like cases. And upon Examination
finding that the City of London and Liberties are very much in Arreare to what
is grown due, and other Counties has paid; the City of London having formerly
had the Honor to be good examples and leaders unto all other Counties in
matters of public concernment. The said Committee from the Honorable House
of Commons, with the Lord Major and Aldermen aforesaid, having summoned all the
Collectors of the several Wards, and their respective Divisions, to enquire of
them the true causes of the slack coming in of the Moneys Assessed upon the
several Wards. For the speedy bringing in whereof, they were appointed
Collectors; and finding amongst other causes this to be the maine; (viz.) The
backwardness and tenderness of the Collectors in executing the power of the
Ordinance by way of distress upon the Goods of their Neighbors that do delay
or refuse to pay the said Assessement; which neglect of the said Collectors
cannot be borne with, in regard of the pressing necessities of that happy Army
under the immediate Command of the Victorious General Sir Thomas Fairefax;
whom God has made Isntrumental, not only to keep the Enemy from our Gates;
but also to scatter their greatest Forces, and drive them to the most remote
Parts in the Kingdom, who are yet in pursuit thereof; which gives us great
hopes of a speedy period to our bleeding Calamities, and does invite the best
endeavors of all that are desirous of a settled and well-grounded Peace, to
give the said Army all due encouragement.

Therefore the said Committee, with the Lord Major and Aldermen aforesaid, have
thought fit to desire the Ministers of the several Parish Churches and
Chappells within the City and Liberties, That they on the next Lord's Day do
effectually stir up their Parishioners speedily and chearefully to pay in
their Assessements to the several Collectors, and to continue the payment of
the remainder, as the same shall grow due. And to let them know, in case they
shall continue to delay or refuse the payment thereof, That the respective
Collectors are enjoined upon the Penalties expressed in the said Ordinance of
the 15 of February, to distreine their Goods, and make sale of the same. And
that none do mistake or censure the proceedings of the several Collectors,
who without respect of Persons are to do their Duties according to the said
Ordinance: But if any inconveniences follow by their non-payment of the said
Moneys, that they lay the blame upon themselves.


