The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
Parliament Assembled, Presented to HIS MAJESTY The Seventh Day of March, 1694.

AND His Majesty's GRACIOUS ANSWER THEREUNTO.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1694.

Die Veneris 8o Martij, 1694.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Address of this House, Presented to His Majesty Yesterday at
Kensington, and His Majesty's most Gracious Answer thereunto, shall be
forthwith Printed and Published: And that the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, do Appoint the same accordingly.

Matthew. Johnson, Cler' Parliamentor'

The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
PARLIAMENT Assembled.
Die Sabbathi 2o. Martij, 1694.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, having Resolved
by the Unanimous Vote of this House, That the Sending so great a Fleet into the
Mediterranean, and Continuing it in those Parts, has been to the Honor and
Advantage of Your Majesty and Your Kingdoms; and having Spent some Time upon
Consideration of the Condition of the Fleet both at Home and Abroad, and of the
great Increase of the Naval Force and Strength of our Neighbors, Conceive it
to be our Duty to Your Majesty and the Kingdom, Humbly to Represent, That the
Honor and Safety of this Nation, under the Providence of God, chiefly Depends
upon Your Strength at Sea. And whereas, by the long Continuance of this War,
the Number of Your Ships must have been Diminished, and those Remaining greatly
Impaired, We think it of the highest Importance to Your Majesty's Service, and
the Security and Interest of Your People, That You would be Pleased to Give
such Speedy and Effectual Directions for the Repair and Increase of Your Royal
Navy, as may Enable Your Majesty, not only to Continue a Strength in the
Mediterranean during this War, which may be Superior to that of our Enemies,
but likewise to Maintain such a Force here at Home, and in the West Indies, as
shall be a Security for our Coasts and Plantations, and a Protection of our
Trade, and Sufficient both for the Annoying of our Enemies, and for the
Protecting and Convoying all such Stores and Provisions as must be Sent to the
Fleet in those Parts; upon the Effectual and Timely Providing whereof, the
Safety of that Part of Your Majesty's Navy does so much Depend.

To which His Majesty was pleased to Return a most Gracious Answer, to the
Effect following:

I Am very Sensible how much Our Safety depends upon Our Strength at Sea, and
therefore cannot but Desire the Increase of it.

And I shall not be Wanting to do what is in My Power, as to the Matters
mentioned in your Address.

FINIS.

