Die Mercurii, 14 Martii, 1648.Resolved by the Commons assembled in Parliament,
THAT Sir John Stowell Knight be proceeded against for life in the upper Bench.

Resolved, etc. That David Ienkin be proceeded against for a trial for life;
And that the Judges in that Circuit in Wales, be required to proceed to an
Indictment against him, in the proper County in the next Assizes.

Resolved, etc. That Charles Stuart eldest son to the late King, James Stuart
second son of the late King, the Duke of Buckingham, John Earl of Bristoll,
William Earl of Newcastle, Sir William Widdrington, George Lord Digby; Sir
Philip Musgrave, Sir Narmaduke Langdale, Sir Richard Greenvile, Sir Francis
Doddington, Sir John Culpeper, Sir John Byron, the Earl of Worcester, and Sir
John Winter; and all such persons as have been acting in the plotting,
designing or assisting the Rebellion in Ireland, shall be proscribed and
banished as Enemies and Traitors to the Commonwealth, and shall dye without
mercy, where ever they shall be found within the limits of this Nation, and
their Estates shall be confiscate and forthwith employed for the use of the
Commonwealth.

Resolved, etc. That Sir John Winter shall have convenient time to depart into
any foreign parts.

Die Sabbathi, 17 Martii, 1648.
Resolved, etc. That Colonel Matthew Boynton, late Governor of Scarborough, Sir
John Morley, and Collonell Leveson late Governor of Dudly castle shall be
proscribed and banished as Enemies and Traitors to the Commonwealth, etc.

Resolved, etc. That all other Delinquents, members of this Commonwealth, (not
comprehended in the former exceptions) shall be admitted to compound, (except
Papists in Arms, for whose Compositions rules are not yet agreed upon.)

Resolved, etc. That the time for the coming in of all Delinquents within the
Land, whose habitations are within 80 miles of London, and for the filing of
their Petitions and particulars shall be before the twentyeth day of April
next; And for all others residing at a further distance before the third day of
May.

Resolved, etc. That the times for perfecting the Compositions of such
Delinquents, that is to say, for submitting to their Fines, and paying one
moiety, and securing the remainder at three months day; shall be six weeks from
the respective days before limited for filing their Petitions and Particulars.

Resolved, etc, That the time for the coming in of Delinquents not excepted,
and now beyond Seas, and out of this Land, shall be the first of June next, for
the filing of their Petitions and Particulars, and six weeks after for the
perfecting of their Compositions, as is before expressed.

Resolved, etc. That the Rents and profits of all sequestered Estates, (except
the persons before excepted) growing due at our Lady day next shall be stayed
and detained in the Tennants hands, until the first day of June next.

Resolved etc. That the Estates of all such persons who shall neglect to render
themselves, and submit to their compositions at the respective times before
limited shall be confiscate and converted to the use of the Commonwealth, and
no further allowance shall be thenceforth made out of the same to the wife or
children of any such Delinquent.

Resolved, etc. That Delinquents who were formerly excepted from Pardon by
their particular names or Titles, who have not been formerly but now are
admitted to Composition, except such as have already compounded) shall pay one
full moiety of the true value of their Estates.

Die Mercurii, 21. Martii, 1648.
Resolved, etc. That all such Delinquents as have bin Members of either House
of Parliament, and all Judges, Officers toward the Law, common or civil, and
all Sergeants, Counselors, and Attourneys, Doctors, Advocates, Proctors of the
Law, common or civil, and all Bishops, Clergy men, Masters, and Fellows of any
College or Hall, in either of the Universities or elsewhere, And all Masters
of Schools or Hospitalls, and also Humphry Bennet, Esquire Sir Edward Foord, Sir
George Vaughan, and all other the persons named in the fourth Qualification of
the Propositions sent to Hampton Court, to pay one third (except such of the
said Persons as were included in any Articles whereof they have the benefit
shall pay one full third part of the true value of their Estates.

Resolved, etc. That all other persons Delinquents (not included in any the
former Qualifications) shall pay one full sixth part of the true value of their
Estates.

Resolved, etc. That if any person not yet sequestered who conceives or doubts
himself to be liable to Sequestration for any thing said or done in relation to
the War, and was not publicly and personally engaged in the latter War, shall
come in and discover his case to the Commissioners for Compositions before the
first day of July, 1649. (being not before such discovery, judicially impeached
and discovered for the same by any other) then such person (if his case so
discovered shall be adjudged liable to Sequestration) shall be admitted to
compound, and discharged of his delinquency, paying one years value for Land,
and a twentieth part for his personal Estate. But in case any such Delinquent
be first judicially impeached and discovered by another, or shall not be
discovered by himself before the said first day of July, 1649. Then he shall
not be admitted to Compound at any lower rate then is appointed for the
Qualification under which he falls.

Resol. etc. That no promissary oath shall be imposed upon Compounders as a
condition without which they may not compound.

Resolved, etc. That all persons who have formerly Compounded and have
concealed or under valued any part of their Estates, and shall themselves
discover it before the first day of June next, shall be admitted to Compound
for the same, at the same rate for which they did Compound for the other part
of their Estates. But if any such concealment or under value shall be hereafter
discovered by any other person, before the Delinquent himself discover the
same, and shall not be compounded for (within the times herein before limited)
according to the rates heretofore imposed by order of Parliament upon such
discoveries, that then such Estate which is concealed, or so much as appears to
be above the value Compounded for, shall be forfeit to the Commonwealth.

Resolved etc. That all such persons as have been engaged in the latter War,
and not in any former engagement against the Parliament, shall pay one sixth
part of the true value of their Estates (except such as are included in any
particular qualification before mentioned, who are to pay according to the
several rates in those qualifications.)

Resolved etc. That all such persons as have been engaged in the latter War
against the Parliament, and have formerly compounded, and have not paid their
whole Fines, shall make good the remainder of their Fines according to their
agreement.

Resolved etc. That all such persons as have been engaged in the latter War
against the Parliament, and have formerly compounded, shall pay one full sixth
part of their Estates over and above their former Fines.

Resolved etc. That all such delinquents as shall perfect their Compositions by
the respective days herein before limited, whose sequestrations have
continued upon their Estates to this day, shall be exempted from paying any
fifth and twentieth part.

Die Mercurii 28. Martii, 1649.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that the Resolutions of the
House touching Delinquents and their Compositions, be forthwith printed and
published.

Hen. Scobell Cler. Parliament.

London, Printed by R. Cotes. 1649.


