After debate about the Printing and Publishing of the Orders of the 16th of
January last, which follows in these words, Viz.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the High
Court of Parliament: That the Divine Service be performed, as it is appointed
by the Acts of Parliament of this Realm. And that all such as shall disturb
that wholesome Order, shall be SEVERELY punished according to Law. And the
Parsons, Viccars, and Curats, in their several Parishes, shall forbear to
introduce any Rites or Ceremonies that may give offense, otherwise then those
which are established by the Laws of the Land.

9o September 1641.
Resolved upon the Question, That the Order of the 16. January, 1640. shall be
Printed and published.

Lords assenting,
Bishop of Lincoln. Lord Mowbery. L. Cleveland. L. Dunsmore. L. Dover. L.
Denby. L. Portland. L. Carnarvan. L. Coventree. L. Newarke.
Lords disassenting,
Lord Keeper. L. Privy Seal. L. Bedford. L. Mandavil. L. Newport: L. Whorton.
L. Clare. L. Hunsdon.
It being put to the Question, whether the Lords would Order that it should be
voated that the said Order of the 16th of January should be Printed and
published, before a Conference desired with the House of Commons concernit. We
whose Names are underwritten did disassent; and having before the putting of the
Question demanded our right of Protestation, did accordingly make our
Protestation: That We held it fit and necessary to have the consent of the
House of Commous in those things which concern so nearly the quiet and
Government of the Church: And therefore we desired to have a Conference with the
House of Commons before any Conclusive Order were Printed or published herein;
Especially the House of Commons having but lately brought to us, (and desired
the consent of our House unto) certain Voates of theirs against diverse
Innovations, in, or about the Worship of God, lately practiced in this
Kingdom, without Warrant of Law. And therefore to acquit our selves of the
dangers and Inconveniences that might arise by the Printing and publishing of
the said Order of the 16th of January, as binding to the whole Kingdom,
without desiring the consent of the House of Commons, We did protest our
disassents to this Voate: And do thus enter it as aforesaid.

Lord Privy Seal. L. Bedford. L. Warwick. L. Newport. L. Clare. L. Hunsdon.
L. Mandavill. L. Whorton.



