The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
Parliament Assembled, Presented to HIS MAJESTY.

AND His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS ANSWER THEREUNTO.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased;
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1697.

Die Sabbati 19o. Feb. 1697.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Right Honorable the Lord Chancellor of England do give Order, that
the Address of this House, and His Majesty's most Gracious Answer thereunto, be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
PARLIAMENT Assembled.
Die Mercurii 16o. Feb. 1697.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament Assembled, having taken into Our Consideration the great
Interruption that has happened to the Trade of this Nation, during the late
Long and Expensive War, whereby the Manufactures of this Kingdom have greatly
Suffered for want of the usual Exportation of the same; Do most humbly Beseech
Your Majesty, for the future Encouragement of the Growth of the Commodities of
this Kingdom, and the Manufactures thereof, That You would be Graciously
Pleased, by Your Own Royal Example, Effectually to Encourage the Use and
Wearing of all Sorts of Furniture, or Wearing Clothes that are of the Growth of
this Kingdom, or Manufactured here, and to Discountenance all Persons
whatsoever, who shall Wear or Use any Manufactures of Foreign Countries, as a
Matter of great Consequence to the Good of this Kingdom, and absolutely
Necessary to the Support and Livelihood of great Numbers of Your Majesty's
Industrious and Loyal Subjects.

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Address.
THat He Himself would give the Example to His Subjects, and would Endeavor to
make it Effectually followed.

FINIS.

