Die Mercurii 8o September. 1641.
WHereas diverse Innovations in or about the worship of God, have been lately
practiced in this Kingdom, by injoyning some things, and prohibiting others
without warrant of Law, to the great grievance and discontent of his Majesty's
Subjects. For the suppression of such Innovations, and for preservation of the
public Peace, It is this day Ordered by the Commons in Parliament assembled,
That the Churchwardens of every Parish Church and Chapel respectively, do
forthwith remove the Communion Table from the East end of the Church, Chapel,
or Chancell, into some other convenient place, and that they take away the
Railes, and level the Chancels, as heretofore they were, before the late
Innovations.

That all Crucifixes, scandalous Pictures of any one or more persons of the
Trinity, and all Images of the Virgin Mary shall be taken away and abolished,
and that all Tapers, Candlesticks, and Basins, be removed from the Communion
Table.

That all corporal Bowing at the name (JESUS) or toward the East end of the
Church, Chapel, or Chancell, or toward the Communion Table, be henceforth
forborne: That the orders aforesaid be observed in all the several Cathedral
Churches of this Kingdom, and (...) Churches or Chapels in the two
Universities, or any other part of the Kingdom, and in the Temple Church, and
the Chapels of the other Innes of Court, by the Deans of the said Cathedral
Churches, by the Vice Chancellor of the said Universities, and by the Heads
and Governors of the several Colleges and Halls aforesaid, and by the
Benchers and Readers in the said Innes of Court respectively.

That the Lords Day shall be duly observed and sanctified: All Dancing, or
other Sports, either before or after Divine Service be forborne and restrained;
and that the preaching of Gods word be permitted in the afternoon in the
several Churches and Chapels of this Kingdom, and that Ministers and
Preachers be encouraged thereunto.

That the Vice-Chancellors of the Universities, Heads and Governors of
Colleges, all Parsons, Vicars, and Churchwardens, do make Certificates of the
performance of these Orders: and if the same shall not be observed in any the
places aforementioned, upon complaint thereof made to the two next Justices of
Peace, Major, or head Officers of Cities or Towns Corporate, It is Ordered that
the said Justices, Major, or other head Officer respectively, shall examine the
truth of all such complaints, and certify by whose default the same are
committed, All which Certificates are to be delivered in Parliament before the
thirtieth of October next.

Resolved upon the Question.

That this Order now read shall be an Order of it self without any addition for
the present, and that it shall be Printed and published.

It is further Ordered, That the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of every
Shire, City, and Borough, do take care to publish this Order in their several
Counties, Cities, and Boroughs.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1641.


