SEVERAL ORDERS OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS and COMMITTEE of the NAVY; With the
proceedings thereupon, touching the Discovery and Prevention of TRANSPORTATION
of GOLD and SILVER: With other abuses practiced upon the COIN and BULLION of
the Kingdom.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM BENTLEY: Anno Domini 1648.

Die Mercurii, 1. Sept. 1647.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament assembled, That it be referred to the
Comittee of the Navy, to consider of, and take some effectual course to
prevent the Transportation of Bullion out of the Kingdom: and speedily to
report what they have done herein to the House.

H. ELSYNGE, Cler. Parl. Domm. Comm.

Committee of the Navy 2. September, 1647.
THe Commissioners and Officers of the Customs with Master Watkins the head
Searcher, are desired to consider of some course to be taken to prevent the
Transportation of Bullion out of the Kingdom, according to an Order of the
House of Commons hereunto annexed; and to certify the same to this Committee.

Giles Green.

THe Commissioners and Officers for the Customs, having together with the head
Searcher, in the Port of London, in pursuance of the directions of this
Honorable Committee above mentioned, perused sundry Statutes yet in force,
relating, as well to the restraint of the Exportation of Bullion, as the
Regulation of Merchants Strangers in their way of Trade, do humbly conceive,

1 That if the Satute of 2. Hen. 6. cap. 6. enjoining Merchants Strangers, to
give security in Chancery, not to Transport the Money or Plate of the Realm.
And the Statute of 3. Hen. 7. cap. 8. enjoining them to employ the money they
receive, in the Merchandise of this Kingdom.

2 And that to the Statute of 5. Rich. 2. cap. 2. and 2. Hen. 4. cap. 5. The
Parliament would be pleased, First to declare who shall be reputed Aliens: for
that since the sitting of this Parliament, the Children of Aliens born in this
Kingdom, are reputed Freeborn Subjects, and do enjoy their Privileges
accordingly: which in former times was not allowed till the third descent.
Secondly, To declare by Ordinance that the Estates of him or them that shall
Export Money or Plate, shall be immediately Sequestered.

3 To impose a severe Penalty upon the Master of such Ship or Vessel, upon
which any Money or Plate shall be found above his ordinary charges, he being
privy thereunto.

4 To allow to such as shall discover or find out, any Bullion or Plate,
endeavored to be transported, a greater share and proportion, then by the
Statutes in that case is yet provided.

5 And to settle some way of punishment for such as shall resist, or abuse
Officers sufficiently authorized in their endeavors this way on the States
behalf,

The said Commissioners and Officers, do humbly conceive, That it would be a
good means to deter such, who by all secret means do daily endeavor the
Exportation of the Coin and Bullion of this Kingdom; and much prevent the
Exportation thereof. All which, nevertheless they humbly submit to the wisdom
of this Honorable Committee.

Tho. Dawes Coll. John Hoolloway Comptr. R. Carmarden Super. Vis. Edw. Watkins
Searcher. W. Toomes Super. Vis. Genesis Walter Boothby. Rich. Bateman. Sam. Avery.
Christoph. Pack. Charles Lloyd.


AFter the return of the abovesaid Report of the Commissioners and Officers of
the Customs, Master Watkins was again required by the Committee of the Navy,
to use his best endeavors in the discovery of the abuses aforesaid: who in
order thereunto, did deliver his answer to the same Commit, as follows.

December 3. Anno Dom. 1647.
The humble Answer of Edward Watkins Esquire, head Searcher of the Port of
London, to the demands of the Honorable Committee of the Navy; for the
finding out of such persons, who do and have, against the Known Laws of the
Land Transported Gold and Silver into diverse parts beyond the Seas, and have
melted down the Current Coyns of the Kingdom: and bought Gold and Silver above
the rate of the Mint.

1 THat by his place he has the Moyetie of all Gold and Silver which shall be
seized in manner as before mentioned.

2 That to give a stop to these abuses, and to make a perfect discovery of
those who have offended, there must be Commissions, one or more, (as occasion
shall require) issue out of the Exchequer, granted to such persons who he shall
trust, to examine all such persons who may be suspected to be guilty of such
Misdemeanors, or give any Evidence therein.

3 That in case he may be allowed the Moyetie, and have full power to prosecute
with effect; That then he will be at the charge in carrying on this business
(which will cost thousands of pounds) having power to use his own instruments;
which he is confident will prove so active, as shall satisfy the expectation
of this Honorable Committee, for the hindering of the Transportation of Gold
and Silver: and will bring considerable sums of money to the State.

4 That an Ordinance may be prepared for the enabling of him and his Assigns:
And Henry Cogan Esquire, Comptroler of the Mint, to proceed in this service:
and that provision be made for the allowing them a Moyetie, or half part of all
such sum, or sums of money that shall be received, or recovered by the Fines or
Compositions of the Offenders aforesaid; for the defraying of their charges and
pains.

Edw. Watkins.

Committee of the Navy, 3. December, 1647.
THe Committee having taken this Proposition of Master Watkins into
consideration, together with the annexed Report of the Commissioners and
Officers of the Customs, do think fit to refer the same to the Chief Officers
of the Mint: Who are desired to certify their opinions thereupon to this
Committee.

Giles Green.

The Officers of his Majesty's Mint in the Tower of London, whose names are
here under written, in pursuance of the directions of the Honorable Committee
of the Navy, in relation to their Order dated the 3 of December present, do
humbly conceive, and certify as follows.

THat to prevent great abuses practiced upon the Coin and Bullion of the
Kingdom, which is Transported out of the Kingdom; as also to prevent the
Culling and Melting down the Current Money of the Kingdom: and for the
discovering of such as have offended to be brought to justice, to deter others
from acting the like abuses for the future, do humbly conceive,

That according to the President of the 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12. a Commission be
granted to make inquiry through the Realm, of such as had conveied the moneys
of England out of the Kingdom, and to make inquiry after all such as Melt and
Cull out the heavy Current Money, contrary to the Statute of the 4. Hen. 4.
cap. 10. none to melt the Current Silver Coyns of the Kingdom, upon pain of
forfeiture four times the value.

That 2. Hen. 6. cap. 12. It is ordained, that neither the Master Worker of the
Mint, nor the Changer for the time being, neither sell or cause to be sold, nor
alien to no other use; but apply the same wholly to Coin, according to the
tenure of the Indenture of the Mint, made between the Kings Majesty and the
Master of the Mint: to declare by Ordinance, That what Goldsmiths, or Changer
shall buy Gold or Silver, and convert it to any use to Transport, shall forfeit
the value.

To declare by Ordinance, that according to the 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 19. and
Act touching the Exchange of Gold and Silver. That whosoever gives more for
Gold and Silver then it is or shall be declared, shall suffer imprisonment by
the space of a year, and make Fine at the pleasure of the King. The Mint cannot
be employed, nor the Transporting of Treasure stopped, if some course be not
speedily taken to discover these great abuses. And already, almost all the Gold
is Transported out of the Kingdom; and the Silver follows it apace, as is
prudently insisted upon in the late Petition of the Citizens of London, to both
Houses of Parliament.

We humbly conceive, that the making of this discovery throughout the kingdom,
of such as have, or shall Transport Gold and Silver into parts beyond the Seas,
and of such as have, or shall melt down the Current Gold and Silver Coyns of
the Kingdom, or have, or shall buy Gold and Silver at above the price of the
Mint: the practice of which abuses, if not timely prevented, is likely to bring
speedy destruction to the Trade of this Kingdom: which is Presidented Anno 4.
Rich. 2. cap. 2. when the Kingdom found the same mischief as we now suffer
under, by Transporting of Treasure. And Anno 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 19. by
giving for Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint. As it will be a service
of great importance to the Public affairs, and bring great advantage to the
Trade of this Kingdom; so it will draw with it a very great charge. Which if
Master Watkins will undertake, he will deserve well to be encouraged.
Nevertheless, we humbly submit the premises, to the wisdoms of this Honorable
Committee.

John St John Warden. Robert Harley Master. Henry Cogan Comptr.

December 20. 1647.
Committee of the Navy. 8. Febr. 1647.
WHereas the House of Commons, did by their Order of the 1. of September 1647.
refer unto this Committee, to take some effectual course to prevent the
Exportation of Bullion, and report their proceedings unto the House. Whereupon,
Edward Watkins Esquire, Searcher of the Port of London, presented certain
Propositions unto this Committee, which this Committee have referred, both unto
the Commissioners of the Customs as also unto the Officers of the Mint; whose
respective reports are hereunto annexed. The which the Committee having taken
into consideration, do think sit, and Order, That the said Edward Watkins do
attend Master Solicitour with the said Propositions and other Papers, who is
desired to draw up such an Ordinance as in his judgment he shall see sitting
to be presented unto the House, for the intents and purposes aforesaid.

Samuel Vassal. George Scutt. George Thomson. John Waddon. Giles Green. Edward
Ash.

IN pursuance of this Order, I have been attended by Master Watkins, and have
considered of the Order of the House of Commons of the 1. September last; and
of the Certificates and Papers annexed. And I do conceive Transporters of Coin
and Bullion, and Buyers of Coin at greater rates then for which the same is
allowed to be Current, may be punished by the Statute-Laws now in force, if an
effectual course were taken for their discovery. For which end, if a
Commission be issued out of the Exchequer, directed to fit persons to be
employed in this service; and Examinations and Proofs returned, Informations
may be Exhibited in the said Court for punishing the offenders.

Dated the tenth day of March, Anno Dom. 1647. Oliver St John.



Committee of the Navy and Customs. 28. Martii 1648.
WHereas the House of Commons did by their Order of the 1. September last,
refer it to this Committee to consider of, and to take some effectual course
to prevent the Transportation of Bullion out of the Kingdom. Whereupon this
Committee did refer the same unto the Commissioners and Officers of the
Customs: as also to the Officers of the Mint, who returned their several
Certificates thereupon unto this Committee; which the Committee having taken
into consideration, Did desire the opinion of Master Sollicitour thereupon. Who
has returned his Certificate: That Transportation of Coin and Bullion, and
buying of Coin at greater rates then for which the same is allowed to be
Current, may be punished by the Statute-Laws now in force, if an effectual
course were taken for their discovery. For which end, if a Commission be issued
out of the Exchequer, directed to fit persons to be employed in this service,
and Examinations and Proofs returned; Informations may be Exhibited in the said
Court, for the punishing the offenders. The Committee having taken the whole
premises into debate and consideration, do think fit, and Order, That it be
especially recommended unto the said Master Sollicitour to procure a Commission
to be issued out of the Court of Exchequer, directed unto John St John's, Henry
Cogan, Edward Watkins, Vincent Delabarre Esquires, Thomas Lever, John Bird,
John Bennet, James Hoar, Anthony Keilock, and Francis Smartfoot Gent. and such
others as he shall think sitting, or two or more of them returnable quam Citius
and tandem ad tres. Michls. to take Examination in the City of London,
Counties of Kent and Sussex, concerning the unlawful Exportation of Gold and
Silver in Mass, or Moneys, or Plate out of this Realm to foreign parts; and
concerning the buying of Gold and Silver at higher rates then are allowed at
the Mint, and Melting the Coyns of the Kingdom, and other abuses practiced upon
Coins and Bullion within this Kingdom. And he is desired to move the Barons of
the Exchequer, to grant the said Commissions, and to proceed thereon according
to the Laws.

Samuel Vassal. Squire Bence. Giles Green. Walt. Earl John Roll.


AFter all these serious Debates, Orders, and Certificates in the pursuance of
the Order of Parliament, The Barons of the Exchequer granted out a Commission,
dated 12. February 1647. to the persons before recited, to find out the offenses
before named, in London, Kent, and Sussex.

That which will give dispatch in this business, is,

1 That the said Barons may be desired effectually to proceed against such
persons as either refuse to Appear before the Commissioners upon Subpenas
served on them for such Appearances, (or as when they do appear, refuse to be
examined upon oath) wherein themselves are not concerned, as against persons in
contempt in other cases.

2 That whereas diverse Masters of Ships, Factours, Goldsmiths, and other
persons, are to be Witnesses in the discovery of the Offenders; That such
persons as shall be examined as Witnesses and certified by any two of the
aforesaid Commissioners, whereof Edward Watkins Esquire, to be always one
(shall be discharged only for themselves, and as much as they confess) of all
Fines, Penalties, and Punishments that they are liable unto by the Law, for any
the aforesaid misdemeanors.

3 That the Parliament Men and Committee of the Navy, are daily scandalized in
Pamphlets, for the Transporting of great sums of Money, both Gold and Silver
out of the Realm. (The chief Offenders will be found to be the Merchant
Strangers.) Therefore for the Vindicating of their own Honors, a strict
examination of the offenses aforesaid, ought to be enquired after. Without
which, this scandal will stick on this Parliament and their Members, That they
will not suffer Inquiry of these great abuses, against the Commonwealth to be
made, because themselves are faulty. And how damageable Transporting Treasure
is to the Commonwealth, the Petition of the City of London (the 1. of
December last) to the Parliament, the Certificates of the Officers of the Mint,
and Commissiioners of the Customs before recited, and several Statutes and
Laws in all Ages abundantly declare.

20. June, Anno Dom. 1648.
FINIS.

