A PREAMBLE WITH THE PROTESTATION MADE BY THE whole House of Commons the 3, of
May, 1641* and Assented unto by the Lords of the Upper House the 4* of May.
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House in Parliament,
finding to the Grief of our Hearts, that the Designs of the Priests and
Jesuits, and other Adherents to the Sea of Rome have of late more boldly, and
frequently put in practice, then formerly, to the undermining and d^nger of the
Ruin of the true Reformed Religion, in his Majesty's Dominions established,
and finding also, that there has been, and having cause to suspect there
still are, even during the Sitting in Parliament, Endeavors to subvert the
Fundamental Laws of England, and Ireland, and to introduce the Exercise of an
Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Government; by most pernicious and wicked Counsels,
Practices, Plots, and Conspiracies, and that the long Intermission, and
unhappier breach of Parliaments, has occasioned many illegal Taxations,
whereupon the Subjects have been prosecuted and grieved, and that diverse
Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church, Multitudes
driven out of his Majesty's Dominions, Jealousies raised and Fomented, between
the King and his People, a Popish Army leavyed in Ireland, and two Armies
brought into the Bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of his Majesty's Royal
Person, the Consumption of the Revenue of the Crown, and the Treasure of this
Realm. And lastly, finding the great Causes of Jealousy, endeavors have
been and are used, to bring the English Army into misunderstanding of this
Parliament; thereby to incline that Army by force, to bring to pass, those
wicked Counsels; have therefore thought good to join our selves in a
Declaration of our united affections, and Resolutions, and to make this ensuing
Protestation.

THE PROTESTATION.
I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and potest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my Life, power, and
Estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery, and Popish Innovations within this
Realm, contrary to the same, And to the duty of Allegiance to his Majesty's
Royal Person, Honor, and Estate.

As also the power of Privilege of Parliament, the lawful Rights and
liberties of the Subjects. And every person that makes this Protestation in
whatsoever he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same, and to my power
as far as lawfully I may oppose, I will and by all good ways and means
endeavor to bring to condign punishment all such as shall by force, practice,
Counsel, plots, conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing to the contrary in
this present Protestation contained, and further I shall in all Just, and
Honorable ways, endeavor to preserve the union and peace betwixt the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. And neither for hope, fear, nor
other respects shall relinquish this promise, vow, and Protestation.

FINIS.
Printed* for JOHN ASTON, Anno Dom. 1641.


