A TRUE AND EXACT List of those persons nominated and recommended by the House
of Commons to his MAJESTY, As persons fit to be entrusted with the Militia of
the Kingdom: wherein they desire the Concurrence of the House of Peers.
Feb. 12. 1641.
Published to prevent the printing of false Copies.

Barkeshire -- Earl of Holland. Bedfordshire -- Earl of Bolingbrooke.
Buckinghamshire -- Lord Paget. Cambridge shire and the Isle of Ely -- Lord
North. Cheshire, and the Cou^ty and City of Chester Lord Strange: Cornwall --
Lord Roberts. Cumberland -- Lord Gray of Wark. Derby -- Earl of Rutland.
Devonshire, and of the County and City of Exon -- Earl of Bed. Dorsetshire,
and the County of the Town of Poole -- Earl of Salisbury. For the Isle of
Purbecke Com. Dorset Sir John Banks Knight, Lord chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, and Constable of Corffe Castle. Durham -- Sir Henry Vane the elder.
Essex -- Earl of Warwick Gloucestershire, and of the County and City of
Gloucester -- Lord Chandois. Hampshire, and of the Town and County of
Southampton, and of the Earl of Penbroke. Isle of Wight -- Hertfordshire --
Earl of Salisbury. Herefordshire -- Lord Dacres. Huntingtonshire -- Lord
Mandevile. Kent, and the City and County of Canterbury -- Earl of Leicester.
Com. Lancaster -- Lord Wharton. Leicestor -- Earl of Stamford. Middlesex --
Earl of Holland. Com. Northampton -- Lord Spencer. Nottingham, and of the
Town and County of Nottingham -- Earl of Clare. Northumberland, and of the
Town and County of Newcastle, and of the Town of Barwicke -- Earl of
Northumberland. Norffolke, and of the County and City of Norwich -- Earl of
Warwick. Oxfordshire -- Lord Viscount Say and Seal. Rutland -- Earl of Exon.
Salop -- Lord Littleton, Lo. Keeper of the great Seal of England. Somerset --
Marquis Hortford.
That the Lieutenant of the County of Worcester shall be nominated before
Somerset.

Staffordsh. and of the County of the City of Leichfield -- Earl of Essex.
Suffolk -- Earl of Suffolk. Surrey -- Earl of Nottingham: Sussex -- Earl
of Northumberland. Warwick, and of the County of the City of Coventry. -- Lord
Brook. Westmerland -- Earl of Cumberland. Wiltes -- Earl of Pembroke. Wigorn,
and of the County of the City of Worcester -- Lord Edward Howard of Eserig. For
the County and City of Bristoll -- Master Denzill Hollis. Yorkshire, and of the
County of the City of York, and of the County of the Town of Kingstone on Hul
Earl of Essex. Of the parts of Restaven and Holland, and the County of the
City of Lincoln -- Earl of Lincoln. For the parts of Lindesay, in the County
of Holland -- Lord Willoughby of Parham. Monmouth -- Lord Philip Herbert. Isle
of Anglesey -- Earl of Northumberland. Brecnock -- Lord Philip herbert.
Cardigan -- Earl of Carbery. Carmarthen, and Carmarthen Town, Earl of
Carbery, Carnarvan -- Earl of Pembroke. Denbigh -- Lord Fielding. Flintshire
-- Lord Fielding. Clamorgan -- Lord Philip Herbert. Montgomery -- Earl of
Essex. Merioneth -- Earl of Pembroke. Pembroke, and the Town of Raverford West
-- Earl of Northumberland. Radnor -- Lord Littleton, Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England.
That for the levying, ordering, and exercising the Militia of the City of
London, power is given unto Sir John Gaire, Sir Jacob Garret, Knights and
Aldermen, Thomas Atkin Alderman, Sir John Wollistone Knight and Alderman, John
Warner Alderman, and John Towse Alderman, Sergeant Major General Skippon, or
any three or more of them, Randolph Manwaring, William Gibs, John Fowke, James
Bunce, Francis Peck, Samuel Warner, James Russell, Nathaniel Wright, William
Barkley, Alexander Norminghton, Stephen Estweek, Owen Row, Citizens of London,
or any six or more of them.

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his Shop next door to
the Kings head in Fleetstreet. 1641.


