The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
Parliament Assembled, Presented to HIS MAJESTY On Monday the Twelfth Day of
February, 1699.

AND His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS ANSWER THEREUNTO.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1699.

Die Lunae 12. Februarii, 1699.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Lord Chancellor of England, do give Order, That the Address of this
House presented to His Majesty, and His Majesty's most Gracious Answer
thereunto, be forthwith Printed and Published.

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
in Parliament Assembled.
Die Sabbathi 10. Februarii, 1699.
WE the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, being according
to our Duty ever Solicitous for the Preservation and Increase of the Trade of
this Kingdom, on which the Support of Your Majesty's Greatness and Honor so
much depends, as well as the Security and Defense of Your People, have been
very Apprehensive, That the Steps lately made toward a Settlement of Your
Subjects of the Kingdom of Scotland at Darien, may tend to the great Prejudice
of this Nation, and possibly to the Disturbance of that Peace and good
Correspondence with the Crown of Spain, which we conceive is very. Advantageous
to us all: We have therefore taken the same into our serious Consideration, as
a Matter of the greatest Importance, and proper to be laid before Your Majesty,
as the Common Father of both Countries. And as we are truly sensible of the
great Losses our Neighbor Kingdom has sustained, both of Men and Treasure, in
their Expeditions to that Place, which we very heartily lament, so we should
not Endeavor, by any Interposition of ours, to Defeat the Hopes they may still
Entertain of Recovering those Losses by their further Engaging in that Design,
But that we judge such a Prosecution on their Parts must end not only in far
greater Disappointments to themselves, but at the same time prove very
Inconvenient to the Trade and Quiet of this Kingdom.

On this Occasion we humbly presume to put Your Majesty in mind of the Address
of both Houses of Parliament, Presented to Your Majesty on the Seventeenth Day
of December, 1695. In the Close of which Address Your Majesty will see the
Unanimous Sense of this Kingdom in relation to any Settlement the Scots might
make in the West Indies, by Virtue of an Act of Parliament past about that time
in the Kingdom of Scotland, which was the Occasion of the said Address.

And we humbly Represent to Your Majesty, That having received Information of
some Orders Your Majesty had sent to the Governors of the Plantations on this
Subject, this House did on the Eighteenth of January last, come to this
Resolution, That Your Majesty's Pleasure Signified to the Governors of the
Plantations, in relation to the Scotch-Settlement at Darien, was agreeable to
the Address of both Houses of Parliament Presented to Your Majesty on the
Seventeenth of December, 1695.

And on the Eighth Day of this Instant February, this House came to this
further Resolution, That the Settlement of the Scotch-Colony at Darien is
Inconsistent with the good of the Plantation-Trade of this Kingdom.

All which we humbly hope Your Majesty will take into Your Royal Consideration;
and we are Confident that Your Majesty cannot be thought too Partial to the
Address of this House, if Your Majesty shall in the first Place Consider the
Advantage and Good of the Trade of this Kingdom, by the Preservation and
Improvement of which, both these Kingdoms, and all Your other Dominions, must
on all Occasions Principally be Defended.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Address, was to this Effect:
His Majesty having Received a very Dutiful Address from the House of Peers, in
relation to the Endeavors lately used by some of His Majesty's Subjects of the
Kingdom of Scotland, toward making a Settlement at Darien, in which they
humbly Represent to Him their Opinion, That such a Settlement is inconsistent
with the Good of the Plantation-Trade of this Kingdom: Is Pleased to let the
House know, That He will always have a very great Regard to their Opinion; and
to Assure them, That He will never be Wanting by all Proper Means to Promote
the Advantage and Good of the Trade of England. At the same time His Majesty is
Pleased to Declare, That He cannot but have a great Concern and Tenderness for
His Kingdom of Scotland, and a Desire to Advance their Welfare and Prosperity,
and is very sensibly Touched with the Loss His Subjects of that Kingdom have
sustained, by their late unhappy Expeditions in order to a Settlement at
Darien. His Majesty does Apprehend, That Difficulties may too often arise with
respect to the different Interests of Trade between His Two Kingdoms, unless
some way be found out to Unite them more nearly and completely: And therefore
His Majesty takes this Opportunity of putting the House of Peers in mind of
what He Recommended to His Parliament soon after His Accession to the Throne,
That they would consider of a Union between the Two Kingdoms. His Majesty is of
Opinion, That nothing would more contribute to the Security and Happiness of
both Kingdoms; and is inclined to hope, That after they have lived near a
Hundred Years under the same Head, some happy Expedient may be found for making
them one People, in Case a Treaty were set on foot for that purpose; and
therefore He does very earnestly Recommend this Matter to the Consideration of
the House.

FINIS.

