The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
Parliament Assembled, Presented to HIS MAJESTY On Tuesday the Third Day of
January, School.

AND His Majesty's MOST GRACIOUS ANSEWR THEREUNTO.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceased;
Printers to the King's most Excellent Majesty. School.

Die Mercurii 4o. Januarii, School.
IT is Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled,
That the Lord Chancellor do give Order, that the Address of this House
presented to His Majesty yesterday, and His most Gracious Answer thereunto, be
forthwith Printed and Published.

Matthew. Johnson, Cleric' Parliamentor'

The Humble ADDRESS Of the Right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal In
PARLIAMENT Assembled.
Die Jovis 22o. Decembris, School.
WE Your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal in Parliament Assembled, being highly Sensible of Your Majesty's great
Grace and Goodness toward Your People, Expressed upon so many Occasions, and
particularly in Your Majesty's most Gracious Speech to both Houses, at the
Opening of this Parliament, Do beg Leave, humbly to Assure Your Majesty, That
as we shall always Retain a lively Impression of those great and continued
Obligations, which Your Majesty has laid upon this Nation to all Posterity; so
it shall be upon every Occasion the Perpetual Care and Study of this House,
with the most zealous Duty, and the most grateful Affections imaginable, to
make Your Majesty all Suitable Returns within their Power.

And at this time particularly, we beg Leave further to Assure Your Majesty,
That we shall not fail to use our most diligent Endeavors, for the Attaining
of those great and good Ends, which Your Majesty has been Graciously Pleased
to Recommend to Your Parliament.

His Majesty's most Gracious Answer to the Address was to this Effect:
MY Lords, I take this Address very Kindly, and give you My Hearty Thanks. The
House may always Depend upon My Kindness, as I do on this Assurance of their
Duty to Me, and their Zeal for the Public Good.

FINIS.

