THE QUESTIONS propounded to MR. HERBERT The Kings Attorney General, By the
House of Commons in the presence of both Houses of Parliament, on Friday the
fourteenth of January 1641.

Together with the Answer of the said Mr. Herbert to the said Questions,
concerning the Impeachment of the Lord Kimbolton, and Mr. Hollis, etc. Members
of the House of Commons.

Also the Articles against the Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, and the rest.

And lastly, his Majesty's two Messages to the Houses of Parliament, to repair
the late Breaches of Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, Anno 1642.

THE QVESTIONS Propounded to Mr. Attorney General, By the House of COMMONS,
And his Answer thereunto.
Question 1. Whether did you contrive, frame, or advise the said Articles, or
any of them?

Answer.

Question 2. Whether do you know the truth of the said Articles, or any of
them in your own knowledge, or by information?

Answer.

Question 3. Whether will you undertake to make good the said Articles, or any
of them when you shall be thereunto called by due course of Law?

Answer.

Question 4. From whom received you these Articles, and by whose direction and
advice did you exhibit them?

Answer.

Question 5. Wether had you any testimony or proof of these Articles before
the exhibiting of them?

Answer.

To which Answer Mr. Sergeant Wild replied, the House of Commons desires you
to answer whether you had any proof or testimony, or any information of any
proof of these Articles, they in no kind desire to know what you had. To this
Mr. Attorney answered, there is nothing in this world that I shall not be most
ready to, but this I desire time to consider of, in regard of a trust between
a Master and Servant.

Die Sab. 15. Jan. 1641.
IT is resolved by the house of Commons, since the said Answer of Mr Attorney
General, Thar he has broken the privilege of Parliament, in preferring the
said Articles, and that the same is illegal, and he criminous for so doing;
and that a charge be sent up to the Lords in the name of the House of Commons,
against Mr. Attorney to have satisfaction, for this great scandal and injury
to the Members thereof, unless by Thursday next he bring in his proof, and
make good (if he can) the said Articles against the said persons, crany of them.

Articles of High Treason, and other Misdemeanors against the Lord Kymbolton,
Mr. Pym, John Hampden, Denzill Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig, and William
Strowde, being all M^mbers of the House of COMMONS.
I. THat they have traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws
and Government of this Kingdom, and deprive the King of his Legal power, and
to place on Subjects an Arbitrary and tyrannical power. II. That they have
endeavored by many foul aspersions upon his Majesty and his Government, to
alienate the affections of his people, and to make his Majesty odious to them.
III. That they have endeavored to draw his Majesty's late Army to disobedience
to his Majesty's command, and to side with them in their Traiterous design.
IV. That they have Traitorously invited and encouraged a foreign power to
invade his Majesty's Kingdom of England. V. That they have Traitorously
endeavored to Subvert the very Rights and Beings of Parliaments. VI. That for
the completing of their traiterous designs, they have endeavored as far as
in them lay, by force, and terror, to compel the Parliament to join with them
in their Traiterous designs, and to that end, have actually raised, and
countenanced Tumults against the King and Parliament. VII. That they have
traitorously conspired to Leavy, and actually have Leavied war against the
King.
The Kings Message to both Houses.
January 12. 1641.
HIs Majesty taking notice that some conceive it disputable whether His
proceedings against my Lord Kymbolton, Master Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerige,
Master Pym, Master Hampden, and Master Strode, be legal and agreeable to the
Privileges of Parliament, and being very desirous to give satisfaction to all
men in all matters that may seem to have relation to Privilege, is pleased to
wave His former Proceedings: and all doubts by this means being settled, when
the minds of men are composed, His Majesty will proceed thereupon in an
unquestionable way: And assures His Parliament, that upon all occasions He will
be as careful of their Privileges, as of his Life or his Crown.

His Majesty's Profession and Addition to His last Message to the Parliament
Ian. 14. 1641.
HIs Majesty being no less tender of the Privileges of Parliament, and
thinking himself no less concerned, that they be not broken, and that they
be asserted and vindicated whenever they are so, than the Parliament it
self, Has thought fit to add to His last Message, this Profession, That in
all His Proceedings against the Lord Kymbolton, Master Hollis, Sir Arthur
Haslerig, Master Pym, Master Hampden, and Master Strode, He had never the least
Intention of violating the least Privilege of Parliament; And in case any
doubt of breach of Privilege remain, will be willing to clear that, and
assert those, by any reasonable way that His Parliament shall advise him to.
Upon confidence of which, He no way doubts His Parliament will forthwith lay by
all Jealousies, and apply themselves to the Public and pressing Affairs, and
especial to those of Ireland, wherein the good of this Kingdom, and the true
Religion (which shall ever be His Majesty's first care) are so highly and so
nearly concerned: And His Majesty assures himself, that His care of their
Privileges will increase their tenderness of His lawful Prerogative, which
are so necessary to the mutual defense of each other; and both which will be
the foundation of a perpetual perfect Intelligence between His Majesty and
Parliaments, and of the happiness and prosperity of his People.

FINIS.

