ENGLANDS REDEMPTION: OR, A Path Way TO PEACE: Plainly Demonstrating, That we
shall never have any settled State, UNTIL CHARLES II. (Whose Right it is) enjoy
the Crown.

Eccles. 10.17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the Son of Nobles.

Lament. 5.8. Servants have ruled over us, and there is none that does deliver
us out of their hands.

March.26. LONDON: Printed for Charles King. 1660.

ENGLANDS REDEMPTION OR, PATHWAY TO PEACE.
AS a distracted Ship (whose Pilot the raging violence of a tempestuous storm,
has cast down headlong from the Stern) staggereth to and fro amongst the
unquiet Waves of the rough Ocean; some^imes clashing against the proud surly
Rocks, and sometimes reeling up and down the smoother waters; now threatening
present shipwreck and destruction, by and by promising a seeming safety, and
secure arrival, yet never settled fast, nor absolutely tending to the quiet and
desired Haven: So the vexed Government of frantic England, ever since the
furious madness of a few turbulent Spirits beheaded our King and Kingdom, threw
down Charles the Martyr (our only lawful Governor) from the Stern of
Government, and took it into their unskilful and unlawful hands, it has been
tossed up and down, sometimes falling amongst the lawless Soldiers, as a Lamb
among Wolves, or as a Glass upon Stones) yet in all our Revolutions, (although
many gaps have been laid open) the Government has not steered its course
directly to Charles the second, its only right and quiet Haven.

O therefore let our di^^racted England be a Warning-Piece to all Nations, that
they never attempt to try and judge their King, for what cause soever; and let
all Traitors and Tyrants in the world learn by the example of our English
Rebels, that their prosperity and dominion (though it seems never so
perpetual) is but momentany, and as the w^nd which no man sees; for who so
much applauded and looked upon, as the Long Parliament, when they first took
upon them to correct and question the King? and who now so ridiculous and
scorned? They were then admired by the people as the Patrons, Vindicators,
Redeemers, and Keepers of their Liberty: Nay, I may most truly say, that the
people did Worship and Adore them, more than they did God* But now they aae
become a byword, the scorn and derision both of men, women and children* and
hooted at by every one, as the greatest and most shameful laughing stock in the
world.

O abominable! that Englishmen should degenerate into such impudence: for this
is the truth of their Case; Might they but still have the Kings and Bishops
Lands, which they have gotten by their horrible Treason and Rebellions, and be
sure to live secure from the punishment which the Law of the Land would inflict
upon them, they would easily confess, (if the Devil have not made them
Contradictors of all manner of truth) That Monarchy is the best of all
Governments, especially for the English Nation, where (as one may say) it grew
by Nature, until these Destroyers of the Laws of God, Nature, and the Realm,
rooted it up, and endeavored to plant their fancied Commonwealth in its room,
which will grow there, when Plums grow in the Sky, or when Rocks grow in the
Air, not before; as you may see by the small Root it has taken, ever since the
Reign of Charles the Martyr: Read his incomparable heavenly Book, which will
make thee weep for our loss, but rejoice and admire at his piety.

As for our rising Sun, Charles the second, though hitherto obscured by the
foggy Mists of Treason and Rebellion in his own Kingdoms, yet do the rays of
his Sacred Majesty shine throughout the world beside, and his Renown ecchoeth
in every part of the Earth, to the admiration of Foraign Kingdoms, and to the
envy and hatred of the Rebels in his own: yet cannot their malice but marvel at
the Virtues and Patience of their King, whom they so much wrong; and it grieves
them to see that Royal Progeny (whose ruin they so greedily hunt after)
flourish with such glorious splendour amongst the Kings and Princes of the
Earth, growing in favor wit^ God and man, whilst they (odious to all but
themselves) by their Tyranny and Rebellion, incur the displeas^re both of
Heaven and Earth, and become a ridiculous Rump, the object of the S^orn and
Derision both of old and young, rich and poor: And had not these infatuated
Rebels brazen faces to deny what their own Consciences tells them is true,
they would presently Declare, That the only way to settle our Distractions,
and restore our Nation to its pristine Happiness and Glory, were to call in the
King, and re-establish him in his own, which they unjustly pocket from him: for
so long as there is one of the Race of the Stuarts (which God long preserve)
and any Foraign King or people remain alive, we must never look for peace or
plenty, but (as public Thieves) always live in a posture of War, and ever
expect Foraign Nations to come in, and swallow us up, who account it (as indeed
it is) the greatest piece of Justice under the Sun, to revenge (with our
Bloods, and utter Destruction) the bloody Murder of Charles the first, and the
unnatural Banishment of Charles the second, our only lawful Sovereign.

Therefore let the cries of the People come unto thee, O God; and restore our
gracious King Charles the second to his Hereditary Crown, whose Youth thou have
seasoned with the Afflictions of King David; and clouded the Morning of his and
our happiness, with the Misery of an unchristian Exile, which has made him
the fitter for his Throne, and thy Mercy.

Restore our Ancient Liturgy, and our Lords Spiritual and Temporal, to their
undoubted rights and Privileges in Parliament: Restore the Commons to their
right Wits, and learn them to know, That the Head is above the Feet: So that
our King only, with the Assent of the Lo^ds and Commons, may make, and give us
Laws, as it was in the beginning: Until which time I will put down my Sails,
and keep close under the Haven, being sure to have nothing else but Tempests
and Storms, and no clear settled Weather, until then, either in Church or
Commonwealth: Let our Republicans boast of their Free State, or of what else
they please; for a bone out of joint, will never be settled right, but in its
proper place.

On the late Miraculous Revolutions in England.
I.
THree Kingdoms, like one Ship, a long time lay
Black Tempest-proof, upon a troubled Sea,
Bandy'd from Wave to Wave, from Rock to Sand,
A prey to Pirates from a Foraign Land.
II.
Exposed to all the Injuries of Fate,
All the reproaches of a Bedlam State:
The brave Sails torn, the Mainmast cut in sunder;
Destruction from above, and ruin under.
III.
Once the base rout of Sailors tried to steer
The giddy vessel: but thence could appear
Nothing but mad Confusion: Then came one,
He sat at Helm, and his Dominion
IV.
Frighted the blustering Billows for a while,
And made their Fury counterfeit a Smile.
Then for a time, the Bottom seemed to play
Ith'wonted Channel, and the beaten way:
V.
Yet floated still. The Rabble snatched again
Its Management: but all (alas) in vain;
No Anchor fixed, no wished Shore appears,
No Haven after these distracted years.
VI.
But when the Lawful Pilot shall direct
Our wavering course (and heaven shall him protect)
The Storms shall laugh, the Winds rejoice thereat,
And then our Ark shall find an Arrarat.
FINIS.

