ORDER'S AND INSTRVCTIONS FROM The Lords of the Kings Majesty's Privy
Council; for the Commissioners appointed to Treat for the surrender of the
City of OXFORD, to the Parliament.

WITH Several Letters and Papers that passed between Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and
Sir THOMAS GLEMHAM, about the same.

Being examined by the original Papers; these are appointed to be printed, and
are published according to Order of Parliament.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Walbancke, May 23. 1646.

The Copies of the Papers of the Treaty at Marston, concerning Oxford.
The Summons sent into Oxford.
SIR,
I do by these summon you to deliver up the City of Oxford into my hands, for
the use of the Parliament. I very much desire the preservation of that place
(so famous for Learning) from ruin, which inevitably is like to fall upon it,
except you concur. You may have honorable terms for your self, and all
within that Garrison, if you seasonably accept thereof. I desire the Answer this
day, and remain

Your Servant, THO: FAIRFAX.
May 11. 1646.
The Governors Answer.
SIR,
I have received your Letter, summoning me to surrender the City, which was
given me in trust for His Majesty's use; but in respect there are many persons
of great eminency, I must desire you to receive for answer, a request; That you
will be pleased to send a safe-condvct for Sir John Mounson and Mr. Philip
Warwick to repair unto you, at such a place and time as you shall appoint, by
whom you shall understand what for present is desired. I remain,

Your humble Servant, THO: GLEMHAM.

On Friday the 15. of May, 1646. Sir Thomas Glenham (by the directions of the
Lords and others of His Majesty's Privie-Councell now in Oxford) sent a Letter
out to his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, certifying his consent to treat for
the delivering up of Oxford to the Parliament.

For Sir Tho. Fairfax General of the Parliaments. Army.
SIR,
IT is here resolved to treat with you, or with whom you shall appoint for a
fair, peaceable, and honorable Accommodation: if therefore you shall be
pleased to send a safe Conduct for such persons as shall be named for such
Commissioners, and appoint the place, the names shall be sent you to morrow, so
as the Treaty may begin on Monday next, Sir,

Your Servant. Tho. Glemhan.
Oxford May 15. 1646.
To this Letter from Sir Thomas Glemhan, His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax; (by
the advice of a Council of war) returned Answer the same day in to Oxford.

For Sir Thomas Glemham Knight, Governor of Oxford.
SIR,
I Have now received your Answer to my Summons, and think Mr. Crookes house in
Marston will be a convenient place for the Commissioners entrusted on both
sides to treat in: I am contented that the Treaty begin on Monday morning next
by nine of the Clock if you please to send me the names of your Commissioners,
and their Qualities, I shall send you a safe conduct for them, together with
the names and Qualities of my own Commissioners, I remain, Your Servant.

THO: FAIRFAX.
May 15. 1646.
This Letter being delivered to Sir Thomas Glemhan Governor of Oxford, he
acquainted the Lords therewith, who sat in Council to debate the same, all day
on Saturday the 16. of May 1646, and many great debates were amongst them, some
desiring that the Treaty might be delayed as long as could be; others fearing
that might be of ill consequence; rather thinking the present opportunity best;
but many pressed to have the King sent to before any thing was concluded; but
the next day viz. Sunday May 17. Sir Thomas Glemham returned Answer to Sir
Thomas Fairfax.

For Sir Tho. Fairfax General of the Parliaments. Army.
SIR,
THe place and time mentioned in your Letter for the Treaty, is accepted, and
herewithall I send you a List of the names and quality of those who are deputed
to Treat with such as you shall appoint, and according you may be pleased to
send the safe Conduct desired, together with the names and quality of your
Commissioners, Your Servant,

Tho. Glemham,
Oxford May 17. 1646.
Commissioners names for the City of. Oxford.
Sir John Mounson Knight. and Baronet. Sir John Heydon. Sir Thomas Gardener. Sir
Geo. Benyon. Sir. Richard Willis. Sir Stephen Hawkins. Coll. Gosnold. John
Dutton. Doctor Zouch. Tho. Chicheley Esquire. Colonel Tillyer. Jeffery Palmer.
Philip Warwick. Capt. Robert. Meade.
The Generals Excellency having received this Letter and List from Oxford did
immediately call a Council of War the same day to consider what
Commissioners to choose for the Parliament, who rather would have had a fewer
number of Commissioners, that so the Treaty might be the shorter, and nominated
only 10. whose names His Excellency sent into Oxford.

Commissioners names for the Parliament.
Lieutenant Gen Hammond. Commissary Genesis Ireton. Colonel Rich. Colonel
Harley. Colonel. Lambert. Major Desborough. Mr. Herbert. Major Harrison.
Scoutmaster Genesis Watson. Mr. Waller.
The Lords in Oxford would not by any means consent to Treat by less then
the former number, and consulted about sending of a Letter to Sir Thomas
Fairfax about it, and accordingly, on Monday the 18. of May 1646. sent out this
Letter to His Excellency.

For Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Parliaments Army.
SIR,
BY reason the Names of your Commissioners are not sent, I desire your excuse
of not sending our Commissioners this morning, and shall expect the complete
numbers from you by three a clock, and at four our Commissioners shall be with
you.

Sir, Your Servant; THO: GLEMHAM.

The Lords also desiring that a Secretary might be present at the Treaty from
Oxford, both for to take account of such passages as happened in the Treaty, and
from the Commissioners to give an account to the Lords, as also to acquaint the
Commissioners with the minds of the Lords from time to time; concluded that a
Letter should be sent to Sir Thomas Fairfax, to grant a safe conduct for Mr.
Davison for that purpose.

For Sir Thomas Fairfax, General of the Parliaments Army.
SIR,
IT has been the use of other Treaties, that a Secretary of either party
should be present at the Treaty, for the better expediting the business
thereof: I desire therefore your Pass and Safe Conduct for my Secretary (whose
name is Davison) to be present there, and that he may have liberty at any time,
with a Trumpet to pass to, and from Marston, during this Treaty, as occasion
shall require.

Sir, Your humble Servant; THO: GLEMHAM.
Oxon May 18. 1646.
The Oxford Lords also consulted about Instructions to be drawn up for their
Commissioners to treat by.

The Instructions for the Oxford Commissioners.
THe Lords and others of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Sir
Thomas Glemham Knight, Governor of the Garrison of Oxon; do hereby require and
authorize you Sir Thomas Gardner Knight His Majesty's Solicitor, Sir John
Mounson Knight and Baronet, Sir John Heyden Knight, Sir Richard Willis Knight
and Baronet, Sir George Binion Knight, Sir Stephen Hawkins Knight, Colonel
Gosnold, Jeffery Palmor, Philip Warwick Esquire, Captain Robert Meade, or any
two or more of you, to repair to the Village of Marston, in this County of
Oxford, this present Monday the 18. of May, and there to meet and treat for us
and in our Names, with Sir Thomas Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces now
before Oxford, or with such persons as he shall appoint, upon his Summons for
the surrender of this Garrison of Oxon, and concerning the rendering thereof,
upon a fair Accommodation, with the safety of the University and City of Oxon,
and all that are in the same: And to this end, you are required and authorized
to compound and deliver such Articles and demands, as now are, or hereafter
shall be given unto you, and debate and treat upon the same, for obtaining a
full consent thereunto, and establishment thereof,: And further, you are to
continue the said Treaty and debate, from time to time upon such further
directions and instructions, as shall be thought sitting upon the several
reports that you shall make unto us, and your proceedings and Progress of the
said Treaty.

Richard Lane Custos sig. Cottington. Hartford. Dorset. Chichester.
Southampton. Seymor. E. Nicholas. Thomas Glemham, Governor.


Sir Thomas Fairfax excepted against Sir George Binion, and so they were to
treat 13. on a side; and his Excellency sent a Letter to Sir Thomas Glemham as
follows.

SIR,
I Have sent you the Names of the rest of my Commissioners, and a Safe Conduct
for Mr. Davison your Secretary, and have given power to my Commissioners to
grant him a Pass, with a Trumpet to go as often as occasion shall be, betwixt
Oxford and Marston, during the Treaty my Commissioners shall be ready at the
power appointed in the afternoon: I remain,

Your Servant. THOMAS FAIRFAX.
May 18. 1646.
The Commssioners added. Colonel Boulstred. John Mills Esquire. Judge Advocate.
Mr. Hales.


The Copy of a Letter from the Generals head quarters at Haddington.
SIR,
THe Commissioners met at Marston Monday May the 18. 1646. to treat, and made
an entrance; but it was late that afternoon before they met, so that much was
not done, and yesterday they came to treat; I have sent you here enclosed, the
Copyes of several papers concerning the Treaty; there is such lumbering at
Oxford that their own Commissioners know not how to please all, and you may see
by their own instructions how they are bound up, that they can not work on
their own grounds neither, they are to meet us again this day, but God knows
when we shall have Oxford by Treaty if they come on no better then hitherto
they have seemed; but however the General goes on to be in a readiness to
take it another way; for we do not desire to drall here but do the work we are
sent about, Sir I am

Your Servant N. T.
Marston the 20. of May 1646.
FINIS

