ENGLAND AND SCOTLANDS COVENANT With their God;

VIZ.

In The Protestation, In The Vow and Covenant, In The League and Covenant for
Reformation and preservation of Religion, the Honor and Happiness of the
King, and the Peace and safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and
Ireland.
ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, that these Covenants be printed and
published.

Printed for Edw. Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop in the middle
Temple. 1643

Dei Mercurii 5. Maii 1641.
IT is this day Ordered by the House of Commons now assembled in Parliament,
That the Preamble, together with the Protestation which the Members of this
House made the third day of May, shall be forthwith Printed, and the Copies
Printed brought to the Clerk of the said House to attest under his hand, to the
end that the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses may send them down to the
Sheriffs and Justices of Peace of the several Shires, and to the Citizens and
Burgesses of the several Cities, Boroughes and Cinque Ports respectively. And
the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are to intimate unto the Shires, Cities,
Boroughs and Cinque Ports, with that willingness all the members of this House
made this Protestation: And further to signify, that as they justify the
taking of it in themselves, so they cannot but approve it in all such as shall
take it.

WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in the Commons House of Parliament,
finding to the great grief of our hearts that the designs of the Priests and
Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome, have of late been more boldly
and frequently put in practice then formerly, to the undermining and danger of
the ruin of the true reformed Protestant Religion in his Majesty's Dominions
established: And finding also that there have been, and having just cause to
suspect that there still are, even during the sitting in Parliament, endeavors
to subvert the fundamental Laws of England and Ireland, and to introduce the
exercise of an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government, by most pernicious and
wicked Counsels, Practices, Plots and Conspiracies: And that the long
inter^ission, and unhappy breach of Parliam^ents, has occasioned many i^le all
Taxations, whereupon the Subject has been prosecuted and grieved. And that
diverse Innovations and Superstitions have been brought into the Church,
multitudes driven out of his Majesty's Dominions; jealousies raised and
fomented betwixt the King and his people; a Popish army levied in Ireland, and
two Armies brought into the bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of his
Majesties-Royal Person, the consumption of the Revenues of the Crown and
Treasure of this Kingdom? And lastly finding great cause of jealousy, that
endeavors have been, and are used to bring the English Army into a misunder
standing of this Parliament, thereby to incline that Army, with force to bring
to p^sse those wicked councels, have therefore thought good to join themselves
(...) Declaration of our united Affections and Resolutions, and to make this
ensuing Protestation.

I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, Promise, Vow, and Protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and
estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine, and according to the duty of my Allegiance, His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate; as also the Power and Privileges
of Parliament; The lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and every
person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the some. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punisHment, all such as shall either by Force, Practice, Councels, Plots,
Conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further, that I shall in all just and
Honorable ways endeavor to preserve the Union and Peace between the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for hope, fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow, and Protestation.

WHereas some doubts have been raised by several persons out of this House,
concerning the meaning of these words contained in the Protestation lately made
by the Members of this House, ( viz.) The true reformed Protestant Religion,
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England against all Popery and
Popish innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine; This
House does declare, That by those words, was, and is meant, only the public
Doctrine professed in the said Church, so far as it is opposite to Popery and
Popish Innovations, And that the said words are not to be extended to the
maintaining of any form of Worship, Discipline, or Government, nor of any
Rites or Ceremonies of the said Church of England.

Die Veneris 30. Julii, 1641.
Resolved upon the Question.

THat this House does conceive that the Protestation made by them, is fit to be
taken by every person that is well affected in Religion, and to the good of the
Commonwealth; And therefore does declare, That what person soever shall not
take the Protestation, is unfit to bear Office in the Church or Commonwealth.

The Vow and Covenant appointed by the Lords and Commons assembled in
Parliament, to be taken by every Man, in the Cities of London, Westminster, the
Suburbs and Liberties thereof; and throughout the whole Kingdom.
Whereas the Lords and Commons now assembled in Parliament have declared, That
there has been, and now is a Popish and Traiterous Plot for the subversion of
the true Protestant reformed Religion, and the Liberty of the Subject; And that
in pursuance thereof, a Popish Army has been raised, and now is on foot in
diverse parts of this Kingdom: And have further in a solemn manner Declared,
Vowed, and Covenanted, That in order to the security and preservation of the
true Protestant Religion, and Liberty of the Subject, they will not consent to
the laying down of Arms, so long as the Papists now in open War against the
Parliament, shall by force of Arms be protected from the Justice thereof. And
whereas the Lords and Commons have Declared, that there has been a treacherous
and horrid Design lately discovered, by the great blessing, and special
Providence of God, of diverse persons to join themselves with the Armies raised
by the King, and to destroy the Forces raised by the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, to surprise the Cities of London and Westminster, with the Suburbs,
and by Arms to force the Parliament: And the said Lords and Commons finding by
constant experience, that many ways of force and treachery are continually
attempted, to bring to utter ruin and destruction the Parliament and Kingdom,
and that which is dearest, the true Protestant Religion: and that for the
preventing, and withstanding the same, they have thought fit, That all who are
true hearted, and lovers of their country, should bind themselves each to
other in a sacred Vow and Covenant, in manner and form as follows, and
accordingly:

I A. B. in humility and reverence of the Divine Majesty, declare my hearty
sorrow for my own sins, and the sins of this Nation, which have deserved the
Calamities and Judgments that now lie upon it; And my true intention is, by
Gods grace to endeavor the amendment of my own ways; And that I do abhor and
detest the said wicked and treacherous Design lately discovered; and that I
never gave nor will give my assent to the execution thereof, but will,
according to my power and Vocation, oppose and resist the same, and all other
of the like nature: And in case any other like Design shall hereafter come to
my knowledge, I will make such timely discovery as I shall conceive may best
conduce to the preventing thereof. And whereas I do in my conscience believe,
That the Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament are raised and continued
for their just Defense, and for the Defense of the true Protestant Religion and
Liberties of the Subject, against the Forces raised by the King: I do here in
the presence of Almighty God, Declare, Vow, and Covenant, That I will,
according to my power and vocation, assist the Forces raised and continued by
both Houses of Parliament, against the Forces raised by the King without their
consent; And will likewise assist all other persons that shall take this Oath,
in what they shall do in pursuance thereof; And will not directly or indirectly
adhere unto, nor shall willingly assist the Forces raised by the King without
the consent of both Houses of Parliament. And this V^w and Covenant I make in
the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all hear^s, with a true intention
to perform the same, as I shall answer at the great Day, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed.

COme, let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant, that shall
not he forgotten, Ier. 50. 5. Take away the wicked from before the King, and
his Throne shall be established in righteousness, Prove. 25. 5. And all Judah
rejoiced at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him
with their whole desire, and he was found of them: and the Lord gave them rest
round about, 2 Chronicles. 15. 15.
The excellent Usefulness of this COVENANT.
Union with God, Conformity to God, and Unity of the three Kingdoms are things
most desirable: In the first we are happy: In the second holy: In the third is
strength, peace and safety. These are the kindly fruits of this Covenant, and a
Covenant that brings forth those, how gladly should it be embraced, and how
willingly received? They are lovely Bands that binds us to be happy, holy, and
safe. The heart of man is backsliding, and a Covenant is like a hedge or wall
to stop us from going back: it being a good and ready answer to a tempter or
tentation: How shall I do this, and break my Covenant? Surely we have been too
loose toward God, having almost lost a Religion, too loose in our lives, and
too dis-united among our selves: and well it may be thought that a main end of
this Rod which now lies upon us, is to beat us into this Covenant; that thereby
we may be knit faster to God, to holiness, and each to other by this Band of
Unity. Yet the taking, is not the chief part of a Covenant, but the keeping.
The benefits of a Covenant are then sure and steadfast to us, when we are
steadfast in the Covenant: Now a main cause of unstedfastnesse in the Covenant,
is forgetfulness of it. To prevent this, the Covenant is presented in this
form, that being set up before us, it may be daily seen, and by seeing
remembered, and by remembering performed And withal let us remember this; that
all the ways of God are mercy and truth to them that fear him, and keep his
Covenant. But because no man is strong in his own strength, let us seek
strength of Him who is both our strength and our Redeem, that by Him we may be
enabled to keep our Covenant with him, that so he may delight to dwell with
us, to be called our God, and to call us his people; upon which happy
condition, attend Peace, Prosperity, and all blessings of Heaven and Earth,
temporal and eternal.

WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and
Ireland, by the Providence of God, living under one King, and being of one
Reformed Religion, having before our eyes the glory of God, and the advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the honor and happiness
of the Kings Majesty, and His Posterity, and the true public Liberty, Safety
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included, and
calling to mind the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies, attempts, and
practices of the Enemies of God, against the true Religion, and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption, are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland, are present and public Testimonies; We have now at last, (after
other means of Supplication, Remonstrance, Protestations, and Sufferings) for
the preservation of our selves and our Religion, from utter ruin and
Destruction, according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former
times, and the Example of Gods people in other Nations; after mature
deliberation, resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn
League and Covenant, wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself,
with our hands lifted up to the most high God, do swear:

I. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
we and but Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and the
Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, (that is, Church Government, by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deane, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues, and that the Lord may be one and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

III. We shall with the same sincerity, reallity and constancy, in out
several Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve
the Rights and Privileges of the Parliament, and the Liberties of the
Kingdoms, and to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority,
in the preservation and defense of the true Religion, and Liberties of the
Kingdoms, that the world may bear witness with our consciences of our
loyalty, and that we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's
just Power and Greatness.

IV. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such
as have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or parties amongst the
people, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their
offenses shall require or deserve, or the supreme Iudicatories of both
Kingdoms respectively, or others, having power from them for that effect,
shall judge convenient.

V. And whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between these Kingdoms,
denied in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence, of God,
granted unto us, and has been lately concluded and settled by both
Parliaments, we shall each one of us, according to our place and interest,
endeavor that they may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all
posterity; And that Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in
manner expressed in the present Articles.

VI. We shall also, according to our places and callings, in this common Cause
of Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those
that enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing
thereof, and shall not suffer our selves, directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror, to be divided, and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or give our selves to a detestable indifferency or neutrality in this Cause,
which so much concerns the glory of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and
honor of the King; but shall all the days of our lives, zealously and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed; All which we shall do as in
the sight of God.

And because those Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
God, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof: We profess and declare before God and the world,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially, that we have not as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the purity and power
thereof; and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions, so much abounding amongst us; And our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire and endeavor for our selves and all others under our power and
charge, both in public and in private, in all duties we owe to God and man,
to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, that the Lord may turn away his wrath and heavy indignation, and
establish these Churches and Kingdoms in truth and peace. And this Covenant we
make in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great Day, when the
secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his Holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires and
proceedings with such success, as may be deliverance and safety to his people,
and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the yoke of Antichristian Tyranny; to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

FINIS.

