ENGLANDS DISCOVERER; Or The Levellers Creed.

Wherein is set forth, Their great and unparralell'd Design against the twelve
famods Companies of the City of London, viz.

The Mercers. Grocers. Drapers. Marchant-Taplors Haberdashers. Goldsmiths
Cloth-workers. Fishmongers. Vintners.
And the rest.

And all other Trades, Mysteries, Arts and callings whatsoever, within the
Cities of London, York, Lincoln, Gloucester, Bristoll, Excester, with the rest
of the Market towns, Corporations, and Villages, within the Territories of
England, and Dominiof Wales.

PVblished by special Authority, to undeceive the People, the like being never
heard of in all former Ages.

printer's or publisher's device

June 6 LONDON, Printed for G. Wharton; and are to be sold at the Royal
Exchange in Cornhill. 1649

ENGLANDS Discovererer; Or, the Levellers CREED Wherein is set forth, Their
dangerous and pernicious Stratagems, against the Liberties of the people,
Ministry and Magistracy, and their D^sign to make a universal levelling
throughout the whole Nation.
GReat stones are not laid in the building, without some time and great labor,
because of their weight; but once placed, remain long: Charles King of Naples
was surn^med Cunctator, Delayer, because he stayed till oppor^^^^^^y ^as past;
But Fabius the Shield of Rome, was so calle^ ^^cause he only staid till
opportunity was come. But I shall n^w come to a m^re parti^ular Discovery, viz.
Till I ^^w their Manifestation, I could not well tell, nor hardly gu^sse, what
(for men) in many things they would have the world think them to be. There
(indeed) they profess, that they believe there is one eternal and omnipotent
God, the Author and preserver of all things in the world: and deny to be either
Atheists or Antiscripturists. But what Atheists for advantage and to serve his
own turn. Whether there be not Hypocrifie here in their speech; Let these
things be noted from those called Levellers. 1. It is asserted by them, that
Reason is God, and out of this reason came the whole creation. 2. The
immortality of the soul they flatly deny, and scoff at such people as believe
the souls imortallity. 3. In the Levellers creed, there is no Jesus Christ no
conception, birth, life, death, burial, resurrection, or exaltation of such a
one; no heaven nor hell, no Angel, good not bad; no resurrection of the flesh;
for to take it so in the letter (they say) in a dream of our Preachers. 4. All
that we call the history of the Scripture is an idol for there is no other
Adam, or Christ, Cain or Abel, Abraham, Jsaac, Jacob. Moses, Canaanites,
Amalekites, Philistines: but what is seen and felt within every man. Hence they
say, the public preachers have cheated the whole world, by telling us of a
single man, called Adam, that killed us by eating a single fruit. 5. By their
principles men must leave of all teaching and instructing each other. There is
no use of sermons, Sacraments, or prayer, Preachers are the curse, and the
spreaders of the curse, standing ponds of stinking water; yea the zealous
preachers, are no other then Judas, Traitors, Witches, Sorcerers, Deceivers,
they and the people joining together in public worship is an abomination,
gathering Congregations Church-fellow-ship, and all other outward forms this
(say the Levellers is to betray Christ into the hands of flesh, a ^eceit of the
Devil, the government of the beast, Antichristian captivity, and it is to be
under the the tyrant flesh, a new bondage, a wrapping men in confusion, the
mystery of iniquity, and only to hinder Christ the great Prophet from rising.

It has formerly been held, that religion, and the true worship of God, is
much for the safety and prosperity of a Commonwealth, and men's departure from
the practice thereof and falling to heretical, atheistical, and blasphemous
ways brings Gods curse and plagus upon a nation: and indeed the Heathen thought
so too, when God is neglected, the land is corrected.

There is a City called Zaiton, in India, where they bring hot meats to their
Idols, feeding their dumb Gods with the smoke, and eating the meat
shemselves. Whatsoever these men profess concerning One eternal and omnipotent
God, yet, they serve him just as the heathens do their Idols, give him no meat,
no worship, service or Religious duty; all that he has from them is only
smoke, and fitly may it be named smoke, for in truth their principles are
nothing else but the smoke of the bottomless pit.

6. That they are Atheists and Antiscripturists, or little better: men who
regard not God, neither the Scriptures, nor any religion; it may be clearly
seen by the argument of the people, which they call, the standard and ultimate
scope of their designs. Amongst all their Proposals and Article (whic are
thirty at least) there is not one thing proposed, for the holding forth and
furtherance of Gods public worship and service.


Now who knows not and believes except an Atheist, That Religion and the
fear of God preserves the society of men among themselve. It is the speech of
the Philosopher in his Politiques, when he gives a rule of Policy: First,
there must be a care of divine things, and that is the best Policy; for God
loves such most, who are careful to serve him best.

that there is a Levelling design carrying on, dangerous to the Commonwealth,
it is too apparent, and howbeit, but sew are acquainted with the bottom of the
work, yet many are, much use of women as well as men: some to dig, others to
dream, some to raise sedition and hurliburlies, in City, Town, and Country,
others to cry out against Tyranny, and for liberty. And all this is to
effect-one thing, which is as they say themselves, thus.

1. They will have no man to call any thing his: for it is tyranny that a man
should have any proper Land; particular propriety is devilish, the mystery of
Egyptian bondage a destroying of the creation, a lifter up of the proud
covetous flesh; a bringer in of the curse ag^in, a mo^tall enemy to the Spirit,
and that which has brought in all misery upon the creature. 2. Laborers and
such as are called poor people, they ought not to work for any Land lord, or
for any that is lifted up above others. He that works for another, either for
wages, or to pay his rent, works unrighteously lifts up the curse, and by his
labors brings the creation under bondage, and the hand of the Lord shall be
against such laborers. Again, they say, it is a tyrannical usurpation, an
incroachment of Lords of Manors, to lay Fines and other services upon their
Tenants. When as by right they are as free as themselves. 3. Levellers do not
allow, neither will they have any buying or selling no markets to be kept, nor
any civil trading at all: for to do so it is to take the beasts mark: when a
man has need of any corn or catle, he is to take the same from the next store
house he meets with. 4. It is another doctrine of theirs, contrary to the Law
o^ God, of Nature, and nations, that no man is to be put to death for murder,
or any unrighteous crime whatsoever: nor to be imprisoned or punnished any way;
only such as are to work and eat their own bread; and he or they that shall
inflict any other punnishment upon fellow creatures, is an unrighteous actor in
the creation: for it is a mighty dishonor to our maker, that one part of the
creation should destroy another. Again, he that will rule over, imprison,
oppress, and kill his fellow creatures under whatsoever pretense, is a
destroyer of the Creation, and an actor of the curse, and walks contrary to
the rule of righteousness. 5, If their design hold, they will so Level the
nation, that there shall be no corporations, patents, Charters throughout the
Realm, in any city or Town, as some to be free, others not: There shall not be
Mayors, Bailiffs, Aldermen, Common Council men, nor any Judge or Justice of
Peace left amongst us. These as the relics of conquest and Tyranny, they will
pluck up by the roots. 6. For our Terms and Lawyers (whom they term the
Vermin and Caterpillars of this Commonwealth:) hear what they say; would it
not be a notable booty to the Soldiers, when so many cheating Lawyers are
together at the term, to drive them out, or else strip their long taild gowns
over the ears: O Soldiers, you could never do a better piece of service then
to put down all the Lawyers and all their Courts, with all Patents, Grants,
Records, etc. and suffer not one Term more; and we in the Country will assist
you with what power we can: so that let us acquit our selves like men and be
no more slaves: this were an excellent work indeed.

To these therefore are their Emissaries specially sent; to raise the servant
against the master; The Tenant against the Landlord; the buyer against the
seller; the borrower aganist the lender, the poor against the rich, and for
encouragement every beggar shall be set on Horseback.

And this was no other but what the German Levellers did, and by publishing so
much, such as had little means of their own, and all their hope was upon
others, most readily received it.

But you heard them say, they approvd not of this Levelling, unless there did
proceed an assent from all the people: Here is a cloak so thin that a man may
see through it; As if these men did not know and love Figures, though they are
ignorant of other learning, and generally hate it. All must be understood most
restrictively, that is the poor Commoner for rich men, and such as have Lands,
and estates, and claim a propriety in things, they do declare and protest
against; for having exercised Tranny oppression and cruelty, upon their fellow
brethren, and free Commoners of this nation. Now who makes question but this
ALL, will assent to the equalling men's estates, and taking away the right and
title that every man has to what is his own. And then as the law says;
Fundamento desiciente omne rerum. And England may say with the Poet.

Englands fearful fate is come, this day's our last;
We once were English, and fair this Island was;
But Englands glory now, her joy and bliss is gone,
Our Country ruined by Levellers alt's undone,
In our discovery we shall now in the next place take notice, what these men
say of themselves, for their peaceablenesse, as to reconcile differences and to
heal all breaches on all sides, we bless God (say they) our consciences are
clear adding affliction to affliction, having ever labored from the beginning
of our distractions to compose and reconcile them and should esteem it as the
crown of all our temporal felicity, that yet we might be instruments in
procuring the peace of this Commonwealth, the Land of our nativity. Besides
their agreement is tendered as a Peace-off^ring; and this Scripture especial
they assume to themselves, and apply t to their practice, blessed are the
peacemakers.

Finis.

