An Order of the Lords assembled in Parliament for the due putting in execution
of the several Statutes made against counterfeiting of the Kings Coin, or the
Coin of any other Kingdom, made current within this Realm: And also against
clipping, fileing, rounding, washing, or litening any of the several Coins
aforesaid.
Die Sabbathi, 13. Martii, 1646.
WHereas by the common Law of England, it is High Treason to counterfeit the
proper Coin of this Kingdom, and is so declared by the Statute of the 25. of
Edward the third: And whereas also the forging of any Coin of any Foreign
Nation, made current by Proclamation within this Kingdom, is made High Treason
by a Statute made in the first year of Queen Mary: And whereas also the
clipping, washing, rounding, or fileing of any the Moneys current in this
Kingdom, for wicked lucre or gains sake, is also made High Treason, by a
Statute made in the fifth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: And whereas
the diminishing, falsifying, scaling or litening, of any the Money current
within this Kingdom, for wicked lucre or gain sake, is also made High Treason
by a Statute made in the eighteenth year of Queen Elizabeth: Notwithstanding
all which several Acts of Parliament, and the penalties therein comprised,
many and several persons within the Kingdom of England, and Dominion of
Wales, and especially in the Northern parts of this Kingdom, have of late
years, and do daily offend and commit with great boldness, all and every the
said offenses, to the great loss of His Majesty's Subjects, and the scandal
and reproach of this Kingdom, in the Subjects Commerce and Traffic among
themselves, and people of other Nations and Countries.

For remedy whereof, It is Ordered by the Lords in this present Parliament
Assembled, That all Judges and Justices of the Assize, and Commissioners of
Oyer and Terminer, and of general Goale-Delivery, in their several Circuits,
do straightly and carefully put in execution all and every the said several Acts
of Parliament, against all offenders against the said Acts, or any breach
thereof, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

Die Sabbathi, 13. Martii. 1646.
ORdered by the Lords Assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance be forthwith
printed and published.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Printed at London for John Wright at the Kings Head in the Old Baily. 1646.


