ENGLANDS Absolute MONARCHY, Or Government of GREAT BRITAIN.

Composed out of these three kinds, Monarchy, Aristrocracie and Democracie.

From whence the Kingdom of England derives a fit parallel, by a King, a
House of Peers, and a House of Commons.

From whence is collected and explained the Prerogative of the King, the
Authority of the Peers, and the Privilege of the Commons.

Whereunto is annexed His Majesty's Resolution to maintain the Privileges of
the Commons, and the full Authority of the Protestant RELIGION.

London, Printed for Thomas Banks, 1642.

Englands absolute Monarchy, or Government of Great Britain.
THere are three kinds of Government amongst men, Absolute Monarchy,
Aristocracie and Democracie, and all of these having particular conveniences,
and inconveniences, the experience and wisdom of our Ancestors hat^ so molded
this out of a mixture of these as to give to this Kingdom (as far as humane
prudence can provide) the conveniences of all three, without the inconveniences
of any one, as long as the balance hangs eeven between the three estates, and
they run jointly on in their proper channel (begetting verdure and
fertillity in the meadows of either on both sides) and the overflowing of
either on either side raise no deluge or inundation.

The ill of absolute Monarchy is Tyranny.

The ill of Aristocracie is Faction and Division.

The ills of Democracie are Tumults, Violence, and Licentiousness.

The good of Monarchy is the uniting of a Nation under one head to resist
invasion from abroad, and insurrection at home.

The good of Aristocracie is the conjunction of Council in the ablest persons
of a State, for the public benefit.

The good of Democracie is liberty and the courage and industry which liberty
begets.

In this Kingdom the Laws are jointly made by a King, by a House of Peers,
and by a House of Commons, chosen by the people, all having free Votes, and
particular privileges.

The government according to the Laws is trusted to the King, power of
treaties of War and Peace, of making Peers, of choosing Officers and
Counselors for State. Judges for Law, Commanders for Forts and Castles, giving
Com^^ssions for raising men to make war abroad, or to prevent or provide
against invasions, or insurrections at home, benefit of confiscations, power of
pardoning, and some more of the like kind, are placed in the King. And this
kind of regulated Monarchy having this power to preserve that authority, which
without it would be disabled to preserve Laws in their force, and the Subjects
in their liberties and proprieties, is intended to draw to him such a respect
and relation from the great ones, as may hinder the ills of Division and
Faction, and such a fear and reverence from the people as may hinder Tumults,
Violence and licentiousness.

Again, that the Prince may not make use of this high and perpetual power to
the hurt of those for whose good he has it, and make use of public necessity
for the gain of his private favorites and followers, to the detriment of his
people, the House of Commons, an excellent conserver of liberty, but never
intended for any share in government, or the choosing of them that should
govern, is solely entrusted with the first propositions concerning the levies
of moneys (which is the sinews as well of peace as war) and the impeaching of
those, who for their own ends, though countenanced by any surreptitiously
gotten command of the King, have violated that Law, which he is bound (when he
knows it) to protect, and to the protection of which they were bound to advise
him, at least not to serve him in the contrary.

And the Lords being tr^sted with a judicatory power, ate an excellent s^^eene
and bank between the Prince and People, to assist each against any
encroachments of the other, and by just judgments to preserve that Law which
ought to be the rule of every one of the three.

This is the exact form of government established in the Kingdom of England,
which I have published for the satisfaction of all those that desire to be
informed of the manner and ground of the gover^^ent of this State.

It being necessary in these troublesome times that all men should know how to
obey both King and Parliament, how to maintain the Kings just and royal
Prerogative, and likewise how to defend the just privileges of Parliament.

For as the three kinds of Government are in a friendly combination united and
become one absolute government, so the Kings royal Authority, the judicatory
power of the Lords, and the just privilege of the Commons, are firmly united
to make one absolute power.

Which intimates unto us, that to maintain one only, is not our duty, or two,
and neglect the third, but to maintain a firm and inseparable union: for to
make a division is the first step to dissolution: we ought not to maintain
the Kings regal Prerogative, to suppress the judicatory power of the Lords,
nor the judicatory power of the Lords to make breach of the privileges of the
Commons, but maintain each in its proper degree, by that means to make up an
absolute Monarchy.

His Majesty's Letter to both Houses of PARLIAMENT.
HIS Majesty perceiving the manifold distr^ctions which now are in this
Kingdom, which cannot but bring great inconvenience, and mischief to this
whole Government; In which, as his Majesty is most chiefly interessed, so he
holds himself by many Reasons most obliged to do what in him lies, for the
preventing thereof; though he might justly expect (as most proper for the duty
of Subjects) that Propositions for the remedies of these Evils, ought rather to
come to him, then from him; yet his Fatherly care of all his people being such,
That he will rather lay by any particular respect of his own dignity, then
that any time should be lost, for prevention of these threatening Evils, which
cannot admit the delays of the ordinary proceedings in Parliament; Does think
it fit to make these ensuing propositions to both Houses of Parliament.

That they will with all speed full into a serious consideration of all those
particulars, which they shall hold necessary, as well for the upholding and
maintaining of his Majesty's just and Regal Authority, and for the settling of
his Revenue; As for the present and future establishing of their privileges,
the free and quiet enjoying of their Estates and Fortunes, the liberties of
their persons, the security of the true Religion now professed in the Church of
England, and the settling of Ceremonies in such a manner, as may take away all
just offense: Which when they shall have digested, and composed into one entire
body, that so his Majesty and themselves may be able to make the more clear
judgment of them: It shall then appear by what his Majesty shall do, how
far he has been from intending or designing any of those things, which the
too great fears and jealousies of some persons seem to apprehend: And how
ready he will be to equal and exceed the greatest examples of the most
indulgent Princes in their Acts of Grace and Favor to their people.

So that if all these present distractions (which so apparently threaten the
ruin of this Kingdom) do not (by the blessing of Almighty God) end in an
happy and blessed Accommodation, his Majesty will then be ready to call Heaven
and Earth, God and Man to witness, that it has not failed on his part.

FINIS.

