England's Ichabod, Glory departed, DISCOURSED By TWO CHRISTIAN MEN, zealous
for the glory of GOD, and true Lovers of their NATION: The One Called
HERACLITVS junior, Weeping for and lamenting the inevitable Woe and Desolation
impending and approaching on his native Country. And the Other called
DEMOCRITVS natu minimus, Laughing at the Ignorance, Blindness, Madness, and
inexorable Stupidity of his own Nation, overwhelmed in Folly, Sin, and
Wickedness, insensible of its own Ruin and Misery. Both of them Paradoxically
praising the JESUITS, and their spurious seed, for their Policy, Activitie,
and Dexterity, in promoting their Factions and Projects.

By Heraclitus junior, and Democritus natu minimus, for RI: FOSTERSCHISM.

Isa. 31. 1. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help, and stay on horses, and
trust in chariots, because they are many, and in horsemen, because they are
very strong: but they look not to the holy One of Israel, neither seek the
Lord. Matthew. 12. 25. Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
desolation; and every city or house divided against it self, shall not stand.
LONDON, Printed for Edw. Blackmore. 1650.

England's Ichabod, etc.
Democritus. MY love and affection to you, most dear Heraclitus, has induced
me to visit you, that you and I may discourse a little touching these woeful and
doleful days wherein we live.


Heraclitus. Welcome, my most cordial and most constant friend; I rejoice in
your presence so gladsome to me, that, if any thing would assuage my mournful
tears* your cheerful society would do it. But, Sir, it is too late: I rather
wish to be dissolved into Tears, then to be revived with Mirth; for the glory
of England is departed. Where is the glory of our Cities, of our Academies, of
Trade, and Merchandise, either Domestic, or with Foreign Nations; of Equity,
Law, and Justice; of the Liberty of the People; of the Freedom and Privileges
of the Nation in the whole Commonwealth? Nay, (which is the greatest woe of
all) where is the glory of Religion and Sincerity? Religion is nothing but Opus
operatum, a formal, outside Preaching and Hearing, like the fig tree cursed by
our Lord Christ, bearing no fruits of Charity, Humility, Obedience, Justice and
Mercy. It is by some made a mere stalking-horse and a servant to Pride,
Ambition, Covetousness; whose entire and endeared companions and confederates,
gilded Hypocrisy, and execrable Villainy, merciless Cruelty, bloody and horrid
Treason, must be sometimes assistant, to effect impious lawless designs. And
where will the glory of one of the most famous Cities of the world, of London,
be, if the Citizens lose Exportation of Cloth and Stuffs, and Importation of
foreign Merchandises, as they have lost themselves in their Covenant made with
God, whereof there is a Table and Copy, for memorial, fixed and hanged up in
most Temples in the City? And then where will the glory of Clothiers,
Artificers, and others, whose Trades and Livelihoods depend upon manufacture of
Cloth and Stuffs, appear? And where will the glory of the Nobility and Gentry,
whose revenues depend upon Sheep and Wool, soon after be? Last of all, where
will the glory of our Army and Soldiery be, if they conquer not all Europe, or
at least quit themselves against the Power and Forces thereof? For it appears
manifestly, that they have provoked most part thereof to be enemies to our
Nation. Woeful will our Lamentations be: I shall not be able to weep enough: I
shall even wish to be a Niobe, that I might be dissolved into tears. Tantum
relligio potuit suadere malorum? as the Poet. Simon, John, Eleazar; Prelate,
Independent, Presbyter. Scarce three men meet accidentally together of one
mind: men are so transported with fiery zeal for one of the three, and so void
of meekness of spirit, that they become as fierce as Bellarmine, and cry down
all Arguments on the behalf of the other two, although they be newly rouzed
from the pillow of Bacchus, and be inscient of the validity of what was or can
be said. Why has Opinion, distracted about Rule and Government, brought these
later evils upon us, since the just shall live by Faith alone, and not by
Government?


Democritus. I my self making the same observations which you do, and being
apprehensive of the Calamities and Desolation near approaching, and attending
our Nation, could, as I am subject to natural passions, mourn and lament also:
but since I am fully satisfied, by consulting with the sacred Prophets, that
there is an inevitable Divine Decree in this vengeance of the Sword,
fore-appointed for the accomplishment and manifestation of God's infinite power
and glory in purging his Church, and bringing in a better people, and in
restoration of Mercy and Justice in the Commonwealth; that Grief, which would
otherwise possess me, is turned into mirth. Yet, if it may be asked by Prayer,
Let not, O God, the Parable and Curse of Jotham (mentioned in the ninth Chapter
of Judges) be fulfilled, and fall upon our Abimelechs and Shechemites of
England! Hearken, ye men of Shechem, famous Citizens, that God may hearken unto
you, and not send an evil spirit amongst ye, to stir ye up to destroy one
another, as Abimele^h did the Shechemites, when they had raised him, and made
him their King, after the bloody murder of his brethren, the legitimate sons of
Gedeon, about seventy men. Like noble Bereans, read the Chapter, and apply it.
And take notice of a few words uttered and predicted against our Nation, and
some famous City thereof, above 1100 years since, in the Reign of Vortiger,
printed at Frankfurt about 50 years since: Viz. Vae perjuriae Genti, qua urbs
inclyta propter eam ruet: Festinat namque dies qua cives ob scelera perjurii
peribunt. If that Astrologer who uttered these words, amongst others, (whereof
we have seen the completion in a great part, and could, if without controulment
permitted, fully demonstrate) did now live, he would laugh profusely at some
modern Astrologers, who gainsay them, or speak slightly or dubiously of them,
although completed.


Heraclitus. If there be a Divine Vengeance in this scourge of Division,
Faction, Rapine, and Bloodshedding; why have the people severally murmured,
railed, and clamoured, some against the beheaded King, some against the
Parliament, some against the City of London, some against the Scots, as the
several sole causes of our unnatural and bloody Civil War?


Democritus. Because they ignorantly and falsely conjecture that all things come
to pass by Chance, without Divine providence and governance; many being so
peremptory and stiff in Opinion, and so puffed up with their own transcendencie
of Piety, and Singularity of spirit, that they explode all Opinions but their
own, and all Reasons and Arguments against the same, although valid and
forcible; as is evident, in that, that though they despise Government and all
Dominion, yet none more eagerly aspire to, and hunt after high places of
Domination, both Ecclesiastical and Temporal: And when they are invested in
them, none so rigid as Themselves, who so much censured and condemned the
Government of Others to be oppressive and tyrannical: And then they make
ostentation, and buz like the Fly upon the wheel, This have I done; whenas the
coach-wheels and horses heels stirred the dust: So, by the help of Insinuation,
and subtle Faction, ambitious, covetous, proud Boasters, and singular
Self-lovers are exalted to trample on their brethren. Plurimis famam (...),
avide magis ambientibus quam fervide, and sincere (...) annunciantibus. One
would be Paul, another Cephas, and the third Apollo: and the itching-eared
people love to have it so: But what will they do in the end? These men consider
not that their own particular sins, and the general sins of the Nation, have
drawn down God's wrath and indignation against us; some daring to call our
Covenant made with God, filed of Record in our Temples An old Almanac, which
may be thrown in the fire at years end.


Heraclitus. How might their Understandings be better informed, and their
Judgments rectified?


Democritus. By none other means but, first, by reading the Scriptures, and
principally the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 45. verse. 7. and Amos, Chap. 3. v. 6. and
Jerem. Chap. 25, v. 15, 16, 26, 27, 29, 31, 32. and Chap. 3. v. 6. and Chap.
30. v. 24. and Chap. 34. v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and Chap. 5. The whole
scope of which two last-recited Chapters plainly parallel with our Times and
Nation, and Matthew. 24* with diverse other Scriptures, as well touching the
neerness of the end of the world, in confutation of the Millenary Schism, much
availing for the Roman party, and now boldly and busily broached by some of
the prime Dissenting Brethren, Igodown, Oglethorp, and others; as also,
touching National Churches, in confutation of Independencie and Singularity; as
Rev. 20. 4. and 21. 24, 26. and Isai. 60. 3, 5 10, 11, 16. and Rev. 11. 15. And
secondly, by comparing the last occurrences of Tumults and Insurrections when
we had a King, he then having no Council nor Army; and our present
Home-divisions and Naumachies, with the beginnings of our Civil wars, when we
had a King, he then having an Host of men, and Council. But now, since we have
no King, who can be said to be the cause of our present broils, rapine, and
spoils, by Sea and Land, but our own sins; Cum Anglia laborat saevire in
semetipsam? Even as when there was no King in Israel, every man did that which
was good in his own eyes: as Judge. 17. 6. and Chapter 19. more at large.


Heraclitus. The evidence thereof aggravateth my sorrow, and increases my
tears; and much more, when I read the fourth verse of the third Chapter of
Hosea, threatening judgment against the Israelites, that they should be many
days without a King or Prince, etc. Was it a judgment in the days of Israel,
and is it none in our days? Our Laws have depended upon Monarchy, although
enacted (which was our happiness, if we had well considered it) not by Monarchy
alone, but by Aristocracie, and Democracie: Therefore, without all three, our
Laws are dissolved, and we fall into Anarchy. Is Peace ever to be looked for
without Law? If the Sword be our Lawgiver, shall we not become Assassinates
and Heathens? Where will Truth and Religion be? Without them, farewell Peace. We
feel with sorrow and smart, that Inter Arma silent Leges. And if there be
neither King, Law, nor Religion, What will become of Parliaments? Our case will
be the same with the Israelites, when they had no King: Every desperate man
will dare to say to a Parliament Man, as an injurious Hebrew said to Moses, Who
made thee a man of Authority, or Judge over us? But is there go balm left in
Gilead? Is there not one man left, who by grave and seasonable counsel might
discover the Incendiaries of our Divisions, and the Contrivers of our Factions
and Distractions; and so divert the Deluge of Confusion and Slaughter ready to
overwhelm our Nation?


Democritus. It is daily done by zealous Preachers of God's Word in the Pulpit,
and by them and others in Printed Papers, with solid and weighty Motives; but
with little effect: For most men's hearts are hardened, and their understandings
stupefied: God has stricken us, but we have not sorrowed; he has consumed us,
but we have refused to receive correction: we have made our faces harder then a
stone, and have refused to return. We may now, with Jeremiah the Prophet, in
his fifth Chapter, Run to and fro in the streets of our English Jerusalem, and
behold now, and know, and enquire in the open places thereof, if we can find a
man, or if there be any that spontaneously executes judgment, and seeks the
truth; and then hope that the Lord will spare the Land. Where is the man, who
pays his Vows to God? Where is the Patriot of his Country, fearing God and
hating Covetousness? Where is the Justiciary? Do we not see almost every man's
Self to be his own Country? Many great men say, they know the way of the Lord,
and the judgment of their God; but these have altogether broken the yoke, and
burst the bonds. The sins for which most often and most severely God punished
the Israelites, were Idolatry, breach of Covenant, and Perjury. Did God punish
them for those sins, and can other Nations, now in being, hope to be quit, and
go free? We expected an issue of our miseries by the Sword; but they are
augmented, and aggravated: our hopes fail us. What will become of that People
in the end, which repose confidence in their own strength of Charets,
Horsemen, and Horses? Jeremiah (in his 31 Chap. verse. 1.) tells them what
attends them. God is the God of Order, and not of Confusion. Will not the
Lord visit for these things? Shall he not be avenged on such a Nation?


Heraclitus. The consideration of these things, draws a flood of tears from
me. For it is most manifest, that the English Jesuits, by their secret and
admirable policies, and subtle insinuations, under pretext of Tender Conscience
their Bugbear, work upon the easy minds of the weaker sort of people, who, by
how much they are more shallow in Judgment, by so much are more obstinate and
stiff in Opinion, impenetrable, and inflexible with any Arguments whatsoever,
Humane or Divine. Amidst my sad and doleful tears, I am the more astonished,
when I revolve this verse predicted of England long since, viz. Corruet
Anglorum gens fraud suorum; which word suorum can have relation to, or
dependence on no words in the whole series of the Latin nouns but to one or
two ending thus, viz. -- ituum* -- itiorum. It irketh me very grievously, that
it should be said to some of those, to whom belongs the heading of those two
imperfect words, whose hearts are right for Church and Country, against all
obstructions, that exitus will be exitium: but as touching any amongst them,
who are inveterate, rancorous, and deadly enemies to the tranquillity, peace,
and splendour of our National Church, and Commonwealth; I say, Let God arise,
and let his enemies be scattered! How shall God's wrathful indignation be
appeased, when through hardness of heart we are insensible of the National sin,
as heinous as the sin of Achan, and the bloody sin of Saul against the
Gibeonites, committed under pretense of zeal to his Nation, provoking God's
wrath against the Israelites to destroy them with Famine; which was not abated,
until, through David's satisfaction given to the Gibeonites, by the decollation
and slaughter of Readiness sons, God's wrath was appeased? as 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8* 9, 14. Has not God visited our Nation with the same punishment?
It has been said of old, Quos Jupiter perdere vult, prius dementat. What hope
have we to evade and escape the snares of the politic Jesuits, when we are
already wrapped and involved in them, and when we neither do nor will discern
their most exquisite, subtle, and close conveyances? they having adopted, or
rather begotten a bastard-breed of sons, and infused so much of their virulent
virtue into them, that thereby they have not only wrought weak judgments to
pretended conscience of an Independent Church, but have also by State-policie
benumbed, blinded, besotted, and stupefied some great and wise ones in our
Nation, inducing them to connive at their frauds and juglings, whereby more
strenuously a Toleration of Schism and Heresy is creeping in, then ever could
have been brought in by themselves alone for their party.


Democritus. Charitable and pitiful Heraclitus, thy tears verily proceed from a
tender conscience affected with the abominable sinfulness of thine own Nation,
and the blindness and stupidity thereof. But be thou not sollicitous and
grieved, since God, for horrid and loud-crying sins, has designed our Nation
to woeful Calamities: Let us be rather comforted, and give glory to God, and
rejoice, that he has given us the sight of those things in his holy Word,
which neither mighty men, nor noble, nor learned, nor Politicians will take
notice of; but do rather wink with their eyes, and shut their understandings
from being advertised thereof, and will deride both thee and me for our
discourse, if they should hear it.


Heraclitus. Nevertheless, dear Democritus, let us not ^^ist: A word spoken in
its place is like apples of gold with pictures of silver, as Solomon has it in
his Proverbs.


Democritus. Moses and the Prophets speak plain enough to our Nation: if we
will not hear them, neither will we hear, though one rise from the dead again,
unless he should beat wit into our heads with a maul: and some such dreadful
judgment, I fear, does attend us. Were our words acceptable, or might they be
profitable to our Nation, I could be incessant and indefatigable: for, Cuique
probo Patria sua est jucundissima. But our Nation is become so barbarous and
heathenish, that it labors with all its wisdom, wealth, and power to destroy
it self. We do but scatter our words, we do but charm a deaf adder. I have
lately read these words in a book published long before our distractions grew
to this immense multiplicity (as now they are) and irreconciliable
incomposedness, viz. [Be wise, O England, and discern the Jesuitical Romish
frauds, and pernicious plots, and break and avoid their last arrow of
Independencie and Aristocracie, (for they have no more left to wound Great
Britain withal) and be happy: Sin minus, caveto tibi, ne faciem tuam obfuscent
tenebrae non nisi ex nova Romana caligine illuminatae:] and I well know that
they came to the view of some both great and wise; but they seemed to them
ridiculous: yet now they may see, that darkness must give light, or we must
have no light. The unwarrantable predictions of uncertain Astrology promising
security, were and are pleasing, and embraced; which to confide in, is as to
consult with the witch of Endor: But the warrantable presages couched in the
infallible Prophecies of God's holy Seers, contained in his sacred Word,
contemned, slighted, and rejected, even of mighty men, much more of men of
inferior order. Railing, lying, futile, scurrilous, seditious, libellous,
traitorous Pamphlets, spread abroad with all advantage by nimble winged
Mercuries, have been, and are (a time very unfit for such fopperies and
iniquities, when our Nation is bleeding, languishing, and at the point to be
extinct) embraced by most men, according to their several fancies and
affections, very few men having ^^rned the Catechism of that most pious and
venerable Doctor Joshua Hall sometimes Bishop of Exceter, since Bishop of
Norwich, where they may learn how God does and will do all things in this
world, and as few having compunction of heart for the destruction and
desolation of their own Country.


Heraclitus. How comes it to pass that the Jesuits have such influence upon
our Nation now at this time, since their manifold, bloody, and traitorous
practices thorowout the whole Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of King James, of our
late King Charles, are fresh in memory, being to be read in Histories,
rehearsed in Almanacks, and brought to our ears by public Thanksgivings to God
yearly for our deliverances from them?


Democritus. Thou know, Heraclitus, that a Ship at Sea is in the power of
its Pilot, and that he, if out of treachery he intend it, can betray it to an
enemy at his pleasure. The politic practices and treasons of the Jesuits
against Queen Elizabeth* by commotions, rebellions, pistols, poisons, poniards,
the Spanish Armado, were so exquisite and admirable, carried on with such
secrecy, that had any of them prevailed, England must have gone to Rome again
for the Popes pardon. But what were all those their devices to that
transcendent hyperbolical Gunpowder-treason, which with one Sulphurous blast
had destroyed King James, and all his Royal Issue male; all the Nobility, and a
great part of the Gentry, and had subverted Religion, and our Laws, and had
subjugated our Nation again to the yoke and tyranny of the Popedom? Since then,
far more transcendent, exact politic, never to be parallelled have their
stratagems been to undermine our Church and State, by insinuating, creeping,
and serewing themselves into eminent places and employments in both, under
pretext of Patriarchacie and Sanctimony; and they have so hoodwinked many of
the wisemen in our Nation, that they suspect them not at all, much less that
they have now any Plot upon our Nation and Church, or are at the Rudder; but
suppose that they sit still and quiet, neither acting nor plotting any thing.
It it is evident to all honest intelligent men, that our late Civil bellum
Episcopale was plotted and contrived by their ingenuous and profound policies;
and it will shortly be as evident, that our Civil bellum Populare is driven on
by their close conveyances, and ambodexter-juglings, by misleading the people
under pretense of New Lights, and Divine Raptures, and Christian Liberty, and
Liberty of Chiveril Conscience.


Heraclitus. We know well in former times the Bishops days, when all Functions
Ecclesiastical and Civil were transacted and conferred at a price (for Quid
mihi dabis?) it was an easy thing, they being so exquisite and secret in their
Plots and Contrivements, and they having at that time ducem venerii castri, the
Buck with the gilded horns for their Patron and Advocate, to step into* nestle,
and rivet themselves as well into high and eminent places in the Court, as also
into subordinate Judicatory-administrations, and into the Clergy and Prelacie
without controulment, especially after the Eagles Chicken had nested himself in
the highest Rochet in the Realm. But by what means now do they possess
themselves of Public Places either Ecclesiastical or Civil, sance there has
usually been such a wide and opposite antipathy between them, and all manner of
Protestants, though Sectaries and Separatists?


Democritus. First, know, Heraclitus, that the range and rabble of those Gleeds
which the Eagles prime Chicken brought in, are not outed of the Clergy,
Academies, and other public Societies, nor, as the case now stands, can be,
but rather more are gotten into them. And next know, that the Jesuits are the
most subtle expert, and artificial Impostors in the world, instructed by art
and exercise, to put on Proteus shapes, and to personate all degrees and
qualities of men, and neatly, closely, and dexterously to act in all manner of
Societies, Councels, and Factions. And all moderate men know, and of that part
yield, that in the late Wars many of them became Commanders and prime Officers
in the Field and Forts against the Parliament. And if after their surrenders,
and yielding up of Forts and Forces, they have been entertained, and ma^^
Commanders in the present Army, have they not obtained their ends to agitate
their designs of poisoning the Army, and consequently the whole Nation with
Schism and Heresy, so to hinder the settlement of Peace, and to embroil the
Nation in future War? And further, know, Heraclitus that the Pope, and his
emissaries and ministers have of late years had private Oaths for Secrecy,
Fidelity, and Activity in their Catholic Cause, to minister to all their party
both abroad and at home, with dispensation to repair to our Temples, whereby
they might seem Protestants, so to gain popular esteem in their Country. And
since many men have been presented to the Parliament from Counties and Boroughs
by the power of the Soldiery, might not such men, having taken such Oath, by
insinuation with the Soldiery by the assistance of their party in the Army,
make themselves of the number of Legislatores, that they might without the
least jealousy or suspect become Legisviolatores?

Anglicano Italianotto, diabolo incarnatto. An English man Italianate, a devil
incarnate.
Heraclitus. What is thine expectation, Democritus? Do thou conclude that
these Foxes, Wolves, and wild Boars shall still prevail against the unity of
the Church, and tranquillity of the Realm?


Democritus. Though I know well, that Hoc rupti Foederis deaurabit aquila, that
his Holiness is better pleased with the Device and Plot of his dearest sons the
Jesuits for Democracie, then Apes with nuts: if their Plot take full effect,
he will write both in red letters in his Calendar. Yet I make no such
conclusion; but I conclude them to be the servants of God, as Nebuchadnezzar
and Pharaoh were, and as the devil sometimes is, that is, instruments to
execute his vengeance, to bring inevitable woe upon our Nation, and for his
glory to gather wholesome Hellebore out of the Orcades, therewith to purge our
Nation of Phrenzie and Hypocrisy, and the Church of Schism, Heresy, and
Idolatry; and thence and thereout also to gather a lusty new green Besom, that
shall sweep themselves, and all their spurious seed, and bastard-sons out of
the Realm against their wills. And I conclude the Jesuits to be those unclean
spirits, like Frogs ^oming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth
of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the False Prophet: for they are the
spirits of devils working miracles, to go unto the Kings of the earth, and of
the whole world, to gather them to the battle of the great day of God Almighty,
mentioned in Rev. 16. 13, 14.

Let honest men therefore, with David, tarry the Lord's leisure, be strong, and
trust in the Lord, and their hearts shall be comforted.

And as Lot was in Sodom, if they be captivated, let them hope that God will
send an Abraham to deliver them. And let them resolve with David, that whose
dwells under the defense of the most High, shall abide in the shadow of the
Almighty.


To England, An Anagram on ENGLAND.
ENGLAND, lament, repent; bitter Ennd-gal,
Thine Anagram portends thy fatal fall:
Like Samson, grinding with thine eyes put out,
Thou drivest Jesuits designs about:
Thou make them sport; they make thee dearly pay
For thine own downfall, ruin, and decay.
No help remains, but to retort their darts
Upon Themselves, shot at good men and Arts.
Wisely discern; be not blind, stupid, dull,
In suffering them with Shadows thee to gull,
Under pretense Christ's Gospel to advance,
To advance Heresy, Schism, Ignorance;
By false pretext Beasts Language to drive hence,
To gain Beast far more sway then Peter Pence.
Had thou in time imposed the Abjuring Oath,
They had not poisoned thee with deadly Broth:
But now they have enjoined thee such a diet
Will gar thee pine, it is vain to be unquiet.
No joy remains, but by Gods Word to know,
He will at last his Rod in fire throw.
FINIS.

