TWO Judgments OF THE LORDS Assembled in PARLIAMENT: AGAINST John Morris alias
Poyntz. Mary his wife. Isabell Smith. Leonard Darby. And John Harris.
For forging, framing, and publishing a Copy of a pretended Act of PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1647.

Die Martis 21 September. 1647.
WHereas John Brown Esquire, Clerk of the Parliaments, did the 25. of June,
1647. exhibit a Charge before the Lords in Parliament against John Morris,
alias Poyntz, Mary his wife, Isabell Smith, Leonard Darby, and John Harris, for
forging, framing, and publishing a Copy of a pretended Act of Parliament,
alleged to have been made at 43 Elizabeth, and entitled, An Act to enable
and make good a conveyance and assurance made of the Mannours of Chipping
Onger, Northokenden, Southokenden, and other Lands in the County of Essex, and
Beaves Marks, alias Buries-Markes in London, by James Morris Esquire, and
Gabriel Poyntz Esquire, to John Poyntz, alias Morris, and his Heirs, and to
establish the said Mannours upon the said John Poyntz, alias Morris, and his
heirs, according to the said Conveyance. Whereas in truth there neither is,
nor ever was any such Act of Parliament; And for forging and counterfeiting his
hand writing, and subscribing to the said Copy Joh. Brown Cleric.
Parliamentorum. And the better to color their lewd practices, have charged the
said John Brown with the loss of the said Record, and denying of his own hand.
And whereas Sir Adam Littleton Baronet, who had good Title to part of the said
Manours and Lands, as in the right of Dame Audrey his wife, whose inheritance
thereunto was sought to be impeached by the said Copy of the said pretended Act
of Parliament, complained likewise against the said persons before their
Lordships, for the said forgery and publication, in that the said John Morris,
Leonard Darby, John Harris, and Isab^l Smith, did produce the said Copy at
Chelmesford at Lent Assizes, 1646. for the County of Essex, at a Trial in an
Ejectory form, brought by Thomas Smith, husband of the said Isabell, and
Lessee of the said John Morris, against Josias Clarke Tenant to the said Sir
Adam Littleton, of part of the said Lands contained in the said pretended Act;
And did plead and affirm the same to be a true Copy of an Act of Parliament;
And the said Darby and Harris did falsely and perjuriously swear in open Court
at the said Trial, that they had examined the said Copy by them produced with
the Record of the said pretended Act, in the Office of the Clerk of the
Parliaments; And did there also falsely and perjuriously swear, that they did
show that writing to the Clerk of the Parliaments, and that he did acknowledge
the said writing to be his own hand; Whereas in truth the said subscription to
the said pretended Act of Parliament is counterfeit, and none of the said
Clerk of the Parliaments hand; And the said Sir Adam further complained of an
Exemplification under the Great Seal of England, for countenancing the said
forged Copy of the said pretended Act, by some undue means by the said parties
thereunto affixed; of the parties showing whereof proof was made before their
Lordships.

All which being Crimes of a very high and transcendent nature, and do concern
the public Justice of the Kingdom, and of this Honorable House, the
supreamest Judicatory of this Kingdom; That Acts of Parliament, the highest
Records in this Kingdom, should be framed, invented, forged, and given in
evidence, and published as true Acts of Parliament; and the hand of the Clerk
of the Parliaments, a sworn Officer, forged, counterfeited, and subscribed to
the same; as that if such bold and andacious acts should not be severely
punished, no man can be safe in his Life, Person, or Estate; The said John
Brown, and Sir Adam Littleton, desired that the persons aforesaid might
forthwith answer the said Charges; and that their Lordships would inflict such
exemplary punishment upon the offenders, as may deterr the like attempts and
lewd practices in others, and give such fitting reparations as their Lordships
in their wisdoms should think meet.

Whereupon the persons aforesaid put in their Answers to the Premises, and
pleaded not guilty; And after the Case had been diverse days fully heard by
Counsel on both sides, and witnesses produced at this Bar, and the whole
matter afterward thoroughly weighed, debated, and fully considered of by the
house, The Lords in Parliament assembled, being fully satisfied of the guilt of
the said persons for the aforesaid high Crimes charged against them, do award
and adjudge:

1 That the said John Morris, alias Poyntz, shall pay as a Fine to our
Sovereign Lord the King, the sum of one thousand pounds, Isabell Smith two
hundred pounds, Le^nard Darby four hundred pounds, and John Harris four
hundred pounds. 2 That the said parties shall pay to John Brown Esquire Clerk of
the Parliaments, for his damages, five hundred pounds. 3 That all the said
parties shall before their enlargement out of prison, be bound to the good
behavior during their lives, before some one of His Majesty's Justices of His
Bench at Westminster, with good sureties. 4 That the said Copy of the pretended
Act of Parliament, falsely affirmed upon Oath to have been subscribed with the
name of the said Clerk of the Parliaments, entitled, An Act to enable and
make good a Conveyance and Assurance made of the Mannours of Chipping Onger; No
thokenden, Southokenden, and other Lands in the County of Essex, and Beaves
Marks, alias Buries Marks in London, by James Morris Esquire, and Gabriel
Poyntz Esquire, to John Poyntz alias Morris and his heirs, and to establish
the said Mannours upon the said John Poyntz alias Morris and his heirs,
according to the said Conveyance, is hereby declared to be forged and
counterfeit; and is by their Lordships adjudged and decreed to be for ever
damned and cancelled, and never to be pleaded in any Court or Cause whatsoever;
nor to be admitted to be given in evidence; there being no Record of any such
peetended Act of Parliament to warrant the same. 5 That all the said several
Persons hereby adjudged guilty of the said crimes, shall ever hereafter be made
incapable to be witnesses in any cause whatsoever. 6 That John Brown Esquire,
Clerk of the Parliaments, is in the judgment of this House free, and clear of,
and from all and every the aspersions, falsities, and charges of the said John
Morris, alias Poyntz, Isabell Smith, Leonard Darby, and John Harris charged,
uttered, divulged, and given out by them against him, concerning the matters
herein mentioned. And that this Judgment shall be openly read and published in
the face of the County of Essex, at the next Assizes to be held for that County
7 That the said Parties shall bring, or cause to be brought into this House by
the first day of October next, o^e exemplification under the Great Seal of
England concerning the Manner of little Munden, in the County of Hertford; And
the aforesaid exemplification of the said counterfit Act of Parliament, to
which the Great Seal of England is charged to have bin unduly and fraudulently
affixed, that so the aforesaid forged exemplificationi may be cancelled and
vacated. 8 That they shall be imprisoned during the pleasure of this House.
Joh. Brown, Cler. Parliamentorum.

Die Martis, 2 Dii November. 1647.
WHereas the Lords in Parliament assembled, upon the 21 of Septem. last, g^ve
Judgment concerning a Copy of a pretended Act of Parliament, intitutuled, An
Act to enable and make good a Conveyance and Assurance made of the Manours of
Chipping Onger, Northokenden, Southokenden, and other Lands in the County of
Essex, and Beaves Marks, alias Bu^ies Marks in London, by James Morris Esquire
and Gabriel Poyntz Esquire to John Poyntz, alias Morris, and his Heirs, and to
establish the said Mannours upon the said John Poyntz, alias Morris, and his
Heirs, according to the said Conveyance: And declared the same to be forged
and counterfeit, and therefore to be for ever damned and cancelled, as by the
said Judgment more at large appears.

And whereas Dame Audrey Littleton, late wife of Sir Adam Littleton deceased,
Sir Fulke Grevill, Knight, and Maurice Barrow Esquire by their Petition exhibited
before the Lords in Parliament complained, That notwithstanding the said
Judgment, one Isobel Smith (a Person sentenced by their Lordships, and
committed to Newgate for the said Forgery) having procured the said forged Act
of Parliament, and other forged writings, viz. three Fines of the Lands
contained in the said forged Act, and a forged Pleading, setting forth the uses
of the said forged Fines, to be written in Parchment; and having by some
slight made them to seem as if they had been written long since, did foist
and shuffle in the same amongst other Evidences, and writings remaining in the
Treasury of the late Court of Wards; and pretending the same to be found there,
obtained Copies thereof under the hand of Mr. Awdeley Clerk of the said Court,
hoping thereby to gain some credit, and authority to the said forgeries, and
further to impeach the Titles of the Petitioners.

To which Petition the said Isabell Smith put in her Answer, and a day was
appointed for hearing the same. At which day the said Isabell Smith being
present at the Bar, and not making good any of the particulars in her said
Answer, nor giving any satisfaction to such questions as were by their
Lordships demanded of her concerning the same. And the said several writings
after full examination by hearing of Council and Witnesses produced; and also
upon view of the said writings (being by their Lordships Order brought into the
House) manifestly appearing to their Lordships to be gross forgeries: The
Lords in Parliament assembled do Declare, and adjudge:

That the said Parchment writing^, one whereof purporteth a Fine pretended to
be leavied at St. Albans, A die sancti Martini in quindecim dies, Anno 37. Eliz
between James Morris Esquire and John Poyntz, alias Morris his son Plaintiffes,
and Gabriel Poyntz, Esquire and William Cutts Defendants, of the Manor of Chipping
Onger, and other Lands and Tenements, with the appurtenances in Chipping Onger
in the County of Essex. One other whereof purporteth a Fine pretended to be
leavied at Saint Albans, A die s^ncti Martini in 15 dies, Anno 37 Eliz between
J^mes Morris Esquire and John Poyntz alias Morris his son Plaintiffes, and
Gabriel Poyntz Esquire and William Cutts, Defendants of the Mannours of
Northokenden, Poyntz and Groves, with the appurtenances, and of diverse
Messuages, Cottages, Mills, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and other Hereditaments
in Northwokenden, alias Northokenden, Southwokenden, alias Southokenden, Avely
Upminster, alias Upmister, Southweal, Brentwood, alias Burntwood, Warley, alias
Warley Magna, Childerditch Bulfan, Bownton, alias Bunton, East Thornedon, West
Thornedon, West Th^rrock, Grayes Thurrock, Chawdwell, Styfford alias Stiford,
Horne-church Basseldon, and Cranham, and of the Rectory of Northwokenden; alias
Northokenden* with the appurtenances in the said County of Essex.

One other whereof purporteth a Fine pretended to be leavied at St. Albans, A
d^e sancti Martini in 15 dies, Anno. 37 Eliz. between James Morris Esquire John
Poyntz, alias Morris, his son Plaintiffes, and Gabriel Poyntz Esquire and William
Cutts Esquire Defendants of four Messuages, six Gardens, and two Acres of Land,
with the appurtenances in the Parish of St. Katharine Cree-church, London.

One other of the said Parchment writings purporteth a Pleading, setting forth
the uses of the said Fines, and beginning in these words, (viz.) Essex. ss. In
memorandum de Banco anno tricesinto octavo Elizabeth. viz. inter Record.
Termini sancti Trinitatis Rollo xxi. ex part Recordationum in Trer. manen.
inter alia continetur ut sequitur (viz.) Memorandum quod nuper invenitur in
quodam Rollo extract. de finibus and issues Banci in termino Sancti Michalis
annus Regni Domini nostre Elizebethe tricessimo sexto and septimo quod Gabriel
Poyntz Esquire etc.

And one other whereof purporteth a Copy of a pretended Act of Parliament
entitled, An Act to enable and make good a Conveyance and Assurance made of
the Mannours of Chipping Onger, Northokenden, Southokenden, and other Lands in
the County of Essex, and Beves Marks, alias Buries Marks in London, by James
Morris Esquire, and Gabriel Poyntz Esquire to John Poyntz, alias Morris, and his
Heirs, and to establish the said Mannours upon the said John Poyntz; alias
Morris, and his Heirs according to the said Conveyance: Are hereby Declared to
be forged and counterfest, and are by their Lordships adjudged and decreed to
be for ever damned and cancelled, and never to be Pleaded, or admitted to be
given in Evidence in any Court, or Cause whatsoever, there being no Record of
any such Fines, Pleading, or Act of Parliament to warrant the same; nor any
Term then held at St. Albans, when the said Fines were pretended to be leavied
there.

And it is further Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, That the said
Isabell Smith shall by the 27 of November. next bring, or cause to be brought
into this House, the Copies of the said Parchment writings (pretended to be
found in the Treasury of the Court of Wards) subscribed by the said Master
Awdely, that so the same may be cancelled and vacated.

Joh. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

Essex ss.
In memorandum de Banco Anno tricesimo octavo Elizabeth, (viz.) inter Record.
termini Sancti Trinitatis Rollo xxi. ex part Recordacionum in Thesaurum manen.
inter alia continetur ut sequitur, viz.
MEmorandum quod nuper invenitur in quodam Rollo extract. de finibus and issues
Banci and Termina Sancti Michaelis annis Regni Domine nostre Elizabethe
tricesimo sexto and septimo, quod Gabriel Poyntz Esquire fecit cum predicta Domina
Regina finem pro concordia cum Jacobo Morris Esquire and aliis de Plito. condicis
de Manor Chipping Onger, alias Anger, ad Castram cum appertenanc. etc.

5. November. 1647.
I have searched the Records of the Common Pleas, de Termino Sancti Trinitat.
Anno tricesimo octavo Reg. Eliz. Rollo vicesimo primo, and do find that there
is no inrollment of any such Record there, as is above mentioned.

Per Johannem Cocks Cleric. Thesuar. de Com. Banco.
I Have searched in the Treasurers Remembrancers Office in the Exchequer
amongst the Records of Trinity Term, Anno xxxviii. Regine Elizabeth. Roll xxi.
but do not find that there is any such Record or Inrollment, as is above
mentioned.

T. Osburne.



6. May 1647.
MEmorandum, that I Francis Blake, keeper of the Books for searches of Fines
and of the Records thereof in the Chyrographers Office, have made diligent
search in the said Books, and amongst the said Records of Michaelmas Term 35.
and 36. Eliz. and all the Terms after till Hillary 38. Eliz. and I can find
no fine at all from Gabriel Poyntz and William Cuts, or either of them to any
person whatsoever, of any Lands in the Counties of Essex or London. And
moreover, I find by the said Records, that Michaelmas Term 36. and 37. Eliz.
was held at the City of Westminster, and not at the Town of Saint Albans. All
which I do hereby (at the request of Sir Adam Poyntz, alias Littleton Baronet)
certify to all whom it may concern.

F. Blake.

FINIS.

