ENGLANDS New-yeares Gift, OR, A Pearl for a Prince: WITH Such Grapes from
Thorns, and Fruits from Foes, to the whole Land, as none shall be worse for
wrongs, nor hurt by any but themselves, though the times should prove worse and
worse.

Toll and lege. Augustinus. Et experto creed Hieronimo ex Hibernia Redivivo.
LONDON, Printed by Robert Austin. 1648.

To every passive Reader.
TO all, who parallel me with their wronged selves,
In two climes shorn, torn, split on rocks and shelves:
Best fruits from foes, this paper present shows,
From mine own bowels drawn, as Silkwormes Clewes:
Chief here my kindness creeps, which cannot go
To all my Brides firm Friends, from whom, my Foe,
Satan divorced me long: though love regaines
Spleens loss, if Sectaries forbid not baines.
Englands New-years-Gift, or a Pearl for a Prince.
IT is reported of Doctor Ridley, a faith-sealing Martyr, that the only way to
make him a man's friend, was to do him an ill turn, at least this was the way
to gain his prayers. Parallel to his practice was the Counsel, that M.
Omstead lately (a zealous Preacher in Ireland) gave to one that complained of
some emulating sneaks, or snakes of his own Tribe, who had stung him by
detraction, and bit him with a dogged and Theonine tooth, that if he might
advise him in this case, he should presently go to the Throne of Grace and
power out his soul in prayer for him, as David put on sackcloth and mourned
for his enemies, even such as Saul Doeg and Achitophel; and this is all the
revenge he would take on them, as the best way withal to do himself good,
since to do evil for evil, this was Paganish and Brutish, one Dog, Wolf and
Fox tearing and devouring another: to do good for good was carnal and
natural, manus manum fricat, and mulus scabit mulum, one hand rubs another,
one scabb'd mule knaps another, one good turn requires and requites another;
to do evil for good, as Judas did to Christ, and Laffin the false friend to
his Patron the French Byron, and as some Favorites and Traitors to their Kings,
bringing down like Elder trees the walls in and by which they grew, as the
Cuckoo tears the kind hedge Sparrow who bred her and fed her, this is vile and
viperous, yea diabolical; but to good for evil, and to overcome evil with
good, Romans 12.21. this is truly Angelical, the highest pitch of Christianity,
sympathizing with Abraham, who prayed for Abimelech that would have wronged him
in his wife, Genesis 20. with the Prophet whose prayer restored that withered hand
of Jeroboams, which was stretched out against him, 1 King. 13. with Paul and
Silas who improved their best to save the soul of that cruel Jailor, who
whipped and abused their bodies, Act. 16. yea to Christ himself, who healed
the ear of Malchus, one of his riotous and rigorous apprehenders, Joh. 18.10.
and in this case of retaliating or remitting injuries, as Julius Caesar and
Pyrrhus the Epirote, and many more which might be historified, gained friends
from foes, chiefly the two Scipioes, Asian and African, so I would have it
seriously poized, that as patience is the most heroic fortitude, overcoming a
man's self more then others, as fortius est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit,
so impatiency is the greatest folly, yea a madness fit to be whipped in
Bedlam; for a man not to take his cross quietly, and to bear it with Simon
Cyreneus after Christ, but to make his Cross heavier by his own fretting, and
fustian fuming then it is in it own nature, as Thales his Ass made her burden
of wool heavier by laying her self down with it in the water, as before she
had melted her load of salt lighter by the like posture, as if a man should
give me a box on the one ear, I should give my self a box on the other, or
lay another load on my right shoulder, because a heavy burden is imposed on my
left; impatiency being such a salve for every fore, as soute, ink and tar is
to the washing of a foul face to make it seem fair, or as the cutting of the
thumb or the toe is medicineable to the curing of the Gout.

But if by patience and penitence thou live like some fire-flies called
Pyruustae, in brazen furnaces, in the heat of most scorching crosses, and come
out of them as gold out of the fire more pure, with the dross and tin of thy
hereditary corruptions more purged by the spirit of fire and of burning, Esa.
4. then thy most intestine and inveterate foes must do thee good whether they
will or no, even sore against their wills; like that Roman, who resolving to
kill his enemy in a Duel, by running his sword into his breast, so cured him
of an Impostume which he broke, that he made him a sounder man then ever he
was; as it is said of a bone, that after breaking is soundly knit, proves
stronger then it was before; to this purpose of getting summer fruits from
tempestuous and winter foes, (as Virgil gathered gold from Ennius his dross,
as Plato had a curb for his pride, by Diogenes trampling on his bed with
greater pride, and as from the very oil of Scorpions the Italians are said to
reserve Antidotes against the stinging of Scorpions, and Surgeons to cure the
bitings of mad Dogs, from the very livers of the said dead Dogs,) so I heard of
a patient and religious Gentleman, that being unequally yoaked and pestered
with a wife, little better then Moses his Zepporah, Socrates his Xantippe, or
Jobs wife, (thought to be Dinah,) as soon as ever her waspish and aspish spirit
was so conjured up, that she gave him his broth all scalding hot, and scorched
him with her tongues wildfire, immediately he fled from her as from a Snake,
and retired himself into a wood or solitary grove, where in his devout
soliloquies he powered out his soul unto God in mental and ejaculatory prayer;
in this and the like patterns of imitation and virtuous emulation, quod cuiquam
id cuivis, it is easy for any man in the like cases or crosses, enriched with
the like graces of prayer, patience, and penitence, to gather the like figs
from thistles, the like roses of sweet refections from the briers, brambles,
and nettles of the like afflictions, the like golden fruits from the like
cross and cankred foes, more precious then any historified or poetized fruits
in the Gardens of Adonis, or the Orchards of the Hesperides, kept so strictly
by waking Dragons, or Gryphins, oh fortunati nimium si sua bona norint, happy
are the patient in what kind soever passive, all the waves that bluster against
this rock of patience, more excellent then all the white cliffie rocks in our
Albion besides, however impetuous in these tumultuous and tossing times, they
do but dash themselves to some and froth, and wash it whiter, as the
accusations of Potyphars wife, Phedra and the goatish Judges did the innocence
of Joseph of Hippolitus and Susanna; the raging waves indeed, and wraths of
Tyrants, and hell-hatched Heretics may bluster against the outside of the
Church built on Christ the true Rock, as the storms beat against the out-walls
of a house, a Palace, or a Temple, but they disturb not nor distract not the
Inhabitants or Sojourners within; the insides of Rocks are not penetrated by
the most roaring and surging seas, enemies indeed like serpents and toads, and
ravenous beasts, may manducare terram, lick this dust of ours, feed as wolves
on Carrion, on our outward mould, our terrestrial part; but ultra alam
fortunae, they hurt our souls no more (if sanctified, anchored, and settled in
our present Fluctuations) then a sword or a spear does a spirit or an Angel,
or the chop of an axe the beams of the Sun which shine upon a block; now what
great hurt is there in the cracking of a shell, and the saving of the kernel,
in the loss of a rotten purse, (emblemes of our bodies) the soul, like pure
gold being reserved and preserved safe.

When Zuinglius that zealous Belgic Light, received his deaths wound in the
wars of the Quinque Pagi about Religion, his last words (as his ultimum vale)
to the world were these, Corpus occidi potest animam occidere non possunt, my
enemies can kill my body, but they cannot kill the soul, this divinae,
particula aurae, this celestial heavenly infused soul, as it is immateriall,
so it is no more penetrable by any terrestrial weapons then the Sun, the Moon,
the Planets and the Angels and Intelligences which more them, this soul is
extra alam, beyond the power of Tyranny and Cruelty, a note above the Ela of
humane hostility, tunde Anaxarchi Vasculum Anaxarchum non laedis, a Phalaris a
Busiris, an Anacreon may knock in pieces the out-vessell, the out-cask, the
out-cabinet, the out-cage of the body, the continent of the soul: but the
soul it self which is in a manner totum hominis the whole man or the best of
man, this inward wine they cannot tilt, this enclosed Pearl of Pearls (better
worth then a world) they cannot plunder, this Phoenix, this bird of Paradise,
they cannot kill; though the lightning which we see, and the thunder that we
hear breaking the enclosed clouds, chiefly the condensate bolt often break the
bones and the mettled sword without any great signalls on the flesh or the
scabberd, according to Aristotle and Seneca, yet when truculent Tyrants speak
lapides and fulmina, stones and fire-bolts, and lighten and thunder, as Jezabel
once against Elias, Eudoxia that second Herodias against S. Chrysostom,
Innocent or Nocent the third against the Emperor Otho, Innocent the fourth
against Frederick, Gregory the second against Leo Isaurus, Zacharias against
the French Childericke, Pius (or Impius) Quintus against Queen Elizabeth; yet
these Bruta Fulmina, as the French Author derides them, See the Book called
Brutum Fulmen.
and our Roffensis Adversus Bellarminum, page 944. and page 974.
, these roaring Bulls of Basan, these squibs and fire-workes, how ere like
Davusses or Devils, they disturbed the peace of their States and Kingdoms, as
their Incendiaries and Firebrarnds the Jesuits, have set all in a Phaetonian
confusion in Moravia, Helvetia, Silesia, Austria, France, England, and Ireland:
yet they wrought and brought no more prejudice to sanctified souls then the
curses of the Witch Balaam to Gods own Israelites, Numb. 23.19, 20. Hence it
was a wise Consolatory speech of Augustus Caesar to his daughters Livia and
Julia, telling him that all the people of Rome spoke evil of them, he thanking
his Gods, that though they spoke evil of them, yet it was not in their power
to do them any evil, Apud Plutarchum.
and therefore wished them to suffer free speech in a free City, which free
speech all the wit and worth of man, yea of Innocence it self, can no more
curb in malignant minds and mouths, then they can stay the winds, or stint the
waves, or shackle the Hellespont, or do such impossible things, as once Xerxes
and Canutus attempted, since Lions have been tamed, and Elephants in the wars
of King Porus and Pyrrhus, Otters have been tamed like Water-Spaniels, Ravens
have been tamed and lured as Hawks, Wolves and Foxes, wild and vild Dogs, have
been tamed as household Curres, Quoy-ducks have been tamed to deceive the tame;
so Storks, Cranes, Crows Ave Caesar.
, Popinjayes, all kind of birds, and some kinds of Serpents and Fishes See
instances in Cornelins de Lapi de in cap. 3. Jacobi.
; but the tongue-like Panthers and Field-mice is indomable without the help of
Mors and Morpheus, death and deadly sleep: Angels men and Devils cannot tame
it, the wild fire in it kindled from hell, Jam. 3.6. like the coals of
Juniper, yea like hellfire it self unquenchable: the Innocence of an Elias
counted a troubler of Israel, 1 King. 18.17. of Paul held a factious fellow,
Act. 24.5. of Joseph of Hippolitus the Paganish Joseph; of Susanna, of Abner,
of Eugenius, accused of incontinency, of Athanasius called Sathanasius, and
taxed as a Murderer Apud Centur. Magdeburg passim.
of Cato and Scipio, often produced and traduced before the Roman Senate: of S.
Jerome, branded by the Priests of Rome Of which he complains in many Epistles.
for his holy and honest conversing with Paula, Paulina, Eustochium,
Demetriades and other chaste Matrons and Maids, yea the purity of Christ
himself conversing with Publicans and Sinners (as the Sun shines upon
Quagmires and rotten Bogs without any contamination) could cause none of these
to escape the aspersions and calumnies of scandalizing tongues, no more then
the Sun and the Moon can muzzle the barkings of some dogs against their
lusterous shines, as Doegs and emulalating Momists and Zoilists still will
bark, invita Minerva, against shining gifts and graces, and places amongst Arts
and Arms, yet as we have a greater and more certain tutelary God, then
Augustus had, we may condignely thank this God, that though in unbloudy
persecutions we daily hear the mocks of Romish Michols, 2 Samuel 6.20. the
railing of Atheistical and Papisticall Rabshakehs, 2 King. 19.22. the flouts
of rejected Ismaels, Genesis 21.9. the curses of Sathanicall Shemcis, 2 Samuel 16.
the scoffs of malignant Tobiahs, Nehem. 4.3. and Sanballats, all haters of
God, of the godly and of all goodness, all opposers, Remoraes and obstacles of
Religion and Reformation, all as intestine enemies to all of the house of
David, Zech. 12.8.9. all Ezekiasses, Ezraes and Nehemiahs, who would rebuild
and purge our polluted Temples, as ever Hanniball was unto the Romans a sworn
Antagonist; or Haman the cursed Amalekite to Esther, Mardocheus and all the
religious Jews, yet Gratias superis, God be praised, these whelps of Cerberus,
though they bark and show their tongues and their teeth, they cannot bite
further then God pleases to unchaine them and unmuzzle them, and set them upon
us, for our playing the pranks of wild Heifers and indomable Bullocks, breaking
over the hedges of all commanded and limited obedience into forbidden pastures,
as David in his Adultery, 2 Samuel 11.9. and Solomon in his uxorious Idolatry,
for which God set Absalom, Semei, Sheba and Ammon against the one, 2 Samuel 16.
and 13. and cap. 20. and Rezon and Iereboam 1 King. 11.23. and v. 26. against
the other, all the Organs of evil to Sion, all the Factors and Agents for
Antichrist, for the Scarlet Whore, for the Prince of darkness, chiefly in
their unlawful, lustful, and unlimited wars against the Saints, all and
every one of them are under the power and command of the King of Sion, the
Father of the Saints, he has all the malignant powers, plots and policies of
earth and hell, even Witches, Conjurers, and infernal spirits themselves, all
the sorcering Sorcering Mass Priests and Friars of the Romish Hierarchy, and
all the Irish Nigromanticks at this day, the Lord of Hosts has them all as
Wolves and Dogs in their chains, as Lions in their grates, as roaring Bulls at
their stakes, and Bears at their rings, he keeps them all in as Seas and rivers
within their banks and bounds, or lets them out as in the inundations in
Ducalions time, and in Noah's flood; he has all created powers as staves in his
own hands, as arrows in his own quiver, as David his stones in his sting, to
keep in or employ at his pleasure: he being the true Aeolus who has all the
winds in a bag, all the waves in a bank, all the wicked Heretics and Tyrants
within and without the Church, hooked by their noses, as he had Pharaoh,
Senacherib, Rabshekch, 2. King. 19.27, 28. Holofernes, Antiochus, Epiphanes,
proud Cosroes, Saul before his conversion, Act. 9. cap. 22. and 26. and all
sanginnolent persecutors in all times, letting them play their reaks and pranks
so long, till he got himself a name upon them, either in the conversion of
some few of them, or the confusion of the most of them; when their sins like
the sins of the Amorites Genesis 11.16. and Sodomites were at the full
ripeness, and fit for the sickle of deserved vengeance, this then is the first
cordial I give to the corosives of the Saints, the first ground of comfort to
our present mourners in Sion, Ezekiel. 9. the wicked which plow deep furrows on
our backs, God himself yoakes them, they are but rods in the hands of our
Father, but the Jailors and the Executioners of the will and decree of our
Father Judge, as a modern Divine sweetly alludes to God, they are but Gods
Sergeants to arrest us, for our undischarged debts, our unrepented sins, they
cannot hurt us more then a sword in the scabberd, till it be drawn and laid on
by a valiant Martialist, being of it self a dead instrument without a living
hand to weild it; as indeed the creature of it self, whether animate or
manimate, can do us neither good nor hurt, without the restraining or
mannaging of the Creator, as Doctor Preston has lively demonstrated as an
experimental Divine, in his golden work of Gods All Sufficiency: and I have
fully explained in the Book called the Arraignement of the Creature: And indeed
this is a wonderful ground of comfort to all that by the spirit can cry Abba
Father, Romans 8.15. that their crosses come from a Father, not from a severe
Judge, that they are but love tokens from the Bridegroom to his Spouse, Rev,
3.19. healing pills from a Physician, castigating rods and ferulaes in in the
hand of a Father, Heb. 12.5, 6, 7. as Queen Elizabeth said once in some real
or imaginary Delinquencies of her heroic Essex, ad correctionem non ad ruinam,
to correction not to destruction; as Gods scourges were so Idolatrizing and
Adulterizing Solomon, whom though he afflicted in the revolt of ten Tribes, and
in excited enemies, 1 King. 11. yet he rejected not, he took not his mercy
from him as from Saul the Reprobate, 2 Samuel 7.14. 1 Samuel 16.1.14. Oh, this is
indeed Oleum vulneris latificans Galeni, mell in ore melos in aure, as the
phrases be melody to the ear, music to the mind, and honey to the heart, yea
as Rosa Solis and Aqua vitae to our dead sownes and fainting spirits, that
though we be whipped for extraordinary sins and rebellions with sharp rods,
even as it were of wire and knotted cords, not with ordinary willowes and
birches, as in former times, that yet notwithstanding a whipping Father is a
Father, and purposes to bestow his inheritance upon his crying Child if as
penitent as peccant: he takes not a sword to run him through, nor a Dagge to
pistol him when he is prostrate on his knees imploring mercy, like the
Gospells relenting prodigal, with a mouth of confession and tears of
contrition, extracted by the heat and fire of love from the Limbeck Few fathers
prove Tyrants to their own children, like the Roman Manlius, and Brutus, or
as once Manasses was before his conversion, and the Jewish Saul to his
Jonathan, whom he would have executed.
of a heart full of compunction, Luke 15.17, 18, 19. Oh paululum supplicii
satis est patri, a little punishment is enough for a father, as we may see in
the passages betwixt David and Absalom, 2 Samuel 14.21. and cap. 18.33. the best
Father and the worst child: all the water of the Sea will not wash away the
love of a Father, it is as strong as death, even when he frowns outwardly, he
favors inwardly, as Joseph did his Brethren, when he spoke roughly to them,
Genesis 42.6. aequa tamen semper men's est and amica voluntas: Oh suck this
refreshing honey, as a second Jonathan, in thy faintings in the wilderness of
thy woes, that though the evil of sin this malum culpae be from Satan and thy
self, yet this malum paenae, the evil of punishment is from God, Amos 3.6.
and cap. 2.4. per totum, punishment do I call it? I think I must recant the
phrase, for though we read of the plagues of Egypt, of Sodom, of Moab, of
Edom, of Damascus, of Ashur, of Gaza, of Teman, of Ammon, and of Tire, Amos 1.
per totum, yet Divines dislike the phrase of punishment ever to be inflicted on
the Church of God, or any living members of the Church, the punishment of the
sins of all believers being already and at all times laid upon Christ the true
Atlas who has borne the burden of his Fathers wrath, paid the ransom of his
brethren, discharged all their debts, cancelled all their bonds, and given them
their quietut est and Acquittance out of the Chancery or Exchequer of mercy,
though they were clean cast by Moses and his infringed Law at the Kings Bench
of Justice, Esaias 53.4, 5, 6. Romans 3. v. 19, 20, 24, 25. cap. 5.1. and Ephe. 2.
per totum, and in this respect it being unjust with the Judge of heaven and
earth, Genesis 18.25. to do ought but right, in craving a debt twice to be paid by
the principal, when it is paid by the suerty, 1 John 1.9. the soul married and
espoused to Christ by faith, Hos. 2.19. Ephesians. 5.25. being now as under covert
Baron, not liable to the debts and the arrests of her widdow-hood, when she was
estranged from Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. Christ her husband being liable unto them,
who has satisfied and paid them by his blood, Ephesians. 1.7. 1 Pet. 1.18. even eo
nomine in this very case, the child of God being freed both from the guilt and
punishment of his sin in life, and death, and judgment, whatever happens to
him, being not in the nature of a punishment from a stern Aeacus, Minos,
Radamanthus, or an Orbilius Flagellator, or a Dionisius in schola, a severe
Tyrant, an enraged Schoolmaster, but a castigation from a Father, non quod
odio habet sed quod amat, not out of hatred, but out of love, what a motive is
this to drink patiently, as Christ his Master before him, Mat. 26.39. and Job.
Job. 5.11. and Ezekias, Esa. 39.8. and David, Psalm. 39.9. and old Eli, 1 Samuel
3.18. and all the Martyrs Iam. 5. v. 10. and Confessors, the Physical cup his
Father has prepared for him, though very bitter, in the divine providence so
much the better; if another man equal to thy self, or inferior, yea if
superior, hit thee a blow on thy ear, or spurn thee with his foot, perhaps
thou art moved, and waspish, even a Micah or a Paul himself, suffering humani
aliquid, some reluctance, to be unjustly beaten by a Zedekias, a false Prophet,
a Prelaticall Ananias, a painted wall, 1 King. 22.24. Act. 23.2, 3. or to be
scourged unjustly by a Governor, Act. 22. v. 25. but put the case that thy
King, thy Liege Sovereign, or thy natural and affectionate Father give thee a
blow or two, (chiefliy upon thy demerits) will thou grudge? will thou grumble
like a cursed Cur? whilst thou as a whipped dog fly in thy Fathers face? surein
this case of muttering, murmuring, impatiency, like the carnal Israelites,
against God, against Moses, against Aaron, Exodus 16.2, 3. cap. 17.2. Number. 21.5.
in every cross and loss that has befallen thee in thy past or present
pressures, thou show thy self not a mournful dove, but a hissing Snake,
yea a stinging Serpent, not a patient plundered sheep, but a gruntling Hog, a
tusk-whetting Bore, when the hand of heaven touches thee, chiefly if Satan
enter so far into thee, as he did into Judas, Ioh. 13.27. and into Ananias,
Act. 5.3. and into Elimas the Sorcerer, Act. 13.10. and into Edens Serpent,
Genesis 3.1. and into the Pithonist or Ventriloquist at Philippos, Act. 16.16. as
still he speaks in seducing Friars and Jesuits, in blaspheming Heretics, and
in all cursing and accursed swearers, that instead of blessing God in thy
crosses, in thy losses by the plundering Caldeans, or Papal Babilonians, as
Job blessed God in his greatest exigents, Job. 1.20, 21. thou rave and rage like
a Bedlam, set thy mouth against heaven, like Homers Centaures to sight with
Jupiter, curse thy Creator, in the devilish Dialect of Jobs wife, blaspheme
thy Redeemer in tearing again, worse then the Jews on the Cross his heart,
wounds, blood, as a Dog does a harmless Hare, and a Wolf an innocent Lamb.
In this case thou have a soul as black as pitch, stinking and sulphurious. I
say of thee, as Simon Peter said of Simon Magus, Act. 8.23. thou art in the
gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity, in the very snare of the
Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26. yea his sympathizing son, Ioh. 8.34. he blaspheming God
in hell, or in the air where ere he carries his hell about him, and thou on
earth, like a Dutchman, a Frenchman, a Spaniard, or an Italian, thou may be
known by thy Tongue, to what Country thou belongest, even to the lower and
infernal Regions, to the real Styx, Tartaerus, and Flegeton, thy very speech
bewrayes thee, Mat. 26.37. were Satan on earth, in the form of a man, or
Caine, Judas, Achitophel, Julian the Apostate, Porphiry, Libanius, Hacket,
Kett, Michael, Servetus, Dioscorus, Nestorius, Arrius, here again returned out
of hell, they would bring their hell-fired tongues with them, and blaspheme
just as thou blasphemest, they would be (as birds of a feather) fit companions
and comrades with all God-dam-mees, and Roarers, whose mouths like Butchers
dogs, are bloody with bloody oaths, Herod and Pilate, Ahab and Iezabel, Simeon
and Levi, the Atheist and the Papist, the Caldean and the Sabaean never agreed
better now or heretofore in any mischief plotted or performed, then thou, both
in thy mouth and in thy mind, would consort with such Sathanicall sympathizers
with thy hellish humors: Oh this course, this carriage, is not to kiss thy
Fathers rod, like a dutiful, a patient, a penitent, a submissive Child, but to
snuff up the wind like an Onager or wild Ass, yea to kick and spurn (like
Iesurum, Deu. 32.15.) with the heel, as a Mule, when God would catch thee, as
we catch wild Colts, in a strait, in a lane, or betwixt thorny hedges, as Judah
catched Adonizebek, Judge. 1.4. and the Assyrians Manasses amongst the thorns,
2 Chronicles. 33.11. this shows thou art (as M. Deering once used the phrase at the
Court) not tanquam ovis, as a sheep silent before the shearer, Esa. 53.7. who
never bleats when the Butchers knife is at the throat, but indomita juvenca, an
untamed Bullock, bellowing when Saul's Doegs or Dogs be about thine ears: I
tell thee Siboleth and Shiboleth did not more clearly distinguish an
Ephraimite from a Gileadite, Judge. 12.6, 7. or the fire does not more
distinguish gold from dross, or the touchstone gold and pure silver from
counterfeit and adulterate metalls, then patience and impatiency, blessing or
blaspheming, the language of Canaan and the language of Ashdod; show thy heart
(thy mouths fountain) to be carnal or spiritual, degenerate or regenerate,
the habitation of Christ, 1 Cor. 13.5. Ephesians. 3.17, or a den of Devils, a cage
of Scorpions and a nest of unclean Birds, Mat. 15.19. yea, I say, the blew
spots nor the Carbuncle broke out, do not more show the plague, nor the white
spots the Leprosy of a Gehezi, a Miriam, a Naaman, nor a stinking breath
demonstrates not more infected lungs, nor the red ploukes and rubies in the
face and nose of a Drunkard, testify not more plainly a too much heated and
inflamed Liver, then oaths, curses, and blasphemies demonstrate a rotten, an
ulcerous, a poisoned and a polluted heart.

Oh, look to it! thou say it is thy nature, to curse, and swear, and tear
when thou art abased, abused, wronged or exasperated, thou art of a hot and
choleric disposition (so indeed are all Serpents which make them by a kind of
Antipathie with the moisture of the soils, to die as soon as ever they are
brought into the Islands of Gaulon in Creet, or into the Northern Lapponia, or
to Ebusus, or Sardinia, Apud Aelianum lib. 5. Hist. c. 2 cum Solino, cap. 9.
cap. 25. cap. 31. and Mela, lib. 2. ca. 5.
as well as they died in Ireland, for the same cause, ere ever S. Patrick was
born) then, thou hot spawne of the old Serpent know this, that in this plea of
nature, thou show there is in thee little grace, rectifying, ruling,
conquering, curbing, crucifying nature, with all natural lusts, affections and
infections, Gal. 5.24. alas! if there be in thee naught but unclean and
polluted nature by generation, without regeneration by grace, in thee new
birth, the true birth, thou shall (dying in that polluted estate) come to
heaven, when the Devil and the damned come out of hell, Joh. 3.6. 1 Cor.
15.50. Rev. 21.8. and 27.

Besides to brush down the Cobweb lawnes of this excuse, and to show thee the
weakness of this poor paper cloak, to keep off the showers and the storms
of deserved vengeance, may not a Dog as well as thou plead, it is his nature to
bark, to bite at strangers, to worry sheep; the Wolf, (yea the Irish Wolf
called Rebel) that it is his nature to devour our English Lambs? the Hog,
that it is his nature to gruntle, to despise Pearls? the Ass to bray? the Lion
to roar? the Horse-leach to suck blood like a biting Usurer? the Scarabean
Flea, like a Lecher, to delight in filth and dunghills? the drunken Ape and the
Monkey to desire strong liquids? the silent Serpent Dipsas, like the poisoning
whisperer and caluminator, secretly to sting? the Turky-cock like an open
railer, to bluster? the house Cur like a dogged detracter to bite at the best,
if they feed him not with crusts? the Parrot, like a trencher Parasite and a
Buffon, to prate for an Almond? the Swan and the Peacock like a fautastick to
be proud of their plumes, without ever looking at their foul and black feet?
and so the rest of beasts sympathizing with graceless men, in name, natures,
and nurtures, 2 Pet. 2.12. Tit. 1.12. may plead nature for their worst
properties most prejudicial unto man, as well as natural men for their
belluine and brutizing conditions, poetized by Ovid to be turned into beasts.
But let me expostulate with thee a little further, what gettest thou by thy
impatient imprecations or execrations? (which thou may as well spare as dirt
from thy nails, or smoke from thy chimney) they gain thee not so much as a
shoe latchet; nay, (like jealousy and gnawing envy) they are their own
plagues, causeless curses like balls thrown up into the air, light pat on
thine own pate; thou hurtest none by them but thy self, like squibs they
flash and crack, and send their stink in thy own nose: the ball thrown against
a wall hurts not the wall, no more then the waves which dash against the rock
hurt the rock, but break themselves to froath and foame: in raging against God
or man thou kickest against an Iron prick, and the Iron enters into thy own
soul, Acts 9.6. thou roasts at thy own fire, and hurts thy fretting furious
self: besides impatiency in a cross cures it, as mire and soot wash thy face
fowler and fowler, what is it but as Mercury to a green wound more to fret it?
yea, as the horse in a quagmire, a bird in the limebush, and the rabbet in the
Warreners net; the more the impatient madcap strives and struggles, the more he
intangles himself; if he belongs unto God, he will make him quiet for all his
plunging: if he be his Child by adoption, he will use more rods, and lay them
on more soundly, but he will ere he have done with him, make him as calm as a
Lamb, and as meek as a Dove: when Gods winds of wrath begin to blow and
bluster against any soul, he will either make it bow by humiliation, like a
yielding reed, as did David, Psa. 6.5, 6. Ezekias, 2 Chronicles. 32.24, 25, 26.
Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 12. and often repenring Israel, Judge. 2.5.6.7. 1 Samuel
7.6.7. Judge. 3.9. or he will blow it down as a stern and stubborn Oak, by
an utter rooting out and subversion, as he did Pharaoh, Exodus 14.27. Ahab, 1
King. 22. Jeroboam, and Jeconiah, buried (like many now) with the burial of an
Ass, with millions more in all ages, 1 King. 3, 34.

Besides, I say unto thee, in thy curses and execrations against this Malignant
and that Roundhead, in City, Court, or Camp, or sound head, as our turbulent
times have made the unhappy distinctions, as once betwixt the Guelphs and
Gibellines in Italy, betwixt the Aurelians and Burgundians in France, and
betwixt the Lancastrians, and those of the house of York in England; as once
God said to Rabshakeh and Senecharib, whom have thou reproached and blasphemed?
and against whom have thou exalted thy voice, even against the holy one of
Israel, 2 King. 19.21. against whom do thou cast thy squibs and darts and
firebrarnds? against whom (like an Armenian Dragon) do thou spit fire? thou
say against man, a weak worm like thy self, I tell thee, nay, it is
against God, as I have before made it plain, who now has set man against
thee, as his rod to whip to scourge thee, as he calls the King of Ashur, his
rod against Israel, even the rod of his anger in the hand of his indignation,
Isai. 10.5. as Attilas the cruel Goth, called himself Flagellum Dei, the whip
of God to scourge the world, as Tamberlane was but Gods rod against Bajazet:
the Turk, and as the Turk in his conquests of Cyprus, Rhodes, Famagusta,
Constantinople, Malta, and in his inroads still into Hungary, Transylvania,
Dalmatia, Cracovia, and lately into some Sea coasts in Ireland, has been and
still is Gods rod and scourge to Idolatrous, Adulterous, bloody, cruel,
extorting, proud, drunken, profane, and hypocritical Christendom, to
apostatizing Europaeans from their first faith, as well as the Romans now in
some points, and as the Mahumetanized Churches of Asia, once planted by the
Apostles: so what are the Imperialists and Austrians now, but the rod of angry
Nemesis against Germany, and the Palatinate for their contempt of the Gospel,
chiefly for their overspreading painted Popery called Arminianisme, and so what
is the confederacy now of Ephraim and Manasses, against Judah, our Hibernified
Atheists, Papists, Carnallists, with Irish Caniballs, spoiling the goods and
sucking the bloods of many true-hearted Naboths and Nathanaels: what are these
but Gods rods upon us to correct our long forborne Delinquencies now visited in
Gods great Audit or Correction day, Jer. 9.6, 10. yea one of us fighting
against another of the same Religion and Profession, as many heads of the
Serpent Amphisbena are said to fight one with another, as we lately (like the
Midianites in Gideons time, Judge. 7.22. against the Midianites, the Ammonites,
and Moabites in Jehosaphats time, against the Syrians, 2 Chronicles. 20.23. as the
servants of Abner and of Ioab in David's time, 2 Samuel 2.15, 16.) sheathing our
swords in the bowels one of another, as it is writ of Cadmus his brethren, and
of Brennus and Brentius, Polinices and Eteocles, Romulus and Remus, one of us
destroying another, like Bees in a Hive, in a bloody faction, not Bees against
Church-Drones, and State-Catterpillers at home, or against Romish Wasps and
Asps at home and abroad; what are these but rods in Gods hand, by which in his
just and unsearchable justice, he makes us to whip and scourge one another more
bloodily then the Jews once scourged S. Paul, 2 Cor. 11.14. or then the Monks
of Bangor whipped once poor King John; the result of all is, when any man is
an instrument to do us any good, as Obadiah to a hundred poor Prophets, 1
King. 18.13. and David to lame Mephiboseth, 2 Samuel 9. and the good Ethiopian
Ebedmelech to Jeremy, Ier. 38.7, 8. Paul to Onesimus, and Philip to the noble
Eunuch, Act. 8.36.37. such a man is unto us a rod of beauty in Gods right hand,
Zech. 11.10. when any does unto us any damage and detriment, either in
plundering our goods, as Caldeans to Job 1.17. or shedding our bloods, as Caine
did Abells, Genesis 4. or imprisoning our bodies, as the Philippian Magistrates
did Paul and Silas, Act. 16. or smiting us, as Pashur the Prelate did Jereremy,
Jer. 20.2. or doing us much evil, as Alexander the Copper-smith did Paul, 2 Timothy 4.14. in these cases and the like, man is unto us (as he is called in
Zachary,) a rod of hands in Gods hands, yea how ever man is to man, homo homini
Deus, aut demon aut lupus, a God, a Devil, or a Wolf, though in sheeps
clothing, whether a Jonathan, a Ioab, or a Judas, he is but an instrument of
God to plague man, or to pleasure man, God himself setting even Kings
themselves over men good or bad in justice or mercy for his own secret ends;
the same God (if we believe S. Augustine) who gave Augustus Trajan, Adrian, and
good Emperors, Fathers of their Countries, giving also Nero, Caligula, Decius,
Domitian, and other truculent Tyrants: David was so sensible of this truth,
that when Shemei reviled him, he attributed to God the setting this Bandog upon
him, 2 Samuel 6.10. so Job attributes his plunderings not to the Sabeans, the
instruments, but to Gods permissive providence, giving and taking Goods from
him, Job 1.21. and Joseph ascribes his selling and sending into Egypt not so
much to his brethren as to God himself, Gen 45. v. 5. yea whatsoever Herod and
Pilate, and the Jewe and the Gentiles, and Judas did to Christ in his
crucifying, the Apostles attribute it to the Counsel and Decree of God, Act.
4.26, 27. Judas acting in the death of Christ out of covetousness, Luke 22.5.
the Pharisees out of envy, Mar. 15.10. Pilate out of base and servile fear to
displease Caesar, and the Jews, Mar. 15. v. 15. but God wrought in all these
permissively and dispositively, to the glory of his mercy and justice, to the
redemption of his elected one, Col. 1.14. the obduration of the reprobates, the
rising and falling of many in Israel, Luke 2.34. as I have reflexed fully on
this point in my Origens repentance.

These premises considered, thou never looking up to God in thy present losses,
crosses, pressures, plunderings, the chief efficient cause, Iam. 3.38. not to
thy own unrepented sinnus, the meritorious and deserving cause, 1 Samuel
12.18.19. Iam. 3.39. but merely unto man the isntrumental cause, like a Swine,
who has eyes only to look downward to the earth, but never upwards to
heaven, looking upon the creature with the eyes of carnal reason, without the
Creator, thou art enraged against this man and that man, thy heart rises at
him, as at an Incendiary object, as Turky-cocks and Unicornes be enraged at the
sight of red Stammell, and as Bullocks bellow at the sent or sight of blood;
hence thou goarest thy enemy in the sides, thou tearest him with thy tongue, as
a chased Horse or Boar, thou casts thy scums and froths upon him, and art as
much exasperated against him, as the Romans against Cassius, Brutus, and
Dolobella, when they saw the bloody garments of stabbed Caesar.

In these mad postures of thine acting the parts of a second mad Ajax against
Ulysses, or of Hercules, Furens, or Orestes, in the Tragedians, against mere
man, never looking up to God nor into thy self; what do thou but like a
testy dog which runs after a stone thrown at him, which he bites and snarles,
never looking at the hand that throws it, as if a fool should break an arrow
all to fitters which hits him and hurts him, wreaking his wrath on it (as the
fabled Weazle to her own burning, bit the hot iron which fell upon her foot)
never looking to the arm which drew the bow and shot it; as some graceless
Fellons and their friends as I have seen, throw stones at the Hangman and
curse the Executioner, never considering that it is the Judge, the Law, and
their own demerits and fellonies which execute them, the poor hangman does
but his office: thou in this case that ragest against thy foes, thy formal
friends, plunderers, yea, against Committees, Excize men, Sequestrators and the
like, licking their own fingers, and feathering thou think their own wings,
(some of them as receivers, deceivers have been, yea, Empsonians, Dudleans,
Zacheusses, and Publicans have sitten at the receipt or deceit of custom,
customarily in all ages;) thou art possessed with such a mad and malignant,
spirit as whisome that great hearted Byron in France, and Fisher the
Arch-Traitor in England who in their impatiency breathing revenge, even in
death would have wreaked their wraths on their very Executioners, whom our once
noble Essex, Sir Walter Rawely, Sir Thomas Moore and the late Hibernian Heroes
as freely forgave, as S. Stephen did his stoners, Act. 7.60. Christ and his
primitive and modern Martyrs, their Crucifiers, Luke 23.34. vade and tu fac
similiter, do thou the like according to Christ's practice and precept, Mat.
5.44. if thou willest be a patrizing sympathizing son of a heavenly Father.

And to set a further edge upon thee to the performance of this duty and to
curb and bridle thy corrupt heart, which is ever meditating moulding, plotting,
searching and projecting revenge against those that have made thee extremely
passive in plucking thy golden feathers, and making thee as naked as a worm,
or as Esops Crow, when she was deplumed, nothing (according to Machiavells rule
and the Italians practice) being sweeter then revenge, to give a Rowland for an
Oliver, to pay an enemy home in his own coin in retalinted vengeance, an eye
for an eye, even as one mad dog or wolf devoures another; but chiefly since
this forgiving and forgetting injuries as the Estridge forgets her eggs,
writing wrongs in dust, is durus sermo, a bitter pill to swallow a hard morsel
to digest, going against the hair, against the heart, against the very stream
and torrent of corrupt nature, against the course and custom of the world and
worldlings, since hoc opus hic labor, to subdue thy rebellious nature, and
conquer thy corrupt heart in this case is more then an Herculean task, a
greater Conquest then to subdue a Cacus, a Cerberus, an Hidra, a Leana, a
Calidonian Boar, with Meleager, or a Serpent at Bagrada, with Regulus:
therefore to help thee in this conquest; this one consideration may be as
valiant a Champion for thee as Achilles for his Patroclus, namely, that those
against whom thy heart so rises and rages, are not thy enemies, and then with
whom sightest thou thus, but with thine own shadow? or as a Don Quixot with
Rams and Windmills? but at this thou startlest as Moses at his rod turned
Serpent, Exodus 4.2. and criest out, as once Michay and Laban, Genesis 31.30. they
have stolen away my Gods, Judge. 10.24. my goods, my golden Calfe which I
adored. Col. 3.5. and are they not mine enemies? but bona verbil quaeso, be not
so hasty, festina lent, pawse a little upon it, and thou will find that if
thou could but follow the rule of Plutarch a Pagan, how to make use of
enemies, and to get fruits from foes, even grapes of grace from the thorns and
thistles of their hostility, as Sampson got honey even out of a dead Lion, Judge.
14.8. then thou would see, that as Isaac mistook Jacob for Esau, Genesis 27.24.
so thou have all this while mistook thy friends for thy foes; and as one cried
in Stobeus, O philoioude philoi, O friends, no friends, so thou should cry, O
foes no foes; or if foes in the effects of your Vatinian hate, yet in the
effect you are no foes, as you better mine estate, as you are fierce winds to
drive my sin-fraught soul to the haven of grace, to the port of peace, as you
are like gall and soot laid to the desired duggs of the bewitching world, to
weane me from it, as Surgeons with sharp Goads to Phlebotomize my vain veins,
to cure me in the dangerous Plurisies and burning Fevers of my boiling lusts,
to prick and break (though with your swords and rapiers) the secret Impostimes
of my putrid hypocrisy, my sordid covetousness, with the swelling tympany of
my pride, and vain glory, getting thus good from the intended harms of thy
foes, as Joseph and Mardocheus were brought to exaltation by a envious
opposition, Daniel to further grace with Darius, and his three companions to
higher places by calumination, and detraction, Genesis 40.38. Esther 7. Dan. c. 3.
cap. 6. which was also the case of Herod at the table of Augusius Caesar in
Josephus, and of Themistocles in Athens, exiled to his advancement: I say if
thou get sweet siggs of grace from the and wormwood of thy enemies, as
Physicians and Paracelsians extract Antidotes and Mithridate against poisons,
and Restoratives against Consumptions, even from poisonous Toads, Nutes and
Serpents, then thy supposed foes are but men made of strawes, but Scar-Crowes
in Cherry Trees; thou fightest but with shadows, as some Hiperboreans are said
to fight with the North wind, and Pigmees with Cranes, thou art more frighted
then hurt with these Eutopians, as children with Bugbeares, who only (like the
Apes in Plutarch, who marched with green boughs in their Claws on the side of
a mountain) seem to be enemies, but are not, or at most enemies in their acts,
but friends in their effects, as the divine providence disposes of their evil
wills to effect in thee his own good work, as their deep furrows plowed in
thy humbled and rent heart, fits it by receiving the seed of the Word, the
Gospel of grace to bring forth the harvest of sanctified fruits more
abundantly with patience, which being the very mark I shoot at, and the nail
I drive at, that the City may be answerable to the gate, this Tractate to the
Title of Fruits from Foes, let me but hammer into thy head and heart these
subsequent considerations.

First, that if thou be a foe to thine own lusts, which fight against thy
soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. and hate merely what God hates, sin in thy self and
others, as did David, Psa. 119.115. and Lot, 2 Pet. 2.7. and Jeremy, Jer. 9.1.
it is an evident argument to thy own soul, that as was said of Abraham, Jam.
2.17. of Lazarus, John 11.11. and Christ's Disciples, John 15.11. thou art Gods
friend, and therefore no marvel if the world be thy foe; for if thou were of
the world, the world would love his own, John 15.19. as every Ape her own
young, every Crow and Owl her own Bird, every Ethiopian Mother her own
Child, though as black as her self, as cicada cicadae chara, and Graculus
assidet Graculo, one Jay jangles to another, and birds of a feather flock
together; Ego novi Sinonem, and Sinon novit me, as Erasmuus has it in his
adage, a couple of Knaves are as well met, as the biting usurer and his broker,
the thief and the refetter, the braggadochean Thraso and his trencher Parasite
Gnato, and as a luxurious Prince and a Gaveston his fatal Pander, a covetous
Prince that like a Hawke would pounce golden game, loves such Officers as are
Spaniels to spring it, and a drowsy, dull, dead hearted people, love such a
Pastor as will charm them asleep in their Lethargicall security, and sow
pillowes under their elbowes, to further their slumbering in the shadow of
death, but a Boanerges, a son of thunder, that will sound in their ears
Esayes Trump, and ring Aarons Bells, and cry with the voice of a Baptist to
awaken them ere the Trump of Judgment, 1 These. 4.16. he is no Lettice for
their lips, away with such a fellow from the earth, Act. 22.22. similis simili
gaudet, like loves his like, by a natural sympathy and similitude, causa
amoris, similitude draws love as the adamant the iron, and the Caesian winds
the clouds, but dissimilitude breeds dislike and distaste in judgment and
affection: Hence if thou be in Christ, and crucified to the world and the
world to thee, Gal. 2.20. and cap. 5.24. there is as great an Antipathie
betwixt thy enemy and Christ's enemy, and the worlds friend and favorite that
is merely carnal, 1 Cor. 3.3. Jam. 4.4. 1 John 2.15. and thou that art
spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.15. and truly answerest thy name Christian, Acts 15.26. as
there is a disagreement betwixt grace and nature, light and darkness, God and
Mammon, Christ and Belial, 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. Michael and the Dragon, Rev. 12.7.
yea as there is contrariety betwixt the Elephant and the Unicorne, the Fox and
the Lamb, and the Wolf and the Sheep, whose very guts made into strings will
never accord and tune together in a Lute, more then the bloods of Polinices and
Eteocles would mix together after they had slain each other: assure thy self,
let a carnal man, either an open profane wretch like Esau, or a rotten
hearted hypocrite sycophantize with thee and observe thee for his own sinister
ends, and adhere unto thee as Demas once to Paul, 2 Timothy 4. yet so long as thy
works are good and his evil, and thy life and light a real Sermon to blame
and shame his, he loves thee no better then Judas did Christ whom he betrayed,
then Herod did the Baptist whom he beheaded, though he reverenced and heard him
gladly, Mar. 6.20. nay he hates thee inwardly for the same cause that Caine
hated Abel, 1 John 3.12. Jezabel Elias, 1 King. 19.2. and Ahab Micaiah, because
he prophesied no good unto him, 1 King. 22.8. because thy right steered life,
like Noah's once amongst the worldings, and Lots among the Sodomites, Luke
17.27, 28. shames the irregularities of their vain discourses and vicious
courses, Lux oculis aegris odiosa, thy light which shines before men, Mat.
5.16. offends their blood-shotten eyes, as the Sun does the pur-blind Owl, the
Lion, Wolf, Fox, Badger, Otter, Fowmant, Weazill, Poulecat, and all beasts of
prey, love the night better then the day, darkness more then light: now thou
art of the day, if Christ the Day Star be risen in thy heart, Luke 1.78. and
shine in that Orb by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. thy enemies are of the night, 1 These.
5.4, 5. therefore however they seem to collogue and to close with thee, they
are as discrepant from thee in their dispositions, and at as far a distance
in their infected affections, as the Northern and Southern Pole; the Raven is
thought by some to forsake her young ones for a time, because in their first
hatching they are white and downy, then God is said to feed them; but after a
while when she returns and finds them black like her self, she takes to them
as her own, fabula de te narratur, Bercorius in his Moral Reductory, and
Geminianus in his Similies make the Application.

Now is this no fruit from a Foe, that his hostility proclaims thee to be
Christ's friend? whose love will stand thee in a thousand times more stead then
Ionathans did David, or Damons to his Pithias: A wise Courtier had rather have
his King his friend, with his Ego and Rex meus, though all the emulating Court
be against him, then to curry favor with the Court, and be at a frowning
distance with the King, si Deus nobiscum, quis contra nos? if God be with thee,
who can be against thee? Romans 8.31. if I have the Sun shining in my face, what
need I the lesser twinkling Stars, or the light of a candle which may go out
with the least windy puff, and leave in my nose a stinking snuff? it is some
content to be assured I am in the right way in my Pilgrimage to my heavenly
home, though all the Dogs (and Doegs) bark at me in every Town thorough which
I pass.

Secondly, as a Corollary to this consider seriously, that if thou be patient,
sustinendo and abstinendo, in which Epictetus epitomized Moral Philosophy, in
sustaining and bearing the brunts and blasts of thy foes, and in abstaining and
forbearing from revenge, then God is engaged by promise, which he ever
performs, 1 These. 5.23. to be thy avenger on thy enemies if in thee they
oppose him, Romans 12.19. as he avenged David of Michals mocks, 2 Samuel
6.16.20.23. of Shimeies revilings, 2 Samuel 16.10. 1 King. 2.44. of Nabals
churlishness, 1 Samuel 25.39. Ezaekiah of the railings of Rabshakeh, and the
blasphemies of Senacherib, 2 King. 19.28.37. Abraham of the intended wrongs of
Abimelech, Genesis 20.7.18. a zealous Prophet on Jeroboam, whose hand he withered,
1 King. 13.4. Moses on Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, whom the earth swallowed,
Numb. 16. Lot on the Sodomites whom he first blinded, Genesis 19.11. and then
burned, V. 24. as he did Valens the Arrian in a Shepherds Cottage, the great
enemy to S. Basil, Apud Marcell. lib. 3. Hist.
so he avenged the Counsel of Calcedon on their grand enemy Anastasius whom he
smit with a Thunderbolt, Eutropius, lib. 3. cap. 5. Azariah the high Priest, on
presumptuous Vzziah, whom he smit with Leprosy, 2 Chronicles. 26.20, 21. Athanasius
on Constantius the Arrian Emperor, whom he cut off in great distraction of
mind, Idem Hist. lib. 12. Amb. lib. 5. Epist. 52.
S. Ambrose on Valentinian his persecutor, who was hanged by his own servants,
Gregory the best Roman Bishop of those that succeeded him, on Mauritius the
covetous Emperor slain by Phocas a cruel coward Blondus lib. 3. decad.
, with many more which might be enumerated in all times and ages, the Lord ever
siding with his Sion, his Militant Church, against all her malignant opposers,
as he did with his Christ her Head and Husband against Herod, the Scribes, the
Pharisees, Annas and Caiphas, chiefly on Pilate, who hanged himself after his
disgraces with Tiberius and Caius, as their Tragedies are recorded, not only
by Eusebius, Hist. lib. 2 c. 7. and Nicephorus, lib. 2. c. 10. but even by the
Paganish Writers of the Olimpicks of the Greeks.

Now is this no fruit from a foe, that as his wrongful, undeserved, unprovoked
hatred and opposition shows thee (as I have proved) to be Christ's friend, so
reciprocally Christ to be thy friend: as Pilades was to Orestes, as well as
Orestes to Pilades Vt praestem Piladem aliquis mihi praestat Orestem.
Nisus to Eurialus, Titus to Gisippus, as well as Eurialus to Nisus, Gisippus
to Titus, according to the rule, ut ameris amabilis esto, love begetting love,
as one candle lights another, one burning coal kindles another, yea, as
Naphtha is said to take fire at the near approach of fire: and is Christ's
friendship barren of golden, of gracious fruits? Can a true friend indeed, an
alter ego, a second self, a Philadelphus, a sworn brother, a friend and a
brother, in the bond of blood, in the nearest link of love, as Christ is to his
Church, Heb. 2.12, 17. stand by and see his friend need and bleed, yea in the
paw of a Wolf, or a Lion, or in the fangs of a mad Dog, or on the horns of a
Bull of Basan, and he administer no help from a strong and an armed arm? Can
a father, though as stern as a Manlius, or a Brutiu, do this to a child, if
there be any storge or spark of affection in him, if he do not more stupidly
then a Stoic or stock, hominem exuere, put off all that speaks him man, like a
brutized monster? yea, can a Husband do this that loves his Wife in the
nearest and dearest union, which Tullie himself makes marriage, in his book of
friendship. Now was there ever any Father loved a Child as Christ does all his
Children by adoption, who cry Abba, Father, Romans 8.14, 15. Did Abraham ever so
love his Isaac, his son by nature and by promise, as Christ does every
believer the son of Abraham by faith, Gal. 3.7. as Zacheus was called, Luke
19.10. Was there ever in the best improvement of love, such a near and dear
union and communion of moral love, betwixt Solomon and Hiram, Agamemnon and
Nestor, Theological love, betwixt Basil and Nazianzene, Augustine and Alipius,
Eusebius and his Pamphilus, natural love betwixt Jacob and Joseph, Helena and
her Constantine, Matrimonial love betwixt Jsaac and Rebecka, Elkanah and Anna,
Admetus and his Alcest, Brutus and his Portia, Collatinus and his Lucrece, as
betwixt Christ and his espoused and contracted Church, and every living and
loving member of the same? Hos. 2.19. Ephesians. 5.23.24.32. now thou art ingrafted
into Christ as a wild Olive by nature into a good Olive tree, Romans 11.24. and
in him brings forth much fruit, John 15.4, 5. this is one fruit amongst the
rest which grows on the tree of thy penitence and patience, that if thou stand
for Christ, for his Truth, for his Religion, as once that Athanasius called the
Atlas of the Faith, he will be sure to stand for thee, and to be with thee as
thy Champion, and deliver when thou passest through the waters, and through the
rivers that they do not overflow thee, as he was with Moses, and Aaron, and
Israel in the red Sea, Exodus 14. and with Noah in the first universal Deluge,
Genesis 7.1. and he will be with thee when thou walk through the fire, as he
was with the three Jewish Martyrs in the furnace, Dan. 3.25. and with S. John
in the furnace, into which Domitian cast him, Tert. in praescrip. adversus
Haeret.
according to his promise to all true Israelites, the spiritual sons of
Jacob, Esaias 43.1, 2, 3. yea he will be with thee as he was with wrestling and
conquering Jacob, Genesis 32.24. when any Laban or Esau comes against thee for any
intended mischief; Oh assure thy self he will be with thee when thou art
amongst Lions, as he was with Daniel, cap. 6. and when thou fightest with such
beasts as Paul fought with at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15.32. with Bears as David, 1 Samuel 17. with young Lions as Sampson, Judge. 15. and with men whose tongues are
swords and sharp arrows, and under whose lips is the poison of Asps; yea if
thy enemies with the horn of their power push thee into prison he is with thee
there also, as with Joseph, in Putiphars Goal, Genesis 29.21. with Jeremy in the
dark Dungeon, Jer. 32.2. with Paul and Silas in the Philippian Prison, Act.
16.25, 26. yea with pious Philpot, once in the Bishop of Londons Cole-hole, and
with that Martyr in Mr. Fox his Martyrologie, who writ from his prison his
delectable Paradise in Argiers, yea if thou be exiled and banished from thy
house and harbor, he is with thee where ever thou art racketed and bandied, as
he was with Abraham in a strange Country, Genesis 12.7. with Isaac amongst the
Philistines, Genesis 26.12.24. with Jacob in Padan-Aram, Genesis 20.43. and in Egypt,
Genesis 47.27. yea if thou be led to execution and to suffering for his names
sake, to which there is a blessing pronounced, Mat. 5.12. he is with thee there
also, as he was with Peter and Paul, crucified with their heads downwards, with
Laurence roasted on a Gridiron, with Polycarpus, grinded to be pure Manchet for
Christ, with the teeth of Lions, with Dagilla, Tecla, Quintilia, Petronella,
pulled and torn in their flesh from the bone with burning Pincers, yea with
our Q. Mary's Martyrs, sincere Saunders, blessed Bradford joyfully paying his
vows in Smithfield, trusty Tailor skipping in joyful Levaltoes when he was
near his burning sacrifice, godly Glover sensible of the approach of the
Spirit, and with that young man who at the stake no sooner cried Sun of God
shine upon me, but in a dark and gloomy day the Sun cast such gleames on him on
a sudden, as astonished all the Spectators, yea as their last foe and enemy
that is to be subdued is death, 1 Cor. 15.

Christ according to his promise, Psalm. 41.3. is with his Saints, they have him
with old Simeon in the arms of their faith: and with Paul live and die by
faith; both in their natural death as he was with Jacob bowing and worshipping
on his sick bed; and with Theodosius, Augustne, Ambrose, Luther, Calvin,
Oecalampadius and others, whose last spiritual breathings, with Spirits
surrendered into their Fathers hands, are recorded to exultation and admiration
by Grineus in his Apothegmata morientium, amongst his Thesis in quarto, as also
he is with them in the most virulent and violent deaths, which cruelty and
tyranny can invent; as he was with every one of his Apostles, who were martired
(excepting S. John) whose acts, lives and glorious deaths, are fully recorded
to any that will for consolation and imitation peruse them in Eusebius his
first book of Histories cap. 25. his second book, cap 1. his third book. cap 1.
his ninth book cap 1. Nicephorus his second book cap. 40. his fourth book cap.
7. Sabellicus his seventh book Eneid. 4. Russinus his first book cap. 9. Hierom
in the life of Paul, the Magdeburgians in their Centuries, Cent. 1. lib. 2.
cap. 10. and Hosiander their Epitomizer, Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 30. which I
allege as Inns by the way, where the learned reader may drink if he will, the
unlearned pass by them if he like them not.

The result of all is this, if thou be a Believer, (for I have Cordialls only
for such as corasives to the slaves of sin and Satan) if thou have such
relations to Christ as I have touched upon, as to a head, a husband a father, a
friend, then let who will be the rod in Gods hand to afflict thee, the
instrument or executioner to torment thee, be they Achitophels and Hamans for
pestilent plots, Judasses and Joabs for treachery, Neroes, Caligulaes, and
Perianders, for cruelty, Serpents for subtilty, Lions for power, Foxes for
policy, though they spin never such Spiders webs to catch thee, set never so
covered snares to entrap thee, though they despise thee, dispight thee, vilify
thee, nullify thee, revile thee, peesecute thee, and hunt thee as Saul did
David, as Iezabel did Elias, and Pope Leo Luther, though they defame thee and
slight thee, as the false Apostles did Paul, as the Pharisees did Christ, as
the Arrians the Orthodox Christians, as the Papists all Protestants, some
calling their very hounds by the name of Luther, Calvin, and the like, as the
mad and unwormed whelps of Cerberus, our Familists, Fantasticks, new Seekers
and Anabablers, term now all zealous and judicious Divines no better then
black Dogs barking in Pulpits, in Steeple and Stone Churches, as Satan speaks
in them as at first, so still in Serpents: I fay, if they could hate thee, and
howl at thee more then Julian the Apostate, Porphiry and Lucian the Atheist
against thy incarnate Savior, yet nevertheless I can give thee this mirth in
mourning, joy in tribulation, light in darkness, rejoicing in suffering, Act.
5.40. 1 Cor. 4.9, 10. honor in thy disgrace, 1 Samuel 2.30. and such an
Ariadnees thread to bring thee out of the mazes and Labyrinths of their
perturbations, (as I have given Cordialls for every other cross in the end of
my seven helps to Heaven) that thou may be sure of a good issue in a
victorious Trophie and Triumph over all thy enemies, if thou can but rest and
rely by faith and affiance on the Lord of Hosts, who fights in thee, with thee,
and for thee, as he fought in and for David against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.45. in
and for Jonathan against the Philistines, 1 Samuel 14.6. for Gideon against the
Midianites, Judge. 7.20. for Iehosaphat against the Amorites and Syrians, 2
Chro. 20.12.13. in and for Abraham against five Kings, Genesis 14.13. in and for
Joshuah against the Canaanites, Jos. 1.5. cap. 5.14. in and for Abiah against
Idolatrous Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 13.9, 10. in and for Asa, who relied on him
against the Lubims and Ethiopians, 2 Chronicles. 16.8. in and for Barak and Deborah,
against Jabin and Sisera, Judge. 4. yea besides infallible Scripture instances,
as he is the same God to day, yesterday and for ever, Heb. 13.8. semper
praesenter hic and ubique potenter, as the great soul of the world, as Plato
calls him ever present and resident with his Church, Mat. 28.20. ever near to
them who draw near to him, Jam. 4.8. as a friend to help at a dead lift, even
in the last exigent of extremity, which is usually his opportunity, even when a
red Sea is before his Church, and a Pharaoh behind: so why can he not, why will
he not deliver thee, yea this whole nation according to his promise, Jer. 18.4,
5. in his due time, since his hand is not shortened, Esaias 59.2. as well free us
from our inbred enemies to our Sion, to our grace and peace at home, as he
delivered Rehoboam and all Israel from the Egyptian Shishak, a mighty foreign
enemy abroad, could we act the same parts with them in godly sorrow which
brings salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. as we re-act their sins, yea, the very sins of
Sodom, Ezekiel. 16.49. Esaias 1.10. yea, though all things in Church and State seem
to be luxate and dis-joynted, as a body without nerves and sinews, as once in
Israel, when there was no King, Jud. 18.1. or as some say in Rehoboams time,
when the green blades were preferred before the riper heads, the young
counselling Phaetons before the solid Senators, yea though all things, as some
mutter, some vociferate, and utter, seem to be turned suique deque, topsie
turvie, upside down, in our antipodized times by the wracks of war, as if a
dish were turned with the bottom upward, and a ship with the sails downward,
in such a Hysteron Proteron, as few Ages have ever seen, chiefly Plebeian Owls
throwing down Eagles nests, Crows chattering, and Nightingales the sweet
singers of Israel, silent, learned and Orthodox Buclarks Ciphers, and Dolts and
Dorbells Figures, knowledge a mere mute, and ignorance a sounding Vowell,
though never Consonant, Mechanical, blind arrogance perking into Moses his
Chair, with as much peril to mushrump ungifted, uncalled usurpers, both to
their own souls and others, as once to leprous Vzziah intruding into the
Priests Office, 2 Chronicles. 26. to Vzzah in staying the tottering Ark without a
call, 2 Samuel 6. to Nadab and Abihu, in offering strange fire, Lev. 10.1, 2. and
to Dathan, Korah and Abiram resisting proudly and rebelliously Moses and Aaron,
Numb. 16. as though they were dropped out of the clouds to curb, yea to crush
both Magistracy and Ministry, which took too much upon them, and that they
had such a flash and flux of Revelations to guide and govern both themselves
and others for life and Doctrine, that Christ as Office perde, clean out of
Office, unable or unwise to rule Church or Commonwealth by his Powers or
Ordinances secular or spiritual, might take them back again to heaven if he
would, and lock them as Aeolus the disturbing winds into his own closet, they
had no more need of them then the Ephesians had of Paul's Gospel, when they
would cry up their Diana, Act. 17. then Idolatrous Israel had of Moses when
they caused Aaron to set them up a golden Calfe of their own making, Exodus
32.3. then John a Leyden, Knipperdolin, and Munster had need of any other
warrant from the word, but Revelations for massacring a hundred thousand
Commons besides Nobles in their Rustic Belgic War, or then the Fratricelli,
the Flagellants, the Beguardines, the Familists, the naked Adamites of latter
times in Germany and Italy, with the Enthusiasts and David-Gorgians, the
Swinekfeldians, and the Anabaptists, Michael Servetus in Geneva, Gentilis in
Berne, Jack Cade, Wat Tiler, and Straw in England, Ket the blasphemous Arrian
in Norfolk, Hacket once in London, yea Montanus and Priscilla, who both hanged
themselves in Tertullians time, the Donatists and Circumcellians in Augustines
time, or any that would set up thirteen or fourteen Religions in one Kingdom
against one Truth, one Christ, one Salvation, Joh. 14.6. Ephesians. 4. all as
erroneous as the Jews Thalumd or Tucks Alchoran, and with as much warrant, as
to grant thirteen wives to one husband, thirteen Suns in one Firmament,
thirteen Kings in one Land, should for all their folly, fantasticalities,
blasphemies, and heresies of old, from hell new varnisht, stand any more in
need of the Word, of Scripture, Counsels, Fathers, or Schools of the
Prophets, then of a sixt-finger Revelations and a pretended spirit, like the
Popes all-commanding unerring Authority in his Chair must be the Domine fac
totum, that which strikes with the great hammer hits the nail on the head, the
great Apollo, the Ipse dixit the deciding Judge, the Oracle of truth; though
from a Diabolical Delphos from which there is no appeal, like Hercules his
pillars, ne plus ultra, now I say though in such Apostatizing in part or whole,
many have forsaken their first faith, fallen from their first love, set up
strange Gods, strange Idols, even as Israel in Rehoboams time were said to
forsake the Law of the Lord, and the Lord to forsake them, 2 Chronicles. 12. yet
there is hope in Israel, as repentance has ever won what sin has lost, as may
be seen in Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33.9, 10, 11, 12. in Nebuchadnezar, Dan. 3. in
the Ninevites, Jonas 3. in Peter, and often in sinning and repenting Israel,
Judge. 3.9 cap. 6.7. cap. 10. v. 10.

So had we but Ninevehs and Rehoboams humiliations, 2 Chro. 12.6. why might not
we have their exaltations? if we could sow in tears, why might we not reap in
joy? Psa. 126.6. if we have a wet seed time, why might we not have a hopeful
harvest? if we did mourn, why might we not yet be comforted? Mat. 5.4. why
might not all things prosper as in Rehoboams time, ver. 12. and go well with
us, and with our posterity? why might we not have Halcyon days after all these
storms and clouds? why might not our Horizon clear after all these showers of
blood? why might we not, like a bone that is broke and right knit, be stronger
then ever we were, both with God and man? Psalm. 51.8. could we with Jacob
wrestle with God, we should prevail with men yea with our foes, with our selves
being our own foes, as I hope by degrees to manifest, Genesis 32.28.

Let the conclusion of this pressed point be this, let us turn like Jordan and
the red Sea backward, all the stream and torrent of our hostility and hatred
one to another, against our selves and our own sin, which only make us
odious unto God, which are only the Ates and Haggs, which throw the balls and
brands (as Adultery betwixt man and wife) of division betwixt God and us, Esa.
59.2. take away the cause, and the effect will cease; take the mote out of the
eye, the thorn out of the heel, the thief out of the candle, the eye leaves
watering, the heel rankling, and the candle smoking: let us cast our
refractory Jonasses out of the Church, Achans out of the camp, Achitophels out
of the Court, Sinons and Heretical Simon Magusses out of our Cities,
self-seekers, finger-lickers, pence-spongers, state-caterpillars, corrupt
Officers out of place and grace, both in City and Country, chiefly every man
hew every Agag in pieces at home, mortify his own lusts, put the sacrificing
knife of the word and spirit to his bosomed Delilah, his own bewitching
domineering sin that most reigns in him, or as an entertained spirit is his
familiar; and so all remoras and obstructions removed, the chamber of our
hearts furnished for Christ's cohabitation, Joh. 14.23. Rev. 3.20. as he lodged
with Zachous, Luke 19. then he that is the Lord of our Castles will be sure to
keep them, the strong armed man being thrown out, Luke 11.22. we need no more
then fear foes spiritual or corporal, foreign or domestic, then one, of
the sons of Anak, or a Briarcus fears a Pygmie, then Ajax or Ashilles feared
babbling Thersites: will men both cominus and eminus, in offensive and defensive
wars, fight for their own rights, and possessions: and will not the Lord of
Hosts hold his own in us? will a Spaniard keep a Hold or Fort with tenacity,
that he once possesses? and as Jepthah told the King of Ammon, Jud. 11.24.
will every man hold his own, and keep that which God has given him, and will
not God hold his own? if we be his, will he suffer men to swallow us up quick,
as the great Whale did Jonas? if God command us not to forsake our friend and
our fathers friend, Prove. 27. he that has been a friend to our father Abraham,
and to David, and delivered them out of all their troubles, Psalm. 139.1. if we
insist in Abraham's steps, Romans 4 12. and be of the spiritual House and heart
of David, Zach. 12.10. he will also deliver us as he did them, according to his
purpose and promise, Psa. 34.18.19. he will not fail thee nor forsake thee,
more then he did Joshua, cap. 1.5. Heb. 13.5. he will lift up himself, and his
strength against thine enemies, Psalm. 7.6. he shall turn them backward, Psa.
9.3. and break the arms of then power, Psa. 10.15. they shall fall into the
pit that they have dug, and into the snare they have set for thee, as Faux,
Garnet, Digby, and our Jesuited powder Traitors were caught in their own
snares, Psa. 9.10, 11. he will keep thee as the apple of his eye, and hide thee
under the shadow of his wings, from the wicked that intreacheth thee, Ps.
17.9.10. though he come upon thee like a Lion greedy of his prey, v. 11.12. If
God once arise, and be present with thee, thy enemies shall be scattered as the
dust and chasse before the wind, they shall vanish as smoke, and melt as the
wax before the fire, Psa. 68.1.2. though they come about thee like Bees, or
like Thorns, they are but a blaze, they shall be extinct.

Call thou upon God in the day of thy trouble, that is thy duty; he will deliver
thee, that is thy dignity, Psalm. 50.15. Will the Regal Lion lose life, but he
will rescue his Whelps if he hear them yell? and will not the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, to whom vengeance belongs, Psalm. 94.1. avenge the cause of his
little ones, who cry night and day unto him? Did not the Romans, the Athenians,
and all the Pagans fight to the death pro focis, for their wives and children,
as well as pro Aris, for their Paenates, their house Gods! Oh! if the Greeks
were so encouraged in their Ajax and Achilles, the Trojans in their Hector and
Troylus, the Philistines in their Goliath? and most Nations in the Colyphonians
(though mercenary, like our Switzers) if they could get them to stand for them?
Shall not he that is armed cap a pe, with the shield and buckler of faith, be
confident of a Trophie over every malignant enemy, external, internal and
infernal, that fights under the banners of Jehovah Elohim, the great Commander
and disposer of all created powers and natures, Angelical, humane and
belluine, from the Lion to the Worm, and the wretched Wren who can do a
thousand times more for his friends and favorites, then ever Achilles for his
Patrocius, whose death he so revenged; or Hercules for his Theseus, or
Pirotheus, not being able to save himself from the plots of Nessus the
Centaure, no more then Samson (the Jewish Hercules) from the complottings of
his Harlot and the Philistines against his life and liberty, Iud. 16.20. so
unhappy is all humane power and strength (as all may see in these two broken
glasses) if God once leave it, as the German Phoenix Melancthon has well
observed: so happy are all those true Israelites, true-hearted Nathanaels,
patrizing with Abraham, to whom God has made a promise, that he will bless
those who bless them, and curse those who curse them, Genesis 12.3. there being
as it were a covenanted League (as now betwixt two Nations, and often betwixt the
Romans and their Confederates) betwixt Christ and his Church, mutually to aid
one another in all essays and assaults. Oh! if the Saints be blessed who offer
themselves willingly to help the Lord, Judge. 5.9.23. it is no question of the
other auxiliary; God will never be wanting to help them, secundum necessitatem,
non voluntatem, according to their necessity, when God will, not according to
their own will, (which is now the case of our English Sion) forbeggers must be
no choosers: Novit Medicus, non agrotus, our Physician knows better then we,
poor impatient Patients, how and when to balm our long Phlebotomized bleeding
times from our regnant crimes: we must not indent nor articulate with the King
of Kings, nor limit the Almighty by our prescriptions, as did the Bethulians,
Judith 7.30, 31. and that wicked Iehoram, 2 King 6.33. it is enough that he
will not always be plowing, and that the rod of the wicked shall not always
be upon the godly, but at last be burned, when his peccant children are
scourged and humbled, upon his promises of deliverance, tandem aliquando, at
his good leisure and pleasure, not at ours: In the interim, let every perplexed
spirit work upon this meditation, (even parallelling parvis magna, the strong
God with the weak arm of flesh:) that if the Romans put such successful
confidence in their Manlius, the defender of their Capitol; in their Camillus,
languishing Romes restorer; in their Marcellus, Romes sword; in their Fabius,
Romes Atlas against Hannibal, the Greeks in their Themistocles, the prop and
pillar: in their eloquent and thundering Orators Demosthenes and Pericles, and
of latter times the French in their Huon of Bourdeaux, their great Virago Jean
de Pucill, but chiefly in their Charles the son of Pipin, called the Hammer
of their enemies; as the Germans in their Otho the fourth, called for his
victories, Mundi miraculum, the wonder of the world; as the Hungarians once in
their Hunniades and Mathias, with others, whose Martial exploits are famoused
in Plutark, Livie, A. Gellius, Lib. 2, cap. 11.
Sabellicus, Lib. 6. Aeneid. c. 13
Aventinus, Lib. 3. annal.
Pontanus, De Fortitudine.
Fulgosus, Alex. ab Alexandro, lib 2. c. 11. and others, yea if our English
were sometimes so confident in the glories of our Nation, our Bevis of Hampton,
our Prince Arthur and his Knights, our Edmond son of Etheldred, called Iron
sides, our Guy of Warwick the Conqueror of Corinaeus, and other subduers of men
and monsters, yea, if we that were lately stormed and distressed in the Land of
Ire by the numerous Rebels, were so happy in the ever successful valor and
Heroic resolves of that undaunted Sir Charles Coot, the scourge Kerne as his
Anagram bears it, and the terror to the Rebels, as Richard the first once to
the Turks, and our Talbot to the French, whose very name put them into a
pannick fear, and made them fly as tripping Does and Rascals before our
Martial Beagles into Tyrones old Forts of Woods and Bogs.

I say, if there have been such helps, such hopes in all Ages, in arms of
flesh, in frail men, whose breaths were in their nostrills when God pleased to
animate them, as Organs of doing good, or preventing evils in some States and
Commonwealths, then rouzing our hearts a little higher, how much more hope and
affiance ought we to place in the fountain of strength, then in the streams?
in the root and strong bole, then in the weak and broken branches? in the
primitive power, then in the derivative? in him that both in the Abstract and
Concrete is both powerful and power it self, both mighty and might it self,
even omnipotent as well as omniscious, and omnipresent, who as by speaking but
a word he made the heavens, Genesis 1.15. calmed the Seas, turned the red Sea
backward, Exodus 14.22. stayed the raging of the waves and winds, Mat. 8.26.
cast out Devils, Mark 1.26. cured the Leapers, Mark 1.40. raised the dead, Joh.
11.43, 44. recovered the Centurions servant, Mat. 8.8. healed all diseases,
Mat. 9.2.29. so if he speak but the word he can sheath the sword, it shall not
drink a drop of blood more: if we could but turn to him as we are enjoined,
with rent hearts and broken, as corn in a Mill, and pepper in a Mortar, Joel
2.12. Psa. 51.17. we should by turning our mirth into mourning, Jam. 4.9. so
turn his frowns into favors, his judgments into mercies, that in a trice
his ear being not heavy to hear, Esa. 59.2. more then in the like cases with
ours, 1 Samuel 7.6, 7, Judge. 2.5, 6, 7. and cap. 20.26. with one word he would
turn our storms into calmes, our wars into peace, our sighs into songs of
deliverance; yea our Swords into Scythes, our Iron Helmets into Be Hives, our
instruments of cruelty into instruments of mercies, our Mars into Minerva, our
Martial Guns into Gowns: were but we turned as once Saul to Paul, Act. 9.6.
from Wolves to Lambs, from Goats to Sheep, from Newtralls and Laodiceans to
anchored Zealists, yea from Lions and rearing Tigers, to Kids, living and
loving together in a peace, inseparably married unto grace, Esa. 11.6, 7, 8.
Oh! could we with the old year cast away the old man, which is corrupt, and
old fashions and deceivable abominable lusts, Col. 3.9. Ephesians. 4.22. Romans 12.2.
and with the new year put on Christ the new man, and be renewed in the inner
man, Romans 13.14. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. as the Serpent casts off his old slough, the
Stag his old head, the Colt his old hair, the Lobsters their old shells, the
Eagle her old bill, whereby her age renews, and some men, women and children
their old teeth, (rather then their old tongues) could we thus cast off our
abominations, Ezekiel. 18.31. our lying vanities, Jon. 2.8. our heart Idols, Esa.
31.7. our works of darkness, Romans 13.12. with hatred and indignation, in
loathing and leaving every sin, the true signal of saving repentance, 2 Cor.
7.10.11. how soon then would God cast all our transgressions into the grave of
his son, into the midst of the Sea as a millstone, Micah 7.19. how soon would
he make an act of oblivion, Ezekiel, 18.22. of all our former Delinquencies, how
soon (contrary to the nature of Foes, but superficially reconciled) would he
write our enmity in dust, our repentance in brass? were we but once cast in a
new mould, as old metalls broke melted and renewed, to ring better peales of
prayers, and praises, how soon should we be cast into the arms of his mercies,
that by a justifying faith having peace with him, Romans 5.1. by our grand
peacemaker, Ephesians. 2.14. we should soon have peace one with another, though as
yet there is no peace to the wicked, says my God, Esa. 57, 21. neither let us
ever expect it, or delusively dream of it, so long as the Whoredoms and
Witchcrafts of so many Jezabels continue, 2 King. 9.22. of he and she, false
Prophets, Rev. 2.20. as by such old Heresies new conjured up from hell, and
such new fantasmes and fopperies as Angels and men fearce ever heard before,
the souls of so many millions are so poisoned, their minds so distracted, and
their intestine hatreds so inflamed one against another, more then ever the
Samaritans against the Jews, Joh 4.9. that Timpler, Althusius, Arnisaeus,
Tholosanus, Bodin the Frenchman, our English Case, and all Politicians within
the sphere of my reading, should be deceived, if Schisma Ecclesiasticum an
Ecclesiastical Schism, as it is now the mother, so it do not continue as in
all States where it kindles her wildfires) the Nurse seminary and fuellizer of
Schisma Politicum, of perpetuated factions, fractions, distractions, and
(Germany tells us) destructions also in our Commonwealths, and for my part I
wish my predictions might prove as false, as they will be slighted, though as
true as those of Laomedon, Chalcas and Cassandra, which were not believed, till
supine secure and incredulous Troy were fired, that the Toleration of many
Religions in one Kingdom, which some would thrust in upon us by head and
shoulders, invita Minerva, without one breathing of the Spirit from the word,
or the least glimpse of Conscience grounded on Science, Conscientia cordis
scientia, taking light from the unerring Scriptures, as the Moon from the Sun,
without which it is but like a Papal Purgatory, a Triton, a Chymaera, an
opinion at best, or a phantasme, that such a Toleration of Liberty as the
Libertines in Belgia once pleaded, and planted at last in blood, in the Rustic
war, will bring any more peace amongst us, then betwixt Menclaus and Paris,
striving for one Helena; or betwixt the true Mother and the false in Solomon's
time, contesting for one Child; or betwixt Caesar and Pompey, bandying bloody
blows for one Supreme Power; or betwixt the seven Cities that contested for one
Homer; or then was in Rome Papal, when three Anti-Popes, siring the whole
Christian world, run at Tilt for one Triple Miter; or then was betwixt Henry
Monmouth, the right Heir to an Albion Crown, and Richard the Usurper, when the
sword decided the undivided Scepter in Bosworth field: yea, no more probable
peace amongst many Religions, or indeed many painted errors, vanities, and
gross Heresies, if not such blasphemies as in the Jewish Thalmud, or Turkish
Alcoran, which (as our late powder Treason, the Irish Rebellion, Absaloms
conspiracy, Ahabs assasinating of Naboth, Read instances in Tholosanus de rep.
lib. 13. page 878. c. 7. page 909. c. 8.903, 904, 905. Bodin de rep. lib. 7. c.
7. page 547. Eusebius lib. 2. c. 13. Scorates lib. 5. hist. c. 16.
Herod's intensive butchering of the Bethlehem Babe, and the most pestilent
plots and designs for vile and sinister ends, ever amongst Jews, Turks,
Christians and Pagans, have ever been palliated and cloaked and veiled in the
habit of Religion, and in the helmet of holiness and honesty.

I say all these Hydra-headed errors, different from truth, and from
themselves, will no more gain or retain any peace, with one true Orthodox and
Uniforme Religion, then there was peace amongst the diversified lustful Lovers
of one Penelope, all hating Ulysses her legal husband, as well as one another;
or then peace betwixt Agamemnon and Achilles, about Briseis; Troilus and
Diomedes about one Cressida; Turnus and Aeneas about one Lavinia: alas such
Peace, (as any may foresee a storm, that sees the pendent pitchy Cloud,) as
has been ever among the Turkish Ottomans, when he that prevailed in the
Throne, whether justly or unjustly, ever either imprisoned, exoculated, or
executed all the rest of the Bloud-Royall, as Abimelech the bramble, dealt with
all his Brethren, the sons of Gideon, Judge. 9.5. and Jehu with all the sons of
Ahab, 2 Kings 10.17. or such Peace between Heresy and Truth as will set all on
fire, Luke 12.47. as would be between 6 or 7 Cocks of the game in one Pit,
where they will either be all victors, or all die, though upon no other
quarrel then Ambition, which domineers in Beasts and men, but most in men
metamorphosed to Beasts, by being brutized either by lusts in their life and
conversation, or drunk with errors and strange opinions, as a Crow with Nux
vomica; even to reeling, and staggering, and occasioning or causing a whole
Kingdom to reel, stagger, and totter with them to probable ruination, quod omen
avertat Deus: which to prevent, let us halt no more betwixt two opinions, nay
betwixt more opinions then colors in the Rainbow, if not then Argus eyes in
the Peacocks train: if every Babylon and every Baal, every reared Dagon, be
God or for God, or from God, adhere to it, 1 Kin. 18.21. but if God be God, and
there be but one God, ipsissima veritas, as one essential soul, saving truth,
and but one true way of worshipping this God, in spirit and truth, John 4.23,
24. as there is but one soul and spirit in man to be saved by this right
worship, without will worships, Papisticall, Pharisaicall, or Schismatic,
and if this God will admit no corrivalls in a Church or state (as was told the
Roman Senate, that Christ would have no copartnership with their Paganish
Gods,) yea if this God hate all plowing with an Ox and a Horse, all sowing
with miscellanian seeds, all linsey-woolsey weavings; all compounded,
interwoven, intermixed Worships in a hotch-potch, and a galley-mawfrey
Religion, as he is a pure and simple Spirit, no more mixing with false Spirits
of lies and errors, then fire with water, oil (which ever swims above) with
any poisoned liquids: if it be thus with God, then let my pen, as well as
tongue, in press, pew, and Pulpit, preach to all John-indifferents, all
Scepticks, all Seekers for any new Religion, as if they went yearly or monthly
to Poland, or Amsterdam, or Holland, to seek a new one, or were white paper,
fit to take any print or blot, or wax for any seal, new vessels for any
seasoning, sweet or sower, with wine or vinegar: let me say to such, even what
Christ preached to Satan himself, who is a liar in the tongues of Heretics,
as well as a murderer in the swords of Tyrants, John 8.44. do thou worship
the Lord thy God, and him only do thou serve, Mat. 4.10. so shall thou gain
such figs from thistles, such fruits from foes, both to thy body and soul,
goods, goodness and good name, that though the Land should be dark like
Egypt, yet thou shall find a lightsome Goshen in thine own soul, Exodus 10.23.
thy fleece should be wet like Gideons, with the dews of grace, though the whole
Kingdom should be as dry and barren as the sands of Africa: thou should be
as a cube or square, undique quadratus, to fall right and straight, which way
soever the many headed multitude moved, right or wrong; thou should be fixed
as the two poles, the Axhurried as in a rattling Coaeltrees of Heaven, which way
soever the scopperill and whirligig times did volve and roll, thou should
cast the Anchor of truth in our tempestuous seas, in the high swollen waves of
all windblown-opinions, ruffling in such fierce and furious opposition; yea if
thy ways do please the Lord, thy enemies shall be at peace with thee: Let
these curative cordials, be as words spoken to the weary in dueseason, let them
be as apples of gold, with pictures of silver to refresh him who says with
Gideon, if the Lord be with me, why then is all this evil befallen me? Judge.
6.13. why go I thus heavily oppressed with my foe? as Hannah was provoked by
her adversary, to make her fret, 1 Samuel 1.6. how long shall mine enemy be
exalted over me, Psa. 13.2. how long shall my false familiar friend, my Junior
Achitophel plot mischief against me? yea, being unequallly yoaked with a
Zipporah, or a Xantippe, my uxor, my vexer, how do I wear a strait pinching
shoe, yet unless I go barefoot and wear upon the hoof, I cannot put it off,
no more then the horse in the Fable could put out of his mouth the curbing
bitt, or throw off the saddle of servitude which man his rider and derider put
upon him, when he was once as free as the wild Stag and Buck upon the wide
mountains, ere he foolishly vassalized himself, like an infranchized freeman
made a slave? Oh how long shall I hold a Wolf by the ears, if I hold him he
bites, if I let him go and resist him, he worries? how long shall I be hurried
as in a rattling Coach, or tossed ship, which way I would not: yet if I leap
out, I break my leg or neck by land, or drown by sea? quo me vertam nescio,
do what I can, I fail betwixt Scylla and Charibdis, I split on one rock or
other: my proposed salves will be as ill as my sores, like Androdus the Roman:
I am fed as in the Lions Den; all the ways I project to help my self, seem
to me as desparate as to him who cut off his great Toes to cure the Gout, yea,
leaping as it were out of the drying pan into the fire, lik to the Flounder, a
malo ad pejus, from evil to worse; for escaping (with such difficulty and
danger, as the Hare from the Hounds) from the Irish Caniballs and Nimrodians,
thinking here to swat and tapez safely, I have in two or three places sheltred
my self as the sheep under brambles and briers with some torn fleece, if not
flesh; and at this instant I and my poor perishing Children, roasting as at a
lingering sire, and dying and consuming by degrees, as Lamps go out wanting
Oil; we cry for bread as hungry Birds to their Dams, and children to dry
nurses, yea as Prisoners in Ludgate to Adders ears: while the corn (says vox
populi) to feed us reaped in a silver Harvest in Holland and in England, is
either (as is vox loculi) put into private poakes, from whence like the prey in
the Lions paw, there is reductio perimpossibile, or elfe diverted another way,
as if Peter should be robbed to pay Paul; and further this is my misery, that
though venture non habet aures, the belly has no ears, and those that grieve
must groan; yet if hunger the worst of all plagues as Homer calls it, find but
a complaining tongue, it is probable to get me a bolted heel: if I do but vent
my mind, my wind, like the Whale and the Otter in the water, and the Moal above
the Earth, I may be struck with the sharp spear of construction or correction.
Oh is there any hope in Israel for these harms? any balm in Gilead for these
griefs? any Mithridate for these maladies, miseries? any Roses from these
pricks, cries Pierce Pennilesse) Oh yes: for if we believe Dioscorides
Dodoneus, and Sir F. B. Centuries, Roses grow best and smell sweetest, near
unto strong sented Onions and Garlic, yea we see amongst Nettles and Thorns:
and it is observed by Herbalists, that those Roses that are without pricks, as
your wild Cop-roses in corns, and Canker-roses in hedges, are ill sented and
good for naught, base (as excellent Emblemes of prosperity and adversity) in
respect of those with pricks, excellent in color, odoriferous in smell, which
though they often grow low, and amongst thorns, yet exceed your canker-roses
high bloomed in hedges, as much as a scale weighed down with gold is above a
scale filled with feathers and fuzballs, which flurts up like some light heads,
from low barnes, chaires and tubs, as high as Ezra's pulpit, Nehem. 8.4.

O it is a comfortable truth, which is affirmed and confirmed from many
examples in all ages by the best Belgic Divines, Melancthon in postillis part.
4. page 4.37. and in locis, fol. 466.
Luther Page 241.
in his Colloquies; Strigellius in his Chronicles Part. 1. page 351. part. 2.
p. 51
Sigfridus Saccus in his Postils Part. 1. page 126.
, with others; that as Roses grow the best with pricks and among thorns,
Onions best and biggest in storms and tempests Pezelius de Margaritis c. 3.
the Palm tree (according to Pliny) in terra salsa and nitrosa, in a salt
earth, and when it is most pressed with weight, according to the old verse,

Nititur in pondus palma, and consurgit in altum,
Quo magis and premitur, hoc mage tollit onus.
Yea as it is green like the Laurel in winter as well as in Summer, and buds
again succisa and emortua, when cut, and seemingly dead, with many other
rarities in it, described by Camerarius Cap. 84. page 472.
in his Centuries: so the Church of Christ, and every true Christian is and
has been ever more glorious under the Cross, under Tyrants, Sophisters and
Heretics, (the three great pests and plagues of the Church now) as they have
been ever, (if we believe Hemingius In his Postils fol. 264.269.
Gualter In Mat. cap. 23.
Strigellius In Argum. Psalm. 28. and 83. fol. 79.
and Melancthon In his Postils part. 4. p. 585.
) then when it had most rest and peace, it increasing more, and budding more
under Nero, Domitian, Decius, Julian, Maximinus, Gensericus, Theodorick and
other Pagan and Arrian persecutors, when it was watered and grew by the blood
of the Martyrs, as both Tertullian Plures efficimur quoties metimur.
, and Eusebius Lib. hist. 9.
, yea experience have observed, then when it had most rest and peace under
Constantine, and other Halcyon days of tranquillity, when Heresies were hatched
like Summer Gnats in heats and Sunshines: and at last the Antichristian Pope,
from ambition of Prelates and Patriarchs for superiority See Morney de
progressu Papatus.
, when Religion begot riches, and the daughter viper-like devoured the mother:
when prosperity (like the Sun which caused the Traveller in Plutarch to cast
off his cloak) made men cast off the true worship of God, and adversity (like
the rain, which made him Hist. lib. 13. c. 4.
buckle his cloak to him) caused men to cleave closer toward God, even as
Jacob was more glorious in his vision of Angels when he lay in the open fields
with a stone under his head, then when he possessed Canaan, Genesis 28.11, 12.
Noah more glorious pent a whole year in the Arc, preserved among wild beasts,
then when he planted vines and was drunk, Genesis 7.1. c. 8.1. cap. 9.20, 21. so
Joseph was most glorious in prison, where God revealed dreams unto him, Genesis
39. John in his exile in Pathmos, where he received Revelations, Rev. 1. The
children of Israel in the red Sea, where they had their preservation, Exodus 14.
In the wilderness, where Manna from heaven was their meat, and the rock gave
them drink, Exodus 16. The captived Jews in Babylon, where God stirred them up
such excellent Prophets, as Daniel, Ezekiel, Zachary, Haggai, and propagated
his worship by them to Kings and Kingdoms. And as Christ himself was more
glorious on the Cross, then when the Jews entertained him with their
Hosanna's, John 12.14. for then the Centurion, Luke 23.47. Pilates wife, Mat.
27.15. the darkness of the earth, Mark 15.33. the eclipsed Sun, Mat. 27.15.
the earthquake, the opened graves, the veil of the Temple, and the rocks rent,
verse. 51, 52. testified his innocence, as also Judas his betrayer, Mat. 27.4.
and the thief that was crucified and converted, Mat. 27.43. so if thou be a
true disciple of this Master, a living member of this mystical Head, and not
as a wooden leg, and a glassie eye, livelesse and senseless: the more thy
enemies seek to cloud thee, the more thou shall shine, like stars in a dark
night: the hotter the furnace of their wrath, the more shall the gold of thy
Faith be purified: the more the winds blow, the more Oak like shall thou be
fixed and rooted in thy holy resolutions, 2 Samuel 6.20, 21. as David by the
mocks of Michal: the more thy foes rub thee like a Pomander, yea pounce thee in
the mortar of their malice, the spices of thy graces smell the sweeter: the
more that Satan and his Organs winnow thee, the less chafe they leave in
thee; the more thy Kitchin-sculs scum thee and scour thee as a vessel of
Honor, the brighter they make thee: the tongues of these Dogs, these
Cerberized whelps, do but medicinably lick the sores of thy sins, as once the
ulcers of Lazarus; their Gall and Aloes does but imbitter the dugs of the world
to thee, that Christ may be more sweet; these bug-beares do but make thee cry
and fly into the arms of thy Father, and faelix crux quae ducit ad Christum,
it is a happy Cross which drives thee, yea draws thee nearer unto Christ; it
is no matter how fierce and rough the winds be, that drive the laden ship
sooner and safer into her Haven, the Port of Peace.

The conclusion of all is to prevent confusion, we may be wronged by others,
hurt only by our selves, others may plunder our goods, but so long as the flesh
is sound the silver feathers may grow again, as in Jobs case, Job 42.10. the
Devil himself could not hurt Job, nor his cursed wife, though called the
Devils Dam, Naomi that is empty may be full again, Ruth 1.21. however, thou
runnest thy race never worse to heaven, though thon want thy trappings and
golden Bosses, and though thou be in as great exigents as once David, 1 Samuel
21.3. and ca. 25.8. and as Elias, 1 King. 17.12, 13. to beg thy bread of some
Nabal, some poor Widow, yea as poor as Job on the dunghill, or as once Christ
thy Master, Luke 9.58. yet in all this not forsaken, Psa. 37.21. the Lord
forsakes not his Saints, V. 28. though the Lions lack and suffer hunger, yet
they shall not want, Psalm. 34.10. though they gather but a little Manna it
suffices, Exodus 16.18.20. godliness with contentation is enough, 1 Timothy 6.8.
God can bless to them a little meal, a little oil in a cruse as to two poor
Widows, 1 King. 17.13. 2 King. 4.2. a little pulse to Daniel, cap. 1.12.13.
as sometimes a few Turnops and Potatoes, when we were besieged in Ireland as
well as a stalled Ox. There is one Pearl even for a Prince which cannot be
plundered, it adornes a Crown though beset with Thorns, and this Pearl is
patience, a great possession unto all, as Christ calls it, Luke 21.19. a rich
dowry to a Widow as poor as Ruth, a possession out of which the Devil
himself could not dispossess Job, c. 1.22. withal, thou may be wronged in
thy name, a Joseph may be falsely accused, a Cato, a Scipio, an Abner, a
Themistocles, a Phocion, a Socrates, yea the best Patriots and Patricians may
be questioned, an Athanasius, an Eugenius, a Narcissus may be scandalized in
life and Doctrine by the Arrians, as was Calvin, Beza, Luther, our best Belgic
Divines, by Cocleus, Bolsecus, Scurrilous Kellison, Endemon, (Cacodemon,) and
other Romish Rabshakehs: but what of this? is an Eagle hurt by the chartering
of a Crow? or a Lion by the yelps of a Curre? does the Moon shine less though
the Dogs of Egypt bark at it? can earthly or lunatic interpositions long
eclipse the Sunshine of the Saints? we have heard of a Grandee which wished
his man to call him Knave, and then shakt the lap of his Gown, and what was he
worse for it? words are but wind, they break no bones, quid male feci, what
evil have I done may any Plato say, that a bad man speaks well of me, de me
male dicunt ast mali, God will do David good, even eo nomine, because Shimei
reviles him, 2 Samuel 16.12.

Besides thou art imprisoned, yea Paul and Silas may be so far wronged as whipped
in prison, Act. 16. yet not hurt, these blessed Birds sing sweeter tones in
their cages, v. 25. then ever the birds of Hanno or Sapho; thou may be also
so far wronged, as to be banished thy Country, and bandied, and racketed
from post to pillar, and find no rest like Noah's Dove, to the soale of thy
foot, yet not hurt, so long as thou findst rest in Christ, so long as the
Spirit does visit thee in thy Pathmos, Rev. 1.10, 11. omne solum forti Patria,
the Sun shines every where, and God is found in every Country, indeed could
thy foes banish God from thee, as thy sins do, thy worst foes, then thy case
were lamentable, as once Saul's, 1 Samuel 16.14. and cap. 28.15, 16.

Lastly, thy foes may take away thy life, yet they hurt thee not, only sin
hurts thee, that deprives thee of the life of grace and of the life of glory,
that deads thy soul here, Ephesians. 2.1. Luke 6.60. and damnes it hereafter, Romans
6.23. it is only sin the sting of death which hurts thee, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56.
which sting being taken away by Christ, thou may put this stinglesse Be in
thy bosom, v. 57. death is to thee a sweet sleep, Esaias 57.2. a blessed rest,
Rev. 14.13. in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.22. in these and whatever else is
obnoxious to humane nature, the Saints are Conquerors, Romans 8.37. now did
Conquests ever hurt a Caesar, a Pompey, a Lucullus, a Fabius? do all things
health, wealth, poverty, sickness, life, death, friends, foes, work together
for the good of the Elect, Romans 8.28. as all the Physical Simples in a
compound for the good of a Patient? all the Stars and Planets by their
influence, for the good of these sublunary bodies? and can that which works for
our good do us hurt, unless we hurt our selves? as indeed we do, bringing
the worst foes we have from home with us, yea carrying them about with us as
Snakes in our bosoms to sting us, our sins our darling regnant unmortified
sins bred in our souls, these and only these being the Achans in our Camps
to disturb us, the Sinons in our Cities, chiefly in our Troynovant, yea the
Quoy-ducks, the Dalilahs in our Families, our Chambers, our Closets, to betray
us, the vipers which breed within our bowels, the worms within our intralls,
the Flesh Wolves within our flesh which corrode us, yea kill us, the
Cantharides in our ointments to soil us, to spoil us, the Moaths in our
Garments to fret us, the Midianites amongst us to vex us, the Canaanites in our
borders, as pricks in our sides and thorns in our eyes, Judge. 2.31. to torture
us, to torment us: that of Chrysostom being to me oraculous, truer then from
Delphos, that nemo laeditur nisi a seipso, hone is hurt but by himself, by his
own sins, as Noah was drunk with his own wine, Genesis 9.22. Cambises slain
with his own sword, Marlow stabbed with his own Dagger, so we are slain by
our own lusts which fight against our souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. and vassallize us
as they did Hercules, Sampson, Alexander, Caesar, Hannibal, Achilles, and the
greatest Conquerers, who were slaves to their own unlimited luxuries, as I
could largely Historifie them and Parallel our very postures and pressures with
that fond horse in the Fable, bred near the smoaks and fogs of some thick
air, not on the pure airy Mountains with the wily Stag, who suffering man to
ride him, being as free as the Buck, was so vassallized by man his rider and
derider, that he could never yet for all his fretting at his own folly, put
the curbing bit out of his mouth, nor shake the saddle of subjection from his
back.

Oh! we are slaves to our lusts, as that great Alcides to his Dianira, to him
Deiira, these are the Lord-Danes which rule us as by armed Law, either we
cannot or will not resist them; these are to us like Traitors bred in the
breasts and bosoms of Kings, yea as Favorites growing up by their Kings, as
Ivies by strong Oaks, and Elder Trees in and by walls, yet bringing them down
by whom they grew, and every way as fatal to them as Jeroboam once to Solomon
and his house, Cleander Phrix to Comodus, Philip Arabs to Gordianus, Calippus
to Dion, Phocus to Mauritius, Giges to Candaulus, and our Court Ganimede
Gaveston once to Edward the second, with many more recorded by Tholosanus in
his Commonwealth, l. 22. p. 1403, 1409. Guicciardine in his Politikes, part 2.
p. 94. and the French Bodin in his republic lib. 6. c. 5. p. 1154. with
others, whose fates and falls to prevent, since a volumn might be multiplied,
what States and Potentates such sins have ruinated, as are regnant at this
instant both in our Church, State, Countries, and Cities; let us crush them as
Cockatrices in their shells, and Serpents in their heads; let us put the
sacrificing knife of the Word to their throats, and mortify them by the
Spirit, Romans 8.13. so killing these vipers that will otherwise kill us, we
shall gain, and retain Grace and Peace with God, with man, and with our selves,
even Peace external, internal, eternal: chiefly let us close hastily,
heartily with Christ our Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. with Simeon let us claspe him in the
arms of an applying faith, Luke 2.28. then we shall be sure to find Sunshine
in our Rains, songs in our sighs, calmes after storms, peace after wars: in
this Sun we shall have all light, in this Manna all meat, in this fountain all
refreshing waters of life, John 4.10. in our dead times, Deus meus and omnia,
said a Martyr) my God and all things, my Rock, Refuge, Sanctuary, and
Salvation, Psalm. 18.1. Jesus esto mihi Jesus, O Savior be to me a Savior,
AMEN, AMEN.

FINIS.
Jan. 29. 1647.
(...)

(...)

Postscript to the candid Reader.
THough the Authors eye is said to perfect the Press, as the Masters eye to
fat the horse, yet some Errataes may escape the eyes of an Argus, as page 15.
lin. 25. effects for affects, in such venialls thou art desired to wink at
small faults: as also, p. 32. and p. 37. the Fable of the sadled Horse, and the
wily unsubjected Stag, are by our oversight twice reflexed upon, perhaps
useful to some that read the Riddle right, though decies repetita, though to a
too critical Carp-fish, bis repetita sordent. Others liking (as our Irish
their Rainebow Butter above Venison) ought slubbered in Press or Pulpit in a
Luxate style, savouring of Gregory Nonsense better then ought relishing of
Demosthenes Lamp-oyle, Lipsius his Multa paucis, or Chrisostomes and
Chrisologus golden tongues, or polisht by Christ's own Scribe, prescribed to
bring out of his treasure things old and new: before whom in this antipodized
age, where light heels go up, and grave heads down, every green blads, though
died black or block, is preferred, if but Lettice for Schismatic lips. And
to speak where the shoe pincheth, as just (or unjustly) now I comment what I
write Fruits of, and from Foes, though as the Swan and Peacock I am so
conscientious to my black feet, that I am not proud of real or imaginary fair
feathers, of too much reading History and eloquence, of which factious
Hot-Spurs falsely would cry me so guilty, that as though store were a sore, for
this they frisk from me, perhaps to some Doctor Dulman in a gray coat with a
gross note, and on such frivolous pretexts go about to divorce me once more
from my Brides, to whom I offer to demonstrate against all disputes, that above
all Ministers I have as lawful a call as Collatine to his Lucrece, though any
young Tarquin who had need stay at Jerico till his beard and brain be grown,
should offer to ravish her from me, whose heart I have ten to one above any
intruder, yea though his factious Favorites (like the fatal sons of Brutus)
should arm his usurpations by a misinformed Parliamentary power, against my
life or Doctrine, in causa inaudita, in defect of such a Justice as Nicodemus
taxed in the Jews, and Paul found in Felix, Festus, and Agrippa, though
Pagans, to be condemned ere I speak, yet once heard I here pawn that very
blood which I have ventured for them more then any Preacher in three Climes,
that I deserve more grateful regard and reward then by unjust divorcing me
from my Ministerial marriage, to be exposed to scorn, impoverishing and
persecutions verbal and real, yea to fly for means, without cause shown why,
in the winter of the year, and of my years; If this be not summum jus, and
dare veniam corvis, vexat censura columbos, I am like my successor Ignoramus:
to say no more: yet jacta est alea, pejora tuli, majora meliora spiro spero.
Hercules invidiam supremo fine domavit. Ah si fas dicere, sed fas -- in
utramque paratus,

Resolute Hierom against the dissolute times.


