Englands Alarm to War against the Beast:

By command from Heaven, and His Isreal's Example upon Earth, coming in to
rescue David out of the hands of a cruel Lord and a bloody Edomite: upon the
same ground from Scripture and Reason, Israel had then, and Christians now, To
resist the Prince ruling in the Air, and with the Kings of the Earth.

In 3. Sections: Wherein,

I. The History of Saul's War against David is so related from the sacred Text,
that it relates in whole, and in part, to the three last years affairs: The
most remarkable Passages between the King and the Parliament before the War
brake forth.

II. And to the bloody Execution of the Edomite in this War against the
Parliament in Ireland and England ever since.

III. Here is also excellent Reason given, Why the Tribes came not in sooner;
and sufficient Reason, Why they came in so Armed at the last: Relating fully to
this present time, The wonderful Providence, The admirable Deliverances,
Strange Discoveries, etc. As at this day.

Also, To confirm the hearts and hands of the Godly in their warfare: and to
strike terror to the wicked, fighting for the Devil, and against Gods hidden
ones, contrary to the Vow in Baptism, Oath of Allegiance, and Covenant entered
into by all good Subjects; And To stablish the heart in a patient expectation
of the glorious end GOD will make, Though, for a time, He will plead with all
flesh by fire, and by His sword, and the slain of the LORD shall be many.

He who affirms. That Christians may not resist wicked Rulers, does affirm
with as with as loud a voice though he would not be heard) That Christians may
not resist the Evill-one, ruling in wicked Rulers, and acting violences by
their hands, Scl. de Imp. PSALM. 11. 5, 6 7. The Lord tries the Righteous but
him, that loves violence, His soul hates, etc; ISAIAH 60 22. A little one
shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation, I the Lord will
hasten it in His time. Printed in the second year of the Beasts wounding,
making war with the Lamb, and those that are with Him, (...) and Faithful for
Thomas Underhill. (...)

An Apology for the Epistle following.
I Shall lay open the depths of Satan, hidden works of darkness. Then I shall
show a Train of Providence, etc. The sure mercies of David: I can tell my
self, now, I shall, against my Rule, speak excellent things in the ears of a
fool: show him the Sun in your hand (as the Proverb is) he will not see it:
Tell him it is the Word of God, what cares he, he will not hear it. Tell him
it is a Pearl, he regards it not. A very swine, A brutish man, Mad upon his
Idols. Yet let us do our endeavors to make him sober. Surely this before him,
will do it, if any thing under heaven can make him hear and see both. For he
will see the Devil here all along acting a bloody part; and, if the Devil be
not in him, he will see himself, and his own Actings in the Devil. He will
hear two men speaking to him from the dead also, he will see all their
notorious violences acted over afresh by his own hand now. He must hear the
voice of the Eving God too, and see what end the LORD makes. Those Persons all,
whom he and his fellows have dealt so hatefully with, shall be set on high
before his face, (the higher, the lower he would have pressed them down) there
singing the high praises of their GOD; and himself amongst others his fellow
Malignants laid low, as contemptible as their own dung, gnawing their tongues
for pain. Whether he will hear, or whether he will forbear, it is at his
peril: Let him that is filthy, be filthy still: and let the fool hold fast
his folly: sober men will hear, and be instructed.

To the most Malignant Reader.
IT is granted on both sides (there are but two) That now is the time all over
the Christian world, when Kings go forth to battle: All their Subjects are
engaged now. It is high time then to consider the Case, weigh it well with all
our hearts, and with all our souls. There are but two great Commanders in the
world, God and the Devil; All serve under th^se two. Another Commander there
is (we call it man's Will) and boasts great things, but an underling it is,
and subservient, obeyed in reference to the other two, who rule in chief: so
the question is single, Who must be hearkened to or obeyed? Not whether Gods
Command, or man's Will contrary thereunto? Though this is the greatest question
in the world, and most stubbornly argued; nor will it be answered, no not when
it is answered and fairly proposed to every man's consideration, judge yet so it
was answered more then sixteen hundred years ago, therefore Act. 14. 19
it cannot be the question now: But this; Whether God is to be obeyed or the
Devil? I confess it is a strange question: But it were a stranger answer, and
argued more then a distemper in the brain: To say, That the Devil is to be
obeyed, and God is to be resisted. And yet so much thou must say, if thou will
accuse Israel now for taking up defensive Arms, being charged thereunto in
obedience to God, and in defiance of the Devil; for this is the very Case,
which we will propose in Isreal's Case first: and anon, bring-it-up to our
times, and make every line then run parallel with our Case now. This was
Isreal's Case;

All true Israel once took shield and buckler, came in so armed to rescue
David. Did they well? It must be granted they did well, and their bounden duty
in rescuing David, and in him, themselves, out of the hand of a cruel Lord,
and bloody Edomite. Indeed it would argue more then indiscretion in us to
censure all Israel at that point, for taking up defensive Arms, though we
could give no reason for what they did. But the sacred Text is clear in the
point, That the Tribes came-in, not with an intent to resist Saul their King;
no, nor the Edomite neither, (and that a Malignant may think strange, being not
like, but the same now, with the Edomite then, a bloody adversary to Israel;
and yet Israel not resist him:) But to resist the evil Spirit commanding in
chief with both: This evil Spirit commanded in Saul, else he had not thrown
a javelin a^ David, quickly after at his own son, Jonathan: nor had Saul after
all this sealed a Commission to an Edomite, to execute the pleasure of his own
will upon Israel. 2. And the evil Spirit ruled in the Edomite too, else he had
not executed Saul's Commission to destroy a City of Priests, man and beast
there. The Tribes then came-in, not to resist Saul, but the perverse will in
Saul, acted by the evil Spirit upon Saul. They took up defensive Arms to
withstand the notorious violences, the astings of Saul's and the Edomites wills
acted by their evil Spirits: These outrages, extreme violences, actings of an
evil Spirit, Israel withstood then, and no body else in the world, but as the
body was acted by this evil Spirit.

And this is Isreal's Case now, I mean all true Christians in the world. And
such is their practice, according to Isreal's example in all Ages, by allowance
and command also of all the Laws in Heaven and Earth. I repeat it again; Upon
the same ground from Scripture and Reason, All true Christians now are engaged,
as Israel then, To help the Church against the mighty; To come-in now with
shield and buckler, To oppose and resist with all their might, Not their King
[no; This resistance has an affi^^ce, a full agreement rather with duty and
loyalty] nor the Papists, nor the Athiests neither, but that evil Spirit in
both, The actings, and notorious violences thereof, and of a private and
perverse will acted thereby, which has done all the mischief, done in the
world, since the beginning of the same, and will do all the hurt there it can
while the world stands: All true Christians now will maintain a Resistance
against the Actings, as aforesaid, of this will, which, like the tongue, is a
world of iniquity b, defiles the whole body; sets on fire the course of
Jam. 3. 5, 6.
nature, and is set on fire of Hell, (i. e.) of that evil Spirit, whose
Mansion House is Hell, but now he is the great Peripatetick of the world,
walking to and fro therein, and, by the help of man's will, a willing servant to
him, does all the violences, insolences and wrongs our eyes have seen, or our
ears have heard have been done in both Kingdoms: Thie evil Spirit, this Will
(call it what you will, if it be not the Devil, yet it Acts his Commands.)
This evil Spirit, all true Christians will oppose and resist now; Nay, they
have solemnly protested before the Lord, That this evil and unclean Spirit
shall not rule over them, he shall not be king in their world, they will break
his bands, and cast away his cords, they will oppose and resist him to the
death, and no Body else in the world, but as the body is acted and effectually
wrought in and upon by this evil Spirit: and, if so acted, they will resist
him or them what ever Bodies they be, though Kings and Princes and Nobles of
the Earth: for upon the same ground from Scripture and Reason, will they make
this resistance, by which they stand charged to obey God, and to resist the
Devil. And if you find any other resistance maintained now by men, or books,
then against the actings and notorious violences of man's private will, acted by
that evil Spirit so powerful upon Saul, and working as effectually in the
Edomite, I mean, him or them, who say of our Jerusalem now, Raze it, raze it
eaven with the ground; If, I say, any other resistance is maintained in those
books, then only only against that Power, which Commands in the Ruler, not by
God, but against Him; then let those books be served, as the King served the
Roll, be first cut it, then burnt it; only read the books first c, which the
King did not do, whereas, c Jer. 36. 23.
which is verily thought, had he read the Roll through out first, he had not
burnt it afterward. I will name the chief of these books here; That Answer to
Doctor Fearn, and the fuller Answer. That of Anti-Turkisme [Cavalierisme is too
gentile a word, for they are the same with the Turks, and more brutish; though
Turks (as one writes) are in the lowest degree of men, next to bruit Beasts in
the shape of Men.] And the same Authors Vindication of the same Book, against
a Bishop in name, who has in that Vindication, not only given the Bishop a
bone to pick, but choked him therewith, for he has made the Bishop and his
fellows speechless for ever, in point of Reply thereunto. Not so only, he
has burnt this note of infamy upon their foreheads, [gain-savers of the Truth,
Nothing for it, but all they can against it] more visible there then is the
bone in the throat, which the Anatomists (too Rabinically) do call Pomum Adam,
Adams Apple: And let Scripture and Reason be served so to, (being first read
through) and that full Letter, which has so cleared a just Cause, that the
Answerer has not found with all his search, [yet he did his utmost, with all
his skill, strength, wrath, malice, and what the Devil could help-him into,
because he found the Devil his Father there, a most notorious liar, yet he
found not] one word of sense to reply unto that Letter: But yet let this, and
that, and the other, have the same execution aone upon them, as aforesaid, and
as was done upon that abominable and cursed Pamphlet (for we must not call it a
Book) giving liberty to riot, and dance upon the Lords Day: let those Books be
burnt by the hand of the common hangman in all the Cities and Towns through the
whole Kingdom; for so such Papers should be served, which give such liberty to
sport and play away the Lords Day: or a liberty to Subjects to resist their
King. But if th^se Books (I will call them Books, having for their Patrons,
Truth and Reason, and such only are worthy the name of Books d) persuade
obedience to Rulers, submission to that power God d Libri (...) nomi^e dignandi
in vericatis tan^um and rationis clientelam s^dare debent, Ver. de Aug. l. 1
has set over them, and resistance only against that evil Spirit, the great
Monarch of the world, King of the bottomless Pit, working mightily now, and
effectually in the Rulers of the world, and in their sworn servants, Isreal's
enemies, the Edomites there: if a resistance only of that power in the Rulers
not for God, but against Him, giving full Commission to Athiests, and bloody
Papists, to do as the Edomite did against Nob, and as Saul would have done
against Keilah; if so, allow the Books, read what they say, and hear them out,
it is Scripture and Reason, and be stubborn and brutish no more, but obey.
Show thy self a man, who wilt never oppose so reasonable a charge as this,
Obey thy Sovereign Lord, Resist the Devil, and thy own will, the Devils
right hand, in the world: Grant so much we are agreed, and altogether to fight
against the Devil, and this perverse will, as long as there is a Spirit of
life within us, and a drop of quick blood at our heart.

All this is commended to thee, and charged upon thee before God the Father,
His Son Jesus Christ, His Elect Angels and Men. Therefore do not dare to refuse
nor gain say such a sacred Truth, so firmly grounded upon sacred Scripture and
Reason both; Scripture specially now opening it self unto thee, wherein thou
may, with one cast of the Eye, Read and Remember David and all his
Afflictions; The Church and all her enemies. Their deadly persecutions,
contrivances and complottings how to do her mischief: The contrivances and
admirable providence of her Lord God to do His people good. All this thou
shall read here, and at last thou shall see all the Tribes coming in to set
David free from his Adversaries; and then fast upon his Throne, (so God will
deal with His Church now appearing in His glory) for David has a Kingdom on
earth at last. But, O the admirable ways unto it! These are Gods ways. He
will make David Ruler over all His House; he shall learn to obey first. He
shall be a good, a merciful King; he shall go through sore temptations first:
He must be the highest man in the Kingdom, he must be the lowest there first:
He shall have afair house, his little house must be smitten and burnt first: He
shall have all in God, but all must be taken from him first: He shall live to
enjoy a Crown on Earth in despite of Devils and men there, who will persecute
him as they can, even to the gates of death, and in their way, cast shame and
all manner of reproach upon him first: David's way to the Crown, is the
Churches way to her Glory: The very same dark-paths, intricacies, and
back-wayes in it: David's enemies, the Churches enemies for ever: David's God,
the Churches God for ever: David's security, the Churches confidence for ever.
Many are the troubles of the righteous, The Lord will deliver them out of all.
For who is God, save the Lord? or who is a rock, save our God? So it comes to
pass, That the righteous are an everlasting foundation. Here they will put
their trust for ever. Amen.

Englands Alarm to War.
Sect. I.
David's Story, and Saul's persecution of him briefly related, his secret
practices, and fine contrivances to take away David's life, colouredover, and
made specious with goodly words, and lovely actions; Relating fully to the
words and actions the King, seduced by evil Council, has spoken and done
seemingly for, but indeed clear against his Parliament ever since they sat,
to the time the War broake forth.

Chap. 1.
After a short, but righteous Apology, David's story is Related; Saul's
persecution of him; The cause and manner, the same with the persecution now;
The heads or particulars of the three Sections.

THE Sword is come-in amongst us, drinks blood, eats flesh: We make no
question but God has given it a Commission, and it cannot be still; And for
just cause all this, even because of His Peoples sins. Let us lift up our
hearts with our hands unto Lam 3. 41, 42, 44.
GOD in the heavens: We have transgressed, and rebelled, Thou have not
pardoned. Thou have covered with Anger, and persecuted us: Thou have slain,
Thou have not pitied Gods people say now, as they said then, and they say it
heartily. Yet, as Job said, sitting in the dust, GOD forbid that I should
justify my accusers: till I die, Job 27. 5, 6.
I will not remove my integrity from me: My Righteousness I hold fast, and
will not let it go: My heart shall not reproach me so long as I live. A people
so blasphemed, so reproached say as much now, and are so resolved; Their
consciences bearing them witness, and Goa also, That neither against the Law,
nor against their King have they offended. If Psalm. 11. 3.
the foundation be destroyed, what can the Righteous do? Was David's complaint
long ago, and the Righteous may resume it, being now as David then, the Butt
and Mark at which the wicked bend their Bow, and make ready their arrow, at
this day; even against the upright in heart. And that they may have some color
for this their bloody work, they deal with the righteous now, as Saul did
with David then, and as the Edomites did with Christians ever since; They
putover them the skins of the fiercest beasts, that so the dogs might be the
more fierce upon them. Just so now, the wicked persecute the righteous with
fire and sword, and they make the world believe they do all this by the known
Laws of the Kingdom; for they persecute none other but the Incendiaries of
the Kingdom, the only Rebels and Traitors there: Well, as David said (for I
shall make his Case run parallel with ours all along, he is the Emblem of the
Church to this day, and will be to the worlds end) The Righteous know not what
to do, but their Lord knows, whose Throne is in heaven, whose eyes behold and
try the children of men. To Him they commit their righteous Cause, and yet they
must not be silent, hearing themselves charged with rebellion, and treason, as
heavy a charge every whit as Heresy is: They will take the same liberty, which
is granted to Church-robbers, Traitors, yea, and Sorcerers too; all these,
says Lactantius b, are permitted to speak for themselves and to speak all b
Sacrileg is and proditoribus and veneficis, l. 5. Cap. 1.
they have to say for themselves, before judgment passes upon them. Indeed
the greatest reason, that so they should do, for so their crimes will be
manifest, or their righteousness will be cleared as the noone day. There were
strange crimes (yet I should not say so, being but after the manner and
practice of the wicked in all times upwards to this day) horrid crimes charged
upon Paul, and they concluded against him before he was heard, That Paul ought
not to live any longer, and so they spoke before Festus; who having examined
Act. 25. 24
the matter very fully, professed as heartily, That he found many and grievous
complaints against Paul, but nothing proved, no, nothing at all:
notwithstanding his adversaries, a multitude of them, importune me, said he,
very much to write his indictment to my Lord Augustus; And, as I am an honest
man, though I have their clamours against him once and again, yet I have not
one word for certainty to write unto my Lord; Therefore hither I have brought
him especially unto thee, O King Agrippa, that, after thou have searched out
the whole matter, I might gather something whereof to write; for it seems
unreasonable to send a Prisoner, and not withal to signify the crimes laid
against him. Festus spoke like an honest man indeed, He will understand the
cause before he indites his Letter, or the prisoner before Augustus. And
Agrippa speaks as honestly too, Paul, Thou a^t permitted to speak for thy
self. The servants of the Lord desire no more favor then Paul has from an
Heathen King. Let their crimes, so many and grievous, be fairly examined: and
if any one crime be proved against them, let them suffer as evil doers for all
suggested against them. But we are sure they can clear themselves, and their
upright dealing as the noone day, even as Paul did then, and as David before
him: And because David's history is theirs now, we may read the Churches story
now, in David's story then: I will read David's story quite through from point
to point, that we may see anon, how parallel the lines thereof run-up to the
Churches story now.

David's story begins like a Comedy, with a marriage, but quickly there is a
turning of the Scene, proves a Tragedy, and ends in blood. David was envyed by
Saul, for two Reasons:

1. Because he had wrought salvation for Israel, slaying Goliath the Philistine
with his own Sword.

2. And, because the Kingdom must be established in David's house, and Saul
knew it, therefore he envied David, and pursued him 1 Samuel 23. 17
to the death: but because bloody intentions have no pleasant appearance, Saul
veiled them over with sugered words, and lovely actions, he causes many
love tokens to pass betwixt himself and David: as if he purposed not only to
affiance his daughter to David, but marry himself unto him too. See the depths
of Satan, that evil spirit, who wrought so effectually upon Saul! All his
words and actions were as soft and smooth as Oil and Butter, but inwardly
drawn swords, to slay David therewith. But the people remote from the Court, I
say remote from the Court (for Israel in and about the Court knew very well,
that Saul hated David, and would have nailed his head and the wall together
twice, and once he would have served his Son Jonathan so too, for being a
friend to David: Therefore, I say, Israel remote from the Court) were wholly
taken with things in appearance, and so judged of Saul and David, and of their
actions: so as, if one of the two were too blame, David was he. And these
colorable pretenses stood Saul in some stead, to veil the peoples eyes, for
some time, and not long; for wicked and malicious intentions will work-out, and
discover themselves, as five will, and light will, they will not be hid. Saul
plots against the righteous, lays a snate here, and there a snare for David's
soul: The Righteous God discovers all, and breaks the snare, which enrageth
Saul yet more, the evil Spirit taking advantage thereby. And now Saul pursues
David with open a^e, and sword in hand, up to Naioth in Ramah, and from thence
to Nob. There he enters his foot first into blood, and goes up to the knees
therein quickly, for he takes an Edomite to his side, gives him a Commission,
uses him as his right hand, and presently he (with other Edomites with him,
for we cannot imagine that one should do that ^xecution alone) smites a City of
Priests, slayes men, women, and sucklings there, and beast also: Where I shall
note, That all this is done by the known Laws of the Kingdom, for the
Edomite accuses the Priest, Saul gives the Priest leave to answer for
himself, then execution is done according to the known Law, which Saul and
the Edomite have enacted. We shall enquire farther into these matters, when I
shall handle them in order, why Saul takes the Edomite to his side, gave him a
Commission, being a known adversary to Is ael, whereof I shall give a better
account anon. And then, though we are concluded, That the Lord is righteous,
and His Judgments are as the great deep: yet I shall search into them, and
findeo^^ reason enough to satisfy us, why the Lord suffers the Edomite to make
such a slaughter in Isreal's Land, and His own Kingdom: To do execution
according to their wills, upon those, who did their du^y, by direction from
Gods mouth: We shall see reason for all this, though God needs not give account
of His matters, yet we shall see, so He is pleased to do.

And now David's History proves Tragical indeed. The Priests are slain, and
David is strucken-at through the priests sides: he sees Saul's sword now, and
against whom it was pointed. So away he flies, and to Keilah he comes in all
haste, expecting relief there; for he had done the inhabitants such a piece of
service, as was very notable and would have engaged them to David for ever, had
they been honest men. But Keilites cannot consider what David had done for
them, they ponder not the kindness of God toward them, nor man's kindness
neither. And now David, having a strong hold over his head, is resolved therein
to defend himself; but the Keilites proved treacherous, they (after their
manner) will betray David, and he is warned thereof, (for a mighty Counselor
was with David wheresoever he went) and away he went from Keilah to a mountain
in the wilderness of Ziph^ Saul pursues his way, and bloody intentions, and
after he goes, for he sought David every day: but it follows, (God (...) 2^. 1^
delivered him not into his hands.) The Keilites would have done it, so would
the Ziphites too, these would have delivered up David into Saul's hands; yea,
but God would not do it, and His is the overruling Hand: These adversaries
shall but show themselves so, show their teeth unto David, discover their
treacherous hearts against him, that is all they shall do, more they would do,
but they cannot. Therefore Psalm. 54.
David makes a Psalm of praise to his God, for that deliverance. Here a great
question will be proposed anon, (I do but give the heads here) why the Tribes
came-not-in all this while, now they saw what was done to Nob, what was offered
to be done to Keilah; and saw the sword was pointed directly to David's throat;
why yet the Tribes came-not-in? Some will Answer, Conscience withheld them; had
they come-in to help David, they had resisted their King: I shall clear the
contrary in the third Section, for it is the chief purpose thereof. Other
conceits there are, I will pass them over in this place. This is certain:
Things were not ripe yet, nor yet Gods time; David's straits must be yet greater
then they were at Nob, or when he was at Keilah: and and there must be farther
discoveries yet, of Gods right hand with David, and of his adversaries against
him: whereof toward the close of the Work. Saul pursues David still through all
the Thousands of Judah 1 Samuel 23. 23.
; [malice will draw blood, but it cannot, yet will pursue to the death] he and
his men have cooped-up David and his men, for they have compassed David round
about. Then God wrought wonderfully for David, as His Name is, and His Manner,
and the Earth must help David; [A Drossie earthy people shall help David, shall
work for his deliverance, though enemies to him.] And though Saul has David as
a prey in his hand, yet the Lord sets up a Rock of separation betwixt David and
Saul: David is almost under Saul's nose, within the reach of his spear, and yet
saul cannot reach him: O wonderful! It is so indeed, therefore 1 Samuel 23. 28.
they called the place Sela-Hammahlekoth e, as at this day.

(...) takes no notice of this, no not of David's Rock in his way; he (...)
David still, and he pops-into a Cave? all alone, where David, and all ^^ m^n
were, [the man shall run strange adventures that (...) David, and may escape
once and again: but beware the third (...), he that pursues David may fall into
the Philistines hands a^on, as Saul did.] Note again, how various and
changeable mat^^rs are in the c^^ying-on of David's Wars. Saul had David in a
coop ^^e other day, now David has Saul at the same advantage. It was so, (...)
will be so in David's wars ever more. Then Saul had the advantage, now David;
Down and up, Up and down: But the advantage i^ shall on Davids-side, whether he
rise or fall, for he is instructed. To make advantage of his falls, Saul cannot
of his risings; Either he shall not see his advantage, or shall make no
advantage thereof at all. David shall see his advantages, and make use of them
for glorious ends, and toward Saul, to clear his innocence as the noone day.
For now it shall appear to all Israel, and to Saul himself, That David is a
man after Gods own heart, (and will show him the kindness of the Lord:) And
that Saul is misinformed, and all his Courtiers are liers all; Now Saul and
David are come to a Parley, and David is heard to speak for himself, he can
speak with such evidence of Truth, that the quarrel had now ended, (for the
evil Spirit in Saul seems to be quite silenced (for a short time) and Saul
himself so fully convinced concerning David's uprightness, as that he seems to
^ Sam. 24. 16.
melt into tears, nay it is so indeed, he wept heartily:) but that the evil
Spirit moves in Saul again and the Ziphites, a mischievous generation, ^ Sam.
26.
and enemies to Peace, did egge-on, and drive Saul to pursue David again [see
what he Devil will do, and these Ziphites as evil as he, and as like him, as
the children are like the father] these hurry Saul-onward, and after David he
runs (for the Devil drives him) having three thousand chosen men of Israel
with him. A mavelous ^ Sam. 24. 2.
thing! That thousand chosen men of Israel with him! And yet I shall make it no
marvel at all anon; for if a King will fall desperately upon his own sword,
there is another will do as desperately as the King does, fall upon it too. It
is no marvel at all, That Saul 1 Samuel 31. 5. 6.
has three thousand chosen men with him: But this is the wonder, That, after
such a conviction, as we read before, he should yet, with such a company, seek
David to slay him. But that is no wonder neither: The evil Spirit is with him,
and the Ziphites his Councillors: These will drive-on Saul furiously, but
David shall see whereto they drive; for he has his 1 Samuel 26. 4.
spies abroad, and they tell David where Saul is; and thither he goes, as bold
as a Lion (for his Cause was good, and though it was stormy without, yet
always clear within) he came to the place where Saul had pitched, beheld it
well, and there went down, he with two more, even to Saul's Camp by night, and
there they found Saul asleep, and all his people round about him sleeping too;
(God would have it so.) Then said Abishai to David, Let me smite thine enemy
once; one blow shall do the deed, there shall not need a second to destroy him:
No, says David; (and observe what he says) The Lord forbid that I should
stretch forth my hand against the Lords Anointed, suffering thee to take away
Saul's head; but take away his spear, etc. and so they did, then gat them away,
and no man awaked, for a deep sleep from the Lord was fallen upon them. [The
Lord will find out a way to clear David's innocence as the noone day] David
was no sooner gone, but he calls out to Abner, Captain of Saul's guard, reproves
his negligence above many, bids him behold the spear, etc. which stuck so
near his Masters pillow, his Masters Verse 16.
head was in the same danger, and Abner asleep the while! When Saul heard that,
(for it could be no man's voice but David's) his heart seems (and in his own
apprehension) to close with David now. Observe what Saul says, and what David
replies, for now they are Verse. 21.
as their last Conference. Matters are fairly debated, and concluded betwixt
them, even with a blessing from Saul's mouth: Then Saul Verse. 25.
returned to his place: But Saul was resolutely bent to oppose Gods decree,
touching the setting of the Crown upon David's head, therefore Suspectum semper
invisum que domi^anti b^s, qui, pr^xim ^s des^inar^tur, Iac. H^^. 1. lib. 1.
cap. 7.
he envied David; and the evil Spirit wrought effectually upon that advantage:
so as David did not trust Saul, nor regarded his words, for indeed bloody
thoughts lodged within him s^ill; nor was he sui juris, but of the possession
of himself quite: The Keilites had a part in him, the Ziphites also, and the
evil Spirit divided Saul betwixt them, they have him in their power, and drive
him as they will, and so David will trust none of them all: Nay they prevailed
so, That David distrusted God a little, and so away David runs to Gath, and
when Saul heard that he sought no more after him, says the Text 1 Samuel 27. 4.
, intimating no less then this; That Saul would have pursued him still, but
that he was out of Saul's reach. About this very time the Tribes came-in, when
all was clear before them touching Saul's implacablenesse, and stubborn
resolution; touching David's uprightness, and the treachery of David's friends,
then the Tribes came-in, after they saw all fair ways had been used to
incline Saul, to hold him back from shedding blood, after they had prayed and
fasted too; for this I must make good also. Then the Tribes came-in with shield
and buckler, as we read. And so we have a brief relation of David's Story, and
Saul's persecution, which will relate clearly and fully anon, the History of our
time. I shall not do as the wise Judges did, in a (...)
Case, wherein it was hard, and dangerous to give righteous Judgment, They bad
the Parties come and appear before them a hundred ^ years after. I cannot do
so now: As I shall relate an ancient History, so I must declare how it relates
to these present times: for in setting down David's Story, and Saul's
persecution of him, I must needs set down the story of these days fully, and
wholly, for no Chronicle in the world gives us the like story, so parallel with
the Churches story now, and affairs of these days: For example, A King, the
chief Actor then, a King the chief Actor now; Persecuting David then,
persecuting his own subjects now: All under colorable pretenses then, the
same pretenses and shows now. The delivering up of the sword into David's hand
was the pretense (and no more) of the quarrel then; the same pretense now.
Saul takes an Edomite to his side, and gives reason for so doing then; The King
takes Edomites (for they say of our Jerusalem, as aforesaid) into his bosom,
and gives the same reason for so doing now. The Edomite informs against the
faithful servants of the Lord then; so they do now, but with much more
forehead, and less shame now than then, as will appear. The King impeached
the servant of the Lord then, so the King does now. The servant of the Lord
made answer to his Master, the clearest that ever was read: The servants of the
Lord do render as full and fair account of all their actions now.
Notwithstanding, the king gives a Commission to the Edomite to smite all the
Priests, because one had done his duty then: The King gives the Edomites the
very same Commission now. And so a City was smitten and burnt with fire then:
Cities and Towns, yea, two Kingdoms, are smitten and burnt with fire now. And
yet the Tribes come-not-in, no, not yet: Why? I will tell you the reason for
that in due time. They did come-in then to help David; And all true Israel will
come-in anon to help the Church (that we are sure of) in obedience to God, and
in defiance of the Devil, so soon as the Kings intentions shall be yet more
clearly manifested: our Edomites sins shall be full: Israel shall sufficiently
groan under such Taskmasters, crying unto God against them, etc. when the
Edomites bloody intentions shall be yet more fully manifest; and when the
treachery of the Keilites and Ziphites (for such we have amongst us) shall be
yet more fully discovered to the world; and when by all this Isreal's sins shall
be purged, their hearts prepared, their strong holds, forts and breast works
(vain confidences meant thereby) are destroyed, all and every one, then
Isreal's deliverance comes carried on, as upon Eagles wings; when Israel is very
low, in David's Case, their Ziglags smitten (all vain confidences) their
comforts taken thence, and they have streng^^ened their hand in God: Then as
all Israel once came in to help David, so will all true Christians now join
hand and shoulder, and heart together to help the Church: but of this in the
last place.

All along, for I am entering into the particulars of the Story, we shall read
words and actions then, words and actions now, answering each other, as face in
water answers f^ce: Then how heart answers heart, the world will judge whether
we will or no. I must observe ^ri^^ H^stori^^ (...) ^^ qui^ falsi aud^^^^e q^^^
^^ri (...) aud^^^, (...) Ora^.
the Law of History: I must not be so impudent as to speak what is false: nor
must I be so bold as to conceal the truth: Specially being persuaded that the
speaking out the truth now in such a Case as this, may prevail with the Reader
now, more then if one came to him from the dead. Again, this comforts me all
along in the things done then and now, which run up so parallel each with
other, that yet I hope, the destruction of the Kings house now, will not answer
the destruction then to Saul, and his house. It is true* Never any man from
that day to this hour, persecu^ed David and prospered. Compare it 1 Samuel 18.
17. with 31. 3.
And very notable it is, That Saul was wounded with those instruments of death
in the enemies hand, wherewith he would have had David to have been wounded;
and he perished by the very sword, which he would have made drunk with blood in
David's bowels: 1 Samuel 31. 4.
Nor was this all, he would have destro^ed David, that the Kingdom might not be
established in David's house; and he slew all the Priests for David's sake, and
so he ruined himself and his whole house; for 1 Chronicles 10. 16.
Saul died and his three sons, and all his house died together: from such a
destruction the Lord deliver the King and his Kingdom: And we hope the Lord
will do it, though the Kings hand (now in the hands of bloody and pernicious
men) is as rough now; his intentions against the Church now, are as bloody now,
and as manifestly so, as Saul's were against David; yet we hope the destruction
will not be such, though God is the same, and the Church as dear to him now,
as David was then. We have only this thread (a weak support) to bear up our
hope herein. That we read not, Saul had any one Prophet, nor any good man (so
much as is in show) with him, who justified his way of persecution against
David. But the King is in the Schole of the Prophets, has those by him
eminently known all over the Christian world, for Learning and Piety, who (if
we believe heresay, I believe it not) do justify the Kings way, saying of it,
It is the right way, and according to the Scriptures: and they who are against
that way, do turn head against the Scripture of God, the 13. to the Romans,
touching that matter. This may be some inducement to the King, to prosecute
this stubborn way, having such persons approving his doings; The greater their
sin (if they do so by conniving at it, or not contending against it with all
their might) But it may render the King more excusable, a tanto, then Saul was.
I will give a full and fair account of this way of persecution, all the
turnings and windings in it, as Saul followed-on against David; And we shall
see how it runs-up all along with the way of persecution now: And if this way
prove it self according to the Rule and Line of the Word, in any one degree or
step of it: If it has any agreement with Peace, Righteousness and Holiness,
then all the true Israel of God are utterly unacquainted with the good Word of
God, and have erred concerning the way of Holiness, from the beginning of the
world upward, unto this day. I will examine and ponder the Kings way, what it
was anciently, and what it is now, the several steps and motions therein;
beginning with the first step, as follows.

Chap. 2.
Saul's bloody intentions to David varnished over with fair Words, and lovely
Actions. These are compared with Words and Actions now: And so all the most
Remarkable Passages and Acts of Grace, which passed between the King and
Parliament since they sat, till the War brakeforth, are Recorded, and Weighed,
but found Light.

PEace is in Saul's tongue, War is in his heart; There he conceived mischief,
but yet, that he might not make his wicked thoughts legible to all Israel; that
they might not break-out at his mouth, nor at his fingers end, (as they have
done before a few in the Court) he veiled the peoples eyes by means we shall
fully understand by and by. He persecutes David with his tongue, and hand too,
but so priva^ely and cunningly, that the people, remote from the Court, could
read no such thing, but that Saul's tongue was for David, and his hand too. Nor
would they en^er^aine a thought that Saul, the chief Master and Dispencer of
Justice. would do unjustly. True indeed it was, That Saul had almost (tantum
non) pinned or nailed David's head and the wall together; Saul sought to smite
David even to the wall with his javeline 1 Samuel 19. 10.
: And it was so violent and sudden (for it was by the Devils motion) that David
had no more time then to 1 Samuel 18. 10.
slip away and avoid the place, so the javeline was smote into the wall: And
though this was twice, yet this was known in the Court only, perhaps to some
dwellers hard by.

It is as true also, and as clear every whit in the sacred Text (but the
people inquire not into that, not what is written, not they) That an evil
Spirit from God 1 Samuel 18. 10.
came upon Saul, and that is reported twice too; And this evil Spirit was so
active in Saul, That, whereas he might have rested and slept quietly in his
own house, he runs about (tanquam ostro percitus) from place to place, (for he
must run whom the Devil drives) and is restless in the pursuit of David's
soul; so as Saul might say, and others also, and all say truly, and the people
might believe it too; That Saul did not go away from his Court, but was d^i^^n
away; he was indeed, for an evil Spirit did drive him, which is clearly
written: But I say, the people observe none of that, No^ could they hear what
good Jonathan spoke of David unto Saul his fa^^er, David's works have been
to-thee-ward very good; he did so, and so, and so ^ ronght a great salvation
for all Israel; wherefore then will thou si^ against innocent blood, to slay
David without a cause (...) ^. 4. 5.
; The people, A^l Isr^el, remote from the Court, heard none of all this; they
heard what a salvation David had wrought, and they might think, as Jonathan
did, judging his fathers spirit by his own, that Saul seeing that salvation
did rejoice, thou saw it, and did rejoice, Verse 5.
said Jonathan: so the people might think too; and that David was in all the
blame, and Saul in none at all; That David had done some great matter against
Saul, because Saul did so persecute him, so the people may think; and the
people might very well be so deluded, for Saul did cover his malice with fair
words, as a potsheard may be covered with silver dross ^^. 26. 23
; go and tell David from me, said Saul; The King has delight in thee, and all
his servants love thee 1 Samuel 18. 22.
. Nor could there be greater shows, nor more lively expressions, then were in
Saul toward David; nor were his shows greater then were the reality of his
actions, as the people must understand them; We do accouut Acts of mere Right
and Justice, to be Acts of most transcendent Grace; (and so we can flatter) but
indeed the Acts of Saul toward David, could seem no otherwise then Acts of
most transcendent Grace, and that was the account that David himself made of
them; he was sued unto twice to be the Kings Son-in-law, and David was
exceedingly taken with it, seems it to you a light thing to be a Verse 23.
Kings Son in-Law, seeing that I am but a poor man and lightly esteemed? It
made David quite forget that unkingly act of throwing the javelin at him; And
the people must needs be taken as much with it also, seeing a poor shepherd
matched to a Kings Daughter, for the people could not tell what Saul had said
in his heart, I will give him Verse 21.
her, that she may be a snare unto him, and that the hand of the Philistines
may be against him: [Note it by the way, That this very snare wherewith Saul
intended to catch David, took Saul himself, as we may read, 1 Samuel 31. 3. It
is ominous, and a point of desperate folly, to lay a snare for David] But this
snare was contrived in the Court, and that which was said, was said in the
heart, whose language the people cannot understand till it be made legible by
the hand. So much as was in sight was an act of most transcendent Grace: True
indeed it is, and it is legible, that Saul spoke to Jonathan his son (bad 1 Samuel 19 1.
council to a young Prince, therefore an Almighty hand stayed Jonathan
upright, conversing with such a Father, and amongst such Councillors) and to
all his servants, as we heard, That they should kill David: But this was not
legible to the people, it was a secret from the Court, where David had a good
friend, (Jonathan) who will tell him all he hears, and what his fathers bloody
intents are, that so he might prevent them. Saul goes on, sends Messengers to
David's house to watch 1 Samuel 19. 11.
him, and to slay him in the morning; but his wife makes an ill-favored shift
to save her husband, and tells a lie to boot. So David escaped Psalm. 59.
at that time, and makes a Psalm of Thankesgiving to the LORD after his
manner; so many deliverances, so many Psalms to call to remembrance. Then to
Ramah he runs, and Saul sent Messengers as fast after him, and then came
himself thither (we shall read more of that in due place) And now that Saul is
at Ramah, David flies from thence, and comes to Jonathan; he and David are made
sure together, and fast one to the other. [Marke it by the way, Saul had his
Scout to spy, as you shall hear anon: The LORD provided for David too, he had
a Spy at Court, a fast friend there close at Saul's elbow. Be thou as David was
upright with the LORD, thou shall have a Jonathan, a true friend at Court, that
is certaine] I proceed, The Father observes great signs, and tokens of their
love, so his anger kindled against Jonathan and reproacheth him shamefully; it
grieved Saul that 1 Samuel 20. 30, 31.
David lives upon the ground (that is the expression) commands Jonathan to
fetch him unto his Father, for he shall surely die: Jonathan will see reason
for what he does; he will not run out of the Court gates to fetch David to his
Father, because his Father said, David shall die: Jonathan was a good man,
notwithstanding the bloody words his ear drank in from his Fathers mouth
continually, and his conversing daily with bloody Courtiers [God, He only,
keeps the heart upright and from pollution, even there where Satan's throne is]
there Jonathan was a good man and an obedient Son notwithstanding.

Object. Nay but he was not you may say, for his Father, a King, commands, and
Jonathan, a son, disobeyes.

Ans. It is seemingly so indeed, and, as we use to say, That he is an obedient
servant, who obeyes his Lord, never examining what is the command and charge,
nor how unjust; as the Kings Attorney did obey, commanded by his Master to
accuse the six Members sitting in Parliament of high Treason: This was an
obedient servant, say we, but what says the Lord our great Master in heaven? I
think the Judgment Deuteronomy. 19. 19, 20, 21.
from the LORD is, That this wicked servant shall be drawn first, and hanged
after. For ye shall do unto this evil servant, as he had thought to have done
unto his brother. This was the Law anciently, what proportion the laws have
now, with this then, let the honest Lawyer judge. Now we are informed of and
resolved in an high point, or question, who has an obedient ear? Who obeys
indeed? He who disobeys the perverse will of Saul, and obeyes the Holy will of
GOD: This must be our resolution now, which was Jonathans then, he disobeyed,
he resisted (as some express it) his Father, pleades David's case, and his
innocence, which vexed Saul not a little, as appeared by his Answer, for he
made reply to that, with his Javelin. Now Jonathan has a full discovery of that
Evil spirit ruling in his Father, takes a little lad with him, and betakes
himself to his bow (for Jonathan is allowed the wisdom of the serpent)
shoots an arrow, sends words after the Boy, but intends them to David's ear,
make speed, have, stay not, the evil spirit works effectually in my Father.
Then he sent back the lad, runs to David, they embrace one the other; bid
farewell, then turned back to back, Jonathan back to his Fathers Court, David
hastens forwards, and comes to Nob, that strong hold, we shall come thither
anon also.

Chap. 3.
Words and Actions then, are compared and weighed with these now; and being
weighed, are found light now as then.

Now we will look over what has been said, and take the result there from,
which is briesly this, gathered to our hands; Saul's words (those that were
heard abroad) were as soft as butter, when war was in the heart; his actions
also (those the Common people, remote Psalm. 55.
from Court, and unacquainted with matters and transactions there can take
notice of) were very lovely, full of favor, and indeed, most transcendent
Grace: yet were they snares and traps, or, to express it as the Searcher of
hearts does, very drawn swords. This is the Result of all Saul's Words and
Actions hitherto, the very product the Spirit gives us therefrom. Now I will
compare together Words then, and Words now; Actions then, and Actions now; and
for the intentions of the heart, I will leave them to the world to read, for
they will be legible by and by.

The King (in the hands of wicked men) has given good words; so did Saul too:
The King now, by his evil Council, has made so many Declarations of his grace
and favor, so full of engagements, that he is worse then an Infidel that will
not believe him; so they say, who, what ever they know, care not what they say.
I will entreat but this, observe this Story well, and we shall never trust bare
words; no, nor the most lovely Actions neither that can be in show. In this
Story we have all this, most gracious words, and most transcendent Acts of
Grace, yet proved themselves mere traps and snares, very drawn swords. It is
possible now, to say no more yet, that Acts of mere Right, and Common Justice,
(the Acts and Grants of the King have been no other, no not even for the
continuance of a Parliament) may prove as deceitful now: And whether so or
not, the Court and places there-abouts can more then guess, for the Court is
witness of as hard dealing from the King against David now, as it was in Saul's
time against David then. Nay, (to go-on a little in the general) Court, City,
Country, all, now can tell us, That, as, when Saul's words were most like unto
oil and butter, most smooth and soft, then were the thoughts of his heart most
bloody and treacherous, even as drawn swords: so now, when the Kings-party
made some overtures toward a peace; when they gave most goodly words (as often
times they did) then were the most devilish projects hatching, and bringing
forth to the birth: when the wicked made shows of Justice, then they plotted
against the Just, and gnashed upon him with their teeth, against all the rules
of humanity and justice also; when the wicked seemed as Angels of Light, then
did they carry-on Designs most horrid and hellish, as it is at this day. But,
what a good God, what a discovering God does Israel serve! Who would not serve
Him! He suffers the wicked to conceive mischief, to travel with iniquity, and
then to bring forth falsehood: He leaves them to Psalm. 7. 14.
their own Counsels, to make a pit, and dig it deep, and then they must fall
into the ditch they have made; their mischief must return Verse 15. Verse 16.
Verse 17.
upon their own head, and their violent dealing must come down upon their own
pate: (proceed) I will praise the Lord according to his Righteousness: and
will sing praise unto the Lord most high. O that the wicked could consider all
this, and this which follows, Let not him that is d^ceived, trust in vanity:
for vanity shall be his recompense. Job 15. 31
But I must not stay upon Generals: More particularly, Thus, Saul commanded it
to be said to David then, The King delights in thee, and all his servants
love thee; he carries the same regard to thee, as unto his own child; for
thou must be the King Son-in-law.

The King now has said as much, That he tendered the Parliament, and their
safety then, as his own safety, or the safety of those most near to him in
place and affection; And the very next day, yes, the very next day, these
lovely words were drawn swords. But let words go: His Actions, before and
after, were such, as if he meant to exceed Saul, in loving kindnesses to David,
he would marry (not as Saul, his Daughter to David, but) himself to his good
people for ever, his Kingdom should be his wise, he would be eternally theirs,
so long as this world lasts. So he spoke, and so he did, perhaps, heartily
intending all good to all his good people: But no sooner did his Majesty turn
aside, and give his Ear to his pernicious Council, but all was turned the
clean contrary way: To the ruin of himself and his Kingdom.

Chap. 4.
Vile and pernicious Councillors pervert their Masters mind (making shows of
much good to his poor people, the clean contrary way; To the destruction of
the King and Kingdom.

NO, say his Majesty's most wicked, desperate and pernicious Councillors, in
whose hands he is, for thus they say; That his Majesty has no Malignants about
him, none that council him, but for the good of King and Kingdom: And that it
is so, thus it may appear to the whole world, (and so they would cast a veil
before the eyes of the multitude) First, by what his Excellent Majesty has
done; and by the Acts of most transcendent Grace, which has passed his hands:
Consider on them in order, and first, what he has done.

There were vile Councillors set up in high places, the vilest men A. Psalm. 12
8.
were exalted, and then the wicked walked on every side: This his Majesty
suffered to be cast into prison, and the one of them he suffered to be brought
unto the Block: Besides, he suffered the prison doors to be opened, and let
the oppressed go free.

We will say this only: This was mavelous in our eyes. The B.
The wise man has given a double observation upon it, and it shall suffice
here: The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, but transgressors
Pr. 11 6, 8.
shall be taken in their own naughtiness. The righteous is delivered out of
trouble, and the wicked comes in his stead.

As he put the wicked down, so, at the same time, he exalted precious A.
men, and honorable indeed, he set them in high places.

This was mavelous also in our eyes: And we judge not what B.
the Councels were, and the intentions of the heart in setting-up those so
precious men, and truly honorable, though in the multitude of such Councllours
there is safety; and to such Councillors Pro. 11. 14. 12. 20.
there is joy: But we praise God, That the snare is broke. What snare? A great
snare, the snare of the world, the fair offers thereof, its Pomp and Glory,
that snare is broken. They were tempted, says the Heb. 11. 37.
Spirit, with the Glory of the world, that is certain. If stoning could not
serve the turn, nor sawing asunder neither, tempt them with the glory of the
world, see what that will do? It is not possible to withstand that temptation,
without an Almighty assistance: How have the mighty fallen here? Alas, the
humble know full fell, The world knows no other but his own, those that love
the world and his glory, and are content to live and die with it closest to the
heart. If the world do confer any glory (which is to guild gold with copper)
upon the precious, and truly honorable in the world, it is because they should
fall down and serve the world, and blaspheme their God, which they will rather
die then do, though they should be stoned, sawne asunder, or slain with the
sword, for they look to be exalted in due time, and to obtain a better
Resurrection: Therefore, they will not be servants to men (men's lusts) not
they; They are firmly resolved, though they might be promoted to great honors,
and have a house full of silver and gold, yet they will not pleasure man, and
grieve their God.

His good Subjects of Scotland, Rebels some months before, and A
so written upon every Post and Pillar, are styled and enacted Brethren, loyal
and faithful Subjects to God and their King: The breach was made up, and a day
of Remembrance commanded, and all this by his Majesty's command, never such an
Act of Grace!

We acknowledge it, and blessed be His glorious Name, who B
made up the breach, wide as the Sea; caused war to usher-in peace; gave his
people honey out of that devourer; delivered his good people there, and here,
from all the expectation of the enemy, from the oppression of his hand, and
sword of his mouth We praise His glorious Majesty for all this; And we do not
question how upright the Kings heart stood in that matter, because he calls his
good people of England Rebels and Traitors now, for doing their duty, and much
less (in show, and indeed) against him, then the Scots did; and yet they did
nothing but what they had warrant to do from the law of Nature and Reason, and
their Book, the Kings Law-Book too.

His Majesty put down the two Courts, as infamous over the Christian A
world, as ever was, or is the Spanish Inquisition, the Popes truest Purgatory:
for these Courts were turned against the Righteous, and with such violence and
extremity, that it was justly accounted, the greatest tyranny, and feverest
kind of persecution under heaven; Whence it came to pass, that those Courts
stank before David and all Israel. There the estates of men were consumed,
their consciences wracked, their persons abased, and abused worse then David's
fervants, yea, more cruelly then will a Mastiffe-Dog touse a poor sheep, or
lug a swine: So and worse then so were the servants of the Lord toused,
crapped, and lugged by the ears. In these places they said unto the soul of
the Righteous, Bow down, that we may go over, and he laid his body as the
ground, and as the street to them that went over Isa. 51.
There they gathered themselves together against the soul of the Righteous,
and condemned the innocent blood. I say the innocent, he was the But, and the
Mark that they bended to; he that served God and feared an oath, he that lived
in all good conscience, Act. 23.
he was smitten on the mouth; and because he did so, even because he was
upright in he^^t: when the vilest Priests, such as made the Offering of the
Lord to be abhorted, when such as they were purged there; Not as the King of
Babylon purged those two base persons, in the fire Jer. 29. 22.
; but purged after the manner of the Court, which was to clear them, whom God
and His Word condemned: These Courts his Majesty has put down, he has taken
those yokes from off the neck.

He has so, and we thank His glorious Majesty for this His transcendent grace,
and favor to His good people evermore, Who intends B.
them good, and will have good done unto them, what ever man's intentions were
then, or would have done since. It is clear enough, That the Kings intentions
(seduced by evil Counsels) were not to disburden his people, not to take off
their yoke, but to make it yet heavier, and more to establish the foot of
Pride; Nor do we judge of the heart now, or of the thoughts, transactions, or
discussions of the mind then, within his inward closet, and privy chamber
there: we do not judge of these secret talkings and parleys of his mind any
farther, then as lawfully we may, and ought to judge of them now, being cast
into a fair mould, and as his Majesty has given them a true stamp, and shape
ever since.

His Majesty has passed an Act against the Bishops Voting in Parliament: and
more then that too, touching that matter And this was A.
a very lovely Act indeed.

Indeed it was, and as equitable, as ever was any Act in the world; B.
for enquire what Bishops did there? All the mischief they could against the
LORD CHRIST, and His hidden ones. Therefore a most equitable Act. We again and
again thank His glorious Majesty, Whose overruling hand did all this: The
King did not do it with a clear intent thereby to bring glory to God, and
relief to his oppressed people, groaning under those Taskmasters; for his
Majesty has made a full Declaration of his mind that way; and his people
understand it very well: Let the Parliament have their will in this also, let
them take his Bishops (said his wicked Council) out of the Court, and let them
be taken with his Majesty's favor, and Act of Grace that way: But the hand of
the Philistines, said Saul: The Army of the North shall come-up (said the Kings
evil Council) and overpower the Parliament, and undo all that has been done
in favor and honor of David and his Court.

It is presumption to judge of the Kings intentions to be so, and so bloody,
and destructive toward his Parliament, and by consequence to his Kingdom,
when his Words and Actions were so clearly otherwise, good, pious, and most
advantageous to King and Kingdom; To judge his intentions now argues
rashness, headiness, and presumption, all three.

No, it does not: For we do not judge of thoughts, proiects, contrivances, B
while these are the secret Talkings, as was aforesaid, and parleys of the
mind, for this were rashness, and madness both, because they are in the dark
to us, and indiscernable: But we may, and ought to judge of them, when they are
made legible by the hand, demonstratively known to the world in full
Declarations, touching the Army in the North, and his Bishops also.

There are more Acts of transcendent grace yet behind, But I A
will sum up all in this one: The King has passed an Act for the continuance
of a Parliament, a fundamental mercy, and such an Act of Grace, as never the
like Act passed from any Kings hand.

Yes, there has: But let that go: For we will thank God here, B
who can make, a grand enemy to the Parliament, and as great a Traitor to the
King and Kingdom, Digby, I mean, [not Lord now, but Nobile Portentum, a Noble
Monster, in the Heathens account,] Nequit^a sord^^us imbuta Nobitia portenta,
^al. M^x. lib. 3. c. 5. Josh. 10. ^2.
an active Instrument to work-out this grace and good to the Kingdom: We care
not what his intentions were, too bad, and bloody, and so they have declared
themselves; but we Praise, we Bless, we magnify the LORD Jehovah, Who did as
great a work at that time, in our days, as he did in Joshuahs day, when He
made The Sun to stand still upon Gibeon, and The Moon in the valley of Aiialon:
We exalt and magnify this God; and so we are resolved to do while we have
any being; and not to give any thanke] to the kings Councillors, and yet we
will give the King his due, for we say, and shall make good what we say, had
this Act been from the King, an Act of Grace, there had been grace in it: I
mean, he had given grace unto it by continuing a gracious aspect upon it, and
his Influence into it, seeing it was not imaginable how he could, in so doing,
wrong himself or prejudice his prerogative, for it had been good for his
Kingdom (and that was the end) then it could not but be good for him. But that
his People may know and be assured what grace was in that Act of continuing his
Parliament, the King with-hol is all grace from it; Makes it, what he could,
and to his power, headless, and useless; he takes away all life and power
from it, so far as was in his power: I believe the oldest man living never
heard of the like, of an Act of grace made so graceless. And yet I think I
have read of an Act somewhat like it, and that was as bloody an Act, I think,
as ever was done in the world, and yet it seemed and carried the face, and
obtained the opinion in the People (a little while) of an Act of grace. Thus it
was, Duke D' Alva, (all the world knew what he was) had besieged a Town in the
low countries so long, that the Inhabitants, in extremity, treat with him for
their lives, he shall have a peaceable entrance, all the Ammunition, and all,
only the Inhabitants crave their lives: It was granted, their lives I mean,
and the People accept it thankefully, as an Act of grace, for life is a
precious thing. When the Conqueror (a Tyrant rather) was entered the city; he
keeps the People pent-up still, and denies them bread, and yet tells them he
keeps Covenant with them and keeps himself to the Articles of agreement: They
have their lives, but they shall have no bread, for bread, that was not
expressed in the Covenant: No? O monstrous! But it is boorlesse to cry out and
dispute the matter now, otherwise I could make this good at large, as I shall
by and by very briefly; That the Conqueror granting them their lives, did, in
the same grant give them bread too: But the Lord has Answered this matter by
himself, so I will pass it over, and apply it, only telling the Reader this
first, That this Act of Grace was so graceless, that it rendered him odious to
all people after this; and did the King his master Philip of Spain no small
disadvantage too, for it lost him a little Kingdom, which neither his Son,
nor his Sons son could ever recover again, no not to this day; They will not
be subject to him who would give them their lives but no bread to sustain
life; I will apply it (so far) as it fits to our purpose.

Truly this Act of the King, which is so extolled, is but too like this (...)
mentioned, life was granted; why then bread too, in the (...) grant: bread is
denied a poor People, why then life is denied them, for they cannot live
without bread [though I read of a maid, that did live without bread or meat,
and was named Meatlesse, it is a loud lie told by a Papist amongst a thousand
more after his manner] I say life here cannot be preserved, in an ordinary way,
without bread [or something like it] therefore take away bread, you take away
life: so the King, grants an Act, for the continuing his Parliament; an Act of
grace indeed it is, which lies in this, included in the same Act, a grant of
all things which lay in him, whereby to make the Parliament succesfull, and, by
necessary consequence, himself happy, viz. his presence, the influence of his
very spirits into it, his free ascent to the passing all Acts tending to the
forementioned end: But his Majesty, seduced by ev^l counsel, with draws all
this, which is as bread to life; as the Soul of a Parliament, he withdrawes
all, and yet this grant, before specified, must be called an Act of grace; No,
God knows, and he knows, and all his people know, there is no grace in it at
all, for he has withdrawn his gracious presence from his Parliament, and
influence thereunto as aforesaid.

No, his Majesty did not willnngly withdraw himself, his Parliament A
^erced him to do as he did, to withdraw from the Tumults about the Court, and
from the City.

Take heed what you say; God, the searcher of hearts, ^ears us B
what we say; and what was spoken in secret, is made manifest now, and that
which was hid is known and come abroad, and the Parliaments A^^. 8. 17.
Righteousness touching this imputation, and the Cities in^^cency is cleared
at this point, as the noonday; therefore pray let ^s speak and hear Reason.

Less cannot be said, but what his Majesty is pleased to say; he did A
not go from his Parliament but was driven; so he said again and again.

If it be so urged again and again, we will grant it, he was driven, and B
did not go but run; which was Saul's case: Certainly the Parliament did not
drive away their King from his Court, no more then David did drive Saul from
his house, but an evil counselor did it, and away he goes, nay he does not
go but run, for he must run whom the Devil drives, and that was a sad ease, we
will note it by the way; Saul pretendes that David sought his life, and away he
goes in pur^^it after David, but when did Saul return to his house? Good
Reader mark the answer, and take heed of making that the cause of thy ^^ght
which is not the Cause, and so it fails out to thee, that thou, whose will
carries thee from thine house, shall never return thither again in peace. It
was so with Saul, and that is the Answer, he never returned unto his house in
peace: I say in Peace; it is true, there is mention a great while after, that
Saul after a conferrence with David went home, and 1 Samuel 24. 2^. 26. 25.
after a blessing upon David, Returned to his place. I cannot tell where, or
what that place was, perhaps some strong Fort, Castle, or the like, for war was
in his heart, so long as the evil Spirit was there, and there he was, though
non-plussed then, and silenced for a time; But this is certain, where ever
Saul's house or place was, he had no peace there, for surely he never ceased
from persecuting of David, till David went to Gath; and about that time Saul
hears a noice of a great Power coming against him, whither of Israelites or
Philistines I cannot tell: But the sacred Text tell us plainly, That he, who
ran from his house at the ^vill Spirits motion, and the motion of his own will,
never returned again in peace, never enjoyed quiet rest there, at home
afterward. This puts me in mind of a communication betwixt two great persons,
and a resolution thereupon: Go thou one way, and I will go another, (both their
own ways, driving-on furiously toward a cursed end) so they wen^ on-ward,
setting their face against God, and their back one to the other, but never met
again. Truly it yields us a very sad consideration, but this only we will say
touching the King driven (they say) from his Court: There he might have rested
within the arms and imbracings of his good people, most quietly and securely
there, had it liked and pleased his Majesty best: But his will seemed his best
Counselor (amongst the rest we know no other reason) and he did otherwise,
and most contrary to his own rest, and quiet, egged-on, and acted no doubt, by
that evil Spirit, acting most effectually, and envying evermore to Kings and
people all, their rest and happiness. So he went from his Court, and his good
people, or rather was indeed, or too truly, driven thence by the instigation of
his wicked Council, and a common Adversary, as aforesaid: And now he lives as
one in the land of Nod, where he never enjoyed himself, nor one days rest and
quiet ever since. Councels (which are carried headlong) advised his Majesty at
that time to repair unto a strong hold, [O that they had told their Master
where that strong hold was, only the Almighty God, and next, the peoples
hearts] there to make war with GOD and his good people. So war was in
proposition quickly, great preparation for it then, the sweet words wete all
lost, as the Proverb says, turned into gall, or drawn swords. This we shall
read in the next Section; where the language of the heart, blood and death is
made legible to all the world, in the bloudiest characters. I will shut up this
Section with the wise man's (...) 2^. 26. 27. ^^
proverbs, Whose hatred i^ covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be showed
before the whole congregation. Whos^ diggeth a pit, shall fall therei^ and he
that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him. A lying tongue h^^^th th^se,
that are afflicted by it, and a s^^ttering mouth ^^^ke^^ r^i^e.

Finis. ^. Sect.

