ENGLANDS CONDITION CONSIDERED, AND BEWAILED.

WHEREIN, The obstructions of Peace, and the ways essayed to effect it are
rightly stated, and argued, between the Parliament, and the Scots COMMISSIONERS.

WITH Many observations on their late Papers, concerning the four Bills, and
PROPOSITIONS sent to the KING.

In bellis civilibus etiam post partam victoriam, non statim pax, sed varius
metus, and discordia.

Tacitus lib. secun. Hist. Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbot.

LONDON, Printed for Robert White, Jan 18. 1648

ENGLANDS CONDITION, CONSIDERED, AND BEWAILED.
IT is no time to make Apologies, and Prefaces, to have Epistles dedicatorie,
and unto the Reader, to write under the Rose, or to shadow discourses with
dark and knotty resemblances; we have been premising, and prefacing all this
while; plain English is best, for we are like else to lose our own Dialect
shortly. The name of Liberty of Subjects, and Privileges of Parliaments will
soon be worn out, as the old Saxon language, and refined into Prerogative and
Tyranny. And our laws which were first written in French, are like for better
understanding them, to be reprinted in the same, with the Scots marginall notes.

I am soon fallen into a lamentable discourse before I am aware, and my
trembling pen would feign hasten over it; But I must be serious. Distractions
and confusions in States, and Kingdoms, are not trifles. He that will view the
condition of poor England, had need have a heart made of wax, and eyes of
water, and bowels of compassion. If men knew where they are come to, they
would soon know how to think themselves miserable; we have gone a seven years
march in a State disguise, and after a long round are fairly reduced into our
old condition, and it were well (say some) if we are no worse; the scene is
changed but the play the same. That noble, and gallant spirit, which heretofore
wrought in true English hearts, for liberty, and Privileges, is now down, and
the old unmanklike pusillanimitie come upon us, with an addition of stupidity,
and insensiblenes; we have lost our blood, and now we are like to lose our
hearts; we have been almost destroyed by a civil war, and may be undone by
unsound peace; But I must be cautious, I shall be accounted a fool for my
labor, yet I must be honest, I shall only speak what wise men think, and
honest men feel; if more were done, less would be spoken Our greatest work
has been to undo our selves; we have acted magno conatu, magnas nugas, sown
the wind, and brought forth the whirlewind. Certainly we have lost that
reflect act of our understanding, by which, they say, the rational soul is
made happy. Recollect your selves what you have been doing so long a time,
where you are going, what new designs are on you. We have escaped the Spanish
Inquisition, we hope, But how nigh you are to France, and Scotland, you little
think. What is become of that golden fleece ( Liberty) which you so gallantly
fought for? where are the trophies of your conquest? who will pity us? We
have seen our malady, but know not our remedy; we know how to be miserable,
and have found out an easy way to it, but yet cannot see our way to be happy.
Our enemies are conquered, and now we are falling out with our friends; Its
harder to reconcile our own party, then to destroy the Kings. Our wounds are
opened, none wholly cured; our nakedness discovered, and nothing to cover it.
What shall become of poor England? we have won liberty, but dare not wear
it; the victory is got, but we cannot agree about the spoil? Formerly we knew
our enemies, now we neither know them nor our friends. Seven years experience
of tumults and war is sufficient (one would think) to learn us the way to a
happy peace, we have not wanted time, or ways to know our enemies and our
friends. Providence has helped us through a bloody war, and now division
would help us to a dishonest peace, But these are too melancholy meditations;
if men had been as honest as they pretended to be wise, we should have no such
sad things to work upon. But let us warily consider how we are come into this
condition, on whom lies the fault. Ask our grandees who stear at the Helm.
Some blame one, some another, I blame none, and yet all; I have nothing to say
to particulars, we have too much in generals,

Some lay the fault on his Majesty, And the truth is he has enough to be
charged withal, yet since the conquest, he has been under restraint, and
could not so possitively hinder, except you grant him his negative voice, yet
he cannot be altogether excused, he has done what in him lies in such a
condition, and his private influences and negotiations have not been ordinary,
but we have too much to charge him with on the old account.

Others lay the blame on the Parliament (and here we shall not want Votes) they
say they have sought themselves, not the Kingdom: but we may give our enemies
too great advantage of us by such jealousies. Its true, they are the rock to
which we have looked for our salvation, they have promised us our liberty, they
can procure it, and it were to be wished they could wash their hands clean of
all things; yet all must not be laid on the Parliament, but a faction in it:
they are a great body, made up of diverse and unsuitable spirits, and labor with
abundance of infirmities, and pass through those difficulties vulgar eyes see
not, yet to be plain, more might have been done then is; had some of them been
less employed, and interessed in affairs, more would have been acted for us:
those sad retreats they have made of late, is too ominous, of great distempers
even among them: but I shall rather pray for them, then speak any more of their
frailties. Others wipe away all blame from both, and lay all on the Army; poor
men, they have born the heat of the War, and now must needs have the blame of
the Peace: its our misery that we have none to distrust, but these which have
been most faithful; but yet it may be they are not wholly free, though I think
in an equal distribution little will come to their share; they have been good
servants, what they may prove when they become masters, I know not; some men's
conditions alter their spirits, but we have little cause to suspect them; where
ever the blame lies, the misery is like to lie on us: the truth is, It has
been the design of some to bring us where we are; and the ill foresight of
others; we cannot go so far back, as to question the truth of our cause, (God
has cleared that from heaven,) but some men may question their principles. God
has acted for us in the War, and now men act in the Peace: we have not come
into this condition per saltum, as many Dunces are made Doctors; but have
gradually and insensibly been led into it by the cunning artifice of some
master builders in the black Art: As many an ignorant disputer granting this,
and that, is by an ingenious Sophister, brought before he is aware, into a
confuting absurdity.

Let us cast our eyes back, but since the end of this War with the Royal
party, and we shall find some steps, wherein the secret contrivers of our
ruin have walked. When the King saw he could hold out no longer in Arms, he
betakes himself to his shifts, leaves Oxford to a confiding party, and betakes
himself to the Scots Army as his sanctuary, (a plot agreed on to mutual
advantage) the King gives in Newark at the desire of the Scots, is carried to
Newcastle, and by this time Oxford is likewise surrendered, and the War ended,
but things end not so: we want an enemy in the field, one must be made at home.
Factions are raised, discontents fomented against the Army, under the name of
Independents, etc. Some principles infused into the City of designs against
them, they are set on to go to the Parliament with Petitions, Remonstrances for
the settling Presbyterian Government, the Ministers made to stir up the people
against such and such men, under such names as they know would incense
sufficiently; some of our English, great men (who knew not how to be high
enough) join Counsels with the Scots, under pretense of maintaining the
Covenant, and setting up Presbyteriall Government, and that the City might be
made sure, the Scots are sent to Court them, with Letters from the
Ecclesiastics and Civils, to congratulate their faithfulness to this Cause,
to stir them up to the diligent prosecution of the Covenant; things grow to
some height, (as such fire will not want fuel,) and are ripe for action, they
get Ordinances for pressing all men to take the Covenant anew, that none shall
be employed in any office in Church or State, but he which will take the
Covenant, (and that over again) and submit to the Presbyteriall Government, and
all this with an eye to the Army, whom they knew how to ensnare; and as things
were thus laid, so they were not negligent in the execution, the City of London
must first begin as a pattern to the rest, cast out their old Militia, get power
to choose a new fit for the design, and because the Common Counsel is to order
the Civil Affairs, as the other the Military, that must be Moddled into the
same image; all that were thought but to be of the other party, or favorers of
them, cast out: All this while the King is at Newcastle, indeavoring to engage
the Scots Army for him, and how far he prevailed I could tell you, but that we
had such a peaceable parting at last. While the King was engaging for him the
party in England had another eye on that Army, as the Army of the Covenant, and
to have kept them to Balance this Army which lay in their way; but things were
not yet ripe, they were too great a power to be conquered by force, especially
having been just then raised with the glory of so great a Conquest, and the
countries crying out of their burdens under all the several Armies, which
were insupportable; counsels are joined, and agreed to the march of the Scots
Army, and delivery up of the King, on the little consideration of 400000 l. The
King shall still be kept as a reserve to make advantage of at last; But now the
Scots are gone, and that fear over, what they could nor do by force, they
will do by guile, the Army is still the eyesore, that darkened the glory and
Splendour of some great ones who had formerly been in Command, and had done
Service, but had not the happiness of being total Conquerors; nothing less
is endeavored then to break this Army; many ways they essayed, but the maine
was under pretense of relieving Ireland, (a design, not only fair, but so
honest in it self, that all men cried it up,) but how is this to be carried
on? who but Waller and Massey, (men who had an inveterate hatred against this
Army, they thinking themselves too much clouded by them) are sent down to
treat with the Army about it, and propose questions and conditions to the
Soldiers to be under their Command: the one as General, the other as
Lieutenant general: The reflection of this carriage in the thoughts of the
Soldiery, cannot but make them look about them, that some design was on foot
against them, by their and the Kingdoms enemies; especially seeing the
Parliament should wave them, who had but even now done them such faithful
service, and not so much as think them fit to be further employed in any
Service, especially to command their own Soldiers; they resent the business,
observe the Design, and are strangely united, to give a Negative Answer, that
none of them would stir without their own Commanders; But with either the
General, or Lieutenant Gen Crumwel, would all march at the Parliaments
pleasure; yet seeing this will not do, some other way must be taken: Money for
Arreares is offered to those which will leave the Army, (on which some fell
off, but no considerable number,) as they sought to divide, they unite; yet
when this would not do, but they saw they were not so meal mouthd as the rest,
they must be disbanded as unnecessary, and a burden to the Kingdom, and that
without their Arreares, and in parts, without those requisites which belonged
to their honor and security; thus would they have the first fruits of this
Conquest, begin in the dishonorable disbanding of the Conquerours. But the
Soldiers grew acquainted with these designs, and get heart, resolve to stand
on their guard, and to knit them the more, choose Agitators out of every
Regiment, for the better ordering and communicating of things to each other,
draw up Petitions to the Parliament, which by the strenuous negotiation and
power of those first designers against them, was censured as Treasonable, and
the Authors as Traitors; which could not but incense, when they saw favors and
services so soon forgotten: yet all this which was laid for division is the
advantage for their union, and they randevouz with much unanimity and courage,
and were at last owned by the General, and the rest of the Commanders, who for
a while were shy because of the newness and hazard of the business. Things
being thus in the Army, and in that posture, they bethink what may be of
concernment to them before they are disbanded, expecting to have no more
afterward, then they could make sure at first; they therefore propose to the
Parliament what belonged to them as Soldiers: And having this advantage,
seeing they fought for the good of the Kingdom, make an Essay by Propositions
to the Parliament for the settling of the Kingdom also; drew up charges against
eleven of those Members who were the chief Actors in the design; upon which,
they, at their own desires, had leave given by the Parliament, to withdraw;
but things thus acting, new Counsels are set on foot. First, the King must be
looked unto, and got away either into London or Scotland, and so it was
endeavored, in the mean while (unknown unto the Army, as the General professed
in his Letter to the Speaker) by the particular Act of Cornet Joyce, (one of no
great head for to lay any deep design) who was sent out with a party of horse
toward Oxford, but would needs go visit his Majesty, the King was voluntarily
brought to the Army, which though it was strange to them, and they were
startled at it, yet they thought they might make an advantage of him as well as
others, at least to keep him from being in a Faction against them. But that
design is not yet broken, all this while Reformadoes, Apprentises, and others
are secretly listed, great sums of money paid to the old Officers of Essex, and
Wallers, and Masseyes Army, and things grew so high, as a great company of them
beset the House of Commons kept them in till nine of the clock at night, with
threatening words make them recall their Ordinances, vote in the King which made
the Speakers of both Houses, with many of the honest Members fly to the Army
for safety: These men are still in the City stirring up the Militia, and Common
counsel, framing a new Army, and those seeds which were formerly sown by the
Scots and them* come up into blades* and Pikes, they stand in a Posture of War
to defend themselves and oppose the Army, which never intended to come nigh
them, unless provoked; the Army hearing of these doings march toward the
City, and when they came to Windsor accidentally met with the Speakers, and the
rest of* the fled Members; after congratulation and mutual expresses of love,
and joy to see one another, the Army Rendevouz at Hunslow heath, and resolve to
march to the City, who prevented them with terms suitable to peace, (out of
what principle we will not dispute) the Members were brought to the House in
peace the Army marches through the City in peace, and now things seemed to be
hopeful; but though the eleven Members were gone, yet the Spirit was not gone
with them; though the City durst not oppose the Army, they will starve them,
and make them odious, and a burden to the Kingdom, therefore they will lend
no money, delay their contributions, not pay their Arreares that the Army is
looked on as our misery, the Countries undone and all business retarded above,
by the remainder of that party, that while we look for peace, behold
threatenings of another War, and we are now brought to such a pass, that he is
a wise man that knows what to propose first. The King is gone from us to the
Isle of Wight, and there he takes time to weigh his designs upon us;
Propositions are gone to him, di^^^^ed by some, and protested against by the
Scots; coldly, and cunningly answered by himself: Thus have we handsomely made
way for our own misery, we know not our own strength, and therefore must
divide, and with David number the people. Some men have played their own games,
and now leave us to pay stakes; divisions are grown so high among our selves,
that our common enemy grows high in their hopes, and expect a turn, wherein
they may be a third party, and have one cast more for to recover their
compositions. When shall we learn to be wise? But I crave pardon I have made
this digression, but its to show you the way you are come to this misery, which
if God prevent not, will make us the spectacle of the Nations.

But what is become all this while of our Brethren of Scotland, that they have
been out of the transaction? You will have enough of them anon. The truth is,
they have not been idle all this while in the City. And not unknown, how they
have endeavored to bring Edinbrough to London, and Hallyrudehouse to
White Hall; they love us so well, that they would not only be one with us in
Covenant, but Privilege, and would gladly have the name of great Britain
comprehend us all. And because our divisions were not wide enough, out of their
superabundant love to us, they cast in bones betvveen us, and publicly reflect
on our strength (the high Court of Parliament, and the Army) to strengthen the
great animosities that is in the most against them, that we may have a second
need of them to be Umpires. But now before I am aware I am fallen into the bosom
of the Scots Declaration, a Declaration of the Scots indeed, and of other men
too; by which I hope all true hearted English men will take a copy of their
countenance toward us. Yet I shall not meddle much with the contents of it;
the Parliament no doubt will so fully do Justice in it. Only in the general I
shall take leave to animadvert something. We may better speak plain English
then they. I take notice of a grand Design driven on against the Parliament
and Army, by those who wait for our ruin; and of which this Declaration is but
a Manifesto to the world. Viz. to make the Parliament low in the eyes of the
people, and render them distastefull, that so the King may have the fairer way
to his old power; so likewise to render the Army, so intolerable a burden as
that the Kingdom cannot subsist under them; and to carry on this the more
secretly, the Covenant, and Religion are made the veiles.

Two things I cannot but take notice of as general in that Declaration. First,
their so often zealous (if not superstitious) mentioning of the Covenant, more
then twenty times in one leaf, as if all Religion were vv^^p^ up in that,
that it were not only the compendium, but the exact form of all divinity. And
as if they would make the world believe, that they prefer the Covenant before
all their own Interests, and Designs, whereas I fear, they, and too many
more, have made it but a State trick to deceive poor ignorant devout souls.
Its a great question whether they think so highly of the Covenant of Grace. I
confess we have no reason to repent of taking the Covenant, we took it
honestly, and sincerely, little thinking the use which would be made of it, to
ensnare us to the Scots designs. I would only desire our Brethren to recollect
themselves, how they kept Covenant with our Commissioners in the North, and
then they will have little heart to charge it on us in the South. I could name
the particulars, but that I am loath to disturb the honorable Commissioners in
their Religion.

Secondly I cannot but take notice, (as all men else should) of the tenderness
of our Brethren, and the deep refenting of the affairs of England, and that in
so near and intimate a way, that they neglect their own; chiefly insisting,
purely and nakedly on these things which concern our Kingdom, and fcarce
mentioning their own. This is brotherly love indeed; But lest we should be
suspicious, they fairly salve a mistake with this, that they would have the
Militia in the hands of the King, and the Parliament and Kingdom lie again at
his Majesty's feet for a general pardon; for so they shall soon if once he
get that power. And now since I am fallen on this, it will not be much out of
the way, to spend a word or two, in distinguishing how far Scotland is to
meddle in the concernments of England by the Treaty. Let this be laid as a
foundation, that let the union be never so nigh; it does not necessarily imply
a communication of properties, there are entire and proper incommunicable
Privileges which are reserved to both: As between man and wife, which is the
nighest conjunction, there are titles and honors which are proper to each
person, which both have the benefit of, but not the particular propriety in.
The union between England and Scotland, can be only in those things which are
of common concernment to both, which belongs to the very being, and well being
of the union; they are notwithstanding two Kingdoms, and have distinct Laws,
and Privileges peculiar to each, and which neither may meddle in. Now let it
be seriously weighed, that to press our union too far, even to an
introaching on the properties of one another, is to make our union
uncomfortable, and to lay a foundation for a breach; Now what concerns us in
particular, and does not touch on the Interests of the Kingdom of Scotland,
must be left to the Parliament to determine, as what concerns them to their
Parliament. That which concerns us are especially our Laws, the Privileges of
Parliaments, the Militia; and these are so ours, as that you may turn Scotland
into England, and make an Identity between us, before they can meddle with
them; and doubtless the Parliament cannot choose but resent it highly, that
any Commissioners either of Scotch, or of any Kingdom in the world, shall take
upon them to declare and protest against the sending those things in
Propositions, which is their birth right, and undoubted Privilege, and which
they can have no competitors in, without the highest breach of their trust. And
the Commissioners might as well have protested against any Ordinance made by
the Parliament for Excise, or against their making a new great Seal, as
against any of these four Propositions, which are solely the concernments of
England, and have not so much, as the least aspect on the Interest of Scotland,
nor influence upon the Treaty between the Kingdoms. And as to that clause in
the Treaty which says, that we shall not make either peace or war without
each others advise and consent; It must be still meant in these things wherein
our mutual Interests are contained: for else we have covenanted our selves
into a fair condition, that the Scots negative voice, though in those things
which essentially concern our own Kingdom, may hinder our happiness as they
please; so that we must be beholding unto them for their consent in that which
God, and nature has invested us withal; How much should we have been
overseen to deny his Majesty a negative voice (knowing the hazard of it) and
give it to the Scots? You see how our exigencies have brought us into
inconveniences; we have, of our indulgence, and brotherly respect made them
privy to all our Counsels, and Privileges, and they now claim an Interest in
them; I doubt that if this Parliament be dissolved, our Brethren will challenge
the right of calling the next, that we shall neither have Law, nor Privilege
without their consent. The last year they claimed a Right to the disposing of
the Kings person in England; and now they claim a Right to dispose of the
Parliament, and their transactions, though purely in matters of our own
Kingdom. They begin fair, if the progress be suitable, we shall have neither
Law, nor Liberty, but what the Scots Commssioners shall vote for us; But that
by the by, though they make it the great scope of their Declaration. We have
now seen our misery, how we lie at the brink of great dangers, some would
divide us into more parties, then all the wise men among us know how to make
up; and what advantage men are taking daily to make the Breaches wider, while
others lie at the catch to disadvantage us.

Let us now see what may do us good, (if we be not past cure) we have been
long time in war, its time for us now to think of a peace; and I know that
is in the expectation of all men. Peace is a sweet word, especially after war,
yet we had it a long time, and could not prize it, we have been long
unacquainted with it, and now have lost the way to it; we all agree on the
thing, if we could on the terms; Indeed to some the name of peace is as an
unpleasant sound, there be fish that cannot live but in troubled waters; others
love peace, but have too common apprehensions of it. I love peace, and I hate
it, I love it as I find it wrapped up in the arms of truth, I hate it as its in
iniquity, and on base terms; let others take it, I shall not envy them. I
would men loved truth as I love peace. I love that peace which may requite the
blood which has been shed to purchase it, such a peace as may keep God, and
the Gospel with us; any other will be but a foundation of a future war; Its
better suffer a little to settle a good peace; Its better suffer a little
longer, then get a peace that will end in greater war; We know what will be
the worst to stand to such conditions as may produce a solid peace, but we
know not what will be the end of an unsound peace.

Diverse, as they have desired, so have assaied to bring forth peace; the ways
and means, with the ends they act, are not so consonant, we will a little
consider what is proposed in such a transaction. The Parliament and the Scots
are the great Agitators of this work, but with different principles and ends,
as we shall see anon: the Parliament stick to the way of Propositions, only
those for security turned into bills: the Scots urge a personal treaty, and
therefore have followed it hard, that no other way may be thought on, yea, have
protested against the Parliaments way of Address, though they so far
condescend, as to bring down the number of Bills to four, and to treat the rest.

Let us consider soberly, which way is most likely to effect the end. In
general, I much question, whether the Queen of Hearts and the King of Clubs
will make a good match, especially when the Queen of Diamonds is competi^resse.
But especially this must be taken in, what the nature of that peace is, we are
to endeavor. That peace which must make us happy, must be a safe, honorable,
and well grounded Peace. The Question is, whether in a personal treaty
according to the Scots endeavor, such a peace may be established? they urge
much for it, and quote former Declarations of the Parliament; but what may be
for the good of Scotland properly, and as in its own constitution is one thing,
and what for England is another; I doubt whether a peace grounded only on such
things as are contained in the general Treaty, will serve for all the
particulars we need have granted for our own Kingdom; such a peace must be
procured, as will confirm our union with them, and encourage our friends,
discountenance our enemies; that may unite us at home, and (...) others abroad.

Now what way is most suitable to such an end, is the question: Let us take
first into consideration, the personal treaty, which our Brethren are such
sticklers for, how like it is to produce such a peace.

First, Consider the probable good that will come out of such a treaty in
reference to this end. The Parliament have sent Propositions, which they have
thought fit for the future good, and security of the Kingdom, without the
granting which, we can neither be happy, nor hopeful; they have altered some
of them; and qualified them, more to the sense of the King, rather then
Kingdom, that it might take better with him, a long time he has had to
consider of them, some he is willing to grant, which are less material,
others he refuses his consent to; as being against his honor, (we are sure
for our good) the Parliament cannot but still insist on the substance of the
Propositions, they must be the matter of the treaty* Now if his Majesty after
so long time of consideration; cannot consent to our demands, how can we
believe he will when he shall treat in person, when the same things are urged
and stuck unto? for either the Parliament must treat only on what the King
shall propound, or else frame new Propositions of a different sense; not so
good for the Kingdom, or else a personal treaty will be no more then a
formallity, or complement; which yet may be hazzardous to us; to speak truth,
the King can write plainer then speak; and if we cannot have his hand and
seal, how can we expect his heart.

Secondly, Neither is it honorable for the Parliament after so long waiting
for his Majesty's consent, now to admit his person with freedom and honor to a
personal treaty, wherein they must be fain to retract all their former
Propositions, or have the same negative answer to the most material
concernments of their privileges, and our liberty; they have made too many sad
retreats already, to their own dishonor and the Kingdoms disadvantage. Its our
unhappiness that his Majesty has put himself in such a capacity, as he is yet
to be looked on under the notion of enmity; and whereas the Scots urge the
Parliaments own Declarations, they must consider times and seasons: can the
Parliament in honor treat on equal terms now, as when the King had an Army
to balance their power? It was the utmost the King desired, to come to a
personal treaty, when he had his greatest strength, and doubtless he knew his
own ends then as now. But it will be objected, can any way be more honorable
then to treat personally with the King? I answer, that is most Honorable to
the Parliament, which holds them to their first principles of justice and
liberty, and keeps up their resolutions for the good of the Kingdom, and the
personal treaty will not contribute much to this, however if it be honorable
touching Ceremony, we must have it firm, in regard of security, which is the
Third thing to be considered seriously, How safe it may be; though the
Commissioners seem to make it out of Question, they must give us leave to fear
it, especially when so many heart-burnings are already among us, and fire balls
ready for (...) are (...) up and down City and Country. It is a sad condition
we are brought in, that what his Majesty thinks honorable for his person, is
not safe for us. How can we think to gain any thing by a personal treaty, or
have security of any good by it, seeing he refuses to take the Covenant? and
here I wonder our Brethren, can dispense with their Cause, to trust the Kings
person in such a Treaty, when he refuses and protests against the Covenant;
they highly charge the Parliament for that they left it out in the
Propositions, and yet our Brethren can willingly let it out of the personal
Treaty* The truth is, they would gladly have his person with us, for they know
they can never have him further off them, they (...) go^ what they can of the
Parliament, how they would try what they can get from the King. But how safe it
may be for us in these unsettled times, when most are discontented, and seem
to be taken with any thing which is new, and seems but to speak of peace,
though it be in its remote principles, at never so great a distance from it;
How safe I say, let our brethren judge. We have vvarping enough already, the
presence of a fevv apprentises, has made us retract Ordinances, how much more
the presence of the King looking smilingly for his own advantages? what if
the King should come in person to Treat, and He and the Parliament should not
agree, they standing to their just and reasonable demands in the Propositions,
and the King withdraw his consent? what will follovv in regard of hazard,
and danger, he being brought so nigh us, before he has given any security to
us of our Liberties? we know Kings are strange creaturs can carry that in their
countenance which they never had in their hearts, and the influences, and
painted rays of Majesty on Subjects may work strange things, which may be
strange indeed unto us. His Majesty has had a great share in the ruin of the
Kingdom, he must be content to share in the misery, and abate something of his
honor to make up our losses; we should joy in his Person if we had his heart,
without which the other will do us little good; the Kings honor lies in
granting the just desires of his Subjects in Parliament, and if he looks to his
honor abstractively, we must to our safety. We have little cause to put our
necks under his Majesty's feet, and lie at his mercy.

Besides, neither can His Majesty come alone without his train; I mean those
Incendiaries which have been actors of this Design against the Kingdom; those
he calls friends, which the Parliament calls Delinquents: And I wish as his
Person has been engaged with them in a bloody War, so his honor be not left
with them. Its doubted, He has wrapped up his interests too much with theirs,
and cannot honorably come himself without good quarter for them: However, he
will have an eye to them as his Favorites, and how safe we can think our
selves, when such shall be about His Majesty, let our Brethren of Scotland
judge.

That Peace can only be Happy, which is suited to the first Principles and
Answers the ends of this War, which was to preserve and settle Religion in
power and purity, by countenancing the professors of it, and discountenancing
the opposers; by this Treaty the Bishops themselves might be likely to be
accommodated, and those outcasts brought in State: And the second stated end,
was to bring Delinquents to justice, an Act of Oblivion will not satisfy the
just expectations and engagements of the Kingdom, and we shall still by it
keep the fuel of the same fire, or worse within us, they will not so forget
us, though we do them, but when they grow up with us, will take their
advantages to be quit with us; if we do not justice on them, God will on us:
Can we expect by such a Treaty, that the King will ever suffer them to be
plucked from his bosom, whose new Titles and Punctilioes of honor, he will
not suffer to be taken from their persons? It is certain we cannot be safe, as
long as they get heart, this generation will retain the seeds of this
discontent; Impunity will but encourage them to act more when they have
opportunity, yet still as much favor as can be shown with the safety of the
Kingdom must; justice must be distributive, and proportionable to the persons,
and faults.

In a word, such a peace we must have, as may not let the guilt of blood be
upon us. It can never enter into any serious heart, that the issue of all this
blood, and the natural product of all this stirs, should be a slight and
overly accommodation: Doubtless God has had his end, as well as men theirs,
and that has been working out, and we ought to expect it with faith, and
patience, and not run our selves on uncertain rocks, and skin over our sores,
when we may heal them; but no more of the Personal Treaty, (the golden bait
our Brethren have laid before us, we shall have enough of it to our grief, if
ever providence should permit such an overture,) only let me add this; I know
not why, if the Parliament have made war without the King, nay against his
consent, they may not make peace without him, especially seeing he refuses to
grant that which they judge essential to our happiness; we conclude with
this, That the sending honest and wary Propositions for his Majesty to grant,
is the best and safest way to procure a settled peace; if he be obstinate, it
must be done without him, there is no Medium, the Kingdom cannot always
languish. But our brethren will not only have a personal Treaty the best way
to peace, but add the disbanding of the Army, without which the grant of the
former will not serve: This Proposition they urge from the tenderness of the
sense they have of the taxes, and burdens of this Kingdom, in regard of
freequarter, and Contributions; (for this thanks must still be returned,) but I
wonder our Brethren lost their sense of Englands burdens in the North, where
besides free quarter, and plunderings, they laid such a sesse, that the fish in
the sea could not escape their tax: However, I am glad they are come to their
senses at last, we hope, they will be sensible to abate some things of their
hundred thousands we owe them* out of brotherly assistance: the reflections on
those gallant men (of the Army) I will not mention; its a sad thing that
faithfulness should be the ground of suspicion, and the object of envy.
Whereas they say, that they expected on the disbanding of their Army in
Scotland, we should disband ours. Its a wonder, with what face of reason they
could urge that, seeing that we have work to do, which they have not; they know
the ends of keeping up their Army, and we know ours, the Parliament are not
bound to give an account to the Commissioners why they keep up their Army, and
though they are pleased to say there is no use for them now, they must know,
they go about to make use for them. England was the first seat of War, and most
distempered, and that will not settle us, which will Scotlan; we have conquered
our enemies persons, we had need have an Army to keep down their spirits: What
is the matter our brethren have such an eye at this Army? Is it because they
have been too faithful? Have done too much service which they would fain have
the honor of? It may be they have conquered those, which our Brethren were in
hopes to conquer, and get the spoil of. It may be the reasons are, because the
London Apprentices and Reformadoes, may more handsomely come, and beset the
Houses of Parliament and make them V^^e in the old Militia, and cr^^ down
Independents, and such like tricks; but I hope they are more serious, and
therefore I recall my words; it is, that the Parliament may be disbanded more
handsomely, and be made the next burden to the Kingdom, and the Scots may have
a new Covenant with the King, to be his Loyal Subjects: If the Army become a
burden, the Kingdom may thank them, and their Party, who could not carry it
so fairly and wisely, as to disband them Honorably at first. The violence and
rashness of those men, gave them ground enough of distaste then, and still
ground of jealousy; let peace be settled, they will soon disband: Its reason,
that if they have fought for peace, they should not disband until they see
terms agreed on, and things put in a hopeful way of security for the Kingdom
and themselves: they have made many proposals for the good of the Kingdom, and
if they have failed in circumstances, we may well overlook that; now they are
freed of their popular Counsel, we may well be free from Jealousies of them:
If in any thing they have miscarried, its because some of them have been at
court as well as the Scots Commissioners, but I have said too much on these
things, more then will please I am sure; I wish they would give less occasion
to the Parliament and English men, to make Anti-Declarations. There only
remains to add, what we are to endeavor particularly for the stablishing of a
well grounded Peace: I know wiser men have it in hand, I wish they may in their
hearts also. I only offer something to inform the people what they must stick
to, if they will find the way to peace.

The first thing must be the settlement of Religion in the power and purity of
it, and in this our Brethrens order of giving it the preeminence, is to be
commended, but I hope by Religion, they do not only mean the Presbyterian
Government; Ministers must be sent out to preach the Gospel, and inform poor
souls in the things of Christ, this will be a good foundation of our happiness.

The second thing mainly to be eyed is the preservation of the Union of the two
Kingdoms, by all the lawful ways we can, according to the true intent and
proper sense of the Covenant; the strengthening of such a mutual
correspondence between us will increase our happiness; yet care must be taken
that we interfere not in our proper privileges; even reckoning, and fair
stating of our peculiar concernments will keep us long friends.

Next in order to this, what concerns our own particulars, and are most
fundamental to our future happiness, must be proposed, and not moved from.
These things are,

First. The Privileges and Authority of Parliaments; our liberty and
happiness is bound up in them, if they be discountenanced, discontinued,
disesteemed, so shall we be too; we must therefore be very wary of
entertaining hard thoughts of them, or reflecting on their proceedings, that is
the great advantage our enemies now look at: this Parliament must be continued,
until it has done the work of this season.

Secondly, The happiness of our Peace will lie in the establishing of good
Laws, repealing bad, or inconvenient ones, and in a speedy and direct way for
the profitable execution of them; if our Laws be never so good, they will not
be so to us; if they be not in good hands to execute them; the influences of
them will be cold and destructive, if they have bad Interpreters* we know
formerly, how good Laws have been made use of against good men.

Thirdly, The power of the Militia must be put in those whom the Parliament can
trust, and though we are hardly able to find such as could be wished, yet we
must take such as we can, and are most clear of scandal, and have given best
testimony of their faithfulness to the Kingdom. The next thing, which might
have been put in the first rank, in regard of the concernment of it, is an
endeavor to unite among our selves, until this be done we shall be to seek of
such a desired peace; Something must be given in by each party as a sacrifice
to this Design; nothing undoes us but this; that we strive to strengthen
parties, and do not our parts to compose our differences. And unto this must
be added a constant cying of our public enemy; some distinction must be put on
them, whereby they may be known, and observed in their actings; while this
Generation lasts, their grudge will last against our peace above all things;
(that so we may be out of fear against next Parliament) something must be done
to take away their Votes (who have been in Arms, and are adjudged
Delinquents) in election of Burgesses; for else we are like to be as we were,
yea more sad; for they are so numerous, and desperate, that they will over-vote
all the Parliaments party, and at length think of revenge by such an advantage;
they will soon have a Parliament of the old strain, to make us more miserable;
and what act of this Parliament can bind the next? I would this hazard were
more seriously in the hearts of men, I know nothing of more ominous
consequence, then the allowing such a privilege to Delinquents, neither is it
reason, that those who have fought against the Parliament, should have their
Vote in the chosing of them again: Besides, God requires something as well as
reason, to be done in way of distinction to them who have acted in such a
desperate Design; the Parliament will find few or no friends, if their enemies
be brought up in equal privilege with them. But some will say, what shall be
done with the King all this while the Parliament is about Propositions with
him, and if he will not consent to the terms of our Peace, we must preserve
him, and our selves as we can. The Parliament will take care of his Person
with honor, and safety, and wait on God to change his heart, in the mean time
to proceed without him, and see to the settling of the Kingdom; great care must
be taken for the satisfying the Parliaments engagements to the Kingdom, paying
their debts, performing their promises, that public faith may be had in
reverence; especially something must be done for meum and tuum, that the poor
people may see Justice running like streams by their own doors; this would
engage people much, and indear them to the Parliament; that the vulgar: may be
able to say this I have got by this Parliament that I could not have before;
this mechanic kind of Justice, as its most honest, so its most profitable; let
people see some things visible that they may find in their plowing and sowing,
in their bargains and estates, and they would never be against the Parliament
more. Let those especially which have been most forward, and active, and
faithful, have most of the influences of the peace upon them, and then we
shall act like wise men, and honest men. Many things might be added which are
not so considerable as these. I shall not want censures for these; I can only
wish men honester, or wiser. Si populus vult decipi decipiatur; If we will be
fools we shall soon be slaves. If we wince, and seek to cast off the easy
burrhen, that will be but for a time, till things settle, we may sink for ever
under the intolerable mischief of an unsettlement, and perhaps, Tyranny and
perpetual flavery attend the issue. If we will not see our happiness, we
shall quickly our misery. I cannot better conclude all, than with this desire
to all those which have any English blood yet left in their veins, (or any
sense of true liberty) that as they have valiantly fought for peace, so they
would considerately weigh and stand to the terms of Peace against Scot, or
whoever attempt to encroach upon, or enslave this Nation. You are yet in the
greatest hazard: Have not your own hands been your destruction? Do not lose
all by playing one card. Your enemies are waiting to see your folly, and their
own advantage; and many of your pretended friends secretly undermine you; leave
nothing out you can foresee, and trust not men further then you see; our
condition is sad, and the worse, because we are so; but remember you are
English men, when you think of Scotland, wait on the Lord, seek his face, and
he will yet appear.

FINIS.

