Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this be forthwith
printed.

Hen. Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

ENGLANDS COMPLAINT, OR The Church her Lamentation, pitifully bemoaning her
self to her Children, to move them to compassionate her, now in this
troublesome time, and to bring them to a mutual agreement and reconciliation.
IT was the Fathers complaint over his children* Hear O Heavens, and hearken O
Earth, for I have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled
against me: Even so now it is, and may well be the Mothers: Hear O ye
Heavens, and hearken O Earth! For I have nourished and brought up children, but
they have rebelled against me, in seeking to destroy me, and to bring me to
utter ruin and desolution Ah woeful Mother of a stubborn and disobedient
offspring. How did I sit as a Queen (rejoicing and solacing my self in the
midst of the Nations) and said, I shall see no sorrow? But now (behold) that
which I feared not is come upon me, it is come upon me suddenly and in a
moment, and pains as upon a woman in travel. My lovers and acquaintance begin
to forsake me, and stand a far off, looking upon my trouble. I am forsaken of
mine own children, even those I brought up upon my breasts, and dandled upon my
knees. Behold therefore if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, and like
unto that, wherein the Lord begins to visit me. Pity me o my children, o
pity me and let not your fainting and disconsolate mother, sink down between
your hands. O be not so cruel and hard-hearted as by your civil discord, by
intestine war, by schism, faction and division, to rend and tear out the
bowels of your mother! which has so lovingly nursed and brought you up, so
tenderly kept you, and Pelicane like has fed you with her own heart blood,
even the blood of Saints and Martyrs. O make not my sorrow greater, in
despising of me. I am black, but comely: I am black in regard of some
enormities, misdemeanors, and imperfections; but comely as the tents of Kedar,
and as the curtains of Solomon* Regard ye me not, because I have some spots
and wrinckles in outward show and appearance? yet (behold) within I am all
fair and beautiful: For the King's daughter is all glorious within: It is the
Roman strumpet that does adorn and set herself forth to the eye, that would
seem all beautiful without, when as within she is full of rottenesse, dead
men's bones, and all uncleanesse. It is the note of a false and erroneous
Church, to boast its self of its purity. I confess my fault, I acknowledge my
deformity and desire to be reformed. Therefore plead with me my children,
convince me of my errors* Let our controversy be decided by a lawful
assembly, which the King and Parlia^ent may appoint. But (alas) how shall they
appoint that, about the which they are in controversy already? If that which
should be my curing, be my wounding, how great is my misery. Let the righteous
smit me, but let not their precious baulme break my head. Fall not out my
dear children, neither destroy your selves for the blemishes and imperfections
of your mother. O give ear and listen to my counsel: least I be constrained
to call upon the Father of those children, to be a Judge and a Witness against
them.

Give ear and help me, o my King! for the children are brought to the birth,
and there is no strength to bring forth. Dread Sovereign your Nobles and Peers
do sit in Parliament, for a redress and reformation of things; and there is no
strength to bring to pass without your Royal consent. God himself is about a
work, a great work, a work of Reformation, tending to his own glory and our
good, o be not you a means to hinder or prevent it, or that that which should
be for our comfort, turn to our utter ruin or destruction. Remember that you
also have a King above you, to whom you must give an account of all your ways
at the last day: Resist him not, withstand no longer, least hapily you be found
to fight against God himself. Remember that you are not only a Defender of the
Faith, but also that you should be a nursing Father. O let not posterity record
you a destroyer of your people and Country. Let not the frogs of Egypt or the
Locusts of the bottomless pit any longer whisper in your Royalleares, to
seduce and deceive you, they croke only for their own advantage, and to bring
you and yours back again to the Egyptian bondage, and to Romish captivity.

Give ear and way (dread Sovereign) to your Parliament, and trusty
Counselors, who not only know and are privy to the enormities of the Land, and
the disastors of the Kingdom, but also are willing to redress and reform
them, having their hearts touched with zeal to Gods glory, love and duty to
your Majesty, care of their Country, and seek and endeavor the good and
welfare both of Church and Commonwealth. They desire not to rule, but to be
ruled, neither are they willing to usurp soveraignity, but to acknowledge you
their leidge Lord, they desire to bring in no innovation, but to reduce the
Church and Country to their ancient Laws and Liberty. They endeavor to bring
your Majesty's subjects to your obedience, and our Religion to that purity, it
was in Christ and his Apostles time. For this they have humbly sued to your
Highness, for this they strive and contend. They desire (being Protestants) to
conform themselves to all other Protestant-Churches, and not to halt any
longer between two opinions: between Christ and Beliall, between the Truth and
Antichrist, between Rome and England, or between a Papist and a Protestant, or
being luke warm, to deserve to be spued out. It is no dishonor for a King to
be ruled by a wise, and religious Council: Your Majesty intends no other Law
or Discipline; but what was in force in Queen Eliza^^th her time, and in the
days of your Father our* late Sovereign of famous Memory: the Parliament
intends nothing else. Only they endeavor to break and disa^ull that absolute
Sovereignty, your Highness does seem to challenge; whereby they find not only
your Subjects Liberty infringed; but also themselves and the whole Land brought
into an unaccustomed bondage and servitude. You blame them for taking up Arms.
It is not against your Majesty, but for you. It is for the peoples liberty and
safety; and in so much as it is for them, it is for you: because the Honor,
welfare, and happiness of a King, consists not o^^ly in the multitude of his
people, but also in the Liberty* Peace, and safety of his Subjects. Your
Highness will aleadge, that they have no Law for what they do. I answer, they
have and are a Law in themselves; for Parliaments both have made Laws, and
d^^nanull'd them. And though they seem to enterprise that which was never
seen nor heard off before, and from the which your Majesty may seem to be
dissenting; yet if either i^ be grounded upon, or according to Gods word, or
make for the peace, and welfare of the Kingdom, it is lawful. For wherefore
were Counselors ordained, but to be Rulers in the Kingdom, and the eye and
direction of the King: but it is well known, that the Parliament is your
Majesty's great Council, and by the same you ought and must be guided and
directed.

Give ear and pity me, O my Parliament, and help thy rufull and disconsolate
mother, commiserate my woeful and distressed condition. Behold how I sit
mourning all alone, and there is none to comfort me; look upon my breaches,
and upon my ruin and desolation, which seems to be at hand, if it be not
spee^ly prevented, my sons do faint, and begin to bleed, my Widows and
Virgins mourn, and sit comfortless in the streets, my honor is gone, my
beauty fails me, my wealth i^ consumed, and joy and mirth is fled away. Oh
let me not be a hissing to the Nations. but labor, O labor with speed to
bind up my wounds, and to cure my soars, labor with his Majesty for a peace
and reconciliation, labor to gain him by love and humility, and that he may
see you are his friends, and that you desire his enemies to be as the dust
before the wind, and the Angel of the Lord to scatter them, but that upon
himself, and his post^rity, his Crown may ever flourish. And if your swords
mu^^ be drawn, O let it be drawn in defense of him, and in defense of your
selves, in defense of the Kingdom, and in defense of the Laws, and ^^berties
of the same. Be zealous, be valiant, for the battle is the Lords and no^ yours,
and the c^use is Gods, and not man's. Be faithful unto the death, and Christ
has promised you a Crown of life. Subdue the proud, spare the lowly, and let
all you^ actions be seasoned with moderation and discretion. Sp^re not, O spare
not to take us the Fox^s, even the little Foxes; that spoil our Vines? and
while ye have rooted out all Superstition, Errout, and Heresy: and while you
have restored your mother to her ancient splendour beauty, and dignity.

Give ear and help me O my Nobles, my Gentry, and Commonalty, pity me, O
pity me, and let not the Mothers ruin and desolation be your consolation.
Make not my rent greater, by the mutual discord, and by imbrewing you^ hands
in one another blood. Side with the King, but side with you^ Parliament also;
and so side with both, that you may be sure you side with God. Which you
cannot do, if either you take part with the King, against the Parliament, or
with the Parliament (in any unjust or un^awfull thing) against the King. But
the Parliament (you have heard) seeks your good, it desires your welfare, the
glory of God, the honor of the King, and the peace and welfare of the Land.
Lay down therefore your weapon^, and think ^ot you are for the King when you
seek the destruction of one another, for the Kings ea^e and welfare consist^
in your mutual love and unity. Lay down your courage and haughty minds. How
long will ye contend, and bend your swords against your selves, and against
your brethren: know ye not that it will be bitterness in the later end; and
that when ye have left destroying, you shall be destroyed? Against whom do ye
fight, against an enemy, against a forraigne^? or stranger: no but against God,
against the King, against the Parliament, against your friends, against your
selves: Are ye wretched and ma^d, that be^ cause strangers do or will not
destroy you, that you will destroy your selves? Who has bewitched you; but be
only that is the common enemy of mankind, and seeks your ruin and overthrow?
O listen no longer unto him, give no more ear; you are not acquainted with
war; nor shedding of blood. Put up therefore your swords, and fight no
longer, for it is enough O father of my children, pity thy children, and let
it greive thee, to see them slaughter down one another, before thy face:
knowing that when they are destroyed, thou can not be safe. It is false
seduc^rs, and such as smell of the smoke of the bo^ttomlesse pit, that bre^ks
your peace, and sets you together by the ears. Why then against them (with the
Parliament) seek to bend your swords, Domestic, and homebred enemies are
worse then alie^s and strangers, endeavor to root out these, and your fears
and jarres are at an end.

Give ear and help me, o my Judges and grave Counselors! where is now your
aid? What is there no Balm in Gileaed, for to cure my s^are and malady? is
there no wisdom nor understanding in you? Is Wisdom perished from the
ancient. and Counsel from the prudent? Is there no knowledge in the Land? Or
are ye like unto Ephraims silly Dove; altogether without heart? what is the
cause that you are silent now in these troublesome times, surely something is*
the matter, that your mouth is stopped. I doubt (some of you) have been those
that have gone down into Egypt for help, and increast my trouble. I doubt ye
have taken counsel, but not o^ the Lord, and covered with a covering, but not
by his Spirit, that ye might add sin to sin, and devour the Land in his
presence. You have mislead the King, misguided the State, and for your own
advantage, and for filthy lucres sake; Which now is the cause of my grief, the
cause of my fear and danger, the cause that his Majesty is so hardly won to
a right understanding between Him and his Parliament, so hardly reclaimed from
his wonted conceit and opinion of things. Yet now at the length put to your
helping hands, freely confess your faults and errors, and by all possible
means labor to bring a right understanding between the King and his great
Council, and to reconcile him to his Subjects and to recover his Subjects love
to him. Cursed be they, that wish not prosperity to Zion and pray for the peace
of our Jerusalem. Give ear and help me, o my Clengy. But a^ si^full Nation, a
se^d of evil doers, how ca^ or will ye help, when as the most of y^u seeks ^o
destroy. You mind Popery, you seek Hierar^hy, you usurp soveraignyt, you are
a people laden with iniquity: Your greatness is and will be your ru^ne and
downfall; and not of you only, but also of the whole Nation and Kingdom, for
your sakes: You worship and adore Tables, you commit Sacrilege* and are in
love with Mammon more then with God. You fleece Christ's sheep but seed them
not; you sell and make merchandise of souls, of Heaven, and Christ, and all
you have and do abuse the King, you seduce the Noble, you delude the people.
You cannot be content with one living, but you must seek to scrape all into
your hands, you cannot be content with meat drink and raiment; but you must
build Houses, plant ^ine-yards and lay living to living, while there is left no
place for the poor to live beside you. And to the end you may be great, and
that your posterity may praise your doings, you always side with the stronger
party; and to gain the world, ye would even loose your souls, forgo the
Gospel, and betray Christ, for this cause you are more ready to blo^ the fire
that is kindling, then to quench it. You like and skill so well of
superstition, and Idolatry, that you neither can nor will forgo the Roman
Monarchy, seeing it was the first of you rising, and is as yet the only prop of
your greatness: no wonder then, that King and people be seduced, wh^nas those
that should be our guides, do mistead us, and are mislead themselves, for if
the light that is in us, be darkness; how great is that darkness. You are or
should be the light of the world, but resei^ble the darkness of Egypt; dark
Lanterns that do lead thousands to eternal perdition and destruction; So that
Satan needs no* other agents upon Earth but you, you are so accustomed to ease,
that you cannot take pains, and therefore down with preaching, playing
bec^mes you better then praying, and feasting then fasting. And if you preach
at any time, it is to show your selves, your Learning, your Eloquence, and to
obraine your base sinister ends; even to get a living, preferment, or the
like, or to maintain and uphold the Papa^l dignity, your pomp, your pride,
and vain glory, or to move sedition and faction in the Land, and to breed
division between the King and his Subjects, and between the Governors and
their inferiors. You are in and of the flesh, and therefore cannot savor the
things that are either of God, or of his spirit. The Apostles traveled from
country to country on foot, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, being poor,
naked, d^stitute, and despised; ye ride in coaches like Princes, and j^^ it up
and down in long Robes and costly apparel, f^ring deliciously every day. Ye
have greetings i^ the markets, the chief rooms at Feasts, and of men to be
called Rabbi. O how unlike are ye to the Apostles, whiles ye would seem to
imitate them, and pretend to be their successors, finally and in a word, ye
are the sole and only cause of all my evil; and of the trouble and danger
that is come upon me. Pity me therefore, o my children, and repent, and do
the first works: Least God remove the light of his countenance, and of his
Candlestick from among us, and take his word and Gospel, and give it to a
Nation or people more thankful than we, and that will bring him forth the
fruit thereof in due season. Let us break off our sins by speedy
repentance, and our iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a
lengthaing of our tranquillity. Let us pray for the peace and welfare of
Jerusalem, and for the safeguard and protection of our King and Country,
knowing that it is for our sins, that he and the Land is troubled. Let us, ^
let us by a mutual love and concord seek to reconcile our selves one to
another; knowing that our jarring is but the rejoicing of our Enemies, and that
our fall will be their r^sing; whereas our friends cannot choose but mourn and
lament at our misery and ruin. Let us every one turn from our evil ways,
and from the violence that is in our hands; who knows whether the Lord will
turn and repent him of his fierce anger, that we perish not? O Let not this
potent and flourishing Land and Nation come to a perpetual and utter
desolation. Let not Satan delude you my children, to make you a h^ssing or a
mocking stock to other Nations, but remember your mothers former and ancient
splendour and brightness remember your zeal, your love, your faith religion
and happiness, and be not overcome of evil; but overcome evil with
goodness. The which that we may all do God of his infinite and endless^ mercy
and goodness give, grant, and give us his grace, for Christ's sake, Amen.

FINIS.

