ENGLANDS MONUMENT OF MERCIES, IN HER MIRACVLOVS PRESERVATIONS FROM Manifold
Plots, Conspiracies, Contrivances and attempts of foreign and homebred
treacherous Enemies, against the Parliament, Kingdom, and purity of Religion:
Discovering the Time, Persons and places of these attempts; with all their most
remarkable proceedings. Published purposely to raise up the hearts of all the
faithful in the Kingdom, unto a continued Thankfulness unto GOD.
depiction of various enemies of the Crown W: Laud A.B. of Canterbury
depiction of William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury (1573-1645) Debuty of
Ireland
depiction of the Lord Deputy of Ireland Prince Rupert
depiction of Prince Rupert Earl of Newcastle
depiction of the Earl of Newcastle Sr. Bazill Brook
depiction of Sir Basil Brook of Madeley(1576-1646) Lord Digbie
depiction of Lord Digby Lady Aubignye
depiction of Katherine Stuart, Lady Aubigny (1618-50) Lord Iarmin
depiction of Lord Jermyn Earl of Montross
depiction of the Earl of Montrose

Anno 1641.
1 A Great plot to bring the English Army in the North against the Parliament,
and to advance this design, the Deputy of Ireland attempted his escape out of
the Tower, promising Sir William Balfoure 20000. l. and to marry his son to
his daughter: but Sir Williams loyalty appeared above treachery. The chief
Actors in this design were Sir John Suckling, Captain Chidley, and Col.
Goring, who should be Lievtenant-Generall, (endeavoring to get Portsmouth into
their hands) and the Earl of Newcastle should have met them with 1000. horse;
and to further this design, the Bishops proffered to maintain 1000. horse.

2 Another wicked design was to make the Scots Army n^w^e^s, by many wicked
suggestions: but this design prevailed not.

3 The breaking forth of the rebellion in Ireland, which had been all lost in
a moment, had not the Lo^d miraculously delivered Dublin but the evening
before, by a Messengers escape, who was rewarded by the Pa^liament. And here
note, that after this Rebellion had been broke forth four months, to the
loss of many thousand Protestants lives, yet but 14 Proclamations must be
printed to proclaim them Rebels, with S cretary Nicholas his hand for the
Printers discharge.

4 The L. Cottingtons being made high Constable of the Tower, who did not a
little trouble the City, by planting Ordnance against it, but by their care
this was frustra^e.

5 Cottington being displaced by the importunity of the Parliament to His
Majesty, (one as bad as he, a prisoner in Newgate not long before, fitter for
Newgate then the Tower) Col. Lunsford, who with great difficul^^ by the City
and Parliament, importuning His Majesty, was at last displaced likewi^e.

6 Sir John Byron was put in by His Majesty, who was something better then the
former, yet this crused suspicion in the person, and therefore the City
petitioned, that he might be removed also.

7 In November a divellish plot to have murdered many of the Nobility, with the
Members of the House of Commons, and some Members of the upper House; many of
the Papists conspired to set upon some of the strong holds in Cheshire,
Lancashire and the parts adjacent, the plot being so contrived, that at the
same time the City of London should have been surprised, and all the
Protestants throats cut: the maine plotter of this design was the Earl of
Worcester, who was to supply them with Forces, and two Jesuits, Father Andrews
and Father Jones, who were apprehended according to an Order of Parliament,
that all those that should discover any Popish Priests or Jesuits, and cause
them to be apprehended, should be rewarded by the Parliament. Subscribed,

November. 15 Io. Brown Cler. Parliament.

8 The Popish Lords and Prelates fitting in Parliament interrupting
Parliamentary proceedings, being petitioned against, the Petitioners were
affronted by Col. Lunsford in Westminster Hall, being assisted by Ruffianl^e
Courtiers from White Hall.

9 The Bishops petition the King to protest against the Parliaments
proceedings, but the Parliament voted 12 Bishops guilty of high Treason, for
endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, ten of which
were committed.

10 The taxing and demanding of the five Members by the King, coming in an
hostile way to the Parliament, and accusing them of high treason. J^n. 4.

11 The Malignants petition against the Militia of London, Binion a Silkman
being the chief, but another Petition being framed against the former, the
former was censured to be burnt by the common hangman, Binion fined 3000 l. and
two years imprisonment for his insolency.

12 Malignant spirits discover themselves in a Kentish Petition framed by Sir
Edward Deering, who for publishing that and other things, was cast out of the
House, imprisoned in the Tower, his book burnt, and the Petitioners returned
with much disgrace.

13 The King and Prince depart from London, attended by diverse Cavaliers to
York, who in a hostile way go to demand Hull, which caused the Parliament to
put the Militia in execution in most parts of the Kingdom.

Anno 1642.
14 A treacherous conspiracy of the Archbishop of York against the Parliament,
in providing 150 arms, with many pistolls, muskets and ammunition for military
affairs, intending to riase a party, but his design was frustrate.

15 A dangerous plot against the City of York, whereby it should have been
betrayed, by causing of an insurrection, to the amazement of the Governor; the
rude Apprentices running in the streets, and throwing up their hats, crying,
For the King, for the King; and then in the midst of the night following, the
Watch hearing a cry, Horse, Horse, Arms, Arms.

16 A plot against Sir John Hotham (in the time of his fidelity) and the
inhabitants of Hull, the design being to fire the houses next the Fort, and
thereby overcome the town, which they did perform, but were prevented.

17 The Cavaliers plots against the Parliament, and sharing out the city in
several proportions beforehand, which confirmed the relation from Roterdam,
which was to this effect: that diverse gentlemen and others in Roterdam resolved
to come for England, whereupon two ships were provided with guns of 12 foot
long, which shot bullets of 44. pound weight, the furthering of this design
was the pawning the Jewels, in which M. Webster a Merchant in Amsterdam was a
great assistant. P. Rupert proved a buyer to carry horse for England and Jacob
Lightfoot a Merchant brought 15000 weight of powder for England; and for their
encouragement Iermyn sent to Roterdam 40000. gilders to be delivered to P.
Rupert, P. Maurice, L. Devinant, L. Digby, Oneale, Hide, and diverse others.

18 Sir Richard Gurney L. Mayor of London proclaiming the Commission of Array
in affront to the Parliament, is imprisoned for the same.

19 A bloody plot attempted against Sir Thomas Fairfax Sir W. Brereton, Sir
Tho. Middleton Sir William Fairfax, Col. Ashton, Col. Mitton, Col. Moore, and
diverse more Officers in the Parliaments Army in false accusations laid against
them before the Judges at the Assizes at Chester, where they were arraigned of
high treason for taking up arms for the Parliament, the Kings Attorney was
prosecutor, and the Jury making oath against them in Court, but God delivered
them out of their hands, and some of them lie in hold for the same fact.

20 The Catholic cause is advanced, and many Papists that would take the Oath
of Allegiance and Supremacy, are the greatest in the Kings favor, and have
power from him to exercise their Religion.

21 The fifting of the Scots, what they would do for the Catholic cause, to
further which design a Letter was f^amed from the King to the privy Council of
Scotland, who returned answer, they desired the King to return to his
Parliament, and they would do their utmost endeavor for the good of this
Kingdom.

22 Another design by casting aspersions on the Parliament, concerning vast
sums of money to be pu^loyned from the public, and bestowed on private
persons, as 10000 l. to the E. of Holland, 6000 to M. Pym, and other persons in
places of public trust.

23 The E. of Northumberland (being Admiral of the Seas) is disp^ced by the
King, and Sir John Penington plac^d in his room, upon this the Parliament made
the E. of Warwick Admiral, but the King demanded of his Honor to deliver up
his place to Sir Io. Penington on pain of high treason, but this honorable
Patriot with the advice of Parliament faithfully prosecutes his duty.

24 Diverse Letters intercepted by the Earl of Warwick, one to Capt. Slingsby
desiring him (rather then to discover the design) to die a Martyr in His
Majesty's cause.

25 Beck with a P^pist, with his confederates, would have fired Holl in four
places, and then the Kings Forces were to assault the town, the signs to be
given to those that would have fi^ed the town was when they saw fire on Beverl^
Minster, but this was timely discovered by an Officer of the town, who was
solicited by Beckwith for to act the same.

26 Neutrality plotted in Yorkshire, to stand neither for King nor Parliament,
whereby many honorable persons had been betrayed, had not the Parliament
declared against them.

27 A ship laden with ammunition (sent by the Q even) was taken at Yarmouth by
Captain Johnson, with 400 barrells of powder, 10 piece of Ordnance, 50
Commanders, many soldiers with Letters, one especially from the Queen
concerning the design.

28 In the midst of October a plot was invented to blow up the L. Generals
Magazine by a Scotch man, one David Alexander, under Sir John Meldrum, he
confessed he was to have 500 l. that Sir John Culpepper had given him 10 l. and
the rest he was to have from a great person, whom he refused to name.

29 This was that Alexander who was formerly set on by Sir John Hinderson to
kill Sir John Hinderson (for a sum of money) to kill Sir John Hotham, Alexander
said, it was the work of a butcher, and not of a soldier.

30 The design of Sir Faithless Fortescues revolt at Edge-hil, who ran away
to the King with his whole troop, and immediately charged on the Parliaments
Forces.

31 A base plot acted at Brainford under a pretense of a Treaty for peace,
Prince Rebel, thinking to archieve his design (our Forces being unprovided)
to march to London; but let the reward of treachery, and the valor of London
Apprentices never be forgotten.

32 A plot contrived by the Kings party, for electing of new high Sheriffs, the
most of them being either Papists or Commissioners of Array, or Deliquents, but
the Parliament declared by the Laws of the Kingdom, that they were not
lawfully deputed to their places, and by vote disabled them.

33 A design at Oxford to proceed against the Parliaments Officers and
Soldiers as Traitors, using them worse then the Turks would have done,
whereupon the Parliament declared the same Laws here against them, which by
Gods mercy prevented the same.

34 Sir W. Waller having entered Chichester, a train of powder was laid from his
lodging to part of the magazine, but by diligent search prevented.

Anno 1643.
35 A design against the City of London, by some malignants in and about the
same, preferring a Petition to His Majesty at Oxford from two Aldermen and 4
Commoners, to return to the City, in reply to which the King sent his
messenger Capt. Herne, and a special Common Hall was called, Herne read his
message, and but one man appeared of the Malignant party, the rest crying out,
they would live and die with the Parliament.

36 A Letter (by the procurement of the City malignants) dated Jan. 17. to the
Citizens of London, ordered that all sorts should hear it at several Halls,
but the Letter being found of dangerous consequence, was not suffered to be
read.

37 A conspiracy to betray Bristol to P. Rupert the manner thus: Rupert with
4000 horse and 2000 foot were to be ready on Durdan Downs, directed by Robert
Yeoman, John Butcher, and their assistants, Butcher ordered a company of rude
fellows to be about the gates to let in the enemy, and to give notice by the
tolling of a bell, when they were ready; the conspirators and their abettors
were distinguished from the rest by a white riban in their hats, using the word
Charles, but this being discovered not above two hours before the time of
action by a poor boy, Ruperts design was frustrate.

38 A villan of the Lord Roberts his Regiment who fled to the enemy was hired
to blow up the L. Generals magazine, and confessed that he was to have 5. l. for
doing it, but was only hanged for it.

39 London assayed to be betrayed, by petitioning for peace, to surprise the
City and to let in the Kings Army, 4000 were to be within 15 miles the same
night the plot was to be acted. The actors were some members of both Houses,
others of the Court and City, Crispe, Royden, Brown and Binion, were to hold
correspondency with both Armies, the Commission of Array was to be put in
execution, and 17 Citizens to be of a Council of war to execute martial law,
Royden and Challenor to be the chief, Waller and Tomkins were great actors,
their design was to seize upon the magazine, they wearing white ribans, their
meeting place was to be at Black Heath, the parties to be seized on were the L.
Say, L. Wharton, M. Pym, M. Strode, the L. Mayor, the Committee for the
Militia, and diverse others specified in their Commission. M. Hern, M. Hamden,
and the Lady Aube^y brought the Commission. This plot was (by Gods providence)
brought to light, and the two chiefest Actors Tomkins and Challenor were
executed.

40 Hull endeavored to be betrayed by Sir John Hotham, Capt. Hotham, and Sir
Edward Roads, this was discovered by M. Ripley, who surprised the Block-houses,
castle, and all the Commanders, the maine Guard, and all the Ordnance, and sent
presently to apprehend Sir John, who escaped out of the town, but was pursued
and apprehended; Sir Edward Roads and Cap. Hotham were also taken, and Sir John
and his son executed.

41 A plot to betray Lincoln by two Captains belonging to Hull, who attempted
to let in Forces for the Qoeen, who let in about 60. but the City being
informed of the plot, seized on these two Commanders, and at 12 a clock at
night thought to seize on the magazine, they were discovered by a Canoneer, who
discharged at them, the town rose and put them all to the sword, except the
two Commanders, Cap. Alison, Capt. Williamson, and some other of quality.

42 The rewd women about London petition for a peace, who came in an abusive
way to the House of Parliament, affronting them with ill language swearing that
they would have a peace, there was amongst them 500. whores as is conceived,
but some of the women came short home, and some dis figured, one of them
without a nose.

43 The Queens design to persuade the King to come for London, but was
frustrate. He takes his way for Gloucester, but they being all true, it was no
gain for them to go thither.

44 Kentish malignants oppose the proceedings of Parliament, 2000 and more of
them gathered together being led by Sir Edward Bathurst, capt. Stansby, and M.
Leigh, 200 of them attempted to seize on Dartford magazine, but a troop of
horse prevented that design, and by Col. Brown they were quelled at
Tunbridge, where many of them were slain and taken prisoners. Sir Michael
Livesay opposes the rebels at Yawlding, enters the town, and takes a
considerable prize.

45 Canterbury and Feve^sham malignants begin to fortify themselves, but the
well-^ff^cted of Canterbury raised 3 or 400 Dragoons and appeased them. Sir
Edward Hal^s and his grand-soun^ were chief sticklers in this design. The
chief ringleaders of this commotion were impris^ned in the Tower and other
prisons.

46 Oxfordian Achitophels plot to preven^ traiding and commerce with, and to
hinder vitals from London, thinking to starve it, but the Country know that
Londons pay was better then Oxfords plots, and choose rather to embrace the
pay, then to reserve it for an Oxford prise.

47 A plot hatched at Oxford intended to have it perfected at London, is
petitioned against, that the Lords would not give ear to any such pretended
peace.

48 Sir Alexander Caries endeavoring to betray Plymouth, discovered, and he
executed.

49 Four Proclamations sent to the Lord Mayor of London the first to alter the
monthly Fast, the second to make all Irish money current in England, the third
to command all Counties to accept of those high-Sheriffs that were chosen at
Oxford, the fourth to disanull the taking of the solemn Oath and Covenant, the
Lord Mayor sent the Messenger to the Parliament, who gave him his just reward.

50 A design against the City, the Kings endeavor to break into the
Ass^ciation, to attain this Sir Ralph Hopton is desired to advance to
Winchester and Chichester, and so forward to Kent: but this design was
frustrate also.

51 Malignants next plot was for Scotland, the Queen Regent of France sent into
Scotland to persuade the Scots from coming into England, but they vowed they
would maintain the true religion and the Power of Parliament to the loss of
their lives.

52 The King sends two Letters into Scotland to prevent their coming, the first
was against the Scots Proclamation for all to be in readiness, the second was
against the Covenant, desiring them not to aid the Parliament of England, which
he said were in Rebellion against him.

53 The King sends into Ireland for those to come to aid him, who came and
landed at Bristol, the King pretending they fought for him and the Parliament,
and would have forced an oath on them, they seeing the contrary, refused and
came to Colonel Massey.

54 A Declaration printed at Oxford for the Irish Cessation for a year, to
further this design in England, which has been acted in Ireland.

55 Gl^c^ster assaved by plots by popish Winter who should have surprised the
town of Gloucester, by the help of the traiterous party in the town, which the
watchful Governor hearing, prevented it.

56 A plot to convey away the Kings children, but Letters being intercepted
they were secured and the servants about them removed.

57 Another pl^t to betray N^ttingham-Castle, and many circumstances used to
corrupt Colonel Hutchison, who was offered by Decres 10000. l. if he would
procure the same, but fideli^ie scorned treachery.

58 Prince Ruperts endeavor to betray Bristoll the second time, but prevented.

59 The Earl of Crafords proffers to Captain Sidenham to betray Poole, but
this brave Captain scorned his proffers.

60 The Earl of Crafords plot to betray Alisbury in bringing a written copy
with large proffers signed wi^h C. R. but was denied to his great shame.

61 The Protestant Religion, plotted against in most parts of Christendom,
Holland and Denmark have raised contributions to maintain that cursed crew
against the Parliament.

62 Another divillish design to divide the Parliament and Cite by Col. Reed a
Rebel of Ireland and Sir B^z^ll Brook, and Vilet a Goldsmiths and Ril^ y a
B^d-maker, Scout-Master-General, for the City of London, but the plott being
discove^^d, Reed writ a Letter with a Superscription To the man in the moon,
who came to Oxford and acqu^inted the King with the design, he desiring to
advise with him, with the assistance of the Queen, Lord Digby, Duchess of
Buckingham, wife to that rebellious E. of Antrim, with whom a way to send
Propositions was considered, a Letter is sent with many l^ving expressions to
the Lord Mayor and Alderman, calling them his loving Subjects; His Majestye
sent two Signets as a New Years Gift to these Plotters, but Gods providence
now appears by private intelligence, Rily is apprehended and examined, Sir
Baz^ll Bro^k being sent for confessed all sudde^l^, after Vilet was
apprehended, who had the Kings Letter about him, are confessed all: these three
were committed close prisoners in the Tower, and Vilet was to be tried as a spy.

63 A wicked plot endeavored by the instigation of the E. ^f Bristoll, and
Serjeant-Major Ogell, to betray the City of London, by causing a division
between the Presbyterians and Independents, M. Goodwin and M. Nigh are tampered
with to further their design, who speedily discovered the same to the House,
the manner as follows. Propositions were drawn up that they would grant
Toleration, and diverse Letters sent to those Ministers promising them
preferment: but this plot failed also.

64 Endeavors to betray Windsor Castle, bu^ the Governor scorned the base
treachery of such cursed Courtiers.

65 In Jan. another plot to betray Alisbury by M^jo^ Ogl^, he promising the
Governor 1000 l. for his reward, whereof the Governor received 100 l. present
and a brave horse and sword, with a safe conduct under the Kings own hand; but
the faithful Governor discovered the same and he was rewarded according to
his treachery.

66 In Jan. Nottingham town and castle is once again endeavored to be
betrayed, but the faithful Governor Col. Hutcheson scorned their treacherous
design.

67 In Jan. a treacherous design to betray Southampton by the L. Hopton, and
two Lords more, who offered 1000 l. and His Majesty's pardon under the great
Seal, but the worthy Governor denied to condescend to their base treacherous
demand.

68 In F^bruary, A sad exploit performed by Bishop Usher, that in after ages
may be a warning to such unfaithful Messengers, who joining all to take the
pernicious oath at Oxford, wishing that all those that would not take it, might
die in prison; whereupon many were persuaded to take it, some since being much
perplexed in mind concerning it, and some dying in that condition.

69 In February, Another design was to prevent the Scottish march, Rupert that
Rebel to meet them with twelve ships of Irish Rebels, but was prevented by
Captain Swanley.

70 In the same month a third design against Nottingham castle; diverse horses
laden with sacks, and about 30 Cavaliers in women's apparel, and others like
poor contrymen, as if they had been going to Nottingham market, but they
being discovered, were all taken prisone s, and more that were coming to assist
them in that design.

71 In March, a Divellish plot to betray Weymouth and Melcombe Regis to Sir
Lewis Dives, the manner thus; that the gates were to be set open to let in Sir
Lewis Div^^, and the (...) to surprise the Forts, which was done, and the
townsmen were to assist them, and th^^ they might the better be known, (...)
word was Crab Church, and the sign was a handkerchiefe about their arms, but
the plot being discovered, and God giving courage to the Soldiers, they were
beaten out, and the chief Conspirators executed.

72 Gloucester is again attempted to be betrayed by Edward Stanford a Papist,
Esquire, laboring with a Captain belonging to Col. Massey profering him 5000
l. and whereof he received 200 l. in hand, but he discovered the design.

73 A plot in Scotland by the Marquess Huntley, L. Montrosse, and the Earl of
Craford, by a sad insurrection to force the Scots our of England: but the noble
Earl of Argile and the Earl of Calendar went with a strong party to repel
them, and took all their ordnance, arms, and ammunition.

74 Sunderland delivered from a plot intended by the Mayor of Newcastle, but
discovered by the Seamen on the river, who planted two pieces of Ordnance, and
betook themselves to their Arms, for which service the House ordered them 200.
l.

75 A bloody exploit in Cornwall intended against Major Genesis Skippon, to have
put all to the sword, and having taken 30. put 28 to the sword, whereupon the
Major declared he would live and die with them before they should suffer under
such bloody rebels.

76 Plots attempted against the town and castle of Stafford, but prevented by
Sir W. Brereton.

77 D^ver attempted to be betrayed, but by Gods mercy prevented.

Anno 1645.
78 Abbington assayed to be betrayed by Digby, who ^ff^red Major General Brown
10000 l. but he scorned his treacherous pro^er, and Digby was repulsed with
great disgrace.

79 Alesbury should likewise have been betrayed, but by Gods mercy prevented.

80 Reading endeavored to be betrayed, but prevented by the mercy of God.

81 Plymouth in danger to be betrayed into the hands of merciless enemies, but
by the faithful Governor prevented.

82 Lime was in great danger to be betrayed, but the faithful Governor Captain
Lemon disc^v^red the design, who was proffered 1000. l. to yield it to the
Kings service, which town the King valued as his Crown.

83 Buckinghamshire Malignants dangerous petition presented to the
Commissioners at Vxbridge, on purpose to dissolve the Treaty.

84 A cursed design to draw the hearts of the people from the Parliament,
persuading them that the Parliament sought to inslave them, whereupon the
Parliament put forth a Declaration to the contrary, which did not a little
content them.

85 The Kings design for York prevented by Major-Generall Poyntz, the King
near Doncaster makes Proclamation for all to come in unto him, but they knowing
his service, would not obey his command.

86 The peace with the Irish Rebels.

Published according to Order.

September: 21th Printed for S. W. and I. P. and are to be sold at their sh^ps in
great Woodstreet, and in the great Old Bailey, near the Sessions House. 1646.


