ENGLANDS SATISFACTION IN EIGHT QVERIES; Concerning the true place, Office, and
power of a KING, according to GODS Word.
A KING, as he is the Lords Anointed over his GODS Judgeme^ts upon his people
for asking of a King.
people Israel, 1 Samuel 8.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. will take your sons and
your daughters to serve him; He will take your fields, vineyards, and your
olive-yards, even the best of them from you, and give them to his servants; He
will take the tenth of your seed and of your vine-yards from you, and give them
to his Officers and to his servants; and he will take your menservants and
your maidservants, and your goodliest young men, and your Asses, and put them
to his work; He will take the tenth of your sheep, and ye shall be his
servants.

1. Quest. Is it lawful for Kings to do as Samuel from the Lord told the
people Saul would do?
Answ. No: for Samuel at the establishing of Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 25. told Saul and
all the people the duty of a King, as it is written, Deuteronomy. 17.16, 17, 18, 19,
20. and wrote it in a Book and laid it up before the Lord, as a witness
betwixt King and people, so that all that the Lord does command, is lawful to
be done, and it is a sin not to do it; and all that the Lord does forbid, is
unlawful to be done, and it is a sin to do it. The Lord in the 8th of the 1 Samuel does not command Kings to take from one and to give to another, and to do
their own wills: therefore it is not lawful for Kings to exercise this regal
power: but the Lord says, that they will do so and so, which is not a
sufficient warrant for Kings to do so and so, because the Lord in his Law of
the duty of a King has expressly forbidden the same. Deuteronomy. 17 18, 19, 20. And
it shall be when he sits upon the throne of his Kingdom, that he write him
The duty of a King*
a copy of this Law in a Book, and it shall be with him, and he shall read
therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his
God; that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren, to the right hand or
to the left. Therefore it is unlawful for Kings to exercise this regal power:
King David, though a man after Gods own heart, because he by virtue of this
regal power, would have Barshebah, the wise of Vriah to be his wife, and
caused Ioab to put Vriah in the forefront, that he might fall by the sword: for
which Nathan the Prophet told David, 2 Samuel 12. 9. Thou have killed Uriah with
the sword, and have taken his wife to be thy wife, and have slain him with the
sword of the Children of Ammon: Verse. 10. Therefore the sword shall never
depart from thine house: It made good David by the experience of evil, the
sight and knowledge of evil, and repentance for evil, say at his latter end,
2 Samuel 23. 3. He that rules over men, must be just, ruling in the fear of the
Lord. Rehoboam thinking by this regal power he might do what he would, over
and with his Subjects, refused the good and mild Counsel of his grave and
wise Elders, and took the rough and evil Counsel of his young Counsel, 1
King. 12. 3. which lost him ten of his twelve Tribes. Ahab by this regal power
thought he might take away Naboths Vineyard, and so followed the wicked
Counsel of Idolatrous Iezabel his wife, and put Naboth to death: for which the
Lord says by Eliah the Prophet, 1 Kings 21*19. 21, 22. In the place where the
dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine. And I
will take away thy posterity, and will cut off from Ahab him that pisseth
against the wall, and will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son
of Nebat: therefore it is utterly unlawful to use this regal power.

2. Quest. If it be unlawful for Kings to take from, and to give unto, and to
do what they please, why did or does the Lord (in the 1 Samuel 8. 17.) command
the people to yield obedience, and serve their Kings, according to such
demands, commands, will, and pleasure.
Answ. For two reasons: first, in respect of the Lord himself, because he was
King of Israel, and had that regal power and prerogative* Royal, to do his
own will with man; as the Potter with the clay; who being able, and did with a
mighty hand, and stretched-out-arme* bring Israel out of Egypt from the
cruelty of Pharaoh through the red Sea, and in the Wilderness caused the
stony Rocks to yield them water to drink, giving them Manna, Angels food, and
sent them Quails to eat; and gave them the Land of Canaan, houses they
builded not, Vineyards, Orchards, and gardens they planted not, and cast out
seven Nations greater then they before them; even a Land flowing with milk and
honey: Notwithstanding all which, Israel would have a Man King, as had the
Nations, 1 Samuel 8. 5. At which Samuel was displeased: but the Lord said unto
Samuel, ver. 7. hear the voice of the people: for they have not rejected thee,
but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them: therefore
testify (verse. 9) unto them, and show them the manner of the King (being but a
man what evil inclinations he will be of) that shall reign over you, to take
from one (unjustly) and give it to another (that has no right to the same
unequally to demand of, and command over and from you (according to his own
corrupt lusts) as it is verse. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. And when these things
shall come upon you* verse. 18. ye shall cry, because of your (man) King whom
you have chosen you; but the Lord will not hear you at that day: therefore
bethink your selves O Israel, because you will forsake the Lord to reign over
you as formerly, and will have a man to be your King to sit in the Lords throne
of Majesty; for in all these things, ver. 17. ye shall be his servants, in
obeying of him without redress: whose answer is ver. 19. Nay but there shall
be a King over us, Chap. 10. 18, 19. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I
brought Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the hands of the
Egyptians, and out of the hands of all Kings that troubled you; but you have
this day cast away your God, who only delivered you out of all your
adversities and tribulations: And out of Chap. 12.12. the hands of Nahash King
of the Children of Ammon* when the Lord your God was your King: yet ye said, A
King shall reign over us: Know O Israel, verse. 3, 4, 5. you and your King
bear record, Whose Ox have I taken, or whose Ass have I taken, or whom have
I done wrong to, or whom have I hurt, or of whose hands have I received any
bribe, and I will restore it says Samuel? Then they said, thou have done us no
wrong, nor hurt us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand: Then Samuel
said, the Lord and your Anointed is witness this day that ye have found
naught in my hands: And they answered he is witness, so the Lord in his anger
Hosea 13. 11. gave them a King, who was no blessing but a curse unto them, as
will appear.

Secondly, In respect of man, because Israel would have a man to be their King,
and forsake the Lord their God peremptorily; notwithstanding all before
mentioned, Israel must know that a mortal man, one of their brethren, to be
exalted to the dignity of the Lords throne of Majesty, unto which belongs
such a regal power and royal prerogative, that was not fit for any sinful
mortal man, because the ways, power, and wisdom of man, cannot (as the Lord)
exercise such a power, but either on the right hand or on the left, they will
transgress against God or man, in disobeying the Commandment of the Lord, and
this is the cause of the Lords anger; and therefore for a punishment Israel
must (although their Kings should will unlawful things, 1 Samuel 8. 17.) yield
in obedience, and serve their Kings accordingly: and therefore the Lord Chap.
12.17. sent them (in judgment even in wheat harvest) such a thunder and rain,
to convince and to show them their great wickedness in asking of a King; that
(ver. 19. all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the Lord
thy God (they durst not say our God) that we dye not, for we have sinned in
asking us a King, Chap. 8. 20. to judge us, and go out before us, and fight
our battles: the first whereof was against the Philistims, where Saul Chap. 13.
12. was bold to offer a burnt offering: for which Samuel verse. 13, 14. told
Saul, thou have done foolishly, for because thou have not kept the Commandment
of the Lord thy God, thy Kingdom shall not continue; for the Lord has sought
him a man after his own heart, and the Lord has commanded him to govern his
people: Another battle against the Amalekites, Chapt. 15. 9. who (against the
Commandment of the Lord) spared Agag and the best things of the Amalekites;
for which Samuel told Saul, verse. 22, 23. Obedience is better then sacrifice,
and to hear the Word of the Lord better then the fat of Rams; that rebellion
is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness as iniquity and idolatry:
because thou have rejected the Word of the Lord, he has rejected thee from
being King, ver. 28. The Lord has rent the Kingdom of Israel from thee this
day, and given it to thy neighbor that is better then thou: therefore Kings
though Anointed of the Lord, and sit in the Lords throne, may not exercise this
regal power to do their own wills, against the Commandments of the Lord, no
not by duties of burnt offering, or sacrifice; even Kings are to be as subject
to the Commandment of the Lord, as well as other men: none may do evil for
good to come of it* for with the Lord there is no respect of persons; and Kings
must know as they are but men, That Pro. 28. 15. as a roaring Lion and a hungry
Bear, so is a wicked Ruler over the poor people: therefore thus says the
Lord, Ezekiel. 45. 9. Let it suffice you O Princes of Israel, leave off cruelty
and oppression, and execute Judgment and Justice, and take away your exactions
from my people: Thus says the Lord, Jere. 21. 12. O house of David execute
Judgment in the morning (and do not delay) and deliver the oppressed out of
the hand of the oppressor. Chap. 22. 2, 3. O King of Judah, that sit in the
throne of David, execute ye judgment and righteousness. And Pro. 25. 5. Take
away the wicked (Counselors) from the King, and his throne shall be
established in righteousness: for Chap. 29. 14. A King that Judges the poor
in truth (according to Gods Word) his throne shall be established for ever: for
Chap. 22. 23. The Lord will defend his cause, and spoil the soul of those
that spoil them. Chap. 19. 21. Many devices are in a man's heart, but the
counsel of the Lord stands. Chap. 14. 26. In the fear of the Lord is an
assured strength, and his Children shall have hope: therefore know, O Kings,
Princes, and Rulers, that Chap. 21.30. there is no wisdom, neither
understanding, nor counsel against the Lord; who says, Mat. 5. 3. Blessed are
the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Luke 6. 20. Blessed
be ye poor, for yours is the kingdom of God, that fear the Lord, and unto
salvation believe in Jesus Christ; for Mat. 11. 5. The poor receive the
Gospel. Luke 4, 18* 19. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, that I should preach
the Gospel to the poor, and heal the brokenhearted, and preach deliverance
to the captives, and set at liberty them that are bruised, and preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. And Isa. 61. 3. To give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness, that they may be called trees of righteousness, the planting of
the Lord. Jer. 22. 2, 3. O King of Judah, vex not the stranger, the
fatherless, nor the widow, do no violence, nor shed innocent blood in this
place (where such of the Lords dwell) although Kings think they have a regal
power to do their own wills, they are mistaken.

3. Quest. What is the true and only right place, office, and power of a King,
according to the Word of God.
Answ. First, the true and only right place of a King, is from amongst, above,
and over all the people, alone to sit in the Lords throne of Majesty.

Secondly, The true and only right office of a King is Romans 13. 4. to be the
Minister of God for the wealth or good of the people over whom he is set; doing
the will (according unto the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances) of him in whose
throne he sits, verse. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher power, for
there is no power but of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God:
therefore Kings are not to make any Statute, Law, or Ordinance, destructive or
contradictory unto them that were made by God before he made any King; so that
even Kings are to be as subject to the Lord as men to Kings; and so as one
entrusted by God, as the Lords Vicegerent or Lieutenant over the Lords people,
betwixt God and man, to see and look unto it, that God may be honored,
glorified, and served by himself, and all the people, and to see and look to,
and preserve the people from all enemies, perils and dangers, both from abroad
and at home.

Thirdly, The true and only right power of a King, is as the Minister of God,
Romans 13 4. to bear the sword of Justice, to take vengeance on, or execute
Justice upon all evil doers: and verse. 3. to praise, honor, and encourage all
such as do well: and also Exodus 18. 16. to judge of, and decide matters in
difference betwixt man and man, according to the Laws and Ordinances of the
Lord, and provide and appointing verse. 21. men of courage; fearing God* dealing
truly, and hating covetousness, such shall thou make Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19. Judges
and Officers, and they shall Judge the people with righteous Judgment, not
wresting the Law, nor respect any person, neither take a bribe, knowing that
the Lord is King of Kings, and Judge of all the world, who is the searcher of
the heart, and tryer of the reins, and discovers the thoughts of man's heart.

4. Quest. Was there no difference between the Kings of Isreal's powers, and the
Kings of the Nations powers, and the Subjects of both?
Answ. Yes; for the people of Israel were within the Covenant and promise of
Jesus Christ, unto whom the Lord gave his Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, both
Moral and Ceremonial: unto whom also was given Priests, Levites, and
Prophets, to administer unto them, and to teach and direct them; and Judges to
guide and lead them; and the great God of heaven and earth to be their King, to
save, defend, and deliver them: therefore the Kingdom and Crown of Israel,
was the Gods of Israel, and so of a greater and higher power and majesty, then
any other Kingdom of the earth; for the Kings thereof were by the immediate
appointing and anointing of the Lord; and unto whom with their Crown, the Lord
gave, or of right unto the throne of that dignity did belong, a regal power,
and royal prerogative of self-will and pleasure; which made them cry out and
say, Nehemiah 9. 36, 37. Behold the Land that thou gave unto our Fathers, to
eat the fruit thereof, and the good things thereof, behold we are servants in
it this day (indeed) it yields much increase, but it is unto our Kings, whom
thou have set over us; who because of our sins (in asking a King) have
dominion over our bodies to command them, and over our estates to take away
them at their pleasure; so that this promise or gift little avails us: so
that the Kings of Israel had a regal power over their Subjects, to demand and
command, according to their own wills and pleasures, in respect of the peoples
charge of obedience.

The Subjects of Israel because of their sins against the Lord in asking of a
King, must submit 1 Samuel 8. 3. and be his servants without any redress. 1 Pet.
2. 13, 14. Submit your selves unto all manner of Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, both to the King as superior, and to governors sent for the punishment
of evil doers, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers:
and when they suffered they had no other means but to say, Nehe. 9. 37. We
are in great distress.

The Kings of the Nations came out of the loins of cursed Ham, Genesis 9. 25. A
servant of servants shall thou be unto thy Brethren, whose Grand-sonne Nimrod,
Chap. 10. 8. began to be a mighty man in the earth, ver. 10. The beginning of
his Kingdom was Babel, whose very name signifies a rebel or wicked one, and
Canonized for a Proverb, ver. 9. Wherefore it is said, even as Nimrod the
mighty Hunter before the Lord, who was neither appointed nor anointed of the
Lord. The second generations of Kings of the Nations was out of the loins of
Esau, whom God hated in the womb, Genesis 36. 31. And these are the Kings that
reigned in the Land of Edom, before there reigned any King over the Children of
Israel, who was chosen by Election, verse. 32, 33* 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 The
Kings of the Nations were out of the Lords Covenant, and so had nothing to do
with the Lords mercies or promises, but were used as the Lords instruments of
wrath, whom the Lord regarded not for good, because they served him not, nor
knew the Lord by his Word. Ioshuah 8. 29. took the King of Aie, and hanged him
on a tree, and cast his carcass down at the entering of the gate of the City,
and laid thereon a heap of stones. Chap. 10. 23. The King of Jerusalem, the
King of Hebron, the King of Jarmuth, the King of Lachish, the King of Eglon,
verse. 24. Ioshuah said to his Captains, come and put your feet upon the necks
of these Kings, ver. 26. and Ioshuah slew them and hanged them on five trees,
Chap. 12. 24. Ioshuah slew one and thirty Kings of the Nations, whose manner of
reign was according to the custom of their Countries, and their power was by
man: and therefore all destroyed by the power of God: so the power, the honor
and dignity of the Kings of the Nations was not from the Lord as was the Kings
of Israel, therefore not worthy to be compared with the Kings of Israel,
therefore the Kings of the Nations cannot plead any right to this regal power
from the Lord by his Word; for the Kings of the Nations were ordained by and
ruled over the Nations, before the days of the Prophet Samuel, they were not
obedient unto the Commandments of the Lord, and therefore have no right to the
promises of the Lord.

5. Quest. Now what difference is there betwixt the power of the Kings of
Israel, under the Moral and Ceremonial Law, and the power of the Kings of
England, under the Moral Law, and the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and the Subjects
of both?
Answ. The Kingdom and Crown of Israel, was the Gods of Israel, who in
Judgment to the people for their sins, gave the same to Saul, and confirmed
it upon David and to his seed, 1 King. 8. 25. There shall not fail thee a man
in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel: So that the inheritance of the
Crown of Israel was established upon David; for Bathsheba said, 1 King. 1. 20.
My Lord, O King, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou should tell
them who shall sit on the throne of my Lord the King after him: says David
ver. 34. let Zadock the Priest, and Nathan the Prophet, anoint Solomon King
over Israel, and blow with the Trumpet, and say, GOD save King Solomon. The
Lord never gave any Kingdom, nor Crown, neither did the Lord appoint or
anoint any Kings, save only of Israel and Judah.

The Kings of England were not at their beginning appointed nor anointed, as
were the Kings of Israel, but were by the Nation ordained as Kings over this
Nation, according to the custom of this Nation, which is, before they will
admit the Crown to him they do intend, he must by Covenant and Oath imposed
upon him, yield them their rights and privileges, and that he will rule them
according to the Customs and Laws of the Land; and then they grant unto him
the Crown for his own life: so that power that has power to impose an Oath
before a Grant, has power to deteine the thing to be granted, if the Oath be
refused by him to whom the Grant is intended, and every Grauntee is subject to
the Grauntor, according to the Covenant of the Grant, there can be no
fee-simple estate in the Grauntee of the thing granted, but the fee-simple
estate of the thing granted is in the grauntor: The Kingdom or Commonwealth
of England is the grauntor, the King of England is the grauntee; the Crown of
England is the thing granted; so that the fee-simple estate of the Crown of
England, is the Commonwealths of England to dispose of, according to the
Custom and Laws of the Land, which is by Covenant and Grant to the Prince in
being, and after whose decease by custom, but not by right of inheritance, to
the next in or of blood; and so from one generation to another in like manner.
So that this regal power in the 1 Samuel 8. does not at all belong to a King of
England, therefore if the Lord was wrath, and did exceedingly punish the Kings
of Israel for exercising this regal power, before the light of the Gospel,
wherein is revealed a greater light of liberty unto the members of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 7. 9. 10. Unto you therefore which believe in Christ Jesus,
he is precious, for by him ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the praises of him,
who has called you out of darkness into his marveilous light. Revel. 5* 9,
10. And they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book and to
open the Seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood, and have made us unto our God, Kings and Priests: How much more then
shall Kings under the knowledge and light of the Gospel, incur the wrath of
God, if they be found guilty of oppression and tyranny against the believing
members of the Lord Christ? themselves professing the same faith, and
acknowledging the same knowledge: the Lord is no respecter of persons, but the
soul that sins shall dye.

A King of England may not by this regal power demand and command of and from
the people, as the Kings of Israel, neither by the Laws of God, nor by the
Laws of the Land, neither are the people of England bound to that slavish
obedience, as the people of Israel were; but the people of England, both by the
Laws of God, and by the Laws of the Land, are freed from such a slavish
obedience; and therefore both according to the Laws of God, and the Land, may
lawfully deny, and refuse to submit, because it is an unlawful imposition; and
where the demand and command is unlawful, the denial or refusal is lawful.

6. Quest. How shall we know when a King does transgress against his Oath, and
break his Covenant, and what is the remedy?
Ans. A King does trangresse his Oath, and break his Covenant, when that his
demands are beyond the National Law, which by virtue of his Oath, as it is a
breach thereof, is oppression; and when a King does command of, and from the
people, such things as are opposite unto, and against the fundamental Laws of
the Land; which by virtue of his Oath, as it is a breach thereof, is tyranny:
which lawfully begets in the Commonwealth an absolute denial and refusal to
such demands and commands, and so the peace of the Land is endangered: the
only remedy to preserve the same, is for the King to call a Parliament, that
is, to send out his Writs to the Commons, to choose their Knights and
Burgesses, who by virtue of the Kings Writs, and the Commons voices for them,
are Parliament Men, and as Arbitrators are to decide all differences in Church,
State, and Commonwealth; whose conclusions and determinations, together with
the Kings assent, consent, and signing, are binding Laws both to King and
people.

7. Quest. How far may or ought a King lawfully to deny to assent, consent,
and sign their determinations and conclusions?
Answ. A King as he sits in the Lords throne may, and as he is entrusted by God
over the people ought to deny to assent, consent, and sign their
determinations, if the same shall either be dishonorable to the glory,
worship, and service of the Lord, or injurious to the good of the
Commonwealth, and no further; for it is his office to be as (or more) forward
and careful for both, as any other man, both by the Laws of God and the Land,
as he is the great Minister of the greatest trust for both, by taking the same
charge upon him.

8. Quest. But if a King shall deny to consent, assent, and sign the
Parliaments determinations, although honorable to the Lord, and good and
beneficial to the Commonwealth; then what is the Kings offense, benefit, or
danger; and their power, as they are Parliament Men, and so the body
representative of the Land.
Answ. If a King shall deny to assent unto that which is lawful before God and
man, and contend against it; and in stead of consenting unto them, to dissent
from them; and in stead of signing their determinations, to separate himself
from them, and make war against and upon them; he does thereby break the
peace, which as he sits in the Lords throne of Majesty, he ought to keep,
maintain, and preserve; and also thereby he breaks and wilfully violates his
Oath, and National Covenant, by which he enjoyes the Crown; and so is an
offender both against God and man, by both, for both, he is entrusted betwixt
both. Adam did not transgress until he was advised by Eve; Gen 3. 6. And the
woman said, ver. 13. The Serpent beguiled me: because a King does nothing
without advise, therefore he cannot transgress, but by the evil advice of
evil Counselors, who with Eve are beguiled by that old Serpent the Devil:
and such Counselors was 1 King. 12. 13, 14. Rehoboams young Cavaliers, and
such evil Counselors was Chap. 22. 6. Ahabs four hundred; Balls Prophets,
who were beguiled by the Devil, who said ver. 22. I will be a lying spirit in
the mouth of all his Prophets: and also such advisers had Pharaoh, Genesis 7. 11,
12. Jannes and Jambres, who had the Devils help, and by him did that they did
in their withstanding of Moses: and so such are all they that do advise the
King against the good advice of his grave and wise Elders the Parliament. Long
ago these Counselors were branded out and foretold by the Apostle Paul, 2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. In the last days, perilous times shall
come, men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, headdy,
high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, having a form of
godliness (in their mouths) but denying the power thereof (in their hearts)
ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; who as
Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth; Men of
corrupt minds, reprobates concerning the faith; but they shall proceed no
farther; for their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as Jannes and Jambres.
By which war, if the King get the better, these woeful advisers will advise
him, that then he need not submit to the legal power, according to his
Covenant and Oath, but may rule by that unwarranted unlawful, forbidden, and
often punished regal power of his own will, both in Church, State, and
Commonwealth, and so have all his Subjects to be his slaves; as all
tyrannical Kings have that so do: as in prevention, in a foretelling way of
such an evil in these latter days, wise prophetical Solomon, as a remedy
against such an evil, and to make known the lawfulness of a violent power
against such, says in a high and commanding language, Pro. 25. 5. Take away
such wicked (Counselors) from before the King, and his throne (by new and
stronger Covenants, and better Counselors) shall be established in
righteousness: verse. the 4. take away these drossie hearts from the Kings
silver godly heart, and there shall come forth a vessel for the finer, who is
the Lord, to make thereof a vessel of honor for his own glory, to do his
own work: which is Revel. 17. 5. And upon her forehead was written a name,
Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the
earth: this mystery is ver. 8. The beast which thou saw was to ascend out of
the bottomless pit, and is not, because she shall go into perdition, ver. 9.
here is the mind that has wisdom (or the mind of Gods intentions, who is
the God of wisdom) the seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman or
whore or Antichrist sits: ver. 12. and the ten horns which thou saw, are
ten Kings, or Kingdoms: ver. 17. whom God has stirred up or put in their
hearts, and as one man to agree; ver. 13. and have one mind; ver. 16. to hate
the whore, the Pope of Rome, and Antichrist of the earth, and shall make her
desolate and naked to show her filthiness, and shall eat her flesh and burn
her with fire, even the fire of Gods wrath, that she may never take root, to
appear again, or any more. Chap. 13. 18. Here is wisdom from heaven, let him
that has (spiritual) understanding count the number of the Beast, or the time
of her desolation, which shall be fulfilled in the year of Christ 1666. (in
Christ Col. 2. 3. are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge) and
therefore are revealed to none but such as are in Christ, and so a mystery to
others; for it is the number of a man by computation of man's nature, which is
66. or a Prince, or the prime Prince of the ten Kingdoms, his age shall agree
with 1666. and make up that number, being added to 1600; for 1600. having 66.
added unto it, makes up 1666. Charles the first, now King of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, his age does agree to make up and to fulfill this prophecy, who
is the King of Englands Lion, the King of Beasts; of Scotlands Unicorne, the
chief sovereign expeller of all poison of Popery: and of Irelands Dragon, the
chief of all poisoning fierce Serpents: and now have cause to be the most
fierce in this work, because the whore Antichrist has sucked out Irelands
blood in abundance: these three Kingdoms, are three of the ten Kingdoms, and
his Majesty a treble, or three comprised lawful King, is to be the Lord
Christ's chiefest instrument to the destruction of the great whore or Antichrist
the Pope, who unjustly usurpingly, and unlawfully wears the treble Crown: Now
this work of the Lord to destroy Antichrist, must be done by the members of
Jesus Christ, which formerly have been of Antichrist; of whom Peter says in
his first Epistle Chap. 2. ver. 10. In time past were not a people, and without
mercy (because ye were of Antichrist) but now are the people of God, and have
obtained mercy (because ye have forsaken Antichrist, and are now the members
of Jesus Christ* therefore as now all things stand, the Parliament or
representative body of the Land, as by the Lords providence are lawfully called
by the Kings Writs, thereby laying aside his regal power, and the Commons
voices, wholly committing all things unto them, have power lawfully, according
to Solomon's tenent, by (if need require) a violent force, even from before, or
out of the Kings presence, Pro. 25. 5. To take away these forenamed evil
Counselors from the King, that his throne in righteousness may be established
unto him: and then as in the 4. ver. the Lords refining work of separation by
a through reformation, in taking the Atheistical and Papisticall dross from
the silver members of Jesus Christ, quite out of these Dominions: but as Paul
says, 2 These. 2. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10. Let no man deceive you by any means, for the
mystery of iniquity does already work, only he who now lets will let
until he be taken out of the way (who are the Kings evil Counselors,
Papists, Atheists, traitors, and all such, as is before mentioned, therefore
away with them) and then shall that wicked one be revealed, whom the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, even him (the Pope Antichrist) whose
coming is after the working of Satan, devilish, with all deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness in them that perish, for want of the knowledge and love of the
truth in Christ, that they might be saved; and when such wicked ones are taken
from his Majesty, then as Jethro, Exodus 18. 21, 22. Counseled Moses, so do
ye his Majesty, to provide out of all the people, able men, such as fear
God, men of truth, hating covetousness, making such Rulers and Judges and
State Counselors, as it is Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19. that thereby both King and people
may all as one man, go on amain in the Lords refining work of Reformation in
these three Kingdoms, by turning out of them all Antichristian dross, that
nothing of it may remain ever any more to defile the silver truths, doctrines,
or members of Jesus Christ, who must be first reformed from errors, and then be
informed in the truths of Jesus Christ (for without a true knowledge there can
be no good obedient practice) and then the Lords second work of actual
destruction, will go on the better against that Beast Antichrist, to the glory
of God in their destruction, the Jews conversion, and Gentiles further
information and confirmation.

FINIS.

