Englands Alarm FROM THE NORTH, Wherein the affairs of Scotland are
represented, with the ominous aspect they have to England, to awaken all
interests to consider of the nearest conjunction among themselves against the
common Enemy, who appears in a new disguize, yet as destructive as ever to our
Laws, Liberties, and Privileges.

Respublica incolumis, and privatas res facile salvas praestat, publica
perdendo, tua nequicquam serves. Live. lib. 26.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White 1648.

ENGLANDS Alarm from the NORTH.
WEre it not that some special judgment from heaven lies on the most of this
Nation for our formalitie and unthankfulness, it were impossible to conceive
that we should be so ignorant and insensible of the designs which are yet upon
us; he which casts his eyes back with any observation of seven years
proceedings, cannot but have seen such a contexture of plots, and stratagems,
to ruin this Kingdom, as has not been before in such a space of time; and
had we been good husbands of our experience, we might have both foreseen, and
prevented many mischiefs which are like to come upon us. But we may sadly
lament, instead of observing the public contrivances of our enemies, we have
closed in with many of them, and are like to engage again on the same design
(if God prevent it not.) God has done enough to open our eyes, and Providence
has discovered that, as at noon day, which lay hid, and was for a long time
carried on by secret and only suspicious steps; and that we might have a
demonstration of their intentions, our enemies have writ them in blood, and we
have the undeniable prints of their malice on our bodies, estates and
liberties, yea our Religion and consciences. But this has been our misery,
though we have felt the pain, yet we have not looked into the design, nor
eyed the secret and invisible paths and forms these men have walked in. We
should have had no need of any paper discoveries if we had carefully observed
the real and manifest practices of these men but within these few years. But
because I may not speak at random, and all that can be done is little enough
to make men sensible of their own good, I cannot but tell you that you are yet
on the sands, and have need now if ever to open your English eyes, and stand
upon your guard, for there are yet who seek to make a prey of the richest and
sweetest of your enjoyments. We have very loud Alarmes from the North which
bespeak strange things, I shall give you what I know, and many honest and wise
men justly fear, that the old Engineers are still at work to undermine (though
in a more close and hansome way) the very foundation of our peace and
liberties. When we look to heaven, we may well fear the quarrel is not ended
there, our unfruitfulnesse has been so great under the late happy
dispensations of the Almighty to us; but that still some sharper arrows, and
bitterer pills are providing for us; if we look to men we may promise our
selves that all advantages shall be taken against us, and indeed many clouds
far above the bigness of a man's hand arise in the North, the vapors of
which have ascended partly from the South, and are yet increasing as if they
would fill the whole heavens, which many wise men upon great reasons think will
not distill in moist and spring-like showers, but in blood and misery, on this
poor Nation, if the Lord for his own name sake be not very merciful. And that
you may the better prognosticate, and be awakened, it will not be amiss to
lead you back unto the consideration of the old design, and how its like now
to be carried on under another habit with as great diligence as ever, and if
possible you may be quickened up to a serious and deep apprehensiou of what
mischiefs do await you.

Two great interests have been for a long time apparently driven on with a high
hand in these three Kingdoms, the Kings, and the Clergies, the one for
Prerogative, the other for Popery, the one to bring us nigher Turkey, the
other nigher Rome; and though they seem to be different, yet they have both
interwoven interests for the mutual strengthening of each other, and profess
one common cause; they well knowing that the best way to inslave our bodies,
was first to engage our consciences, and the way to make our consciences
stoop, was to tyrannise over our bodies. This design was carried on secretly
for a long wile, until at last through the opposition of this Parliament, it
broke out into a bloody and cruel war, which was not managed by children or
fools, but with the greatest policy and strength, as the wifest heads could
conjecture; but after many and tedious overtures, and bloody battles, God
appeared against them, by a poor and despised new Model, and we obtained a
full and absolute conquest over them, so that now all honest hearts seemed to
be at rest, and to have sat down, and have eaten the fruits of such a
glorious mercy.

But though the war be done, the design is not done, other ways are essayed
to give opportunity to our old adversaries; the Covenant is brought in, by the
now ruling malignant party in Scotland, as a bait to catch honest men, the
Presbyteriall Government must be made the next ground of a quarrel, as if that
was designed to effect what Episcopacie could not. A new kind of Malignants
arise in both Kingdoms, which are of two sorts; some great Malignants
formerly, and actually in arms, to save their Compositions take the Covenant,
are again admitted to our bosoms; and others who, though not in arms, yet
ever were of the Kings side, strike in with honest men whom they find zealous
for the Presbyteriall Government, press them to the pursuing of uniformitie to
the crying down the Army; whence divisions arise, new names are found out to
distinguish and divide, that some might reign. Those which were not fully
complying with their ends are called Independents, and Sectaries, and
represented as the only plagues of the Kingdoms, and incompatible with the good
of either nation; the common enemy does not stir all this while, as being
under the lash, and knowing that the very mention of them would be odious, the
Scots Commissioners must be employed to ply the Citizens with Declarations, to
get into the hearts of the Ministers, and to engage them, profess only their
desires for the Church, the purity and uniformitie of it; and that this may be
the more effectual, Remonstrances must be Printed against the Parliament and
their proceedings, and that by the Scots Commissioners, men publicly entrusted
with the affairs of Scotland, wherein the Parliament must be taxed for breach
of Covenant, for neglect of the Church; and that you may see the bottom of the
business, the coming of the King to London is thought fit as the only medium,
and a personal Treaty pressed with so much violence, as if they meant to bring
him by the force of their Papers, against the Sense of both Houses of
Parliament; the Commissioners must go visit the King in the Isle of Wight, and
there protest against the Parliaments Propositions (though only proposing the
very substance of what we fought for) and for what private conferences they had
with his Majesty, though we know not the words, we may easily understand the
sense by their carriages since, and what is now doing in Scotland. How
strangely by these transactions we are divided, and what hopes and expectations
are in our common enemies we may feel before we are aware. And that some
engagement has been made between some of the Grandees of Scotland, and the
King, is more then probable, if there were no more presumption of it then that
secret and clandestine proceeding of the Comissioners in the Isle of Wight. But
when we do consider of the model of the Parliament of Scotland, and how it is
framed, and patcht with Malignants, and how they cry up the Kings Interest
against the honest party in Scotland and England, we may well suspect that we
shall want nothing of the same design, but the name, and the place from whence
it is visibly to be acted. And these things are not bug-beares (though false
Alarms are sometimes useful) some of their own godly Ministers, the last Fast,
did publicly declare the great plottings and contrivings in the Parliament to
engage against the honest party, and did even so point out the Agents (who were
no mean ones) that the same night a challenge was sent from the Treasurer, Lord
Craford Lindsey, to the Marquess of Argyle, supposing the Marquess had pressed
them to speak what they did, the Lord Lindsey being one pointed out in the
design. And that you may yet be certain of the strenuous endeavors of these
men to effect this work, you have it declared by the general Assembly in their
late Declaration. And besides all this that we may have demonstration upon
demonstration, the continual concourse of Cavaliers from all parts, especially
of English, with the cold entertainment of our Commissioners, and the great
neglect and contempt of Mr. Marshall for but endeavoring a peace between the
Army and the City, speak loud enough, that any one who is not lost in the same
design cannot but be sensible of. And if it be not yet time for us to awake
and consider what we are doing, we may feel before we fear our danger; the
great encouragement of this design is our divisions, upon which stock they
graffe all their hopes. O Populi ad servitutem non ad libertatem nati? Is there
not a spark of true gallantry, and of English Spirits, yet within you? Have the
sound of Drums and Trumpets made you quite deaf, and slavery and faction quite
put out your eyes? Is there any Interest like to the Public? Is it not now
high time to unite, when others mean to unite against you? Whom do you gratify
but your common enemy? and shall your divisions give life again to the dying
hopes of those sons of violence? Had it not been better you had peaceably
laid down your necks at first, then to have given ground for such cruel
revenge? I would these were but passionate expressions, and that we had not too
much ground to inculcate them in every English heart. But we must take off a
disguise, or else we shall but lose our labor, and speak to engaged men. There
are many glorious, and fair pretenses, which are urged and made the ground of
a new quarrel, though the truth is, they are but made the veil and varnish of
the old cause: the setting up the Covenant, and Presbytery, contrary to
Sectaries and Schismatickes. But what ever is pretended, nothing less is
intended, and if it be intended first, I am sure it will be executed last;
after they have served their own ends upon England, they may perchance serve
that. But that honest and well meaning men may see how they are cheated, and
that there can be no such quarrel with England either for the Covenant, or for
Presbyteriall Government, let it be considered, first that the Parliament have
according to the advice of the Assembly stablished it, and have declared their
intentions concerning it, that they have and will set it up as the Government
of the Kingdom, and have given it the great preeminence of and above all
others by its public stamp of Authority and maintenance, so that there can be
no pretense for that, except they will quarrel about an unlimited power, which
the Parliament cannot with safety give them, which can be offensive to none but
those who hold that Principle, Non dominari instar servitatis est, who think
they are slaves except they be rulers. But suppose Presbytery should not be set
up, yet does it deserve the hazard of all the blood, and liberties of English
men, to purchase its establishment, which is so new to us, and of which we have
such little experience, yea whose name is not in the Covenant, but as it
referres to Scotland, to whose model we are not to be tide, but as we judge it
to be according to the word of God? Must Scotland have needs Bellum
Presbyteriale with us, as the Bishops had Bellum Episcopale with them? can
nothing but war make up our difference? Let men but remember the event of the
Bishops war, and then they will have little heart to engage Nations for an
unexperienced Church government. Has Presbytery been indeared to us for so
many hundred years, and has it left such sure and happy pledges of its divine
descent in the purest distillations of holiness, A peace, that its impossible
for us to keep God and our liberties together without it? if so, we should be
glad to venture the choicest of our outward accomodations to obtain it; and let
me add this, That when Presbytery shall give us good testimony of her
benignesse to England, as Episcopacy has of her malignity, we shall be able to
plead more for her. But its too common for men of no religion to begin their
most mischievous practices with that name. I cannot understand how these men
can be so true to that government, which so often calls them to the stool of
repentance: But to be serious, that there is no such matter in hand, as either
Covenant, or Presbyteriall Government, but purely the Kings Interest, Let us
but consider first that the greatest Malignants which have been in Scotland,
are now taken into the very bosom of their Parliament, as the Marquess
Huntly, the Lord Traquaire, with many others who have been the greatest
Incendiaries of that Kingdom.

Secondly, Who are the great Agents in this business, and do carry the sway in
this design, but men who have ever been opposite unto the Covenant, as Mr.
George Gellespy spoke openly in the Pulpit at Edinburgh, that there are now got
up into the greatest places, to sit at the helm, men of strange faces, who
were never known to appear for the cause of the Covenant, but have ever
opposed Reformation to the utmost of their power; and that you may ghuesse by
the leaders which way the conduct is like to be, you may take their names with
their short characters too well known of them. The first and great one who
steeres most invisibly this Affayre is Duke Hamilton, one who loves the Crown
better then the King, and yet its thought he acts out of a different and
peculiar end; the Lord Traquaire, a man formerly excommunicated both out of
Church and State, but now the great Favorite of this Faction; the Lord
Lanericke, a younger Brother to the Duke, who can no more live without the
Beams of Majesty, then the plant without the Sun, who was so dear to the King,
as he made him his Secretary at Newcastle, to supply the place of the Lord
Digby, who can no way exceed him in policy and malignancy; the Lord Calender,
who has been a Black-bander, and as secretly disaffected to the Covenant as
any of the rest, only engaged by his Leiutenant-Generall-Ship, and some
particular discontents to Montrosse. Its well known how often he has been at
Court within these few months; I might add many more. But that you may know
ex^pede Herculem. Can any wise man imagine that these men should now begin to
engage on the interest of the Covenant, which they never owned before with any
affection, and which is so diametrically opposite to their own private
engagements: But how ever, the Covenant must bear the name! or again, can we
imagine that those who shall stand for the King, and join with the common enemy
to set Him in His Throne who refuses to take the Covenant, or give any
satisfaction to what is contained in it (but only concerning his own Person)
will ever maintain the Covenant it self?

But let it be granted that there was a real violation of the Covenant in some
particulars, and an engagement should be for that cause as the principle: yet
it cannot be conceived, that the taking in of the common enemy to the quarrel,
as Assistants, will ever manage such an intention with any probable success,
but it will rather endanger the whole cause, by putting weapons into their
hands who aim at the ruin both of the cause and Covenant. Ye we know by sad
experience many a good end has been soon left, or at least mistaken in the
multitude and hurry of Affairs, and those we have put much confidence in, have
found it very easy to dispense with their principles, to further their
particular and private occasions. We began well in England, and did set out so
fairly, as honest, and plain dealing men thought every thing would be carried
on uniformly, in effecting one common end. But Proteus never made so many faces
and appearances, as there has been changes and alterations in our Affairs.
Let us now therefore be wise to know the meaning of pretenses and principles,
and not to be terrified from looking after our own good with the name Covenant,
though spoken by the Scots themselves with never so much zeal, and
protestations, remembering how you have been formerly deceived into a miserable
war by the Name King, and Common Prayer Book. Religion is a blessed, and
happy mercy, without which no Nations are secure; but when it comes in the
hands of Politicians, and to be made father to their designs, you must only
look upon it as in their glass, and you are in danger to have it represented
in another form then its own. The Historian said of old, Specie pietatis in
ambitionem delabuntur; and its true now, men make Religion but the footstool
of some particular advancement; they make designs for their own advantage, and
then entitle Gods name to it, that it may be the less suspected, and engage
men's consciences in it the more freely.

But that they may not want a sufficient vizard for their own ends, they tell
us of the increasing of Sectaries and Schismatics, which is both dangerous to
the Covenant and State, and the Parliament intends to tolerate them, against
whom they cannot but engage by the Solemn league and Covenant; this is yet a
fairer pretense, and seems to be practical, either to good, or ruin; but if
it be well weighed, we may see a great fallacy whereby we may be easily
deceived. The truth is, they have given us names, and will make it a ground of
quarrel with us for being called by them; the most of these they call
Sectaries are honest men, who ventured their lives in this Cause, and have been
and are still faithful to the State, and if there be any difference its in
some lesser points of judgment, which yet they manage very modestly and
peaceably, and the wisest men can hardly determine the things themselves. Thus
strange and formidable names are given to honest men, that they may be thought
to be some strange and desperate creatures not fit to live in this world. But I
hope English men will know how to call every faithful man by his right name
shortly. I would feign know whether there be any Sect or Schism now, or has
ever been known to be, like the Sect of the Malignants, which yet the Scots do
not only tolerate, but intend to make use of to suppress the Sects and
Schisms in England: Will any man be so mad to hazard his blood and estate to
punish the secred erroneous speculations of another man's judgment? or will the
suppression of them (take them in the worst sense) countervaile the cost and
charges, and the hazards that must be run to effect it? or can the Scots
promise when these are suppressed, we shall have no more Sects? nay, can they
free us from worse in the Church, and State? the truth is, when they have
suppressed them, they must think of dividing among themselves, for interests
make Sects, and men will create interests as fast as they see exigencies. When
the Scots have got the art to beat all men's brains to one noddle, and all men's
principles and ends to one interest, we may happily have some hopes of being
free of Sects, in the mean while, though an eye must be over them, and those
suppressed which are absolutely destructive to the State, yet a wary indulgence
must be afforded to some, lest we make more Sects, by persecution of them, then
before. We never had so many Sects until this war, nor never such names to
divide them before the Scots were pleased to baptize them so, and we may fear
on just grounds a multiplication of other kind of Sects, if ever a new war
should be promoted; for though the engagement be one at first, yet the ends are
different in the prosecution. By this time I doubt not but you may see into the
bottom of that pretense as of the rest.

English men, look about you, a war is threatened against you, great talks
there are at Edinburgh of the Parliament of England, of the breach of Covenant,
of vindicating the honor of the King; you are forewarned, be fore-armed; you
have been sorely whipped for your former stupiditie, let experience teach you
wisdom, remember names of things will never effect ends. You have fought
against the King and his party for your liberties, never give them away to
another nation for nothing; things are now in a hopeful way of settlement,
Peace begins to spring over all our enjoyments, let us not suffer a Scots blast
to nip our hopes in the bud. God knows when ever we shall be so fair for
liberty and peace, if we begin a new broil; the name of a war should now be
as odious to all honest men, as the name of peace has been, and is, to the
sons of violence. Many discontents are among you, many divisions, make them
up, lest others discontent you more. Events are not easily foreseen in
hazardous and difficult transactions, improve the present mercies you enjoy,
and pray for more, but take heed of making them less by fomenting such new
differences among friends. Let us all lay to heart the danger of a new war,
the hazard of all that ever we have gained, the uncertaintie of effecting the
best pretenses by such a course. It can never enter into the heart of any
English man except he has been bred in the Highlands among the Redshanks) that
the Kingdom of Scotland should engage for a war in England purely to
preserve our interests, and set up our liberties, or that they should be more
sensible of our condition then the Parliament of England, whom the whole
Kingdom have entrusted, and of whose faithfulness we have experience
sufficient, though an absolute perfection is not to be expected from men on
earth, and allowance must be given to men for failings, especially who are
employed in multitude of affairs, and who go through variety of temptations
Though we acknowledge Scotland a good neighbor, yet we have formerly thought
that providence had well ordered it that the river Tweede should run between
us; and I cannot think him an English man that shall desire any more bridges
then Barwick to be made over it; for holding a brotherly correspondence with
us, we have not wanted grounds of suspicion that sme thing more is desired by
them then a bare keeping up the Union. Wise men observe how they have of late
pryed into our liberties, made many encroachments on our interests, seemed to
challenge a part in the best and richest jewels of this State, affronted our
Parliament to their faces, and that when they have had no army in England. Such
forward essays portend only want of power to effect it, which they may do in
due time, if providence and our care prevent it not. Its not unknown how it was
once pleaded hard at a Conference, that the name of great Britain might
comprehend us all, and to leave out the distinct names of Scotland and England,
knowing that would be a handsome way to get an oneness in power and interest.
And at another time it was pressed hard in both Houses, and presented in their
Papers, that the four Northern counties might be engaged to them for the
payment of their army, knowing that possession was eleven points of the Law,
and a fair step to a property. And all this propounded when they came in
called by our Parliament purely on the interest of both Kingdoms equally in
danger. But if ever they should now come in let the pretense be as glorious as
it will) you can expect nothing but a transplantation of many generations of
them, into the best and fattest places of this Kingdom. England is too great a
remptation for soldiers who have no other ends to serve but their own bellies.
Put beggars on horseback (pardon the comparison) you know how they will ride.
But a hint of these things may suffice, except we are willing to sell our
birthright for a mess of pottage. The result of all should be an earnest
endeavor of all the honest party in both King doms to unite, and accommodate
among themselves, waving the punctilio's of private difference, and fixing
their eye on the designs of the common enemy, in the close, and underhand
transactions of them.

And before I conclude, I think it will not be amiss to spend a few words on
each interest, and that, if possible, we may be a wakened to a happy compliance
against all our enemies. And because our Brethren of Scotland are now most in
sight, I cannot choose but begin with them, and give them this faithful
advice, as an honest Covenanter, and true English man. (Brethren) we thank you
for your brotherly assistance, we shall labor to requite you with the same, as
we have opportunity, you were never so nigh England as now you are, the next
breach will make us at a greater distance then ever we were: he that makes the
first breach, must expect the first ruin; we have mutually engaged together
against the common enemy, let us not now engage with them against one another;
let it never be said that you had made a Covenant with us to put out our eyes;
let not the dying hopes of our and your enemies be revived by you; give not
occasion to them to have one cast more against both Kingdoms. You have had
sufficient experience of Royal promises, and what the Kings engagements have
been to you; the English Cavaliers are the first born of his heart, and will be
most respected because of their first free and voluntary engagement with him,
and they hate your Covenant, and your Nation, more then any people in the
world. When you have set up the King, you will give him leave to remember his
old quarrel against you. Our English Gallants will never endure to see the
best of you sit down at the right hand of the Royal Majesty, you had better
keep your esteem you have with the Parliament, and the honest party in England,
and give us time and peace to pay our debts, then crack your credit with every
party. We shall call against you to the most High God for revenge of the
greatest treachery that ever was known, if you now join with our common enemy
to undo this poor Nation. Do not verify that old character given you in all
Histories and Nations where your name is mentioned, that you are called
Persidi. Know this for certain, Though many in England would be glad to see
things changed, yet they will never endure to see you rule Take heed that while
you think to come into England, God does not raise up a second Montrosse to
ruin Scotland. Neither are we so low in England, but we can resent your
favors or frowns, and you will never make wise men believe, pretend Conscience
or Covenant, but your next coming must be to judgment, to part and divide our
spoil among your poor despised Gentry and soldiers and though we have of late
degenerated much from our English Nobleness, and Gallantry, yet there is a
vein of good blood that yet runs in some honest hearts, which will be
prodigally spent upon such treacherous underminers of our Liberties. But we
have better thoughts of the honest party in Scotland, then that ever such a
design should come into their hearts, or get the least countenance from them.

It would be far better, and more agreeing with our Covenant, that we should
come in to help you against that malignant Faction which grows prevalent among
you, then that you should help them against your friends; and there need not to
be any fear of our soldiers unwillingnesse to come back again to England;
though we must tell you plainly, you must give us leave to fear that if ever
your soldiers come into us, we shall never get them out without blows. If you
will not further, do not envy our peace, you shall enjoy some of the fruits of
it as well as we, make much of such friends while you have them. The next whom
I would address a few lines unto, are the English Presbyterians, (but I am
loath to call names) who have been too far engaged by the fair and smooth
pretenses of the Scots Commissioners: yet they are English men, and I have more
hopes to prevail on them to look about them. Though your judgments be not
much different from the Scots, yet your interests are. Let not the zeal of the
Covenant eat out your love to the being of the Commonwealth. Settle not the
foundation of Presbytery in Christian blood. Let the beams of truth shine
abroad from you to dispell and destroy errors. Call not for fire from Heaven,
especially not from Scotland, against your Brethren. The sweetness of your
Spirits, the Rays of Christ's glory which shine from your doctrine, will do
more to destroy the Kingdom of the Devil set up in the judgment of men, then
all the swords and cannons in the world. Can you think that the Scottish
Cavaliers will settle an English Presbytery? will your setting up the King,
set up your Government? no, no, Episcopacy is too great a darling of the Kings,
and his party, for them to give away its Crown to you. Soldiers will well
mind Religion when once they get power; when they have served your ends, you
must serve theirs. Be content with what you have, let not the world see you aim
purely at Domination, they will then soon conclude you are not Iure divino.
Presbytery may well give in some thing to an accommodation, as well as
otherwise; you have reaped the first fruits, yea the Harvest of what we have
yet sown, though with many tears; you may well give leave to others of your
Brethren to gather the gleanings of Peace and Liberty, since they have fought,
and hazzarded their lives with you for the whole; you have the broad Seal for
what you do, the public stamp of the State, the engagements of a Kingdom for
your maintenance, you may well give leave that a squint eye should be cast on
other honest hearts, who desire but to serve Christ according to that light
they have; none seeks to be Competitors with you in your enjoyments, or envies
your privileges, only desire to sit quietly down by you, serving of God with
you, though not in the same external form. Will the most exactest external
Uniformity, if obtained by force, amount to the loss of innocent blood, and
the oppression and persecution of any poor Saints? Remember what was the ruin
of Episcopacy, but the rigidnesse of pressing Conformity; let Pres byterie take
heed she come not to the same end by over-forcing an outward Uniformitie. And
howere you may now think, the design is as much against the honest
Presbyterians, as Independents; and though now we divide, we shall then be but
one in the misery, if ever through our own divisions God should let such a
device take effect. But they cannot be ignorant of these affairs; if they be,
and are blinded by Scots mist, I shall only wish they may have time enough to
repent, when they shall feel the mischiefs of such an Enterprise.

And before I go further, I cannot pass by the City of' London, a place where
most of those designs have been hatched, a people mixed in their intorests, and
divided among themselves, who have been ridden by all parties, but now of late
more abused, and engaged by the Scots Commissioners, and some others: You are
full of discontents against this Parliament and Army, you were like to have
begun a bloody war of late; had not some men, more wise and honest then others
prevented it, you had inconsiderately, made way for your utter Ruin; and yet
you think it now your happiness you live in Peace. Have you yet so many Bags
to spare, as to invite your Brethren of Scotland in? Are your Chests so full
that you know not how to employ the overplus? let bleeding Ireland have the
benefit of your superabundance: if ever another War should be, you must launch
out otherwise then ever you have done yet; you may not expect the Bishops
Lands, or Delinquents Estates to be sold for your security, the Cavaliers will
soon punish that which they call Sacrilege, and redeem the Revenue of the
Clergy again: you had need make much of this Parliament, that they may settle
things so, as they may perform their engagements to you, and you may enjoy what
you lent your money for; the next party may quickly undo what is now done: you
have paid money only by way of Loan now, for which you have got well, the next
turn you must give, and pay for lending also; what you have done for this
Parliament against the Kings party, if ever the King get his power, you must do
for him with an addition, and lose your former profits too. Oh that you would
now be wise! sit down and eat the fat, and drink the sweet of your enjoyments
under this Parliament, and let not another Kingdom come and make you
Tributaries to their own designs; Lose not all the glory of your former Actions
in a new strain of Malignity? If any of you be still discontented, and would
gladly see a new overture of Affairs in relation to a War, I could only wish
those men's persons were as far distant from the public as their interests are,
and then let them take their fill of War. Let every man consider that there can
be no pretense for War so strong, and necessary, as the settling of our Laws
and Liberties (after Conquest of our common Enemy) can be for Peace. And of all
men, the Citizens had need be quiet, and stick fast to the Parliament, who
enjoy all they have by them; their trade is now coming in apace, their shops
full, and except they long for to be plundered, and to lay temptations before
their old Enemies, they cannot but detest any thought of a new engagement, or
of countenancing such an undertaking: yet doubtless the Scots Commissioners
have not courted them all this while for nothing, they have observed their
tempers, cast in Baits to try their affections, and have no small confidence
in their assistance: But I hope they have observed and read the Scots
Commissioners by this time, as well as they have formerly done them: if they
will still be made pack horses to the Scots designs, I shall wish them no
worse masters.

I have one word to another party, of which I am sorry to hear that they should
be thought a party distinct from the whole, the Levellers (falsely so called)
and as innocently misled, in whom the principles of liberty would shine very
resplendently, were they not mixed with some other unsuitable passions. You
honest hearts, whose design do you drive on with such violence? are there not
parties enough already, make no more, lest you part your Interest from the
Public. Liberty is the garland we must wear after victory; but we must take
heed how we prosecute the attainment of it; all things cannot be done at once,
every man is not to be judge of his own liberty; there may be more dangers
sometimes in settling liberty, then in acting a war. I fear you have done more
disservice, and made more breaches in the honest Party, then the liberty of
your particular persons will countervaile, Avide ruendo ad libertatem, in
servitutem delapsi sunt, was an observation found out by old experience. It is
observed in you, that the violence of your spirit has sprung from some
particular discontents, and injuries received from particular persons, which is
an ill foundation; and honest men see not these holy, and Christian-like
gallantryes in your carriages, but much of self, and particular reflections on
private persons; Oh let not advantages be given by you to your and our enemies
again, revenge not your particular quarrels to some members of Parliament,
with opening a gap for the old Incendiaries to creep in at to destroy us all.
Balance former services with present failings, consider the many exigencies
men of public employment are put unto; they bear with your passions, you must
with their other infirmities; wait but a while, and calmly endeavor in your
places what you aim at, but let not your particular spirits manage such a
public work; and especially remember who threatens to take advantage by our
divisions. I can assure, you give the Cavaliers such a glimpse of hope, that
they as men risen from the dead, at the hearing of your new agreements of the
people, and such like transactions: for while you seem to agree in that, you
divide from the whole, and encourage the present design to destroy our Union
and Communion together. But I know the thoughts of a Scottish Invasion will
settle your present thoughts to endeavor the strengthening the present honest
Party, under what names soever.

What remains, but that all honest and true-hearted English men should unite
their apprehensions and affections in standing for the particular Interest of
England, and the sticking to this present Parliament; for though things have
not been carried so uniformely, as could have been wished, and many members
have had their particular failings, yet that is the most certain remedy we
have ever found; and if we vilify, and undervalue them, we shake the
foundations of our own peace, and there is no other visible remedy left us, to
support our selves, but what is violent, and unnatural; and though private men
may see many failings in particular actions, they must remember, that they
cannot see all the difficulties they meet with, nor all the secret principles
and reasons they act by; and that what ever passes through the best of men
will need refining, and long continuance in variety of Affairs cannot but
alter thoughts, and apprehensions, if not principles. We now know the worst of
this Parliament, but we know not what will be the next; they are now going on
happily, if we discourage them by our divisions, the blame must lie on us, not
on them, who cannot possible please all parties, in every circumstance of their
desires; and it is a mercy they have kept to the foundation of our liberties,
and have not given it up yet, either to the King, or Scots; and their last
declaration in Answer to the Scots Commissioners papers may satisfy the whole
world in their absolute entireness to the Interest of this Kingdom, and may
calm our spirits from such murmurings as arise against them. I am sorry to
hear honest men so hot, to desire a dissolution of this Parliament, before we
are freed of our fears, and they have settled the Kingdom in a positive
defense against our enemies. It is better trust them whom we know, and who
promise better things, then leave all to the hazard of a next Parliament, of
whom we know nothing, nor how they may be packt, and how in the intervall
designs may act. Let the last malignant elections in Scotland for ever stand a
Pattern to us, else we shall be wise when we have paid more for it.

And that we may yet prevent this design from the North, let us reflect on our
former actings, and recall our first principles of engagement in this war. We
may very well remember that the old Character which was given to our common
Enemy, by which we distinguished them, was from their owning the Kings
Prerogative interest against the Parliament of England, and the liberty of the
Subject, from whence they were called Malignants; and who ever own the same
interest, or seek to set up the King in his Throne, contrary to the
Propositions of Peace propounded by both Houses of Parliament, and do join
with the same party, cannot be looked upon any other notion, then as the
common Enemy, though under another name; and all honest men are to unite
against them, as at first, except we mean to forsake our principles, or do
imagine that our Enemies are regenerated, and that the King is turned purely
for the liberty of the Subjects, and the Privileges of Parliament, Cujus
contrarium verum est, they had never more wicked intentions then now they have,
nor their hearts fuller fraught with malice then at this day. But its our
misery, that we can see nothing but what we feel, nor will believe nothing
before its too late to prevent it; we have not so much wit, that the same
design can be carried on by several mediums which seem contrary to it. But
if men will be secure, let them be undone by the danger. I hope wise men will
take care for themselves. If God will yet punish us with a senseless slavish
spirit, its but the fruit of our own doings. Its happy for honest men they have
a reserve at last, but its sad to think that so many gallant spirits in this
juncture of time are divided, when division is the greatest prejudice to our
affairs. Its no wonder that Englands glory and happiness has been the
object of so much envy, and other Nations have such ambitious eyes upon it;
but the wonder is, that we should by our own folly prostrate so fair a Virgin
to the ravishments of every ones lust. We can exchange nothing with other
Nations of our Liberties and Privileges, without indangering their affections
to it. It has been but a little part of our wisdom, that we have given
Scotland such a sair prospect of our happiness, we might have kept our secrets,
and have been kind enough unto them too. But we cannot now help it, you see
what a virtue men make of necessity, let us be wise for time to come, and know
that a fair and loving distance from Scotland will not at all prejudice our
condition, so long as we keep to the substance of our union, and correspondence
in mutual affairs; any neerenesse besides will but make them covet, and us
fear. It stands upon you to have your eyes in your head, and to observe where
you are, and what you are coming unto, and if all will not make you wise,
there must be a whip provided for the back of such fools. It may be this
discourse may seem needless, and be thought only the frenzy of some
melancholy spirit. I wish it may prove so, I shall be glad to lose my pains,
so they may lose their designs. It will be my happiness to be mistaken in this,
though timely caution never yet hindered any serious work. I shall conclude
with my hearty desires to God, that he would open the eyes of this Nation,
defeat the plots of our Enemies, settle us in Truth and Peace, and that while
we are of one Nation, we may have one Interest in all public Affairs.

FINIS.

