ENGLANDS Deadly Disease to be Sick of a KING.

OR Religions just Complaint against her Enemies the Heretics, who call the
Diety into Question.

AND Revoke their Covenant, scornfully to have it hanged lower in the
Steeple Houses, for Dogs to piss upon etc.

Licenced according to Order of both Houses of Parliam.

LONDON, Printed for George Lindsey, and are to be sold at his Shop over
against London-stone, 1647.

A Just complaint of true Religion against ENGLAND.
O England! England! To thee I do direct my speech, against thee I do
complain. Then hear me thou filthy adulteress, have thou no other pretext,
but me to authorize thy treacheries? None else but me to color thy Treasons?
Shall I bear the blame of thy disobediences to God and thy lawful King? Say
strumpet will thou make me a mother to thy whoredoms, will thou that I
support thy shameless Apostasies, art thou not ashamed to say, that it is for
my cause that thou committest such robberies? Is it for my honor (as thou
say) that thou commit such murders, and bloodshed? Have I been at any time,
the mother of oppressions? Or the upholder of Seditions? Or the consenter to
Conspiracies, do thou not know the contrary? That all these things be
against my heart? Does not kingdumes stand by me? Do not I Only I, make man
acceptable to God? There can be nothing more hateful to me, then thy filthy
defections. Has any of thy neighbor Natitions done such affronts to me as
thou have done? For thou have stripped me naked, robbed me of all my Ornaments,
pulled down and dishonored my stately dwe^lings: killed my servants* banished
all my wellwillers, and now do thou go about to banish my self. Unparalleld
ungrateful consider, and remember of the happy estate all the time that I was
maintained and respected by thee. So long as you did honor me, did thou lack
for any thing? Wast thou not admired? For thy beauty, riches, glory, strength,
and manhood. Was there any of thy neighbors could compare to thee in these
things? Could any Nobility compare with thine for glory? Could any Gentry
compare with thine for rich^s? Could any Merchants compare with thine in gains
by their traffic? Was not England honored, respected, and made welcome to
all Nations? Was not England both loved and feared of all her neighbors? But
now open thine eyes and look upon thy disfigured estate. Thou art become
frantic and out of thy wits. Thou art now become miserable, infamous,
tyranized and oppressed by thy own self? Does not thy own Sword (which of old
was a terror and a conqueror of others) now pierce thy own bowels? Does not
thy own homicidiers m^rcilesse hands make thine own children fatherless? Thou
stopst thine ears at the pitiful cries of the poor widows and oppressed.
Thou disdainest the lamentable cries of the poor. Thou have opened thy doors to
all detestfull Vice and have banished Virtue, thou art become barbarous, and
do hate all civility, thy only pleasure is to commit murder: and thou
take delight to disobey and tread under foot the holy Laws of my God, thou
art drunk with innocent blood, and yet thou do still thrust forward, thou
do esteem it thy greatest praise to oppress thy neighbors, and thou art
not ashamed to proclaim unto the world, that it is for my sake, that thou
committest sacrilege. Filthy apostat look upon thy self and consider thy
estate now what it is, and what it was when I was maintained in thy
territories, where thou wast then beautiful. Thou art now filthy, stinking,
and loathsome, thy glory is turned to shame, thy riches are turned to penury,
thy strength is turned to feebleness, and thy manhood to cowardice, and thou
art become a byword and laughing stock to all Nations. When the children of
Israel did fall from God and me, with the gold and Jewels they took from the
Egyptians they did convert into a golden Calf, and for this the Lord my God did
plague them. Have thou not done the like with thy Gold and Silver, thou have
bought a sword to kill thy own self. Rememb^r what has been done in thy sister
Germany for her contempt of me, look for no better no, and if it were not for
the honor and respect that I carry to that godly well inclyned Prince thy
King, thy case should be worse then hers. For I do know that that King shall
restore me to all my rights, and apparel, and that he shall reedify my
ruined houses, and restore my exiled se vants and welwillers to their wonted
liberties. Let not t^o^e thy diss^mbling seducers look for a better reward,
then such as Baal his Priests had, for deceiving Israel. And bid them remember
that visib^e destruction that came upon them who did strive against Gods
Ordinance and against A on. Do not think that the al-seei^g eye of my God
sleeps. No, no: the innocent blood ^f thy murders cries (from the earth, as
did that of Abell) for a vengeance against thee. Thy inhumane of pressions of
the poor, of the widow, and fatherless, whose pitious cries thou disdaines:
the Lord my God does hear, and my Sister Justice, whom thou have banished, is
now in heaven, pleading for the Poor against thee. Has not my God forbid to
touch his Anointed and do his Prophets no wrong? But thou respectlesse
strumpet makes no Conscience to abuse the Lords Anointed, and to kill the
Prophets. For since the time of thy filthy backslidings from me, thou make
no Conscience of thy ways. Thou can do no more to fill thy cup full to the
brim with thy abominations, but woe be unto them when it shall be full, for
thou shall be forced to drink up all thy filthy perjuries, blasphemies,
abominations, murders, and poysonable heresies, allowed of, invented, forged,
and maintained by thee, to the dishonor of my God, and dispraise of me, thou
art become senseless, and thy understanding is departed from thee, Do thou
not remember that when the evil spirit did undertake to persuade Ahab to fall
by the sword of the children of Ammon, was it not by being a lying spirit in
the mouths of his Prophets? And has not thy Prophets seduced thee to fall
upon thy own sword do thou not perceive that there is a heavy judgment
coming from the Lord my God upon thee? Art thou blind, or do thou not regard
the visible threatenings of the Lord my God for the contempt of me? Art thou
become so insolent, as to slight the wrath of the Almighty? Thou have and do
proclaim thy self open enemy to all civility and civil government, denying
thy duty to God, and thy King, refusing all Religion and right rule,
suspending, subverting, and suppressing all spirutall Pastors and godly learned
men, maintaining heresies, Atheism, and ungodly livers in their rooms, do
thou look for a fearful end, and that thou sha^t be made a spectacle and a
visible example to all Nations for this, a ke but those of thy commerse what
difference there is between thy estate now, and the time that I had my
peaceable habitation with thee, ask thy tradesmen, what alteration there is
now of their estate? And those who got their living by their handwork, I say
ask them what loss they find at the weeks end. Let every one in their
several callings bear witness with me to this truth. And since thou have
cast me off, following after thy enchanting, seducing lovers. What have thou
gained? any thing else, but that thou had purchased hundreds of years
before, thou have spent all in these 7 years of thy licensious living, denying
thy duty to God and thy King, and forsaking me. Thou may be compared unto an
adulteress woman who had spent all her husbands riches with her new lovers.
And now when thou beginest to be poor, thy lovers who has enriched themselves
with thy goods, does now disdain thee and laugh thee to scorn, if thou have
no more moneys, they shall strip thee, and rather pity thy nakedness, then
commiserate thy estate, but shall utterly undo thee, if thou disassent to their
desires. Art thou bereft of sense, or depraved of eyes, that do rather fall
then see thy own wreched estate: that (those whom thou hired to be the
executioners of thy malice against them whom thou intended to undo) are now
become thy shame like unto Hamans gallows, that hanged his master: be not thy
hirelings become thy masters, thy bond s^rvants, thy Commanders: has the like
been done in any other Country that is done in thee? It is a thing to be
wondered at, that thou have such heart to do such unlawful things, as to
press to depose thy lawful Prince, to subvert Religion, and to kill thy
self, and have not the courage to withstand the cruelties of thy domestique
enemies, nor to gainsay their imprisoning Ordinances, nor to refuse their
unreasonable demands.

O miserable wretch! more then miserable, how long will thou halt between two
opinions? If the Lord be God follow him, if Baal be God follow him. Thou had
once wit: thou had judgment, thou had understanding, thou had once
valor to withstand the power of Nations: call to mind the prosperous success
thou have had to resist the invasions of Kingdoms, and not only to resist, but
overcome victoriously, witness France and Scotland, where in one day thou
had the glorious victory of two battles, and took both their Kings prisoners,
art thou not England now as thou wast then? The number of thy fighting men and
arms be rather augmented then diminished. Thou lackest nothing but courage.
Then heed, and take my counsel, I love thee, and am sorry for thy disaster,
for all thy rigor used against me, return then to thy wonted obedience to
God and to thy lawful King and to me. And try if the Lord will not give thee
a blessing, and will make good all thy losses, and restore thee to thy wonted
happiness, so that thy withered branches shall yet bud and bring forth the
wonted pleasant fruits, stop then thine ears at thy seducing inchanters,
hearken no more to their flattering alluring intisings, but take courage, and
shake off the heavy intolerable burden of slavish bondage, and turn to the
Lord thy God, and let me have my own accustomed liberty, that my sister
justice come again and enjoy his wonted Prerogatives, and thou shall see how
the Lord shall cast thy scourge into the fire, and ease thee, as the loving
father did his forlorn child. The Lord my God give thee eyes to see, a heart
to un^erstand, judgment to discern, and to chose the best that thy fall be not
perpetual. Amen.

Imprimatur.

JOHN DOWNHAM.

FINIS.

