ENGLANDS Genius PLEADING FOR KING CHARLES To the Right Honorable the LORDS and
COMMONS in PARLIAMENT, etc. And to the Lord MONCK General of all the forces in
England, Scotland and Ireland, etc.
GReat Worthies!
Who (I hope) were Born to be
The Restaurators of my LIBERTY:
House of Lords
You who Rich Scarlet, faced with Ermins wear,
And both high Titles and true Virtues bear:
House of Com.
You, who have always been, and now will be
The perfect Type of true Democracy,
My careful Patriots of Plebe an Power,
My never-stormed Fortress my strong Tower,
Resisting still Usurped MONARCHY,
Or too much ^ording Aristocracy;
General.
And you (Great Sir) who draw your splendid Line
From Yorkes White-Rose, whose Noble Blood does shine
With an untainted Loyal tincture, you
May give me Peace, and CHARLES his Empire too.
At your auspicious Feet the Genius of
Distracted Albions Isle does lie, (the scoff
New justly of her foes) this Face you see
This squallid Face is mine, I, I am she
Whem twice ten bloody and tempestuous years
Have vexed with Soul-tormenting fears;
Torn by the rage of my unnatural Sons,
Whose fury rackt me with uncessant wrongs,
(Oh vip'rous brood! ungrateful Whelps that dare,
Your kindest Mothers panting Bowels tear!)
My once vast Treasures are exhausted, all
Consumed, and I to a Prodigious fall,
And utter Ruin posting down amain,
If your Heroic Hands me not sustain;
But my decayed Treasures likely are
Never to recruit till the Trade obstructing War
With his great Catholic Majesty of Spain
Does find a Period; till I be again,
(I say) till my three Royal Crowns and I,
Be given to CHARLES his sacred Majesty.
Even as a Ship upon the boistrous Seas,
When the blew Billows mount to troubled Skies,
When tempest-breathing Boreas does roar,
Driving the Waves against the assaulted shore,
When N. W. Wind.
Corus from the great Atlantic Maine
Thunders, and other Winds retort again,
His raging blasts and Ship-encountring Waves,
When, not without just cause, the Pilot raves,
But th'shaken Vessel (be what will his mind)
Is rapt away by the prevailing Wind;
Just like this tempest-tossed Ship I Have been
Long time abused and cheated, rackt between
Pale fear and hope; then by the longest Sword
Commanded, daring not to speak a word.
Be you [my Supreme Court] (Illustrious Sirs,)
The Olive-Crowned, welcome Harbingers,
Be you the happy Phospherus, who may
With your resplendent, truly happy Ray
The wished re-establishment fore-run
Of my so long in vain-desired SUN!
But (GEORGE!) to your renowned worth and you,
How much does England's grateful Genius OW?
Nor Changes, nor this series of time,
Nor yet to Faith that inauspicious Clime
Scotland, (long never to one Interest true)
Had power t'extinguish those true Sparks in you,
(Sparks, which black Embers many years did Cloud
And in eternal silence seem to shroud)
Of Love to me, who in a pensive tone
Wish my just Master, and his juster THRONE.
Sir, you and your peace-bringing-Troops did come
Not as Great Caesar to distracted Rome,
Did once advance, Trophes bringing along
From the fierce Galls, and fiercer Germans won,
With raging Mars in his War-threatning-look,
Which could no equal or superior brook.
No angry frowns your milder looks did show,
But Peace sat Crowned in your triumphant Brow;
Your Scottish mist (Oh strange!) down did not power
In a tempestuous or a bloody shower,
But did impending rage and tempests chase,
From the sad surface of my mourning Face,
And by it is active breath, did dissipate
The feared effects of my resolved Fate.
With King-restoring By whose means the Crown was won from R 3. and restored
to H. 7. heir of the house of Lan.
Stanley shall you stand
Ranked, when our pridigious Annals brand
The horrid fury and nefarious Rage
Of this blood-sucking, King-condemning age.
The eager teeth of all-devouring Time,
Shall never triumph over your high, sublime,
Star-towring Name; and, though we daily see
No pitch of Glory from the Grave is free;
Yet when stern Death (never touched with least remorce)
Shall by his fatal unrelenting force
Storm your Life's Fort, your better part shall then
Survive, yea gloriously revive again?
Your Fame (I mean) and lasting Name shall be
Preserved in Brass to all eternity.
Parlia.
My hopes mount high (Grave Senate!) when I see
The Regal Crown and Royal Ca^opie,
With that Rich Laurel, which Phanaticks hate
To see upheld by Cherubims in State;
I trust that Halcyon days may once again,
Return and I in my old Glory shine.
I hope your happy and Resplendent Light
The bloody shades of my long gloomie night
Will still dispel and drive away, and now
My Native foes proud fury tame, if you
If You my KING and ancient Laws restore,
If you take care I be abused no more,
If you the Church and Clergy countenance,
If you my now-decayed Trade advance,
While Radiant Stars shall run their usual race,
While Neptunes Arms these fruitful Isles embrace,
While Luna shall her Horns together close:
While the Day Star the Rosy morn foreshows,
Englands good Genius shall your praises sound
And your blessed Heads with Laurels shall be Crowned.
London, Printed for J. Jones, 1660.


