ENGLANDS PETITION To KING CHARLES.

OR, An humble Petition of the distressed and almost destroyed Subjects of
ENGLAND,

To the KINGS most excellent Majesty, now at the Isle of Wight, That He would
yield to His Parliament in all their reasonable Demands in the Treaty there.

Containing the very sense of all the loyall-hearted true lovers of the KING.

Better save something then loose all. Dept ye 8th LONDON: Printed in the Month
that the Scots Army were utterly overthrown, and Colchester taken. 1648.

To the obvious not desired Reader.
GOod Friend,
We would have you know this Petition was intended only for His Majeties view,
but considering what power his pretended friends have with Him, we think fit to
submit it to common view, and to turn it out, in hope His Majesty may be
induced seriously to read it, and lay to heart the distress of the miserable:
if you censure it as the work of some few discontented persons, Know you it is
the sense of our The North and Northwe^^ of England, with ^he I^habitants of
Colchester.
part of the Kingdom^, and if you will promise us hopes of success, we'll soon
return it you with the hands of 1000000. If you condemn us for speaking too
plainly, Know that misery makes men forget good manners; and dying men use not
complements; We are in the casi of the I epers, If we sit still we perish,
therefore we will move in the way of hope, and go in to the King, though it be
not according to Law, and if we perish we perish. Yet know, we will come far
short of the plainness of better persons and times, 2 Samuel 7.12. 1 King.
18.18. etc.etc.etc.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty; The humble P^t^tion of many of Your
distressed and almost destroyed Subjects of Your Kingdom of England.
DREAD SOVEREIGN,
It Is a double grief to our souls, that we should be constrained to beg for
our lives at Your hands, who are bound by the Law of God and nature, and by
Your Oath, to preserve them, and that we should be forced to entreat You to
spare our estates, liberties, and blood, whose honor and strength depends so
much on these our enjoyments: But extremity prevails and drives us to You,
and casts us here prostrate at the feet of Your Majesty: And let not Your
Majesty be offended, if we speak more plainly then usually becomes us; for
necessity has no law: It is for our lives and more, and therefore blame us
not to speak; our friends, our wives, our children, our wants, our dangers, our
Country, our blood, do all pierce our ears and hearts with their daily and
doleful cries; Oh that our requests could find as quick access to Yours!
Surely it is impossible Your Majesty should be ignorant of the doleful
condition Your two Kingdoms are in; Do You not know that our houses are
re-plundred, and the fruit of our new labors taken from us; that men who have
heretofore relieved hundreds of the poor, have not left them a bed to lie on,
food to sustain them, or an house to put their heads in? And the poor they
were wont to relieve, are forced to become Soldiers, that they may rob us by
authority. Know You not how many thousand distressed souls cry to God day and
night, in their anguish and misery, while they see You the Father of their
Country, having no compassion on them? You were wont if we lost our estates by
Pirates, or but an house by fire, to grant Your gracious Letters Patents for
our relief; but now Your Soldiers rob us of all, and burn our houses to the
ground. You were wont to relieve Your Subjects when taken by Pirates, and made
Gally-slaves; and now the loathsome prisons are filled with their miserable,
starved, diseased bodies, who (some of them) would think themselves half
freemen were they Turkish Gally-slaves; such is their cruel usage. Know You
not how our Corn lies uncut, and devoured by Soldiers, who seize upon our
horses and sheep, and eat the bread out of our mouths? and what can follow
this but extreme famine? Know You not how our blood is spilt, and the dead
bodies of Your Subjects scattered as dung on the face of the earth? Have not
your eyes seen it, and your ears heard the groans of the wounded, gasping for
life? Is all this nothing in your ears? To whom should Your people go but to
Your Majesty in this our distress? We have tried all other known means, and
profess in the sight of God, we know none but Your Majesty, under God, that
can deliver us without more blood and desolation; and the world knows it is in
your hands, You may do it if you will; and do it easily, and do it with
increase of Your honor, safety, and happiness. What if it were to part with
something of Your right, yet should not your M^jestie do it to save the life of
Your people, from whom, and for whose good, You first received it?

Dread Sovereign, We beseech You consider, what has your Parliament and
people done, that deserves all this from You? Is it because your Parliament
relieved us from oppressing Courts, and illegal taxations? Was it not with
your own consent? and is it not your glory, to be King of a rich and free
people? Is it because they prosecute Delinquents? Why, to what end are your
Courts of Justice else? and are not they your chiefest Court? And can those be
friends to You, and worth the defending, that are enemies to your Kingdoms? For
your Forts and Navy, are they not yours for your Kingdoms good? And is not your
Parliament, the Kingdom representative? We know your Majesty cannot manage
them in your own person, but by your Ministers, and those chosen by Counsel;
and can You or the Kingdom possibly judge any more able, impartial, and
faithful to advise You in this, then your Parliament? They meddled not with it,
till absolute necessity constrained; till they saw Ireland in rebellion, the
Rebels threatening England* and their own lives and the Kingdom in present
apparent jeopardy, by the same spirits as malignant and active at home, and
your Majesty's consent to their Bill denied. We cannot but see the same
Counsels that set your Majesty against your Parliament, which caused their so
long discontinuance, which caused the Shipmoney, and other illegal taxations,
which caused the late innovations in Church and State, which caused the war
with Scotland, which broke up the last Parliament, and caused that invective
Declaration against them, in the very language of the present times, to be
restless in their endeavors to carry on their wicked designs by raising a
new war. They desire nothing more then your concurrence; and we know if
humble Petitions or loyal affections would procure it, there would not have
been so long a distance. Neither is there any visible means left, but either
the Parliament must give up our states, liberties, lives and Religion to the
dispose of your too-long tried secret Council, and make your Majesty's mere
will the only Law, and so betray their Country, and the trust committed to
them; (which God forbid) or else defend us by the sword.

And for us your people, what have we done that we are made a common spoil?
Would your Majesty desire us (which we will never do) perfidiously to betray
them whom we have trusted? and to kill them whom we have chosen to save us? and
destroy those who are our selves representatively? Then should we be the
disgrace of the English Nation, the reproach of our posterity, the very shame
of Nature, and should presently expect some strange judgment of God, according
to the strangeness of our offense. It Is true, we are forced to take Antidotum
contra Caesarem; or rather to save our throats from the violence of desperate
persons; But we beseech You call not this bearing Arms against You; it may be
against your will; but if any of your now followers be more respective of your
royal Authority established by Law, more truly tender of your person and
honor then we; then let not God prosper our proceedings, but cause us to fall
before them, and give us up into their hands.

We are fallen upon by the cruel, and because we will not dye quietly, and
without resistance, we are accu^ed as tray^o^s and enemies to your Majesty. We
beseech your Maje^^^e, consider in the presence of God, if your own Father and
King had run upon you with his drawn sword, whether would You have ^uffered
death without resistance, or have taken the sword pro t^mpore out of his hand?
and yet neither be averse to his honor and person, or his propriety in his
weapon. Does not Nature teach us the preservation of our selves? will not the
eye wink^ without deliberation? and the smallest worm turn back, if you tread
on it? And beside nature, we have frequent presidents in sacred Writ, for even
more then defensive resistance of Transcendent Monarke, 1 Samuel 14.44, 45. 1 Samuel 23.11, 12. 2 King. 1.10.12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 26.18.20. Dan. 6.14. etc. But if
all this were nothing, yet we know your Majesty has passed an Act for the
continuance of this Parliament: and sure that Act must needs mean a Parliament
with it is power and authority, and not the mere name and carcass of a
Parliament; It Is not only that they shall stay together in London, and do
nothing, or no more then another Court; but that they continue your chief
Counsel, your chief Court, and have sole legislative power, which are your
Parliaments peculiar properties: And if your Majesty has enacted the
continuance of a real Parli^ment in it is power, who sees not that You have
thereby joined with them your royal Authority, though not your person?
wherefore we hope your Majesty must needs discern that we fight not against
You, but for your known established Authority in Parliament. And we hope your
Majesty will not deny them to be your entire Parliament; for is the Act
recalled whereby they were established? if not, how can they sease to be your
Parliament? neither let the fault be laid on part of them; for we all know the
major part has the authority of the whole; and if it were the minor part, why
did not, or does not the major over-vote them? And we beseech your Majesty
blame us not to think our Religion and all lies at the stake, while we look
back by what a train Popery had been almost brought upon us by that party, and
see them still the chief in favor, and when so many Pap^sts English and
foreign are now in Arms against us, and know no one Papist in the Land that
is not zealous in the cause. Wonder not, Dread Sovereign, if we hardly believe
that those come now to save us, who in 88. and the Powder Plot, would so
cruelly have destroyed us: that Papists should be most zealous in fighting for
the Protestant Religion, and Delinquents (proceeded against in parliament,)
should stand for the privileges and Laws of the Parliament; that oppressing
Monopolists shou d fight for the Subjects liberties, seem all riddles and
paradoxes to us. Blame us nor, we bessech You, to fear, while we see no
contradiction appear to Mounsieur de Ches^e his book, sold openly for many
years, not in Paris only, but in London, and read at Court, which records your
Majesty's Letter to the Pope, promising to venture Crown and all to unite us to
Rome again.

Dread Sovereign, many Princes have gone astray through strength of
temptation, and after have been happy in repenting and returning; Oh that the
Lord would make it your case, and glorify his mercy on You and us, in making
known to You the thing concerning our peace, and not his Justice in hardening
You to destruction: that it may never be read in our Chronicle by the
generations to come, that England had a Prince who lived and dyed in se^king
the desolation of his people, and the Church of God, and would not be wrought
upon either by mercy or judgment. Your Majesty knows there is a King and a
Judge above You; before whom You must very shortly stand and give account of
your Government; We desire You in the presence of that God, to think, and think
seriously, and think again how sad it will be, to have all this blood charged
on your soul; Can your Majesty think of this with comfort when You are dying?
Can these Counselors that now put you on, then bring You as safely off? do you
not see how the hand of God is against them in all they do? And are there not
many despe^ate Levellers that plot the ruin of Kingly Government? Your Majesty
may despise what we say, and call away our Petition, and judge us your enemies,
because we tell you the truth, and speak as dying men in the sorrow of our
souls; but You cannot so put by Divine Justice, or quiet conscience at the
la^t: As true as the Lord lives, your Majesty will one d^y know that
Blasphemers, Papists, and flatterers, are not your friends; but plain dealers,
who do assure You, the way You take, tends to the utter ruin and destruction
of your Self and Kingdom. And can your heart endure, or can your hands be
strong in the day the Lord will reckon with Y^u for His people committed to
your charge! O^! suppose You now heard the blood of your people already spilt,
crying in your ears, and saw the many thousands yet living a life worse then
death, lying in their sorrows at your feet, crying for pity, help, Oh King
help, or we lose our liberties, Laws, lives and Religion; help that your Self
and Royal posterity, be not ruined: help as ever You would have God help You
in the day of death and judgment, when your Self shall cry for help and pity;
help that deliverance come not some other way, while You and your Fathers house
are destroyed. The Lord God of our hopes, who has for our sins most justly
afflicted us in You, give your Majesty a discerning eye, an holy and tender
heart, to yield to the Petition of your distressed Subjects, To concur with
your Parliament, that God and man may forget your mistakings, and You may be
the blessedest Prince that ever reigned in our Land, the terror of your real
enemies, the joy of your people, and the glory of posterity; Such shall be the
daily and hearty prayers of

Your Majesty's loyal (how ever esteemed) Subjects, etc.

FINIS.

