ENGLANDS Public Faith: OR, The Poorest Creditors, unto the Richest Debtors:
Their Solicitous Appeal, To Men of Piety, Honor, and Zeal.
EVery man is Obliged to Pay his Debts by a Threefold Law: A body personal,
viz.


1 The Law of God, Exodus 22. 14. Prove. 3. 27. Psa. 37. 21. Romans 13. 8. 2 The
Law of Nations, employed, Prove. 22. 27. Prove. 6. 3. Matthew. 18. 25. 28. 3 The
Royal Law of Equity, Matthew. 7. 12. To do as you would be done unto.
Also having Borrowed upon their City or Town Seal, A Body Corporate.
is Obliged to Perform and Pay their Debts by Charging the whole Body, because
all have a Common Benefit in that Corporation.

Being a Republic in their Representative, A Body Politic.
viz. A Parliament, is no less Obliged to Pay their Debts Borrowed for the
benefit of that whole Commonwealth.

The Resemblance being Congruous, Let the Honorable Representative Allow the
Creditors to be importunate, for from their Necessities the Law of God requires
them so to do; -- (for when in Prison, or in Debt, or Surety, or in Family
wants, Prove. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Prove. 22. 26, 27. Luke, 18. 1. 6. 1 Timothy 5. 8.

The Public Faith was made by a Body Politic Twelve Years past, 1 Object.
and another like Representative Succeeded, and Both Dissolved without Paying?

As by Law, Answer.
(The Heirs and Executors are as much Engaged as the Deceased, if there be
Assets, or Estate left, to Discharge Debts; So in like manner Your Petitioners
Humbly conceive, That your Honors are as well Obliged for the Real Public
Debts,

1 Because You are as Their Heirs, Your Lives and Estates were involved in that
Body, embarked in that Ship, which if the Public Faith Money had not upheld,
had Sunk and You with it.

2 You Inherit that Power and Authority, or the like, by Your Free Elections of
the People, and thereby their Successors, and stand in their Place, and have
the Revenues and Estates of Three Nations at Your Command (the Consent of His
Highness being included, whose Heroic Spirit is so Propense for all Justice,
That no doubt His Actions will silence many who are filled with evil Surmises.)

But many Public Lenders are Paid by Purchase of Lands; 2 Object.
And many others of Good Estates have Nothing Due to them; Therefore to Pay it
by General Taxes will not be Accepted.

This bespeaks for the Petitioners (by the Royal Law) for if Those that are
Paid, Answer.
and perhaps with great Advantage, were in the Petitioners Condition, not Able
to Purchase by Doubling, but in Prison, in Debt, or in Want, Would not they
desire their Own?

And was there not an Equal Benefit to all the Body of the Nation; Whether Lent
Much, or Less, or Nothing: And therefore Equal for All to Pay?

And if the Richest Lenders are Paid, which perhaps Lent most Sparingly, their
Estates Considered, shall therefore the best Affected that Lent most Freely,
Timely, and Largely, be still Deferred; or after Twelve Years staying, to be
Alloted Forest or Delinquents Lands (improper Payment for Money, Plate, and
Horses which they Lent) for to Relieve their present Necessities?

And for those that Lent not, and yet enjoy their Proprieties, for them to Pay
an Equal Tax, is most reasonable; if not a Double Proportion.

The Premises Considered, Your Honors are Desired to follow Gods Command, Prove.
3. 27. Withold not the Good from the Owners thereof, though there be Power in
Your hands, say not, Go and come again, etc.

Especially when Your Petitioners are in such Want.







And the Petitioners shall Pray unto that Wonderful Counselor, Isa. 9. 6. who
true says, Counsel is Mine: Prove. 8. 14. To impart so much to His Highness and
to Your Honors, as the Meeting may bring to these Nations that Promise, Jer.
31. 23. The Lord shall Bless thee, O Habitation of Justice, and Mountain of
Holiness.

