ENGLAND's Over-Joy AT THE Duke of Monmouth's Return:
By the Author of ENGLANDS Lamentation for his Departure: Reflecting on his
Heroic Actions.
THIS Morn, as in my Bed I sleeping lay,
When busy Dreams led my mind astray:
Methought I on Parnassus top did stand,
Where the Nine Sisters, each with Harp in Hand,
As their grand Master Phoebus did inspire,
Sung Monmouths Welcome to the tuneful Lyre:
And as thy sung, one kinder than the rest,
Breathing a gentle Heat, o'r all my Breast,
Cried, Rouse, for shame, and trail thy lasy Pen,
For the Brave Monmouth is returned again,
The Valiant Monmouth, to whom this our Isle
Is more obliged than Egypt unto Nile.
With that (for who could such a CALL withstand?)
Unskillfull as I was, I took in hand
My scribbling Instrument, Willing to pay
An uncouth Offering to this welcome day,
Welcome indeed, when such good News it bears,
As is of Force to banish all our Fears:
What, my dear Britons, to that Angel's due!
Who always has so careful been of you?
As not to let those Demons of the Land
Destroy and ruin you, but was at hand,
And did with timely diligence remove
The Dangers that hung threatening from above;
And has dispelled the CLOUD which threatened NIGHT,
Hiding the Glorious Monmouth from your sight:
Monmouth! whom we like Merchants that have lost
Jewels of weighty Value, and great cost,
If ere they find them, do esteem them more,
Than ever they were wont to do before.
Have you not seen after a cloudy Day,
The rising Sun next Morn appear more gay?
As though he had withdrawn his dimmer Light,
Only to deck himself with Rays more bright:
So Monmouth to enrich himself withdrew,
That he might come again more dear to you.
Let then your JOYS be great as were your FEARS,
For HE the Noble Monmouth now appears:
Go, Bid him welcome from the Belgic shore,
And consecrate the Yatch that brought him over;
Let it be Sacred, as DRAKE's famous Boat,
Which round the watery Universe did float;
As sacret as the Ship that brought the Fleece
Of Gold, which Jason stole from Greece:
For none did e're a richer Treasure bring;
Except that ship which brough Great Charles our KING.
London, Printed by T. Dawks, his Majestier British Printer, at the Blew Anchor
in Ludgate Street. 1679.

Where will speedily be published a Methodical History of the Popish PLOT,
demonstrated and illustrated in 52 choice Figures, most of which have on them
the Year, Month and Day wherein it was acted; and, a brief Chronology of the
growth of Popery: the which Figures are so contrived that they will be made up
in a Pack of Cards, and wrapped in a printed paper, which will assist the Readers
understanding of them: or, they may kept together in one view, in two large
sheets of paper, making a Complete Ornament for a small Almanac, this having
only in place of an Almanac, a Journal of the Plot.

There was lately published a large sheet, called Sir Edmund bury Godfrey's
Murder made visible; with his Character thereunto: Dedicated to the Earl of
Shaftsbury, etc. wherein the several Cruelties of the Papists, in the said
Godfreys Murder, are lively represented in a copper plate, which may be had
plain, or painted and with Rollers, being a neat Ornament for Gentlemen's Houses.


