ENGLANDS REMEMBRANCER: IN TWO PARTS. OR, A Catalogue of all or most of the
several Victories, and strong Holds obtained (through Gods blessing) by the
Parliaments Forces since the Armies rising from before Oxford in June last,
1645. to the last General Thanksgiving, October. 2. 1645. As also since that
time to this present General Thanksgiving. Febr. 5th. 1645 13.

All within the time of 7 Months.

Published of purpose to draw forth Englands Thankfulness, Unto the Lord of
Hoasts at all times, but more especially upon her days of Thanksgiving.



LONDON: Printed for Tho: Underhill at the Bible in Woodstreet.

Febr. 4th. 1645.

A Catalogue of the PARLIAMENTS Victories since the Army (under his Excellency
Sir THO: FAIRFAX) rose from before Oxford in June last. 1645.
IN June 1645. the Army of the Parliament under the Command of his Excellency
Sir T. Fairfax rose from the beseiging of Oxford, marched against the Kings
potent and insulting Army then in Northamptonshire (who were newly flesh't with
the taking and sacking of Lecester) and by Gods blessing obtained over them.

A glorious Victory the 14. day of the same month by a great battle fought in
Nazby-field, where after a great fight we routed all the Kings horse, killed, and
took all his foot, with all the Ordnance, bag, and baggage. Also the Kings
Cabinet of Letters, therein promising to set up Popery; and calling over not
only Irish, but other foreign forces against the Parliament. Presently after
which, God blessed the same Army with,

The regaining of that very considerable Town of Lecester, with all the many
Ordnance, and Arms, much Powder, and many hundred horse that were in it. And
after a long and wearisome march, with,

The Relief of that greatly distressed, but faithful Town of Taunton.

And the gaining of the Garrison of Ilchester in Somersetsheire. Which done,
both Armies again joined battle, and God gave the Parliaments Army under his
Excellency, Sir Tho: Fairfax,

A great and full victory over Gorings Western Army near Langport: And suddenly
after gave unto them many other very strong Holds: (viz.)

Langport Garrison, with all the Arms, and Ammunition.

Burrugh-Church Garrison, a strong hold near Taunton.

The great and strong hold of Bridgewater.

The City of Bath.



The Army of malignant Club-men of Somershetsheire: as also to take in

The strong Castle of Sherburn, by Storm, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and
Ammunition therein.

Nunney Castle in Somersetsheire. And after 3. weeks lying about Bristoll, God
delivered up unto the same Army.

Porshut Point, a strong Fort commanding Kings Road by Bristoll, and presently
after also on the 11. Sept.

That rich, great, strong, and most considerable City of Bristoll, partly by
Storm, and partly by Composition. And,

That considerable Castle, and Town of the Devizes, upon the 22. of Sept. 1645.
A little time after which, the Parliaments forces also took

Farligh Castle in Somersetshiere.

Laycock-House in Wiltsheire.

Barkly Castle in Gloucestersheire, Sept. 26. which was a very strong Hold.

There was also about the time of the Seige of Bridgewater taken by the
Parliaments Forces,

Chidwiek Castle near Lyme, being a strong Garrison.

The success of the English and Scottish forces in the North since June last,
viz.

The obtaining of the strange City and Castle of Carlisle, after many months
seige.

The strong Castle of Pontefraict in Yorkesheire.

The impregnable Castle of Scarborough, after a long seige.

And the regaining of Rabie Castle in the Bishopric of Durham.

Since which, the Scots took by Storm,

Cannon Froome Castle in Herefordsheire.

Dawley Castle, 26. Shradon Castle, 27. Caos Castle, 28. Stockley Castle, 29.
Morton Corbet House, 30. Rooton Castle, 31. Linsill Manner, and 32 Apley House.

A glorious victory upon the 13. day of Sept. 1645. (which was to them as a
Resurrection from death, God remembering them in their low estate, after
Montrosse Crafford: And so the Kingdom was won again. Which is here inserted
among our Victories, because we did lay the loss so much to heart.

The Parliaments Forces also in South Wales under Major General Laughorn, have
been blessed with glorious successes in the time before mentioned, viz.

With the raising the Seige from Pembroke.

A great Victory, Aug. 1. 1645. over the Enemies whole Welsh Army, consisting
of 450 Horse, 1100 Foot, and 4 piece of Ordnance, upon Colby Moore, 3 miles
from Haverford-West, where the Enemy was totally routed, 150 of them killed,
about 700 of them taken prisoners: Among whom were 3 Feild-officers, 29
Captains, and other Officers. Where they also took from the Enemy 4 piece of
Ordnance, 5 Barrels of Powder, and about 800 Arms, with all their Carriages,
and Provision.

The taking the Town and Castle of Haverford-west by storm, Aug. 5. and in it
120 common Soldiers, 20 Commanders, and Officers: whereof were, 1 Coll. 1
Lieu. Coll. and 1 Major, also 1 piece of Ordnance, and 120 Arms.

Carew Castle.

Picton Castle in Pembrookesheire, and

Cardifh Castle in Glamorgansheire.

Chester being beseiged, stormed, and part of it taken by the Chesheire forces,
the King with an Army of 5000 marched from Worcester to its relief, which
Forces were incountred at Routon-heath near Chester, Sept. 24. by the Chesheire
Forces, and the Forces under Major General Pointz; who were blessed with a
glorious Victory, the Enemy being wholly routed, the Earl of Litchfeild killed,
and about 600 of them slain. We took prisoners about 1400 men, and 2000 horse.
Besides 10 Knights and Colonels, 7 Lieu: Colonels, 5 Majors, 19 Captains,
besides other inferior Officers.

The second Part of the Catalogue of Victories, since the Rising from before
Oxford, containing a Catalogue of all or most of the Parliaments Victories
since the last General Thanksgiving, to this present General Thanksgiving.
Feb. 5. 1645.
GOd continues yet gracious unto the Parliament, in delivering unto the
Parliaments Forces in Yorksheire under Colonel Overton.

Sandal Castle, Oct. 1. after a long siege, a place of great strength. To the
Forces under Sir Tho: Fairfax, led by Lieu: General Crumwell.

Winchester City and Castle upon composition, Oct. 6. A place of great
strength, with 7 piece of ordnances, 17 barrels of powder, 2000 weight of
Musket bullet, 800 weight of Match, 700 Muskets, 38 Hogshead of Beef and Pork,
15000 weight of Cheese, 8000 weight of Butter, 140 quarters of Wheat, 7000
weight of Biscuit, 112 Hogsheads of Beer, 3 Hogsheads of Wine, etc.

To the Forces of Gloucester and Munmothsheires.

Chepstow Town and Castle in Munmothsbeire, Oct. 11. 1645. (after a siege and
battery) upon Composition, with all the Ordinance, Arms, and Ammunition, viz.
10 barrels of Powder, 17 Piece of Ordnance, 200 Arms, with great store of all
manner of provision.

Holt Church Garrison.

Tho: Fairfax, led by Lieu: Gen: Crumwell, and the Forces under Col: D'albere.
That rich and strong Hold, of Basing House by Storm, Oct. 14. In which was
taken the Marquis of Winchester, all the Commanders, and common Soldiers, all
the Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, viz. 10. piece of Ordnance, 20 barrels of
powder, with Match proportionable, 9 Colors, 2000 Arms, 200 horse, 400 quarter
of Wheat, 300 flitch of Bacon, 200 barrels of Beef, 40000 weight of Cheese,
diverse Sellers of Beer, etc.

To the said Army under his Excellency:

Langford House near Salisbury, Oct. 17. upon composition: with all the Arms,
and Ammunition in it.

And to the Forces under Major General Laughorne:

Camarthen Town and Castle, Oct. 12. The whole County thereupon declaring
themselves for the King and Parliament.

Presently after which, God blessed the Parliaments Forces in Yorkshire with,

That great victory near Sherborn in Yorkesheire, Oct. 15. which was in manner
following. (viz.) The Enemy commanded by the Kings new made General Digby, and
Langdale, with a purpose to invade Scotland, in their march surprised about 600
Foot of ours at Sherburn, and Milford; but our party under the command of
Colonel Copley being then in the pursuit of the Enemy, forced them to fight
near Sherburn: and after a hot dispute, totally routed them, and pursued them 3
miles. By which victory not only our lost men were rescued, but we killd of
the Enemies 2 Colonels, took of the Enemy, 4 Coll: 2 Lieu: Coll: 1 Major, 9
Captains, besides many other Officers, and about 400 common soldiers, with 600
horse, and many Colors; together with Dygbys Coach, and Cabinet of Letters.

Tho: Fairfax, with the gaining of Tivorton Castle near Exeter by storm, Oct.
19. in manner following. A Council of War being called to order the manner
of the Storm, a Cannonere with a great shot brake the chain of the
Drawbridge, whereby it fell down; and thereupon the Soldiers immediately
without order entered, and got over the Works with little opposition: whereupon
the Enemy fled into the Castle and Church for their security, where they had
quarter for their lives. In which Castle we took 4 piece of Ordnance, 30
barrels of Powder, 5 Field Officers, 6 Captains, 7 Lieftenants, 6 Ensigns, and
about 200 common Soldiers.

Morgaine with the taking of Munmoth Town by storm about the middle of
October, and after three days seige the Castle upon composition, in which were
taken 7. Pieces of Ordinance, 4. sling Pieces, 300. Muskets, 100. Pistolls,
10. Barrills of Powder, with all manner of provision proportionable, and the
Scottish Forces in the North of England, commanded by Sir John Bromne, with The
great second Victory over the Kings Army under the Command of and Langdale, who
again intending the invading of of Scotland were met with, by the said
Scottish forces, October. 24. on the sands, upon the Border of Scotland, and
after a fierce encounter were totally routed in which fight, the Scots killed of
the Enemy 100. took in this fight 200. Horse, Digbyes quarter Master General,
1. Coll. 2. Lieutenant Collon: etc. and utterly dispersed the rest, who were
most of them taken by the valiant Traind Bands of Lankeshare and Westmorland in
their flight, which happy Victory did not only cross the new Generals
intended expedition, but utterly overthrew his Army, and forced him to fly to
Ireland from the hand of Justice.

Shortly after which God gave the Forces under Sir William Brereton upon the 1
Nov. 1645.

A great Victory over the united Forces of several of the Kings Garrisons,
under the Command of Sir William Vaughan at Denbigh in Wales, who were 2000.
Horse and Foot, intending the relief of Chester, but were by a small party of
ours (while the greater part of the body were fetching a compass to gain the
advantage of gro^und) fought with, and totally routed, in which Battle were
slain of the Enemy about 100. and taken 600. Horse, and 400. Prisoners.

And blessed the Parliaments Forces under Major General Pointz, with the
taking of several strong holds, viz.

Shelford House by storm, Oct. 27. 1645. with all the Ordinance, Arms and
Ammunition.

Boulton Castle near Newarke upon Composition.

Worton House near Newarke upon Composition.

Welbeck House procured to be slighted.

God continued yet gracious to the Parliament, in blessing their Forces in
several Counties, viz.

The Chesheire Forces with the gaining

That impregnable Castle of Beeston in Chesheire upon Composition Nov. 16.
after a long seige.

The Lanchesheire Forces after a years seige with the obtaining

The impregnable Fort of Latham House upon Composition, the only remaining
Garrison the Enemy had in that County.

The Forces under Collon. Morgan and Col. Birch, with the gaining

That strong and considerable City of Hereford by a Strategem upon the 18. of
December, 1645. where were taken 11. Piece of Ordinance, many Arms, much
Ammunition, the Lord Brudnell, 14. Knights, with many Field Officers, Captains
and Leiftenants, all with little or no loss.

The Forces under Major General Laughorne, with the winning of

Embleden Castle in Carmarthen-sheire.

The strong Castle of Skipton, and only Garrison of the Enemies remaining in
Yorkesheire upon Composition, after a long Seige.

Also the Army under his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax is further blessed with
the gaining

The Garrison of Fulford House near Exeter, and

The Garrison of Callityne House near Exeter, and in it a Troop of Horse, with
all the Arms and Ammunition, and

The Garrison of Pouldram House near Exeter.

The releiving of that famous Town of Plimmoth (the Plimmoth Forces taking
from the Enemy

Canterbury Fort.

St. Budeaux Church nere Plimmoth by storm a strong Garrison and in it 92.
Prisoners among which 2. Majors, 4. Captains with a Troop of Horse, and all
the Arms and Ammunition, and forcd the Enemy to quit.

Sir Franciss Drakes House nere Plimmoth.)

Also the strong and considerable Town and Castle of Dortmoth by storm, Jan.
18. 1645. Sir Thomas his Excellency being present at the storm, in which were
taken the Governor, 1. Earl, 1. Col. 4. Lieutenant Colonels, 2. Majors, 15.
Captains, 14. Leifetenants, 9. Ensigns, 1. Cornet, above 800. common
Soldiers, 120. Pieces of Ordinance ready mounted, with all the other Arms and
Ammunition, also two men of War in the harbor.

The last Victory is the gaining of Belvour Castle, a place of great strength.

To God be all the Glory.

