ENGLANDS NEW DIRECTORY: Commanded to be used in GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND,
And may serve to give Light to all Christendom.

printer's or publisher's device

September: 6th* Printed Cum privilegio, 1647.

The general grievance of Great Britain and Ireland, and may serve to give
light to all Christendom.
The first Rubric showing, HOw the Priest first got all the wealth of
England;next the Lawyer, and now adays the Soldier. Secondly, Showing there
were two Transportations; first a Transportation of blindness by Religion; next
a Transportation of blindness by Law, now adays a Transportation of policy, to
purge out blindness of Religion and Law by Association, Fortification and
Garrison, and making the Law as plain at the Gospel, according to the
government of best Reformed Churches. Thirdly, Showing how that King James of
the line of Cadwallader, the last Britain King, endeavored to bring that to
pass 37 years ago, which the Parliament since swore to perform, viz. to add the
primitive Law to the primitive Religion for the promotion and connection of
righteousness unto piety, the summun bonum of policy.


GOD governs the world by the supreme Council of heaven, according unto
righteousness and true holiness. A Parliament in England is called the supreme
Council of England; I ask the baynes of Matrimony between Righteousness and
true Holiness; if any man know any lawful reason why they may not be joined
together, let them now speak; because in Parliament time is an appointment for
that purpose, to be conformable to supreme Council: For Injustice or
Unrighteousness has had a brazen face 536 years (long enough in conscience) as
appears by King James speech to the Parliament 1609 published by authority, and
in Parliament time, his tongue should be cut out by the root or else we might
wish his tongue might cleave to the roof of his mouth, that so his brazen face
might fall and speak no more; as it did in Oxford, saying, time is, time was,
times past, and then it fell: Time is of correction, time was of injustice,
times past we shall have no more, the Parliament have sworn to repent of their
sins, and so the brazen face will fall and speak no more. Time was of making a
brazen wall round about England, but Friar Bacon fell asleep; time overslipt,
not taking time by the foretop, all the wealth of England went to Rome, into
the Pope and Priests baggs. Time was of making a brazen wall within England, by
planting a more righteous policy, if time be not past: because Lawyers and
their generations had the Major voice in Parliament 16^9. and wearing buckram
bags by their sides, they were called buckram rogues: Rogues in buckram hindered
it 1609 and so all the wealth went into buckram ba^s: as some say, the E. of
Cork was a Lawyer, whose bag held 40000 l. per annum. Since the Parliament 1640
the report went that the Soldier would get all, or run over all. The L.
General went so far West, that he fell into the sea at Plymouth and rose again
at Portsmouth: the whilst, Sir Will. Waller went up a hill as high as Worcester,
and then came down again: The Earl of Manchester came from York to Dunnington
Castle with a great Army, and there stood still. Sir John Hotham was for the
Parliament, and after for the Privy Council.

The Privy Council and Parliament ought to fast and pray,
For they are the evil Stars the Scots do say:
Whose influence has had an evil inclination
To end few causes, but for a prolongation
Of controversy, which is their trade and occupation:
Like Italy, Spain and France whence came the fashion:
France the continent of strife, that vice hither came,
Transported by the Norman to be Island of the same:
And could a Norman bastard beget a righteous Law?
That were such a wonder as no man ever saw.
The Parliament have sworn to repent of that sin,
And if the Privy Council would once begin,
It would be an acceptable and seasonable thing,
Not only to God of heaven, but also unto men.
M. Peter's wished 10000 from New England to cause the Council repent,
As 20000 from Scotland did make the Parliament:
And so frame the Law as plain as the Gospel,
According unto the Scots and Hollanders example
Of best reformed Churches; and leaven the whole earth
That of righteousness and true holiness there be no dearth
Lex Angliae est ancilla Religionis pontificia,
Roma pietatis, Antichristus, Anglia justitiae.
Witness Philip the 2 of Spain, vide Guiniardine;
And K. James in a Parliament speech 1609.
Whereby men are infected with false tradition* and kept blind in the whole;
That the Scot the Physician, might gain by purgation of body and soul.
And then to settle them there is no hopes in beer
But wholesome pots of Scotch ale but it is deer:
As the E. of Newcastle said eight years ago in a play;
Called the Country Captain, which did the truth betray:
Reformation being of such costly consequence,
Which men do hate to the loss of life and sense.
The Concistory of Rome hates that any should know Religion but Priests,
because it is their trade and occupation to gain, by keeping men blind in their
whole Ecclesiastical or Spiritual Jurisdiction: The former Parliament of
England did hate, that any should know Law but Lawyers, because it was their
trade and occupation to gain, by keeping men blind in their whole temporal or
politic jurisdiction: and so men are infected with false tradition and kept
blind in the whole etc. Lycurgus the Lawyer was the Author of false tradition,
which does contaminate the touchstone; for purgation whereof the best reformed
Churches do prescribe a potion of Calvin's white wine, the Law as plain as the
Gospel, which is according to their government. For Britain has been taken by
violence of Romans, Saxons, Danes, after whom came the Normans, who brought
hither the French and Cavalier Law, making it lawful to plunder men as fast as
they grew rich, kill them as fast as populous, except they would s^eak French
to be called Normans; (as Historians write) 535 years after the Norman, entered
the Scot of the line of Cadwallade^ the last Britain King, and proved it
unlawful by the Law of Moses, but Parliaments would still maintain the Law;
whereby it appears that the Roman, Saxon, Dane and Norman were the plunderers
of all Britain; and the last, the Norman, made it lawful: Since the Parliament
1643 it happened that the Lord General was a Norman, Sir William Waller a Roman
for the Parliament; The Earl of Newcastle a Saxon, and the Lord Hastings a
Dane, for the Privy Council: Plunderers of Britain by ancient generation, and
sworn to kill one another by Law, which the Scots could not salva conscientia
come to maintain, ergo, the Parliament swore to repent of their sins, and
govern according unto best reformed Churches; to be no longer plunderers or
ambidexters by making Prerogative above Parliament to kill up the Country, and
Parliament above Prerogative to kill up the City; no man knowing Law but
Lawyers, and so were like unto the Kingdom of France, where they call
themselves the Kingdom of blindmen, because they know neither Law nor Religion;
for they speak French, and their Law and Religion speaks Latin. About 15 years
past a book was printed at Paris, called Le Royaalme des Aueugles, dedicate to
Cardinal Richelieu, who had a very rich place according to his name: for, being
Admiral of the Kingdom of blindmen of France, he set them together by the ears;
taxed, plundered and made himself an admirable and wonderful rich Admiral, So
in England men speak English, but the Law speaks French, and differ somewhat
because they know Religion; the Lord Rich Earl of Warwick, Admiral of the
Kingdom of blindmen by Law, in time like to be admirable rich for the same
reason; if the Scots hinder not. Moustrum horrendum, inform, ingens, cui lumen
ademptum, and so confront the Cyclops, calling for help when no man hurts them,
but themselves; will ye confront the Cyclops ye Poliphemians? The ^^ory is in
the 9 No-man of Homer the blind Poet, where Vlisse, William the Norman is the
Noman; or a bastard who is an unlawful man; of the injustice in the law of
France men may read Philip de Comiues, who was a privy Councellor unto Lewis
the 11. Charles the 8. and Lewis XII. Kings of France; who writes in his
History that most men in Italy live by factions and civil Wars, and so infect
Spain and France, and they the rest of Europe, and that in France is such
tedious and vexatious prooefs of Law that it needs reformation, but that
Reformation is of so dangerous consequence, which men do hate to the loss of
life and sense.

By what has been written may be understood,

That Friar Bacon would have a brazen wall round about England, and K. James
would have one within; both very necessary according to the reformed, but to
build after their manner, are yet to begin.

Corporis politici cum naturali comparatio; sive modus purgandi corruptiones
corporis utriusque secundum purgationem corporis Ecclesiastici tempore Hen, 8
vino Rheni Lutheri sive candido.

A Hymn for the ARMY
THe world unpeopled, when but Cain and Abel.
two, no more
Were all the store:
Those Brothers which had been enough alone
To make two one:
Yet pride, and envy, and the tragic crimes
Of after times
There took beginning and the earth did stain
With purple gore, which it does still retain.
2.
There power usurped first upon a Brother,
Because us other;
And violence oppressed the weaker part,
By strength not art:
The world untaught to do those bad things well
Which these days tell
Of men so civilized, as they can do
Foul actions fairly and have thanks too.
3.
The oppressors hand might it be armed still
Where it will kill
Holding a lost, or sword, or asses jaw,
Or Lions paw;
Or peradventure some enchanted cup
To drink all up
So warnd, so armd, perhaps the innocent
Might all in time the ensuing stroke prevent,
4.
But all alike are cast into a slumber
Amongst the number;
Be it what it will, as well the great as small
Are pleased withal,
And are content for fear of death to dye
Rather then fly,
Or to avoyde the stroke before it come
Except it be to give oppression room:
5.
Thus Abel lies under foot, we have
Ere born our grave;
The child were happy in the Mothers womb,
were it his tomb:
And not a further Funeral attend,
When all must end,
Surviving some short season, but to eat
The bread of sorrow without other meat.
6,
But to behold the Vulgar innocence,
With what expense
They carry fuel to their own Sacrifice,
And please their eyes
With sight of the Executioner, who shall
Make up with all,
Would breed astonishment, but that we see
In what confusion and what mist we be.
If ever ignorance deserved praise,
It Is in our days;
Men run to death as to a wedding feast,
And think them blessed
When they are least; and have their special grace
To set a face
Upon their proper woes, in what sweet error
Are you involved to perish without terror.
My afflicted Country, take these tears of thine
Or rather thine;
Or change a tear with me, I care not whether,
Lets weep together,
Betimes too, whilst our tears are known for ours
Ere many hours,
We are no more our selves, we shall become
Somewhat we are not; and others take our room.
Written by a Yeoman, No-man is a Gentleman, who plunders as fast as rich, kills
as fast as populous.
FINIS.

