ENGLANDS HAZARD.
I Know it is dangerous for any man in a point of such consequence to take upon
him to be a Counselor, much more a Teacher; he generally makes himself but a
Fool; which would seem wiser than the Times; a ripe Age likes not to be
directed, lest it should be outwitted; true Principles will not be listened to
against received Grounds; No persons may show their desires, or reading, but
the reward will be censure, or ruin: Yet in a public Danger it is hard to
keep silence, he that bewrays not his affection to remedy general Ruthes,
may seem to want a breast. Therefore when Church and Kingdom are in a
Combustion, I will bring my dreeping bucket, though I be scorched in seeking to
quench the Flames. The cause seems now to be a matter of Blood, for the whole
Kingdom is upon the Challenge, and not only the Soldier plays his mortal
prizes, but the Parliament is turned into a Counsel of War; Committees of
Greevances are become Committees of Variances, and instead of enacting of
Statutes, we have executing of Martiall-Law; whilst the oppressions of the
Commonwealth ought to be Reformed, the whole Kingdom is made an oppression;
and for Justice against private Tyrants, we meet with a spite against the
King: Now Lords of Manors torment their Tennants, or Justices insult over the
poor Countrymen, and a thousand other crying injuryes are now no seasonable
considerations, but all the busy thoughts are intent about the Crown-quarrell;
as if they which ought to enjoy no Peace should rest quiet, and He which should
be secure, must only be molested. Oh how do all the true Malefactors triumph
in villainy, when He should be free from any mortal bar, is the only person
arraigned I culpable persons fear not the Sword of the Justice, when the sword
of violence is drawn out against the King. Dear Sovereign, that your miseries
must privilege all other men's lawless demeanours, and that you must weep to
make them sing! yet this is the whirle of the Times; not they, but You are
humbled; not Vice, but Majesty is punished; the Kingdom is combined to
suppress, if not to destroy their natural Sovereign; Oh that your injuries
could be as easily redressed, as they can be lamented, or that your sorrows
could be as timely ended, as they are passionately felt; but it is Aesculapius
his finger that must heal this Malady; for when the whole Commonwealth is
turned into a Mutiny, and they which should be Your Peacemakers are turned the
Patrones of the Discontent, it is a hard compromising such a difference.
Doubtless our breach is like the Sea, and we may rather expect to see all
under water, than to see the banks repaired. Our sufferings already have been
incredible, but we must not think upon what we have endured, but on the
extremities which are behind. We have yet some face of a Nation amongst us, but
we may ere long seek for England in England, and see our deer Kingdom lest a
Colony for Strangers; Oh how precious is a Native like to be! how many will the
sword leave to draw breath in their own air? We shall fight, so long for
Privileges, till we shall scarce have Countrymen to enjoy them; and stand so
eagerly for Rights of Parliament, till we have scarce a Senate House left. Have
not many Nations thus un-Kingdomed themselves? Has not England formerly thus
cut her own throat? If we be acquainted with Historyes, let us take heed that
we be not made a History; there need not many years to effect this, a short
time may bring it forth. Oh* that we could prevent misery, rather than hasten
it on, or chain up the the wild Beast, before we be made a prey. Where are our
Pilots, which were wont to direct the Ship in a storm? Where are our Watchmen,
which were wont to preserve the City, before a City be made a heap? Can
Shipwreck, or Devastation be pleasure, or honor to the Pilots, or Watchmen?
Is there nothing to calm this troubled air? Nothing, if Fury blow like a
Whirlewind, but set aside Fury, and the gusts are down, the the Tempests gone;
if Religion carry any incentive with it, or Scripture had not lost its wonted
reverence, our Distractions were growing to an end, yea we had felt the last of
misery: For can a King can be resisted? What one syllable of Scripture
witnesses it by full, and clear authority? No, precepts are wanting, only
presidents are insisted upon, as if God would have his evident Laws overthrown
with particular examples; God may dispense with the whole Bible, but it is not
for us to remit the vigor of one Law, without a special toleration from Gods
one mouth. It is in vain then for to shelter themselves under the instances of
David, Jeroboam, Iehu, etc. except we can plead their warrant, as well as their
example; but these examples excepted, what ground or rule is there in the whole
Scripture to countenance the resistance? Calvin, that condemns the attempt of
private persons in assaulting Superiors, what one testimony of Scripture does
he bring to authorize the opposition by the states of a Kingdom? No, we must
trust his own opinion, for not one sound proof does he allege out of the
whole Bible to justify the act; Hugo Grotius which disalloweth the resistance
both of private persons and inferior Magistrates (and has nothing but the
point of necessity to support the languishing cause) yet can he not bring one
instance of Scripture for this particular cause to color this proceeding,
besides those helpless examples which I told you of before. And if necessity
might be admitted as a lawful excuse for the violating of the fifth
Coma^ndement, why upon the supposition of the like necessity, might not men
make a breach of all the other Commandments, as having more Gods, or
worshipping of Idols, or committing uncleanness when the remedy is wanting, or
bearing false witness when a man's estate, or life is endangered? Necessity
therefore is but our greater trial, not a despensation for disobedience. The
strong proofs then that those learned Writers bring for Obedience in general
are enough to confirm subjection, and the weak Arguments that they use to
erect resistance with are enough to settle Conscience, that the Design is
unsettled; yea I was never made a stronger subject, nor a weaker Rebel, then by
considering how they are not able (which hold the contrary opinion) to pull
down that, which themselves have built up.

Resistance then is no religious Act, because the maintainers of it sail in
that, which should give the greatest strength to the Cause, the approbation of
Scripture. But if a King can be resisted, yet can such a King? No, they which
are most tenacious of the point, yet let go their Hold-fast, if the King be
not soyled with the height of wickedness to make him the fit object of
Resistance; but what malicious eye can spy out such steynes in the intemerate
brow of our pure Prince? No, he is the lu tree of the Throne, the Triumph of
Monarchy; His Royal Blood has no contagion of vulgar errors, but is the true
Sovereign of Innocence; When was the scepter borne with such an undefiled
hand? or the Crown worn with so many bright gemmes shining in it? No, he has
honored the Throne with more conspicuous graces, and eminent Virtues, then any
Prince has done for these may years; he being the pride of Humility, the
sober palate of Temperance, the pure loins of Chastity, the soft bowels of
Mercy and Clemency, the warded knee of Devotion, a sworn Protestant, a vowed
Protector of the Liberties of his Subjects, ambitious of Peace, and one that
would strike the weapons out of his enemies hands with an Act of Oblivion. Oh
that such a Prince should be affronted, much more assaulted! No, methinks the
Soldier should rather disarme himself, crampe a March, suffer violent death,
then malign such a Sovereign; for if any King upon earth can be resisted, yet
can such a King?

If this continue, what will be the issue, ye may judge by the present
condition. The Tenant is not only ready to surrender up his Lease, nor the
Merchant to turn Bankrupt, nor the Churches to stand empty without an
Incumbent, the Country is not only consumed with monthly Contributions,
Excises, free Loans, free Benevolences, free Quarters, the Gentry are not only
abased, by having underlings take the command of the Country out of their
hands, by taking their Horses, Armor, every thing that delights the eye from
them, or by taking away their Persons, and muring them up in Prisons, the Poor
are not only ready to murmur, and rage, and starve, but the whole Nation is
ready to draw upon it self, and to give it self the bloody stab.

The opposing of Princes has in former times been fatal to this Nation, yea
the Kingdom has scarce suffered so much by all the miseries that has lighted
upon it, as it has done by civil Wars. In the Reign of William the Conqueror,
when the English men that had submitted to his Government Rebelled against him,
Rog. Wendov. Poli. Chron. Hen Huntingd. Ypod. Neystr. Mat. West. 2. Mat. Paris.
Will. Ma^msb. Polydor. Virg.
it did not only change his courteou^ usage of them into extreme severity, in
escheating their Lands, abhorring their persons (so that he would not suffer
any English Scholar to come to promotion) driving some into exile, forcing
others to live in woods like Outlaws, cutting off the hands of some, and the
heads of others, but the Kingdom was brought to that miserable desolation,
that the Highwayes lay un-occupyed through frequent robberies committed, and
all was wasted from Wales to the mouth of Wye, and the Land from Durham to York
lay nine years untilled, so that for the want of ordinary sustenance, the
Northern people were enforced to eat the flesh of men. H^venden. Ypod. Neystr.
Huntington. l. 8. Malmsb. Nov. l. 2. p. 105. Gervas. D^robornensis.
In the R igne of King Stephen, when the great Ones fell to their accusations
(as no Rebellion was ever without pretense of Reason, and justice) they
charging him with the violating of his Oath touching Forests, and other
Immunities of the Church, and yet indeed (as the History says) the pleading of
Church and Commonwealth, were but public colors for private grudges, their
only quarrel being a secret spite, that because they had set him up, he
would deny them any thing, as the command of certain Lordship^, and Cast^es
which they expected, what outrages were committed in the Nation? Every year
heaped on new calamities, to the ruin of the Nation, thousand Families were
decayed, whole Counties depopulated, and so many men's Estates confiscated to
the Crown, that they generally went by the name of the Disinherited; yea as the
height of misery (by the calling in of the Scots) the wombs of women were
ripped up, infants tossed upon the pikes of Spears, the Priests slain at the
Altar, and the slain (in a most inhumane manner) dismembered. In the Reign of K.
John, we find the estate of the Land most deplorable, Lib. S. Alb. in vit.
Guliel. Abbat.
not only by assaylings, surprisings, burnings, spoylings, disinheritings which
were exercised by Fathers setting against their Sons, Brothers against
Brothers, kinsmen and allies against their nearest friends, but especially by
c^lling in the French Dolphin Lewis, who after he had gotten a little command
in the Land, despised the Englishmen, bestowing all their Towns and places of
Command upon his own Cavallery; Rog de. W. S.
for when Fitz-Walter demanded but Hertford Castle, as his ancient right, an
Answer was given him by Lewis according to the advice of all his French
Nobility, that Englishmen were not worthy to have such places entrusted to
their charges, who were the betrayers of their natural Lord; yea Milun upon
his deathbed confessed, that if ever Prince Lewis had the Crown of England set
on his head, Ypod. Ney^tr.
he would condemn into perpetual Exile all them that then (as Traitors
against their Sovereign) adhered to him against King John, Mat. Paris. hist.
maj.
and that he would extirpate all their Kindred. By one and another the
distresses of the times were so grievous, that the Kingdom (as one says) was
like a general shambles, or place of infernal torture. In the Reign of Henry
3. To soon as the Kingdom grew discontented, every man dared whatsoever his
own audaciousnesse did suggest, Mat. Westminst.
or others connivency permitted, insomuch that Foulke de Brent, and other
Nobles plucked from the K. most of his Crown-Land, without any other right than
that which the equity of Tumults gave them; yea though the Land had been
sufficiently plagued with foreign Power, yet an ordinary Citizen, Fabian.
even Constantine Fitz. Arnulph (whose Sedition infected all, to whom War was
beneficial, Paris.
and Peace banefull) would have set up a Lewis again in London, crying in the
open streets, Mountjoy, Mountjoy, God for us, and our Lord Lewis: Yea such was
the thraldom of those times, through the spite of the Barons against Hubert de
Burgo, that afterward Judgments were committed to the unjust, Paris. Wendover.
Laws to Outlaws, Peace to Wranglers, and Justice to Wrongdoers. And in
conclusion, through the bloody Battles that were fought, all was made a booty,
and put to fire, and sword, from the Marches of Wales to Shrewsbury, insomuch
that such a greevous Famine happened, Wendover. Parisiens.
that persons were enforced to pluck the ears of Corn whilst they were green
in the field. In the Reign of Edward 2. when the Earls of Arundell, Warwick,
Lancaster, and Warren made a woeful rent with the King, and would not assist
him in his Wars against the Scots, not only they which were left to keep the
Marches, instead of valliant Champions proved petty Chapmen; but such grievous
depopulations were committed for four years together, that there was scarce
bread enough to be found for the Kings table, and the common people in
general eat horses, and dogs, yea men, and children were stolen for food, and
Thieves newly brought to Goales were torn in pieces and devoured hall alive, by
such as had continued longer there; and the bloody flux, Tho. dela More. Tho.
Walsingh.
and other diseases that arose from unwholesome diet, destroyed so many, that
the living were scarce able to bury the dead. And in the reign of Richard 2.
how lamentable were the effects that were brought forth by that potent
insurrection in Kent, Essex, Surrey, Suffolk. Norfolk, Cambridgeshire, and
Huntingtonshire for Manumission? Historyes report, that instead of reforming
the Commonwealth, havoc was made of the Commonwealth; the Laws were so near
to be overthrown, that that Idol of Clowns, Stow. Hollingshead.
Wat. Tyler, threatened that he would have all the Laws of the Kingdom come
out of his own mouth; great men were in so little security, that bloody hands
were laid upon the most eminent persons in the Kingdom, and their heads cut
off and fixed upon poles, being so placed that they might kiss, Speed. Stow.
Hollingshead.
and whisper in one another ear, and a general intention to kill all persons
of quality, and to set up petty Tyrannies in the Nation; the Kings person was
damnably conspired against, and the Kings Mother unsufferably abused, the
stately Priory of Saint John's without Smithfield was burnt to ashes, Sir Walter
Lee in his speech to St. Albans men.
and the goodly Palace of the Savoy with all the riches therein consumed,
writings, rowles, and records defaced, and such a general ruin brought upon
the Kingdom before this War was ceasrd, that there was neither Grass nor
Corn, old nor new, within five miles space of London.

Ye see I have laid before you the miseries of former times, would it not
grieve you to behold again such Tragedyes? Take ye pleasures in disasters? Can
the ruin of your Nation affect you? Think of these things betimes, lest after
thoughts be like recovering physic to a dead creature. We are not far from
destruction, the want of Trading, the unseasonable Harvest, the Kingdom drayned
of Means, besides a thousand other calamities afflicting the Age by these last
Wars, forespeaks approaching misery. What house is not full of anguish? What
corner of the Land is not replenished with groans and fight? How few are there
that are not weary of these unsupportable burdens? How few that do not desire
Peace? Will ye not hear the complaints of your Countrymen? despise ye the
sobbes of your fellow-Professours? Will it be honor to you to leave a people
desolate? Will it be comfort to you to conclude in a waste? Think what curses
will follow you, if ye continue these sorrows, lay to heart the troubled
souls ye will have upon your deathbeds it ye be authors of un-Christian
designs. When there are some hopes then of ^nhappy agreement, do not ye slake
the hopes, or disturb the agreement. Do you yield, for the King condescends;
do ye neglect your own desires, for he stands not too much upon his own he
nor; express you a true self-denial, for he has resigned up his own will; he
speaks for Peace, do you echo after him, and say, we will have Peace. I
beseech you therefore by all the English blood which runs in your veins, by
all the prickles of Conscience left in your Protestant souls, by all the
relics of pity which ye feel toward a perishing Nation, that ye take down
the Standards, that ye frill up the Colors, that ye cast out of your hands
the Pistols, and Pole-axes. Oh shed no more blood, but staunch the dropping
veins; brain not the slender numbers which are left, but preserve the
remnant; think when ye have murdered enough, tremble to be the Headsman of
the Nation. Let all rage and rancour, spite and spoil be laid aside, and eye
one another like friends, embrace like Christians, bring Unity again into a
divided Nation: bless the Age, and crown the Land with Peace.

Da Pacem Domine.
FINIS.

