ENGLANDS LOSS AND LAMENTATION, Occasioned by the death of that Right
Honorable, Robert Lord Brook, Baron of Beauchamp-Court, who was slain at
Lichfield, the second day of March. 1642. Amplified, by some mournful funeral
expressions, from the Authors feeling sense of so unvaluable a Loss;
complaining of the Kingdoms stupidity, to awake a people slumbering in
security, insensible of their ensuing Misery. Concluding with some consolations
to his friends, and terror to his enemies Popishly affected, and all Malignants.

BY A loyal Subject to the KING, and a lover of the late Lord Brooks, and all
his wel-wishers.

2 Samuel 3. 31. And David said unto Joab, and to all the people that were with
him: rent your Clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn for Abner, and
King David himself followed the Biere. Verse 29. And the King said unto his
servants, Know ye not that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day
in Israel? LONDON, Printed for L. Chapman. Anno Dom. 1642.

Englands loss and Lamentation.
ENGLAND may justly, at this day lament, with the Prophet Jeremy, and say: How
has the Lord covered Lam. 2. 1.
the daughter of Zion, with a cloud in his anger? and cast down from Heaven to
the Earth, the beauty of Israel? As if the Lord had purposed to destroy the
wall of the daughter of Zion? He has not withdrawn his hand from destroying;
he made the Rampart, and the wall, to lament: He has destroyed and broken her
bars: Her King and Princes are among the Gentiles: The Law is no more. Her
Prophets find no vision, The Elders sit upon the ground and keep silence: they
have cast up dust upon their heads and girded themselves with sackcloth. And
for my self, mine eyes do fail, with tears, my soul is troubled, because
of Englands miseries. Her own sword has destroyed her Prophets, like a
destroying Lion: her young men are slain, her Virgins are defloured, famine is
entering in upon her. When children and sucklings, will say, to their mothers
where it bread? Where is drink? when they swoone as the wounded in the streets,
and power their souls into their mothers bosom.

O England, where is thy glory? Thy Freedom, Liberty, Lawers and Religion?
shall thy freedom be lost, and thy hereditary liberties be taken from thee,
thy just Laws corrupted, and thy Religion adulterated, by Idolatry? and yet
will you not see it? Shall thy profits be destroyed, and thy honorable men
slain by the sword; and thou not avenge it? Where is thy zeal to God? where
is thy care, thy love, thy Justice, to posterity? art not thou guilty of
depriving thy children, of the blessing, which God has by thy Fathers, given
thee? will thou not maintain thine own inheritance, and the rights of thy
children? or will thou suffer those worthyest to be destroyed, that lose their
lives in thy defense, and not avenge their blood?

Is there not a Prince, and a great man fallen in Israel? fallen by upholding
thee? and not only a Prince, and a great man, but a holy just, and righteous,
great man: a Pillar of the Church a supporter of the State, That right
Honorable Robert Lord Brook; rightly to be honored to lasting posterities? He
was honest, and just to all men: righteous in all his ways, and religious in
his whole life; learned in all arts: And able in all Sciences: Loyal to his
King, faithful to his Country: And valiant in his undertakings for the defense
of both: to his end pitiful to his enemies, in his end happy to himself. And
by his end terror to his enemies; whose blood will hasten vengeance upon the
actors, and causes of such cruelties.

We cannot account better of those men then sons of ' Belial, and limbs of the
devil: Who at the news of this noblemans death, called their hellish
companions to the Taverns, and for joy drunk themselves drunk, and in their
drunkenesse spoke scandalous and railing speches against Him: God rebuke them.
God and men heard and saw them.
Who can but commend his parts, and honor his virtues, Moral and Divine? What
man can stain his life, blemish his practice, tax his fidelity, or gainsay his
stoutnesse, courage, and valor, in him as much manifested, in so little a
time, as ever in any man? At his first meeting with his great Antagonist E. N.
between Banbury, and Edgehill, Heroic, Brook, offered to deside the
contraries quarrel, by a Lordly combat (as is known to those whom it then
concerned,) and for his undaunted courage against the face of an Enemy in
battle; Let Keinton, and Branford make report; Stratford cannot deny it, and
Lichfield must confess the same. Whose baseness had no resistance against his
valor, but cowardly treachery; And thereby have robbed the Kingdom of a
precious Jewel, and weakened the Church, and state, of a principal pillar!

O England consider: What have thou lost? But why do I ask thee? thou know
not thine own loss; Thou art in thy stupidity: or in a slumber of carnal
security, a foolish and undiscerning Nation! Thou rejectest thy friends, and
imbracest thine enemies; Thou love pelf, and slightest pearls, art at peace
with thy destroyers, and make War with thy preservers.

That have lost a Noble refreshing Brook, an unvaluable friend, a pearl of
great price, a Hector better then ever Troy enjoyed: an Achilles, more valiant
then ever Greece possessed. A Brook? yea a Brook better then the famous river
Nilus: Nilus could only refresh the herbs, and plants of Egypt; This Brook,
the lives and spirits of men.

Who ever knew him, and grieves not? who can say he loves God, religion, the
King, the State, or good men, and yet mournes not for such a loss, a pillar of
the Kingdom, a staff of the War, a peer of the Parliament, a Patriarch of
his Country, a sincere servant of God: and a loyal Subject to the King, and
State? He, this pillar, this staff, this Peer, this Patriarch, Good servant,
the Kings Subject; He is slain: slain in the Kings and his Kingdoms cause,
slain treacherously, basey, and cowardly, by an Enemy and Traitor to both.

If David, a King, lamented over Abner (though he had been his 2 Samuel 3. 33.
Enemy) how much more should we lament over this our Abner? a friend always,
and to the death, as faithful as Jonathan to David; But how died this Noble
Brook, died he as a fool dies! no; died he by the hands of his equal? no;
died he in a battle by any valor of any Enemy? no; But how died he? As a man
that falls before wicked men, to fell our Noble Brook: and all his friends
weep, and lament for him.

Weep thou, his virtuous Lady, cry ye, pretty children, (his own pictures)
weep al ye his Soldiers, mourn ye his servants, bewail your loss all you
his Friends, Tenants, Neighbors, and Acquaintance; And you poor people
(weekly relieved by his bounty) weep and houle, yea, lament whole England,
because he is not; Thou will know thy loss, by the want of him: (though thou
prizedst not thy gain whilst thou had him,) but thou can not recover thy
loss; I cannot but take up my lamentation for thee, as once the Prophet did
Lam. 2. 13. etc.
for Jerusalem: by way of quaere, What shall I witness of thee? what shall I
equal to thee, that I may comfort thee? for thy breach is great like the Sea,
who can heal it? Thou have been deluded by thy Prophets: thy seers have seen
false burdens, causes of thy misery misleaders of thy King, and Princes: Thou
art a derision to the Nations that have feared, and honored thee. Thy
idolatrous Enemies open Esaias 57. 1. Lam. 2. 21. Ezech. 38. 21.
their mouths against thee, and say, this is the day, they looked for; we have
have found it; we have seen it; Thy righteous men perish, and thou layest it
not to heart, thy young, and thy old men lie on the ground, and are fallen by
the sword, in the day of Gods anger; but thou regardest it not: God has called
for the sword against thee, and every man's sword is against his brother, yet
thou art not humbled, to seek thy God; though all this is upon thee for thine
iniquity; And for thy sin is this pillar taken from thee: He while he lived,
lived for thee, was thy servant, to keep thee from bondage: esteemed thy
liberty above his own life; but thou did not, nor have, nor can, requite
him: his labor, love, zeal, religion, and faithfulness is his Crown: He
died in Gods cause, and his works are with him.

His Ladies tears, his Childrens cries, his Soldiers weeping, his Servants
mourning, his Friends bewailing, his Neighbors sorrow, his Tenants grief, and
his Acquaintance moanings; The Poores complainings, and the Kingdoms
lamentations, can add nothing to his happiness; They may all express their
own unhappiness and irrecoverable loss.

But thou Lichfield, the sink of iniquity, cage of unclean and wicked
spirits: ungodly, profane, and most prodidiously wicked: chief instrument of
the Kingdoms misery! let the remembrance of thee be hateful; and thy name
blotted out from among the Towns of the Provinces. And let it not fail that
some of thy inhabitants, be for ever visited with some Diseases; fall by the
Sword, and want bread: 2 Samuel 3. 29
He whom thou have slain, has finished his course, rests from his labor, and
his soul is for ever blessed; The cry of his blood is gone to Heaven, to hasten
vengeance upon thee, and his enemies.

And you his friends, and Soldiers, be you humbled, who (it is likely) are not
guiltless of his death: you have too much deified his worth, and provoked God
to take him from us: When good men are contemned, God takes them away, that he
may the sooner destroy a Nation, or people, as Noah, and Lot: And when good men
are deified, (that is, rather looked upon as causes, then instruments) God also
takes them away, because his glory is by them eclipsed, in dlivering a Nation,
or people; as Moses, who died in the Mount; whose Sepulcher was never known to
this day. And that victorious King of Sweden, who in his life time foretold the
same of himself: Therefore let every man look to his own heart, and find out
the sin that has displeased God, and be humbled; and then be not discouraged
by this Noble man's death, but rather get more courage, manfully to avenge his
guiltless blood, and God will assist you; The cause is Gods, himself is
engaged in it with you; put forth your strength, use your weapons, make your
best preparations, but trust in nothing (neither men nor Arms) but in God, who
is alone the God of battle, and Lord of Hosts; he will supply you with an
other Joshua, to go before you, and will not fail you, nor forsake you. The
Lord is with you while ye be with him; and if you seek him, he will be found
of you. You have double encouragement to go on with Deuteronomy. 31. 6. 2 Chro. 15 2:
Psalm. 20. 1.
confidence in this cause; you have Gods promise, and you have experience of
his gracious presence going with you in it: The Lord hear you in the day of
your trouble, the God of Jacob defend you.

First, for encouragement take notice of Gods promises: he has promised if you
serve him only, he will deliver you, 1 Samuel 7. 3. Again, He will deliver thee
in six troubles, yea in seven, there shall no evil touch thee; in Famine he
will deliver thee from death; and in war from the power of the sword, Job 22.
30. Be not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee, Jerem. 1.
8. They shall fight against thee, but shall not prevail, for I am with thee,
to save thee, and to deliver thee, says the Lord, Ierem. 15. 20. The Lord
knows how to deliver the godly, and reserve the unjust to be punished, 1 Pet.
2. 9. Gods promises of this nature are obvious in every book of holy
Scripture; yea God is delighted to deliver his people, when they truly seek
to him. See these places, Psalm. 50. 15. 2 Chronicles. 16. 35.

Object. This Noble Lord believed the promises, and yet he saw no deliverance.

Answ. National promises, (though they never fail a Nation, or people, when
Gods time is come, yet) are not always made good, in the same kind, to every
particular man: as we see in the two first battles of the Tribes of Israel
against the Tribe of Benjamin: though they went against them by commission from
God, they were slain, 40000. yet Judge. 20.
the third time, when they had sought God by humiliation and prayer, they
overcame all those wicked Beniamites, who refused to deliver up the men of
Belial to the justice of the Law. We have also particular instances, in Moses,
Vzza, Asa, etc. Sometime God does it because of particular failings in men;
sometimes to make way for the work of some other part of his providence, as it
was in the death of righteous Jonathan; or for the clearer manifestation of his
own power and glory: yet such men fail not of their part, in such promises;
but enjoy a greater good, and better promise, of which the other is but a
shadow: and we have assurance, that all things work together for the good of
them Romans 8. 28
that love God.

Object. But we see whole Kingdoms, and flourishing Churches, have been
destroyed, notwithstanding these promises; as whole Judea, Jerusalem, all the
flourishing Churches of Asia, and of late Germany, the Churches of the
Palatinat, Rochell, and Ireland, etc.

Answ. When whole Kingdoms consent to sin, and associate themselves in
wickedness, then whole Kingdoms are destroyed; and when Churches set up
Idolatry, and wholly forsake God, and adulterate Gods pure worship, God gives
them over to be destroyed: for as God Judge. 3. 7, 8.
promises deliverance when Idolatry is thrust out, by dislike and reformation;
so he denounces destruction and desolation where wickedness and Idolatry is
authorized: So when religion consists only inform and outside-worship, without
the love, and power of it: (as now) then God brings a people into the fire of
affliction, in which, without reformation they may be consumed; but if such a
Kingdom, or such a Church do then humble themselves, and pray, and seek Gods
face, 2 Chr. 7. 14
he will be merciful to their sin, and will heal their Land. But the
representative body of this Kingdom have not associated in wickedness, nor is
the worship of God, yet, wholly adulterated; but Idolatry opposed by that body,
and many thousands besides in this Kingdom, against whom wicked men and I
dolaters give counsel, and do associat themselves to hinder the reformation
they desire. Therefore, (though not for our righteousness, but) for the
wickedness of those men, we may, and ought, to rest with confidence upon the
promise of God for our deliverance if our humiliation be good, and our desire
of reformation right.

Secondly, for encouragement, take notice of the experiences of Gods gracious
presence, going with us in this Parliament, as with Israel, to bring them out
of their Egyptian bondage; he has by his own hand wrought great things by
them, and for them: he has been to them a pillar of a cloud by day, and a
pillar of fire by night, to guide, and to defend them: It was no small part of
providence to bring them together, and wonderful in guiding, directing,
providing, preferring, and defending of them; and no less wonderful in
discovering, defeating and blasting the designs of their enemies. Consider
that saying of Manoahs wife to her husband, when he said they should surely
die: Jud. 13. 23.
If the Lord (says she) were pleased to kill us, he would not have showed us
all these things; wicked men may prevail for a time, but are (as the Psalmist
speaks) suddenly destroyed: Psalm. 64. 7.
There is one righteous Judge, who will give righteous judgment: There is one
mighty King, in whose hand are the hearts of all Kings, who in his due time will
save his Anointed, and destroy his enemies, and our eyes are toward him; Prove.
21. 1.
for we know not what to do, but to trust in him: If you believe in the Lord
your God, so shall you be established; believe his Prophets and you shall 2
Chro. 20 12.
prosper. 2 Chronicles. 20. 20.

FINIS.

