A LETTER WRITTEN Out of the Country TO Mr JOHN PYM Esquire, one of the Worthy
Members of the House of COMMONS, February 1.

feb: 11Printed for W. WEBB. M.DC.XLII

A Letter to his worthy Friend Msr JOHN PYM Esquire.
SIR,
I Shall not need to tell you with what tenderness of care I have hitherto
observed your commands concerning the dispersing of those books you sent me,
but I find my Arts now to fail, and that which herefore was wont to find a
willing, is now to seek a receipt; the Malignant party have infused such
principles into them, as begin to shake the whole fabric, which with so much
industry (I am sure on your behalf) has been built. From a right
understanding always proceeds a right judgment, (now those I have to deal
withal, as they want of the first, so they ever are forward in the latter: and
now that their sufferings has prevailed above your Rhetoric, I am no longer
able to restrain their rash Judgments of you and many other worthy Members of
the Houses, accusing you as the prime Instruments of their miseries. And what
more ordinary then the frequency of such like speeches as these? have we at all
mended our condition since this Parliament? Nay are we not fallen almost into
terms of absolute ruin? do we not see our estates, not only taken away
without, but against Law, (and that by their authority, who pretended to
protect us against all Arbitrary power whatsoever? (Had we borne the illegal
(as they termed it) lay of Ship money even to the period of ours, and our
childrens days, it had never layne so heavy upon us, as this one of the
twentieth, besides the guilt that gnawes us, for that it is employed against
our lawful King. Nay, as often as any Order has issued out from either or both
Houses (since the decerning spirit of our good King, whom God has set over us,
has been absent) has not the event been Profaneness, murder, disloyalty
in the highest kind, not only not to assist, but to resist the higher powers?
And as often as our impieties have (for our sins) seemed to prosper, so often has
thanks been given unto Almighty God; and those things, which in time past were
marks of prosperity, are now badges of public calamities. And if any Ordinance
of Parliament has bin ordained, new and strange by flattery or base and abject
sufferance; how have we cried it up, as proceeding from the infallible
Committee Chair, as if we had tied our faith to their sleeves; whose garments
have not been washed from their filthiness, nor their hands from shedding of
innocent blood? Now for the King, what fault has He committed? whom has He
offended, that He has not trebly satisfied? whether was it, that He was
likely by his unparalleled virtues, to bring forth an unexampled and every
where envied happiness to the Kingdom of England, with a true and lawful
progeny, to muzzell the mouths of all pretenders, to establish our peace? or
would we, that there should be brought into the Imperial dignity the issue of
a great Horse, or some such abortive Governors? To be short, we are dealt
with by cunning Sophistry, with odious Treason, to rid our selves of our
allegiance, and then it is an opportunity of no less favor to them, if we will
part with the twentieth part of our estates, there being no way to maintain
one wickedness, but by another.

Thus are we brought into danger of our lives (by the Parliament Clients) who
shadowing themselves under the name of the people by those usual terms of
Religion and Law, have notwithstanding in effect overthrown both, having done
that under the name of Peace, which would hardly have happened in War. First,
Arms are taken against the King, there wanted only a Captain, which in a
Tumult was easily found. The King now might easily leave the City, seeing at a
beck (in His presence) such Tumults were raised: What has been His demeanor
since, but a continual wooing of us, not to undo our selves for the private
ends of a few, whose deserts have been only the shedding of the Earl of
Strafford's blood, followed with an Ocean of that of Ireland, and now of
England? Bribery from Papists, separating of Protestants, countenancing of
Anabaptists, and all other Sectaries, inhibiting good Preachers; favoring ill,
yea, even Coach-men and Cobblers: Plundring of Houses, Robbing of Orphans,
exhorting to all manner of Rebellion and Lewdness, while they themselves have
Lorded it, free from all danger, and care, but by printing such plausible lies
as might draw things into a farther confusion, and by hoording and sending
beyond Seas those sums provided for the distress of this and bleeding
Ireland; (for they have notice, I cannot tell by what means of those Trunkes,
you know by what secrecy were conveyed away.) And as for those Propositions you
sent by those Honorable Lords, certainly (had they considered the odiousness
of them, and what Masters they serve) they would have preferred the honor of
their ancient Nobility, and the high opinion the Kingdom has of them, before
any obedience to you; and comply with His Majesty's Justice and Integrity, and
hold it much beneath them to stoop to so much vice as is contained in them:
and certainly whatsoever discontents of theirs you build upon, you will at last
find them to return to their proper sphere, knowing they cannot avoid the
Justice of Heaven, if they move out of their order.

These things (lest your danger and prevention should have met together I
thought good to acquaint you with, not doubting but your grave wisdom, as it
will endeavor the warding of those blows are aimed at you, so it will take in
good part the faithful advice of

Your most affectionate friend, and humble servant R. E.

Postscript.
ONe of the Books you last sent me, entitled ( His Majesty's Declaration and
final Resolution, concerning the Honorable City of London) though (I assure
you) it was framed with all subtilties that heart could wish; yet, (I know not
by what crafty eye that pryed into our Mummery) was brought unto the King, and
He knowing it to be false, caused it to be burned by the hands of the Hangman,
which has added a strange discredit to all our devices of that nature; pray be
more circumspect hereafter.

FINIS.

