Englands Division, AND Irelands Distraction.

The fears and disasters of the one, The tears and distresses of the other;
Being the just cause and sad occasion of both Kingdoms Deploration.

CONTAINING A Declaration, Or Remonstrance of the present state and condition
of this Realm of ENGLAND, and that of IRELAND.

Written by one, who in unfeigned love to his Native Country, and entire
affection to the Neighbour-Nation, would sacrifice his life for the peace of
either.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Bates. 1642.

DOCTRINA PARIT VIRTVTEM device consisting of an open book with a sword,
scepter, and surrounding motto
Englands Division, AND Irelands Distraction.
VErsamur in prelio, we are in a sot-battell. Death is already marched into the
field, and a universal desolation, like a Meteor, hangs over our heads. Such
are the growing mischiefs of the two Kingdoms of England and Ireland, that if
these destructive wars continue (without Gods great mercy) all in the common
Fate will inevitably be involved. Ireland is sufficiently dyed in skarlet, and
England lackes but a grain of it: Our senses of seeing and hearing are taken
up with Arms and Ammunition, Powder and Shot, Drums and Trumpets, Pikes and
Muskets, skirmishes and battles, fights and overthrowes. Each hour is an
Herault of homicides, each day a messenger of mischiefs, each week a Diurnall
of dangers, each month a Motto of misery, this whole year but march, and no
language now amongst us but war. In being victors we are victed; in Overcomming
we are overcome, and in winning lives we lose lives. In bellis civilibus omnia
sunt misera, and nihil miserius quam ipsa victoria. It was the saying of Cicero
the Roman Orator, Omnis pax bello civils prastantior, any peace is better then
a civil war. In civil wars (indeed the most uncivil and barbarous of all
other) the Father sights against the Son, and the Son against the Father,
Brother against Brother, Kinsman against Kinsman; These massacres are most
inhumane and unnatural, wherein all bonds of affinity, consanguinity and
humanity are violently broken and dissolved.

Thus in the civil wars between the two Houses of Saul and David, between
Israel and Judah, and of later times betwixt the white Rose and the red the two
Houses of York and Lancaster, the Kings own friends and loyal Subjects have
been constrained to march into the field against him, and have there dyed in
that fight. In the Reign of Edward the fourth, there were no less then nine
civil and bloody battles fought in England, whereby most of the Nobility and
Gentry of the Kingdom either fell by the sword of the soldier in the field,
or by the Axe of the Executioner on the scaffold. Of all war the civil war is
the worst: And if ever it was bad, it is most malignant at this time; For it is
a fatal war in the very bowels of the Nation, with our own Brethren and
Contrymen in the flesh, and will be most destructive to the whole Kingdom.
It has been a long time begun, and end when it will end, it will be
bitterness in the latter end, as Abner once said to Ioah, and if it longer
continue, as it does at this present, without a pacification, it will bring
repentance enough with it when it is too late, both to the vanquished and to
the victor. What horrid slaughters of mankind doc accompany this kind of
bloody war, the History of these times does sufficiently restifie. The loss of
goods, estates, liberties, lands and lives, this dismal shower of war raines
down upon the sons of men to their ruin and confusion.

Manifold are the sad and black calamities which wait upon this illegal and
unnatural war: It makes the breaches wider, and the wounds deeper. These
water-breaches that have been so long broken in upon us (if they be not
speedily stopped, but given way unto) will lamentably prove an inundation and
deluge of destruction to the whole Kingdom. It exposes a people to the fury of
a foreign Nation, that whilst we are together by the ears amongst our
selves, our adversaries have the advantage and opportunity to come upon our
backs; so that besides being liable to the pity of onr friends, the derision
and malignity of our foes, in this respect we may say as David said in another
case unto Gad, we are in a great straight. Bellum Dei Flagellum, War is the
scourge of God; It is one of the Arrows which the Almighty has in the quiver
of his Justice which he shoots at a Nation for the iniquity of the people. And
what mischiefs do not accompany war? It never comes single, but is attended
upon by all the imaginable evils that are in the world, which like those
Eumenides, the hags and suries of Hell do torture men to their perpetual
ruin. Nulla salus bello, there is no safety in war. When the Dye of war is
once thrown, it is a great hazard, and what the issue and chance of it is, is
most uncertain. The sword regards neither high nor low, noble nor ignoble,
rich nor poor, the King in his Throne, nor the Beggar in the street.

When Ahab warred at Ramoth Gilead, a certain man drew a bow at adventure, and
smote the King of Israel as he was in his Chariot. Ye may read the Story at
your leisure in the 1 Kin. 22. 34. where ye may take notice of these remarkable
circumstances; first of a certain man, some obscure, or ignote fellow, God
knows who or what he was, it seems not worth the naming only a certain man
drew a bow at adventure, light where it will light, he shoots at random, and
aims at no man, but smites the King of Israel: Where note, that the basest
coward or villain in the Army of the Assyrians peradventure smites the
noblest. From which premises, the inserence that I deduct is this, that in war
the Lords anointed, who is Pater Patrioe, the Father of his Country, and is
better then ten thousand, may fall as soon as the basest what soever, to the
great hazard of the State, and to the grievous crime of those that shall expose
His Majesty to that peril. The consideration hereof made the people of King
David say, when Ishabenob the Giant in a battle had like to have slain David,
but that some of his Wortnies rescued him from that danger, Thou shall no more
go forth with us to bat tell, lest thou quench the light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.
17. For thou art better then ten thousand of us, 2 Samuel 18. 3. Nay not only
the people of the King, but the Prophet of the Lord, the King of Kings,
speaking of a King, and none of the best neither, makes this one maine part of
his sorrow and lamentation, The breath of our mostrils the Lords anointed,
under whose shadow we had rest, was taken in their pit, by the Babylonians in
their wars against Jerusalem. In the time of civil (or rather uncivil) war,
not only the King, but the whole Kingdom is in danger. If I could reckon up
all the mischieses and miseries that ever were, or will be among men in the
world, they might all sufficiently be expressed in this one word War. Si bellum
dixeris, omnia dixeris. The famine and pestilence (two sore and severe
judgments of Almighty God) are not comparable to this of war. God himself
(the Lord of Hosts) put an end to Saul's life and Kingdom, by the wars of the
Philistims upon Saul. He swept away with the beesome of this destruction the
house of Abab, by the wars of Iehu upon Ahab.

The City of Samaria was brought to that calamity, that women did eat their
children by course, to satisfy their hungry souls; and all this misery befell
by the wars of the Syrians upon Samaria. The most famous City of Troy was
ruined and turned into a tilled field by the wars of the Greeks. The
Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Hivites and Peresites, the
Gigasites, great and mighty Nations, who had walled Cities, and Chariots of
iron, and the sons of Anack, mighty men among them, were all spewed out of
their land by the wars of the Israelites upon them, Josh. 12. I could produce a
cloud of witnesses out of divine and humane Authors, to confirm this black
cloud, which at this time hangs over our heads. To instance one for all, That
mirror of the World, the Metropolis and chief of all Cities, was brought to
that extremity, that the beautiful women (the sole of whose foot might not
touch the earth) such was their nicety and tenderness, did make their own
bowels the sepulcher for their children of a span long, the fruits of their own
bodies; and all this was by the wars of Nebuchadnezzar upon Jerusalem, and was
afterward reduced to as great misery by the wars of the Romans under the
conduct of Titus and Vespasian. These are the miserable effects and woeful
consequents of war, which go along inseparably with it. Bleeding Ireland has
sufficiently tasted of this bitter cup: What horrid villainies and outrages have
bin there committed by the barbarous Romish Rebels, on men, women and children,
rich, poor, Priest and people, without respect or regard of age or sex, of
calling or profession, it is needless at this time to rehearse. Lamenting
England is now somewhat near the like woeful condition. Difference in opinion
has bred difference in affection, and both these have wrought civil
contention. Our long peace has bred prosperity, prosperity has brought forth
plenty, plenty pride, pride discord, which has destroyed our peace. That which
God denounced against his people, we may justly fe^re will befall us: I have
taken away my peace from this people, Jer. 16. 5. It has been a great b^^ssing
heretofore, that in our time there has bin no going out, nor coming in, nor
complaining in our streets, through foreign or domestical war. Happy are the
people that be in such a case Psalm. 144. 15. And I pray God grant this
happiness unto us his people. It was the happiness of Salomons time, that he
was a man of peace, and God did give him rest from all his e^emies round about,
1 Chr. 22. 9. And it was a great blessing upon Ieh^shaphat and his Kingdom,
that the fear of God fell upon all the Kingdoms that were round about Judah,
so that they made no war against Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17 10. Quid^am nisi vota
super^unt? What now remains, but that we pray for peace to the God of peace,
that there may be no coming into our land by invasion, nor any crying in our
streets by the miseries of civil war in the bowels of our Nation. In the midst
of our fears and jealousies, let us be so wise, not to be enemies to our own
peace; but let it be our care and endeavor to prevent war, and preserve peace,
that there may be no offensive hostility amongst us. Let us not cease to
importune the King of Kings, the supreamest Majesty of Heaven and Earth, that
the waters of the Kings displeasure may be abated, that His Majesty and His
Parliament may have a happy meeting and concurrence together; that both being
united as a peeced Arrow (now made the stronger) may fly against the common
Enemy more effectually; that peace may be within our walls, and plenty within
our dwellings, and that our gracious Sovereign may with all possible speed
return to His long deserted Palace at White Hall, with the Olive branch of
peace in his mouth, to the glory of God, the honor of His Majesty, the content
of his Parliament, and comfort of his people.

FINIS.

