ENGLANDS SAFETY IN NAVY AND FORTIFICATIONS; The common Interest both of King
and People.

CONTAINING NECESSARY OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING DOVER, AND OTHER SEA-TOWNS OF
ENGLAND.

Published for the necessary View of the Right Honorable, The High Court of
PARLIAMENT: And also for the public safety of the Kingdom, and all other
his Majesty's Dominions.

Printed for Io: Ch: and John Bull. 1642.

NECESSARY OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING DOVER, AND OTHER SEA-TOWNS OF ENGLAND.
DOVER with her Castle has (by Ancients) been accounted, The lock and key to
the whole Realm of England. Likewise the five Ports, together with the two
ancient Towns annexed, or incorporated into the same; with their seven
members, have all of them been places of great strength and importance; and
consequently, have therefore obtained many great privileges. In this Latin
Verse next ensuing (unfitting to be in this observation omitted) are all the
said fourteen Haven Towns set forth.

Hastingus, Dover, Sandwicus, Romneus, Hithus,
Sunt Portus. Villae antiquae, Rya, Frigmare ventus.
Villa februm, gentis saxum, pelagi vada, Lydda,
Fordwich, Tenterden, Penensea, membra notantur.
Englished, Hasting, Dover, Sandwich, Romney, and Hith, are the Cinque or five
Ports, Rye and Winchelsea are the two ancient Towns, united and incorporated
into the same privileges the said Cinque Ports enjoy.

Feversham, Foulkston, Sea-ford, Lydd, Fordwich, Tenterden, and Pevensey, are
the Five Ports, and two ancient Towns, several members, besides Deal.
Walmer. Very many Villages and Parishes in the Island of Thanet in Kent, and
some elsewhere, enjoying the same liberties and privileges for the Lands
defense.

The Castles of Dover, Sandowne, Deal, Walmer, Sandgate, Camber,
Moates-Bulwarke, and Archcliff^-Bulwarke* these many years now past, have been
much decayed in their several Magazens of Arms, and all sorts of warlike
Munition, which have heretofore been kept and continually very well supported
and maintained; as not only honorable, strong, and defensible Forts, standing
next unto the Seas, being Frontiers of this Realm; but also so necessary
Fortifications for the defense and safeguard of the same, that they have
always been repaired, and with Munition continually supplied, for the public
defense of this Kingdom, yet of late years have wanted much provision of
abiliaments for War, or warlike defense; besides all the defects in store. A
part of the North Wall of Dover Castle since the year 1637. by tempestuous or
such like weather, has fallen down into the Castle-trench. Likewise much of
the Leads of the Kings lodgings in the said Castle have by boisterous tempests
and great winds, blown quite up to the top of the stone-worke thereof, and some
blown over it; impairing the who^e Timber Fabric underneath, to the great
prejudice of Englands sometimes glorious and formidable Commonwealth;
notwithstanding, the several provisions, stores, and Magazens of the said
Castles, etc. have been of late much decayed, have little or nothing been
replenished.

At the first coming of the Spanish great Fleet of War in the beginning of
September 1639. into the narrow Seas, and into the Kings Chamber, there so
called; The said several Castles. Bulwarks, and places of Defense, were all,
or most of them, without any strength formidable before the face of so strong
and mighty a Fleet, or any power resistable, if an attempt had been performed
by the vast and Warlike Spanish-Fleete aforesaid; but contrariwise, in very
weak plight and doleful state, even in depaire of loosing the most part of
the Sea-Townes and Fortifications near Dover, the Downs, and elsewhere, if
not the dangerous destruction of the whole Island, nay, the whole Kingdom.

For further demonstration of the Castles and Seacoasts several weaknesses,
three hundred land-souldiers were appointed out of the said five Ports,
Haven-Towns, and Members to be raised for pursuit of the Scots in that late
expedition, if they had been compelled unto, and to march away from the said
Ports, had been a design only to weaken, the then weak and too weak,
seacoasts for such a time of action: heretofore they have been accounted the
keys of England, yet at that time of eminent danger, they might well have been
esteemed, the Destruction of England. Had we not been then by the Holland Navy
defended (as one well termed it, the scourge of Spain) whom together with us
were protected by the divine providence above, in guiding Admiral Van-Trompe
here below, England doubtless in the said year 1639 had miserably felt the
savage cruelty of Spaines great Treachery; to a Kingdom then and still in
League and friendship with him. Heretofore the courageous stoutnesse of the
English had rather expire in a valiant resistance, than yield to the lasting
slavery of so proud a Nation.

Queen Elizabeth of ever famous memory, kept them under enough; and their
Spanish proud hearts humble in sight only of her Majesty's ships, and her
Vice Admiral Sir Francis Drake; as for instance, when the Armado of Spain in
the year 1588. was arrived in the Narrow Seas, having passed the place of their
expected supply, and gotten Sea-roome for their high bodied Hulks, spread their
main sails, and made away as fast as wind and water would give them leave,
more fearing the small Fleet and Forces of the English, (though nothing in
number like unto them) than standing upon terms of Honor either of their
chieftains or Invicible Navy: Yet surely if they had known the want of Powder,
(a fault unexcusable upon our coasts) they (no doubt) would have stood longer
to their tacklings. But God in this of 1588. as likewise of the last Armado of
Spain, 1639. would have us to acknowledge, that we were only delivered by his
own gracious providence and arm, and not by any policy or strength of our
own. A Motto on the said Vice Admiral Drake, though not much pertinent to the
matter in the precedencie of these observations treated on, yet deservedly to
be remembered to the everlasting renown of so valiant and so true a Subject to
the said Queen Elizabeth. If Popery should (which God forbid) re-raigne,
They could not, Noble Drake, dig up thy grave,
As once they did, I say, with fell disdain,
Against good Luther furiously rage and rave.
They could not do it against thee, I say, for why,
Thy bones in th'bottome of the sea do lie.


Now to the Subject aforesaid, notwithstanding the weakness of the said
Fortifications, in that time of straight 1639. Englands Sea provision was as
weak, if not weaker than the Castles, Fortifications, etc. Provision on the
shore, only four of his Majesty's ships (near those Sea rowns and Villages
aforenamed then and still in distress, if no better fortified then within
these few months now past, if any occasion or attempt in a warlike manner be
offered) for assistance and preservation of Britains great Island; What were
his Highness said 4. ships of war to the Spanish great Gallownes fifty
three in number? full of provision of all materials for war, fitted with
grave and (questionless) skillful Seamen. Moreover in each said ship or great
Gallowne, were a very great store of Land-men: Likewise to each several great
companies were Captains both of sea and land soldiers, in those vast Gallownes.

The report of a friend of mine, skillful both in Sea and Land Employments,
declared his opinion, That this mighty Fleet was bound either for England or
Ireland, and, said he, a fit time for them to act their afore-intended
Designs; By reason England has enough to do with Scotland at present: yet
(said he) though their pretense be for the relief of Flanders chief City and
Sea-town Dunkerke, there to discharge their multitudes of Sea and Land
Soldiers, said he, the Hulls or Bottoms of those mighty warlike Gallownes draw
too much water for ever coming to Dunkerke, or any nearer than a League or two:
therefore (said he) if their Commissions were made known, this Fleet is to land
in some Port or Ports of England, for they have both Sea and Land Companies,
and likewise their Ordnance are mounted with Land carriages above the Decks of
their Gallownes; To the intent immediately after their landing in their Ports
designed by their Commissions, that with the Field or Land carriages wherewith
the said Ordnance are mounted, may display upon the Country; And likewise with
man's strength, or otherwise, draw them against the Castles, Bulwarks, and
fortified Places of this Island, thereby forthwith to obtain a great part of
the Shire or County wherein they land, until repulse, nay even to the City of
London, the Metropolitan City of this Kingdom of England. Many great Papists
(of this Kingdom (for instance) during the Spanish Fleets stay in the Downs, a
good Road for ships near Dover) came thither, and were very jocant and joviall,
nay some of them in a kind of commanding way, seeing things almost compliant
with their purposes.

And at the time aforesaid generally through the whole Kingdom, every Province
or County had a Treasurer for the PaPists, to supply the wants either of
weapons or money of all the Popish party that needed therein; so that
consequently the said Spanish Fleet came for and was provided for this Kingdom
in that time of Englands distress. I say distress, by reason of the intended
war betwixt England and Scotland, which (God be praised) has ended in a
blessed peace, and likewise the weakness of Englands Navy and Fortifications
aforesaid. Now not omitting a true verse, describing this Kingdoms public
welfare, (if truly observed) for the knowledge of Englands Worthies in the
Honorable and high Court of Parliament, now assembled as follows. England's
safe gates, are her Cirqueports,
Her stately ships, her walls:
Her Camps, the Sea; Bulwarks, her Corpse;
Her heart, her Generals.


The days are now dangerous, and full of mischiefs infinite, therefore if the
great Council of Parliament would but cast their eyes (on the Kings Navy,
Castles, Towers, Bulwarks, Blockhouses, and all fortified places for Englands
safety and defense, and likewise upon a book entitled, The Advice of that
worthy Commander Sir Charles Howard, newly published, and lately presented to
this most Noble and Honorable Assembly of Parliament; together with another
small book entitled, Mr. Balls Propositions of Fortifications) and have them
fully and exactly viewed, and certified under the hands of the several
Generals, Admirals, Captains, Lieutenants, Gunners, and Officers, both of Navy
and Fortifications, as they will testify upon their oaths on the holy
Evangelists before this great Court of Parliament; That the Worthies thereof
may know, the true state of the strength of the Kingdom, and so trienually in
Parliament continually make restitution and provision for the same: For as a
learned Member in this Parliament once spoke, That England's safety consists
in being provided continually for war, and to assist the Allies of the
Protestant party; the maintenance of the said warlike provision may
continually be preserved and supplied by a blessed and happy peace.

That likewise persons of good trust, and well affected to the Protestant
Religion, may continually be employed in all the Kings ships, Castles, Towers,
Bulwarks, Block-houses, and all other fortified places of this Kingdom; so that
England may hereafter be as formidable as ever to the terror of her Enemies,
and the safety of her Inhabitants, and the advancement of the true Protestant
Religion; the which questionless will give great satisfaction to all good
Protestants, Gods children, and the Kings most loyal and obedient subjects.

Now let us all conclude, that your Endeavors may (by Gods most gracious
assistance) be for our Countries and Kingdom flourishing in true Religion, and
repulse to all our Enemies domestic and foreign, both of Church and State,
holding this Maxim for ever:

Dulce and decorum pro patria mori? Oh, how sweet it is to spend our dearest
blood,
For our Native Country, her benefit and good?

FINIS.

