The Several JUDGMENTS OF THE Supreme Court OF PARLIAMENT, AGAINST Alexander
Fitton, Edward Loyd, John Cade, and John Wright: And against the Libel
Contrived, Signed, and Published by them and others, against the RIGHT
HONORABLE CHARLES LORD GERARD, Baron of Brandon.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a crown
and flanked by the English lion and Tudor rose on one side and the Scottish
unicorn and thistle on the other

London, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1663.

The several Judgments of the Supreme Court of Parliament, against Alexander
Fitton, Edward Loyd, John Cade, and John Wright; And against the Libel,
Contrived, Signed, and Published by them and others, against the Right
Honorable, Charles Lord Gerard, Baron of Brandon.
Die, Jovis, 9o Julii, 1663.
WHereas the House has heard yesterday at this Bar Alexander Fitton, Edward
Loyd, John Cade, and John Wright by their Council at large, what they could
further say in defense of themselves, for contriving, signing, and publishing a
false, odious, and infamous Libel, signed by Abraham Granger, against the Lord
Gerard Baron of Brandon, a Peer of this Realm, and Member of Parliament: It is
this day Ordered and Adjudged by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, after a very serious and deliberate consideration taken by their
Lordships of the whole matter, That the said Lord Gerard is clear and free, and
is hereby cleared and freed from all, or any of the matters of, or in the said
Libel, And that the said Alexander Fitton shall undergo the Judgment of this
House as follows. I. That the said Alexander Fitton is hereby Fined unto His
Majesty in the Sum of Five hundred pounds. II. That the said Lord Gerard is
hereby left to his free liberty to proceed at Law for reparation, by occasion
of the said Libel. III. That the said Alexander Fitton shall be, and hereby is
committed to be kept close Prisoner in the Kings-Bench-Prison, until he produce
and bring forth the said Abraham Granger. IV. That the said Alexander Fitton
shall find good and sufficient Sureties for the good behavior during life,
which is to be taken by the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench.


And their Lordships do further Order, and adjudge, That the said Edward Loyd,
John Cade, and John Wright, for their being privy to Signing and Publishing of
the said false, odious, and infamous Libel, shall be imprisoned in the Fleet,
there to remain during His Majesty's pleasure, and before their being released
shall find good and sufficient security for their good behavior during life,
which is to be taken by the said Lord Chief Justice.

Jo. Brown Cleric. Parliamentorum.

Die Sabbathi, 11. die Julii, 1663.
WHereas the Original Paper delivered into this House by Edward Loyd, and
signed by Abraham Granger (entitled, A Narrative of the horrid and detestable
Design of the Lord Gerard against A.G.Gr. in compelling him to Swear against
Mr. Alexander Fitton) is by the Judgment of this House, Declared and Adjudged
to be a False, Odious, and Infamous Libel against the Person and Honor of the
Lord Gerard Baron of Brandon, a Peer of this Realm, and Member of Parliament:
It is this day Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
assembled, That Two Copies of the said Libel, which are to be Signed by the
Clerk of the Parliament, shall be burnt; One in the New Palace-Yard at
Westminster, by the hand of the Common Hangman, by the direction and
appointment of the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex in that behalf; And the
other in the Marketplace of the City of Chester, by the direction and
appointment of the Mayor of the said City, at such times as the said Lord
Gerard shall appoint.

And it is further Ordered, That the said Original Libel, Entitled, A
Narrative, etc. shall not be entered into the Iournal Book of this House amongst
the Records, but shall remain in the custody of the Clerk of the Parliament,
until the said Lord Gerard shall demand it of him; And then the Clerk of the
Parliament is hereby Authorized to deliver the same to his Lordship.

And it is lastly Ordered, That this Order, and the Judgment of this House,
bearing date the Ninth day of this instant July, shall be forthwith Printed and
Published by such person or persons as the Lord Gerard shall appoint and
direct, for the fuller vindication of his Lordship.

JO. BROWN, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, 1663.

Mr Fittons sentence for lybelling ye Lord Gerard.


