ENGLAND Know thy Drivers, and their Driver: OR, DEMOCRITUS NATU MINIMUS
Laughing at the epidemical Frenzy of his own Nation being so overwhelmed in
Iniquity, and Stupidity, and so hoodwinked by the snares, and slights of its
artificial, and pernicious Drivers, that it discerns not in their subtle
machinations the indignation of the chief, omniscient, and omnipotent Driver.

Whereby ENGLAND may be advertised to avoid, and beat back the Smart-Lash of
some of those Drivers upon themselves, to whom it is most proper, and thereby
may appease the wrath of the chief Driver.

Proverbs 16. 4, 5, 6. The Lord has made al things for his own sake, yea, even
the wicked for the day of evil.

All that are proud in heart, are an abomination to the Lord, though hand join
in hand, he shall not be unpunished.

By mercy, and truth iniquity shall be forgiven.

James 2. 14. For there shall be judgment merciles to him that shows no
mercy, and mercy rejoices against judgment.

LONDON, Printed for J. L. 1647.

ENGLAND Know thy Drivers, and their Driver, etc.
DEMOCCITVS a Philosopher living in a City called Abdera in the time of
Hypocrates a learned Physician frequently accustomed to repair to the
concourses and meetings of the Abderites, and profusely to laugh at their
madness. Democritus juntor a learned both Divine, and Philosopher in this
present age writ an elaborate, and copious Tract called The Anatomy of
Melancholy therein demonstrating the Causes, Symptoms, and proper Cures
thereof. Now in the third place comes Democritus naru minimus, neither
Philosopher, nor Divine, but a cri^call observer of Times and Persons, and a
diligent searcher of holy Scriptures, one, who, as a calm, humble and
charitable Christian would gladly be his Countries Physician, and for that
cause will endeavor, though he be for his labor esteemed a mad man, as
Democritus was by the Abderites, to laugh his Nation out of its Epidemicall
frenzy. But if our English Abderites take pity on me and send some wise and
earned Hypocrates to cure me, I am confident after he has read this Paper,
he will vindicate me, and conclude that they themselves are sick of a
Frenzy. If Democritus had lived in our age, he needed not have gone among
the vulgar multitude to have made himself merry; he might have gone into the
Court, into the Capitol, and beheld the disturbers of the Parliament, and
violaters of the Covenant made with, and before GOD; into the Synod, and beheld
the Brethren dissenting; among the griping Committees, if there be such; among
the holy anarchicall confused Libertines wheresoever incorporate, or not
incorporate in the Kingdom; in the very streets he might behold Drunkards,
and Men, and Women attired like Anticks, and Stage Players, and have too much
cause of laughter.

He might see hypocritical Zelots professing to be religious.

He might behold men lukewarm in religion, whom GOD has threat'ned to spew
out of his mouth.

He might see superstitious Idolaters bewitched with Antichristianisme.

He might see some of the Angels of the Churches forsaking their first love,
ready to return to the Onions of Egypt.

He might see many Ahabs thirsting after Naboths their neighbors Pastures,
and fields, and houses.

He might see despightfull Furies broaching bitter quarrels amongst
Christians, he might see Blasphemers of God, prophaners of his Sabboths,
Fornicators, Adulterers, lascivious riotous Prodigals.

He might see Envious men, Backbiters, Detractors, breakers of Promises,
detainers of Laborers wages, uncharitable cruel Oppressors, perfidious, and
treacherous Friends.

He might see Demetrius, and the Craftsmen for the Temple of Diana's seek
their own gain, crying, and beating down works of Piety, Mercy, and Charity.

He might see our distracted Divisions and Factions arising merely out of
Pride, and singularity the daughter of Covetousness which is Idolatry, one
emulating to be Paul, another to be Cephas, a third to be Apollo, every one
of them affecting fame and popularity, and striving to effect Parity, that each
might gather unto himself multitudes of Disciples, and so procure much
Contribution to the Saints, thereby to make the coffers and treasury of the
Saints himself opulent.

He might heretofore have seen the hands of corrupt Judges, and Magistrates
full of Bribes, ready to receive a pair of shoots, a basket of Chickens, a
morsel of Bread to pervert Justice, and as on the bench, so at the bar, false
unfaithful pleaders, siding hired perjured aretopagites, and witnesses.

But let them stand or fall to their own Master. What are all these to our
subject, those artificial drivers, (that have gotten a Smart-Lash to drive a
whole host of men with counterfeit pretenses of a wonderful spirit raised for
Justice and Righteousness, and by them to drive a Parliament and a whole
Nation even against God and Christ) those unclean spirits like Frogs coming
out of the mouth of the Dragon, of the beast, of the false Prophet, who were
and are the spirits of Devils working miracles to go unto the Kings of the
earth, and of the whole World to gather them to the battle of the great day
of God Almighty mentioned in the Revelations, 16. 13, 14. Who had well nigh
driven three Kingdoms to perdition by the extirpation and subversion of
Religion, Law, and the liberty of the Subject, and their due right by the
ancient established Laws of the Nation, not that imaginary fantastical
Vtopian pretended Christian liberty framed out of the singularity, and pride of
some spiritually high-minded men puffed up with the spirit of Peter, who having
undertaken to dye with Christ, did not only fall into a sleep when Christ
required him to watch one hour, but also denied, and forswore his Master
Christ three times before the cock crowed once.

These are the second artificial drivers, who drive to the same end of
Englands confusion with the first, but by several ways like Sampsons foxes
tied by the tails. But before I tell these second drivers why I laugh at them,
I will end with the first. Those unclean Spirits like Frogs working miracles
have manifested to the world in these our days the exquisite with incomparable
policy contrived plots and Treasons; first in their secret and clandestine
practices to butcher, and murder many of our late several Kings, and Princes;
secondly, in the twinkling of an eye so soon as a little piece of Paper would
be burned, to have destroyed all the Nobility and chief Gentry of our Nation,
and to have consumed by fire, or ^umbled, or mouldred into dust, all the
memorable records, and antiquities preserved for the honor of our Nation;
thirdly, in contempt of our strict capital and fatal Laws against them, in
creeping into the highest and most eminent places in the Kingdom, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, thereby annulling our Laws, and introducing an
arbitrary power, and rule of government at their ripened opportunities, to have
exalted the supremacy of that Dragon, beast, and false Prophet, out of whose
mouth they came, and without any noise, or power to oppose them, to have
changed our (new, as they term it) true reformed Religion into a false,
Idolatrous, and Superstitions. And if any of our Gentry have entered so far into
their secrets, and orders, worshipping that beast, having his mark, couch
themselves in the number of the Patriarchs of their Country, or in the number
of the Clergy, pretenders to purity of divine Worship, and having brought in
one Mr. Oglethorp among dissenting Brethren under another name, by their close
conveyances, subtle insinuations, and arguments, and pragmaticall positive
opinions, Dogmates, and Votes, do retard, obstruct, and hinder the
reconciliation of King, and Parliam. and thereby the settlement of the peace of
the Church, and kingdom (which without the King cannot be, for no King no Law;
no Law, no Peace; no Peace, no Truth; et e converso, no Truth, no Peace; no
Peace, no Law; no Law, no King) and craftily, wickedly, and traitorously oppose
and hinder the parformance of the national Covenant made with God touching the
King, laboring either to imprison, or dethrone him, are they not worthy to be
laughed at, when being learned Politicians, and having sublime Mercurian wits
they neither discern our Kings many, and marvelous deliverances from their
Treasons, nor that that beast, Dragon, and false Prophet out of whose mouth
they came is the very Antichrist their holy Hierarchy, nor that they themselves
are those unclean spirits like frogs, the spirits of Devils, nor that their
plots, policies, and divelish Treasons are those miracles, nor that they must
go to the Kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of the great day of God almighty, no otherwise then as Gods Ministers
and servants for the execution of his wrath and vengeance; as Nebuchadnezzar
King of Babel was, as Jeremiah 15. 9. and 43. 10. Whom afterward other Kings
brought into subjection, as Jeremiah 25. 14. Or as Pharaoh was, whose heart God
for his own glory hardened, as in the history of him in Exodus, nor that
without Repentance they must go into the bottomless pit, the place of the
damned. And are not they more worthy to be laughed at, who after frustration of
their manifold desperate, mischeivous, traitorous, diabolical designs, more
then the plagues of Egypt, against the tranquillity and happiness of our Nation
and Princes, and after ours, and our Princes miraculous deliverances from them,
yet still persist and proceed in their Machiavellian devises, and enterprises,
nothing astonished or moved at the mighty power and providence of God in their
former failings. Democritus will only merrily put them in mind how some of their
late predecessors, who drove as closely, politickly, artificially, and
furiously as they now do, or can do, and had almost driven to their journeyes
end, concluded with hemp and hatchet, and he laughing heartily expects their
like conclusion.

Now for our Vtopian liberty drivers, who drive cunningly and fiercely, for
breach of Covenant, extirpation of Law, order, and government, pretending
notwithstanding to be Patriots of their Country, and Zealots in the Church, I
will confidently laugh at them, because I well know that God is the God of
order, not of confusion, and that it is evident by holy writ, that in the last
times he will have national churches of the Gentiles, and their Kings, as may
appear in Isa. 60. 3, 5, 10. 11, 16. and Rev. 21. 24, 26. And that he will
have the Kingdoms of this World to be his, and his Christ's; as is manifest
Rev. 11. 15. And what are Kingdoms? Are they not Dominions, and governments?
Who can forbear to laugh at these drivers, whose holy zeal passes over,
slighteth or waveth these Scriptures, and drives even against Gods Providence,
Decree, and purpose, and contemns the threats of his vengeance against
breakers of Covenant made before him, pronounced by the mouth of Jeremiah 34.
17, 18, 19, 20. See the words in the Bible, that Democritus may laugh in no
more sheets then the Mercuries, and other Pamphletters use to lie in, and to
write Libels, and Treason in. Were these threats denou^ced only against the
Princes, Priests, and People of Jud^th and Jerusalem, and not against Englands
and the whole earths Princes, Priests and People also? Democritus resolves to
laugh profusely at all them, who be obnoxious to this curse, if they wilfully
perish thereby, and will tell them, humani mores fingunt sibi fortunam, their
destruction is of themselves. But he hops that God in mercy will spare the
Nation for the sake of that part thereof, whose hearts have not yielded to that
presumptuous horrid sin of perjury, and will not execute his predicted
vengeance of Vae perjurae genti, Woe to a perjured Nation! and therefore waving
all laughter Democritus will close with a short, but serious question to this
Nation.

Anglia pro Votis Violans quadrata rotundis.
Mole sua aerumnis ruet insensata profundis?
From sense will England so it self estrange,
As sound well squared Vows for round to change?
And by its own weight, policy, and strength,
In deadly mischiefs plunge it self at length?
Democritus might behold, and consider our Fasts for distressed Protestants in
Ireland and might laugh at them as mockery, when these drivers are the means to
hinder and keep back competent supply and relief from them, nay how can any
man considering it forbear to laugh, if withal he read Isaiah 58. 5, 6, 7.
and 1. 15. 16, 17. and Zech. 7.

Many other subjects of laughter there be, but cannot be laughed out in one
sheet, neither need we laugh at our selves, Foreign Nations laugh so much at
us, painting us upon their Walls with a Bible in left hand, and right hand in
neighbors pocket.

Vide teipsum, irride teipsum.
FINIS.

