Englands Remembrancers. OR, A word in season to all English men about their
Elections of the members for the approaching Parliament.
Dear Christian friends and Contrymen
WE have all reason to complain, and say, this day is a day of trouble, rebuke,
and blasphemy; our country that was great among the nations is now become vile,
all her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they are become her enemies;
how is the profession of holiness (by the unrighteousness amongst us) blasted
with the names of hypocrisy, falsenesse, ambition and covetousness? how is
the glory and strength of our nation spoiled, and the blood of many thousands
poured forth in wast like water? how is the treasure exhausted, trade and
commerce destroyed? and how are all our rights, liberties and properties
invaded, and subverted by arbitrary powers and force of arms? who can say his
life or estate is secured for a moment, if the jealousy, envy, pride, lust or
covetousness of some in power please to command it? and how is destruction
threatened daily by foreign enemies? surely the day of the Lord is very great
and terrible against us, and yet there is mercy with him that he might be
feared for in his abundant goodness he seems to open a door of hope, and to
give us all leave by our Deputies to advise the means of our safety and peace;
and the present writts for election of our representatives being the product of
divine providence, and we are confident not long since, beyond the thoughts of
those that sent them forth, may be justly looked upon as the voice of God to
you all saying; gather the people, call a solemn Assembly, go and reason
together, for in the multitude of council there is safety. Dear Christians, it
is by the choice of your Deputies only, that the whole body politic of this
nation can consult together for their preservation by this means only you may
all speak your minds, one to another and every one to the whole nation? it is
the natural way to settle your Government, and provide for your common good,
and in your present case, there is no other way or means consistent with the
laws of God, or the nature of mankind, whereby our breaches can be healed,
lawful powers and authorities created, righteousness and justice exercised
amongst us. For which ends we most earnestly beseech you to be very serious and
considerate in a matter of such high importance, and take heed that you neither
mistake, nor carelessely slight, or neglect your present duty, in the choice
of your common Assembly. Let it not be like a price put into the hands of fools
without wisdom or hearts to use it. O that you would all beg of God courage,
wisdom, and faithfulness, impartiality and integrity of heart in this great
affair. First then, mistake not your present duty; think not (as some) that
your strength in this affair is to sit still; let not the darkness of
unexamined scruples prevent your acting in the choice of your representatives.
It may be some of vour tender hearts, being troubled at what has been done by
the Lord Protector (so called) are afraid to vote in the choice of your
Deputies, lest you should seem to approve his power, because the choice is
appointed by his writs: but we pray, examine this better.

First consider, that the writs for elections neither did, nor ever could be
justly construed to give the people any right to choose their members of the
Parliament; the Almighty God the Creator, and the fundamental laws of this
nation, gave the people that right by their birth: it was not in the pleasure
of the Kings heretofore* whether the people should ever choose their Deputies
for the common Assemblies, though it was left to their discretion and prudence
what time in the year it was most necessary to call the Assembly. The Kings
were bound by the laws and their oaths to send out writs every year to summon a
Parliament; and the last law made about Parliaments, ordained the very
Constables to summon the people to the elections, if the Kings and others
should neglect their duties to summon them; and we hope none of you would have
thought that the Constables summons had given you right to choose. The writs
are only to call you to exercise your own rights, and surely you may use your
own rights whosoever call you to do it. If a thief should stop your way to your
own house for a time, and afterward send to you, and bid you go home if you
please; we suppose none of you would scruple to go to your own house; why then
should you scruple (whatsoever you think of the Lord Protector) to use your own
rights in the expected election, now he permits you to do it, being no way
derived or claimed from him? And if it be objected, that the way of elections
approved by the laws is altered; it is easily answered, that the divisions of
the numbers of the Electours into several bodies or meetings, different from
those former ways of meeting, change not the rights, and that you use your own
rights as far as he will suffer you, and it were frowardness to cast away
what you may enjoy, because ye have not all your rights.

But it may be some others of you will say, that God requires at this time
higher ways of advancing Christ's Kingdom, than by Parliaments, and that God
is gone out of the dispensation of Parliaments, and therefore you cannot look
after this to choose or to be chosen; but upon due examination this darkness of
your minds will vanish, and you will find that the Saints preparation for
Christ's Kingdom, which God requires, is clothing themselves with
righteousness. Rev. 19.8. and that no righteous civil powers of governing in
this nation can be yet derived from any other fountain then the peoples consent
or choice; and that you cannot be righteous or holy in setting up, consenting,
or adhering to any other civil governing powers. It Is yet the law given by
God, and repeated by Christ, that you should do unto all men, (Saints or not
Saints) even as you would that they should do to you. And we do believe that
you would not, that any man or men should impose laws upon you at pleasure, and
assume a power over your lives and estates without your consent; and therefore
it cannot be righteousness in you to do it unto others. Say not therefore that
God is gone out of Parliaments, unless you could prove that God has abolished
this old law; or that by some other divlne law the power of politic government
is now to be derved from other original then the peoples consent or choice;
and we beseech you, dear Christians, never fancy that ye are righteous or
holy, if the divine laws be not your rule; we can no way so highly advance
Christ's Kingdom, as by obeying his laws, and to be found doing them when he
comes.

But say some others, we dare not have a hand in the choice of Parliaments, for
we doubt they will take away our liberty of conscience in worshipping God, and
we now enjoy it under the Lord Protector, that's worth* all things else.

Dear Christians, we beseech you try these your fears, whether they be of God;
by what you allege; you seem to say, we cannot endeavor to settle a
righteous government, lest they oppress our consciences. First try whether
you can find by scripture or reason, any other way (except the peoples
personal agreement) to settle a lawful authority in this nation, but by some
chosen Deputies to represent the people, and consent in their behalfs to such
laws as are now necessary for safety, peace, and common right and justice a
among us; if you can, then there is place for prudence, to advise whether your
liberties will be secure by Parliaments; but if you can find no other just
means of making our laws, and settling a lawful government, then you must
either renounce obedience to God, or else cheerefullie do your duty, and choose
your Deputies with wisdom and integrity, and trust to the divine providence
to bless and protect you and your liberties, whilst you walk according to his
rules, and no question, if there be due addresses to God, and dependence upon
him (if it be at this time good for his people, and most for his honor to
preserve their liberties in his worship) he will do it by Parliaments, and will
smite the hearts of any that now intend persecution, as he smote the heart of
Saul in his journie. Act. 9.4. However you may more comfortablie depend upon
God in pursuing the paths of righteousness in government, than you can in
adhering to any power assumed in unrighteousness, under good pretenses, when
the Ark tottered. 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. Vzziah put forth his hand with an intent to
save the Arc, yet it cest him his life, because he took his own way, and not
Gods to his good ends. And many that adhered to Absalom in his rebellion. 2 Samuel 15, 4. (upon hopes of greater liberty, which he promised them*) justly
perished with him. God will have justice, and mercy, rather than sacrif ce;
and its better to suffer for righteousness sake, than to enjoy the pleasures
of in for a season. yet if your representatives may be duly chosen, and freely
consult without the influence of a Court, or the a we of a mercenarie soldier,
their own interests and concernment bind them, much more than any Court,
standing counsel or arbitrary powers, to provide for liberty of conscience,
they themselves being subject to the laws they make, and being without any
possible private interest in oporessing any man's conscience, when the others
have always an interest of their own, cross to the peoples, which guides
their resolutions, and may probably lead them to oppress one day the same
peoples conscience, that were their savourites the day before.

But some may yet say, it is to no purpose to mind these elections, because
the Lord Protector with his red-Coats will either force them to serve his ends,
or turn them home again.

We confess there is much cause for these fears, yet they are no ground for
you to forbear to elect, or to be elected, it cannot be denied that (unless
there could be a personal agreement of the people) an assembly of the peoples
Deputies, is the only visible means to settle justice, r ght and peace in the
nation; and if so, then, no fear of the success or of any danger, can warrant
the omission or neglect of using the last or only visible means of common
right and safety, when there was no other visible means left to preserve her
Country from ruin, then it was fit for Esther to attempt that means. Esther
4.16. (though the Tyrants sword had decreed it to be death to use it) and to
cry out if I perish I perish: none that love justice and their Country, may
omit any one prebable means of their prosperity and safety.

Secondly, the success of a lawful means of good ought not to be distrusted,
who knows what Jonathan and his armor-bearer may do when the spirit of God
comes upon them. 1 Samuel 14.6. when Hezekiah had paid Senacharib all his due
tribute, and nothing would content him, but that Hezokiah and his people must
be slaves, and the people were in great fear because of his mighty host, what
became of his one hundred and eighty thousand men in a night. 2 Kings 18.14.
with 31.

Thirdly, admit the hopes of good were very small, if the possiblt means be not
used, and justice and righteousness in government be subverted, and the name
of God thereby blasphemed and your Country ruined, you cannot comfortably
suffer under it, your conscience will be galled with remembrance that you
neglected one opportunity that might possibly have prevented all the mischief.

Fourthly, if the assembly prove fruitless, yet your electing carefully such
as you ought may prevent much mischief; if men of corrupt, rotten principles,
and of mean base servile spirits should stand under the notion of the peoples
representatives, by reason of honest men's negligence about the election; how
will the name and glory of God be eclipsed, that should shine forth in laws
founded on justice and reason, and in governors acted by noble and sanctified
principles? how may unrighte ousnesse be settled by a law; and you and your
posterities sold for slaves, to serve like beast; the will and lust of great
men; therefore the danger you mention as a discouragement in your election, is
the greatest possible argument of care and caution in the election. And if your
Deputies should be returned home again, for their fait^fulness and integrity in
their trust, the sin be upon their heads that do r, and the measure of their
iniquity will be the sooner full, and fit for divine vengeance. Now as we hope
all honest men will be satisfied, that it is their duties to choose their
Deputies for the approaching Parliament, so we humbly pray them, not to slight
their duty, nor do it negligently. Think not upon this as a small thing, that
must give place to a bargain, or a days harvest work, or the saving of a load
or two of hay or Corn, do not think it of such mean concernment, that it is
indifferent with you whether you go to the elections or not, unless your friend
or your landlord send to you. Let us entreat you to consider the nature of
your Duty and the Importance of it to your selves and others.

You are now to choose those that are to judge of all your common grievances
and complaints, and to study and contrive your redress, ease and happiness,
you are now to choose those that are to dispose of and comm^^d your purses, and
to lay what taxes upon you they in their wisdom shall think necessary: you
are now to choose those that are to make war or peace for you, so that the
blood of your selves and the whole Country, is in effect (under God) bound up
in the wisdom and Integrity of their Resolutions; they may under God involve
you in blood and Confusion, or settle you in peace and Happiness: you are now
to choose those that are to choose for you all the Rules of your civil lives
and conversations, they are to judge wherein you shall be bound and wherein
free. The Rules and Laws you have already are in their power to alter (saving
to you your natural Rights) and what new laws they judge necessary, you are
to be bound by them: you are to choose those that are to supervise the
Administration of all Justice amongst you; so that in truth you are now to
provide for all righteousnhsse amongst men, wherein the Glory of God, and the
Honor of the profession of Christianity is so much concerned. And in a word,
you are now to choose those whom you trust with your persons, your lives, your
estates, your wives and children, and your country. If you have any value for
any of these, and love to justice, and the Honor of God, and love to your
dearest Country, and tenderness to your wives and children, or your own
blood, or any love to your trades, peace and safety, you are seriously to mind
this election and to take heed how you choose, and whom you choose, and to do
it conscionably as in the sight of God, and not as menpleasers. Take heed that
no vile corrupt motive bias or incline your minds in your Election. Let not any
Dependence you have upon any man for personal profit and advantage move you,
let not friendship or relation of any kind whatsoever make you recede from the
pure and noble principles of freeborn English men. Let not the greatest power
or pomp of any man make you admire him, or incline your minds to trust him.
Let not hopes of favor or countenance of any man allure you, sell not your
selves and posterity, and country at such low prices as these. Neither let the
threats or terror of any man, nor yet the clashing of the soldiers Arms
affright you out of your Impartial judgments and Integrity in your choice;
and we beseech you lay aside all personal prejudice against any sort of men,
and agree together to have nothing in your eyes in your Elections, but the
worth and fitness of the persons for so great a trust as you are to repose in
them. And enquire after these ensuing Qualifications.

First, that they be such men as Jethro counseled Moses to choose, men,
fearing God, and haring coverousnesse, and lovers of righteousness and truth.
Exodus 18.21.

Secondly, that they be men of judgment and wisdom, having a sense of, and
able to look into the true causes of all our Countries mise^^es distractions
and burdens; and by Gods help to contrive the best means of our ease and
settlement in freedom and peace.

Thirdly, that they be men of courage and fortitude, despising danger and
hazard for the common good; such as think not their lives too dear to venture
for righteousness sake: men of cowardly mean spirits will sell themselves and
you for slaves, if any man of power boldly attempt to be a tyrant over you.

Fourthly, that they be men of uprightness and integrity in their lives, such
as sear not good laws but love them; how can evil doers to whom good laws are a
terror be isntrumental to make such laws? such as are faith breakers and
falsifiers of their trusts, proud and arbitrary, oppressors of others, or
despisers of the laws; such can never heartily endeavor that justice should be
done on such offenders, and without that, you can never enjoy freedom or
safety.

Fifthly, that they be full of mercy, love and goodness to all men, full of
the bowels of Christ, taking compassion of such as are out of the way, not
malic ous cruel or blocdy, whose hands and hearts are ready to thirst for the
blood of such as are not of their minds though men more righteous then
themselves.

Sixthly, that they be men of meek humble and sober minds, not proud or
ambitious, nor passionate, such will easily degene ate into tyrants, or be
ready to share in tyranny.

Seventhly, That they be men of public enlarged minds and hearts, who know
they are not born for themselves, but to give glory to God in righteousness in
their generation; such as cannot be satisfied unless they be doing good to
othe^s; not men of private mean spirits who m^nd not how the nation fares, if
it be well with them; such will be ready to betray you to save themselves.

Eighthly, That they be men equally concerned with you in all they shall advise
about, or enact, whose interest is bound up in yours, and must share equally
in all your common burdens, opp essions and losses, not such as live upon the
public purse, or any of their adherents, whose gain is your loss, and whose
pomp and greatness must be founded in your oppressions and ruins.

Ninthly, that they be men of sound experience in public affairs and well
affected with the worth of our good old cause, and well read in the deceipts of
this age, and such of whose faithfulness you have had some trial; seek out we
say, dear Christian friends and Contrymen, for men thus fitted by God for
public trust, and meet and advise together how you may find out men so
qualified; and then acquaint each other with your knowledge you have of them,
and lend such in your stead to the Grand Assembly, and then pray for them, and
stand by them, and take every affront done to them, as done to the whole
nation, and to every one of you in particular, and then without doubt (if God
shall please to humble the nation for the sins which have brought us under all
our miseries) the mighty God will so bless all those endeavors that tend to
the advancing of righteousness, truth and justice, that the voice of Tyranny
and Oppression will be no more heard amongst us; your liberties will be
vindicated, your Grievances and burdens eased, the Honor of our Country
(that now lies in the dust among all nations) will be again restored; your
trades revived, peace and plenty returned, and the Generations yet unborn will
have cause to bless God for such an Assembly: and what shall we say more to
you? dear Christians and Countrymen; Do not the tears of the widow, and the
cries of the fatherless speak? do not your imprisoned friends speak? do not
your banished neighbors speak? do not your infringed rights speak? do not your
invaded properties speak? do not your gasping liberties speak? do not your
often affronted Representatives, (which have been trod upon with scorn) speak?
Witness Jamaica.
do not your encumbered estates speak? do not the blood of many thousands speak,
some slain with the sword, and others killed with hunger? do not the cries of
your poor brethren the honest Sea men, the wall and bulwark of our Nation
against forreiners, who have so freely venturd their lives upon all just
accounts and calls, and are now most barbarously forced from their wives and
children to serve the ambitious, and fruitless designs of one man? do not all
your ruins at home and abroad, by land and sea speak to you? Surely they have
loud voices, surely they do daily cry in your cares, Help, help, or England
perishes.

FINIS.

