THE EQVITY Of the Solemn LEAGVE and COVENANT IVSTIFIED, Against an Infectious
and Libellous Pamphlet: INTITVLED, THE INIQVITY Of the late Solemn League and
Covenant Discovered.

As it was lately sent from Oxford: and intercepted by the way to London.

Written by way of Caution to all those who either have or shall read the said
dangerous Paper.

Printed for John Field. 1644.

THE EQVITY OF THE SOLEMN LEAGVE and COVENANT IVSTIFIED.
IT being my fortune to meet with a frivolous and groundless pamphlet, penned
as by the Title appears, on purpose to traduce the Equity and Justness of our
Sacred Solemn League and Covenant, and to poison the People with a
misunderstanding thereof: And being informed that many of the papers were by
Malignants and other ill Members procured and dispersed abroad by stealth, and
in a clandestine way: I thought my self bound by the duty I owe unto God, and
the public obligations of this Covenant, wherein I have a peculiar interest,
to take in hand to answer it, and remove those scruples, and ill-contrived
stumbling blocks, which are cast in the way of those which have not as yet come
in, and subscribed to this holy Covenant.

I will not at all take notice of the bitterness of the Traitorous and
Seditious preamble, which sufficiently sets forth the Constitution of the
Author. But considering that Oxford is the place from whence it came (where all
their Doctrine is railing) I purposely pass it by, and will in a facile
moderate way, betake my self to the ground work of the business.

It is pretended to be written to a gentleman of his own party now in Durance,
which desired satisfactiun upon the point, who was intended to take the
Covenant, as a means to procure his liberty; which before he absolutely
resolved upon, he desires information from this dangerous Counselor, who tells
him, if his resolution and advice may in time be herad, it stands this upon
these two points.

I. That no man can with a safe Conscience enter this Covenant by reason of the
gross and palpable Iniqvity of the Contents thereof. II. That he who through
his own ignorance and cunning of others, has been seduced, or by their threats
and menaces forced, or by any other means brought to enter this Covenant with
them, is not bound to the performance of the Contents, but having by the taking
of it, contracted their guilt of a grievous sin, it bound to a speedy
repentance for the same.
These were notable convincing points indeed, if they were proved: But he cares
not for the reality of proof, so he may reduce his arguments to some specious
frame; for the maine scope, or end, which he pretends to by reasoning upon
these two points, is set down in these two particulars.

First, In the resolving and keeping a good conscience (as he styles it) in the
refusal of this Covenant, by reason of the gross and palpable Iniquity of the
contents thereof.

Secondly, For the recovery of the Conscience ensnared by entering this
Covenant, wherein is considered the not binding of it, if taken; which
particulars, if thou can make good, Tu Dominus, Tu vir, Tu mihi frater eris:
I shall most willingly Subscribe.

Thus far we have a fair porch to the building, and which might take any man at
the first fight: But let us now make entry, and see what furniture we can
find within to entertain a man's understanding.

He proceeds to frame Objections against the several Articles of the Covenant.
And the first thing he excepts against, is, that we are bound to endeavor the
extirpation of Prelacie, and Church Government by, Archbishops Bishops, etc. By
the first and second Articles; and not only so, but really and constantly to
endeavor the same. Now he bids him see the Iniquity of this.

Object. 1. First, he says, here is sedition: Subjects entering into a Covenant
for a change of established government, without and against their Sovereigns
Command and Authority.

Answ. I answer, that this is not done against the Authority of our Sovereign,
but this covenanting against Prelacie, is ordained, and entered upon, by those
who have Sovereign Authority communicated unto them from the King in
Parliament, and by them it is commended unto the People to be sworn against,
as a government inconsistent with the good of the Kingdoms. Out of what Laws
Divine, or Civil and National, do you read, that an Act of the grand Estates
of a Kingdom lawfully convened, may be called sedition.

Object. 2. Secondly, he says, Here is injustice to fellow subjects: Subjects
entering a Covenant, and binding themselves to do notorions wrong and injury to
others; that is, to extirpate a company of men, whose Function is of
Apostolical institution, and has continued in this Land from the first
receiving of the Christian Faith; whose immunities also, and privileges, are
undeniably; most ancient and legal in this Kingdom.

Answ. 1. First, I answer, That it could never be proved yet (though there have
been many papers vented pretending the probation of it) that so much as
regulated Episcopacie, was of Apostolical institution, muchlesse Prelacie an
order of a higher strain, with all its Hierachicall Appurtenances, both of
them being held in the opinion of the most and best Protestants unquestionable
and obvious to all men, to be but of humane institution.

Answ. 2. Secondly, I answer: Be it granted that their immunities and
privileges are ancient and legal within this Kingdom; yet you must remember,
that those immunities and privileges were at first conferred upon them by the
favor and indulgence of the State, in those days of the growing greatness of
the Clergy, why then may not the same power of the State, in the ancient and
legal Court of Parliament, derived to their successors, now lawfully
assembled, with as much reason deprive them of those immunities, together with
their greatness, which have proved undeniably so prejudicial to the Kingdom.

Answ. 3. Thirdly, I answer, that our covenanting to extirpate Prelacie cannot
be called injustice, nor injury to our fellow subjects by the same reason also:
Because the abolition of those accidental privileges, the fruitful p^rents
of so many intolerable exorbitances, is agreed upon by the Supreme Court of
Justice, the representative Body of the Nation, which of it self is sufficient
to annull the Hierarchy; but because Authority is of little availment, without
the addition of forcible power in times of difficulty, opposition and rebellion
of desperate Incendiaries; therefore it was necessary that the loyal partee of
the Land should be engaged by Covenant, to defend the Parliament in the
prosecution of their most just proceedings, to redress the grievances of the
Subject, of which, Prelacy is not the least, as also, for the chastizing of
Delinquents; And how is it possible that this Prelaticall government should be
convenient for a State or Kingdom: whereas,

1. They have been burdensome in all ages, what opposites in England have they
been to our Kings, till their interests were changed? 2. Secondly, all reformed
Churches have expelled them, as incompatible with Reformation. 3. Thirdly, they
have set three Kingdoms together by the ears, which now lie weltring in their
own blood. 4. Fourthly, experience now shows, there is no inconvenience in
their want, either in Scotland or England.
Object. 3. The third Objection is, that here is sacrilege, in spoiling them,
or a Church rather, of those possessions and interests, which beside the right
of dedication, do by as good Law and Title belong to them, as any Liberty and
possession does to other Subjects.

Answ. Be it granted, that the right of their possessions hold good by Law; yet
when their Order and Function shall be disannulled by Law, there must be a
necessity of disposing their Revenues otherwise, to the benefit of the Church,
and so the end of the dedication being kept, by disposing them to that use
whereto they were at first intended, it were vain and foolish to call this
sacrilege and spoiling of the Church.

Object. 4. The fourth and last objection against the first and second Articles
of the Covenant is, that here is rebellion with the greatest impiety: Subjects
endeavoring this by force of Arms (as it will appear by the sixth Article,
they that Covenant bind themselves to do) that is to compel your Sovereign to
such an extirpation and spoiling, against which he is bound by the Law of God,
and by express oath, and cannot be released of that oath, without their
consent to whom he makes it, viz. those that must here be extirpated and
spoiled.

Answ. 1. First I answer, that here is neither Rebellion, nor impiety in the
least kind, to endeavor the extirpation of those by Arms, which have been the
maine cause of this present war against the Parliament, and enemies to
Reformation; with whom, because the King is now there in person, being seduced
by evil Counselors, and such as have a design to alter our Religion, invade
our Liberties, and bring in Popery; therefore we shall not defend our selves,
our Religion and Liberties, nor labor to deliver the King from them, but you
will say, we Covenant to compel His Majesty to that which in conscience he
cannot do, that is, to extirpate prelacie; which brings me to my second answer.

Answ. 2. Secondly I answer, that no oath is to be observed, but in licitis and
honestis, so far forth as the matter sworn to is approved and found lawful;
and it holds good in Divinity, that such oaths as are not lawful, are rather
to be repented of, then persisted in. But upon politic considerations there
needs not any repentance, where the same power which ordained the things sworn
to, does after the manifest inconvenience of it, with the present constitution
of public affairs, ordain also the abolishment thereof: for then the
obligation becomes altogether invalid, and in no wise binding to the swearer:
And therefore it is frivolous to say that the King cannot be released of such
an oath as he has taken to maintain Prelacie, unless the Prelates give
consent; when at the best (to use the Language of the learned Exhortation to
the taking of the Covenant) their whole government is but a humane
constitution, and such as is found and adjudged by both Houses of Parliament:
(in which the judgment of the whole Kingdom is involved and declared) not only
very prejudicial to the civil State, but also a great hindrance to the
perfect Reformation of Religion.

His second exception is against the fourth Article, whereby he says, he which
enters this Covenant does profess, that he allow all those which adhere to His
Majesty in this cause, should be esteemed, and proceeded against, as
Malignants, Incendiaries, and as in the first Article they are set out, common
enemies: Also by the same, fourth Article he binds himself to discover all
such, that they may be brought to punishment.

Object. Now he tells him that the iniquity of this appears by what was said
upon the former Articles; but more especially by the duties unto which the
Oaths of Supremacy and allegiance bind all Subjects, viz. the assisting of His
Majesty against all attempts, and the discovering unto Him all conspiracies,
duties contrary to what is undertaken here.

Answ. I answer, that it is great equity and reason, that those now about his
Majesty, which have involved him in this war, and are declared and known to be
Incendiaries and Malignants, and the common Enemies of the Kingdom, should be
discovered and proceeded against thereafter; and that the equity of that
Article may further appear, the intent of it is the very same with those, in
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, viz. The assisting of his Majesty
against attempts, and the discovering of conspiracies; which does not only
evidence the equity, but also the seasonablnesse of this Covenant, being taken
in such a time, when there are so many attempts, practices and conspiracies in
hand by a desperate partee of Cavaliers against Religion, and the Kingdom; the
greatest of which attempts is absolutely against his Majesty, though it seem
otherwise, by engageing his Person in a bloody and strange war.

Object. The third exception taken, is concerning a clause in the third
Article, for preserving and defending the Kings Majesty's Person, and
Authority, without any thought or intention of diminishing his just power and
greatness; And all which he has to say against it, is this: That though he
which enters this Covenant, may think this clause to be just and fair, yet is
it indeed a fearful collusion and mocking of God, there being nothing more
against his Majesty's authority and power, then the intent and pursuit of this
Covenant.

Answ. All the answer which I shall give to this, is, that it is but his say
so, and I shall refer the impertiall Reader, to my former answers.

Object. His fourth exception is against the fifth Article; and he objects,
that he which enters this Covenant, does bind himself by that Article, to
endeavor the continuance of peace between the two Kingdoms, which, according
to the intent of this Covenant, he must do, by joining with those who have
actually broken the Pacification, and in pursuit of this Covenant, invaded this
Kingdom, which is also a fearful collusion and macking of God.

Answ. I answer, that it is absurd to say, that the Pacification between the
two Kingdoms of England and Scotland is broken by this Covenant, when both the
Kingdoms by an unanimous consent, are joined in this holy League for the
mutual defense and preservation of each others peace; and with as little
reason may it be called an Invasion, or a collusion and mocking of God: For it
is monstrous to conceive that any men should affirm that ratification to be
broken, when the persons ratifying do jointly prosecute the preservation of it,
by virtue of this Covenant, with all earnestness and alacrity, which is
manifested at this day by an ample testimony of the full and free concurrence
of the Bodies of both Nations.

The fifth exception taken, is against the sixth Article; because he that enters
this Covenant does profess by the sixth Article, that he allows and approoves
the Assisting and defending of all those, that take this Covenant, in the
maintaining and pursuing thereof, against all opposition, and lets or
impediments whatsoever; and by the same Article binds himself really and
constantly, to endeavor the same to his power, without giving himself to a
detestable neutrality in this cause, or making a defection to the contrary part.

Object. Now see, says he, the iniquity of this Article, which so plainly
speaks the language of desperate Rebellion, that he which Covenants with them,
does by this Article bind himself to endeavor by force of Arms, to compel
his Sovereign to the Reformation pretended by this Covenant, and does, as much
as in him lies, cut himself off from returning to his Duty and Obedience,
which is here called, a defection to the contrary part.

Answ. I answer, that by this you may see the Iniquity of the Author, and the
desparate sense he makes use of to mis-informe the Gentleman he wrote unto. The
Equity of the Article is apparent; That there should be a firm adhearing to
this Covenant and continuance in his same, notwithstanding all opposition,
contradiction, or diswasion to the contrary whatsoever. All the people stood to
the Covenant, 2 King. 23.4. This was Josiah his care not only for himself,
but for all the people; He made all that were found in Iudeth and Benjamin to
stand to it, so all his days they turned not back from the Lord God of their
Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 34.32, 33. But as for that slander of compelling our
Sovereign by force of Arms to a Reformation; I answer, that it is not
properly to compel him, but rather to expel those from him, which are enemies
to Reformation, and in time would approve themselves so unto him also, if not
resisted by his faithful Subjects, and compel him to enact what themselves
please; which, what it would be if considered, is enough to engage all true
Christian hearts against them: And therefore they are bound to this Covenant by
that duty, obedience, and loyty which they owe unto their Sovereign his Crown
and dignity, and the welfare of the Kingdoms, without defection to the
contrary part.

Object. His last Exception is against a clause in the sixth Article, That he
which enters this Covenant, does profess that he approves, and binds himself
to all the premises in the Articles, as to that which much concerns the glory
of God, the good of the Kingdoms, and the honor of the King: and this he says
is to fill up the measure, and to mock God Almighty to his face.

Answ. I answer, Let all men judge how unreasonable and hellish a slander this
is, and observe with what wresting these black characters of a false Comment,
are here brought in under pretense of writing information to a Gentleman, to
defame the genuine, and innocent sense of a glorious Covenant.

Thus I have done with the first particular of his discouse, which pretended to
prove a necessity of refusing this Covenant, by a false imputation of gross
and palpable Iniquity upon the contents thereof. Now I shall proceed to the
second particular, pretending to prove a necessity of repenting of it, if once
taken.

If he could have proved the premises, then the Conclusion would have followed
more current, for I grant what he says, That the matter and intent of any
Covenant being unlawful, it cannot bind to performance, no more then Herod's
oath did bind him to proceed to execution, Matthew. 14. or the great curse under
which the forty Conspirators, Act. 23. combined themselves to make an end of
Paul, could indeed obliege them to performanc^; But the former point being not
proved, the sense of the Covenant being rather defamed and traduced, then
controverted justly; This latter point grounded upon the former, must of
necessity fall of it self, and therefore it needs not an answer, running
altogether ex falsa Hypothesi, upon a false supposition of Iniquity in the
Covenant which is not as yet proved, nor can it be by the Jesuits, and Iesuited
impugners at Oxford. If they can furnish us with some convincing Arguments in
this way, I my self who am a Covenanter, will not speedily repent of it, but
also persuade others: but till then you must pardon me.

Now in relation to the latter part of his discourse, I shall only give you
notice that the frame of it is grounded upon a false insinuation,

Object. That this Covenant does contrary the Oaths of allegiance and
supremacy; and that the Judges here took it with this reservation: as thus, I
take this Covenant so far forth as it does not contrary the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy. But,

Answ. 1. First, I answer with the words of the learned exhortation to the
taking of the Covenant, that this Covenant is so far from crossing the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance, that ^t binds all, and more strongly engages them
to preserve, and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority in the
preservation and defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdoms.

Answ. 2. I answer that the Judges took it without any such reservation he
speaks of, or any other at all.

But this latter part need no answer (in regard as I said before) of the
grounding it upon a false supposition of the illegality and injustnesse of this
Covenant, which is not as yet proved: And therefore I advise all to take heed
both of the former and the latter, and to weigh the former objections with the
answers impartially and seriously, not as men fore-armed with prejudicate
opinions but as those that desire sincerely to be informed of the necessity and
excellency of this holy Covenant.

The Apostle Peter speaks of Paul's writing, that in them some things are hard
to be understood, which they that are unlearned, and unstable, wrest, as they
do also the other scriptures, to their own destruction. 2. Epist. chap. 3.
verse. 16. But here on the contrary, though the text of this Covenant be easy
to be understood, we see that some (who at lest think themselves) learned, and
who are not only stable but stiffened (as most of the Oxford party are) in
their own erroneous principles and opinions, will be trying their skill (or
rather malice) to wrest or (as the Greek word streblousi imparts) to torture
and set this Covenant upon the rack, to make it speak, and confess a sense
never intended by the composers, or proposers of it: And whereof (if but common
ingenuity be the judge) it never will, nor can be found guilty: But at this
time, I shall say no more to the Author of this base, injurious paper, but that
in the close of the verse quoted from the Apostle Peter; Let him take heed such
wresting as this be not to his own destruction.

Thus I hope in answering this virulent Pamphlet, I have given the Readers some
insite into the matter of this holy League and Covenant, according to the
sincere aim of those that made it; Take it then Reader and swear to it: Who
but an Atheist can refuse the first Article? Who but a Papist the second: who
but an oppressor, or Rebel the third? Who but the guilty the fourth? Who but
men of no fortune, desperate Caviliers the fifth (Who but light and empty men,
unstable as water the sixth? In a word the duty is such that God has ordained,
the matter is such as God approves, and the consequence will be such as God
has promised, the accomplishment of our peace and happiness in this life, and
the final consummation of it in that which is to come.

This is Licenced and entered according to Order.

FINIS.

