THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN FROM HIS EXCELLENCY, TO THE COUNTY OF WARWICK.
Gentlemen,
I Have advise that the Kings Forces are upon their March toward Coventry, I
need not mind you of the lamentable distresses which must attend every man
which falls into their hands, and the particular danger, if the City of
Coventry be taken; therefore that all the Kingdom may know that the
professions of your love to Religion, Liberty, and Country are not in vain,
be now encouraged to show your selves gallantly for the defense thereof, and
raise all the Trained Bands and Volunteers of your County to defend the City of
Coventry, and your County from any violence by opposing their coming thither:
I have also written to raise up the County of Northampton for your defense; I
have also written Letters to the Counties of Leicester and Darby, to advise
them also to gather head, to hinder their passage into your country: And now
being confident that upon the receipt hereof, that you will instantly fall upon
the work, lest delays herein may become your own prejudice, I bid you
Farewell, resting

Worcester, October 2. 1642. Your most assured Friend,ESSEX.
Gentl: If upon your rising I may perceive your carefulness for your own
preservation, and give me intimation thereof, I shall do my part to give you
such assistance as shall become me, and may be suitable to the occasion.



October 10. 1642. SIR,
I Received your Letter the last week, and I bless God for the good news
that it brought with it, concerning (...) Victory of Manchester men, which
shows that the cause, and not the strength of Arms must win the day. We
have Intelligence here, that to morrow both the Armies pitch for Battle, I
should be glad to hear of peace; But if His Majesty's heart be so hardened,
that we must have War, I pray God that the right side may bring away the
Trophy. I have enclosed a true Copy of a Letter that his Excellency writ to the
counties of Darby, and Warwick; My Lord Say sent it to our Quarter Sessions,
with a Letter of his own, to advise the Country to be ready in Arms to
hinder their coming amongst us, for it is their constant course every night,
to ride out by two or three hundreds, and to pillage and plunder Towns and
Villages.

London Printed for H. Blunden, October 13. 1642.


