CAMP DISCIPLINE, OR, THE SOVLDIERS DVTY. In certain Articles and Ordinances of
WAR, commanded to be observed in the Army of SCOTLAND.

BY HIS EXCELLENCE The LORD GENERAL of the said ARMY.

And the Soldiers demanded of him, saying, What shall we do? And he said unto
them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely, and be content with
your wages. Joh. 3.14. LONDON. Printed for Jo. Rothwell in Paul's Churchyard.
the tenth of August. 1642.

ARTICLES AND ORDINANCES of WAR, etc.
The publishing of the Articles and Ordinances of war
THat no man pretend ignorance; and that every one may know the duty of his
place, that he may do it: The Articles and Ordinances following, a^e to be
published at the general randezvous in every Regiment apart, by the Marshals
of the several Regiments, and in the presence of all the Officers. The same
shall afterward be openly read to every Company of Horse and Foot, and at such
times as shall be thought most convenient by the Lord General: and in like
manner shall be made known to so many as join themselves to be professed
Soldiers in the Army. For this end, every Colonel and Captain shall provide
one of those Books, that he may have it in readiness at all occasions, and
every Soldier shall solemnly swear this following Oath;

The Oath of Soldiers.
I N. N. promise and swear to be true and faithful in my service to the
Kingdom of Scotland, according to the heads sworn by me in the Covenant. To
honor and obey my Lord General, and all my superior Officers and Commanders,
and by all means to hinder their dishonor and hurt: To observe carefully all
the Articles of war and Camp discipline: never to leave the d^^^nce of this
Cause, nor fly from my Colors so long as I can follow them: To be ready to
watching warding and working, so far as I have strength: To endure and suffer
all distresses, and to fight manfully to the uttermost, as I shall answer to
GOD, and as GOD shall help me.

Kirk discipline.
I. Kirk discipline shall be exercised, and the poor cared for in every
Regiment, by the particular Eldership, or Kirk Session to be appointed, even as
uses to be done in every Parish in the time of peace: And that there may be an
uniformitie throughout the whole Army in all matters Ecclesiastical; there
shall be a general Eldership, or common Ecclesiastic judicatorie, made up of
all the Ministers of the Camp, and of one Elder direct from every particular
Regiment, who shall also judge of appellations, made unto them from the
particular Sessions or Elderships.

Councels of war.
II. For deciding of all questions, debates and quarrellings, that shall arise
betwixt Captains and their Soldiers, or any others of the Armies and for the
better observing of Camp Discipline, two courts of Justice, the one higher and
the other lower, are appointed, wherein all Judges are sworn to do Justice
equally: The higher also to judge of appellations to be made from the lower
court. And if any man shall by word or gesture show his contempt or (...)
regard, or shall fall out in boasting or braving, while Courts a^e sitting, he
shall be punished by death. And both these Judicatories as well of the Kirk
matters as of war, shall be subject to the Council of Estate, and general
Assembly respective.

Duties to God.
III. Whosoever shall wilfully or carelessly absent himself from morning and
evening prayers, or from preaching before and afternoon on the Lords day, or
other days of the week, when the sign is given by sound of Trumpet, or Drum,
he shall be censured and punished for his neglect or contempt, by penalty,
imprisonment, or other punishment, as his fault deserves.

After the warning given, there shall be no Market, nor selling of commodities
whatsoever, till the Prayers or Preaching be ended, upon the pain of
sore-faulting the things so sold, and of the imprisoning of the offenders.

IIII. Common and ordinary swearing and cursing, open profaning of the Lords
day, wronging of his Ministers, and other acts of that kind, shall not only be
punished with loss to pay, and imprisonment, but the transgressors shall make
their public repentance, in the midst of the Congregation, and if they will
not be reclaimed, they shall with disgrace be openly casseered, and discharged
as unworthy of the meanest place in the Army.

Duty to King, country, and General.
V. If any man shall open his mouth against the Kings Majesty's person, or
Authority, or shall presume to touch his sacred Person, he shall be punished
as a traitor. He that shall speak evil of the Cause which we defend, or of the
Kingdom and Country in the desence thereof, or shall use any words t^nding to
the dishonor of the Lord General, he shall be punished with death.

No man shall at his own h^nd, without warrant of my Lord General, have or
keep intelligence with the enemy, by speech, (...), signs, or any other way,
under the pain to be punished as a auaitor. No man shall give over any
Strength, Magazin, victual, etc. Or make any such motion, but upon extremity,
under the same pain. No man shall give supply, or furnish money, victual, or
any commodities to the enemy, upon pain of death.

Whosoever shall be found to do violence against the Lord General his
Safeguard, or safe conduct, shall die for it.

Whosoever shall be found guilty of carelessness and negligence in his
service, although he be free of treachery and double dealing, shall bear his
own punishment.

Duties of Superiors.
VI. All Commanders and Officers shall be careful, both by their authority and
example, that all under their charge, live in godliness, soberness, and
righteousness: and if they themselves shall be common swearers, cursers,
drunkards, or any of them at any time, shall come drunk to his Guard, or by
quarrelling, or any other way shall commit any notable disorder in his quarter,
loss of place shall be his punishment: And further, according to the sentence
of the court of War.

The Captains that shall be negligent in training their Companies, or that
shall be found to withold from their Soldiers any part of their pay, shall
be discharged of their place, and further censured by the court of War.

No Commander or Officer shall conceal dangerous and discontented humors,
inclined to mutinies, or grudging at the orders given them, but shall make them
known to the prime Leaders of the Army, upon the pain to be accounted guilty
of mutiny.

No Commander or Officer shall authorize or wittingly permit any Soldier to go
forth to a singular combat, under pain of death; But on the contrary, all
Officers shall be careful by all means to part quarrellings amongst Soldiers,
although they be of other Regiments, or Companies, and shall have ^ower to
command them to prison, which if the Soldiers (...) disobey or resist by using
any weapon, they shall die for (...).

No Captain shall presume at his own hand* without warrant of the Lord General,
to call (...) or give a Pass to any enroled Soldier, or Officer who has
appeared at the place of the general Randezvous; nor shall any Commander,
Officer, or Soldier depart without a Pass, or stay behind the time appointed
in his Pass, and whosoever transgresses the one way or the other, shall be
punished at the discretion of the Court of War.

Duties of Soldiers.
VII. All Soldiers shall remember that it is their part to honor and obey
their Commanders, and therefore shall receive their commands with reverence,
and shall make no noise, but be silent, when the Officers are commanding or
giving their directions, that they may be heard by all, and the better obeyed:
he that fails against this, shall be imprisoned.

No Soldier shall leave his Captain, nor servant forsake his master, whether
he abide in the Army or not; but upon license granted and in an orderly way.

Whosoever shall presume to discredit any of the great Officers of the Army,
by writ, word, or any other way, and be not able to make it good, and whosoever
shall lift his weapon against any of them shall be punished by death; and
whosoever shall lift his hand against any of them, shall lose his hand.

No Soldier nor inferior Officer shall quarrel with, or offer any injury to
his Superior, nor refuse any duty commanded him upon pain of casseering, and
to be further censured by the Court of War. And if any shall presume to strike
his Superior, he shall be punished with death* But if it shall happen that any
Officer shall command any thing to the evident and known prejudice of the
public, then shall he who is commanded modestly refuse to obey, and presently
give notice thereof to the Lord General.

If any man shall use any words or ways, tending to mutiny or sedition,
whether for demanding his pay, or upon any other cause, or if any man shall be
privy to such mutinous speeches, or ways, and shall conceal them; both shall
be punished with death.

All must show their valor against the enemy, and not by revenging their
private injuries, which upon their complaints to their superior Officers,
shall be repared to the full. And if any man presume to take his own
satisfaction, or challenge a combat, he shall be imprisoned, and have his
punishment discerned by the Marshall Court.

Duties to others.
The Provost Marshall must not be resisted, or hindered in apprehending or
putting delinquents in prison, and all Officers must assist him to this end,
and if any man shall resist or break prison, he shall be censured by the Court
of War.

VIII. Murder is no less unlawful and intolerable in the time of war, then
in the time of peace, and is to be punished with death.

Whosoever shall be found to have forced any woman, whether he be Commander or
Soldier, shall die for it without mercy. And whosoever shall be found guilty
of adultery or fornication, shall be no less severely censured and punished
than in the time of peace.

Thieves and robbers shall be punished with the like severitie. ^^n^ shall
spo^le, or take any part of their goods that die in the (...) or are killed in
service, he shall restore the double and be farther ^^^^shed a^ discretion. It
is provided that all their goods be forth coming, and be disposed of according
to their Testament and will declared by word or writ before witnesses, or if
they (...)* ^^de no Testament, to their wives, children, or nearest kin^^^^,
according to the Laws of the Kingdom.

A^l ^^all live together as friends and brethren, abstaining from w^^^s of
disgrace, contempt, reproach, giving of lies, and all prov^cation by word or
gesture. He that fails, shall be imprisoned for the first fault, and if he be
incorrigible, he shall be with shame put out of the Army.

IX. All Sould^ers shall come to their Colors, Con^^^^. Arms.
to watch, to be exercised, or to muster, with their own Arms, and if any
Soldier shall come with another man's Arms, he shall be punished with rigor,
and the lender shall loose his Arms. All shall come also with complete and
right Arms in a decent manner, otherwise to be severely punished.

If any man shall sell, or give in pawn his Horse, his arms, or any part of
the ammunition committed to him, or any instruments, as Spades, Shovels, Pickes
used in the field, he shall for the first and second time be beaten, through
the quarter, and for the third time be punished as for other thift: And he that
buyeth them, or takes them to pawn, be his Soldier, or Victualler, shall
pay the double of the money, beside the want of the things bought or impawned,
and b^ further punished at discretion.

Whosoever in a debauched and lewd manner by Cards or Dice, or by sloth, and
un^x^^^^^e neglect, shall loose his Horse, and Arms in who^^, (...), the
hinderance of the service; And whosoever shall w^llful^y spoil, or break his
Arms, or any instrument of war^e comm^t^d ^o ^^m, by cutting down of trees,
or any other way he sh^^^ serve is a pioner, till the loss be made up, and he
^unished (...) charges.

X. No man on h^s ^^rch, Concerning Marching.
or at his lodging within or without the Country upon whatsoever pretext,
shall take by violence either horse, (...), money, or any other thing, less or
more, but shall pa^ (...) usual prices for his meat and drink, or be
furnished according to the order given by the Lord Generaall upon pain of
death, without mercy.

If any man shall pre^^^e to pull down, or set on fire any dwelling house,
though a Cottage, or hew down any fruit trees, or to waste, or deface any part
of the beauty o^ ^^e country, he shall be punished most severely, according
to the importance of the fault.

In marching, no man shall stay behind without leave: No (...) shall straggle
from his Troop or Company. No man shall (...) out of his rank, and put others
out of order, under all high^^^ pain.

XI. If any Colonel of horse or foot, Of Muster.
shall keep back his Soldiers from the appointed musters, or shall lend his
Soldiers to (...) false muster, upon trial in the court Marshall, he shall be
punished as a deceiver. And if any Muster-master shall use any take Rols, shall
have any hand in false Musters, or by connivence, or any other way be tried, to
be accessory to them, he shall suffer the ^ike punishment.

XII. No man shall presume to do the smallest injury to any that bring
necessaries to the Leaguer, Victuallers.
whither by stealing from them, or deceiving them, or by violence in taking
their horse or goods, under the pain to be accounted and punished as enemies.
No Victualler shall sell rotten victuals, upon pain of imprisonment and
confiscation, and further as they shall be judged to deserve.

No Soldier shall provide and sell Victuals, unless he be authorized, nor
shall any that sells Victuals, keep in his Tent or Hutte, any Soldier at
unseasonable hours, and forbidden times, under pain at discretion. Like as
all the prices thereof shall be set down by the general Marshall, and be given
to the Marshall of the several Regiments.

XIII. No man enrolled professing himself or pretending to be a Soldier shall
abide in the Army, Duties in the Camp.
unless he enter in some Company, nor shall he that has entered depart
without license upon the pain of death. No man having license shall stay
beyond the time appointed him upon pain of loss of his pay during the time of
his absence, and further punishment at discretion. If any man in a mutinous way
show himself discontent with the quarter assigned him, he shall be punished as
a mutiner.

And if any man shall stay out of his quarter or go without shot of Cannon
being intrinshed, but one night, without leave of his superior officer he
shall be casheerd.

All that shall be absent from the watch after the sign is given for the
setting thero^ shall be severely punished. He that reveals or falsisieth the
watchword given by the officer, within the trenches, or before the Colors: He
that is taken sleeping or drunken upon his watch: he that comes off the watch
before the time, every one of those shall be punished with death.

If any number of Soldiers shall assemble together, for taking mutinous
counsel upon whatsoever pretext: The Officers joining with them, shall suffer
death: The tenth man of the Soldiers shall be hanged, and the test condemned
to be pioners, and to purge the Camp, till by some exploit they procure
pardon, and redeem their reputation.

XIV. Every man when the Alarm is given, (...)
shall repair speedily to his Colors: no man shall forsake or flee from his
Colors. No man in the Country shall receipt them that flee. No man in the
Battle shall throw away his Mushet, Pi^^, or Bandilier, all under the pain of
death.

Whatsoever Regiment of horse of foot, having charged the enemy, shall draw
back, before they come to stroke of sword, shall answer for it before a
council of war: And if it be through default of any Officer, he shall be
censured by the council of war. If the fault be in the Soldiers, the tenth
man shall be punished with death, and the rest put to base service, till by
their valor they prove themselves worthy of a better condition.

XV. If it shall come to pass, Dut^^ after Battle.
that the enemy shall force us to Battle, and the Lord shall give us victory,
none shall kill a yielding enemy, nor save him that still pursues, upon pain
of death. Neither shall there be any ransoming of persons, spoiling, pillaging,
parting of the prey, or wasting and burning by fire, or disbanding from their
charges, or Officers, but as the Lord General shall give order upon the same
pain of death.

XVI Every man's carriage shall be diligently observed, Rewards for ^he
well-deserving
and he according to his merit rewarded or punished: And whatsoever Officer or
Soldier shall carry himself dutifully in his station, and does his part
valiantly, in battle or fight, shall after the laudable example of the wisest,
and worthiest Kingdoms and Estates, have his honor and reward according to
his worth and deserving, whether hereafter we have peace or war.

Matters that are clear by the light and law of Nature are presupposed: Things
unnecessary are past over in silence: and other things that be judged by the
common customs and constitutions of war, or may upon new emergents, be
expressed afterward.

FINIS.

