ENGLANDS WOLF WITH EAGLES CLAVVES: OR The cruel Impieties of Bloodthirsty
Royalists, and blasphemous Anti-Parliamentarians, under the Command of that
inhumane Prince Rupert, Digby, and the rest. Wherein the barbarous Cruelty of
our Civil uncivil Wars is briefly discovered.
depiction of a wolf in cavalier's clothing with eagle's claws for feet

1. ABout the middle of September, 1642. a base and barbarous act was performed
against that faithful Commander, Captain Wingate, a Member of the Honorable
House of Commons, being taken prisoner by the Kings party in fight near
Worcester, he was carried prisoner to Worcester, and there brought before the
two Germane Princes, Rupert and Maurice, and by them with many base
reproachful revilings examined, concerning his being in Arms against the King,
which he wisely, and as resolutely declared. At which the bloody Prince Rupert
being incensed to hear, with an outrageous fury, called the said Captain
Parliament dog, telling him, if he had such a gift of patience, he should
speedily be made a rare martyr. Immediately after this they marched from
Worcester to Ludlow, and this Captain being bound with his hands behind him was
set on horseback, bound fast to the horse, guarded by Troopers that swore Dam
them they would pistol him. And having rode about six or seven miles, having
often set their charged Pistolls to his breast, if he would not turn they would
shoot him. But Prince Rupert himself coming to him gave command, if he would
not renounce the Parliaments service, and turn to the King, he should
presently be stripped and ride stark naked before them to Ludlow. But this
faithful Captain still continued his former resolution, and was presently
stripped, (receiving, as he said, more hurt by the cold, then trouble at their
cruelty and scorn.) And thus the Prince causd him to ride through the street
at Ludlow, and with jeeres asked him, If he had now learned to suffer, vowing if
he would not recant, to proceed against him with cruel torments to put him to
death: but he persisted still in his constancy, and being sent to prison, was
used most cruelly, being allowed but bread and water. This truth is confirmed
and published by Authority of Parliament formerly.

2. Amongst the rest one that was hanged three several times, one after
another, the halter broke every time as he was cast from the ladder, and the
last time of the three, in a rage they took two halters, and twisted them
together, but this also snapt in sunder. When he was cast off, and the man was
still perfectly alive and well, at which they were struck to the heart, yet
cast him into prison, and there starved him to death; which upon occasion by
witness is to be verified.

3. Their common saying is, They will not be beholding to God to save them, and
that they had rather be in hell with their Comrades, then in heaven with the
Roundheads.

4. After the Parliaments Forces were out of the City of Bristoll, and without
the Works, the Cavaliers revilingly and blasphemously told them, they were
sorry they could not butcher them, upbraiding them, and asking where is now
your God? where are your fastings and professions? where is your King Jesus,
and said, King Charles should be King for all King Jesus.

5. Another saving of theirs is; The Devil that made us, dam us, and Dam me
and Ram me into the mouth of a Cannon, and shoot me nine miles into hell.

6. They drink a health to King Charles, in whom they live, move, and have
their being.

7. How should we forget that bloody massacre of Byron in Cheshire, that in
cool blood murdered no less then 1500. that fled into a Church for shelter,
by fiering the same, and all these innocent poor souls burnt therein.

8. At Crowland in Lincolnshire about the middle of May, 1643. the Cavaliers
coming to a neighbor Town called Spawling, they beset the house of one Master
Ram, a godly painful Minister of that Town, they took him with one Master
Harington, Master Horn, and Master Slator, all worthy religious Gentlemen, and
carried them away prisoners, and there kept them at Crowland for three weeks.

9. After which time they of Spawling beset Crowland, hoping to release these
worthy Gentlemen and their Minister. Whereupon these Cavalerian Crowlanders
took these worthy Gentlemen out of prison, apiniond them all together, and set
them on the top of their brestworkes of the Town, in the face of their friends
that came to relieve them, who not knowing who they were at such a distance,
shot fiercely at them, and one Captain Harington, son to Master Harington, then
prisoner, shot three several times at his own father not knowing him, but at
last perceiving this cursed wile, the fight abated on that side where they were
placed.

10. Herein appeared the admirable providence of God, that in so many violent
and furious shots, not one of these worthy Gentlemen were touched or hurt by the
shot, God guiding the Bullets not to hurt his servants. Thus they were
miraculously preserved, and the Town taken.

11. Cicester prisoners coming near to Oxford, diverse Inhabitants went to see
them, the prisoners were tied two and two together with cords or Match, two
Ministers trasht through the dirt as the rest: when they came before his
Majesty, in the mire they fell upon their knees for his Majesty's favor; but
it was in vain, his Majesty returned this answer, they had brought that misery
upon themselves: five or six dyed the same night they came to Oxford with their
miserable usage; and one to end his misery cut his own throat.

12. They also took after the fight five of the Parliaments Soldiers, and
tied them by the hands with ropes, and forced them into the Thames, where they
were drowned.

13. Amongst the rest one honest woman, Jane White, that reproved them for
swearing, was shot with a brace of Bullets through the back and belly, being
great with child, and within three weeks of her delivery, she dyed immediately.

14. At Banbury, though his Majesty gave his hand and seal to the contrary,
that no injury should be done, yet most barbarously they fell to plunder the
whole Town, to the utter ruin of the said Inhabitants, saying, The King did
not know the state and condition of war.

15. One William Wright, of Abington, being well affected to the Parliament,
advised the Inhabitants to stand upon their guard, and oppose the enemy, who
being discovered, by Prince Plunderers command was condemned by martial Law,
and hanged at his own door.

16. A Gentleman of good worth they hanged up in a With upon a tree, for
saying, he was for the King and Parliament.

17. At Ipbeworth an honest religious man, saying he was for the King and
Parliament, they cut off both his ears, and gave him thirty wounds; and after
threw him on the dunghill, saying in a scoffing manner, Let the dogs lick him
whole.

18. They took another man in the same Town, and fastened a coard to his
feet, and dragged him about the streets: at last being weary of their cruelty,
thus they said; Why should we weary our selves with this P^rliament dog, and so
discharged three Pistolls at him to end his torment and life together.

19. A young man at Leeds for refusing to bear Arms against the Parliament,
was horst by the Cavaliers, and great weights hung at his legs, which so hurt
him that he bled and filled his boots with blood, and his Mother weeping offered
largely to take him off, but they would not, so that within a small space after
he dyed.

20. Great cruelty was used to the prisoners at Oxford to force them to take
the Protestation by the tyrant Smith, by tying lighted Match between their
fingers, burning them to the bones, of which there were eyewitnesses.

21. Prince Rupert coming to Brainford with his cruel Cavaliers, he exercised
most inhumane outrages there, plundering a Brewers house, spoiled and let out
his beer, took from him ten or twelve Horses, drew his wife out adores in her
smoke, with her young infant in her arms, having layen in but a week before;
she dyed soon after.

22. All those Prisoners which were taken at Brainford fight, they pinioned
together with match and ropes, stripped them to their shirts, whipped them, and
drove them before them like dogs to Hounslo, over surres and prickly bushes,
barehead and bare-foote. Some of these poor wretches fled from them into the
Thames for hoped safety, were shot by these barbarous Cavaliers; and thus many
were drowned.

23. In November 1642. by that cruel and devilish Cataline, the Lord Digby,
entering the Town of Malbrough with his cruel companion Sir Daniel Oneale,
that Irish bloody Rebel, having with grenades fired the Town in four
several places, rod furiously through the streets, and with drawn swords cut
and hackt all they could meet with, whether men or women.

24. Then they brake open their shops, and took away all sorts of goods they
met with, setting their swords and pistolls to men and women's breasts,
threatening to kill them, if they would not confess where their money was, and
what goods they could not carry away, they brake and spoiled.

25. One Cavalier above all the rest coming an honest Gentleman's house in
Malbrough, uttered these words in a most insolent outrageous manner; God dam
me, ram me, sink me nine miles into hell, if I suffer one Roundhead to continue
here.

26. In a short time after the Lord Digby or Grandison came into the same
Gentleman's house, who had many children, and told him he must pay 500.1. within
four days after at farthest; the Gentleman told him he had not wherewith
possible to pay 100.1. he had been so plunderd lately; and besides he had 18.
children to maintain, and now nothing left to keep them: but this Lord
swearing his common Oath, God dam him, what did he tell him of 18. children,
why did he not tie them two by two together and drowned them; then demanding
where they were, he said, if he would not drown them he would and then swore
the same oath as formerly, if he would not pay that sum, he would hang him at
his own door.

27. Another Cavalier in the Town profferd a Townsman twenty shillings, to
teach him a new Oath, that he had never heard sworn.

28. The spoil at this time was most lamentable, besides what they convayd
away, letting out whole hogsheads of oil, and vessels of strong water, Aqua
vitae, Treakles, spice, and fruit, which was all thrown about the shops, and
streets, besides the burning and taking away of large Bibles, and all sorts of
good books, with which they made great fires.

29. In one man's shop, wherein was Hemp, Flax, Oil, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, and
such like combustables, they kindled a fire, and left it burning when they left
the Town, which was timely discovered and quenched.

30. At this time they drove at least 200. prisoners before them to Oxford,
bound two by two, and forced them on foot through all the dirt and mire where
their Cannons went: of which number about thirty were honest able Townsmen;
they were most cruelly used in the Tower of the Castle, not being allowed fire,
candle, or straw to lie on, but the bare boards and plankes of the room, and a
penny in bread, and a farthing beer, depriving them of all friends, or supply
otherwise.

31. And when Smith their cruel Jailer was solicited to pity them; his answer
was, Hang them damned rogues, villains, traitors, the Devil take them, they
are used too well, and when some of them were ready to dye, and he told of it,
he would suffer nothing to be administered for their help or recovery.

32. Note moreover, that besides all this spoil by plunder, and otherwise, of
this distressed Town, these wicked Cavaliers burnt down 35. dwelling houses,
and made at least 150. able persons homelesse and harbourlesse; six or seven
barnes full of Corn burnt and destroyed, besides stables, wood piles, and
outhouses, and all their horse taken away: the loss of this Town in all is
by eyewitnesses and sufferers confirmed to be 50000.1.

33. This Tyger-like Tyrant Smith has so pincht his prisoners with cold and
thirst, denying them water to drink, that when they have been brought forth
and examined by their merciless Judges, they have gladly drank the water
wherein Gentlemen had washed their hands, and raine-water in the Castle Court,
yea, many have drunk their own urin.

34. After some were brought to such misery, then they were promised a penny a
day in cheese, and their liberty at length, if they would take that Oxonian
cursed Protestation. Whereupon diverse poor souls took the same, and within
three days after their cheese was denied them, and all hope of liberty,
unless they would pay the Tyrant Smith large fees, or serve in arms for the
King.

35. And others had their heels and necks tied together for 44. hours, not
suffering them to have one bit of bread all that time, or drop of water: some
were so tied or manacled three weeks together, without intermission, because
they would not take that Protestation.

36. The perfidious dealing of Prince Rupert at Bristoll, violating all
Articles of agreement at the surrender of the Town, as soon as they had
entered plundering all houses as well Malignants as others.

37. They also took women by the throats, one especially, and put a rope about
her neck, threatening to throttle her, if she would not reveal where her
husbands money lay, and tied a sheafe of hemp to her body, and began to set it
on fire, thereby to force her to confess the same.

38. Some gave money to several Officers, that they might escape, yet were
plundered, and found no redress; others were greatly fined to recover those
goods that were taken away.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons, dwelling in Aldersgate- street. 1647.


