ENGLANDS SECOND Alarm to War, Against the Beast. Saul, with his Edomite has
shed blood to his power; He smites Isreal's City, and destroys his own house;
overcame his People once, and overthrew himself for ever! It relates to what
is done now. Grave questions touching the Edomite; his admission to Court, and
into office there; how it relates to Papists now. He has a Commission to
destroy a City of Priests, which he does with an utter destruction. Excellent
Reasons why The Lord suffered such a destruction to be executed upon Israel
then; And why he suffers the same now; And why by an Edomites hand then and now.

Lament. 4.21. Rejoice and be glad [It is a bitter mockery, i.e. weep and
howle] O Daughter Edom, The Cup also shall pass through unto thee: Thou shall
be drunken, and shall make thy self naked.

Isa. 49.25.26. For thus says The LORD, The prey of the Terrible shall be
delivered; I will contend with him that contendeth with Thee; I will feed them,
that spoil Thee, with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their
own blood as with sweet wine.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill, in the second year of the Beasts
wounding warring against The Lamb and those that are with Him, Called, Chosen,
and Faithful. 1643.

ENGLANDS ALARM TO War, against the Beast.
SECT. II. THe Edomite is Saul's Scout now, and his General in the Field anon:
David's enemy always, The Priests accuser; but can charge him with no more but
what was his office to do, therefore not so impudent as are the Edomites in our
days: Saul impleads the Priest; gives him leave to make answer for himself,
which he does clearly and fully; and then is destroyed, he, and a City of
Priests, man, woman, and child there, and beast also. This relates fully to
our times. Quaeries touching the Edomite. Saul's taking him into his Court,
assigning him to office there, and giving him commission to smite a City of
Priests. Quaeries touching that miserable destruction. Gods judgments secret,
but just and righteous upon Ireland, and England. Yet the mischief done by man
shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing upon his own pate.
CHAP. I. David comes to Nob; Doeg spies him there; hastens to Saul, tells him
all his observations, yet can lay nothing to the Priests charge, but what was
the Priests duty to do. Doeg tells truth, yet loved lying. The Edomites now,
more shameless.
DAvid comes to Nob to Abimelech the Priest there, 1 Samuel 21.
entreats a courtesy of him, and the Priest does him a Hawfull favor (whereof
we shall hear more anon) Doeg the Edomite, Saul's chief Heardsman was there,
for Saul had a Scout to spy every where, but none did his master better service
(to Saul's liking) then Doeg did; he was an Edomite, (that I would have noted)
and now, being in Isreal's Land, he was of his Religion too [for that is a thing
easily taken up] and being at Nob, has a fair pretense for that also, as you
may read, Religion called him thither, and held him there: a pretense only,
and no more; for that bloody wretch minds not Religion, not the solemn Acts
thereabout: he minds only all that which passed betwixt Abimeleth and David,
that so he might do mischief, a mighty man that way. And now having fed his
eye, and filled his mouth with observations, he hastened to his master Saul, 1 Samuel 22.6.
finds him in Gibeah under a tree in Ramah, having his spear in his hand, and
all his servants standing about him.

It is worth the noting by the way, what mischief this evil and perverse will
actuated by his evil spirit, has done unto Saul; It had drown him from his
own house, and Court, where he might have rested in peace with his servants
about him; he is now, even Saul the King, under a Tree with a spear in his
hand, when no enemy is near him but himself, and his evil spirit, which he
entertaines and hugges as his best friend, though the worst enemy to Saul, next
to himself, and the peace of the kingdom. It is a true saying. A man finds
no such enemy in the world, as he may find himself to be to himself.
Chrysostom.
The Greek Father has a full Treatise upon that matter: I return to the Tree
again, where Doeg found his master, him, that had lost himself, and heard him
complain bitterly to his servants, That they had all conspired against him.
Why? because they had not yet betrayed innocent David, and delivered him as a
prey up unto their masters hands: This Saul calls a conspiracy with his son
Jonathan, a good man, who withholds his fathers hands as long as he could from
shedding innocent blood, and does, according to Gods Commandment, his utmost
to deliver the innocent; This Saul calls a stirring up his servant (he means
David) against him, Verse 9.
to lie in wait as at this day. It follows, Then answered Doeg. The Edomite
takes the words out of Saul's mouth, as spoken to himself: they were very
pleasing to him, and answers before he was asked, for sure Saul does not
question the Edomites readiness in that service. But he answers, assures
Saul, that he is none of those conspirators with Jonathan, in behalf of
David, not he; and he gives good testimony thereof, for he tells all that,
which passed betwixt Abimelech and David there; he tells all, just as David
knew it would be, when he heard that Doeg the Edomite had spied him there.
Verse 22.
We may observe David's Psalm touching this matter; and by the way, how well
fitted a cruel master is with a bloody servant. And so let it pass; Psalm. 52.
noting only this in this place, and touching that Edomite; how Doeg impleads
Abimelech, and what he lays to his charge; he tells all, and yet he tells
nothing at all, but what stands upon everlasting record to the Edomites shame,
and the Priests glory: for this he says, I saw the son of Iesse, [he means
David] but speaks as contemptibly of him as he thought fit at that time; yet
not so wickedly as the Edomites now adays call David, for they call him by as
vile a name as David, vile in his own eyes, but the more precious in Gods
eyes, calls himself, a dog.]

I saw the son of Iesse come to Nob to Abimelech there. [Well, 1 Samuel 22.9.
whither should David go, persecuted by a cruel Lord, but to a good Priest
for direction from Gods mouth? there was no hurt, but good in all that] The
Priest enquired of the Lord for him.] [It was well he did, for he did but his
duty,] and gave David bread.] The Priest was bound to do as much to his enemy,
much more to David, for who so faithful as David in all the kingdom. Nay, had
he not done it (though sacred bread) he had destroyed David; as bloody men have
done in Oxford, denying the hungry soul bread there, and suffering them to dye
for want of water.] And gave David the sword of Goliab the Philistine. [And
that was it, but the greatest reason for that in the world. David had slain
the Philistine with the sword, then carries it away as lawful prize; but, that
God might have all the glory, he lays it up before the Lord; and now, after
enquiring at Gods mouth, it is given David.] But this is all the Edomite has to
say; And I know not what he could have said more to the Priest his
commendation. Blessed be God, that the Edomite has not whereof to accuse the
good Priest; all he speaks is for his commendation; and surely so is the will
of God, that, with well doing, Priests then, and Ministers now, and people also
(and it is their glory) may put to silence, 1 Pet. 2.16.
[muzzle the mouths of beastly men] we read, silence the ignorance of foolish
men. And so, by the will and grace of God, have and do Ministers, and people
at this day, even put to silence the ignorance of wicked men: Many and
grievious things are laid to their charge, but no more proved then was against
David or Paul after him. Therefore we must note here, that the Edomite then,
though a bloody wretch, and mighty to do mischief, and could, like the Spider,
turn Balsome into Poison; yet was he a very modest informer: I do not
remember, that the Bishops had such another in any of their Courts; and truly
he shames the Edomites of these days: This Edomite tells Saul the truth, and
nothing but the truth, and so shames the Devil: That Abimelech enquired of the
Lord for David; so he did; That he gave David bread; so he did too: and a
sword; so he did also. The Edomite accuses the Priest of no more but what the
Priest did, and the Edomite saw done. The children of Edom in these days are
more graceless and impudent a great deal: they swear, and curse; and
blaspheme, and do not utter more words then lies, against David, the upright
in heart; what devouring words hear we from their mouths! what horrible
blasphemies from Liechfields Press in Oxford! how do they charge David with
those things he knows not? nay abhorres to think of, as contrary to his foul
and spirit, as were those things charged upon Job in his two and twentieth
Chapter.

This is all we will note, touching the Edomite in this Chapter; we shall
enquire more of him anon. We see here, he was a very mannerly civil fellow, in
comparison of the Edomites now a days; not so much of the Divill in him as
these have, who rage now amongst us, breaking bands, and casting away cords, as
possessed men in ancient times. And yet before I shut up this Chapter, I must
satisfy a small doubt. Psalm. 52.3.
David in his Psalm of Instructions, tells us that Doeg loved sying; So he
did, for when Saul complained, that all his Servants conspired against him;
M^^^^^^ to inform the understanding touching the Edomite, and this time.
they do indeed, said Doeg, Abimelech conspireth against thee too; and so he
accuses the Priest, materially, not one false word in the whole Accusation:
But intentionally, lies all, and devouring words; he intended as much mischief
to Abimelech, as he could have done him, had he spoken against him never a
word true. We may exemplify it thus.

An Edomite now, (for we shall prove anon, that the Papist now, and the
Edomites then, are brothers) came to the King, tells his Majesty, that the
Ammunition was removed from Hull. That is true; and yet lying and devouring
words, intentionally spoke to enrage the King against his best Subjects. It is
all in all with what mind words are spoken, if with a mind to murder and
destroy, they are lying and devouring words, though never a word false: and so
I will shut up this Chapter, Verse 4.
Thou love all devouring words, O deceitful man!

CHAP. II. Saul impleads Abimelech; he makes answer for himself, which clears
the case of all the righteous now, and the great case now in question. Saul is
not satisfied with reason, but, notwithstanding reason and Law both, command
also from Gods mouth for what Abimelech did, Saul slays Abimelech, and
destroy's the City of Priests.
SAul will be discovered anon, his own hand will take off the Veil, wherewith
he has covered the eyes of Priests and People: the very intents of his heart
touching David will be laid naked before the people; his own hand will now
give in clear evidence, how bloody his thoughts were always toward David.
And indeed the hand is a sure witness, and tells us evermore whitherto
thoughts tend, as the casting the Water-mans Arms tells us whither he tends,
and not the setting of his face. When Diotrephes did reach forth his hand to
Excommunication, casting the Brethren out of the Church, then the old Servant
of the Lord must needs tell against whom the malicious words were pointed or
prated; Against us, 3. Epist. Ioh. 10. (...).
says Saint John, for against them the hand went our also. I speak not this,
as if I thought it so hard a matter to ken which way malicious devouring words
do tend; or that I think the thoughts, projects, contrivances of the wicked
against the godly are so indiscernable; though we must grant that there are
many intricacies and perplexities in their ways, the turnings and windings of
the crooked Serpent; for the wicked (like harmfull beasts) do love confusa
vestigia. The wicked man forgeth and hammereth forth deceit, Fabricatur, Pro.
6.14.
and while his thoughts and imaginations are thus busily employed, he thinks no
eye is upon him, but that he is (as some Pioner or Gun-powder-man) hid under
ground: and indeed from the eye of man he is hid. For our thoughts are but the
transactions or discussions of the mind, within that inward closet and privy
Chamber there, and therefore they must needs want form and shape; but the
office of the tongue is to stamp a form, to give a shape unto them, and then
our thoughts are legible.

For what other are our actions, but our very thoughts, our secret talkings and
parleys of our mind, cast into a mould: only we must observe (and it is but a
common observation) That the hand gives the truest shape, the hand makes the
perfectest mould. There are some, we know, who read not as they write, nor sing
as they prick, and many more who speak not as they think; but the hand
varieth not from the Idea that was in the mind. If a man forgeth mischief
upon his bed, then when he is up, and it be in the power of his hands, and
there be no overruling hand, he will act it: The hand is a sure interpreter of
our mind, and of the transactions there, an infallible witness that cannot
lie: words may deceive, and many times are spoken for this very end, to darken
the thoughts and intent of the mind, and to make them less legible; these may
be smoother then butter, when war is in his heart: these may be as soft as
oil, and yet drawn swords, as we read: But when we see the hand besmeared with
blood, then we certainly conclude, that the thoughts were of a scarlet color;
and this is the sight or prospect we shall take a view of presently, A bloody
execution done upon Nob, yet bloody though it be, Saul pretends he does it by
help of God and the Law, by the known Laws of the Kingdom; which, that we
may examine, we will handle it not as an execution done, but ready to be done,
else Saul might be said to do as the Judge at Lidford, who hanged a man in the
forenoone, and then heard his indictment, and passed sentence over him in the
afternoon, not called the known Law of the kingdom then, Mr. Iueil. defense.
but Lidford Law to this day. Saul was not to bad as to do so, he has slain
Abimelech, but he impleaded him first, objects against him, and hears what
he can say for himself: Saul has this to say against him.

That Abimelech and the son of Iesse ( Saul means David, Ob.
whom he names with as little honor as can be) were confederate together and
had conspired against him; 1 Samuel 22.13.
Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Iesse?

A sore accusation, Ans.
but of no weight, validity, or strength, from Saul's mouth, who calls all
conspirators, who will not show Saul where David is, that so he may shed
innocent blood according to the power in his hands, Verse. 8.
that so he may shed innocent blood according to the power in his hands, Verse.
13.
All of you have conspired against me. But what had the Priest done which might
be called a Conspiracy, a taking part with David, That he should rise against
Saul, to lie in wait as it is at this day? Thus Saul says, and so he impleads
Abimelech.

In that thou have given bread, Ob.
and a sword, and have enquired of God for him.

We will take the last first, Ans.
enquired of God for David: It was the Priests office so to do; nor was that
the first time that the Priest enquired of the Lord for David, Verse. 15.
nor did the Priest know the second amongst the many thousands of Israel, who
deserved better from the hands of Saul and all Israel then David did; and
therefore why might not Abimelech enquire of the Lord for him There is all
Reason and Law both, that so the Priest should do, enquire of the Lord for
David; but reason will not serve, nor the resolution of the Lord neither. The
enquiry was (says Iunius) about the Shewbread, Vt cognoseeree an sacros panes
tantum Sacerdotibus concessos, and gladium semel Deo sacratum, ad alios usus
transfer fas esset.
lawful for the Priests only to eat; and the Sword consecrated to God,
Whether that or this might be translated unto other uses? whereunto (no doubt)
the Priest had full satisfaction, That they might; In such an extremity David
might refresh his hungry soul with that bread; and in such a danger which God
was privy to, he might take Goliath sword, to defend himself therewith; and to
prevent Saul from seizing upon it first, 1 Samuel 21 10.
the more easily thereby to further his bloody design upon David.

But yet there is some more question touching the Sword; as for the bread, it
was made for man, and not man for bread: That is a cleared case from the Lord
Christ's own mouth. Touching the Sword there is all the question now: Saul (a
King) pretends himself Master of the same, as of Keilah; for all the strong
holds and ammunition there did belong to Saul, they were all his proper goods,
and therefore Abimelech giving the sword to David, he did it, that he should
use it against Saul, to lie in wait: So Saul forces the accusation.

Whereunto Abimeleth makes a fair and full answer: That Saul was no more Lord
of the one then of the other; he had no more propriety or right in the sword
then in the bread; nor the one, nor the other were Saul's, but the Lords,
laid-up both before the Lord, and consecrated to Him: But the Lord has no nead
of bread or of a sword. His people Israel have need of both; and as their need
required, so Israel might take the Bread, thereby to sustain life, and the
Sword, thereby to defend life. David took it for that end, and according to
the mind and will of God, whose intent was clear. That Goliabs sword, now
lawfully wrested out of his hand, and in David's hand, then laid up before the
Lord, should be for the defense of Israel, and to fortify Israel against their
enemies to the worlds end. And so the case is resolved about Keilah too, a City
that had gates and bartes, not Saul's City now to batter down (though he would
presume so far) about David's ears; but His City whose the kingdom was, the
Lords kingdom, and trusted only to Saul for the defense of Israel, and no
further: And yet that Abimelech may deliver no more to Saul but what is
justifiable by the Law of heaven and earth, he assures him, that what he says
is from Gods Mouth, for there he enquired, and received answer as aforesaid,
and thereupon his warrant to give David Bread and Sword both. Moreover he
adds, be it far from him, 1 Samuel 22.14.
the Priest of the Lord, to entertain a disloyal thought against his Master,
the Lords Anointed, enquiring of the Lord for David, and giving him bread and a
sword: he knew David to be a faithful person, none like him in all Saul's
house, nor more honorable, being the Kings Son-in-Law, and for any thing else
he knew nothing less or more. As honest and satisfying an answer, had it
been spoken to any man's ear but Saul's, as ever came from a Priests mouth, for
it was taken from Gods Mouth: but Saul is resolved before hand upon the
Question, for nothing can satisfy Saul's thirst but David's blood; and because
Abimelech stood in Saul's way, and for relief of David, Saul will have the
Priests blood; Verse. 16.
And the King said, thou shall surely dye Abimelech: See! There is an argument
Abimelech cannot answer: when a man drives furiously onward in a bloody way,
neither law nor reason shall stop him, nor the Angel with his drawn sword in
the way. Nay, Saul stops not there, he speaks more bloody words yet, and will
do as he speaks: What? I am loath to mention it from the mouth of a King, and
King of Israel, the great Fiductary of the kingdom there; I had rather a
Philistin said it, such an unkingly word, so devoid of all reason and humanity:
but yet Isreal's King says it, and we must repeat it after him, Thou, and all
thy fathers house: Ah Lord! what a bloody word is this! what a bloody man is
that! An Evil spirit came upon Saul indeed, haunts him still, and drives him
on: Lord deliver us from him, for the man is mad with rage, Thou, and all thy
fathers house. 1 Samuel 2.23.
True it is it was the burden of the Lord upon Elies house, and cause there was
just enough, why God should do to that house as he threatened. Yea and just
cause too, though not so clear to dim eyes, Wherefore Nob should be so
smitten, men, women, and children there. We have concluded, The cause is just,
for God is righteous; And yet no cause, not the least title of reason, why Saul
should do it, why he should seal a Commission to an Edomite to do such an
horrible execution; Saul (I say) the great Eiductary of the kingdom, entrusted
with the lives of all the Priests and people there, no reason why Saul should
so say, and so do, being as aforesaid; but all the reason in the world why he
should stop his ear from hearing of blood, much more his hand from shedding
the same. But Saul will do as he said, Thou shall surely dye Abimelech, thou
and all thy fathers house: See! Saul will be chief and foreman in this bloody
work, to make the City of Priests an Acheldama, that it may be called no more
Nob, but a Field of blood, or HORMAH, Number. 21.3.
utter destruction. Saul is the chief Actor here, for he commands his servants
first, Turn ye and slay the Priests; his servants would not; Saul will have it
done: then he turned to Doeg a Rightman, and said as much to him; no sooner
said but it was done, And Doeg the Edomite turned, fell upon the Priests, and
slew: Mark it, for though here is a miserable destruction, bodies and garments
too rolled in blood; yet here is comfort to every true Israelite: What is that?
To see a City lie in ashes, Priests and people wallowing in blood? is there
comfort in this? No, and yet God will bring comfort and good out of all this to
his Israel anon: Now this is the comfort, that there are but two Actors in this
Tragedy, Saul and his Edomite; only these specified by name. True it is we
shall read anon in the third Section of Three thousand chosen men out of
Israel, whom Saul called together to guard his person, he said, being afraid
of David (as the Bird of Prey is of the Partridge.) But nothing they did, not a
drop of blood shed by them; These only are the Active Men, these two, skillful
to destroy, Saul and his Edomite.

Thank God for this; Wickedness proceeds from the wicked man. Israel can wash
their hands in the innocence of their hearts, and say, They are free touching
this matter; for (which will be more clear anon) Israel cannot charge any
more, then two amongst those three thousand, their King, and his Edomite; More
were guilty of that bloodshed, that is certain; for the Edomite was not
singular, but plural, as will appear by and by; but no more could Israel
charge with the bloodshed, that their hands had shed it, but Saul and his
Edomite only. And the charge lay heavy upon Saul, like as a heavy burden
unsupportable, as a Millstone, pressing him down upon his own sword, and then
Lower. He had shed blood to his power, and blood pursued him, till it had made
a more clean riddance of him, and his house, then he made at Nob, for there
one Priest escaped his butchers knife; here, not one shall escape. This we may
read in a Book I have seen called the Kings Chronicle. And so God reckoned
with Saul to the last drop, 1. Sect. p. 26.27.
which he has shed; for God has barrelled-up the spilt Blood of the Righteous,
as he bottles-up their Tears.

CHAP. 3. The Priests Arraignment, impleadings, and Answers run-up paerallell
with ours in these times, so does the upshot or determination of the business;
for there was Peace in proposition, but none in conclusion betwixt Saul and
David. So here. Saul has shed blood, which runs-up to these times too, but with
a fuller stream of bloods: yet the voice of Blood cries louder, then does the
voice of Bloods.
SO now Saul has done execution, and God has dealt with Saul according as He
threatens. When we think thereon we have cause to say, and feel the virtue of
what we say, My heart trembles because of Thee, and I fear for thy
judgments. Before I will relate to these Times, I will tell one thing very
briefly, which shall relate to the present, and parallel it self. Here has
been a fair and peaceable parley betwixt Saul and Abimelech touching David.
He impleaded Abimelech, and gives him leave to make answer; which the Priest
has done, as we heard, the clearest and fullest that ever was heard. Was there
not a sweet agreement betwixt them? No, it was never intended. Proposition it!
as we say, Tender propositions of Peace betwixt Saul and David, while the Evil
spirit is upon Saul, and the Edomite in Saul's Bosom! It is to no purpose,
vanity of vanitie's the greatest vanity; To wish or think of an Accommodation
betwixt Saul and David, rebus sic stantibus, (that must be remembered) the Evil
spirit in his place, and the Edomite in his, and Saul quite out of himself;
for so it was then. No, you will say, Let the Priest call-back David, take from
him the Sword (he should have had an hard pull of it) then give it unto Saul,
and the matter is ended. No: As sure as the Sun did shine then, and does
shine now, so sure it is, That this would not have contented Saul; but this
would have wonderously contented him. If the Priest would have called back
David, demanded the Sword, and, being given into his hand, have sheathed it
into David's Bowels, or have given it Saul, that he might do that horrid
execution with his own hands. Then the Priest had been a Right-man, for Saul's
service: Then here had been Peace betwixt Saul and the Priest, such as would
have pleased all three. The Devil, Saul. and the Edomite too: Then Saul would
have blessed the Priest in The Name of the Lord, saying, Thou have compassion
on me. Do I speak without the Book? No, it is every word sacred Truth, you
shall hear more of it in a fitter place. We must see now how the lines of this
Accusation put up by Saul against Abimelech, run parallel with the Kings
accusation, suggested to him by his vile Councillors against his faithful
Servants at this day. The King pleads Law for what he does; so did Saul too:
for he charge this heavily upon Abimelech, That he enquired of the Lord for
David; gave Bread to David's mouth, and the sword into his hand. All this was
against the known laws of the Land, as Saul seems to conceive. These are the
Kings charges too, I will speak thereof in order; The first Charge is,

1. That Abimelech enquired of The LORD. So should Saul have done then: and so
should the King have done now; not harkening to vile Councillors, whose graves
The LORD has made, for they are vile Nahum. 2.44.
; he must not advise with them, rather let them fly to the Pit; He that
rules over men must be just; ruling in the fear of God 1 Samuel 23.3
; Therefore made He thee King over them 2 Chro. 9.8. Psalm. 72.2.
. Wherefore? To do judgment and justice: He shall judge THY People with
Righteousness, and THY Poor with Judgment. There is a must and a shall for
the greatest King that ever was. It is very emphaticall too, and as notable;
Thy People, Thy Poor; GODS People, and GODS Poor must be judged with
Righteous Judgment. But so it cannot be but by enquiring of The LORD, what He
says, taking Counsel from His Mouth, and from His Law-Booke, which the King
stands charged to write for himself, for it must be with him, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
and therein be must read all the days of his life, that he may learn to
fear The LORD his GOD, to keep all the words of the Law, and the statutes to
do them. This the Parliament do, They enquire of The Lord by prayer, and
fasting, They take direction from His Law-book, which is continually with them,
wherein they read, and whereby they order the great affairs of The Kingdom.
Great use of a Law-booke, and to have it continually with them, before their
eyes. And this is all the Crime that can be objected and proved against them.
They enquire of The LORD, and consult with This Law-booke. It is well they do;
They can thank God for that. Saul's accusation runs on.

2. The Priest has given David Bread. The King by his wicked Counsel accuses
his Parliament even so; They have given his good People bread, that is life in
our sense, which, by a Figure, we may call bread. They have given a poor dead
People life again, and bread to maintain life. They have given (we thank
them heartily) life to their laws life to their liberties, life to the soul
of their life, to their Religion; and this they had not done, but by enquiring
of the LORD, and doing all by Statute Law; and this we call bread. There has
been something like this bread given to the People, Show bread, rather bread in
show, stone indeed; and something they had given them like a fish, but indeed a
Serpent Now the Kings good People will desire no more of their King, but that
he would give his People Bread, bread under this figure which we may call life;
or bread indeed, and properly so called, which more then too cruelly, was and
is denied to David. The third charge follows, and that is grievous.

3. And a sword, says Saul then; That seems to be the quarrel now, (and but
seems) that the Sword, Forts, Castles, Towns, Ships, Ammunition of the
Kingdom, (all which we understand by the Sword) is put into David's hand,
Trusty, welbeloved, and faithful: Well, and well indeed, may we poor people
say, that the Sword is given into David's hand (the Parliaments hand) for they
will manage it for our good to defend us, and offend the Philistines. The
Parliament will not cut our throats, we are very assured and confident thereof.
But the Edomite (we shall know him anon, if we know him not yet) would have
cut our throats, before this time, all their throats that had their hand with
David, had he had the Sword delivered into his hand. We can confide in none but
David: no wise man will blame us, for him we know, a man after Gods own heart;
and the Edomite we know, and shall know him better anon, a Right man, for he is
the right hand of the Devil. We are glad, that the Sword is in David's hand.
But yet this was charged against the Priest then and the Parliament now, that
David had the sword. And what shall I say to this? whereunto GOD, Nature, and
Law speaks Reason and more, that so it ought to be; the Sword ought to be
given into David's hand, a faithful Man, in whom the people may confide. A Man
will trust no other in shutting-in the windows, doors and gates of his house:
great Reason there should be the same care had about the great house, and Trust
of the Kingdom, the frontier-Towns there.

But why given out of his Majesty's hand, and given into David's hand?

Because the Sword was never in the Kings hand, as his proper right there, any
more then the Sword was in Saul's hand, as his proper goods there. Therefore we
speak not properly, given-out. The Sword is Isreal's Sword, the Common Trust of
the Kingdom: belonging, indeed, to the great Fiduciary there; and yet is the
Sword not out of the Kings hands, but given into David's hands, for a second
Reason.

2. Because, as the Edomite was nearest to Saul's hand, and heart too at that
time: So the Papist is so near to the Kings heart now, that he is as dear to
him, as he is near, even as his Right Arm, and Right Eye, eternally his, for
ought we can gather from his writ. I will conclude this with the words of an
honest Servant to an overbearing Master: I will serve you (Sir) if you will
serve The Lord.You may command me, when God commands you. I will heartily obey
your commands, when you shall so obey Gods commands (...), The head has an
Head; All things shall be done as you will have it; But you must command as God
will have it. Ignatius to a Priest Chryso.
. I pray you heartily give me leave to be honest and faithful: If you will
not, so I will be whether you will or no. Do you what you will, I will do what
I ought. No man can dislike this, except Saul, and his Edomite; I need say no
more in a case which is so fully opened and cleared, that all the Malignants in
the world shall not be able to darken it to the worlds end. I will not say,
look upon Mr. Pryn's book, (I will name him for honor sake, and to spite
the Devil) read him, or choose you whether you will or not; we must say,
Blessed be God for His servant, who has stood-up in the gap by the power of His
might, and held up His hand for him ever since against the Mighty, Blessed be
God. But notwithstanding all this is cleared, to be all Truth, Reason, and Law,
and more yet, and that is most of all, a Command for all this, the Parliament
has done, from Gods mouth too. Yet such Evil Counsels overruled the King and
the case that he does now as Saul did then, and much more, kills the Priests,
and destroys Cities. So far as his Arm can reach he has overthrown those,
Tunc vere victus quando tot vicis prudentes. Walfing. Edw. 2. p. ^5.
whose hand is with David; therein giving himself the greatest overthrow, for,
no such victory against the King, as for him to have victory against his good
people, as was said of Edward the second overcomming his Parliament once, and
destroying himself for ever. Thus Saul did in his days; thus and more the
King, seduced by Evil Counsel, and acted by evil instruments, does in these
days; as follows, and what Saul did first. Saul was David's Lord on earth, but
he hunts after David's soul, that he might not live upon the ground. Saul is
David's King, and David's persecutor. The Priests King, and the Priests
murderer, by the hand of an Edomite. Ah Lord, who can express the miserable
plight, and how doleful the condition is, the evil spirit has driven Saul
into! He is Isreal's King, and he is smiting Isreal's City! The great Fiduciary
of the Kingdom, and the greatest Traitor there. This tells us what is done
now. David is persecuted now; and his King, seduced by Edomites, David's
adversaries, persecutes him because who so faithful as he in all the Kingdom!
A defendor of the Faith, and, by his evil Counsel, a destroyer of the Faith.
A maintainer of the Gospel in profession, and a persecutor of the faithful
Ministers publishers of the same, the Messengers of the Church and the glory of
Christ. The great Fiduciary of the Kingdom, yet, seduced by an evil Council,
he betrays that great Trust. Englands King, and Englands destroyer; The Lord
of their Cities, and waster of the same. Are not these grievous words? Yes,
they must be so, plain Truth, direct and home; what expectation of any good,
but from such-like-words. If ever the King come to himself, find himself
lost, (for murderers have stolen him away) then such words as these will be to
his heart, and may serve to usher-in Pardon, peace, and comfort: for the sowrer
the herbs, the sweeter the Passover: whereas pleasing words from vile
flatterers, his Court Chaplains, have wounded their Master, and left him more
then half dead. Such words as these may kill him outright, and, by Gods grace
quicken him again to a life indeed. I am glad I have spoken; for first, I have
said no more, but what is already told in Gath, and published in the streets of
Aschalon. Secondly, what if it were not told by me, nor as aforesaid, yet all
created strength cannot stop the mouth of bloods, so loud it cries; Irelands
blood, what an Ocean of blood is there? Cyciters blood; Burminghams blood;
Banburies blood, (shedding of this blood, was counted a fine device, as
Bristols blood intended to be shed) Oxfords blood; Blood here, and there, and
everywhere, whereto the hand could reach; O what a voice is here, as the voice
of many waters; or, Thunders! Is there a voice that can outcry, I mean, cry
louder to Heaven, and in the Ears of the Lord, then can the voice of bloods?
yes the voice of blood, cries louder then the blood of Abel, or the bloods shed
from righteous Abel unto this day; and there is the hope of Israel concerning
their King; The voice of the blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12.24.
that speaks better things then that of Abel; Better things; that cried from
the earth for a curse upon the earth, and Cain there: Genesis 4.12.
This cries in Heaven for mercy to such sinners on earth, who can say, not with
Cain, My punishment, but, my sin is greater then I can bear, yet not too great
for Christ to bear, a Redeemer that is strong, a Savior to the utmost; There
is hope in Israel concerning that. And here is ground of hope too, because
these Stephens, the slain all the day long, can pray for their King all the day
long, crying with a loud voice, not more for themselves at such a time, then
for their King, saying, Lord lay not this sin to our Kings charge. Amen. Amen.

CHAP. 4. Quaeries touching the Edomite, whether by the known Laws of Isreal's
Kingdom, Saul might entertain him in his Court; grant him a Commission to
smite a City of Priests; whether any reason for that; whether single or
plural; and whether by any possible means an Edomite may be made serviceable
to Israel; How it relates to the present, exemplifying the History of our Time.
Why does King Saul take an Edomite into his Court, Qu.
to be an Officer there?

It is answered in effect before; Ans.
Saul is King and he knew himself so to be, Qu.
and will choose his own Officers; may he not?

No indeed, Ans.
he may not unless it be to be his Heardsman, and there should be caution, and
some consultation about that too. Questionless he must not choose a servant to
be chief in his house; to transact the great affairs of his Kingdom there,
without the allowance and consent of All Israel, because Saul does not choose
for himself, but for the whole Kingdom.

But it is written, Ob.
Thou shall not abhor an Edomite.

Yes, Ans.
that is most true; it is the charge of the Lord, and we have the Reason; Deuteronomy.
23.8.
For he is thy brother: Nor shall thou ab or an Egyptian, because thou wast a
stranger in his land. What is the meaning of this? This; we must not be
unnatural: nor must we forget old favors. But it does not follow from hence,
I hope, that therefore Saul might take an Edomite, make him a Chief Ruler in
his house; or that, he might put considence in an Egyptian; for the charge is
contrary. And if Saul will entertain an intimacy, and familiarity with an
Edomite an old adversary to Israel, (as we have heard and seen, and shall make
it more legible yet) It does plainly argue, 3 Sect.
Saul to be no true friend to Israel. Saul's heart cannot be upright toward
Israel, when it cleaves to Isreal's adversary in love: He cannot heartily desire
the peace of Israel, and heartily love an enemy to that peace. I pray let us
ask some more questions touching the Edomite; I will answer by the Book, then
good Law and Reason both.

Why did Saul make the Edomite General in this war against David? Qu.


Saul gives someanswer to that, with a little Reason, Ans.
Because his son Jonathan stirred-up David to lie in wait for Saul as at this
day. 1. Sam. 22.8.


As at this day indeed. Qu.
But this answer makes us more unresolved then before; for all the world
knows, that Jonathan was a good man; and David as good as he; besides, we
find David fleeing away from the face of Saul like a Partridge; and Saul
hunting him like a Dog. Let us hear Reason, I pray you. Was it not, That the
Edomite might recover the sword our of David's hand?

No, no, that could not be it; Ans.
for when Saul speaks out his mind freely, as sometimes he did, (for a wicked
heart will discover it self) amongst his Servants; he does not bid them, fetch
the sword from David, but kill him: And Saul spoke to Jonathan, and to all his
servants, 1 Samuel 19.1.
that they should kill David. It is David's life, not the sword, that is aimed
at. And the Edomite was a Right man for that service, for he was a mighty man,
mighty to do mischief, and skillful to destroy; Whom? David, and All them that
had an hand with David. That is the direct Answer. Saul indeed spoke merrily to
the people as he went along by the way, and would make them believe, that he
had taken the Edomite to his side, and sealed him a Commission, because he is
afraid of David; he tells them more then twice, David lay in wait to kill him;
therefore he took the Edomite to his side; for, who so faithful as he to
defend his master from David's violence! (a poor-hunted Partridge:) or a more
Right, handed man to execute his masters command against David? True it was,
David never durst stand to it, till he came to Keilah, and there, had not the
Inhabitants proved themselves ungrateful and treacherous -- he had guarded
himself and fenced his throat, and hazarded Saul's. But Saul feared David no
more, then the Birds of Prey a hunted Partridge, (that is the expression;) And
kill David, that was his charge. There is one doubt more, and occasions another
question.

Was this Edomite singular or plural? Qu.


The singular number sure. Doeg was but one. But let us note, Ans.
that One is mentioned sometimes, not to exclude a second, but to imply the
first, chiefest in place; and so more mighty, and principal then the second,
because of his place; as Iehoram is said to compel Judah to commit
fornication. When Athaliah was as masculine, and imperious, yea as mischievous
that way, and yet not named in that verse, because she acted by power from her
husband, not so clear to every man's eye: And so Doeg the Edomite is mentioned
single, as if he did all, because the chiefest in favor with his King. The
meaning of the question then is, Was there but one Edomite employed in that
war, or were there more?

There were more sure; Ans.
for it is not imaginable, that Doeg alone could destroy the City of Priests,
men, women and children there; doubtless there were more Edomites there, or
bastard Israelites, as Right-men for Saul's service (as the word is, if men can
be Right, who are the seed of the Crooked Serpent) as Doeg was; Nay it is
probable there were many in Saul's Camp Right-men, Edomites I mean, of that
generation: for thus it is; When a Doeg is entertained at Court, is favored
there, he will work for his Countrymen what he can and according to his power,
that they may have place, and respect thereabouts that they may be of use and
service, when the King shall rise-up against David. One question more, with a
resolution, touching the Edomite.

Saul his master has entertained him: Qu.
Is there no means to be taken, whereby he may be made a faithful servant to
Israel?

No, Ans.
by no means.

What! Qu.
not possible to make him a Right-man?

No, Ans.
not to Israel; but to Saul's service he will be right and straight.

Me thinks Israel might have dealt with him, Qu.
as we with Papists, bring him to Church; might they not have done so?

Yes; Ans.
and to no purpose at all; for he will go to the house of Abimelech himself,
(that is, to the Church, as we too commonly call it) and a mischievous person
though he be, yet he will sit there close to his solemn service, and pretend
there, he has a vow upon him; you cannot work upon him that way, to make him
Right for Israel.

Then try him another way; Qu.
give him, as we to the Papists, the Oath of Allegiance; swear him faithful
to God and his King; an Oath is a sacred band, that will bind him to Israel
sure, will it not? an Oath I mean, such a sacred Band?

Hang him: Ans.
for like the possessed man, no Bands will hold him; he will break all Cords,
such a child of Belial is he, except one, and that the Hangman must
pluck-up-close to his neck, then turn him down, for by no means can you make
an Edomite stand right to Israel.

This is very suitable to the time; But for the first Questions: How far the
Kings power reaches for the choice of his own Ministers, I leave, as in
manners I ought, to the determination of the High Court, which is this, That
the King must choose such Ministers as his good people may confide in: and by
no means such, who are sworn enemies to the peace of the King, and prosperity
of the Kingdom. A man's private judgment may be steeped in his affections: he
may cleave more in love to a private person, then to a whole Kingdom; and in
choice of persons to places, he may stand biased to his own will and ends,
which All Israel, a Parliament there, cannot do. Therefore it is against the
known laws of Isreal's Kingdom, That Isreal's King should, by himself alone,
make choice of Persons to high place there, for it is against the SUPREME LAW,
the welfare of the People: And Saul, taking that liberty against that known
Law, had destroyed the Cities of Judah, and had slain David too, had not the
Lord interposed His Almighty Arm.

To the other, which I should not make a question, whether by any means a
Papist, may be made serviceable to Israel?

It is Answered as before; by no means, which man can use: You cannot change
the Ethiopians Skin, not the Leopards spots. Ier. 13.23.
He will go to Church as the Edomite to Abimilechs House, and yet be mighty to
do mischief: You may swear him to the King and Kingdom: Bind him with that
Sacred Band, he will be willingly bound, for he was a reservation; Or if you
press him hard, he is informed very well, That he cannot be bound to
Heretics, (as he calls them) in any bands; you may put bands upon him, he will
beak them as easily, as you can break burnt Flax. The Doctrine of his Church
and her Laws (written in blood) do absolve, and set free This Child of
Belial, from all bandsand at liberty to do all manner of mischief. And so he
has done, and it is the very purpose of his heart to do, according to the
Power in his hand. All the mischief as his manner is, to Israel, being the
fruitful Parent of all the Rebellions, Treasons, Massacres, (and so forth, for
there is no end) That have been acted through the Christian World, as at this
day. You may then proclaim them Traitors, to the Peace and Crown of the King
and Kingdom: for so is every Papist, (said a great States man in our Kingdom)
holding to the Tenets of the Romish Church; Traitors in hand, or in heart; in
action, or affection. And so said Luther of himself (once an Aug. Moncke) and
of all his fraternity, or Brotherhood there We are all Men of Blood, Nemo
nostrum non erat vir sanguinum, si non opete tamen cord Abhorrebam vel ipsum
Nomen. W. Hus in Galas. Cap. 1. p. 15.
says he we hate a true Protestant (such an one as John Huss) with our
heart, and we will presecute him with our hand, to the death. We abhorretheir
very Name: we would not have a man of that profession to live upon the Earth;
so said Luther having his eyes shut up, and living in Monkery. Why then, when
they are declared to be so, So Rebellious to the Laws of the King of Heaven:
So Traiterous to the Crown of the King and Kingdom: Let it be done unto him
according to the Judgment of our Law, The Hangman must do his Office: see
what that cord will do.

To the other Questions, Wherefore the King takes the Edomites, Atheists, and
Papists (David's Enemies) all To his side? Why his heart cleaves to such
Enemies as these in love? His Answer is (advising with pernicious Counselors,
in whose hand he is) as Saul's was, Because he is persuaded These are Men
faithful to his Person, and Right for his Service (so they are indeed) and
will defend him from David, who (as he seems to say) lies in wait for him, as
it is at this day: and as David lay in wait for Saul in those days. So we may
mock men, but God will not be mocked. It were endless, and needless, to tell
stories, touching this matter, how Right-handed-men Papists have been to their
Kings, and their Kingdoms in all Ages. Thank Master Prynne (I will name him
again being resolved to anger the Devil, and all his Bishops) he has told us
enough, and abundantly satisfied us at this point. I proceed; Saul may say,
David lay in wait to take away his life, therefore he took the Edomite to his
side, to defend him from David's sword; when the truth was, Saul persecuted
David thorough the Thousands of Israel: and that he might do to David
according to all the desire of his soul, he took the Edomite to his side, a
Mighty Adversary to Israel and as Skillful to destroy.

The very same Reason, and no other now, wherefore the King (in the hands of
bloody, and pernicious Adversaries) takes Atheists, and Papists to him now, why
he cleaves to them in love? Because they are mighty to do mischief, skillful
to shed blood, as is legible now in Ireland and England both.

But this we must note; Though Saul's excuse for taking to himself such a
guard, and such a Captain over them, was not so specious, as it was
ridiculous; yet there was bloodshed in good earnest, which was charged heavily
upon Saul, for it ruined him and all his house, and all together, as we read.
We must apply this now, and approve our selves faithful to the Soul of our
King, That his Conscience may speak-out before it be too late, and he
speechless, (then commonly the Conscience speaks loudest.) That the
Conscience may speak-out, and in season, we apply and read on; So will the
bloodshed in Ireland, and England by the Edomites in both places, be charged
upon the King, whose servants they are, and whose Commission they have, (such a
pernicious Counsel he has;) Turn thou and fall upon the Priest, and people
all, whose hand is with David: and the Edomite turned, etc. This is the
Edomites Commission now against all that have an hand with David; And therefore
all the Blood they have shed there or here, shall be charged upon the King.

Not the blood of Ireland sure, Ob.
not a drop.

Yes every drop, Ans.
though it be an Occan a.

He called them Rebels, Ob.
and caused them to be proclaimed so in forty Papers at least; and Rebels with
an accent.

We remember some such matter, Ans.
and as it harpened, saw the Proclamation; but it was not hearty; if so, then
not only the Public Crier, but every Post and Pillar, had proclaimed them
Rebels, for so the Kings best Subjects were proclaimed the year before: We
understand The blood, a Ruler commands to be shed, or suffers to be shed, The
Lord charge upon the Rulers score. Thou have killed. 2 Samuel 12.9. 2 Kings
21.19.
well when a thing is done heartily, for then the whole Land shall ring of it;
every City and Town there, every Church and Chapel: nor so only, Stocks
and Stones shall be taught to speak, and to proclaim Rebels: so good Subjects
were proclaimed Rebels; Rebels indeed, as those in Ireland, not so proclaimed,
but coldly and faintly, God He knows.

His Majesty made offer to go himself and fight with the Rebels, B.
his stomach did so rise against them.

We remember his Secretary wrote some such matter; A.
but the Secretary knew, the stomach of his wicked Counsel rose against Hull,
and was cager upon that place to take the Ammunition thence, which they would
have had first, and have gone to suppress the Rebels afterward; we remember
this very well.

And his Majesty says, his soul bleedeth over the bloodshed in Ireland. B.


We do not certainly know what his Majesty says, A.
for we cannot think that we read his words. His Secretary has told us so
much, and truly I can forbear him no longer; he is one of the vilest
Hypocrites in all the world: one of the vile Counselors sure, who persuaded
the King to intercept the provision of Clothes, and other things sending over
to a poor, peeled, naked people; and then would make us believe, They pirty
the peoples nakedness, and their souls bleed over their misery. The Kings
party make all supplies over to the Rebels there, to make them the more able
for the shedding of more blood, and then tells us, The Kings heart bleeds over
the bloodshed there. They call them Rebels there, and call them over hither to
do the like execution here; and here they do it with all their might; and yet
the Secretary tells us The Kings soul bleeds over this bloodshed. O hellish
blasphemy; horrible hypocrisy!

If the Secretaries blood, and all the blood, that runs in the veins of that
Hellish Counsel about his Majesty, were shed, it would not redeem the wrong
they have done to the King their Master, I do not add, and the Kindome, by
these notorious Blasphemies, Contradictions. Remonstrances, and
Contra-Remonstrances; declaring one thing with the Tongue, and then the
contrary with the Hand; so making us believe, That the King their Master is as
one of them, Obeb. 11.
(which we tremble to think-of,) as notorious an Hypocrite as was he, we have
often read of, and we have never read the like till this day, whose foot stood
in the path of the destroyer, did drive-on furiously there, weeping all along
as he went; (That is the expression, Jer. 41.6.
) as if his soul had bled over the bodies, which he had slain: when yet he
went-on furiously resolved to slay more; and so many he had slain, that he has
filled a great Pit with the slame. GOD beholds all this and will require it.
Rebels in Ireland, howsoever proclaimed against for fashion sake are the Kings
good Subjects here, helping on the Design: And they, who opposed their Bloody
Designs here and there, not in design only, but in execution, are called
Traitors and Rebels both and all heartily. Here is a double Iniquity. We do
not pray for, we deprecat against the Judgment, but the Lord looks upon this
and will Require it: He will not endure, to have evil called good, and good
evil. For three transgressions of Edom, etc. But of that anon. So much for
resolution to the Queries touching the Edomite, his taking into the Court,
Designing unto Office there, The granting him a Commission to destroy Neb; Now,
see we how stoutly and with what a good will he performed it; Saul's Command
was to the Edomites heart, and heartily he executes it; So Saul shall see That
the Edomite is a Right Man, 1 Samuel 22.17.18.
no sooner Saul had said, Turn and slay the Priests of the Lord, because their
hand also was with David, and they knew when he fled and did not show it me; No
sooner this was spoken to the Edomite, but he turned and did accordingly: he
fell upon the Priests, and slew, and showed no pity. Then Men did groan out
of the City, and the Soul of the wounded Cryed-out: Yet GOD lays not folly
to these murderers, Though they are of those, that Rebel against the light,
Job 24.12, 13.
says Job, offended at those very things our eyes behold at this Day: The
Lord, who cleares His Servants Righteousness, as the Morning, will clear His
own Righteousness as the Noone Day; And though we are but dim-sighted, yet we
shall discern it anon I will shut up this Chapter, as David begins his Psalm;
Why boastest thou thy self in mischief, Psalm. 52.1.
O Mighty Man? The goodness of God endures Continually.

CHAP. 5. Sad Cases examined and tried before the Lord, and resolved from His
Mouth; which may silence a Poor People, slain all the day long by the
hurtful and oppressing Sword, now in the hand of bloody Edomites.
NOw here is a case to be tried before the Lord touching these slain Priests,
and their destroyed City, which, I hope, will give us good satisfaction at
least silence us, when our spirits are stirred within us beholding the
villainous Butcheries the notorious violences acted by our Turks (I never
yetcal'd them Cavaliers, and never will by that Gentile Name in our Land upon
our Ministers, and good People (all that have their hand with David) and our so
wasted Towns, and Cities. Touching the Priests first.

God is Righteous, so we have concluded, Ier. 12.1. Hab. 1.13.14.
yet the Righteous say now as once they did: Wherefore look Thou upon them
that deal treacherously, and hold Thy Tongue, when the wicked devoureth the
Man that is more Righteous then he? And make men as the Fishes of the Sea,
as the Creeping things, that have no Ruler over them? Nay, they speak now
almost as foolishly as once they did, it is in vain to serve GOD, and what
profit is it, that we have kept the Ordinances? The Proud are happy, for they
that tempt GOD are set up, Mal. 3.13, 14.
while they that serve Him truly are cast down and destroyed: This was
Abimilechs Case; he has done his duty, the Edomite himself being witness, by
direction from Gods Mouth, for he enquired of the LORD for David, etc. Yet he
is cut off from the Earth with, 84. more, the Priests of The Lord, as not sit
to live upon the ground. So the Priests were dealt with then, and so now, So
Cruelly. And what then? Yet the Potsheards must not strive with their Maker;
but if they will strive (the Servants of The LORD, must not strive, but if they
will strive) then with the work of their own hands, the Potsheards, with the
Potsheards of the Earth. The LORD is Righteous, and His Judgments as the great
deep. The Glory of His work, even of His Strange work, exceeds infinitely the
glory of the Sun, which yet we cannot pry into; and does ever shine clear,
though sometimes we see it not, and the blind man never. The Cause of His
Judgments may be secret, but ever Just. So we have Concluded. But because I
would clear the Sad Condition of our good Ministers now I say. 2. There be
Sins in these Best Ministers (for none other are persecuted) and though but
little Sins in Comparison of others of their Tribe ( Great and Mighty Sinners
before The Lord, for Men abhor the offering of the Lord for their Sakes) yet
are they Sins, and the greater in them because they are indeed the Messengers
of the Churches, and the glory of Christ (The more Glory, The Lord puts upon
them, The greater their Sin) And these Sins must be purged in them by Fire.
But Blessed be God; That whereas He might have punished them For their Evil
doings. he makes them suffer from the hands of wicked men for Righteousness
sake; and so honors them with the Glory of Martyrdom, as it is at this day:
for doubtless The Ministers now suffer for the Cause of Christ, if ever any
suffered for his Cause since the beginning of the World.

But why were the 84. Priests slain at the same Time? As for Abimilech he
might Transgress, as a Man: and yet that cannot be granted in this Case, for
he enquired of the LORD, did all by direction, from His Mouth: he could call
God to Record upon his Soul, that he did, what he did, by Statute Law, the
known Law of the Kingdom. But yet suppose, That Abimilech did Transgress in
giving forth the sword, yet why were the fourscore and four Priests slain?

It is not possible for man to speak Reason here; Ans.
though, indeed, there is some reason given in the Text, the same, and as good
reason as is given now, because their hands also is with David: Speak Reason;
and speak out; with whom should she Priests be but with David, who had wrought
such salvation for Israel? and upon whom, next to God, Israel had rouled
themselves, and all their concernments? yet this was the reason then, and this
is all the reason now of this horrible persecution, because their hand is with
David (the Worthies, the faithful of the Lord there,) therefore destroy the
Priests, because their hand is with David; thus we see man can give no reason,
only God can, as aforesaid; And we must note still, That these were cut off
with the Sword of an Edomite, not because they were greater sinners then any
other Priests were, but because they were godly and conscientious of their
duty, that enrageth the Edomite against them. There is another reason also
which The Lord gives, That other Priests might be warned thereby; For note we,
the greatest sinners are not the greatest sufferers in this life, I mean, they
have not the greatest afflictions. Nay, it is most commonly clean contrary,
they have no changes in their life; when as the godly have changes of sorrows.

True it is, and we will not make it a question, Destruction is to the wicked,
and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity. But we must note, That to
be slain with the sword of an Edomite, is no strange punishment; but the lot
of the righteous, their lot to be smitten with the hand of violence, and made
the portion of Foxes. It is so, and the will of The Lord, it should be so, for
note we; where the Lord gives Commission to the Sword to go forth, Ezekiel. 9.5.
spare and pity none, neither old nor young; neither man nor woman: He does
say, Come not near any man upon whom is the mark, (i. e.) to hurt them) He
does not say, Come not near My Sanctuaries, the Priests, or their Cities; The
Holy Ghost charge the Sword to begin there; And begin at my Sanctuary. We
cannot be ignorant, what the use is, the Apostle Peter would have Priests, and
people, 1 Pet 4.17.18.19.
good and bad make hereof: If judgment must begin at the house of GOD, what
shall the end be of them, that obey not the Gospel of God? And if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly appear? It strikes
terror to the wicked, but strong consolation to the godly; Wherefore let them
that suffer, according to the will of God, commit their souls to Him in well
doing, as unto A Faithful Creator. But with them and their house, the Sword
begins; for note we, who is the Butt of the Edomites malice Si fuerit sublimis
fit despicabilis, etc. Si bonus est quispiam quasi m^lus spernitar. Si malns
est quasi bonus honorat^r. Salv. li. 4. p. 113.
against whom then and now, he draws his Arrow with all his strength? It is
that he may shoot at and kill the upright in heart; The Priests of The Lord
then, the servants of The Lord now. Is there any one, whose hand is with David?
any one, who fears God above many? any one, who, as his Lord and Master,
loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity? Is he such an one? beat him, stone
him, slay him, hang-him; he is a degrees, use him like a Dog; the Parliaments Dog,
his hand is with David, that is Reason enough with an Edomite, turn about and
stay him, for he is no friend to Caesar. Blessed be God, That this man can
count his cost, and account the reproach of Christ great riches. And blessed be
God, that, according to their sufferings shall their consolations be, full
measure, pressing down, and running over; he remembers his masters words, in
the world tribulation; What more? that which makes amends for all, in Me peace,
that is enough, John 16.33.
But let me ask these Edomites this question; Have they a Warrant for what
they do? Yes, they will say, they have a Commission from the King under the
Great Seal of England, [An honest man is the KEEPER the while,] which runs
evermore thus, For the doing of these [notorious violences] this commission
shall be to you, and them, and every one of them, a sufficient warrant. But O
that they could remember, That God is an avenger of these things; and when He
makes Inquisition for blood, then he that granted this Commission, and he that
executed it, Ezekiel. 22.14.
shall fall both together; Their heart cannot endure, nor can their hands be
strong in the day The LORD shall deal with them; and with the KEEPER too, who
has wickedly betrayed the great trust of the Kingdom. Come we now to the
people.

1. The children and sucklings there, they were slain. The Edomite has made
the like slaughter in our days, for he has slain the mother and the child
together, I think the child in the mothers womb: We need say very little
more unto it then this, The Sword was in the Edomites hand then; it is in his
hand now, (the Papist I mean still) as bloody now and ever, as the Edomite
ever was, and what he was you shall hear anon.

2. We must say The LORD is righteous, and these sucklings had finned, though
not after the similitude of Adams transgression. Indeed it is a sad sight, but
we may shut the eye, yet see into this case as far with our eye shut as open;
for truly, now we are in the dark, we are come to the secrets of GODS Decree,
and there we leave these Sucklings and Children all. Only I will tell my
thoughts, which have ground from holy Scripture; That Parents now, seeing their
Sucklings snatched from their breasts, and their children from out of their
dear arms, and from under their wings, because the Parents have an hand with
David, (pray mark that) may take more comfort in such a violent death, theirs
or their childrens then if they had seen them dye on their bed: For I do
assure you, That I have read of some Parents, who have been very ambitious of
such a Martyrdom: Oh! to have an hand with David to help him against the
mighty, and an heart with Christ and to suffer for this, and so it is at this
Day, is a glorious kind of Martyrdom that it is:

3. The People are destroyed Men and Women there. Answ:


I will Answer again, The Edomite did it, a sworn Enemy to Israel, as we have
read once and again; he did it, who does thirst after Blood; and yet not he
alone, It cannot be reasonably conceived That he alone, a single man could act
such an horrid execution, but helped and strengthened with Saul's bloody
Courtiers some more of that generation; or Bastard Israelites, as Cruel as the
Edomite was every whit; And let me say too, for it must be observed,
strengthened also with the Peoples Sins, I mean the Sinues of that City. The
Inhabitants there did doubtless strengthen the Edomite, and the Bastard
Israelites against their City and their selves: Nostris peccatis Barbar^ fortes
sunt; nostris vitijs Romanus superat exercitus, Hiero. Epist. l. 2. (...).
Isid. Pelus. Ep. l. 1 Ep. 294, p. 66.
( a) The Peoples sins made the Edomite strong (we Include all David's Enemies
under that Name) against the People of Israel: Doubtless it was so, for I Read
the like expression full for our Instruction, The Sins of Israel strengthened
Eglon Judge. 3.14.
against Israel; Mark it, Eglon then and the Edomite now had a Will always
(as the Devil has) to do Israel mischief; But nor Eglon them, nor the
Edomite now, no nor the Devil neither (mighty though he be) nor this
Adversary, nor that, nor the other, have strength and power of themselves, To
do Israel mischief (for hurt they cannot do) I say, Will they have still,
Power they have none, of themselves, till GOD lets it forth, till He
strengthens them against His People, for their Sins against Him, The God of
all Wisdom, Power, and Grace. So we Read: And the Children of Israel did
Evil again in the fight of the Lord. [Observe that expression by the way, and
you will observe That God Marks what is done amiss, He sees Sin in His
People, for you Read here and every where, before the Eyes of The LORD, Judge.
3.12.
in the sight of the LORD.] And The LORD strengthened Eglon against Israel.
Why? It is repeated again, Because Israel had done Evil in the Sight of The
LORD: Therefore Eglon was so strong against Israel then, The Edomites after
that time; and now at this preent time, are so strong now. That is the Reason
The Sripture gives and it is a full Reason. Does the Enemy prevail? Isreal's
Sins do prevail. Sins are strong, and hands are weak; Mighty sinners,
and then mighty Adversaries! Does the Edomites rage reach up to Heaven, the
Peoples Sins reach thither too. Doubtless if the Edomite have success in
any Quarter of the Land, God does not do it to gratify the Edomite, but the
more to confound the Adversary, and to fit or make His People meet for
Deliverance. Does Deliverance stay? It is That Praise may wait for GOD in zion;
when the Work is done, and Israel is humbled before his GOD, then the Edomite
shall fall and rise no more: The Lord will utterly undo him: this belongs to
the next Section. The Edomite has not yet fully executed his Commission not
completed his Slaughter, There are Oxen, and asses, and Sheep Remaining, and
these he will smite with the Edge of the Sword in Revenge of David because he
has escaped his bloody Knife: The Bruit Creatures fare the worse for Davia now;
but these groan under the Edomites hands. The Ox, I cannot speak little of
him, therefore I will say nothing, but much increase by the strength of the
Ox. Prove. 14.4.
And much good Service is done by the Ass; The Sheep Cloatheth us with her
Fleece, and feeds us with her flesh, It is Man That has sinned, and done evil
indeed, but as for these Sheep, what have they done? Says David grieved for
his poor People slain with a grievous Plague, Gods Sword, which he had called
for to lessen the number of People, wherein David boasted. We may say as much
now and without a Figure, What have these done? Was the Edomites Rage against
these poor Creatures? No, it was against David, or rather, for so David's Lord
is pleased to take these Insolences and wrongs done against David, as done to
Himself, Thy Rage against Me. 2 Kin. 19.27.
Therefore the Servants of the Lord have boldness, and assured confidence,
That their Lord does even now deal with this Beast, as he has done with his
fellow- Beast, He puts an Hook in his Nose, and a Bridle in his Lips even Now.
Verse 28.
And His People will give their LORD no rest touching this matter, saying Arise
O Lord in Thine Anger, lift up Thy self, Psalm. 7.6.
because of the Rage of our Enemies, and awake for us to the Judgment, which
Thou have commanded. Amen.

CHAP. 6. Weighty Reasons, Why The LORD suffers the Edomites to lay wast
Isreal's Land; how it Relates to this time. If Wolves had not been grievous to
our Land, they had not been destroyed out of the Land.
Why does GOD suffer an Edomite to destroy Israells Land? Qu.


Is there not a Cause? Says David in another Case; surely yes, Ans.
and a Cause for this also, an excellent Reason, 1 Samuel 17.29.
for what The Lord does or Suffers to be done though we could give no account
of it. First,

1. Because Israel may be grown wanton and carnally secure. A little Rest from
their Enemies, will make Israel settle upon their Lees: Israel cannot, I say
Israel, Gods own people, cannot well and Thriftily husband their time and
peace. They may do it after they have felt the Edomites hand and have rest from
his oppressing Sword. Act. 9.31.
Therefore Israel must have a Scourge, a Thorn in his eye and a Goade in his
side. And none more pricking Briars nor any more grieving Thorns, then an
Edomite is, Ezck. 28 24.
That known Adversory to Israel. Israel will not know the Service of their
GOD: 2 Chro. 12.8.
Therefore he shall know the Service of a cruel Lord, that delights in Proud
Wrath; An easy yoke made Israel wanton. An Iron yoke shall make them groan.
Israel will be stout with their God, and comply with an Idolatrous People, and
learn the manners of the Heathen, play away the LORDS day, and snufe at His
Service; will Israel do so? The LORD will meet with them for this; He will
deliver them into the hand of them, whom Israel hates, into the hands of them,
from whom Isreal's Mind is ALIENATED, Ezekiel. 23.28.
Prelates, Edomites, Atheists, Papists and the like, and these shall deal
hatefully with Israel, they shall take away all Isreal's labor, and shall leave
Israel naked and bare. This Relates it self, I need not show how it relates to
this time.

2. The Edomite must be a plague to Israel. Why? because the Edomite is become
a Lord and Master in Israel, that he is set over the Servants of Saul, 1 Samuel
22.9. 2 Chro. 12.6. 2 Samuel 106.
if you observe it, he is next to the King, the greatest man in Court, who but
the Edomite there! he does all, all must come through his hand. The Edomite
must be a plague to Israel, it must be so. Will Israel suffer their Master Saul
to take an Edomite to his side, To make him his right hand, dominus factotum,
LORD do all, as the Proverb is; will Israel suffer this? They shall have
enough of the Edomite, that they shall; and Israel shall see there is mighty
reason it should be so; and when they see their Cities burnt with fire, and the
Edomite Israel saw with open eyes, That Saul, rising-up against David, could
not abide an honest man: but his heart clave in love to the Edomite, he should
have the honor of Knighthood, and of Lord General in the held.
slaughtering them like Sheep; then they shall say, The LORD is righteous; yes,
and gracious to Israel too, for

3. By suffering the Edomite to deal with Israel so hardly, and according to
all the desire of his soul, The good LORD will make the Edomite hateful to all
Israel, Isreal's mind shall be alienated from him; he shall never be entertained
at Court any more; The Edomite shall well perceive as the Amonitedid, That he
slanke before David and all Israel: he has shamefully abused Israel this once,
he shall never serve them so again; he shall see how he stinkes before Israel.

Oh! there is mighty reason why the Edomite in these days should deal so
hatefully with Israel now; for all the Reasons abovesaid, (which I will not
recall) and for this especially, That he may STINK before David. and all
Israel; so as Israel not abiding his savor any longer will join hand, and
shoulder, and heart and all to thrust him out of the Land, where they have
committed such abominations and executed such wrath with such a rage. Indeed it
is good for Israel to feel the weight of the Edomites hand; and the mischief
of his counsel: It was good for Israel then, it is as good for Israel now, to
be so wasted by Edomites. Who but the Edomite, before, in Court, City,
Country? In the Court chief Commander there, and Keeper of the great Seal
hard by; Recorder in the City, and Lord General in the Field: Who but the
Edomite all this? Dominus fac totum, Lord Do-all as was said before. But the
Edomite has smitten Cities, and burnt Towns, They stink before David and all
Israel now, and they must needs know it, that Israel will, in good time, rise
up all as one man to thrust them out of their land. It is good for Israel that
the Edomite has dealt so hatefully with them, wasting their Cities, and
slaughtering their people. We would not lift up a sword against the Edomite,
to drive them out of the land, without gain of money, (not yet) which the
heathen in ancient time, and now, scorn to take, fighting against Israel. The
time will come very shortly, Judges 5.19.
after the Edomite has vexed us a little more, that we shall willingly offer
our selves, and jeopard our lives to the death to be avenged of the Edomite for
our two eyes, (he would have put them both out) our burnt Cities, and wasted
Towns. It was commonly said, that there never were any Wolves in England, for
that the Land would not bear them: Yes, there were Wolves in England says
Camerartus, Cap. 28.
and the Land yielded the Wolves good and clean feeding the best Mutton in all
the Country, they feasted upon it every Night. This Man lost 20 Sheep in a
Night, another as many more. Grievous Wolves indeed. The People then did not
stand looking one upon the other. Complaining of their losses; Nor did they
commit the slaughter of these Wolves, so grievous, to their Shepherds, Those
undertakers; who could look to their own safety, sleep all Night, leave the
Wolves to their Prey, and take gain of money in the Morning. No it was not so;
every Man stood-up for himself, To keep the Wolf from his Door, and from his
Fold, Took his weapon in his hand, and so pursued the Wolves; And it was gain
sufficient to rid themselves of them, and secure their Folds. And so they did
their work quickly, being every Man's work, and bestirring themselves about
it. Only this help was granted them, That Offenders, so be they were not
Murderers, Capital Offenders should have their lives granted them and their
liberty upon Condition, That they would bring in so many wolves their heads or
their Tongues, else the People could not believe they were killed. By this
means there was a clean riddance of Wolves until this day.

For ought I know, had not the Wolves been, after their manner, grievous, The
Land had been pestered and plagued with them as at this day. Blessed be GOD
say I, That Wolves are grievous, whether they have four feet, or but two,
they are wolves, and grievous. Blessed be God for that; That the Prelates hands
were so heavy; Their Yoke so unsupportable; Their Orders, Their Oaths, their
Courts so vexatious, mischievous and unsufferable. Blessed be GOD, That Clergy
and Laity, Ministers, and people both, did groan for anguish of Spirit, and
Cruel Bondage, under those Taskmasters doing the work of an IMPERIOUS WHORISH
WOMAN. Ezekiel. 16.
I verily believe we shall never see Prelate more in England, I say Prelate, A
Diotrephes, I mean, (such as our Bishops were; Therefore the Name (though a
good Name) is so hateful, 3 John 9.
because so abused, so ill Answered) who love to have the pre-eminence, honor
amongst Men, and therefore cannot love the LORD JESUS CHRIST. We shall never
have such Bishops again (That word will please best) they were so grievous
once: Since they were such grievous Thorns by nature it is well they were so
indeed, That the Thorn was thrust home. And so for these Edomites too. They
will make their own savor to be abhorred in the Eyes and Nostrills of all
Israel. They are about their work as fast as they can, Blessed be GOD for it
say I; for when there is no Peace to him that goes forth, nor to him that comes
in: But great vexation shall be upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries. What
then? Why then wolves are grievous, and then let the Countrymen alone, every
one will stand in his place, The Man and his Wife both; Son and Daughter
also, every one with their weapon in their hand; what it is I cannot tell, but
what comes next to hand, that shall be a weapon good enough, for indignation
against the Edomite, and his oppression (which makes a Wise man mad, Eccles. 77.
) will frame him a weapon sooner then all the Smiths forges in the Town or
City. Is it a discouragement think you, That their Armor is taken from them?
None at all; Courage. Zeal for GOD, hatred of the Edomite, Love to their gain
and ease (I should not put that last) all this is Armor of proof, the best
Armor in the World. Doubtless this was good to Israel, even to feel the
weight of the Edomites hand, and the Mischief of his Counsel: That Israel
might have no communion with him ever after. It was good for Israel then to be
so wasted by Edomites, so it is with Israel at this day, for Israel will deal
with Papists as with their sins, give entertainment to them, put them into
Office, suffer them to bear rule, and sway all there, as you heard, and their
hearts to cleave to them in love; even so with their sins, till they see and
feel what mischief their sins have done them, what Lords, or lusts they have
served, and so what Fightings they have caused without, what fear within: And
when they see and feel all this, then they can abhor their Sins and
themselves, for giving such loving entertainment to their Sins so long. Israel
must feel first, and their Adversaries must be suffered to deal proudly, To
prepare Instruments of death, and then to thrust them home even unto the heart
of Israel. Then Israel will open their eyes and look about them, and not
before. To conclude. The Edomites must be as pricking Briars and grieving
Thorns, before they shall be thrust away: They must be not in some but in all
places, as evening Wolves, before every Man's hand will be thrust out against
them to thrust them to the heart: They must stink before David and all Israel,
and then Israel will rise up all as one man, to thrust them out, who say of
Isreal's Kingdom at this day as in ancient days Raze it, raze it even to the
ground.

But now here is a strange sight, Though the Edomite has dealt so cruelly with
Israel as we heard, though he has laid waste Isreal's City, and dwelling place,
yet Israel, neighboring thereabouts, come-not-in to help their Brethren,
under the hands of a cruel Lord and a bloody Edomite. What might hold back
the neighboring Israelite from comming-in to succor their poor Brethren?
That is the question, and I desire heartily to be understood in it. I shall not
question, Why it was so long ere the Tribes came-all-in to deliver David, for
then I should question the wisdom of God, wherein I am fully satisfied, and
do think I shall be able, by the Grace of God, to satisfy others in that
point, and to give excellent Reason why David could not be delivered one day
sooner then he was; which, being handled, as I hope by Gods strength it may
be, will give mighty establishment and encouragement to Israel, touching the
distractions of this present time.

My question will be this first, What might hold back neighboring Israel from
comming-in to help their Brethren and Sisters now in the day of their trouble,
and tredding down by the foot of pride? The answer to this question is,
CONSCIENCE did withold Israel then, and the same CONSCIENCE must withold
Israel now, in the very same case, from comming-in to succor their oppressed
Brethren; So says Doctor Fern, I will name him to comfort and refresh the
Devil and his Servants, his Edomites in their war against the LAMB (for they
shall have hot service of it.) and to honor their cause, that they have not
only a Master but a Doctor in Israel on their side, a conscientious man, who
is as he says, and makes men believe, a man of a tender spirit, he can behold
Cities wasted, Towns fired, Men, Women, Children, Sucklings, Ox, Ass,
Sheep, slaughtered there, and, tender Soul! he is moved as much as a Rock
beaten upon with the waves: But if so be one or more shall lift up their hand
for David, and to help him in the day of his distress, with Bread and with a
Sword; or lift up the sword for David, then the good man melts, and good soul
his conscience is troubled; O! says he, beware what you do, you resist the
King: Clap your hand upon the breast, consult with CONSCIENCE, remember the
Battle, and do no more so. A man of a tender spirit no doubt! Let him alone,
we know him well enough, he is wiser, in his own conceit then seven men, Prove.
26.16.
that can render SCRIPTVRE and REASON both for what they do.

I shall not go a step out of my way to meet with this good man, that has so
tender a conscience. Only this, (for the History leads me directly to it) I
must necessarily do, and by GODS help and His good WORD I shall do it to
purpose, and make good, That, had Isreal's hand been with David now, and been
so bold and strong, as to have been able to have wrested the Commission out of
Saul's hand, which he was giving into the Edomites hand; and the Sword out of
the Edomites hand too; had any Israelite done so, he had shown as great a
kindness to Saul the King, and done as great a service to his Kingdom, as is
imaginable. Therefore CONSCIENCE could not hold back Israel from helping The
LORD against the mighty. But this with much more, as I do conceive, not
without the Book, of high and excellent concernment now, and will occasion a
large discourse, I must refer to the next Section, unto which I shall hasten
as fast as I can; Because I have a strong hope and confidence, That I shall be
enabled therein to nonplus the Devil, and put his Edomite clean out of
office, if Law will be hearkened to, and the best Reason. For as Law and Reason
both did call-in and authorize all Israel to rise-up in arms, in succor of
David, (at the last, when Gods time was come:) so it follows, That all Israel
will move now upon the same grounds, and will not be slack; And yet they shall
have no allowance, to Resist their King, but allowance granted them from Heaven
and Earth, to resist the evil Spirit, working mightily now-a-dayes with the
Kings of the earth, and with their Edomites there carrying-on their great
design, to dethrone The LORD JESUS CHRIST. But when I have all done, I have
little hope, That I shall sati fie the tender hearted-man. I mean Doctor
Fearnes Tender Conscience I suspect rather I shall leave his Conscience as I
found it, if not asleep, then seared. That I may begin I will end with this;
Do we that, which is before us, our work and duty, with all our might; Set we
our hands and our hearts thereunto; it is to help The LORD against the mighty:
and we will not dare to make question for Conscience sake, 1 Pet. 3.16.
having a good Conscience, That, whereas they speak of us, as of evil doers,
they may be ashamed, that falsely accuse our good conversation in Christ.

Finis secundae Sectionis.

