THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENTS



PEARLS OF ELOQUENCE, OR, THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENTS: WHEREIN Ladies,
Gentlewomen, and Scholars, may accommodate their Courtly Practice with Gentile
Ceremonies, Complemental, amorous, and high expressions of speaking, or writing
of Letters.

By W. Elder, Gent.

Eloquentiae symphonia mulcet, and favorem obtinet.
Praeclara accurate agenda.
London, Printed for T. Lock, and are to be sold by Henry Eversden, at the
Greyhound in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCLVI.

PEARLS OF ELOQUENCE: OR, THE SCHOOL OF COMPLEMENTS: WHEREIN Ladies,
Gentlewomen, and ^chollars, may accommodate their Courtly practice with Gentile
Ceremonies, Complemental, amorous, and high expressions of speaking or writing
of Letters.

BY VV. Elder, Gent.

Eloquentiae symphonia mulcet, and favorem obtinet.
Praeclara accurate agenda.
^ondon; Printed for T. L. and are to be sold at any Booksellers shop. MDCLV.

The Author to the Ladies and Gentlewomen OF England.
IF Custom did not force a Complement of Dedication; yet this Book would
desire to insinuate into the affection of Ladies, and Gentlewomen; since it can
arrive at no greater perfection of happiness than your favor, which is most
earnestly desired. And in requital of this your favor, it shall be always
ready to furnish you with the best expressions of choice and ^omplementall
language; for though by nature and custom ^ou ca^ deliver your minds in a
smooth and graceful man^er; yet from hence, without study, or premeditation,
you may command necessary ceremonies. Let therefore this one ^nstance, in stead
of more which might be inserted, persuade ^our intelligible generous
dispositions, to receive this Book ^ow exactly perfected, as your devoted
Servant, and to ho^our it with your favor, which I shall esteem as an
ex^l^ation to the supremest sublunary felicite, and the ^ightes^ ^errestiall
happiness.

The EPISTLE To the READER.
Reader,
HAving penned this small Treatise; called, The School of Complements; it
cannot seem st ange to thee, for to view this small Epistle before such a
labyrinth of new matter, wherein at the first sight (without such a Clue of
thread to direct thee by) I might very well suppose that thou should not only
be amaz^d but transported, (if not lost with wonder) so unexpect dly in these
angry times to meet with such Novellaes from the school or the Ceurt, but
recollect thy mind, and then smile upon my charity, which has endeavored the
more to enlighten thy Genius, and show my self to thee in conside^ation of our
late losses, which these sullen dislaureating t m^s have occasioned, by
bereaving us of so many excellent Poets, as namely our Sands, Davener, Quarles,
etc. And lest the Garland of the Muses should altogether wither, I could not
but present thee again with this sp^^ig, or rather more aptly composed Iliad of
choicest Recreations to employ thy wit and behaviou^ entreating thee with
w^shed hands, and without a prejudicate opinion to receive it; so farwell.

Pearls of ELOQUENCE, OR, The School of Complements.
SIR, Your conceptions are so strong that ^hey climb over my thoughts.

Sir, You honor me so far that I imagine my self to be some other than I am or
have been, which can be nothing else but your obliged servant.

Sir, I do repute my self happy to be valued by a person who is able to give a
true of imate of me.

Sir, your infallible judgment does amaze vulge^ wits, since in you alone are
found all those felicities and perfections that can be sought or upon earth*

Sir, Your deserts draw admiration from your very enemies.

Madam, the force of your beauty has over-powr'd the weakness of my fancy,
since thee exquesite perfections of your virtues are charactered in my heart.

Sir, If you proceed to be so profuse of your treas^re ^ Mines of Gold will not
maintain your prodigal e^pences.

Good sir, give me leave to fear least some sinister storms of Fortune, stiflle
the early bloomings of my felicities.

Sir, The toyish conceits of your youth, are unfit for the testy cogitations of
my age.

Sir, There is a confused Chaos of contrary conceits that whirls in my brains;
and I am lost in such an endless Labyrinth, that neither choice, nor chance can
draw me out or.

Give me leave, sir, to gain that from your experience, that otherwise, all the
treasures of the earth can not purchase.

Sir, Should you continue to be thus excessive in your actions, the whole world
would take notice of you as the mirror of an immoderate life.

Be not so inconstant in your affections, lest in the conclusion you prove like
the Marigold, to open at the sunshine of prosperity, and to shut at the least
appearance of the clouds of adversity.

Leave me sir, whilst I learn to despise such Gnathoes, and beat of such
flattering Curs with the whip of my defiance.

Theseus, fair one, did never more triumph at his deliverance from the
perilous Labyrinth, then I from the pernicious bondage of such cruel beauty.

Fortune and Fate, place thee in the places of their earthly felicities.

So rarely accumplisht, that it was hard to know, whether virtue or beauty held
supremacy in so rare a structure.

Sir, Being incensed by your singular commendations, I am persuaded to her only
to commit the chiefest treasures of my life and fortunes.

Pardon my rudeness, fair creature, since neither fate nor fortune delights,
nor cares for them that are dastards.

Sir, I will rather put my reputation to the adventure then refuse to act any
thing you shall command me.

Sir, I have ever reflected on you, as an extraordinary person, and have ever
passionately remained yours.

Sir, I am so taken with you, that I am even sick at the relation of your
indisposition.

Sir, I shall not be backward in the expression of your merits, since they do
so exact an acknowledgment of all.

Sir, You shall never be able to accuse this Tenent as erroneous, since I have
never falsified my self to you; but have ever thought my self perfectly happy
to be reputed yours.

Be careful, fair one, lest (being led Captive by security) your mind float in
the surging Seas of idle conceits, whilst the G^les of voluptuous pleasures,
or the stifling storms of unbridled fancy, with raging blasts ma^e a shipwreck
of your beauty.

Sir, I will endeavor hereafter to encounter your graces and courtesies with an
unwearied constancy in the ways of virtue.

Sir, I will endeavor to contervail much pain^ (...) princely liberty.

Sir, The Trumpet of your royal fame has moved us (who are but subjects of
your generous liberality) with all humility to entertain such noble and heroic
favor cast upon us poor creatures, most un^orty of the least of such benefits.

Madam, There i^ no object can allure my wavering eyes as Your Venus like beauty.

Madam, The force of your beauty has overpowred the weakness of my fancy,
since the exquisite perfections of your virtues are charactered in my breast.

Madam, Were you as wise as M^nerva, or as gorgeous as Juno; yet the accounts
of your beauty being cast up, the gains of his affection might be put in the
eye of your lover.

Coy one, what happiness insued the chastity of Penelope, nay rather what
miseries pursued not the virtues of a Lucretia? How wretched are they then that
deal with Venus or Diana, that can so easily transform men into beasts?

Blame me nol, fair one, though my fixed fancies once abused turn into a fury.

By those smiles of your beauty, your creature that before was plunged into a
perplexity, is now placed in the height of earthly felicities.

Mistress, Pardon my rudeness for troubling thus rashly your musing meditations.

Certainly, Madam, if the gods (as Poets say) made beauty, they skipt beyond
their skill, since they framed it of greater force than they themselves were
able to resist.

Fair one, let the showers of your mercy mitigate the fires of my fancy.

Cruel one, if love be only remedied by love, if fancy by mutual affection,
give me leave at least to appeal to your grace and favor, and at the bar of
your beauty, suffer your servant to lift up his hands in an expectation of
mercy, though his life, by your rigor, be sentenced to death.

Fairest, It is impossible to persuade me to break the league I made with my
fancies.

Sir, I am a mortal foe to affection, and now to vow my service to Venus, is
impossible, since I have already addicted my self to Diana.

Sir, Whosoever reads the records of the faithless protestations of men,
their perjured Promises, and feigned loves, cannot but view a poor Ariadne
abused, a Media mocked, and a Dido deceived.

F^ir one, Your virtue and beauty by a stronger power than that of fate or
fortune is deeply inshrine^ in my heart.

Be pleased at last (fait beauty) to accept me for your slave and servant, and
to admit me into your favor, and that I may freely enjoy the sight of your
sweet face, and feed my fancy in the contemplation of your Perfections.

Fairest, If my deed desire merit no more from you then I have no other choice
but to desperately, or live miserably.

Madam, There is a civil assault within me, by which I feel a certain restraint
of my own liberty and affections.

It is impossible, fairest of women, for any one to view your features, and not
be fettered with the power of your virtuous qualities.

Mistress, I feel such an alienation of my senses, such a metamorphosis of my
mind, that it is impossible for me to become any other than a servile slave to
fancy.

How can I fear to enter into a parley with Cupid? fairest Creature, since
there is such hopes left of victory by the happy presage of your auspitious
smiles at the beginning of our loves conflict.

Si, If I may continue to share in your favors there shall not any under the
Canopy of Heaven be more proud of their fortunes than my self, who really am
your affectionate servant.

Sir, It is for the good of the world that you enjoy your igorous health, since
you are ordained for the service of Kings, and conduct of people.

Sir, I will reserve to speak of virtue; till your great works come to light.

Sir, That which others call virtue in the natural habitude of your worthy
person.

Suppose not I use the Court language, when I assure you I am more then any man
living, sir, your mos^ humble servant.

Sir, When I forgot to to confess my self yours, you may justly suppose I
suffer a perpetual silence, sinc^ whilst I have tongue, I protest my self to
be your af^ectionate s^rvant.

Sir, I will make use of all occasions, to testify how passionately I am yours.

Sir, There is no other thing remaining for me, but only the glory of humil^tie
and obedience.

I should show my self ins^nsible of rarities, were I not amazed with the
curio^ity of your beauty.

Sir, Your Hero^call qualities shine forth in you, as bright as day.

Madam, They that do undervalue the comeliness of your person, dare rob Nature,
and bereave Lillies of their beauty, as the crystal of his clearness.

Sir, The virtues of our forefathers are to be esteemed as vices in comparison
of yours.

Extremities are in other things reproveable, in this laudable, since they
force me to confess my self yours.

Sir, you are never so excellent a Poet as when you speak of me, since you have
art to invent new fables.

Sir, Those fine words and quaint discourses, with which your Ladies are
delighted, issue from their mouths, as a pure and innocent breath perfumed
with kisses.

Sir, You go through all Employments with as good fortune, as noble
resolutions; neither can there be any thing above your spirit: since all things
stoop to do you honor.

Who can distill sleep into the eyes of Lovers, whose ears break forth with the
morning l^ght?

Love, art thou but a vain name, and no essential thing, that have thus left
thy professed servant, when he has most need of thy reviving presence; what is
Music to me, but a doleful voice, accompanied with the various discord of my
sighs?

O Love! Will thou now at last offer me Physic, which art my only poison? will thou do me service which long since have brought me into eternal slaverie?

How long shall my languishing sickness wait upon the triumphs of my passions?

At last, O fair one, cast the eyes of thy resplendent presence on thy abject
creature, that by the brightness of those rays, his baseness may be turned
into a most high, and (through any perfections) a most happy preferment; for
being thus disconsolate, by the frowns of thy rigor, how soon may thou raze
down that Temple, which at first was built by the refulgent smiles of thy
beauty?

From whence can these necessities proceed, that love has laid upon me, most
incomparable Lady? are they by your commandment? or is it by a power from your
excellency, that Cupid has such a command over mortal? of a certain it is
from you, whose fair aspect, accompanied with so imperious a Majesty,
vanquished me by him, so far to resign the happiness of my former liberty, as
that I must now confess my self to be your slave, if you think me unworthy of
the name of your prisoner.

Cruel one, how long can I make an ostentation of my felicity, when the
conclusion, even the last Scene of my Tragedy, with horror presents it self to
thin^ eyes? Can death and dissimulation meet at the instant when I leave the
world, and my dying protestations with thee: that for thee alone I forsook th^^
earth, to be more kindly used there, where I shall certainli^ be eased of these
sorrows? if there be: Leander, a Piramus, or a society of abused Lovers.

If thou art fair, is it to present thee too cruel? If thou can command
affections, will thou therefore captivate them? To be beautiful and yet
terrible, are things incompetible, things that imply contradiction; yet even
against the Laws of Nature thou destroyest Nature, and where thou may raise
the structures to thy perpetual honors, thou ruin'st them.

Most certain ^t is, fair Creature, thy love may make me sacrifice my life at
thy Feet, and I may punish that body which has so unjustly wounded my once
free and serene mind: But alas, wherein can thou glory? Not in thy beauty,
for that will veil it self at so black an act: Not in my ruins, for they
will pursue thee with some direful revenge. Blush then thou fair one, since
to be coy is to be cruel; to be cruel is to alter the property of what thou
art, beautiful.

Fairest, be no longer so great an enemy to my desires, as to imprison them in
silence.

I cannot express the least disobedience to your commands, but rather hope my
past displeasures may deserve pity, if not my future services a reward.

Ponder my merits in the balance of your mercy, that the unworthiness of my
deserts, by the fair sufferance of your goodness, may procure your gracious
re^pects in my behalf.

It is a sin to suspect such virtue which glories to arm ^t self against all
deceits.

Fair one, you have a wit which delights not to judge it self, and a beauty that
glories to condemn others; reconcile your beauty to your wit, that the use of
the one may restrain the abuse of the other, whilst we your servants live to
admire your perfections, and you your self survive to perfect your virtues.

Fair one, what unremovable suitor eclipses your affection from shining on
your devoted, and most constant servant.

Perfections of my desires, with one determinate answer, bless me with
happiness, or silence my long continued suit.

That my desires to enjoy you are more than to live, proceeds from the effects
of my affection, the efficient cause being your excessive beauty.

Madam, The eyes of a ravished Lover, cannot but have virtues aid so ready in
himself, as always to bewail the loss of a virtuous constancy in other,
since such a loss, by his own affections, is ever placed in the very face of
his memory.

By the memory of our fore-past affections, by the oaths of our yet continued
love; by whatsoever is virtuous, credit me.

Can you (Sir) wear a Mars's heart in a Cupids body since the eyes of all
spectators, judge you fi^ter for the pleasures of the Court, than the Tents of
War?

In him (it seems) Nature was not mistaken, since whatsoever was in mankind,
was in him to the uttermost.

Sir, It is a degree above humanity, and therefore requires the admiration of
your friends, that your wit should so far out-go your age.

It is not strange (O thou cruellest of women) that those eyes of thine should
strike him with terror, who stands unmoved with the sight of the most horrible
countenance of death?

Sir, I am most infinitely bound to you, for this so rare and noble a courtesy.

It is you (and none but you) which I am bound to love: and therefore, though I
am presented with ^ likeness of your beauty, yet likeness of another cannot
make the same essence of your person, much less ca^ dissolve your commandments
of my seevice.

The very Image of your countenance, and outward expressions of your behavior,
are suitable to the virtuous resolutions of your mind.

Fairest, Grant me this happiness, to have my poor affections raised to the
honor of waiting upon your commands.

Violence of love leads me into this discourse, in which I am not so
unfortunate, as full of desires to be more happy.

Armies of objections rise up against my accepted opinion.

Sir, Though I were to pass through all the splendors of the World, and frame
them all to blazon forth your worth, my pen could never teach you.

Sir, Nature in you has laid deep foundations, in respect of your qualities,
both of mind and body, in both which she has made no promise of any
mediocrity, by the distribution of which rare perfections she has rendered you
lovely to the world, and fit f r the service of the greatest monarchs.

Sir, Your imagination (which you speak in such high terms) cannot but move me
to believe great improbilities.

Sir, How happy should I think my self, were the Characters of your virtues
imprinted in my Breast, by a more continued acquaintance?

Sir, No imaginary jealousies shall deliver me from mine inclination to that
goodness, to which I have always had an extraordinary propension, by your
royal example.

Sir, I have an interest in your prosperity, so far that I will complain of
fortune, so you have an occasion to commend her.

Worthy Sir, You know your self too well, to suspect me of flattery.

Virtue and Eloquence are bestowed upon you, to make you be amongst men as
immortal.

Sir, I could not have the ambition to suppose that there could be any room
left for you to entertain a woman of so many imperfections as my self.

The contemplation of your virtues amazeth m^.

Sir, I find in you whatsoever may give a reputation to the Courts of Princes.

Sir, I am reserved for your sake, that nothing might be wanting to your glory.

Sir, You are the man, whom the necessities of the State require.

Opportunities would wax old, should I neglect this present to serve you.

All spirits would prove favorable unto you, since you have convinced them by
your merits.

Your generous disposition has permitted me a longer audience than your
affairs could well permit.

Worthy Sir, reflect upon your creature with the bright beams of your generous
disposition.

I cannot allot more moderate limits to my ambition, or wish my self a greater
happiness than to do your service.

Your Heroickacts succeeding Historians shall crown with Laurels.

Sir, for your sake I will undergo the infelicities of cruel fortune.

Sir, there is no happiness on earth, but is included in your self, or in what
concerns you.

Sir, your goodness does be^eave me of a voice to express your virtues.

You cannot blame me though I hate ingratitude since even beasts are capable of
acknowledgement.

Sir, If you withdraw from me your presence, you overthrow all the honor you
have hitherto acquired for me.

Sir, I shall fall sick for want of a capacity to digest your favors.

Sir, whatsoever you undertake, permit noth^ng to your spirit which may wound
your reputation.

Sir, Of all men I dare free you from this crime of violating the chastity of
Language.

Sir, I owe too much honor to the memory of our fore-past acquaintance, to
displease you.

Sir, for your sake, at the same time, I both enjoy pleasure, and endure pain.

Sir, I must beg of you hereafter, to have a greater care of my modesty, since
you enforce, either to lose it, or not believe you.

Sir, The whole Court is sensible of suffering your name to fall to the ground.

Sir, I am so far from hiding my own defects, that I acknowledge there is none
so imperfect as my self, neither can any man arrive to perfection, except he
be adorned with those abilities whereof I am utterly ignorant.

Sir, I have neither power nor ability left me, but only to express I am yours.

Sir, You have anticipated me of all Rhetoric, either of being complementall,
or returning you commendations for your worthy favors.

Sir, instead of requital of those vows you offer me, I am put to a stand what
to answer.

Mistress, I desire to pass my life in the pleasing dreams of your perfections.

Your Courtly voice is like an Oracle, either to approve or condemn me.

Sir, I am none of those who slight the benefits are showred upon them.

Sir, I cannot light upon that accent, wherewith I might authorize my own
follies.

All my thoughts are your real inspirations.

I have no servile dependencie, but upon your conceptions, I move by your
directions.

In matters of Eloquence you seek out singularities, hitherto unknown.

From the first minute of my acquaintance, I made have, as I shall ever, to
acknowledge my self your most humble servant.

Sir, I entertain these passions, to the end that you may appease them.

Madam, If you still persevere to dote thus on your beauty, the time will come
when your face will scare you more than a Judge does a felon.

Sir, I have quitted all complacency, and there is no means shall make me
silent.

Fairest, There is no part of the World so remote, whither my curiosity in your
search shall not carry me.

Lady, The moral of my affection is to instruct you to make use of your youth,
and to gather Nose-gayes before the Roses wither: For be confident, when you
have no further attractions than an eloquent tongue, no man will seek for them
in the furrows of your face; and you shall only be left to bewail the ruins
of your beauty.

Sir, suffer your self to be convinced by reason, since you cannot resist the
same, but to your disadvantage.

Sir, you must excuse me, since I know not in what manner to suffer so wounding
a displeasure.

Sir, All the water in the sea can never purify me from this offense.

Lady, You have no more beauty than will serve to excuse you from being
extremely ugly.

Sir, If you grant me this favor, you shall elevate me to a more Sovereign
Fortune than the state of Kings.

Sir, It were as great a crime to be ignorant of the diversions that attend
you, as not to be acquainted with the great affluence of noble company, daily
repairing to visit you.

Mistress, In my most solitary walks it shall be my ambition to presume only to
revolve you in my most secret cogitations.

Sir, In you alone I must commend the commencements of all virtue.

In all shapes, and under the most dreadful aspects that can appear, I am yours.

To return you complements for such excellent favors, were to undervalue their
worth, since my language is too poor, and unable to lend me wherewith to pay
you.

I fear I shall be indebted to you all my life, for the favors I have received
of you.

It is the height of my desires to be passionately, as I am, your most faithful
servant.

My passions cannot so far transport me, but that I shall remain as I have ever
been, yours.

Sir, I intend not to commence any real war against you, for I acknowledge my
color to be artificial, which I am ready to lay down at your pleasure.

Fair Creature; Painters and stage players are not guilty of those Murders
which the dart of your eyes do most cruelly commit.

I am not so curious as to condemn the whole multitude, which have lost
themselves in the admiration of your virtues.

I will dilate my self no further in my Expressions, lest I dishonor your
goodness with my undervaluing praises.

Sir, Mine eloquence will come too late, since there is no precept in all humane
wisdom, which has not presented it self to your view.

Sir, The consolation I have next to the assurance I have of my innocence, is
the liberty I enjoy to profess my self yours.

The principal object of my intentions, has ever been the glory of your name.

Sir, I do profess my self yours, with all those protestations, which are able
to make truth appear in violable.

Sir, I prostrate all my presumption at your feet, and shall despair of being
happy, if not reputed yours.

Sir, I can no longer conceal my thoughts, since you have an interest both in
me and them.

I never gave you visit, which culed me not of some passion.

How often with your Golden Eloquence, have you taken me out of my self?

You alone can conduct me to the highest pitch of accidental perfection.

The beams of your eminent virtues have discovered to me mine own perfections.

In stead of all those high expressions you have bestowed upon me, I must only
answer you, That I am your humble servant.

Sir, There can be no acknowledgement that I can make, can be answerable to the
obligations I owe to your honor.

Sir, You mistake my disposition, if you suppose I affect praises with the like
intemperance, as I do perfumes.

Sir, Should I forfeite such occasions, my friendship would never appear but
remain as a Recluse.

Sir, The world would end, and Nature prove imperfect, if there were no such
men to maintain her honors.

Continue to express your self what you are, that your virtue may be its own
recorder.

Fairest, My thoughts are not so often here, as where you are.

Time which prescribes limits to all things, preserve your beauty to the worlds
end.

The Physicians have not so far exhausted me, but that there are some drops of
blood left, to bestow in part of your honors service.

Madam, Put on those rays of your beauty, that it may bud again with the next
Roses.

I confess I was more astonished, then to find such an equipage of sorrow
about you.

Sir, You are adorned with all excellent qualities that Art and Nature can
bestow, for the commanding of men.

Sir, There is not one part of your body, whereof another is not master.

Sir, It is not in my power to dispose of one single hair since I am all yours.

Madam, you draw the eyes of all to admire you, since you are as a fair
prospect, adorned with all pleasures to allure the beholders.

You are the Cabinet, in which nature has locked all her miracles.

Though I receive injuries from you, it shall be my humility not to take notice
of them.

Sir, I would visit those parts of the world which avarice it self has not yet
found out, rather than lose your society.

Sir, It is impossible for me to conceal my sensibilities.

Sir, What violence soever I offer to my anger, I can no longer contain it.

Sir, You do so heap your favors on me, that you will not so much as suffer me
to seem miserable.

Sir, Your innocent actions carry their warrant with them.

Sir, You do not so much express your wit, as your Tyranny, in inflicting such
torments on me.

Sir, be not confident, lest he whom you have so often injured, do at last grow
weary of his sufferings.

You are the man with whom alone I desire to pass the most pleasant hours of my
life.

Sir, If you pretend excuses for so poor a trifle, know I am no longer your
affectionate servant

Sir, I, shall hold my eloquence as pernicious as the perfections of a
Courtezan, should it prove any cause of your quarrels.

You usurp a more absolute authority over wits than is lawful or reasonable.

You smell too much of your Musk, and Amber, to express your self serious in
the weight of affairs.

Sir, My conceptions are popular, and to be intelligible among women.

Your conceits are too far fetched, and they transcend the subject on which you
bestow them.

Fairest, let me ravish a kiss from your hand.

Sir, My affections spring not from the diseases and distempers of my soul,
since my inclinations to serve you, have their original from immortal reason.

Mistress, You have a power to infuse love and fidelity into the hearts of
Barbarians.

You cannot bestow favors amiss on him who harh searched the secrets of nature,
and the depth of Philosophy, that he might not appear to be grateful.

Sir, you must give me leave to admire your judgment, which appears to be far
more excellent than your Fortunes.

Sir, Let me not seem to incur a crime, since I am forced to extol your
generous liberality.

Sir, You vary your shape, and change your perfumes, according to the diversity
of the seasons.

Let it please you out of your nobleness, to (...) me to be your graces most
obedient and faithful ^e^vant.

Sir, You have all those excellent qualities that are necessary in a Prince.

Sir, I measure the necessities and fatalities of this world by your
contentments or discomforts.

Sir, In this exigence of my fortune, I am forced to admire your virtues, since
you still set so high a value on your creature, who is lost to all men but to
your self.

Sir, Your goodness is as unlimitable, as the desire I have to serve you.

Sir, in you are comprehended all the riches that Nature bestows on her most
glorious creatures.

Sir, I speak this seriously with my best sense; you may reduce me to any form.

All, who have either eyes or spirits, must place them on so deserving an
object.

Fairest, Cast one glance of pity on me, lest you deprive me of all conceits
of mercy, with the terrible aspect of your eyes, which are to me the
Ambassadors of life and death.

Sir, You are the emblem of terror, and your furious looks are able to
consume a woman.

Lift not me so high with your favors, lest you do but fit me for a precipice,
and I behold my descent with a greater terror.

Fairest, Let not your heavenly beauty, seated in its royal Majesty, draw
forth the sword of disdain, to the ruin of your creature.

Fairest Creature, Since I am the pattern of all ill fortunes, by the force of
your affection free me from all the miseries that oppress me.

You hit my inclinations, since to recompense such virtues, were a work most
worthy of all generous spirits.

Sir, Your refusal to the title of eloquent, proves your modesty to be most
unjust, since your tongue long since did beareave you of all excuses.

Sir, I dare not enter the lists with you, in respect of your elegancies of
speech, for when I would become most persuasive in my language, I appear most
barbarous in my expressions.

All your Rhetorical arguments are but like blue flowers amongst the corn;
which though they may seem pleasant to the eye, prove most unwholesome to the
body.

Sir, I shall always acknowledge the artificial language to be like
Gentlewomen adorned with Rubies and Diamonds, which glister upon her garments
whilst she her self want, the eyes of her body and of her mind.

Fair one, Can I prevent the powers of the plannets or resist the force of the
stars? you may then conclude I can then repel these affections.

I am yours, sir, and will be yours in despite of fates and fortunes.

Madam, Your excellent qualities, and exquisite virtues have so assaulted the
Fort of my Fancy, that I must of necessity resign my self up to you, as a
trophie of your victories.

Mistress, since Cupid does so fitly favor the causes of his Clients, let us
not slip so happy an opportunity.

Madam, If the wishes of a poor mortal may be, heard above, I question not but
heaven with felicities will crown your royal deserts.

Madam, Though I have not hitherto by dutiful services made manifest the
loyalty of my heart, yet since I first framed in my fancy, as in a mirror
the shape of your surpassing beauty, with all humility I have cast my self and
fortunes at your Royal feet.

Fairest, There is none upon earth does with a more loving duty reverence your
person and virtues, than I do:

Madam, in consideration of my poor fortunes, let my affection appear so much
the more excusable, since I so far esteem of your divine beauty and exquisite
virtue, as I would think my self most unworthy, though I were Prince of the
World, to possess your heavenly perfection, in respect of any of my own native
honors.

Sir, I have learnt to know, that it is the Religion of lovers to swear and
forswear.

Madam, The parching heat of summer makes the cool shapes more pleasant; and
the frowns of Lovers make their smiles more delightful and cheerful.

Mistress, I must never hope so entirely to love, as with my affections to
require your loyalty.

Sir, She which builds her fancy upon fading subjects, ties her honor to the
unconstant wheel of fortune.

Fairest, As a pledge of my protestation, you shall have both my heart and hand
to be yours in dust and ashes.

Sir, You have a heart as large as the sea, which contains in it a capacity of
all ornaments that use to dignifie Princes.

Strive not (sir) to bereave me of the reputation of my honor, lest those that
shall succeed me hereafter, read my insamy upon my Tomb.

Madam, The beams of your Sun-like beauty, with their lively luster, and
sparkling flames, dazzle the eyes of your amazed lovers.

Madam, In the shady darkness of this Arbor, you seem like a heaven enameled
with an infinite number of stars.

Having disposed so many affections to do your service, fear not, fairest, your
servant must of necessity visit you.

Fair one, Whilst mortals enjoy your heavenly beauty, the luster of your
resplendent eyes, shall as the day light serve them for the dispatch of their
affairs.

Sir, I cannot be insensible of your miseries, since the web of our destinies
has passed us both through the like misfortunes.

Sir, I am real, and use not to entertain any friends with dreams and
illusions.

Sir, This your inhumane usage of your creature, shall never seem strange to me,
since the most fervent affections of the world, often times degenerate into the
vehementest enmities.

Sir, We equally share of one another discontents, and dissolve our hearts
together, as one would melt one piece of Wax into another.

Fairest, Those eminent qualities, which nature, as a Dowry, has bestowed upon
you, like flowers spread themselves forth by the rays of your bright beauty,
causing those courtships, services, and admirations which so sweetly adorn you.

Mistress, Ladies of honor to express the sincerity of their affections, have
breathed forth their lives on the Tombs of their deceased Lovers.

Madam, If I am consumed by the fires of Cupid, blame me not, since your eyes
kindled the flames of my affections.

Madam, exercise not the extremity of your rigor upon him that suffers such
miseries, under the false title and quality of an offender.

Know, fair Creature, that such a bright day may at last enlighten my
innocence, when revengeful lovers shall search into my ashes, to find out
truth there buried.

Sir, These glorious progressions of your virtue will at last mount you to the
highest pith of admiration.

Madam, shut not up these eyes from the light of your beauty, lest they be
perpetually opened to tears.

Madam, It is impossible you should ever draw to you a reputation of honor,
signed with the effusion of my blood.

Madam, There are those will deplore my ashes, and strew some silly flowers on
the place impressed with the prints of your punishments.

Fair one, When my soul shall be separated from my body, it shall every where
wait on your purified spirit, as the shadow of it.

Madam, If you should please to condemn me to darkness, by the eclipsing of the
divine light of your beauty, yet I despair not, but that at last from the
sphere of your splendors, due to my merits, you will vouchsafe the rays of
your clemency, to enlighten the duskie nights of my miseries and misfortunes.

Fair one, Though death may separate our lives, yet love shall un^te our ashes,
and we shall preserve the immortality of our affections, by the immortality of
our souls.

Madam, Seated thus on your fair pavilion, you appear like resplendent day, in
the attires of a Majesty, absolutely royal.

Madam, Your goodly nature, well proportioned body, the bright color of your
face, the lively port and grave carriage of your person, all these speak you to
be a real branch, sprung from some royal stem.

Fair one, Your hair negligently disshevel'd. and careless attire, grace forth
your beauty, which shines in the midst of so many obstacles, as the Sun in a
winter day.

Fair Creature, Cast not those eyes down, neither color your face with those
modest blushes, since it would appear most admirable, that your Virtues should
find Fetters in a place where they expect Crowns.

Sir, I desire to end my days on the Theater of Kings in their glorious
services.

Madam, Heaven has created me such a one, as you see full of good will, though
of slender fortunes and means.

Sir, We have continually lived together as one soul divided into two bodies,
and since our amities have taken root in a mutual temperance, and
correspondencie of humors, we have maintained in us a continual familaritie,
which neither death nor hell can ever have power to separate.

Fairest, Our breasts shall be ever interchangeablie transparent.

Fair one, Dissimulation or contradiction cannot approach the sincerity of our
loves.

Fairest, let me embrace you with the oppenness of my heart, and the profusion
of my love, that our souls may evaporate themselves into one another.

Sir, Your favors create me again, and give me a new being.

Sir, I shall never pretend any right to any honor in the world, but only to
obey your commands.

Mistress, The grace of speech dwells on your fair lips.

Sir, Hereafter ages shall take Palms and Laurels to crown the relics of your
honored ashes.

Fairest, these eyes of mine, are but emblems of tears mixed with love.

Madam, spread not that Cipress Vail over your face, lest you benight your
beauty, and darken the bright rays of that which makes our day.

Madam, Your beauty is a divinity left on earth to be known and beloved of
mortals.

A description of Beauty.
BEauty is Natures Ivy-Bush.

It is her beauty only creates her queen; it is that which adds a commanding
power to every syllable.

Glory not too much in the prerogative of Nature, seeing she has made thee
man, make not thy self a woman.

Your beauty is a Tyrant of a short reign, you cannot call it your own, for you
can neither give it, nor preserve it long.

Beauty is the conqueress of man, never to be satisfied with the rays of her
crystal painted eyes.

A feature that excels all mortal sense.

Such a one, that when she lay naked, his eyes did carve him out a Feast of
love.

Her body does present those fields of peace that Poets sing of in Elysium.

She lay like eclipsed Cynthia, sweetly canopied with darkness, til he drew the
curtains of love.

Had Paris seen her naked, he had slighted his Nell of Greece for her.

Trimming her beauty forth with blushing bravery, with the wonders of her
beauty, mortal eyes are never to be satisfied, as if she were made only for
admiration, to be adored of men, or win grace from Heaven.

A Complexion as clear as the Sky.

Beauty is the image of the Creator, and the Rhetoric of Heaven.

THE School of Complements. Choice and fair Flowers, selected out of the Garden
of Eloquence, to adorn our Language with variety of Expressions upon several
occasions
Upon his absence.
I Shall no longer esteem my self absent from you whilst I hold any room in
your heart and memory.

Let those dull clods of earth, not yet informed with true promethean fire,
measure affections by their Miles of Acres; we, whose souls are cast in a more
pure mould, by a most subtle penetration and transfusion of hearts, enjoy a
secure freedom in one another wishes, and in the greatest distance, are
cherished with a virtuall contiguity.

It is a brutish love, and wants the quickening fire of reason, that can by
circumstances be intermitted; the more extracted flames of our affections, shall
like more glorious Pyramides burn bright and clear, and light our souls,
though thus seemingly disjoined, to our daily mutual imbracements.

Let not my remoteness change your purposes, more than it shakes the resolution
I have made, to live, yours.

Protestations of love.
IT is as impossible for me not to love you, as it is for the Sun to forget his
ordinary course.

So am I ravished with your beauty, that it will prove harder for me to forget
you, than it would prove difficult to resolve for death: and know for a
certain, that I shall still be rather content, and disposed to consent to the
hatred of my self, than to the love of any other object, but you.

Your sight may be forbidden me, and you may hinder me from speaking to you,
but not to have the effiges of your divine beauty imprinted in my heart: and
not to love and serve you, it is a thing not only out of your power, but mine
also; for I am to you as an accident, so inseparable, that you cannot be
without me.

Upon her beauty.
I Should have thought I had too much failed in so much duty, had I not
directed it to so fair a mark; but the favor of your affections is that to
which I sacrifice my best endeavors.

Vanquished by your beauty, I have yielded up the arms of my liberty and
freedom, under your obedience.

Nothing shall take from your heart, but death it self, the fair image of your
divine beauty.

Death it self, shall here stand vassal, and homage pay to your more powerful
darts, when every quickening glance from you shall ad new life, as he destroys
the old.

In admiration of her goodness.
IT is your goodness that has supplied my small merit; which could no have
dared to promise me the favors you can afford me.

The goodness of your soul is so clear and bright, that sin dares not approach
too near, for fear of discovering its own deformity.

You need not seek for your inheritance, when the rich evidence of your virtue
entitles you to heaven.

I wonder not to see so many bankrupts in goodness, when I find the Stock of
Virtue rests alone in you.

These noble favors may quicken my endeavors, but never create a desert in
me, they are so much beyond my all.

On her leaving him.
LOvers in despite of absence, lose not the remembrance of their lovers; they
are as the Flowers; which (though trod on) do resume their luster at the Suns
approach.

Although thou go away yet we cannot part.

Here in my heart thou still remainest, yet I must shed some tears, which like
the morning dew, or as April showers, shall make the springtide of our love
(though by this winter covered) grow fresh and green again.

To forsake me, when your company is dearest to me, is no sign of true
friendship, which parts not at death it self, since love remains for ever.

Take pity on all those bloody sorrows, which the apprehension of your absence
makes me already so miserably to feel.

To accuse in a Letter.
IT is better to love with severity, than to deceive with sweetness,

I expected a Cordial, but I received a Corrasive, your bitter-sweet was
unequally tempered, and in your Pills, though sugared over, I found an
unwelcome operation. I received thy Letter, but -- I must chide thee (sweet)
another c^ose from thy fair hand, will make me surseit, you frowned when last
we parted, and by that cloud you bid me expect a storm; it is a double bliss,
thus sweetly to be deceiv^ed; you frown indeed, but a thousand Cupids lodge
themse ves in every wrinckle of your brow.

I would forbear to write to you in this manner, were it not that the affection
I bear to you, does force, and by its authority, draw all these words from my
heart and mouth.

Mistress, The Bees are not hated for their stings, no more should you hate me
for the sharpness of my circumstances.

We must not praise our selves for being better than the worst, but rather
blame our selves for being worse than the best; since then I fail in my
merits, give me leave to mourn for my imperfections.

Farewell.
I Must depart from you, yet shall not your service be deprived of my obedience.

Adieu, fair Sun of my life, I leave you for this present, but be always
assured, that my mind, and my desires, shall never depart from you.

Dear Love, I know not which way to begin to bid you farwell, nor how to finish
this discourse, which once ended, our disconsolate departure follows.

Woe is me, must I needs wander away from all my felicities at once, losing with
the happiness of your sight, the most perfect object of beatitude?

Farwell (Madam) be always fortunate, whilst I shall languish unhappy, though
most constant.

Expressions of affection.
YOU can never do so much for me, but that the affection wherewith I adore you,
and the faith I have imposed in you, will prove far greater.

Mistress, You are the first, to whom my affect^onate heart has been offered,
and shall (if you please) be the last that shall have the last possession of it.

Do but let me once discover my aff^ct^ons to you, and then command me to
perpetual silence if you please.

You are the eye of mine eyes, and thought of my thoughts, the perfecter of my
defaults, the life of my love, the scope and end of all my desires and hopes.

Bear well in mind mine affection; that though I be removed from your fair
eyes, I may not be so fa^ from your favors.

The Lovers impression of Costancie.
I Shall in loving you, manifest such an affectionate stability and
stedfastness, that my loyalty and my love shall inseparably wait upon you.

My constancy may easily show you, that I have as good an heart to die for
you, as I have a mind and desire to live and love you.

I shall make it appear to aftertimes, that I am the man, who for your sake,
have made my self an invincible rock of stedfastness: for I shall still hug my
constancy, and never let it stir from me til my last gasp.

Upon her Affability and Courtesy
IT is your courtesy that lends me the favor which Heaven and Nature has
denied me.

Your courtesy will force the most rigid Cato to turn your Proselyte, and make
the Cynick leave his Tub, enamoured with your banity.

Each part above you shines with a peculiar grace, but in your mild behavior
they all concentrate.

Upon your Brow, Beauty, and honor sit enthroned whence in your stately
carriage they dispense their powerful Laws.

It is out of your generous disposition you w^sh me well, as it is of duty that
I honor you.

Upon a LOVERS fear.
LOvers live always in more fear than hope, and will sooner conceive of their
sorrows, then hear of their joys.

Lady, I have just cause to fear, lest by plac^ng my love upon an object
either too violent or too much di^ant, my sense may be deceived: you far
transcend my deserts, but my desires lie captive at your feet, one ^eam from
your bright eye will kindle them a new, and ^dd a new vigor to me your
languishing prostrate.

The fear I have left my slender merit should take away our good mind to wish
me well, does in a sort make all those joys imperfect, which my sweetest
thoughts made me judge so fuil and entire.

On her desires.
FAirest, Be but as desirous of my content, as I am of your service.

My desires make me as careful to please you, as I am bound by duty, and
compelled by inclination to serve, you.

I wish, Heaven that gave me the boldness of desire had likewise graced me with
desert.

To give or present.
THis I dedicate, consecrate, and offer up unto you with the samt heart,
wherewith I vowed you my service.

Your bounty has furnished me with power, and your example with will; accept
therefore this small present, gleaned from your plentious Harvest, which shall
ever testify to the ungrateful world, how much I glory to proclaim aloud my
wealths chief founders.

I should be ignorant and ungrateful too, should I presume to think it worthy
your acceptance, when every jewel receives its Character of value from your
esteem.

The mass of all my wealth made up together, discla^ms the name of merit, and
therefore here I freely give it all, and in the strong indentures of loyalty, I
bind my self your, Prentice.

I had rather present you with some small thing, and so be reputed ignorant,
than ungrateful.

Regard more the affection, than the merit of the gift, and so accept it, not
as a thing of desert, but as a testimony of good will.

A description of a Married woman, VVidow, and Maid.
A W^fe is like a Garment worn and torn,
A Maid like one made up and never worn;
A Widow like a Garment worn threadbare,
Sold at the second hand, like Brokers ware.
The Maids Complement upon his Eloquence.
YOur eloquent deserts speak love, and I should wrong to lock it in the wards
of covert bosom, when it deserves with characters of brass, asorted residence
against the tooth of time, and a razor of oblivion; therefore my soul cannot
but yield you forth to public thanks, forerunning more requiralls, Oh! how you
are winding up the watch of your wit!

Sir, I cannot but admire the delight and life of your wit, the light of your
wisdom, and the Mercury of your Eloquence.

His Answer in praise of her Elegancie.
Sweet Mistress, I could not (without making my self guilty of irreverance)
speak otherwise to you, than in a way of praise.

I value love in all, but (fair Lady) most in you, where I find it richly
sitting on the neck of honor.

Fair one, such is the galled condition of the age that should my feeble
Encomiums presume to touch a l^ttle at what your beauty in the largest manner
merits, the fairest title I should gain for my true meaning, would be parasite.

Madam, Let others daub and flatter, I Will not give over to draw true lines, but
maugre all their painting, ^il proclaim you aloud, virtuous and fair.

In a Word (Madam) to live with you is to live with all the graces; for Nature
has made you the example of all her liberalities.

Madam, I will put it upon the file of thankful remembrance, and register it for
a singular act of your benificence.

A Lady and a Knight.
Sir, say not you love unless you do,
For lying will not honor you.
His answer.
Madam, I love, I love to die,
And will not lie unless by you;
You say I lie, I say you.
A lovers sad passion for loss of his Mistress.
Where shall I find that Melancholy Muse
That never heard of any thing but moan
And read that passion that herpen does us^
When she and sorrow sadly sit alone.
To tell the world more than the world can tell,
What fits indeed, most fitly figured hell.
Let me not think once of the smallest thought,
Nay speak of love then of the greatest grief,
Where every lover with sorrows over-wrought
Live but in death, dispairing of relief:
While thus my heart with torments torn assunde
May of the world be called the woeful wonder,
The Day's like Night all darkened in distress,
Pleasure becomes a subject unto pain;
The Spirit over-prest with heaviness,
While helpless horror vexes every vein,
Death shakes her dart, grief has my grave prepa^
Yet to more sorrow is my spirit spared.
The Only eyes that not endures the light,
The N^ght-ravens song that sounds naught but death
The Cockatrice that kills with her sight
The poisoned air that choaks the sweetest breath;
Thunders and earthquakes all together met.
These tell a little how my life is set.
Were woes dissolved to sighs, and sighs to tears,
And every tear a torment of the mind,
The minds destress unto the deadly fears,
That find more death than death it self can find;
Death to that life that living can descrie
A little more yet of my misery.
Put all the woes of all the world together,
Sorrow and Death, set down in all their pride,
Let misery bring all her Muses hither,
With all the horrors that the heart may hide,
Then read the state but of my ruthful story,
And say my grief has gotten sorrows glory.
For Natures sickness sometime may have ease,
Fortune (though fickle) sometime is a friend,
The minds affection patience may appease,
And death is cause that many torments end.
To show the nature of my pain, alas,
Pain has no nature to discry my pain,
But where that pain it self in pain does pass;
Think on vexation so in every vein,
That hopeless, helpless some endless pain may tell,
Save hell it self (but mine) there is no hell.
If such love be a ground of deadly grief,
Consuming cares has caught me by the heart;
If want of comfort, hopeless of relief,
Be further more, so weigh my inward smart:
If love's unkindness, so my grief is grounded,
If causeless wronged, so my heart is wounded.
If love refused, so read on my ruin,
If truth disgraced, so my sorrow moved,
If faith abused the ground my sorrow grew in,
If Vettues scorned, so my death approved:
If death delaying, so my heart perplexed,
If living, dying, so my spirit vexed.
My Infants years misspent in Childish toys,
My riper years in rules of little reason,
My better years in all mistaken joys,
My present time, (O most unhappy season)
In fruitless labor and in endless love,
O what a horror has my life to prove!
I sigh to see my infancy misspent,
I mourn to find my youthful life misled,
I weep to feel my farther discontent,
I dye to try how love is living dead,
I sigh, I mourn, I weep, I living dye,
And yet must live to show more misery.
The hunted Heart sometime does leave the hound,
My heart alas does never leave the Chase,
The live Hounds line sometimes is yet unfound,
My bands are hopeless of so high a grace:
Summer restores what winter does deprive,
But my love withered never can revive.
I cannot figure sorrows in conceit,
Sorrow exceeds all figures in our sense,
But on my woe even sorrows all may wait,
To see a note exceed their excellence,
Let me conclude, to see how I am wounded,
A lover himself is in his love confounded.
But whereof grows this passion of the pain,
That thus perplexeth every other part,
Whence is the humor of this hateful vain,
So damps the Spirit and consumes the heart,
O let my soul with bitter tears confess,
It is the ground of all unhappiness.
If lack of love I am the note of need,
If lack of friends no faith on earth remains,
If lack of health, see how my soul does bleed,
If lack of pleasure look upon my pains,
If lack of love, of friends, of wealth and pleasure,
Say then my sorrow must be out of measure.
Measure! No measure, measure can my thought
But that one love that is beyond all measure,
Which knowing how my grief have now been wrought
Can bring her love into the highest pleasure;
Which must my sorrows either cut off quite,
Or never let me think upon delight.
There is a lack that tells me of a life,
There is a loss that tells me of a Love,
Betwixt them both a state of such a strife
As makes my spirit such a passion prove,
That lack of one, and the others loss, alas,
Makes me the wofulst wretch that ever was.
A Scholar in praise, or rather dispraise of his Mistress.
A Scholar to win his Mistress love
Compared her to three Goddesses above;
And swore she had, to give her due deserts,
Pallas, Juno, and fair Venus Parts.
Pallas was foul and grim, so out of measure,
That neither Gods nor men in her took pleasure;
Juno so shroud and cursed was of her tongue
That all mis-liked her both old and young;
Venus unchaste, strong Mars enticing still
To garnish Vulcans temples, and fulfill
Her lust. Now think you these are praises mean,
Compared to a slut, a shrow, a queen;
A woman kind, that is not true,
Plays false, and makes her husband rue,
If true she be, and nothing kind,
She is a Corrasive to his mind:
True kindness, and kind truth in one
Makes up a happy union.
On a dishonest woman.
HEre lies a fair wife in earth foul and dirty,
Who drew at fifteen, and went out at thirty.
On a Maids inconstancy.
SHall I weep, or shall I sing?
I know not best which fits mourning
If I weep I ease my brain,
If I sing I sweeten pain.
Weeping, I Will sing, and singing weep,
To see how Maids no love can keep.
On a Maids lying sick.
A Maiden fair with a Green Sickness, late,
Pity to see, perplexed was full sore,
Resolving how to mend her bad estate,
In this distress Apollo does implore,
And cure for her ill, the Oracle assigns,
To keep the first letter of these following Lines.
On a beautiful and fair Lady, called, my Lady May: And her Dear love, Mr.
Field.
THis is the sweet and pleasant month of May,
Which clothes the fields in his most rich array,
Adorning him with colors better did
Than any King can wear, than any Bride;
But May is almost spent, the Fields grows dun
With gazing overmuch on Mayes hot Sun:
Vouchsafe, O Zephyrus; thou gentle Wind,
And you, O Floods, unto the Fields be kind,
Distill your honyed drops, this heat to lay,
Or else poor Field will burn in midst of May.
On a Lovers departing.
THough envious fortune which could never have while
As yet to grace me with one pleasing smile
But ever frown, new to augment my grief,
Bare me my sight, my refuge, and relief;
Yet thou'ast my heart (my dear) instead of me,
And as it lives, so shall it dye with thee.
Though I must part, and parting be a pain,
Keep thou my heart, til I return again;
So that in part, I but depart from thee,
Thou have my heart, the rest remains with me,
Which rest, small rest, that find, til having run,
Its wonted course, and where it first begun:
What more remains? best thoughts shall thee attend,
My love in thee begun, in thee shall end.
On a Welsh man.
A Welshman 'twixt Saint Tassies day and Easter,
Ran on his Host is score for cheese a Teaster:
His hostis choked it up behind the door,
And said, good sir, for cheese, discharge your score,
^ods so (quoth he) what means these,
Do you think her knows not choke from cheese?
On Virginity.
Jewels being lost are found again,
This never, this lost but once, is lost for ever:
Two falling out, into a ditch they f^l^,
For falling out, their falling out was well.
On the dispraise of women.
O Heavenly powers! why did you bring to light,
That thing called woman, Natures Oversight?
That born Tyrant, proud shop of Vanity,
That gilded Weathercock, Trunck of misery.
That Wayward, Froward, that unconstant Evil,
That seeming Saint, sole Factor for the Devil;
For what is a woman? she is such a creature,
As Nature striving to adorn her Feature,
Forgot to make her honest; this was she
That first plucked Fruit from the forbidden Tree,
For which accursed, she then began to fall
From bad to worse, from worse to worst of all:
Now therefore thus I will define a woman,
She is a spightfull Creature true to no man,
It Is plain, she can do more than can the Devil,
For man, which God made good, did she make evil,
And often those women, which we often do cherish,
Are often the cause why men so often do perish.
An answer to the former.
Be be you heavenly powers that brought to light
That precious thing called woman; man's delight,
That freeborn subject, kask full of treasure,
That constant author of man's hoped pleasure,
That spotless harmless Saint, not knowing evil,
No Devils Factor, unless man's the Devil;
She is a work so purely wrought, that nature
Knew not whether it were more adorned with feature
Or with chaste honesty; yea this was ^he
Fruit of whose womb freed man from misery,
For which she is blessed, that her sons fault should fall
From small to less, from less to none at all:
And therefore thus I will define a woman,
She is lovely, faithful, constant, false to no man,
And what she can do more than can the Devil,
It Is true, she made those good which he made evil,
And if sweet woman's love no man should cherish,
Those that condemn them, without them let perish*
Of Woman of Women.
Are Women fair? yea, passing fair to see to,
Are Women sweet? yea passing sweet they be to^
Both fair and sweet they be to them that love them,
Kind and discreet to all but them that prove them.
Be women proud? yea, passing proud and praise them,
Are woomen kind? yea, wondrous kind and please them
Envious and disdainful if you move them,
More proud than wise, and yet we fools must love them,
Are women wise, not wise, but wondrous witty,
Are Women witty? yea, the more is the pity:
They are so witty, and they are so wily,
That being never so wise, they will beguile you.
Are Women fools? Not fools, but fondlings many:
Are Women shrows? Not shrows, but sheepish nosey,
Or, if in in sheeps attire they please to cloth them,
It Is done as Foxes do, that none may knew them.
Are women Saints? No Saints, nor yet no Devils:
So Women Goods? No they are needful evils:
So Angel-like, that Devils none need doubt them,
And yet so needful, tha none can live without them.
A Hushand on his wife a shrow.
WE lived one and twenty years
A man and wife together,
I could no longer keep hernere
She is gone I know not whither.
Could I but guess, I do protest,
I speak it not to flattet,
Of all the women in the World
I never would come at her:
Her body is bestowed well,
A handsome grave does hide her,
And sure her foul is not in hell,
For the Devil could never abide her:
I rather think she is soard aloft,
For in a late great thunder
Me thought I heard her very voice
Rendering the Clouds assunder,
Thus charity bids judge the best
Of them that are departed,
Oh! what a Heavenly thing is Rest
To them that long have smarted.
A Lover to his Mistress with a pair of Gloves.
If that from Glove you take the Letter (G,)
Then Glove is love and that I send to thee.
Her answer with a Handkerchief.
If that from Clout you take the Letter (C,)
Then Clout i^ ^out, and that I send to thee,
An old VVid^we^ to a young VVench.
AN old stale widower loving a young wench,
Told her, naught but her his love would quench:
Good Sir, quoth she, your lustful suit withdraw,
You shall not thatch my New-house with old straw.
An Epithalamium for a Wedding Night.
NOw is that welcome night addressed
When love and beauty makes a feast
Let not the Bridegroom be afraid
Though he encounter with a maid,
She Will squeck, she will cry
She Will fain, she will eye,
She Will fear as she did tremble,
But take her, and rowse her,
And mowse her, and rowse he^,
For she does but dissemble.
Now Mistress Bride, thus much to you
The Item I shall give is true,
Young maidens must not be to coy
To entertain their wishes joy,
But take him, and hug him,
And rug him, and lug him,
For thus true love is tried,
Nor be too nice in yiedling things
Which must not be denied.
Protestations of Charity.
I Will bind my hands to fasten just desire,
My tongue shall fear to wrong my Mistress fair,
And if to gaze on her mine eyes aspire,
I wash them forth with my repentant tears
If my proud hands dares once offend my love
Or make an offer of a guilty touch,
I Will cut the veins whereby my Fingers move,
And blead the last, my love to her is such:
If any part or motion of my sense,
Transcends the limits of my loves direction,
My bodies death shall ransom that offense,
My souls engaged so deep in her perfection.
A Description of love.
A Lover is like the Herb Helit^opia, which always inclines to that place
where the sun shines, and being deprived of the Sun, dies, so as lunaries
herb, as long as the Moon waxes, brings forth leaves, and the waning shakes
them off: So a lover, whilst he is in the company of his l^dy, where all joys
increase, utters many pleasant conceits, but ban^shed from the sight of his
mistress, whereall mirth decreaseth either lives in melancholy, or died with
desparation.

Of constancy in Lov^,
Constancy is like unto the Stork who, wheresoeever she fly, comes into no
nest but her own: or the Lapwing, whom nothing can drive her from her young
ones, but death.

The Tongue of a Lover should be like the Poin^ in a Dial, which though it go
none can see it ^oi^g: or a young Tree, which though it grow, no^e can perceive
it growing

The Tryangles in love
THere must be in every Tryangle three Lines, the first begins, the second
augmenteth, the third concludes it a figure: So in Love three Virtues:
affection which draws the heart: the second, Secrecy, which increases the
hope: third, Constancy, which finisheth the Work; without any of these three
Rules, ^o Tryangle, without these three Virtues, no Love.

Another.
LOve is not unlike the fig tree, whose fruit is sweet, but the root is more
bitter than the claw of Byte^^ or li^^ the Apple in Persia, whose blossom
savoureth lik^ honey, whose bud is more sour than gall: as the adament draws
the heavy Iron, and the Harp the fleet Dolphin* so beauty allureth the chaste
mind to love, and the wisest wi^^ to lust: and who more traiterous to Phillis
than Demophoon? yet he a traveller: who more perjured to Dido ^ha^ Aeneas? and
he a stranger: who more false to Ari^d^e tha^ Theseus? yet he a Saylor: who
more fickle to Medea tha^ Jason? yet he a Sta^^^. Again, love is like musk,
though it be sweet in smell, it is sower in the smack: the leaf of t^^ Cedar
tree, though it be fair to be seen, yet the sirrop dep^^v th sight; even so
love, though it be p^^g^ned by saluting each other with a kiss, ^^t it ^s
sha^^n off by fraud of the heart. A perfect Lover should be like the
glass-worm, which shines most bright in the dark: or like the pure
frankinsenc^, which smells most sweet when it is in the fire; or to the
Damask Rose, which is swee^er in the still, than on the stalk.

In praise of a loving friend.
OF all the heavenly gifts on earth,
Which mortal men commend,
No treasure well may countervail
A true and faithful friend.
What sweeter solace can befall,
Than such a one to find,
As in whose breast thou may repose
The secrets of thy mind.
If flattering fortune seem to frown,
And drive thee to distress,
A true and faithful friend will help at need
And make thy sorrows less:
Oh precious Item! Oh Jewel great!
On Friendship! Pearl of Price!
Thou surely do each thing excel,
That man can well devise:
The Golden Mines are soon decayed,
When Fortune turns the Wheel,
And Force of Arms is soon allayed,
If body sickness feel;
And cunning art soon overthrown,
Experience teaches plain.
And all things else their course does change
When friendship does remain:
But since by proof they have been taught
A feigned friend to know,
I will not trust such glossing tongues
More than any open Foe.
A Complementall Letter for receiving diverse favors.
SIR, I am so tied unto you, by your many favors, as I profess, I know not how
to carry my self in thankfulness unto you.

Sir, This I earnestly desire you, that you will instead of a recompense, for
all your favors, accept thanks, and of your poor creature, who is able to give
nothing take prayer for payment; what my good mind^ is to you, my tongue cannot
express what my true meaning is, your heart cannot conceive.

Sir, I hope it shall be read with the same mind it was written, and taken on
the right hand; it shall (I trust) not want its due effect and good acceptance;
I know it is not excellent, but the worst; your worthiness indeed (whom I have
often admired) deserves far better^ yet I pray you accept of it, and God, I
trust, in time will enable me to give a further testimonial of my poor service
to you.

Yours in the best bond that I may.

Another Letter for one absent.
KInd Sir, The scarcity of Letters make them prove dainties, being the only way
to enjoy presence in affection, though not in realty: I confess, the bent way
to judge of a things excellency, is sometimes to want it, for we esteem not of
the excellency of breath, til we want air to breathe in; and the goodness of
your conversation, is seen sometimes in absence from you, seeing it is absence
that kindles a desire to enjoy your presence.

Sir, I suppose you are not ignorant of that common rule, that Letters are
always for to to be indicted in a kind of careless strain, which rule Tully
that Prince of Orators, observes in his Epistles; the Bonclace of Rhetorich is
better to adorn and embrace the neck of some lovesick Gentlewomen, which is as
a token sent from her lover to please her, and keep her from crying: I doubt
not but you easily perceive what natural love ought to be united betwixt us,
raked up in the ashes of forgetfulness, and almost quite extinguished for want
of blowing; and in whose power is it to revive this languishing, but in you
sir, who are the life of Rhetoric? Sir, the great esteem I have ever had of
your friendship, suffers me not to endure your absence any longer: This
tyranny of your humor or inclination, is too severe a punishment for me to
groan under: For the eclipse of your better self, seems to me to be a
retirement of your affection: Let me therefore entreat you to return speedily;
I conjute you by all those charms of passion I have ever been at your service,
to make a speedy redress to him, who is

Your most humble Servant.

The Answer.
SIr, I make less account of my absence from the Court, and from my affairs
then from you; your friendship is the only business of my speedy return I have
already chid my self, and now have no more to do, but to precipitate my have,
and in person to make my excuse, with the tenders of all manner of service, in
the quality of

Your most humble Servitor.

A Letter for clearing ones self of false accusation.
SIr, I hope, that all the passions of my service have given you sufficient
proofs, as never to doubt my loyalty, in which my innocence has ever shined
clearer than the best language of my pen can express, so that the malice of
that person was but ill contrived, whose knavery I will make your sport; and if
you please but to reveal his name, I will engage mine honor to make him sign me
an acquittance with his blood. I express my self thus far, that at any rate I
may purchase your higher esteem of me, or be for ever fargotten.

Your abused friend.

A Congratulatory Letter for the good fortune of a friend.
Sir,
THe excess of my gladness, like the merits of yout affection, is not in any
respect vulgar; for all my passions do but wait upon your good fortunes. Pardon
therefore the defect of my Eloquence, since it is supplied with the joy reigns
in me, which had made me so sensible of that extraordinary contentment that in
honoring you the world is possessed of, which long before this, foresaw that
the felicity of this event belonged to your merits: perhaps most of your
friends have prevented me in this congratulation: but this zeal and affection,
cannot come too late from him, that is more than he is able to express,

Yours.

His Answer.
Sir
YOu have so sensibly touched me with your Letter, (your joy as it were to the
life) mingling my interest with yours, that, should I not render thanks to you,
I should dye of a deep impatience: I acknowledge I never mer^ted the effects of
such nobleness, as that you should account of me, as an object for your
virtuous inclinations: the pleasure I entertain to consider your goodness, is
more satisfaction to me than my advancement; as I prefer before other
interests, the happiness of your affection, and the new-assurance of your
friendship: which that I may the more seriously contemplate, I shall for ever
reserve my admiration, and remain in the number of your best friends.

Yours, L. D.

On the effects of their love
YOu shall know one day in effect, what you now have put in imagination.

The constancy of my affection has been such that it has overcome the worst
of difficulties, and the expectation of the harbor has made the danger easy.

When admidst the waves of your disdain my halfeship-wrack'd vessel began to
sink; each sigh I fetched (I see at length) found a courteous gale, to bring me
home to you my blessed Harbor.

One day you will come to know the conclusion of the irreprochable testimonies
of my true and faithful promises.

Upon her Eloquence*
YOUR Eloquence is able to steal the Soul out of ones heart, and carry it
whether it would not go.

O speak again, 'twill make the Spears lay by their warbling Lutes, and listen
to your tongue.

Each articulated syllable does lay a powerful cha^m upon my soul, and
captivates my senses.

One day is no more able to overcome you with good words, than with good
actions.

The eloquence of your most sweet words, closes my lips, and binds them to a
perpetual silence.

Excuses
IN excusing your unjust fear you seem to accuse my boldness.

It is a mercy that you yet afford me, to let me plead m ne own excuse.

I presume upon your pardon for my former suspicious fears; and the rather;
because the goodness of your nature styles them, the individual concomitants
of love.

I pray you hear my reasons patiently, and judge without passion of my
justification.

It is for great minds to excuse great faults; upon the acknowledgment
therefore of my late transgression, you cannot find a fitter subject for your
mercy.

Experience of a Lover and of a Friend.
I Have so much experience of your good will, that it only remains that you
make trial of my desire of acknowledgment.

I have had such trial of your friendship and fidelity, that I hope you will
not fail me in time of need.

Each messenger affords fresh Characters of your friendship, and every day I
see the spring of your love breaking through new channels.

Upon his Face.
THe wonders of your face made me their Captive as soon as I saw them, and that
rare grace of yours, which makes you excel all others, retained me your
Prisoner and Servant.

As she appears, so Day breaks, and with her Beams disperses all my Clouds and
mysts of discontent.

The Epitome of Nature is comprised in her Face, where she has freely given a
taste of all her pride and glory.

Upon his Favors.
IF you judge or deem me worthy to favor you, hold that your merits are much
more than my desert I am ignorant what service might satisfy for the favors I
have received of you, if you please to increase my knowledge, in telling me how
I may serve you again, I shall be doubly obliged.

I want opportunity, dutifully to acknowledge this favorable proof of your
condition, and honesty.

Upon his fortunes.
FOrtune strives, now to make me pay the interest of those pleasures, she
formerly lent me.

Dame Fortune is too covetous, and usurious, in taking from me the interests of
my prosperity.

I appear to you just like an empty vessel that wants his lading, with full
blown sails of love; indeed it is true, and I am bound for the Indies, and if my
compass fail me not, my Genius tells me I shall soon arive.

O withdraw not those two stars, by their blessed light I steer my crasy Bark,
and hope to enjoy the wished for shore of happiness.

Upon her hatred.
I Do not think (though I should give you occasion to hate me) that your good
nature can wish me an injury, since you are not composed of any thing but love.

Courtesy dwelt on your forehead, but malice resided in your soul, and lay
concealed in your mind.

On her constancy.
YOu use your friends as one does flowers, which please only when they are
fresh and new.

I perceive that ardent affection which was wont to keep me so alive in your
thoughts, does now no more reign in you.

In praise of her face.
HER face is loves Copy to read wonders on:

She cannot put her face in such a form, but I must like it.

Her lively face disdains all adulterous arts.

A perpetual spring of beauty dwells in that face of hers.

Fairer than Chloris in all her pride.

Her face veiled with a robe of darkness, shines clearer through it, than the
eye of the day.

The fairest ever nature made for wonder.

But to look upon her face is to live.

Whose looks would force the Warring Elements into order.

For her retention of him in her memory.
DO not that wrong to your true love, to let him slide out of your memory, the
only monument where his felicity desires to be inshrined.

Keep me alive in your thoughts, as I hold you in the most sensible parts of my
soul.

Of his merits.
I Could never do so great a thing but would be too small for your merits and
my desires.

Your merits drive me to love you, my humor permits it, and my content will
needs have me employ my endeavors to serve you.

The praises you attribute unto me, proceed from your will, and not from any
merit of mine.

The necessity of his affections.
The necessity of love is most mighty in the world, for it overcomes all.

O how happy a thing is that necessity, that inforceth us to embrace such a
desired blessing as your self.

I was all frozen, until the sunshine of your favor thawed my benumbed
spirits; but when you darted your quickened beams, the spring of my affections
budded forth in the most pleasant bloomes of Love.

The Magnetic Stone starts not with such natural activity to the North-stars
summons, as I when you command.

Protestations of obedience.
I Shall not, all the days of my life, have a will which shall not obey yours.

You know the power you have over me, and that I am so much yours, as you can
wish me.

To offer and present service.
ALL the honor and ambition I aspire at, is to see my self employed in your
service.

Let all men judge whether your beauty alone is not sufficient to command the
affections I bear you.

All that is mine is no less yours, than are your thoughts and words.

The most favorable gift you can offer me, is your friendship, a jewel I
prefer before all other treasures.

VVishes.
HEaven, which hears the vows of the faithful, bless and content your desires.

I need not wish you more, but a continuance of those graces you most eminently
possess already.

May you meet with such a Paramour, as my equal (for sure out-go he cannot,)
your holyer flames; may the same shaft, with an undivided have, pierce both
your hearts together; may both your loves bear the same date, and when we have
made our selves unworthy of enjoying any longer such a worthy pattern, and rich
example of pure affection, after you have seen a second Generation, may death
gently transport you to that place of bliss, where he himself can never come.

God make you the happyes^ Woman that lives; even as he has made you the
fairest, and most accomplished.

Heaven grant that you may be as faithful, as you are dear to me.

Bewailing of a Lover.
I, do so bewalle our separation, that nothing can ever touch my soul, like the
grief I endure by it.

The greatest grief I carry along with me when part from this place, is, to
see how I am for ever deprived of your fair presence.

To give thanks.
If I have done you any acceptable service, think it was but the shadow of what
I desire to show you, by real effects.

To tickle your ears with breath of Complement, or the air of some presently
contradicted News, would be to imitate the What lack you? To give you good
words, and make your better deeds pay too deer for them.

I take this benefit from you, but as borrowed; I will pay you rent for it.

Though the service I have done you, be but small, yet the desire I had to
acknwledg the honors I have received from you, are exceeding great.

On the deceits of Love.
Your fair eyes have too much majesty to serve for baits, or allurements of a
dissembling love.

Dot deceive him that will out-braue death it self ^o insure your life, and
withstand the frowns of fortune, to protect your honors.

On his life.
MY Life is a Comedy, and therefore no matter how long it be, so that it will be
well acted sweetest, if the last Scene be Tragic, your cruelty must be the
Nemesis.

Our life, without some pleasantness, is like a long Journey without an I^ne:
or like a bed of Roses where flowers are mixed with prickles, Lady, if you
please, from your hospitable bounty, to refresh my over-weatied and solitary
progress, I shall conclude my time richly spent, having attained the end at
which always I aimed, but you have hitherto closed up your fragrant sweet, and
amidst the stearnest briars of discontent, have left me miserably entangled.

On the luster of her eyes.
Your eyes flash so much lightning, that like Suns, they dazell the sight of
all such as dare behold them.

Your souls bright luster sparkles in your eye, and like the Persian, that only
sun I adore.

You have so established your sovereignty over my soul^, that the least
twinckle of your eyes, dispossess me of the state of my life.

Amorous Expressions.
This kiss and thy white hand.

Her spring of beauty raised in him noble desires, which soon broke forth in
liberal streams.

Let me rule, lady, like a Planet, in the Orb of your favors.

You have a most imperious beauty, I must obey it.
Delight shall stream into our bosom,
A faint lovers wishes cannot recall the hours.
I will embrace thee as all wealth and honor.
Though she were divided from me by armies I would make way through death to
gain her.

Let me dwell an age upon those lips.

She is a sparkling delightful piece of Nature.

She is the queen and goddess of beauty.

She is a Mine of pleasing joys and sweetness.

The great commandress of all hearts.

I cannot spe^^ to thee, go thy ways.

We Will stri^ make the example of Love an easy Law.

As white as Truth; as innocent as Virtue.

Take all your vows again, you are as free as the air.

The Cyprian queen compared to thee was but a Negro.

Whose love is the Exchequer of wealth.

A spring of Love issues from her Soul.

I must walk in the dark, and be benighted to all the World but thee.

Madam, I am a poor Fly, burnt in the Candle of your beauty.

A Woman worthy of so composed a man.

Crown your servant, Mistress, with this favor.

A Magnificent present of similitudes, Comparisons, and Examples, Collected for
the Readers Application.
AS the glistring beams of the Sun, when it rises decketh the heavens, so the
beuty of a good wife adorneth the house: As golden Pillars do shine upon the
sockets of Silver, so does a fair face in a virtuous mind.

Her tresses are like the colored Hyacinth of Aarabia.

Her love is such a fire, as either will burst forth, or burn the house, it is
such a stream, as will e^ther have his course, or break through the banks, and
make a deluge, or else force their heartstrings to rack with secrecy

He that is stung of a Scorpion, must be healed by affection.

To stop the stream, to make the ford flow more fierc^ly, to repress the fire,
to make it flame the more furiously.

Like a Demophoo^ that deceived Phillis.

Like an Aeneus, that falsified his faith to Dido.

Like Apolloes passion.

Like Theseus, that forsook his Ariadne.

Conclude not all things by general axioms.

Measure not all men's minds by a few particular instances.

Though some have been fleeting, think not all to be false.

Try me, I refer my passions to my proof, and as you find me loyal, so reward
me with love.

Had not Juno been jealous of Jupiter, Io had not been turned into a Heifer.

If suspicion had not pricked Menelans, Helena had no^ stolen away with Paris.

Procris had been alive, had she not suspected Cephalu^ Love shortneth not only
the life, disquieteth the mind but sometimes is the cause of most strange and
bloody massacres.

Her eye is like the Diamond, and so points, that it pierces to the quick.

Her motion is so chaste, as she is seen there in as in a mirror.

Courtly tempered with a virtuous disdain.

Her countenance is the very man of modesty.

Her beauty is like the gorgeous Cedar, that is only for show, nothing for
profit.

Like the apple of Tantulus, that is precious in the ey^ and dust in the hand.

Like to the Star, Artophilax, that is most bright, but fitteth not for any
compass.

Like young men that stands upon their outward portrature,

Like Aeneas, a brave man, but a ^oul dissembler.

Like a fond girl all, but little worth if they be not wealthy.

To tie a headstrong girl from Love, is to call a Siciphus stone, or breath
words into the wind.

Who must does love, must seem most to neglect it.

A denial at the first, is counted a grant; a gentle answer a mockery.

Ladies use their lovers, as the Stork does her young ones, who pricketh them
til they bleed with her Bill, and then heals them with her tongue.

A bull being tied to the figtree loses his strength.

A whole heard of deer stand a gaze if they smell a sweet apple.

A Dolphin, by the sound of Music, is brought to shore.

As the kind spanel, though he hunt after Birds, yet forsakes them to retrive
the Partridg.

As we commonly feed on beef hungarly at the first yet seeing the quail more
dainty, change our diet.

The admonition of a true friend should be like the practice of a wise
Physician, who wrapped his sharp Pills in Sugar.

Or like a Chyrurgion, who launcing the wound with an Iron, immediately
applies to it soft lint.

As Mothers deal with their Children for worms, who puts their bitter seeds
into sweet Rasins.

Virtue flourishes when beauty fades, it waxes young when age approaches,
and resembles the Ivy leaf, who, although it be dead, continues green.

Let there be such a faithful and inviolable league of love betwixt us begun,
as neither length of time, nor the distance of place, nor threatening of
friends, nor the spite of Fortune, nor the fear of death can alter or diminish.

Let us be like Hypocrates twins, who were born together, and dyed together.

If death should separate you from me, I would imitate the Eagle, which Sesta
the Virgin brought up.

As the precious Stone Sandestra, has nothing in outward appearance but that
which seems black, and being broken, powers forth beams like the Sun.

Like Appelles, who when Beucephulus was painted, craved the judgment of none
but Zeuxes.

Like Prisius, who when Jupiter was carved, asked the censure of none but
Lysippus.

Plants are nourisht with little rain, yet drowned with much.

How valiantly Ajax boasted in the seat of arms, yet Phillis bare away the
armor.

Eloquent words may please the ear, but sufficient matter persuades the heart.

As the herb Moly has a flower as white as snow, and a root as black as Ink.

As amongst the Egyptians there was no man esteemed happy that had not a beast
full of spots.

As the Indian Ura noscope does ever view the azure Skies, and the bright
burning rays of the firmament, and never fixes her eyes on the earth, deeming
things sublunary, too base an object for the sensorum of her light.

As a fained friend is much like a Serpent bred in Egypt, called a Crocodile,
who when she sings poysoneth, and when she weepeth, devoureth.

The Lion so loves her whelps, that she never tastes of the prey, til they
are fully satisfied.

Like the apples of Arabia, which begin to rot before they are half ripe.

As the wounds of the body, by often rubbing, are sometimes made incurable.

As the savor of the Panther seems sweet to none but to bruit beasts.

As continued rain moystneth the earth, so that it cannot be tilled to bring
forth fruit.

As a ship in the Sea, without a guide, leanning now on one side, then on
another, is often in great danger.

As Bees when they strive together, or stirred up by some violent motion, with
strowing of dust are brought into order and appeased.

As apothecaries do cover their pills with some sweet substance, to make them
go down the pleasanter.

As the sucking of a Child, brings Milk into the Mothers Breasts.

As there is no shelter where there is no Sun.

As a Gardener mingleth diverse seeds together and casts them into the ground,
yet will they not be confounded together one with another, but every seed will
have its proper herb.

As Swallows and Flies are dead in the Winter, but by virtue of the Sun, revive
again in Summer.

As the Goldsmith by his art can sever diverse Metals one from another, and some
men out of one Metalcan draw another.

As the Sun and the Moon, being of one substance, differ in dignity and
excellency.

As Prometheus did make miraculous Images, such as none ever could make but
himself.

As continual drops of Water hollow the hard stone.

As those men that live by the River Nylus are made deal by the continual
noise of the waters.

As the disease of a Canker, always infects the next part that is nigh it.

As the Sea, when it rages, the waters thereof cast up dirt and mire.

As in fining, the dross is separate from the Metalls.

As there is a certain weakness in the sight, which causes a party to think he
sees straws, whereas he sees men.

As a Thunderbolt cast out of the clouds, spares the matter that submits
it self to the force thereof, but breaks to powder whatsoever resists.

As the morn^ng dew soon after the rising of the Sun languisheth away.

As the Medecinall plaster cannot heal a wound, if there be any Iron stricken
in it:

As the Rose, the most pleasant of all flowers, is gathered upon rough briars.

Like the Ape, which with embracings does wel-nigh kil-her young one.

As the Moon has so much the less light, by how much the nearer it is to the
Sun.

As the first step to health, is to know the disease.

As by great showers and storms of rain, the air is cleansed.

As in Garlands the beauty of the flowers, except they be orderly composed, are
not half so glorious.

As the moon is not Eclipsed, nor loses her light till she is at the full.

As they that dwell in low valleys are seldom hurt with lightning.

As the pure Coral will not alter the Color.

Like as the Silkworm keeps her body spare and empty, using to fast two or
three days together, that she might stretch out her self, and sp^n her. Thread
the finer.

As a little spark many times sets a whole house on fire.

As Owls and night Crows see better in the night than in the day.

Like as out of a River or Fountain troubled, there can be no water drawn but
what is muddy.

As a strong Corrasive laid to a sore, eats out all the dead flesh.

Like as when the body is distempered, and some members putr^fied, it is then
best for the Patient to have his blood taken away from him.

As Fire is never sufficed with wood, and Earth with water.

As they that are sick of the dropsy increase their thirs^ by drinking.

As children are like to their natural Parents, in honor, speech, and
laughter.

As the Libard, with a strange k^nd of policy, to kill the apes, lies down as if
he were stark dead; which the apes seeing, come all together, and in delight
skips upon him: That the Libard heare^ patiently, until he thinks they have
all wearied themselves with sporting, then suddenly he leapeth up, and catches
one of them in his mouth.

As the Lamb is the more nimble and lively for shearing.

Like as the Pelican, which having brought forth her young ones dead, being
stung or killed by Serpents, she picketh out her heart blood to revive them.

Like the undistinct sound of Music, which delights not.

As the rain makes the new mood grass freshly to spring again, and comforts
the earth, that it yields forth fruit.

As the Estridge has wings, yet flies not:

As sweet scents and perfumes comfort the brain and heart.

As the Sun in winter, when it is farthest off from the Pole, is nearest the
earth.

As Lightning blasts all it meets with, but the Laurel Tree.

As the Chyrurgion cuts, and searches before he heal the wound.

As in Music, if the harmony of strings be not consonant, the sound is not
sweet, nor acceptable to the tunable Ears.

As no man can behold the Sun, unless it be a little covered with a little
cloud.

As the head gives sense and motion to the members.

As from the stock sap is derived to the graft, that it may live and grow.

As a glass filled with an extreme strong liquor, cannot burst in sunder, not
because of any antipathy that is between them, but because the Glass is not of
sufficient strength to contain the liquor.

As a Whore has no more to do with her Husband, nor any thing of his, because
of her breach of Wedlock.

As they that come out of the clear Sun into the shadow, have their sight
darkened.

Like as when one looks on any thing in the air, they appear in their proper
forms and colors, as they are, but if they be looked upon through a greeen
glass, they all appear green.

As the soul does so quicken the body, that notwithstanding the Members of the
same in themselves are but weak, yet they fall not quite to decay, as long as
they have any participation with the soul.

As the light of the Sun yields him no pleasure that is in a dark dungeon.

As a Woman brings forth Children in sorrow.

As the Ocean which is but one, is divided into parts, according to Regions and
Countries against which it lies.

As the superfluous humors in the veins, are no parts of the body.

As the Moon is not always visible being in her change.

As the Hand cut from the Body dies, and wants life.

As the Vine, or Garden, decays with overmuch heat or Drought, except after
the planting thereof it be w^tred with showers.

As men discern the weather by the wind.

As Appelles the Painter much lamented if he mist one day without some line or
picture.

As Vines without lopping grow wild and fruitless.

As a Tree brings forth, first leaves, then blossom^, then fruit.

As water moderateth wine.

As fire is an instrument of medecinall arts.

As the body withour the soul enjoys no life.

As Roses and Lillies graw among thorns.

As a Physician cures a man by taking away his blood and ill humors, by
cutting and searching the flesh.

As the Hiena hearing the voice of a man speaking like a friend, and the mind
of a Wolf devouring like a f^end.

As the Panther, who with the sweetness of his breath and beauty of his Coat,
allureth such beasts, within his compass, as he intends to uncase, and prey
upon their Karkase.

As the flattering Sirens, that sweetly sing the saylors wrack; and the fowlers
Pipe, that pleasantly plays the Birds death.

Like as the Grammar is the key of Knowledge, Logic the rule of reason;
Rhetoric, the Mother of Eloquence; Music, the sweet recreations of wearied
minds, astronomy, the secret knowledge of the nature and course of the Heavens:
arithmetic, the art of numbering, and Geomitry, the art to work by rule,
compass, weight, and measure.

As very a coward as China^.

As love is the bewitcher of the wit, the rebel to reason, the betrayer of
resolution, and the defiler of the thoughts.

Friendship is praise worthy of all men.

Bought friends are seldom sure.

Like unto arabian Ravens, who so long as they are full, do make a pleasant
noise, but being empty, they yield a hideous cry,

As anger is accompanied with ambition, and causes a man for to slay himself.

As Ajax, seeing that the Greecians had preferred Alises before him, and had
bestowed upon him the armor of Achilles as a recompense of his wisdom, fell mad.

Like Swallows that think every sunshine a Summers day.

Her mind is like the Tapers in Ianus Temple, which once set on fire, burn till
they consume themselves.

To tender any thing to a Prince.
MOst high and illustrous Prince, it may appear great boldness in me, to hope
that the least beam of your love, should reflect on my unworthiness to cherish
this imperfect and unworthy work of you^ loyal and obedient subject; yet
nevertheless, I humbly recommend it to your gracious protection; under which I
enjoy all the felicities that moy be; and in which I can take joy of them al.
If your highness will vouchsafe to accept it, who dares reject it? if allow it,
who can reprove it? if protect it? what Momus barking, or Zoylus biting can any
way hurt it, or annoy it? and thus most humbly craving pardon for this
boldness, I cease to write, though I will not to wish, that your highness's
felicities may never cease.

Another.
THat which has been imagined of a golden age, as an India of all perfect
happiness, was but as a prophecy of your gracious reign, showring, down
felicity in such a plentious manner, that all your subjects are thereby
invited, to offer up unto you sacrifices of thanks and obedience, while I shall
account it the chiefest honor, that my birth and stars could bequeath me, If I
may approve my loyalty, in exposing my life to any danger in your service.

Another.
Sir, though I cannot worthily desire nor deserve your gracious favor, yet it
will show you nearest heaven, and that you resemble the King of kings in
accepting my weak and humble devotions, with the tenders of my loyal service:
Let not the poorness of my merit, or the obligation, make them contemptible in
your fight, for I have long had an earnest zeal to express with what integrity
I adore the virtues wherewith you are replenished, far above all flattery, so
that your gracious reign is but the Galaxia, or milk-white path, through which
you travel in your happy Government, and by Example lead your subjects to
heaven.

Another.
MAdam, there are no words significant enought to express how I honor your
royal perfections, which render you beloved and respected of all the world;
while I make it the chief employment of life, to attend upon your commands,
which to obey, is perfect happiness.

An humble address to a great Lord
MY Lord, in regard of those many favors which your honor has heaped on me,
I am bound, not only to acknowledge my happiness therein, but also to desire
that you would always reckon me in the number of your most obliged Servants.

Other wise.
My Lord, as it is a great happiness for me to come into your presence, and to
offer my devotions to your excellency from the altar of an humble heart; so it
will be an addition unto my felicity, if I may improve this present
opportunity, to make tender of my service.

Otherways,
My Lord, it will become me, amongst others to acknowledge your many excellent
virtues, amongst which your noble Clemency and humility are the chiefest,
whereof, as others have had experience, so I doubt not but you will favorably
accept the obligation and presentment of my humble service.

Another to some great Lord.
MOst noble Lord, as I hold it for a principal favor, in admitting me to kiss
your honors hand, so shall I esteem my self most happy for ever, in that your
honor will be pleased to accept me henceforth, as ranked in that number and
Catalogue of your most humble and obsequious servants.

Another.
My Lord, the rank you hold with the great and singular Ornaments of Virtues in
you, do oblige me to offer unto your Lordship all that little is in me, and to
tender unto you upon all occasions, my service in obsequious humility.

Another.
Most honored Lord, May your excellencies will be pleased to permit me to
exercise any small endeavors of rendering my duty to your Honor, in
expectation that Heaven will favor me so far, as to grant me opportunities,
whereby I may make appear in effect, the desires I have to present you with my
best service and endeavors.

A Letter of thankfulness for entertaining a friend.
SIr, mine humble thankfulness knows nor how to express it self otherwise, than
in the sending of you enclosed in a Letter, my hearty prayers for the increase
of your health and prosperity: Sir, no absence nor employment, can make me
forget my humble s^rvice and due respects unto you, to whom I never can be
sufficiently grateful, such noble respects and favors I have received from
you, as the least of them deserves my small praises and best services, which
assuredly shall never be wanting to you from,

Your sincerely devoted in all duty, etc.

Another Letter: How to send a a token to a friend.
Sir,
IN token of a thankful heart, for your courtesies showed toward me, behold,
I do here send this poor token, most humbly beseeching you to take it in good
part, not weighing the value of the thing, which is of no value, but the simple
and good mind and meaning of

Your ever obliged Sarvant, etc.

To entreat a courtesy of a friend.
A. SIR, as necessity has no Law, so it has no shame for contrary to my
disposition, I must become an importunate suitor unto you.

A. Sir, name it, it must be something more than I know of, which I can deny
you, who are always modest in your requests.

A. Sir, I fear I shall give you occasion to report the contrary; I will desire
you to lend me your horse, to caraway a little treasure by moonshine.

A. I do not well understand you, pray interpret your self, and disguise not
your meaning.

A. Sir, I would desire you to dispense with me in a matter that concerns me
near; I am to bear away the Usurers daughter, and carry her where she shall
remain private, til storms be blown over: Pardon me, that I have no sooner made
you acquainted with my purpose.

A. I will be ready to assist you; and since your fortune may receive addition
from any service of mine, my horse, were he the Muses Pegasus, he should be
your servant, it is but to carry away a piece of live Venis^n, that is a mean
trespass, Cupid has enough in his park.

A. I am glad you are so pleasant, and do so well apprehend my intents, I was
afraid, lest my purpose being known (which was manifest in me to deliver) I
should have suffered repulse, and have been blamed by you for my bold attempt.

A. No sir, I do account it in you a bravery of mind that you dare aspire to
reach a fortune, and pluck the Golden apples of Hesperides, watched by the old
Dragon the Usurer: But I would not have you lose time in talk^ I will bid the
Groom prepare my horse ready for your employment.

A. Sir, The whole service of my life cannot require your kindness; for since
you have granted this request so willingly, I shall own my good fortune to your
favorable assistance.

A. Sir, I will pray that your attempt may be prosperous, for I shall rejoice in
your happiness, as much as in mine own: Therefore my best wishes shall be your
good Genius, to wait on you, while my prayers solicit heaven for your happy
success.

A. Sir, you have expressed your self a noble friend, and when this business is
past, all the study of my life shall be, to show my thanfulness to you.

A. Sir, I wish nothing, but that you may obtain your desires.

To present a Ring to a Gentlewoman.
A. Pardon me, if I (moved thereto by the z^alous affection which I bear you)
do h^re express it in the dumb language of a small present, unworthy your
acceptance, yet I pray you wear it for my sake, it may draw down your eye to
think on me, who am now wounded by the powerful beams of your beanty.


Genesis Sir, Though it would show a scornful mind in me, not to accept your
love, tendered unto me in such a visible manner* yet I am sorry you should be at
so great and needless charges; for wherein can I serve you to make requital?


Aim. It is you that make this unworthy present precious; for if you please to
let it incircle your white finger, it being a Diamond Ring, will sparkle most
in the dark; showing that love, like a clouded Star, shines lightest in the
night of misfortune.


Gent: Well sir, I am obliged to your courtesy, to receive it, and since you
please to conser so rich a gift on my unworthiness, I will wear it for your
sake.


Aim. Then you honor me above my desert, for your acceptance of this sacrifice
of my love, is to me above all rewards. The Ring is inscribed with amor
circulus, love is a Circle without end.


Gent. I must acknowledge your beauty, and my self your servant, for bestowing
on me so rich a gift.


Aim. The sparkling luster thereof, cannot compare with the light beams of your
eyes, but honor me so much to wear it on your finger.


Gent. I promise that, and more acknowledge my self infinitely beholding to
you.


Aim. You have said too much concerning so poor a present; yet in your
acceptance of this trifle, I shall ever bless my own happiness.


To woo a coy, scornful Maid.
Aim. LEt not my love be misconstrued for presumption, if I once again strive
to warm your affection, by declaring unto you, how much I honor your
perfection; pray at last be merciful, and do not still reward my love with cold
disdain.


Maid. Sir, I know that men have powerful Language, but I am none of those
young ones; you are deceived, if you think that fine Musk words can sweeten me
up to betray my self, and for my beauty I would not have you dote on that; it
suffices me without commendation.


Aim. Should I not commend what all admire, I were much too blame.


Maid. Sir, Wise men admire nothing, for if I were beautiful, what is beauty
but a fading flower, blasted often with too much breathing on, and cannot grow
safely upon the stalk of Virginity, because every one will be reaching forth to
gather it? Pray excuse me if I prevent such a danger, for love and I are quite
fallen out.


Aim. Let me reconcile you to a good opinion of a chaste love: there is no
greater happiness than the sacred Union of Hearts, especially, when long and
humble suits conquer disdain; and so I hope, perseverance will at last Crown me
with your love, and bring you to entertain my desire with a mutual affection.


Maid. Sir, If you would be more thrifty of your breath, you may spend it to
better purpose; for you may intimate your desires, and make tedious discourses.
But in a word, I shall never love you.


Aim. O say not so, you know not how much misery those few words would bring
upon me; for hope, grounded on your gentle disposition, has hitherto kept me
alive, and made me walk like a faint shadow, whilst in my chamber I am like a
mourner with a Taper by me, watching my own funeral, and I will dwell there in
a mist of sighs, and all this for your sake.


Maid. Sir, I hope you will not accuse me of your death; pray shake of this
love, and I will then acknowledge your kindness, in ceasing to trouble me with
complaints; Learn wisdom, that will cure all distempers.


Aim. Yet while I live I will attend upon you, and when I am dead, I will visit
yo^ ^n a dream, and tell you you were a ciuell Maid. (...) ^^clude, let one
parting kiss, seal my transport to Eli^^^^, and I am gone.


Maid, Sir, since you are so resolu^e, I will strive to give you a better
answer at your next return.


Aim. In confidence of that happiness, I will presume to visit you again, and
live to be your servant.


A jesting discourse with a maid.
Aim COme, why will you be an enemy to your self, and let modesty keep you
still in the state of virginity I came to offer my service, to help you out of
this trouble.


Maid. You are very kind, but I like my present estate: Maids are happy.


Aim. Alas! poor ignorance, do thou talk of happiness? I tell thee, until thou
art married, thou art but a Cipher, and of no account.


Maid. O sir, You are deceived; our hearts, are free from the passion of love,
retain a world of happiness, being exempted from any wanto Knowledge, for maids
dying in their present condition, do all go to heaven.


Aim. You are deceived, their punishment: is to lead apes in hell, and therefore
to avoid this; be kind while you may, and accept of a friendly offer.


Maid. What offer?


Aim. Lest it should raise a blush upon your cheek, I will whisper it into your
ear -- you understand.


Maid. Take heed sir, lest while you counterfeit a flame you kindle a real
fire, I bear too much, thy infectious words have betrayed a base ignoble mind.


Aim. Why? I did but tell you a truth: I had thought you had been more
intelligent, and would not have scarred at a bold word.


Maid. Nay farwell.


Aim. Pardon me, all I have spoken was to try your temper, and having found you
both wise and witty, I will desire you in a fair manner to grant me your love,
which I only desire; and though I did appear rash and wanton, you shall find me
worthy of your affections.


To contract privately ones self, and to tithe knot of marriage.
Aim. NOw our love has arrived to a happy conclusion, the storms raised by our
disdain being blown over, the union of our affections making a soft and gentle
harmony, which the soul can only discern, therefore that our new begun love may
never expire; I do here in the sight of heaven and all good angels, marry and
contract my soul to yours, and give away my self wholly to be at your
disposing, till the Ceremonies of the Church confirm my promise.


Maid. With as true an affection, I do give my self over into your possession,
and freely bestow on you my love, which shall never know alteration, but remain
ever firm and constant to you; it is therefore expedient that you obtain my
friends good will, according to your promise, and til then we must remain only
contracted in our affections.


Aim. Heaven I beseech thee bear witness to our private agreement, and may I
never know one day of comfort when I break my promised Vow, let me now embrace
you with the arms of affection, and thus with a soft kiss, seal the obligation
of our loves


To salute a friend newly arrived from a journey.
Alex. SIir, When first the news of your return had arrived to my knowledge, I
was heigtn'd with an earnest desire to behold you, and prevent other of your
friends, by the first tender of my service, that as my love toward you, does
exceed theirs in true perfect sincerity, so it might in place obtain priority,
and show how ambitious I am of your favor.


Aim. Sir, You still continue your former nobleness, making it your chief aim
to exceed others in perfection of mind; otherwise I had an intention to visit
you; but it is your desire and happiness. to overcome others in kindness, for
which, I can but return you thanks, and acknowledge you a worthy friend.


Alex. Sir, you make too good an interpretation of my rash presumption, but it
is held, that friends have but one soul in two bodies, therefore when I behold
you, I enjoy the other half of my self, besides, after long absence, your
company must needs be more precious, so that I had both love and reason on my
side, to persuade me to come and visit you.


Aim. Sir, I want words to express my mind, or to argue a case in love, but in
my opinion, I ought to have visited you first, in regard I am very much obliged
unto you: But to proceed no farther in ceremony let us discourse of some other
affairs; I will be bold to enquire how all our friends do?


Alex. Sir, some of them has undergone change of fortunes, and therein
declared an invincible strength of mind^ but heaven be thanked, all that honor
and respect you, are living and in health.


Aim. Sir, I am wonderful glad to hear of it, and I shall rejoice exceedingly,
when I meet any of my old acquaintance; I hope I am not altogether lost unto
their remembrance, they will know me certainly.


Alex. Sir, travel has not wrought much change in you^ but I detain you too
long I fear, from your rest.


Aim. Sir, were I tired with travel, as I am not; ye^ your company would very
much refresh me.


Alex. Sir, I will crave your pardon at this time, I know o tarry longer would
be troublesome unto you, but to morrow I will wait on you again.


To entertain a friend who is come to vis^^ one.
Alex. SIR, I am most glad to see you, though I have no other entertainment for
you, but a kind welcome.


Aim. Sir, I expect no more; I come to give you a visit, and to be happy in
your society; for in the general, I do find none that can suit my disposition
so well as your self


Alex. Sir, say what you please of me, I am vowed to your service; and your
loving visitation is an addition to your many other kindnesses.


Aim. Sir, all that I acknowledge, is a will to do you service; but I have been
slow in producing the effects, hereafter I will study to deserve.


Alex. Sir it is your ingenius goodness to decline the acknowledgement of your
own virtue and deserts, far surpassing my merits, for it is I am bound to be
your servant.


Aim. Sir, it is I that am obliged to you by many strong ties of affection,
from which the service of my life cannot dis-ingage me; but I have trespassed
against manners, pray take the chair.


Alex. Sir, will you please to sit first, for it is an honor for me to wait
your pleasure.


Aim. Sir, I am provided, but if it may not appear too much boldness, what was
the adamant that drew you, or occasion that made you so kind to visit my
lodging?


Alex. Sir, I shall tell you, I came not to borrow money, or to force your good
nature to any thing beyond civility, but only to keep our love and amity fresh
and in perfect strength, by a visit and some conference.


Aim. Sir, you have chosen a bad opportunity, my affairs carry me away from my
friends, besides the obligation of my word to a Lady, to attend upon he^ thi^
day.


Alex. Sir, I will choose some other time to wait upon you.


Aim. Sir, I will attend upon you, if I might know the place, and hour, where to
meet you.


Alex. Sir, I will not put you to that trouble, it will become me rather to
wait on you.


Aim. Pardon me Sir, I am much obliged to you.


Alex. Sir, I am your servant.


Aim. Sir, I am the servant of your servants, pray remember my respects to all
my friends.


A. Sir, I will be yours, in that, and all other services


To woce a fair young Gentlewoman.
A. PArdon me, Lady, if I presume to speak what ^ have hitherto with much
affection conceale^ from you knowledge.

There is a Gentleman that has beheld your heavenly beauty; and with his
judgment clearly discerned you^ virtues, the ornaments of your mind, these have
produced in him strange effects, so that in spite of his own reason, or
disswasion of friends, he is violently compelled to speak truth.


Penel. Sir, call you this an affliction? it is a happines^ to speak and hear
truth.


Aim. Do you hold that opinion? then I will convince yo^ by your own
Expressions: For if it be a happiness to hear tr^t^ then I hope you will pardon
me, if being compelled by the strength of my passion, I do truly tell you that
I have place^ my affection wholly upon you; or as they commonly say, I ^^ love
you.


Pen. Sir, I am sorry that you have made me the object of your love; I know
your Birth and Person man deserve one of greater account, and therefore I a^
amazed at the unexpected novelty of your mot^^ (...) imagining, but your bosom
had been free from any flame, let your wisdom then suppress it, lest your love
become fruitless in the event.


Aim. I will not be discouraged by your first answer* for neither are you
beneath me in quality, who am your servant; neither can it appear to you so
strange a matter, that I should be taken with your beauty, which others admire,
though it be my fortune only to be bolder than the rest, and I hope not
unwelcome.


Pen. Sir, I would not have you cherish any uncertain hope; nor build any
assurance, where you have but a sandy foundation; Love cannot be compelled*
but must ^low from the spring of natural desire; b^^ I find in my self no
inclination to entertain your a^^^ction; therefore you must pardon me if I deny
you^ suit, which is not in my power to grant.


Aim. Nothing is impossible to love; for if you wo^^ believe that I bear a
noble and constant affection ^^wards you, you would soon overcome this
difficulty, (...) incline your mind to reward my affection with your ^avour.


Pen. Sir, I am confident that your affection is ri^^^ and perfect, nor seeking
under a fair and coloura^^^ pr^tence to betray me; I cannot force my self to
comen^ to your motion, being utterly ignorant in love matter^^ therefore excuse
me til time and consideration shall enforce me to answer your desire.


Aim. I am comforted, that you have not utterly denied my suit, I hope at my
next visit, to receive more encouragement, til then I take my leave, and
presume only to breath my heart upon your hand, or if you please, your lip,
desiring you to remember me in your absence,


When one meets a friend in the Street.
A. GOd save you, sir, you are most happily met. How fare you?


Clor. Sir I am the better to see you well and lusty, why will not you do me the
honor to visit me at my chamber?


Alex. Sir I must confess I have often broke promise therein, but my business
would not permit me; other wise I had long since waited on you.


Clor. I should rather account my self obliged to wait on you; for I am bound
unto you for many favors, especially for the last courtesy you did me, in
matter which concerned me much. Will you now do me ^he kindness to present my
respects to a Gentlewoman.


Alex. Sir, if she be honest, I am ready to go on your errand; I hope you will
not put me upon a disgraceful piece of service.


Clor. I hope you have no such bad suspicion of me; for she is both fair and a
virtuous Gentlewoman, and has a nimble wit; but I know you can deliver your
mind in an excellent way.


Alex. Sir, it is you whom Mercury the God of wit has adorned with a gentle
amarous speech; but I will speak in your behalf, in as good moving effectual
terms as I can remember.


Clor. Sir, shall you do me a most perfect favor? Tell her, I am her ready and
willing servant, and that the powers of love has given her my heart, which I
will come to fetch, in hope she shall give it me back, and til then keep it warm
in her own bosom; But what need I instruct you, who are all love and courtship.


Alex. Sir, I will perform your command, though not in such words as you would
desire, yet so as my sudden Genius shall prompt me; but I have heard it said,
That in the way of love and glory,
Lovers best tell their own story.



Clor. Sir, Pardon me; I know whom I do entrust with this business, I am
assured of your fidely, and that you can deliver your mind in a powerful
manner, especially to Gentlewomen.


Alex. Sir, it must be my love to you that will inspire me; for I promise you,
I will strive to speak my best.


Clor. Sir, I am confident in you, and at your return from my Mistress, I will
prepare thanks for this great piece of service, and rest, yours obliged.


Alex. Sir, It is but my duty; and I am happy to be employed in any service
that concerns you, Suppose this done.


To court a Gentlewoman in the way of Marriage.
Eugenius. Mistress, I doubt not but that you will judge me as rash as bold; but
I beseech you by your Divine beauty, which glistereth in your fair eyes, to
excuse my audacitie, and to pardon my temeritie, which have emboldned me to
come and present unto you, my most humble and most affectionate service.


Calia. Sir, I am sorry that I have not the honor to know you, and I marvel
that you will offer service to me that of all am most unworthy.


Eugen. Mistress, it is the sweetness of your natural goodness, that causes
you to speak so humbly of your self.


Calia. Pardon me sir, I speak nothing but what I know to be most clear truth.


Eugen. Lady, The singular modesty which I have heard you express in your
language, gives me a hope that you will entertain my intentions, not as harsh
and disconsonant, but agreeable and consonant, and that in time I shall obtain
your grace and favor.


Calia. Sir, If there were any graces in me, they proceed from you, and with
such expressions you honor your self.


Eugen. Mistress, you are pleased thus to oblige me to a greater estimation of
you, which makes you more amiable, and me more affectionate toward you: I
therefore beseech you to believe, that my intentions were never otherwise than
chaste and virtuous, and that I never had any other end than honesty. Did you
think ^rue to have framed some design prejudicial to your honor? I had rather
lose my being, than entertain any such thought; so firm is my resolution, for
ever to continue your faithful and most obedient servant, as the effects shall
make evident, whenever your commands shall call upon me.


Calia. I humbly thank you sir, with my best affection, as also for the pains
you have taken for one that no way merits such favors, I being your very
humble servant.


Eugenius. Lady, It is I that am so deeply engaged to you, that I am
dis-inabled to quit my self of the obligation; and therefore (most fair
Mistress) I beseech and conjure you, to make use of my service and me, in
whatsoever you shall judge me acceptable to serve you; and in the mean time,
after a million of recommendations, I will be bold to take my leave of you and
will leave my heart with you, as an hostage and pledge of fidelity and
constancy.


Calia. Farwell sir, and I give you humble thanks for this your loving visit.


Eug. I hope to see you again, and very speedily, where for the ptesent I must
leave you.


Calia. Sir, so far as your intentions shall continue good and your suits
lawful, you shall always find the doors open; and also to gentlemen like your
self, who shall not want the best entertainment, according to my ability, and n
that regard you shall not oftener come, than be wel^ome.


Eugen. Lady I do assure you, that I now go to elongate my self from the bright
day, and confine my self into an abyss of melanchollick darkness: for I dare
be bold to protest unto you, that without you, I enjoy not the light: and
therefore all the time of this sad ab^ence will be so tedious to me, that
moments will be hours; the hours days; and the days will be ages, unless it
be so, that the experience of being in your favor, be my sole consolation,
which will arm me with a resolute patience.


Calia. You speak strong lines, sir; but it may be you are not so passionate as
your words pretend; Farewell sir, til our next meeting.


Eugen. Mistress, You do wrong to your beauty, and to my love, which is
faithful and loyal; but I hope that time will make me appear to be more
largely what I am; and seeing necessity constrains me to retire from you, I will
never retreat from that affection which your fair eyes have darted in my soul:
and so Lady adieu til my next review, which I assure you shall be as soon as
possible I can.


Upon her absence.
EVgenius. I protest to you, my fairest, that I could never have believed that
the torments of true affection could have been so miserable; for I dare swear
to thee, by those fair eyes, the stars of my fortunes, that I dwelt with
impatiencie and sorrows til I saw you.


C. It is impossible sir, surely I can hardly believe it.


Eug. Mistress I beseech you to believe it, if you please, for I assure you that
I could no longer endure, nor support the violent and troublesome tediousness,
which I endured in the time of your long absence, the object of my good, and
sole content being removed.


C. Sir, it may very well be, for you seem very passionate in your expressions.


Eugen. I protest that it is impossible for me to take any complacencie in the
world, but in that only that flatters my affection, and in the aspect of your
ra^e form and most excellent beauty.


C. It pleases you to term it so; you are delighted in laughing at me, as you
may at one that enjoys not the least glimps of beauty in her self.


Eugen. Wherein, my dearest, should you conceive so of me; I do assure you,
with the better part of my soul, that I should be miserable, did I not really
speak what my affections suggest as truth: Know, Lady, that you see a man that
is wholly yours, and deserves not to live, but for you and to do you service:
But that which troubles me most, is, That of necessity I must absent my self
from you upon a very urgent occasion, but I beseech you to believe and conceive
so of me, that whithersoever I go, I shall carry with me the lively
delineaments of your perfections, and that I shall not live but by the idea of
your beauty, with perfect resolution of obeying you; and therefore (my
sweetest) adieu for a while, and for the present have me excused, that I cannot
enjoy the felicity of your most desired company, but must take my leave
abruptly.


C. I infinitely thank you, and bid you also farwell, wishing you also a safe
return.


An enterchange of Ceremonies at parting with a friend, taking a long Journey.
SIR, I am very sorry that my affairs do compel me to take my leave of you,
from whom I have rece^ved so many benefits, which have bound me in many ties
ever to ^erve you, neither have I any way left to satisfy my self in requiting
your former kindnesses, but to acknowledge them far above my requital, and to
desire you that you would both receive the tender of my humble service, and
command me in something, whereby I might express how much I honor your desert.

Sir, J cannot choose but grieve that you must now be divided from us by a
tedious journey; yet since he loves himself better than his friend, that will
not yield to any thing for his good; J am content in that respect to lose your
company a while, wishing you a prosperous journey, and that in your absence you
would remember me, who will always in my daily prayers, solicit heaven for
your safe return, desiring to be excused for your poor entertainment, which,
perhaps, makes you des^rous to be gone.

Sir, Pardon me, the entertainment J have found, was far above my desert; for
which J render you a million of thanks. There remains nothing now, but tha you
honor me with your commands.

Sir, J entreat you make not so great have to be gone

Sir, J could willingly defer my journey, to enjo your company, but the wind
stands fair for France therefore let us conclude all Ceremonies.

Sir, Since you must dispense with your departure, do us the courtesy to
revive our drooping minds with the good Tidings of your safe arrival in France.

Sir, Be assured J cannot be unmindfull of you, nor of my other Friends, to
whom J entreat you to commend me, since J cannot take my leove of them in
particular.

Sir, I am glad you will do me that favor, to give me any employment in your
absence, I will perform your desires.

Sir, I can but thank you for your love, in bringing me to my ship, which is a
trouble that you would take upon you, though on my part undeserved.

S^r, I am happy to serve you in any thing; God send you a prosperous voyage.

Sir, I doubt not but I shall arrive in safety, trouble your self no far^her,
since I cannot remain with you to requite your kindness.

Sir, Since you will needs have it so, I will bid you farwell, with all the
affection of constant mind.

To invite one to dinner.
Alex. PRay let me prevail so far with you to entreat your company to dinner.


Clor. Sir, I humbly thank you for your courtesy; but my business will not
permit me, therefore I desire to be excused.


Alex. Nay good Sir, let me not be denied, I must confess indeed your cheer will
not be worthy of your stay, but you shall be heartily welcome.


Clor. Sir, I should will^ngly obey your desire, but I fear to be too bold.


Alex. Sir, You shall be most welcome, you shall command in my house as in your
own.


Clor. Your offer is so large and courteous, that I must yield to wait on you,
for you have overcome me in ceremony, but you will draw upon your self many
inconveniences.


Alex. Sir, You will find but course fare, but such as it is, pray esteem your
self most heartily welcome to, in a real manner without complement.


Clor. Sir, Here is much plenty, and you wrong your self to excuse your cheer,
whereof there is so great abundance, that unl^ss you would have provided, all
the Variety that was in Noah's Arc, I know not how it could be exceeded.


Alex. It is your favor to commend and accept of any thing, but pray excuse
me, once more I desire it; if I had bin certain of your honoring my house with
your presence, would have made better preparation for your ^n^ertainment.


Clor. Sir, I desire you rather to excuse my boldness, in putting you to so
much trouble; you may perceive that I think my self welcome by my liberal
feeding; I am no mincing Bride, whose thoughts of eating are took away with the
conceit of the night following.


Alex. I beseech you spare not, I am glad to see you so pleasant, and to
increase your mirth, I will drink to you a health in wine, in hope you will
pledge me.


Clor. Sir, they say there is truth in wine, and if there be truth in wine, I
will find it out, let the health be never so deep.


Alex. I thank you for doing me this piece of justice, I pray see if you can
make up a dinner, otherwise I know not how to be excused for inviting you.


Clor. Sir, to decline ceremony, you have most worthily feasted me, and
honored me so much, that I must ever acknowledge your exceeding boun^y and
courtesy.


Ceremonies at sitting down at the Table.
Alex. Gentlemen; Pray ye take your places, I know not how to direct you. But
first let us wash.


Gent. Gent. Be pleased to begin, for it is fit that we should follow you.


Alex. In this matter Ceremonies are needless, but you will do nothing without
an example, and therefore I will begin.


Gent. Then in obedience to your desire, we will wash with you.


Alex. I beseech you Gentlemen, to save me a labor and take your places.


Gent. Sir, we expect your sitting down, and afterward we will not contend much
for priority of place.


Alex. Come Master Getting, you are my old acquaintance, you shall favor me to
sit here by me.


Gent. By no means, that is not my place, here is a Gentleman that deserves to
be seated there.


Alex. Sir, I have designed you this place, prai^ let me rule you so far.


Gent. Sir I should be loath to be too troublesome, and yet I would not presume
before my betters.


Alex. Sir, You are too full of excuse, you may yield to take your due place,
otherwise I should wrong you.


Gent. Sir, I beseech you then to excuse me, and account it your fault if I
transgress the bounds of manners, in assuming a place far above my desert, and
which is of right belonging to these other Gentlemen.


Alex. We might have spared this Ceremony, for the appetite loves good
dainties, better than Complements. Now pray carve for your selves, you are
kindly welcome.


Gent. Sir; We will not put you to any trouble in helping us, we know that
manners will allow us to make a dinner, we come to trespass on you.


The Feasters excuse to his friend after Dinner.
ALEX. Sir, I desire you to excuse your mean fare and slender entertainment,
whereunto I have presumed much to invite you; but I hope our ancient
acquaintance, and your own good nature will procure me Pardon, in that I have
done this only to enjoy your company and society; for your good discourse is to
me a Feast, far exceeding any dainties that I could provide for you.


Friend. Your real kindness has been such, and so unexpected, that I cannot
give you sufficient thanks for your courtesy and kind entertainment: all that
I can retribute, is t- promise, that I will snatch an opportunity to express my
gratitude.


Alex. You have honored me enough, in your acceptance of my good will. But it
is not wholesome to stir suddenly after dinner: Let Us discourse; you are
conversant abroad, what News do you hear?


Fr. Pardon me, sir, the world runs round about me, whilst I stand unmoved,
never marki^g the motions thereof, and therefore I am altogether ignorant in
novelties; it may be you hear more.


A. Indeed sir, J have so many affairs, that J can enquire after none, J
thought you could have given us some good intelligence.


Fr. Sir, J desire you to excuse me, for J hold it fruitless employment; but to
satisfy your request, if J knew any fresh News that were not yet in print, J
should be bold to acquaint you with it, since you desire me.


A. J will not importune any further, but desire your pardon that J should
impose on you the office of an intelligencer; excuse my intent therein, since
what J desired was to pass away the time while we sit, but now if you please we
will rise.


Fr. Sir, then J most really thank you, you have made me bold with you, J will
accompany you a while to the fire, and then take my leave.


To offer service to a young Maid.
AIM. Seeing you are alone, I would willingly atten^ on you, if you please to
accept of my service.


Maid. It is more than I desite or deserve, and it would appear boldness in me
to accept of a strangers company; For it is not for me to entertain all shows
and offers of kindness, I can but thank you for your good will, I am not far
distant from mine own home.


Aim. I pray let me bear you company, and by the way make me happy in some
discourse, resolve me one question, were you ever in love?


Maid. Though it be no manners to answer one question with demanding another,
yet will I presume to ask you if you were never in love.


Aim. Fair one, from thence springs my unhapp^ness, I am too forward in these
desires, I have beheld many beauties, but you have prevailed more than the
rest, to conquer my affection, and I must acknowledge that in meeting you, I
have met death or life.


Maid. Pray speak in plain terms; I am ignorant of your meanings


Aim. I desire you then, know and believe, that I am already far in love with
you; and I hope you will not scorn my sudden motion, if I should desire you to
reward my love with your favor, and by the way let me entreat you, to th^nk
that heaven have pointed our s^range accidental meeting, and gave me boldness
to p^tition your favor and affection, which I hope you will grant.


Maid. Sir, I know not ^n this case how to give an answer that may procure your
content, but I desire you to impo^tune me no farther, but grant me time to
consider your motion, and this is my fathers house, whither if you pease to
come herea^ter, I will str^ve to resolve ^ou, howsoe^er you shall be welcome.


Aim. But before I lose your presence, which is my chiefest happiness, let me
tell you, that when you go, you bear away my heart with you, and I shall only
languish in sorrow til I visit you again.


Maid. Pray sir do not hold me any longer in d^scourse, there are many jealous
eyes that do watch an occasion to expose me to censures, for maintaining with
you such an usual familiarity; let me entreat you, as you tender my credit, to
leave me.


Aim. I must obey you, honor me with an ordinary salutation, and I will vanish
like a shadow, and return again to wait on you, who are the substance of my
life.


To confer with a widow in an amorous wooing manner.
AIM. I would entreat you, fair widow, not to discourage me in my first suit,
since your modesty and virtuous carriage, in your husbands life time, has made
me bold to plead for affection, and to cherish a certain hope, that I should
obtain your good liking.


Wid. Sir, I would not have you imagine that my love to my former husband was
Written in a Table-Boo^, the Letters whereof may be soon wiped out, again; no,
it wa engraven upon my heart, and there does remain, to inform me that I ought
not to wrong him with a second marriage.


Aim. Nay, widow, I must acknowledge you have a fair pr^tence to put me off,
with the remembrance of your said husband, but will you always punish your
self, and fast from the joys of marriage.


Wid. It is my full resolved purpose, and therefore let not any wanton opinion,
concerning me, give you hope of obtaining my love: alas! since his departure, I
am dead unto the world, and do but only lie, to sigh, when I remember that I
had so good an husband.


Aim. His goodness is gone with him, but for my part, I will be your loving
active servant; come, come, put off grief and false imaginations of honoring
of the dead: for if his soul were capable of any knowledge concerning earthly
matters, he would rejoice to see you happ^ly married, and as he gave you all
contentment in his life so he would desire that you might be supplied in the
same kind after his death.


Widow. You speak unhappily, but pray be satisfied, that I intend not to
marry, yet I respect, your good will, and in other matters, will remain ready
to requite your love.


A. For other matters I am satisfied; but your love is the Mark whereat I aim;
why would you thus strive to become a Virgin again, and forget the conceit of
former pleasures, which are yet fresh in your remembrance; fie, fie, you do not
well to make your self so dull of apprehension; I am come to offer service in the
right kind, and therefore you are very much to blame, to refuse the tender of
my respects.


W. You speak mysteries: but I desire if you love me, show it in ceasing to
prosecute your suit; for I must tell you plainly it will prove fruitless and of
none effect.


Aim. I cannot believe but that I shall be more fortunately happy to obtain
your favor; words are not always the interpreters of the heart, and I am
confident for all this that you love me.


W. Persuade your self to it, but I shall never give you cause to think so, yet
I will ever respect you, and be ready to do you any lawful courtesy.


A. Well I thank you that I have so far thrived in my suit, I hope hereafter to
get deeper into your favor.


W. Your hope is built upon a false. Foundation; and had I known your intent, I
would not have held discourse so long with you; I must leave your company.


Aim. Let me rather take my leave, and seal a Kiss upon your lips, until I
visit you again; for no mortal widow shall discourage me, but I will come
again with the more resolute affections.


To excuse some offense done to a Gentlewoman.
Aymwell. I Must acknowledge I was somewhat too bold to enforce a kiss from you,
in the presence of other friends, but I pray excuse my passion, and let your
mercy be showed in pardoning, as my folly was in offending.


Pen. Sir, it was so great a trespass, and so directly aimed against my white
same and reputation, that no repentance can satisfy for a fault of that
nature.


Aim. It cannot exceed the limits of forgiveness; or if your wrath must not be
otherwise satisfied, enjoin me some penance, as great as your anger, whereby
(...) may recover your lost favor, and make it appear, ho^ sorry I am for
committing so rash an offense.


Penelope. Nay, you may enjoy that Kiss violentl^ took from me before so many
witnesses, but never any more.


A. I must confess it was my rashness, but if you will that I repay it back
again, I will give you interest for that one, and vow unto you never to offend
you^ patience in the like kind.


Penelope. Well, since you are so willing to repent, and to show unfeigned
sorrow, I must needs accept them for present satisfaction, desiring you
hereafter to be more careful of my credit, and never again to make so bold an^
offer.


A. You have charmed me to obedience, since you^ words are a Law, which I dare
not transgress; for I am in all things your obsequious Servant.


The Lovers farewell.
Leonara. ALas! Sir, is this the hour that the sever^ rigor of your absence
must eclips my day^ of their bright Beams? O how this sa^ ^ews does fire my
spirits! and not without reason, since ^ou (to whom I had wholly consecrated my
self) will not ^ouchsafe a merciful eye on my sufferings for your ab^ence.


Florestan. Mistress, fear not, but rest assured, that so long ^is Life will
give leave to enjoy the Suns b^ightn^ss, never shall any other have power over
me; do me only this favor, that having given you these new assurances of my
fidelity, ^ou would be pleased to render me some real promises of ^ours.
Besides I protest to you, Lady, I will never acknow^edge other light tha^
yours, no more than the earth does, any more than the Sun and Moon.


Leon. Sir, they are no false Promises that I have made you, but true
Assurances, drawn from my heart by the force of my passion. And know, that all
things ^eie beneath, shall sooner change their natural inclinations, than in
me shall be seen any alteration from the resolution I have made, to love you,
heaven it self be my witness.


Florest. If, M^stris, you love me thus; let your mind be confident of an
equal truth from me; and should you doubt of my affections, I will give you my
soul for a pledge, and my heart for a sacr^fice, to show you that my wo^ds ar^
u^feigned; be pleas^d the^^fore, to accept of this small gift, not as a thing
wort^y ^f merit, but only as a sufficient testimony of my good will, fidelity,
and faithful love toward you; it being a thing so small and unwo^thy of you,
it will therefore be the more commendable in you to acc^p. of it.


Leon. Sir, I give you infinite thanks, and withal, do beseech you al^o ^o
receive this in requital, for a remembrance of me, which is of a smaller
value; be but pleased to take it in good part from her, who from henceforth
shall not live, but through your sole remembrance.


Flor. Tha ks to you, sweetest, the gift truly is pleasing to me, but the giver
much more.


Leon. But Sir, is there no means to stay you for a little time, that I might
enjoy your presence, which stands me instead of light and life, therefore your
^b ence will invelope me with darkness, and bring upon me (poor soul that I am)
a thousand grievous deaths.


Flor. M^stris, I hope not so, for I am constrained through ^ecessity of my
business, to depart hence.


Leon. O, I see now too well, that that Constancy of you s, which I trusted to
for remedy of my troubled thoughts, is vanished, to give present vent to my
plaints, which you shall receive with my sighs and tears, for true and burning
testimonies of the sorrow I have, to see my self about to be forsaken by him,
by whom only I breath


Flor. Mistress, I swear to you, my heart is alike touched with such strokes,
for this our parting, that I can hardly breath for grief of it, and do already
see I have lost my self, in the loss of the sight of your star-like Beauty. For
I* am sure, that once absent from your luminous aspect, each pleasure will be
tome a subject of grief and sorrow. However, since it will not be otherwise, I
shall so part with you, as that my life shall ever be at your service, and so
farewell, dear Mistress, live still happy and content, whilst I languish
unfortunate, though most constant; let not then my remo^en^ss alter your mind,
more than it shall shake the resolution I have long since made, to live and dye
yours; as for mine own part, I shall not think my self absent from you, so long
as I am longed in you^ heart and memory.


L on. Farewell, Sir, you possess my Soul; and I do even leave it in your power,
conserve it for a more happ e sea^on than th^^ of parting; and in the mean
space, have p tty of all the bloody griefs, which the mere apprehension of
your absence, makes me alreadi^ feel so vehemently, for J think it very strange
to leave you, whose company is dearer to me than my life. But to make an end of
this discourse, J do beseech, you Sir, and let me conjure you by the sweetness
of that love J have horn you, and will all my life long devote to you, in
respect of my cruel fears, to write often to me, during the unhappy time of
your absence, for in reading of your Letters, J shall persuade my self that J
am not wholly deprived of you, or lost to your memory.


Florestan. J vow to you Mistress, J will give to you so many Letters for
confirmation of my loyalty, and the love J bear you, that you shall have no
cause to mistrust. And as the Divine Creator, has made you the fairest and
most accomplished, that he also make you the most pitiful to retain me in your
most desired favor, that J may be able continually to witness how violent my
affections are toward you.


Lad. Heaven grant you may be as faithful to me, as J am to you; and give you
as much quiet and contentment as you take from me. But what should J say more?
J must cease to remember you of the force and heat of my affections, but not to
entreat you to pity my martyrdom; and that wheresoever you are, to be mindful
of me. And so once more J entreat the Deity to grant you such prosperity, that
your fortunes may parallel your perfection.


Flor. Rest assured (sweet Mistress) to be beloved of me, though not equal to
your merit, to which height it is imposble my affections should raise it self.


COMPLEMENTALL POEMS.
On the beauty of his Mistress.
BRighter than inside Barks of new-hewen Cedar,
Sweeter than flames of fire perfumed with mirth,
And comlier than the Silver clouds that dance
On Zephyrus wings, before the queen oth'Spring:
It Is she does teach those Torches to burn bright:
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night,
As a rich Jewel in the Aethiop's ear,
Beauty too rich for use, for love more dear;
So does a snowy Dove, trooping with Crows,
As this my Mistress, over her fellow shows:
Since her whole bodies frame has power to have moved
The chaste Hyppollitus for to have loved.
In sum, her parts are white as Milk,
As smooth as Ivory, and as soft as silk.
O! who can her perfections tell,
In whom alone all graces dwell?
On her hair.
Her hairs reflex with red streaks paint the Skies,
Stars fall to fetch fresh luster from her eyes:
Whilst that those golden threads play with her breath,
Showing life's triumph in the map, of death.
On her locks.
Her locks being platted like a piece of wool,
Are full of sweet, as sweet of sweets is full.
On her Forehead.
Her stately front was figured from above,
Majestic, fair, well polisht, high and pale,
Pure white that dim s the Lillies of the Vale.
On her face.
Her face like Cynthea's when in the full she sh^neth,
And blustering to her Love-mates bower declineth.
Such brightness has her angels face,
Can make a Sunshine in a shady place.
On the color of her face.
Such color has her face, as when the Sun,
In summer his first rising has begun*
On her Eyebrows and ch^^ks.
Each Eye-brow hangs like Iris in the sk^es,
On either Cheek a Rose and Lilly lies.
Another on her Eyebrows and breath.
Her bright Brows drive the Sun to Clouds beneath,
Sweet Morn and Evening dews fall from her breath.
On her Eyelids.
Her arches be two heavenly l^ds:
Whose wincks each bold attempt forbids.
On her Eyes.
Her eyes the contradictors of the night;
Like marigolds, unsheath their glorious light.
Another on the same.
Two jettie sparks where Cupid chaftly hides
His subtle shafts, that from his quiver glides,
Piercing the hearts of others, yet they be
Unhappy, since themselves they cannot see.
On her smiles.
Her smiles so sweet and nice:
On eath do make a heavenly Paradise
On her cheeks.
Her cheeks with ripened lillies steeped in wine,
Or gorgious Clouds upon the Suns decline.
Another on the sam^.
Her cheeks with kindly Claret spread,
Aurora like new out of bed.
On her nose and breath.
Her nose is straight and of a stately frame.
Her breath a sweet perfume a holy flame.
On her chin.
Her crystal chin like to the purest white
Is lovers pavillion and the boys delight.
On her Ears
On these Meanders if you gaze,
You soon will read a lovers maze.
On her lips.
Her lips like Roses over-wa^ht with dew,
Do by their breath their beauties still renew.
On her lips and Neck.
Her lips more red than Coral stone,
Her neck's more white than aged Swans that moan,
O! who those ^uddie lips can miss,
Which blessed still themselves do kiss?
On her Mouth.
Sweet mouth that send'st a musick-rosied breath,
Whose very word darts me a living death.
On her mouth and teeth.
W^thin the compass of this hollow sweet,
Those orien^ rankss of silver pearls do meet.
On her breath.
She breaths forth flowers, she makes the spring,
Perfumes the air and comforts every thing.
On her tongue and words.
Her words do fall like summer dews on me,
Her tongue strikes Musicks sweetest harmony.
On her teeth.
Her lips never part, but they show,
Of precious pearl a double row.
On her speech.
In all her words such virtues couched be,
The learned thence fetch their Philosophy.
On her voice.
A voice which does the Thrushes shrilness stain.
And makes declining nature young again.
On her neck.
Her necks an Ivory shining Tower,
Or like delight that does it self devour.
On her shoulders.
These parching squares with silver skin,
Do pass the hate-spot-Ermaline.
On her arms.
Her twin-like arms, that stainless pair,
Fit for a Kings embraces are.
On her hands.
Her azured veins do use to stray,
With pretty Cupids every way:
Moist Pearl, warm snow, pure Ivory,
Within these strange compacts do ly.
On her fingers.
Long, small, and fit for Orpheus Lute,
Which made the savage Tiger mute.
On her actions.
Her deeds are like great clusters of ripe grapes
Which load the branches of the fruitful vine,
Ostering to fall into each mouth that gapes,
And fill the same with store of costly wine.
On her breasts.
Her Breasts, those Ivory Globes, circled with blue,
Save of their Lord no bearing yoke they knew.
On her Paps.
Her Paps like two fair apples in their prime,
From those blessed sweets, love sucks his summertime.
On her good Thought.
Her mindful Breasts perfumes with Fr^nckinsense,
And sweetest odors every fainting sense.
On her wast and ribs.
Fitly so named, since it does wast
Men's lives until it be embraced:
Her ribs with white all armed be,
Compact with curious symmetry.
On her Skin and flesh.
Her lovely skin is white, like Curds new pressed,
And snowy flesh, as soft as wool new dressed.
On her navel.
Her love delights the wandering thought
Whilst that my eyes astray are brought:
Since nature here would fain unite,
In curious circles busy fight.
On her Belly.
Most beauteous seal of Virgins wax,
Pity it is the impression lacks.
This place with sense my joy does fill,
Since it is entitled Cupids hill,
From whence a seemly passage there does flow
To stranger pleasures that are placed below.
On her womb.
Her Maiden womb the dwelling house of pleasure.
O blessed is he may search that secret treasure.
On her Thighs.
These are the subjects that do fit
The Genius of an Ovids wit;
Whose branches smooth, as in a Glass,
Our Albions Cliffs in whiteness pass.
On her Knees.
These Knots of joy, and Gems of love,
With motion makes all graces move.
Nn the calves of her legs.
Mark well how fare the flesh does rise,
In her brave calves like crystal skies.
On the small of her legs.
View but her Atlus smallest small,
More white than whitest bone of all.
On her feet.
Her feet so short and slender, little round,
On earth a finer pair cannot be found.
A last of his Mistresses perfections.
She has Venus lip and eye,
With Diana's chastity,
In those parts I have revealed,
Venus beauty is expressed;
Yet there are some parts concealed
Which my fancy judges best.
The conclusion.
Thus every part impairs a grace,
And beauty dwells in every place.
Loves Month.
May is not loves month, May is full of flowers,
But dropping Aprill-love is full of showers.
Definition of love.
Love is a friend, a fire, a heaven, a hell,
Where pleasure, pain, and sad repentance dwell.
Love will out.
The light of hidden fire it self discovers:
And love that's concealed bewraies poor lovers.
On the parting of lovers.
Lovers well wot what grief it is to part,
When 'twixt two bodies lives but one heart.
And lovers say the heart has double wrong,
When it is barred the assistance of the tongue.
On the constancy of affections.
Love well is said to be a life in death,
That laughs, and weeps, and all within one breath.
Lovers Lottery.
The World's a Lottery, a Lovers prise,
Is such a Girl that is fair, that is chaste and wise.
The quality of Love.
Love is a spirit all compact with fire,
Not gross to sink, but light, and will aspire.
What love is.
Love is a Golden Bubble full of Dreams,
That waking breaks and fills us with extremes.
Lovers delight to be alone.
Lovers best l^ke to see themselves alone,
Or with their loves, if needs they must have one.
Vows of Lovers.
We know not how to love, til love unblinde us;
And vows made ignorantly can never bind us.
On the purity of their affections.
Needs must Venus wars be sweet,
When two Maiden-lovers meet.
Impossibility of concealing love.
The light of hidden fire it self discovers,
And love that is concealed betraies poor lovers.
On one sick with love.
Where Venus strikes with beauty to the quick,
Great are the cares of those that are lovesick.
The errors of love,
All men do err, because that men they be,
And men with beauty blinded cannot see.
What love is.
Love is a subtle influence,
Whose smallest force still hangs in suspense.
Love admits of no contrary arguments.
Love hates all arguments, disputing still
For sense against reason, with a senseless will.
What love is.
Love is a blinded God, an angry Boy,
A slave to beauties will, a witless toy,
A ravening bird, tyrant most unjust;
A private hell, a very sea of lust.
Another definition of love.
Love is a sour delight, a sugared grief,
A breach of reasons law, a secret thief,
A living death, an ever dying life,
A sea of tears; an everlasting strife:
A bait for fools, a scourge of noble wits,
A deadly wound, a shot which ever hits.
On sudden affection.
From hasty love see thou abstain,
It Is lust (not love) thou seeks thus to obtain.
The effects of love.
This is the least effect of Cupids dart,
To change the mind by wound^ng of the heart.
Cruelty of love.
Love is not full of mercy, as men say,
But deaf and cruel where he means to prey.
The parting of Lovers.
Love goes to love as School-boyes from their Books
But love from love; toward School with heavy looks
A Maxim of love.
It Is folly by our wisest worldlings proved,
If not to gain by love, to be beloved.
Loves wounds.
One was the bow, One was the Dart,
That wounded us both to the heart;
Then since we both do feel one pain,
Let one love cure us both again.
The constancy of lovers.
Once learn to love, the lesson is most plain,
And being learnt is never lost again,
The force of love.
Were beauty under twenty locks kept fast,
Yet love breaks through and picks them all at last
Of Music and love.
As without breath no pipe does move:
No Musick's kindly without love.
A loving conjunction.
The day unto my hope does now shine fair,
I and my love, in love united are.
Love finds an opportunity.
When love has knit two hearts in unity,
They seldom fail to find and opportunity.
Offers of love not to be refused.
Occasion's winged, and ever flies fast,
Coming she smiles, and frowns once being past.
Patience of Lovers.
One may endure; for when the pain is past,
Reward, though long it stay, yet comes at last.
Sorrows of Lovers.
^ighs are the ease calamity affords,
Which serve for speech when sorrow wants words.
To his M^stris on her expected humiliation from him for a rude Kiss.
^f that I must such penance do,
^'le bow unto no Saint but you.
On the Tears of Lovers.
^n sighs the Lover speaks his secret pains,
Tears are his Oratory, words do make him tremble,
^et women's tears fall when they most dissemble.
On frozen affection.
There where the hearts Attorney once is mute,
The Clyent breaks as desperate off his suit.
Of true and false love.
True love's a Saint, so shall you true love know;
False love's a Scythian, yet a Saint in show.
Love breaks all silence.
What Fish so dumb, what Beast so dull of heart,
That hears love sing and will not bear a part?
No business like that of love.
The fair, the false love can
^dmit, all but the busy man:
He that has business, and makes love, does do
^uch wrong, as if a married man should woo.
The perseverance of a Lover.
Desire being Pilot, and bright beauties prize,
Who can fear sinking where such treasure lies.
The beginning of love.
^air beauty is the spark of hot desire,
And sparks in time will kindle to a fire.
On a Lovers adve^sity.
As the Stars in darkelt night,
So love by suffering shines more bright:
For like unto a hidden flame,
It will at last break forth again,
On lust.
Lust maks Oblivion, beats reason back,
Forgets shames pure blush, and honors wrack.
On Virginity.
The ripest Corn dies if it be not reapt;
Beauty alone is lost, too early kept.
A cruel M^stris.
Nothing so ill becomes the fair
As cruelty, which yields unto no prayer.
On Coyness.
A wayward beauty does not fancy move,
A frown forbids, a smile engenders love.
Another.
Fair words and power, attractive beauty,
Brings men too wanton in subjective.
Another.
Hope and despair attend a Lover still,
Hope for to save, despair to kill.
On jealousy.
Where jealousy in base^t minds does dwell,
It Is metal Vulcans Cyclops sent from hell.
On pleasures.
Something must still be left to cheer our sin,
And give a touch of what should not have bin,
To those that know but pleasures price,
All Is one, a Prison, or a Paradise.
On chastity.
The unstained vail which innocents adorn,
The ungathered rose defended with the thorn.
Another on the same.
Penelope in spending chaste her days,
As worthy as Ulysses was of praise.
A chaste Vow.
To thee as constant as the Sun to day,
Til from this light night hurries me away.
Protestations of service.
I have vowed both love and duty,
To your virtue and your beauty.
On the Court.
Thither let Phoebus sons resort,
Where shines their Father but in loves great Court?
On her delaying marriage.
Where hearts be knit, what helps if not to enjoy?
Delay breeds doubts, no cunning to be coy.
On his desires.
What can be said, that lovers cannot say?
Desire can make a Doctor in a day.
On hand and heart.
Heaven seals that faith which firmly stands,
And joins our hands with hearts, our hearts with hands
On Misfortune.
The man that still amidst misfortunes stands,
Is sorrows slave, and bound in lasting bands.
On fate.
They fall which trust to Fortunes fickle wheel,
But staid by virtue men shall never reel.
On disdain.
In high disdain love is a base desire,
And Cupids Flames is but a watery fire.
A Knot of most Excellent Letters Wherein is laid open all the Perfections, or
art of Complementing, or inditing any Epistle or Love Letters.
A letter of a loving father to his son before his death.
MY Son, thou art now coming into the world that I am going out of, and yet
before my departure, I thought fit to write a few lines unto thee, what are (I
hope) needful for thee to have a care of, whilst thou live in it; I know
thou will not break thy bread all in one house, feed always of one dish, nor
live always in one place; and therefore let me give thee a little kind
admonition in this short Letter, for thy carriage in all courses; the Court is
a place of more charge than ease; the City-Gawds of more pleasure than worth,
and the Country sports of more pleasure than profit, yet is there no service
to the King, no dwelling to the City, nor pleasure to the Country, but all the
weight of the worth of them is in the hand of wisdom, who in the knowledge of
the use of them, makes the best esteem of them: but lest I am too tedious, and
long lessons may overcharge the memory, take this one rule for thy learning, in
all, and thou shall find it good in ^ore than a few; Whersoever thou go,
note the best: choose the best, and keep the best: be nor buried in earth
before thou come to the grave, no^ build Castles in the Air, lest they fall
down upon thy head; let not thy eye abuse thy heart, nor thy tongue thy will;
and let reason govern thy will in all the passages of thy Nature, be neither
needy nor ungrateful, uncourteous, or unkind, and examine thy conscience in
the care of thy content; ground thy love upon Virtue, thy hope upon Reason, and
thy Happiness upon Grace; Live as a Stranger in the World, and make what have
thou can to Heaven: Be loyal to thy Prince, natural to thy Countr^y;
Faithful to thy Friend; Kind to thy Neighbor; and honest to the whole World;
so shall God bless thee, the best love thee, and the worst not hurt thee. And
thus so weak in body, that the Spirit faints, enforced me to express these
few lines of fatherly love unto thee, with my Prayers to the Lord of Heaven for
thy preservation in this World, and Eternal Happiness in the World to come,
with my Love, Blessing, and therewith what I am able to leave thee, to the
Merciful Guard of Heaven I commit thee, and rest,

Thy loving Father, etc.

His Answer.
MY most loving father, this legacy of your love for the direction of my life,
how much I prize it in my hearts thankfulness, the eye of your judgment shall
behold in my observation, and give me leave to tell you, that in this little
time that I have spent idly in this world I have had some taste of the meat that
you have given me, where I find, that the best meat may be spoiled spoiled in
the dressing, whilst a cunning Cook will make a rich service of small cost;
and though giddy heads are in love with gaudy toys, yet the better sor^ of
opinions, esteem a small Diamond before a great Sapphire; I care not if I rather
adventure far for the honor of virtue, than lessen my Estate by breach of
arms; and seeing there are so many counterfeits, that the best jewel may be
mistaken; I will meddle with no such wares as may call repentance to an
after-reckoning: while mine heart looks toward heaven, I hope the Earth shall
not blind my eyes, nor the vain ^^lights of Nature prevail against the virtues
of reason, but all is in the power of powers, by whose grace, being guided, I
shall be ever so preserved, that howsoever my heart may be wounded, yet I hope
I shall never be confounded; in hope whereof, and unto the which beseeching the
almighty, either in health to prolong your days, or in the election of his
love, to call you to a better life, more esteeming these precepts of your love,
than all the portion you can leave me, saving your blessing, and so I humbly
take my leave, and rest,

Your loving and most obedient Son, til death, etc.

A Letter to a friend to borrow money.
SIR, If borrowing of money be not a breach of friendship, let me entreat your
patience to open your purse I am loath to be too troublesome in making many
words, where such affable gentleness out-passeth all merit, a present occasion
puts me to the adventure of your kindness, the matter is not much; yet it will
at this time pleasure me, as much as so much may do; the sum five pounds, the
time three months, my credit the assurance, and hearty thanks the interest;
thus without troubling the Scrivener I hope my letter will be of sufficient
power to prevail with your love, entreating your present answer; in the
affection of an honest heart I commit you to the Almighty.

Yours, or not his own.

His Answer.
SIR, if your friendship were a follower of fortune, Love would have but a
little life in this World; the contents of your Letter has put me to a strict
account of my Estate, how I may help you and not hurt my self; I could make
many excuses, but that they taste of small comfort, and therefore knowing time
to be precious, and to avoid delays, let this suffice, your request is
granted, and the money I have sent you, and not doubting your credit, will take
your word for a bond, and for the use (without abuse) I wish but requital upon
the like occasion; Sir I am so glad that in this, or any thing in my power, I
may make proof of my love: I rest in the same,

Yours, or not mine own, etc.

A love-letter to a worthy Gentlewoman.
Fair Mistress, if I had no eyes, I should not like you, and if not wit, I
should not love you; for the brightness of your beauty is for no blind sight to
gaze upon, nor the worthiness of your virtue, for no weak brains to beat upon;
if you say I flatter you, look into your self, and do me no wrong, and if I do
you right, chide nor affection for a discovery, where truth is honorable;
pardon my presumption if it exceed your pleasure, and commend his service, who
will make an honor of your favors; so entreating your patience for answer to
my poor Letter, until I hear from you; and always I rest,

Your devoted to be commanded, etc.

A Love-Letter to a Lady.
Madam,
SVch, and so extreme, are the passions of love, that the more they are
quenched by disdain, greater flames are ^ncreased by desire, and the more they
galled with hate are, the more they gape after love; like to the Stone T^p^zon
which being once kindled, burns most vehemently in the water: so I having my
heart scorched with the beams of your beauty, and my mind flamed with your
singular virtue, neither can any bitter looks ab^^t my love, nor extreme
discourtesie diminish my affection, I am not be that will leave the rose because
it has pricked my finger, or refuse the gold in the fire because it burnt my
hand, for the mind of a faithful lover, is neither to be daunted with despite,
nor affrighted with danger.

I rest, Yours, etc.

Her Answer.
SIR, if your wits go with your eyes, your brains may be on the outside of your
head, and then if you deceive your self I hope you will not blame me: colors
are but shadows and may be full of illusions, and the worthiness of virtue may
be a reach above the worlds reason, yet the discovery of affection may be more
in words than in matter, especially where discretion sounds the depth of
desert, though the honor of truth be worth regard, where there is no fault,
there need no pardon, and therefore without trouble of patience, finding no
cause of displeasure, I thus conclude, love has a priviedge to be at the
command of kindness, in which I res^ to wish you much happiness,

Your wel-willing friend, etc

Another Love-Letter
Fair Creature; To tell you I love you, were a phrase of too plain a fashion,
and yet when truth is indeed the best Eloquence, affection needs no invention
to express the care of her content, which being in thre^ Letters, makes a word
soon to be read, which being Y: O: V: nothing doubting your spelling, I hope
you will so kindly put together, that a conjunction of love shall have no
separation during life: And thus bese^ching you to learn this Lesson by heart,
without a cross in conceit, to hinder the course of loves comfort, till I hear
from you in that nature that may make me a happy creature I rest;

Yours wholly and only if you will, etc

Her Answer.
KInd Sir, to tell you I love you, were too cross an Answer with a comfortable
request; and yet when dissimulation is the worst fruit of invention, d scretion
may be pardoned in concealing of Love; Touching your. Letters, they are sooner
read than understood; while imaginative hopes may be deceived in their
happiness, and yet to avoid all touch of ingratitude, in that nature of
kindness that may give honor to content, as a simple Scholar in the art of
love, loath to have that by heart that may trouble more than my head, when
seperations of conjunctions may endanger the death of comfort, wishing nothing
amiss to them that mean all well I rest,

Your, as I may be mine own, etc.

A Letter from a Lady to a Gentleman, whom she called her servant, for the
preferring of a Gentlewoman to her.
SErvant, I have often spoken unto you for that you must needs do me: I am
going to the Court, and shall have great use of a Gentlewoman to attend me. I
know you have many Kinsmen and acquaintance among whom you may find one to fit
me, I will take her at your hand, and regard her for your sake; and if her
deserts answers my desires, she shall lose no love in my favor, and therefore
leaving this trusty charge to the care of your discreet kindness, as you will
expect a greater courtesy at my hands, I rest,

Your loving Mistress, etc.

His Answer.
GOod Madam, you speak unto me to help you to a Gentlewoman, which with my
Letter I have here sent you a woman, and Gentle, who, I hope, will not be
altogether unworthy of your entertainment: for her person, she is not deformed,
nor her face of the worst feature; she is ^eith^r blear-eyed, nor tongue-tyed:
And for her qualities, I hope she can do more than make courtesy and blush; her
Pa^entage is not bare, nor her breeding idle, and for her disposition, I hope
will be nothing displeasing: to praise her in any perfection I dare not, but in
all, will leave her to the trial of your patience. So wishing my dutiful
service in this, or that else mayly in my power, so fortunate as to deserve
your favor, and this Gentlewoman so gracious as to gain the continuance of
your good opinion, in prayer for your health and hearts most wished happiness,
I take my leave at this time, but rest at all times,

Your Ladyships most humble servant.

A Letter of zealous love, written from a Gentleman to his Brother.
BRother, since I last heard from you, I am sorry to hear that I do of you,
that you are wound so far into the world, as if that you never meant to out of
it: you know I have traveled far, seen much, and I have some understanding, by
all the observation of time, in the courses of nature: I find Solomon's truth in
the trial of the world, that there is a little of it, but is little worth in
it, when all being but vanity, there is little virtue to be found in it:
Believe me, brother, we are near in one nature, but differ in another, in the
flesh, but not in the spirit; for whilst I contemplate the substance of the
souls comfort, thou art puzzelled in the world among the puddles of the earth:
yea I fear the nature of thy affect to be as far from the rule of religion, as
the most senceless creature is from the use of reason.

Brother, I know that thou have wronged many, and thy self most, I would thou
were a Zacheus to right all; but better betimes than too late: look home to the
main chance, have a care of thy soul, and thy body will be the better: believe
it, there is no rust eats so fast into any m^rtal, as the venom of avarice
into the heart of a wicked man: Prodigality is the way to penury, but
covetousness is the root of all evil, betwixt both there is a mean, that to hit
on is a kind of happiness, and if thou have no ears but of Mydas, thou can
hear of nothing but gold, take a heart of Simeon, to joy in nothing but Christ
Jesus: turn a new leaf, serve God, for whom thou were created, and let nor the
earth triumph over thee, for whom it was made to tread upon, lift up thine eyes
toward heaven, where one joy of the elect, is worth all the Kingdoms of the
World: Leave the world ere it leave thee, and love him ever that will never
leave thee: Let they life be a Pilgrimage, and the earth but a passage, and the
Heaven only the home of thy souls eternal happiness: Once a day read these few
lines for my sake, which if they do that good to thee, which I heartily pray
for in thee, till when, and ever my hearts love.

Thy loving Brother, etc.

His Answer.
MY good Brother, I thank you for your careful and kind Letter, yet let me ^^l
you, that zeal without discretion, proves not the best part of Religion:
Reports may be idle, and then belief may be erroneous, when mistakings may
breed abuse of good uses: I know that riches are witches, to them that make
heaven of this world; but he that has a leaden wit, will never worship a Golden
Calf; but since I know Abraham and Lazarus were alike in election, give me
leave, while I am in this world, by Christ, rather than avarice, rather to be a
husbandman, than to be a labourer for hire: If I have wronged any, it is
unwittingly^ whom if I know, I will satisfy most willingly: and for the wound
of conscience, I will hope to be so far from hypocrisy, that I shall be free
from that fear: and therefore, though travel has taught you much experience in
the world, and having sufficient maintenance to pass through the world, you
make the less account of the world, yet when careful thrist breeds no
covetous thraldom, be not jealous of my love; with all the pleasures of the
world, to make comparison with the least of heavens comfort. I know the highest
Mountain is but earth, and the lowest valley is no other, and therefore when I
carry my footstool on my head, let me walk like a fool, or monster. In brief,
I know the world, and (...) to use it, and keep account with my care, how I m^^
most contentedly leave it, but for my love to him th^^ made it, let me live no
longer in it then I love and h^nour him above it, and so entreating you to blow
o^^ ill breaths that may abuse my disposition, and to b^^ persuaded so far of
my souls health, that my joy is ever and only, in Christ Jesus, to his
preservation, leaving the happy issue of your hopes in the nature of the best
love til I see you, and always I rest,

Your most loving Brother, etc.

A Letter of love to an honorable Lady.
Honorable Madam, if love were not above reason, it would not be so high in
regard, who dwelling only in the spirits of the best understanding feeds the
heart only with the fruits of an infallible resolution: What it is in its own
nature, has been diversely described, but I think, never known but unto them
that inwardly know it, Some hold it a Riddle tha^ none can interpret but he
that made it: But if it be a^ I have read of it, a child, and beauty begot it;
I hop^ Nature will be her self, and not unkind to her own bre^^ how to prove
truth, the honor in your eyes, th^^ (...) wrought my heart to your service,
shall make ^n o^^ to your favor in the happiness of your employme^^ So craving
pardon for my presumption, in my dev^^^ duty, to the honor of your command, I
humbly ta^^^ my leave,

Your Lady-ships in all humbleness; etc*

Her answer.
WOrthy knight, if love be above reason, it mus^ be either divine or devilish,
and so regarded accordingly: what it is, I think is best known by the effect of
it; howsoever idle brains have beaten about the description of it: Riddles are
but jests of wit, and miracles are ceased from being seen in our age. But (...)
be a child, though of a strange Parentage, surely nature will not suffer the
Mother to be cruel to her own breed; but if it fall out to be an ungracious
father, what then will be thought of the children: Yet, lest in misconstruing a
conceit, I may mistake a content, since in the secret of nature may be a sense
of strange under standing, I will suspend my judgment, til I have made proof of
my opinion: when eyes and hearts meet together in discourse, I hope the
business will be soon ended that is referred to indifferent judgment. So til
occasion be offered of the performance of employment, hoping that virtue and
honor will soon agree upon sure grounds; til I see you I rest,

Your loving friend, etc.

A Letter from a Knight to a Nobleman, for the entertaining of a Secretary.
NOble LORD, I hear that your Secretary has lately taken his leave of th^s
world, in whose place (if you be not provided) let my love prevail with your
honor, for the enterta^nment of th^s bearer, a Gentleman, and a kinsman of
mine, in whose commendations, I dare thus far use my cred ^, h s heart shall be
as fair as his hand, upon any occasion of your employment: and for his w^t, it
^s both in caput and copyhold, for he has read much, and observed more than a
little, his descent has been from the loins of an honorable Line: and for his
disposition every way, I hope you shall find it no way displeasing: Not to
trouble you with long circumstance, leaving happiness to your acceptance, with
my service to your command, in all humble love, I take my leave at this time,
but rest during life,

Your Honors devoted, to be commanded, etc.

The Lords Answer.
MY kind Knight, I have received your Letter, fulfilled your request, and
entertained your Kinsman, of whom I am already so well persuaded, besides the
assurance of your knowledge, that I think a little matter shall not make square
in our loves. I find what you write of him, and shall have much employment for
him: I thank you for him, and if he continue his carriage, which I doubt not,
he will be of better fortune than my favor, and yet somewhat the more for your
sake, I will take such a care of him, that ere many months pass, you shall find
my love in him: so til I see you at my house, where you shall make your own
welcome, I rest,

Your most assured friend, etc.

A Letter to a friend on the other side of the Sea.
SIR, Distance of place must make no difference of minds, love and life amongst
hearts make an en^ together; I have long longed to hear from you, an^ if I had
known whither, I had ere this written unto you but now having met with him that
means shortly to see you, I have thought good to let you know, that (...) yet
live to love you, and so^ger not to pray for you that all happ^ness may befall
you: glad I would be (...) see you, and in the mean t^me to ^ear from you, how
the world goes there about you, whether all birds be (...) one feather, and
how they fly together: What blazing Stars have been lately seen, and what your
Astronomers think will follow of their appearance: whether your wine be watered
before it come over; and how Youth and Age agree upon the Conjunction
Copulative: How the great fith and little agree together in your seas; and how
your Rabbets escape the Kite abroad, and the Pole-cat in their Borrows: how the
Foxes and wolves prey upon your Geese and lambs; and what sport your Swallows
make with the Flies in the air. I wish you not to write of any wonders,
because they are incredulous; nor of matters of state, for they may be,
perhaps, ill taken: but only how honest men may thrive, and knaves have their
reward; how wise men are honored, and fools laughed at; and how the weaker sort
hold their strength with the stronger; when wenches eyes pull out men's hearts
out of their bellies, their wits out of their brains, and the money out of
their purses, and such matters of no moment; then must needs, if you will take a
little pains to set down in a little Paper; I shall be glad to look upon them,
and in my love to requite them, for our world to hear it, were a world to think
of it: but the messengers have not, giving me time to write of it til the next
Post; I will say this of it, God bless the best, and mend or end the worst,
grant all honest hearts good lives in it, and a joyful departure when they are
to leave it; to which prayer, hoping you will say Amen: til we meet, and
always I rest.

Thine, or not his own, etc.

His Answer.
My long acquaintance, and worthy beloved friend, I have lately received your
Let, wherein I find your desire to hear of the passages in the world, on this
side the salt water, now to satisfy in as much as I can, let me tell you, that
I find some difference in the natures of nations, but touching their divisions,
I think they are much alike through the whole world; for the one side I find
the powerful imperious, the ambitious, envious, the covetous, never satisfied;
the liscencious, idle, and the foolish unprofitable: On the other side,
majesty, gracious, honor, virtuous, wealth, charitable, thrift, wealthy, wit,
painful, and religion, loyal, and labor commodious. Now looking into the
danger of greatness, the charge of honor, the care of wealth, the misery of
want, the folly of wantonness, and the beggary of idleness: I have chosen the
mean for my part of Music, where I shall neither strain my voice, nor stretch
my strings, but with little charge keep my instrument in tune: The passages are
here as in other places, where January and May meet in conjunction there are
strange kinds of countenances that show not the best content.

And when winds are highest in summer the fruit shall fall ere they be ripe:
many idle exercises are more costly than comfortable; much talk, and little
truth, and ga^ outsides, have poor insides, oaths and lies are as common as
highwayes, and painted images make fools idols, honest men thought more silly
than the wise men among the wizards of the world, and the devils among the
brokers daily hunted with beggars, murmuring of war among the unquiet spirits,
and peace guarded for fear of a close stratagem. In sum, such variety of
business, that every man's brain is full of humors; and for women, they are of
such force, that they put men to great patience: for my self, I see the world
at that pass, that I think him happy that is well out of it. In sum, God bless
the best, while the worst mend, and send us his grace and health, with a happy
meeting: so till hear from you, which I wish often with my hearts love, that
shall never end but with life, and my hearty commendations, I commit you to the
almighty.

Yours as mine own, etc.

A Letter from an apprentice to his father, to send him some Money to succor
himself withal, he being hardly used by a cruel Master and mistress.
KInd and loving Father, my humble duty premised, with hope of your good
health, with my Mother, and the rest of our good friends etc. The extremity
which I have long endured at the hands of my unconscionable Master and Mistress,
constrains me (seeing no likelihood of redress) to reveal, and manifest that
unto you, which long I have concealed; which as it is uncouth unto me, in
regard of your paternall care of me, whilst I lived with you; so I doubt not
(your fatherly love continued unto me) but it will be displeasing unto you. I am
placed by your good friend, A. W. in a service, where (til I was bound
Apprentice) I had good usage, but since I was bound, I have seldom had good
day; nay, after that you sent them the money which Master A. W. did promise with
me, they began to exasterate hard usage unto me, to debar from me, not only
liberty, but victuals, finding many times faults without occasion, wrongfully
beating and buffeting me without offense, which I neither can, nor do I think
you will wish me to endure. I am almost pined with want which how to redress, I
know not, unless you vouchsafe to supply my present wants: to leave my trade I
am loath, to call my master in question I am more loath, where to have redress
I know not, in this my extremity, unless you take some course for me, and send
me wherewith to succor my self between time, until it shall please God to
turn their hard hearts. Thus having briefly acquainted you with my present
estate, hoping of your fatherly love unto me, humbly craving your and my
Mothers daily blessing, leaving you to the tuition of the Almighty, expecting
speedily to hear from you, I rest,

Your Obedient Son, etc.

His Answer.
SON, I have received your Letter, wherein I am given to understand that my
Friend, A. VV. has not so friendly discharged that friendly trust, which I
reposed in him, as I expected. Notwithstanding I will in what I may, seek
redress for thy wrongs: In the mean time deliver this twenty shillings to your
Master, as a token from me, happly his hard usage of you is to draw something
from me, which if I see I cannot by my gift^ which I have sent to him have
mended, I will come up my self, and take some course to remove you from him: In
the mean time I send you ten shillings to supply your necessary wants, which I
wish you sparingly (as you have occasion) to bestow, and not idely or
wastfully, and let me hear from you always by this Carryer. Serve God,
endeavor to please your Master and Mistress, and whilst I live, Boy, they
shall know thou have a Father; So in have I rest,

Your loving father, etc.

A Letter of a Patient to his Physici^n.
MAster Doctor, your Patient commends him to your patience, to bear a little
kind chiding for your too long absence, my disease holds his own and my pain
nothing diminished, and if you come not the sooner, your Physic will be past
working, for my Stomach is weak, and my heart grows faint, and yet I feed,
though my digestion be not he best; loath I am to languish, if I may have hope
o^ comfort, but your absence makes me doubt of my recovery, I pray you
therefore have you unto me, an^ let me be assured of your coming, lest you
com^ too late; you know my disease, and are acquainted with my body; for my
cure I leave it to God and your conscience, and so entreating your present
answer o^ your speedy presence, I commend you to the Almigh^y.

Your sick loving Patient, etc.

His Answer.
MY good Patient, I fear your impatience has by some passion increased your
pain; I know the force of your disease cannot but be weakened, if you be not
more afraid than burt, you will not dye of this malady: if my business were not
great, I would see you, or if your need were great I would not be from you; but
knowing every cramp is not a Convulsion, nor every stitch at the heart, I will
only wish you to put off melancholy, to take heed of cold, to have mind rather
of Heaven than earth; eat good meat, but not too much, drink good wine, but
measurably, be in charity with all the world, but not too far with any,
especially with the feminine gender; use motion for natural Physic, and let a
merry heart be your best Physician, for conceit is hurtful, if it be not
contentive, and it is past the reach of my Reason to cure a corrupted mind:
Shortly, and God willing, I will see you, in the mean time imagine I am with
you, for indeed I will not be long from you: and this let me tell you, that to
put you out of fear, I have no fear of you, but that you will be past physic,
ere my hope fail of your cure, and that will not be in have, and so hoping that
you are not so weak in spirit, but that you can endure a little pain with
patience in hope of assured health, til J see you, and always I rest,

Your Physician and loving friend,

A letter from a Son in prison to his mother, his estate being wasted,
DEar and loving Mother; as ever your Maternall love has heretofore been
manifested unto me, so now J beseech you in this great extremity to extend it
toward me; my means are consumed, my self captivated, ready to perish with
want, and which way to turn me in this height of misery I know not, but unto
you, whose ever careful respect of me has bin such that naught could (or as
yet J hope can) remove your love from me: wherefore in pity of my present
misery, J desire you, good mother, to make some means for my Enlargment, my
debts are not much, notwithstanding of my self, J am utterly unable to give
satisfaction, insomuch, that unless you be pleased to commiserate my distress,
J am utterly devoid of all hope of comfort, or Enlargement: if therefore you
will vouchsafe to set me at liberty, my future duty, and diligence shall
obsequiously in such sort be manifested,, that whatsoever has heretofore bin
amiss, shall be amended, to my good, and your comfort, whereof wishing you to be
most assured and expecting your comfortable answer, J rest,

Your distressed Son, etc.

Her Answer.
Son, J am sorry your folly has brought you to such extremity: had you been
heedfull in your courses, you might have prevented these disasters:
notwithstanding, since misery ought rather to be pitied than blamed
(especially by a Mother) J will in this your extremity, in hope of your
reformity, manifest a Mothers Love unto you: Your Debts shall be paid, you set
at liberty, and some speedy course be taken for your future maintenance, if you
will con^^m what you have written, I will be wi^h you to mo^row, til then comfort
your self, and fear God, and pray for your poor Mother.

Your loving Mother, etc.

A letter to a Kinsman that came from the university to the Court, and was
given much to the Study.
MY good Cousin, I hear, since you came from the University to the Court, you
are inclined much to Melancholy, your mind only delights in reading and
study, and among many variety of matters of import, that you take much delight
in searching out of Petigrees, and Herauldry, the knowledge whereof, I hold both
honorable and profitable, but the use thereof requires a heedfull care; for in
the discoursing of matters unfit, you may be brought within the compass of
folly: But as a friend to give you a Caveat in all your course of that study,
take my advice for the bettering of your understanding in the best of your
Coats: Be not too busy with the Crown, and of all Beasts beware of the Lion;
if he sleep, wake him no^ lest you trouble his patience, and in his walk, cross
no^ his way, lest his frown grows wrathful: For other beasts, think of them as
your reason will give you leave* where you find honors, note (if you can) the
desert o^ them, and for bought Coats, consider of them in their kinds; times
alter, and natures in them, and therefore in the setting down of Antiquities,
there may be much deceit, through the corruption of the writers, or directors
for strange Coats; and to see an Eagle have a Fl^ in her mouth, and a Mouse
bite a Cat by the Tail, or ^ Goose keep a Fox in a Den, wonder at it, but make
n^ words of it: and if you see a black swan in a blue Field an Eele in her
belly, running out at her tail, or a (...) cock pulled out of his feathers, and
making h^s (...) upon a Cross-bar, smile at the conceit; but keep (...) censure
of it your self. To conclude, read much but believe little; think much, but
speak little, and (...) much, but meddle little; but in meddling with ^the^ men's
coats, look that you lose not more than your (...) jerkin: and so wishing your
studies as profitable as ple^sing to you; til I see you, I commit you to the
almighty*

Your loving Cousin.

His answer,
SIR, I have read your Letter, and considered of the contents: To the Answer
whereof, give me leave to tell you, that I am not determined to hurt mine
eyesight with too deep looking into a Millstone, nor to believe Antiquity,
further than reason may carry my understanding, and whatsoever I find of Coats,
I will so carry my due and true allegiance to the Crown, tha^ I will avoid all
touch of disloyalty: For the Lion w^l neither trouble him, waking nor sleeping:
and for his walk, wish no beast to be so foolish, as to cross his pleasure in
his passage: For your merry conceits o^ strange Coats, I will only smile at my
conjecture of them, and so long as I know a Falcon from a buzzard, an Eagle
from an Owl, and a Nightingale from ^ Cuckoo, let me alone to judge of the
nature of Birds, and how they are born, and when I look into the nature of
honor, whether by purchase, favor, or desert I note the time, with the
persons, and so go on with m^ opinions to the judgment, I keep to my self: now
for what else may grow out of this study, either pr^f^^ pleasure, loss of time,
or repentance, I thank you for your item, to keep my conceit from discourse,
for all things are to be taken in their right kind, and when ^^arning grows
hurtful, it proves wit not well tempered and therefore hoping so to make use of
my brains, that (...) ^ead shall do my body no hurt, with many thanks (...) your
kind instructions, I commend you to the Al^^^^ty.

Your very loving Kinsman, etc.

FINIS.

