THE Great Earthquake, REVEL. 16.18. OR, FALL Of all the CHURCHES. Discovering
the Apostasy of purest Churches, not yet sensible of their spiritual
Whoredoms, Ezekiel. 43.9, 10. OR, The Great Whore made bare and naked before she
be judged, and her flesh burnt with fire, Rev. 27.16. PROVING, That none indeed
deny the Ordinances of Christ, but present Churches not being in a Gospel Order.

The Pastors are become brutish, and have not sought the Lord; therefore they
shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered, Jer. 10.21. By
William Erbery.

LONDON, Printed for, Giles Calvert at the black spread Eagle at-the West end
of Paul's, 1654.

To the truly Christian Reader.
THe Author of this ensuing Discourse, was a person raised up by the Lord to
bear his testimony against all formal and traditional ways of Religion,
Ordinances, and Government, in the (so called) Christian world; a design,
though seemingly managed by him, with some eagerness and severity of spirit (if
you abstract some passages in this and his other discourses) yet in much love
and oneness of spirit with the worshippers themselves, that their persons might
be saved, but so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3.15.

The Doctrine of Persecution for Conscience sake, though erroneous, was a
stranger to his spirit and principles, which owned no compulsion in matters of
Religion, but that Scriptural one, viz. the energy and effectual working of the
spirit of God overpowring the soul, and leading it captive by an holy violence
to those divine and heavenly discoveries, which our Author bore witness to.

And indeed if we consider the judging and persecuting spirit, we shall
ordinarily find it to ascend. (i.) The weak are most apt to judge the strong,
Romans 13.3. though the strong has another temptation before him, viz. to
despise the weak; so he that is born after the flesh, (i.) the weak legal
Saint, persecutes him that is born after the spirit, Gal. 4.29. The reason I
take to be this, The higher a man's spirit is raised in the knowledge of God, and
of divine mysteries, the more large and comprehensive it is, as coming nearest
to that state of love, which bears all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. Hence it is that
such men comprehend and embrace all weaker Saints, though in different forms,
as to outward observations, in one and the same spirit; but on the other side,
when the spirit of a Christian is captivated to this or that particular rite,
as to a day meat, etc. in the narrowness of his heart, secluding all others, he
is carried out with a zeal kindled from the outward letter, to the censuring,
reproaching, persecuting such Doctrines, as he is not able to comprehend.

An experiment of this we have in Christ himself, who coming forth in the glory
of God, and holding out higher discoveries then the Saints had formerly
attained, was opposed by none so much, as the religious ones of his days,
Scribes and Pharisees, that sat in Moses Chair. And as the Disciple is not
above his Master, so the Apostle Paul, whose errand was to raise up the spirits
of Saints to high and evangelical discoveries, was thwarted by none so much as
by devout women Acts 13.50.

The same measure was meeted to this our Author, who in simplicity of spirit,
and love to all the Saints, bewailing the bondage of the whole creation, did
cast in his mite for the deliverance and relief thereof, how was he scandalized
by some professors of all sorts, having various reproaches heaped upon him, to
render him the more unserviceable for the great work he was upon; hence it is,
that we have heard the brand of a loose person, or a Ranter, an Apostate and
Blasphemer, an Antiscripturist, Antiministrist, an Antiordinancist, an
Antitrinitarian, Vniversalist, and what notinured upon him It will not be amiss
for the removing of prejudices out of the minds of some, and the renewing of
the memory of this worthy labourer in the hearts of others, to give a brief
account of his spirit and Principles, as to every one of the abovenamed
particulars.

1. He was no friend to looseness and profaneness, either in himself or others;
his own strict, sober, and Christian deportment in the whole course of his
conversation is his sufficient compurgator against all the reproaches and
calumnies of this rank and name; yea, he bore public testimony, against a
licentious spirit in whatsoever appearance, in several of his private and
public discourses.

It Is true, some weaker spirits misunderstanding the Doctrines of this Author
concerning the restitution of all things, the liberty of the creation, and
Saints oneness in Christ with God, etc. from these excellent premises; drew
forth such conclusions as were agreeable to their own private conceptions,
rather then the truth, which conclusions being seconded by a practice agreeable
thereunto, gave just occasion of offense to those without, of bewailing and
lamentation to them within, amongst which this Author bore not the least share.

It Is no new thing, This, when the Lord holds forth any eminent and remarkable
truth, which is likely to be of signal advantage to the people of God, for
Satan to raise up much dust about it, to cloud its glory, yea sometimes by
spreading temptations before the pretenders to it, unto personal infirmities,
to abate the edge of other men's spirits from entertaining that which seems
accompanied with so horrid and hideous effects.

But such men would do well to consider whether such conclusions do necessarily
follow from such principles? or rather, are not the principles wrested to what
they never meant? Have not other men's Doctrines of greatest affinity to the
letter of the Scriptures, been as much perverted and abused? Was not the grace
of God turned into wantonness, even in the Apostles days? May not new Wine be
put into old bottles, even to the breaking, distempering, and overturning of
men's spirits? All which things do rather evince the world not ripe for such
discoveries, which our Author held forth, then conclude against the discoveries
themselves, for when the Lord purposes an effectual manifestation of some
eminent truth, he adds also a balanced spirit able to entertain it.

2. He was rather a presser forward, then an Apostate; Forgetting those things
that are behind, etc. It Is true, he was formerly as strict and zealous in all
literal observations as any of his equals, yea he might have boasted herein (as
the Apostle Paul) if it had been worth his labor: But it pleased God to raise
him up from all fleshly rites to a more near and secret enjoyment, which took
him from some outward performances, which many Christians please themselves in;
it were to be wished that such persons could give as good an account of their
diligence in these things, as he could of his omission of them?

And indeed, the prayers of the Saints in the primitive times before the
Apostasy began (which even then was appearing) seem to have been occasional,
only pro re nata, and not limited to times, hours, or seasons, either in their
more public meetings, or privater assemblings, according to the rule of St.
James Chap. 5. v. 13. Is any among you afflicted, let him pray? Is any merry,
let him sing Psalms? yea the prayer dictated by Christ to his disciples, Mat.
6. Luke 11 2, 3, 4. seems to be of the same import, there being some Petitions,
especially that v. 3. Give us day by day our daily bread, squared to the
particular condition of the Disciples themselves, for they being to be sent out
into the world without money or scrip, etc. and without ordinary accommodation
for the relief of the natural man, had need have their daily recourse to, and
dependence upon him for a supply of those things, when as they who have tasted
of the goodness of God in a plentiful provision of outward enjoyments, have
greater reason to rejoice in, and magnify that goodness, then to go forth in
desires after that which they already enjoy: where by the way it may be queried
whethere that prayer were intended for the body of the Saints, or the Disciples
only, and for other Saints, no otherwise then as their case suited with that of
his Disciples.

Yet even near the Apostolic times, the memory of the Jewish observations
being fresh, some of the Christian Doctors did lalour to reduce the Saints to
the same yoke of bondage, as to the strictness of time, place, and season,
which the Jews were under. An instance of this we have in Clemens, living in
the very age of the Apostles, Clem. 1.52. and who is said to have wrote
Epistles to the Corinthians, as Paul did, in one of which he lays it as a duty
upon Christians, to perform their services and observations, statutis
Temporibus and horis, at set times and seasons, and says, that God has
commanded it by his supreme will; but where that command is to be found, he
determins not, neither is it any where to be found in the New Testament (but
rather the contrary) but from the practice of the Jews in the Old, and so a
late learned Critic expounds those words of Clemens, that the force of the
command lies in the Analogy between the old Testament and the new; and not in
any particular Text or Scripture under the Gospel.

As for Prayer, he was led into the secret places of the Almighty to see that
it was not to be limited (as the Jews did) to morning and evening tides, that
it was the least part of it to be vocal; That all divine performances are to be
managed within; that it was proper only for Saints, and not mixed multitudes;
upon which account he was not observed to be frequent in the external
demonstration of this or other duties, yet he prayed always, and in every
thing gave thanks, yea being afflicted with all the sufferings of all the
Saints, he managed within himself such groans as could not be uttered, Romans 8.
How many now adays do place all their duties in being seen and heard of men?
How many outward services do they perform one day after another, which perish
with the using? How are we ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth? If such men think they stand, let them take heed lest
they fall. Yet our Author wanted not a clearer demonstration of the truth and
power of his Religion, then any seemingly religious and external rite could
afford, viz The works of righteousness and mercy amongst men, which justified
his faith, and showed his religion to be pure and undefiled, Jam. 1.

3. He is a Blasphemer that speaks evil of dignities, and of those things which
he knows not, Jude 8.10. If so, let them take heed to themselves, who are
clouds without water, wandering stars, etc. That place seems to be understood
of those that took upon them to be guides and teachers to others (for a cloud
guided Moses, and a star the wise men) who pretending to be divinely sent and
commissioned, yet speak evil of those dominions and dignities, those higher
discoveries which they cannot comprehend. As for our Author, his thoughts of
God were raised together with his discoveries of him, he owned truth in the
power of it; 'twas only the traditional customs which many place their Religon
in, which our Author did decry, upon which account Christ himself bore the
brand of a Blasphemer before him.

4. The Scriptures were owned by him, as given by inspiraration; yet the bare
letter not rested in, but the truth and power being the treasure hid in the
field, sought after. Yea 'twere well if men were single in their adhesion to
the Scripture, not respecting so much any formal or worldly interest, as the
equity of those rules and directions therein contained; the Majesty of which is
such, that they have been admired even by Heathens, an instance we have in our
English Chronicle, K. John sent Ambassadors to the King of Marocco in Africa
proferring him to renounce Christianity, and to receive the Mahumetan religion
from him. The King made answer, that he had been lately reading St. Paul's
Epistles, where he found so many excellent things, that if he himself had been
without a Religion, he would have chosen his; and so dismissed the Ambassadors.
Math. Par.

Yet it is an usual artifice of Satan in all ages to set up the letter of a
thing, against the truth and power of it, yea no opposition so fierce, as that
which is managed by the man of Form, against the true spiritual worshipper.
It Is not enough for men to urge the letter of the Scripture for such or such a
practice, lest they can show the same spirit animating and enlivening their
practice, which was in the primitive times; otherwise the practice is not the
same, but another from it, because acted in another spirit, the spirit being
that which gives its true being and denomination to each part of spiritual
worship, and when the outward practice was abstracted from its primitive and
original spirit, and graffed on men's own spirits, then came in the Antichrist,
and the deceivablenss of unrighteousness. And though the letter of the word (in
some sense) is a Skreen to secure Antichrist, yet the spirit of the Lord in his
more discerning servants will find him out.

5. As is the Scripture, such are the Ministers of it, (i,) such as act in the
truth and power, or in the form and notion only, when Christ appeared, he set
himself in directest opposition against the Pharisee (i.) the Minister of the
Law, and was in that sense an Antiministrist, as having a more excellent
Ministry to hold forth to the world; the first Ministry of the Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, was not denied by our Author; but how it could
be continued during the Apostasit, or how and when renewed, are questions and
cases not so clearly stated, but that they may, well admit of doubts and
scruples, especially since the gifts which accompanied the first Ministry are
ceased; and our Author was of this mind, better no Ministry then a pretended
one.

6. After Ministry follow Ordinances, which our Author acknowledged he was not
against or above, but under and below, as not perceiving the power of those
primitive institutions exerting themselves in the performances of Christians
now a days; which may seem to have more of truth in it, if we consider how
fruitless, as to the true fruits of the Gospel, which are self-denial,
self-resignation, renovation of the corrupted state of man. etc. outward
performances as managed by us are? All professions, though never so different
and contrary one to another, have their zealots, some more devoutly affected
then others, as to the strictness of their outward rights and ceremonies; What
do ye more then these? said Christ to his Disciples; where is the signal and
characteristical difference betwixt your exactness and theirs? Are you strict,
so are they? are you often in your performances, so are they in theirs? What
renovation of spirit, what self-denial appears more in you then them? If none,
then certainly you are not baptized into the true Gospel Spirit, you have not
the power of Gospel Ordinances. The humblest and the knowingest Christian, such
as this Author, is most sensible of his own darkness, pride is the daughter of
ignorance, because we say we see, therefore our sin remains.

6. Yet in this darkness he had rather sit down and wait in silence, then be
beholding to the pretended light and direction of deceivable guides; upon which
account, The Doctrine of the Trinity, as explained by the Schools in
personalities, subsistences, etc. was not perfectly owned by him, One Faith,
one Lord, one Baptism, were the Three great Articles of his belief: neither did
the Lord contain himself within himself, but was made manifest in the flesh of
Christ, according to that (God was in Christ reconciling etc.) and does
continually work in the hearts of his people by his spirit. Neither could he
see how the Doctrine of these distinct personalities and subsistences, could
accommodate their design, who first broached them in order to the clearing (as
is supposed) the Doctrine of Christ's satisfaction to the Father in that sense
as they define it. For if God were in Christ, that God was the Father, for God
is one; it is not one divine nature in Christ satisfying another in the Father
satisfied, but the Father in the Son. And if the essence be the same, how can
the personality make a difference?

8. And indeed the opinion of our Author, as to the satisfaction of Christ's
death was accounted none of his lightest errors: There is a threefold
difference concerning the death of Christ.

1 Some affirming it to be sufficient for all, but intentionally only for some.
2. Others intentionally, as well as sufficiently, for all, but actually to some
only. 3. Others intentionally, sufficiently, and also actually for all, of
which opinion, Origin was the chief, viz. That the whole creation should be
redeemed from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God, that as the whole creation came forth from God, so at last after the
rebellious part of it had been punished for a season for its misdeeds, it
should be released, and taken up into the same glory, that the Saints or
obedient part had entered into before; so that everlasting fire and everlasting
perdition, were expounded by him, not for a perpetuity, but a long duration of
years:
The first of these opinions opposes the second, the second the third. Our
Author had not discovered much of his mind in this latter opinion, which if it
be not true, yet is in it self desirable, in regard a good, the larger it is,
the better; and Plato could say, That God being a supreme good, there was no
envy in him to any of his creatures, but rather a desire that all should be
made like him.

These were the reputed crimes and heresies charged upon this Author.

If any object, he discovered lightness and vanity of spirit in some phrases
and expressions in some of his discourses.

I shall answer, 1. It is not good to set up ones own spirit, as a rule for the
spirits of all other men, considering the various outgoings of one and the same
spirit in different Saints. 2. No doubt the Prophets themselves in some of
their expressions, did not in all things comply with the gravity of the common
dialect, then in use amongst the people. 3. He acknowledged himself to be in
Babylon; as well as other Saints, no marvel then if there were some spots in
his Moon, yea let us consider rather how much he wrote well, as what (we
conceive) he wrote amiss.


J. W.

On Mr. William Erbery deceased.
THe Choycest still! There Is wisdom in the Mower,
To skip the Grass, and Sith down only Flower:
Had thou been low and creeping, thou had stood;
It Is Fatal to be Eminently Good.
But why do we complain? Art guides the hand,
Who would not choose the Best, when All do stand,
Amongst Kish's sons, the Prophet calls out Saul,
Death shakes the Tree, none but the Ripest fall.
How are our hopes post pon'd? we spied the Ray
Of Gospel Sunshine breaking in thy day,
Shrunk in thy fall; of which thy Life may be,
Not (what we thought) the dawne, but Prophecy,
When Future age in thy discoveries skilled,
Shall Live Thee over again, Thou Wilt be fulfilled:
And yet we hardly can conceive the Fate,
That single Saints should live up to thy Rate,
Pattern for Ages and Administrations,
He Will that Example Thee, had need be Nations:
Thou Wilt bankrupt single ears by thy rich growth,
When the whole Harvest comes, 'twill speak thee forth.
Mean time live Pattern great, write Type and Rule,
Thy Spirit, next to Christ's, is Christians School,
Such sweetness, meekness, such humility
Transcending mortals, speaks thy race on high.
If Supreme good define it self by Love,
How near to that High Orb did rhy soul move;
Who did embrace the Christian, One in all,
Both Presbyterian, Congregational:
And at same time thou did the Saintship sever
From the Opinion, This fails, That shall never.
Chemist of Truth and Gospel! Thus the Sun
Extracts from Rose and Thistle both his own;
And that refines, concocts, and then lets down
In dewy blessings on the parched ground;
Such was thy Spirit, exhaling Influence
Returned far richer then it went from hence,
Full ought thou borrowedst Oar and Embryon wild,
Thou paidst it Gold, and a well fashioned child:
For why? Thy larger soul took the dimension
Of every several sect and apprehension,
Hammering, refining, purging out the dross
Till Saint was saved in the Opinions loss
This work was Thine: he will that the errors mend
Of every Form, must all Forms comprehend:
His equal judgment is most like to abide,
Whose interest Proselytes to neither side.
Great was their guilt, who to embase thy worth,
Amongst rank of high offenders set thee forth:
Thy pardon they no sooner sought then found
Truth through thy sides, received the greatest wound.
Dear Truth requires such scandals of each kind
Should answered be (no foe like zeal that is blind.)
Take them in order: First some did not shame,
Loose, irreligous to vote thy name,
Arraigning thee Champion to impiety:
But thy strict life gave such reports the lie:
It Is true, uncasing formal righteousness
Which decks it self in strictest letter-dress,
Thou did some ways prefer the open sinner,
Apposing course offenders to the finer.
Yet thou herein did countenance the profane,
No otherwise then Christ the Publican.
He that for this shall judge or censure thee,
Is of his brother-sect, a Pharisee.
Item: Thou did not Prayer methodize,
As Jews to morning and evening sacrifice:
Devotions ^^m'd from hours and minutes date,
Speak an embondag'd and a legal state
Free was thy spir^t prayed always, always praised,
Proyer is desire not uttered but raised.
Pesides thy sacred skill held it not fit
To make the sou^s outgoings Things
Or Languag'd eloquence; It Is prayers wrong
To prostitute it to a common Throng
Thy sighs not voyc'd or worded were, yet praid
Moses most fervent was, when nothing said.
Thirdly, thy knowing soul could not epsy
True Gospel Order, Faith, or Ministry
brought forth in power; how can the Sun be seen,
When Customs and Traditions cloud between?
'Twas thy life's toil, thy choicest interest
To bring such false professions to the test,
Launcing, corroding deep the formal man,
Yet meant'st not Satyr, but Physician:
Some froward patients wracking thine intent,
Feared Persecution whence 'twas never meant;
'Twas an ill comment, wrath and ire to expound
when Text was Love, and healing of the wound.
Caetera desunt. TO THE MINISTERS of the Church of ENGLAND, and NEW ENGLAND
CHVRCHES.
THe two great Mysteries (read in Scriptures, which the Spirit is now
revealing) are Christ, and Antichrist; the Mystery of Godliness, Rev. 10.7.
Rev. 13.18.
and the Mystery of Iniquity: Christ is the Mystery of God, Antichrist the
Mystery of Man. God manifest in the flesh, Immanuel, Jehova-Tzidkenu, the Lord
our Righteousness, God with us The wisdom and power of God in us, is the
Mystery of Christ, Christ in us, Christ in a Mystery men know not, and godly
Christians will not acknowledge. This also is the Mystery of Antichrist, Man
manifest in flesh, Man with us, Mat. 16.23. Isay 2.22.
and in us, the Righteousness of man, Man magnified and exalted, Flesh and the
goodliness thereof set up in us is Antichrist indeed: for as the number of the
Beast is the number of a Man; so Man alone exalted in the goodlinesse of flesh,
is the Man of sin, the Woman upon the waters, the great Whore* the wisdom and
power of Man is the Mystery of Antichrist within us, which men know not yet;
but God is now manifest in flesh, and beginning to appear in Men, that neither
Man nor flesh may appear any more, but that all being swallowed up in God, God
may be all in all.

The time was, when Kingdoms and Churches were the two Temples in which these
great Mysteries, dwelt and were discovered. Man was most manifest in Kingdoms,
when Kingdoms were merely civil the wisdom and power of man appeared most in
Kingdoms. So God was most manifest in Churches, when Churches were wholly
spiritual, the wisdom and power of God was all in all in Churches: But when
Kingdoms came to be Christian, then Kingdoms began to be Churches, yea Churches
came to be Kingdoms and National Churches began; then also Antichrist came to
be great, Babylon the Great, the great Whore began to appear; when the world
might see Man sitting in the Temple of God, 2 These. 2* 4.
and the Man of sin worshipped as God, when the wisdom and power of Man was set
up as the wisdom and power of God the in Churches of Christ; and Christian
Kingdoms, because they were Christian, would needs appear and Act as Churches,
to judge of the things of God, and to order all things in the worship of God,
whereas they had nothing to do but with the government and outward good of Man.

Thus the Man of sin was revealed; for though God be all in all, and there is
no wisdom nor power in Man, but the wisdom and power of God; yet man at his
best being but a Beast, Psalm. 49.20. Jer. 10.14.
and every man brutish in his knowledge; Man, I say, misapprehending himself,
apprehending himself to be something, and not God in him to be all, and his
Being in God alone, but willing to be wise, and as God to know good and evil,
having had his eyes open to see some power and strength in himself, is
immediately stripped, made naked, and appears nothing now indeed but a Man of
sin, a mere man, made naked, not clothed with God, Act. 8.9. 2 Cor. 3.18, 19,
20.
nor God all in all: for the man of sin is man deceiving himself, seeming to be
something, to be some body, to have some wisdom and knowledge in himself;
whereas God in truth is the wisdom and knowledge of Man, and man is nothing but
a beast (as the Beast is the number of a Man) and there is no difference indeed
between Man and beast, but as God is pleased to appear variously in both: for
as both were of one days making, so God can so appear in man, that man shall
appear as a beast, and eat grass like an ox, as Nebuchadnezzar was: and God
can so appear in a beast, and be manifest in an Ass, that an Ass shall speak
as a man, Dan. 4.33.
yea wiser then the wisest of men, as Balaam's Ass, Number. 6.22, 28
that spoke so rationally, that it reproved or convinced the madness of the
Prophet: what is man then? 2 Pet. 2.16.
even the wisest, as the Prophet, all his wisdom and knowledge is but as a
brute, a Beast, as the scriptures speak; yea, Prove. 30.2.
more foolish then the Ox or Ass, only as God is acknowledged by Man to be that
wisdom and knowledge in Man: Else, it is but a man of Sin, the Great Whore, a
sinful Woman; (for sin is nothing but the deceit and transgression of Man,
deceiving himself, as the Woman's sin was in being deceived, and first in the
transgression:) This Man (I say) deceiving himself, is the Man of sin, or the
sinful Woman, the great Whore, who seems to be the wife, and to her husband
alone, as man should be to God, and as the Church should be to Christ, but as
God not being all in all with Man, that is, the Man of sin: So the adulterous
Woman, the great Whore, is none else but the Apostate Church, which seems to be
the Spouse of Christ, and one flesh with God in her, her head and husband; but
joining with Man, and with forms invented by Man, cleaving to the traditions
and teachings of Man, to the wisdom and power of Man, the Spouse becomes a
harlot, the Church the great Whore.

Indeed, the mystery of Antichrist, the mystery of Man is manifested in every
Saint; but the mystery is most manifest and appears visibly in every
particular Church; for as the Church being in Spirit was thereby called Christ,
1 Cor. 12.12. John 14.19.
though a Saint may be so called also, Christ being in every one, and every one
in Christ; so Antichrist appears most visibly in particular Churches, or in
Saints joined in that fleshly fellowship, where the Spirit of Christ or
Manifestation of the Spirit not appearing, the Church must now be called
Antichrist, the Man of sin, the great Whore.

How the Church came to be thus Apostate, and when the Apostasy began, I have
not time at present to declare, this secret depending much on what the mind of
the Spirit shall make out in the Saints, and what may be learnt by
Ecclesiastic History; by both it is manifest, that the manifestation of the
Spirit in manifold gifts given to the Church, ceasing with the Apostles, was
the first beginning of Apostasy; the Apostle John lived about one hundred
years after Christ, and the seven Churches of Asia (types of the apostate
Churches) stood up a little longer; but before the two hundred years complete,
the wisdom and power of man so prevailed in the Church, the inventions and
traditions of Men were so many, superstitious and childish ceremonies in
Churches that of the British in Wales being the first Christian Church in the
world, long before the Papal Church in Rome; I say, the Apostasy of those
Churches was so visible, the pride of their Ministers so vile, Spelmanantiq.
Britanic.
the power of their Synods in Glamorgan and Monmouth-shire so prevailing over
the Gentry and petty Kings of that Country, the canons of their Clergy so
potent, yea the Churches there and then so carnal in all superstitious
Ceremonies both Jewish and Heathenish, as never was more gross in the midst of
Popery afterward.

How this Apostasy prevailed and became so powerful, History will tell you,
that Antichrist never came to be great, till Kingdoms began to be Christian,
and Christian Kingdoms, because they were Christian, would needs appear and act
as Churches, call Councels and Synods, condemn Heresies. Judge of the Truth and
Mysteries of God by the gifts of Men.

When Kingdoms came thus to be Churches, then Churches began to be Kingdoms.
That is, the mystery of Antichrist and Man of sin was then also working, when
nothing but the Spirit, nothing but the wisdom and power of God appeared in the
Churches of Christ; I say, then the Mystery of Man, the Man of Sin did work,
then the Churches did begin to act as Kingdoms; yea, the very Apostles aspiring
to a Prelacy, would needs exercise authority as Kings and Rulers of the
Nations, Luke 22.24.
and the Elders (not only to seek pre-eminence as Diotrophes) but to Lord it
over Gods heritage, or Clergy, for so the Church was called, 1 Pet. 5.1, 3.
though afterward the Elders or Ministers appropriated that name to themselves;
for they indeed alone would be the Church, as the Pope with his conclave
Prelates in their Convocation; and Presbyters in their classis call themselves
the Church; yea, the Elders of Independent Churches also have all the power,
and do Lord it over their Churches, though the Churches carry the name.

But after that, when He that did let was taken out of the way, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.
that is, when the Spirits presence and power from on high in manifold gifts
then appearing, which did let and hinder the wisdom and power of Man to be so
prevalent in the Primitive Churches; I say, when that manifestation of the
Spirit, that which did then let, was removed, then the Man of sin was revealed,
then the wisdom and power of man appeared visibly in the Churches.

I will not mention now the Papal Churches, where the Popes save reigned as
Kings and Emperors, yea, were called Gods: Neither will I mind the Episcopal
Churches, when Prelates domineered as Lords, not only Lording it over Gods
heritage, but as spiritual Lords in the Civil State.

I pass by also the Presbytery; their Sun being set at noon day, their
Directory of Worship, Confession of Faith, Classical Government, their large
and little Catechism, with all those great works, being even at an end.

The Independent Churches are those my spirit has been most carried out
against these two last years, but could not come forth in a public contest
till now they are come to power, carried up in pomp and state, and fleshly
glory; whereby they discover themselves by their delicacies, to be indeed the
Great whore, deceiving a world of men, their Forms being more refined, and her
flesh fairer, for they are men of great Gifts and Grace too, this being that
purple and skarlet, and precious stones, Rev. 17.4.
the golden Cup wherein they carry their abomination, and cause the Kings of
the Earth (men of highest place and choicest parts) to drink the wine of her
fornication, i. e. Their false worship and Forms of Doctrine, which are the
Fornications or flesh of the Whore.

I will not repeat all that I have written, but this (with God) I shall make
good to the world, that These are no true Churches of Christ, not Zion, but The
whore, though they seem and speak as the Spouse; yet are they not like the
Gospel-Churches, neither in Spirit nor Form, No Ordinance among them in the
letter, much less in spirit according to the Gospel.

For indeed, the first Gospel-ordinance, or that which constituted the Church
in a Gospel Order, was the baptism of the Spirit; this being not the bare
presence of the Spirit, for so all the saints under the Law had the Spirit: but
the spirit in a Gospel-sense was not yet come, or (as it is in the Greek) The
Spirit was not yet, John 7.39.
til Jesus was glorified. Again, the abundance of the spirit was not this
baptism of the spirit; for the Prophets had thus the spirit of Christ, and
Christ breathed the holy spirit on his disciples after his Resurrection; but
the baptism of the spirit was not till after the Ascension, 1 Pet. 1.11. Jhon
20.22.
Act. 1.5. The Apostles, with all the disciples, 120 by name, were assembled
together, yet were they not in a Church State, not constituted in the order of
a Gospel Church, till they were baptized with the holy spirit, Act. 1.15. and 2
47. yea, the Apostles themselves, who had a call and a commission from Christ
to teach all Nations, and to baptize believers, could not go forth to perform
either till the baptism of the holy spirit was come upon them, Act. 2.38.
Therefore the baptized churches are very carnal, in crying out to their
ignorant disciples, Oh, you must obey the command of Christ, and Christ's
command is, that believers should be immediately baptized, etc. Act. 8.6, 38.
Act. 9.18. True, if there were a Minister who had the manifestation of the
spirit, as all (who baptized) had. But again, the first command of Christ
before baptism was this: He commanded them that they should not depart out of
Jerusalem till they were baptized with the holy spirit not many days hence,
Act. 1.5. If the saints could stay a while, and wait for the spirit, not
departing from Jerusalem, Rev. 21.3.
(that is, God dwelling with men) if men could be content with God alone, live
in God only, behold God dwelling in them, and they in God: they had not run so
fast into the Church, nor the churches hastened to send forth their Ministers to
baptize: Isa. 52.11, 12.
there being no Gospel order nor ordinance among them.

The Gospel Order was in these three things (as the Temple had three parts) the
first is the manifestation of the spirit in manifold gifts, 1 Cor. 12.7. Mark
16.18. James 5.14. Secondly, A Ministry of the spirit, with gifts given by the
laying on of hands, 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.11. 1 Timothy 4.14. Thirdly, The
administration of the spirit in all the Ordinances of the Church, which were
not only Baptism and Breaking of bread; but a Psalm, a Doctrine, a Tongue, 1
Cor. 14.26.
an Interpretation and Revelation: all these also were the Ordinances of Christ
for the edifying of the Church; but the present Churches have not any one of
these, not some of them in name or show; therefore sure the edifice is fallen
into a confusion, into a Babel, and the Churches must needs be in an Apostate
condition.

The Apostacy foretold by the Apostle then began, when the manifestation of
the spirit ceased, when the ministry of the spirit was cast down, and when that
administration of the spirit was trodden under foot: and this is a sufficient
notoriety or visible sign that all Church Ordinances were changed into a
confusion, or fleshly performances, when the spirit did so visibly disappear,
and the Gospel Order to be found no more.

First, The manifestation of the spirit in manifold gifts ceasing is spoken of
by John, Rev. 7.1. where the four winds are held in, that it should not blow,
etc. the four winds being nothing else but the fullness of the spirit, rushing
in as a mighty wind at first on the Primitive Church, Act. 2.2. and remaining
still in the Churches of Christ, till the Church came in to spiritual Babylon:
Therefore the four winds begin to blow, when the people of God are brought from
thence, Ezekiel. 37.9.

Secondly, The Ministry of the spirit cast down is also signified* Rev. 9.1.
where a star fell from heaven to earth, ver. 1. The falling star is the fall of
the ministry of the spirit sent down from heaven: now this fell on the earth,
when gifts of men (succeeding those spiritual gifts of God,) humane Arts and
Parts, studied Tongues, Interpretations and Commentaries, became the key of the
bottomless pit: for when the Mysteries of God were opened by the gifts of men,
in stead of opening heaven, they opened hell, and a smoke came out of the
bottomless pit darkening the Sun and air; both Christ and all the means to
communicate Christ were darkened thereby, ver. 2.

Thirdly, The administration of the spirit in all Gospel Ordinances after this
was trodden under foot, Rev. 11. Here the Temple is to be measured, etc. that
is, saints (though under this spiritual apostasy) were still owned of God, as
those who worshipped him in spirit; but as for outward worship and
Church-ordinances (which are the outward Court, ver. 2.) that was to be given
to the Gentiles; that is, not heathenish Gentiles, but Christian Gentiles; the
most carnal Christians have by continuance in all ages enjoyed the Ordinances
of the Church, both Baptism, breaking of bread: for 'twas given to them of God,
as suitable to their fleshly Spirits, rather then to the Saints in truth, who
are the holy City, whom these Gentiles and Christians in common have trodden
under foot to this day; yea, not conforming to Ordinances and Doctrines of men,
not coming to Church has been the cause still of the treading down of the
Saints in all Ages and in this also by the Churches themselves, who trample on
all not in fellowship with them, who cannot conform to their forms of Doctrine
and fleshly Ordinances; for so they are at the best, in their primitive and
purest order, even Gospel Ordinances were but legal things in truth, and
bodily exercises: but now being defiled through the spirits absence, they are
not only far below Christian duties, but the dues of Gentiles, and heathenish
exercises: For so the Protestants have taught that all things in the service of
God, not according to the Scripture, are not only superstitious but profane.
This I am now (with God) to prove that there is no Gospel-Ordinance in all the
Churches, neither in letter or form, much less in spirit and truth, neither
Baptism, nor breaking of Bread, nor Prayers, nor Preaching, nor a Psalm, etc.

First, Their Baptizing of Children is so childish a tradition, that both the
Baptized Churches, and some Presbyterian brethren have fully confuted their
folly; and yet these Churches also come far short of the truth of Baptism,
in the form and end thereof: both these we shall prove hereafter, that the
outward form of Baptism was not by dipping, but by washing the Disciples
feet; those that believed went down to the water, as twere up to the ancles;
for the first rising of waters up to the ancles, was but a type of that state
of Gospel-Saints, who should have the first fruits of the Spirit, Ezekiel. 47.3.
(for the first Churches and Apostles had no more of the Spirit) there-they
thus were baptized.

But Secondly the end of Baptism with water was not that it should abide for
ever, Joh. 14.16.
that was only the promise of the spirit; the spirit, or baptism of the spirit
was to abide, to continue and increase till the waters which were to the ankles
should arise to a fullness, Ezekiel. 47.
to a flood that no man might pass over; the baptism of water was to decrease
and die in time, he must increase, says John, but I must decrease: Job. 3.30.
but by the Apostacy, the Baptism of Christ, the Baptism of the spirit has
decreased, and the Baptism of water, the Baptism of John has increased and
continued to this day. Again, the Baptism of water which was in the Apostles
times, was rather by permission then by command, 1 Cor. 1.17.
an indulgence to the Church, that was for the most part carnal, as
circumcision, and many things of Moses, Act. 16.3. Act. 21.24, 26.
did continue for a time in the Gospel-churches; so the Baptism of John, the
baptism of water was not to continue no longer. Therefore the doctrine of
Baptisms, the first principle of Christ is not yet known by any of the
Churches, who like the whore sitting upon the waters, content themselves with
the Baptism of water, and that in a false way: the Presbyters baptize the whole
Nation; Independents, children of believers only; the baptized Churches dip
believers indeed, but do not baptize them in a true form, nor right end, not
owning baptism of the Spirit at all.

For this indeed is the baptism of Christ, the baptism of the spirit, which is
not a bare presence of the spirit in graces, or in some gifts, for so the
Saints under the Law had the spirit; yea, our Gospel Churches at this day come
far short of the Legal Church; 1 King. 13.4 2 Kings 1. 2 King. 2. etc.
for there were some gifts of the Spirit manifest, as of prophesying, and gifts
of healing, of signs and miracles; but the Baptism of the Spirit was that
manifestation or pouring forth of all the gifts of the Spirit, (not on every
believer, but) on every Church of Christ, that the Church came short in no
gift, 1 Cor. 1.7. This was the true constitution of a Gospel Church, the
Baptism of the Spirit, the manifestation of the Spirit in manifold gifts,
without which no Church can be in the order of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 12.6, 7, 28.
(...) 6.2.
For as the doctrine of Baptisms (not of water only, but of the Spirit
especially) concerned the Church in her members; so the next doctrine, The
laying on of Hands, did concern the Ministry, who received a gift by the
laying on of Hands. Independent Ministers make a mere ceremony of this, never
looking for any gift thereby, as Papists and Prelates did; but the Presbyterian
Ministers of Scotland are a little wiser then ours; for there being no Gift,
they lay aside the laying on of Hands altogether in ordaining their Elders.

Secondly, The Breaking of Bread or Communion, that was in the primitive
Churches, was not as it is in the present Churches, by taking a piece of Bread,
or tasting a sip of wine from the Ministers hands, (a mere popish superstition
to put such pomp and reverence on sacramental Bread and Wine) but breaking of
Bread was a full Meal, for the word is so; and The supper of the Lord shows the
same to be a full Meal, or Feast of Love, Jude 12. Acts 1.46.
for both is one, though old childish Fathers make a difference between the
Feast of Love, and Supper of the Lord; so often used; even daily, that is,
every First day the Church meeting to break Bread, Feast in Love, to Feast on
the Lord together, on the Lord in them; the Bread broken being the Communion of
his Body; 1 Cor. 12.22 Ephesians. 5.30.
for the Church indeed was that body of the Lord, the Church was Christ: This
the Church knows not, nor confesses how fully the Godhead is embodyed in their
flesh, how perfectly one with the Father, as Christ: They are afraid of this;
therefore as if there were but a part of God, and part of Christ in them, they
take a piece of Bread: thus they discern not the Lords Body, yea, they do not
show forth the Lords death, that is, dying to all things but to God, as Christ's
purest flesh was crucified to the Father: but this communion and mystery of
Christ, Hebr. 9.14.
and of his death, is not known nor taught by the Churches; alas, these are
heavenly things, too high for them who live in dead Forms; nay, they scarce
know the earthly thing, the Form of Breaking bread: this being as I said, a
full Meal, for they did break Bread from house to house, Acts 2.46.
eating their meat with singleness of heart, praising God; yea, they drank also
to the full, for some drank too much, or were drunk, 1 Cor. 11.21. which could
not be with a sip of wine; the abuse that was in the Lords supper, shows the
use to be, not to eat and drink to themselves, for so they had Houses to eat
in, ver. 22. but to tarry one for another, till all being come together sat
down in that spiritual Feast, feasting on the Lords crucified body, which the
breaking of bread, being a full Meal, did signify, as we shall show more fully
hereafter.

Thirdly, the next Ordinance was Church-prayers, these being as peculiar and
proper to the Church, and for the Church alone, as Breaking of Bread, Acts
2.42. They continued together in the Apostles doctrine, in fellowship, breaking
of Bread and Prayers. The Churches of Christ, could no more pray with the
world, then break Bread, or have church fellowship with the world. Therefore
neither Christ nor his Apostles did ever pray with preaching; Christ prayed
only in private or with his Disciples apart, Luke 11.1. And the Apostles
preaching to the world, never prayed with the world; for after Peter and John
had been in the Temple, at the hour of Prayer, preaching to them in public,
they returned to their own company in private to pray, Acts 3.1. Acts 4.23. The
Jews indeed had certain hours of prayer, of public prayer, (the Church being
National) so there was a certain place appointed for preaching, in the
Synagogue or Temple, just like our Churches now, (who are the Jews indeed to
be converted) they have none but common prayers still, hours of Preaching, and
hours of praying; yea, such Forms of Prayer, praying before Sermon, and after
Sermon, (a mere popish custom) with the Lords prayer after the first, and a
Priestly benediction after the second Prayer. For Blessing the people last of
all, is both Popish and Priestly, it being a legal Ordinance ending in Christ,
the great High Priest, Numb. 6.23. Luke 24.50.
who ceased this ceremony when he blessed his Disciples, and afterward came in
Spirit to bless his people, Acts 3.26.

But the mystery of Iniquity and Man of Sin, is not manifest in any thing
more, then in those Forms of prayer, public and private. We know the whole
power of popish Religion is in their much praying; so Protestants could not be
taken from it, till their common Prayer was taken from them by force: I cannot
commend this Reformation; for what are Men the better to be beaten from one
Form of Prayer to another, which is as bad, if not worse then that before,
because seemingly more spiritual, yet having not the power: The Churches
prayers how powerful were they, not full of words and fine expressions; but
there was a mighty power and appearance of God in their public prayers, see
Acts 4.31; Acts 12.5, 12. 1 Cor. 14.25. James 5.24, 15.

Besides that long praying which Ministers glory in, is both legal and
heathenish, 2 Chronicles. 6. Nehem. 9. Dan. 9. Mat. 6, 7. The Lords prayer, the
prayers of Christ, and the Apostles prayers were very short, succinct, plain,
and to the purpose, without such preambles, abundance, and vanity of words, and
vainglorious enlargements, Act. 1.24, 25. Act. 4.24.

The cause why the Churches err in all these after Ordinances, is, because they
continue not in the First, which is the chiefest Ordinance, continuing in the
Apostles Doctrine; and holding forth the form of sound words, Act. 2.42. 2 Timothy
1.13. And this we shall prove another time, that the Doctrine of the Apostate
Church, is not the Doctrine of the Apostles, but the Doctrine of Devils, and
yet these Devils being not evil spirits, but good Men, great in Gifts are
those Devils (...), as those heathenish Heroes of old were called (...); 1 Timothy
4.1.
so our knowing men, our Christian Heroes, Yea, (...) sometimes is Deus, (...)
John 6.70. Mat. 16.23.
holy Fathers, modern Divines and Ministers are those Devils: as the Worships
which great and good Men have set up in the Churches are called the worship of
Devils, Revel. 9.10. Let not this seem strange, for not only Ju das was called
a Devil, but Peter was Satan indeed; when he savoured the things of Men, more
then of God; therefore let not our Ministers be moved, if hereafter they hear
their services called Sorceries (as it is there, Rev 9, 21) and themselves the
Sorcerers of Egypt, deceiving the Nation in nothing more then in their Forms of
prayer. For their preaching begins to appear more powerless flat, dead, having
no discovery of God above the Common Form of Knowledge: yea, they know less,
and their preaching is more legal then once it was, by the judgment of their
wisest Hearers.

Yea, as there are not the prayers of the Church this day, as it was, neither
in power not Form; so there is scarce a Christian prayer in private among them,
though they are full, and flow with words at duty-times; yet God and their own
Conscience can tell how little they pray in their Closets, how loose their
petitions are in private, how seldom they retire into their own spirits; yea,
scarce ever do they thus seek the Lord, (as the Prophet speaks) that is, Jer.
10.21.
they seek not any nearer sight of the Lord, nor any new discovery of God in
them: Alas, New-lights are laughed at by these men, though God indeed be the
Father of Lights, there being more Lights then one begotten and brought forth
daily by our God and Father, who will shine in us more and more to perfect day,
till we have a full discovery of himself as he is; James 1.17.
that is, have the Fathers name on our Foreheads, Rev. 14.1.

And as the Churches err in their Forms of public prayer, so they fail in
their Forms of private Prayers, etc. For they pray not to the Father; nor,
secondly, in the name of Christ; nor, thirdly, can they pray in the Spirit.

First, They do not pray to the Father, but to the first Person in Trinity,
whom Christ never knew nor acknowledged; for had there been a second Person or
subsistence in the Godhead, coessentiall and coequall with the Father, surely
Christ should and would have worshipped him; but Christ never paid to any
Person but to the Father; and no Christian ever prayed to the Spirit till the
spirit of Antichrist (Veni Spiritus Sancte) came into the world. Not that I
deny the holy Trinity according to Scriptures; Col. 2.2. and 8 compared.
But (disclaiming all the Traditions of our Forefathers, and teachings of men)
I believe that God is Father, Son and Spirit, and that the Son of God, Mat.
28.19. Rom 9.5. 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.6. Isa. 96. 1 Timothy 3.16. Luke 24.49. Act.
1 4 1 Cor. 12.6, 7.
the Man Christ Jesus is God blessed for ever; yet both in a Mystery, which no
man can manifest or reveal but the spirit, Matthew. 11.25. Ephesians. 1.17. The
Father being none else but the one only true God, of himself and in himself,
inhabiting eternity: The Son being the same God and Father manifest in Flesh,
and dwelling among men; That one mighty God and Father powerfully going forth,
and exerting himself, or appearing in manifold gifts, and operations in flesh,
is the holy Spirit. Which things are not to be carnally understood, according
to the letter, as if God sent his Son, 1 Cor. 2.13. John 14 9. Heb. 9.14. 1
Cor. 15.45.
and the Son sent the Spirit; but comparing spiritual things with spiritual,
we shall perceive that the Son is the Father, and the eternal Spirit is both
Father and Son: so the Father is said to send the Son, where he himself appears
in flesh (from the beginning, in the fullness of time, or this day: Heb. 13.8.
for Christ is the same to day, yesterday, and for ever:) And Christ speaking
in the days of his flesh, that he would send the Spirit, is nothing else, but
that he who dwelt with them, should be in them; that is, when God even the
Father, who dwelt in his flesh, should be manifest in theirs, Joh. 14.17, 18,
19, 20.

Thus also I confess that Jesus is the Son of God, 1 John 4.15. Joh. 14.7, 10,
20 verses. Phil. 2.6.
and that the Man Christ is God blessed for ever: God even the Father dwelling
in him, and doing all in him, being all in all in him: His flesh being the form
of God, an image in whom the Godhead appeared to men; The Son of God being
nothing in himself, Joh. 5.19, 30. John 8 28. Gal. 4.19.
but the Manifestation of the Father, and could do nothing of himself, but as
the Father dwlling in him did all his works and words. Again, I conceive, the
Man Jesus Christ, the Man-God being in us; to be all in all to us, Ephesians. 3.19.
John 17.23.
God dwelling in us as in him, our flesh anointed and filled with the Godhead
as his, and we perfect in one with the Father as he. This is the true Faith and
Confession of the Son of God (if once revealed in us, Gal. 1.16. and 2.20.)
else how could the Son thus confessed bring us to God, God dwelling in us, and
we in him thereby, 1 John 4.2, 3, 15. compared.

I shall not now declare at large how the present Churches deny all the
Doctrine of God, and of Christ, etc. which (if God will) we shall do in his due
time; only we are now discovering all their forms of Worship to be false
(though some may worship the Father in spirit and truth) yet in form of words
they worship not, nor pray to the Father at all.

Secondly, They do not pray in the name of Christ, but as saints of the Old
Testament knew God in Covenant with them, not God in Christ one with them
(that is the Father:) So the Churches apprehend God at a distance, standing a
far off, below in the Temple, Heb. 10.19.
not able to enter into the Holy of holiest, into the Godhead himself; but call
upon his Name as great and terrible, Deuteronomy. 28.58 Gal. 4.6.
glorious and fearful (for so the Law presented God to Men) they have not the
spirit of the Son to cry Abba Father, the Son being not revealed in them, how
can the spirit of the Son be sent forth at all? I believe the Son is in them,
and the Spirit is there, though hid in their flesh: but they conceiving Christ
at a distance, Christ without them, as long ago in flesh on earth, and now afar
off in heaven from them, not nigh them and in them; They do not pray in his
Name, Romans 10.8. Joh. 16.23.
They go not as the Son to the Father, with that neernesse and confidence as
Christ did to God; but as strangers and forraigners, or as far off from God,
being very low in the flesh; They beg the Father still for Christ Jesus his
sake, as if Christ procured the love of the Father to them, or merited life and
salvation for them; or as if God would not hear them but for his worthiness
sake: words not spoken of in Scripture, neither has his Intercession any such
carnal sense. For as the Son is none else save the Manifestation of the Father;
so the Son can do nothing of himself, Joh. 4.9.10.
but manifest the Fathers love to us, and our life in God with him: He being
but the way to the Father, God even the Father being the end and ultimate
object of all our Christian knowledge, confidence, faith; yea, all that divine
worship and honor given to the Son is to the glory of God the Father, Phil.
2.10, 11. 1 Pet. 1.21. John 1.14. John 17.21, 22, 23.
it tends and ends in God, though by Christ, and through Christ; that is, thus:
We beholding in him the glory of the Father, full of grace and truth; I say, we
seeing Christ one with the Father, and his flesh full of God, God even the
Father being perfect in union with him, and he the beloved of God, living in
the Father alone: We see by this the same true in our selves (for he is the
truth and life as well as the way) and learning the truth as it is in Jesus,
Ephesians. 4.21.
the life of God is thus revealed in us also (God revealing his Son in us
first) so we pray in Christ's name, we pray as the Son to the Father, as those
who are perfectly one with God, the only beloved, and living in the Father
alone. This is indeed to be with Christ; Joh. 17.24.
this, to behold his glory, nor carnally in heaven, but here in us, in the
spirit.

Indeed the people of God, who lived under the Law, not knowing the Mystery of
God, and of Christ, nor their union with the Father, did worship God as at a
distance (for the Holy of Holiest they came not near) standing aloof off from
that glorious Majesty whose name was great and fearful, therefore they did not
yet draw nigh to the throne of grace, Hebr. 4.14, 16.
nor had that access with boldness as to the Father, but begged in all their
prayers for his name sake, for his own sake, sometimes for the Lords sake, Dan.
9.17.19. but in the Gospel state, no saint did ever pray so, nor did any
Christian prayer end as ours [For Christ Jesus sake,] neither is this speech
once named in the new Testament. We please our selves much with the often name
of Christ, though in truth we pray not in his name at all; The Apostles had not
the name of Christ sometimes in all their prayers, Act. 1.24.
yet prayed always in his name, in him, and through him they went to God, as
having the same fellowship with the Father as the Son, and seeing themselves as
full in the love of the Father as he.

Therefore he says, In that day ye shall ask me nothing, John 16.23. and yet,
at that day ye shall ask in my name, ver. 29. In that day, in the day of the
spirit (when the Son should appear in the Father only, and in them, John
14.20.) they should not ask of the Son, nor pray to Christ any more (as they
did indeed before) but they shall ask the Father in his name only; not as men
carnally conceive of Christ praying to the Father for us, and so they pray to
God for Christ's sake: nay, says Christ, I say not to you, that I will pray the
Father for you, for the Father himself loves you, Job 16.26.
because ye have loved me, and have believed ihat I came out from God: that is,
Think not that my Father will not hear you but for my sake; for the Father
himself loves you freely, as he loves me: and so ye love me not for my own
sake, but as I am the manifestation of the Father, as I came forth from God.

How falsely then is that Scripture (as other Scriptures of this kind)
translated, Ephesians. 4.32. Forgive one another, as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you? Whereas, it is no other in the Original then thus, as God in
Christ has forgiven you: For as God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself; so God in Christ is All, and Christ is all in all in us, and we being
in him, do ask in his name.

Thirdly, the Churches cannot pray in the spirit, Ephesians. 6.18.
not having that spirit suitable to a Gospel state, as we showed before; at best
all their prayers are legal, as the prayers of Saints under the Law; for
though they repeat never so often the name of Christ, they do but take the name
of God in vain, not knowing God in Christ, nor Christ in them, nor the spirit
of Christ, the spirit of the Son, which Gospel saints indeed had, else they had
been none of his: Romans 8.9.
But I believe many now are the Lords, that have but a legal spirit, but the
spirit of bondage, the spirit of a servant, not the spirit of a son, Gal. 4.1,
3. and 6. compared.
much less, the spirit of the Son: Saints now deceive themselves, in thinking
they have the spirit of adoption, the witness of the spirit, the seal of the
spirit, the earnest of the spirit. Alas, how little assurance had saints a
while ago? what long discourses were learned religious men fain to make, and
find out what witness the witness of the Spirit was; yea, best men were
scarce sure of their Salvation at last, or must have signs to know the people
of God, questioning they might be hypocrites; whereas no Saint under the Law,
even in time of desertion did ever doubt of his salvation: Psalm. 22.1. Psalm.
88.1.15. Job 13.16.
Nor Secondly, did they question whether they were the people of God or no: Nor
Thirdly, That they were Hypocrites; yet this was usual with our Gospel-saints
not long since, and it may be were the better Christians, then being sensible
of their bondage; but now Saints (like those Jews who counting themselves
free) see their liberty and freedom by being in a Church State, Ioh. 8.33.
as children of Abraham, and people of God therefore, for some conformity to
the Law, or to the Letter of Gospel commands; but I believe few have that full
assurance to the end; Heb. 36.14. Col. 1.23. Ephesians. 1.19.20.
few rooted and established in the Gospel; none know the exceeding greatness
of his mighty power, which is indeed the Spirit, the Spirit of the Son, the
Gospel spirit, the Spirit of Liberty; Alas, How can Christians boast of this,
that are in Babylon in Bondage under the Spirit of Antichrist? Antichrist being
in that power in the best Saints, who are in a far differing dispensation
from the Gospel state; Romans 12.12. 1 These. 5.16. 1 These, 3.10.
But to pray in the spirit was to pray continually, to pray without ceasing
(not twice or thrice a day as with do) but praying night and day; which was not
on their knees, or at a set time, or in a form of words though Christ did use
thus to pray, being a Minister of the Circumcision, and in the duyes of his
flesh living under the Law:) yet I conceive, that the private prayers of
Gospel-saints, was not in sound of voice, or form of words, but waiting upon
God in Christ for the supplies of the Spirit, and of all good things promised,
as may appear, Romans 8.25, 26. we know not what to pray for as we ought, but
the Spirit helps our infirmities with groanings which cannot be uttered. We
know what to utter, what to pray for in our formal prayers, yea we have the
form and pattern of all our petitions framed in ous heads before we utter
them; we know what to pray for, besides we have our set times, of our hours of
prayers, our duty times (as we call it) We pray morning and evening as David
and Daniel did use to do under the Law: Psa. 58 17. Dan. 6.10.
sure such duty times were never heard of in the Gospel times; therefore
praying in the Spirit scarce appears in these times, much less among those
who are most zealous for it.

Fourthly. There is no preaching in all the Churches, no preaching of that they
pretend, no Gospel preaching; for neither the doctrine of free grace, nor
discoursing of Christ after the flesh, is the preaching of the Gospel; Ephesians. 3.5.
the Gospel is a Mystery hid from ages and generations before and under the
Law, not manifested to the sons of men, till 'twas to the Apostles and
Prephets by the Spirit: but the Covenant of Grace, Free Grace, the forgiveness
of sin, etc. was fully manifested by Moses and the Prophets of old. Again,
Christ after the flesh is not the Gospel, 2 Cor. 5.16. Col. 1.27. Mar. 1.14.
for the Apostles would henceforth know Christ after the flesh, no more, not
Christ without us, but Christ in us is the mystery of Christ, and of the
Gospel also; yea, though Christ after the flesh did present the Gospel in
part, preaching peace to the Jews; the Kingdom of heaven being then at hand,
yet the Kingdom was not come, nor the Gospel fully preached till Christ came
again and preached peace to them that were a far off, and to them that were
high, Ephe. 2.17. this coming of Christ was not in flesh, for that was
crucified before, ver. 16. but he came in spirit, that is, it was Christ in the
Apostles that afterward preached, seeing you seek a proof of Christ speaking in
me says Paul; he knew Christ living in him, 2 Cor. 13.3.5. Phil. 3.8, 9.
and himself crucified with Christ, all his flesh and the goodlinesse thereof
crucified, his righteousness, his gifts and graces as dung in respect of
Christ in him, that is, God manifested in his flesh did slay all that flesh to
himself, that God alone might appear to live, or Christ living in him: and this
is also Christ crucified in him; I bear in my body the dyings of the Lord
Jesus; 2 Cor. 4.10. Phil. 3.11.
we see Paul preached nothing but Christ in him, Christ dying in him, Christ
^ising in him, not as if I had attained to the Resurrection of the dead. Indeed
the Apostles did mention Christ after the flesh, but yet so as thereby to
manifest the Mystery of Christ in spirit, of Christ in us, of God in our
flesh: Christ suffered for sins the just for the unjust to bring us to God: So
that all the Ministers of the Churches come too short in these three things
which the ministers of the Gospel had. First they had the manifestation of the
spirit in manifold gifts enabling them to preach the Gospel purely, 1 Timothy 1.12.
and with power, they preach the Gospel by the holy spirit sent down from
heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12.
which none of of our Ministers have. Secondly, They could clearly manifest the
mystery of the Gospel, and preach glad tidings to every creature under heaven,
to every man and woman in the world, Col. 1.23.28
presenting every man in Christ, and Christ in every man. Know ye not that
Christ is in you except ye be reprobate? that is, 2 Cor. 13.5.
men void of judgment to discern your spiritual estate, and being in Christ,
God being in every man, and every man's being in God. Act. 17.28. Thirdly, the
Ministers of the Gospel could not only manifest the mystery by scripture, but
without scripture they could make it forth in the works of creation, from the
writings of poets, the mystery of God even the Father and of Christ: For in
him we live move and have our being: and we are his offspring; we, that is
mankind, for the Poet means that; and the Apostle also, he is not far from
every one of us; yea in every Creature the Apostle could manifest Christ, Act.
17.27.
therefore the Gospel is said to be preached in every creature under Heaven.
Col. 1.23. The Heavens declare, (...).
yea day to day utters speech, Psa. 19.2. etc. So the Sun, Moon and Stars,
their sound is gone throughout all the world. v. 4. That is the sound and
speech of every creature; and as the Gospel is called the witness of God. 1
Cor. so the rain and fruitful seasons do fully witness God. Thus the
Apostles though to the Jews they spoke from scriptures, because the scriptures
were owned by them, Act. 14.17.
yet to the Nations, who denied all scriptures of the prophets, and knew no
other then the poets, and their own profane authors, the Apostle I say never
preached to them out of scriptures; for to what purpose was it to tell the
heathen of Moses, the prophets and the psalms, or to preach of their sins (as
out New England Ministers do to their Sagamoores very simply) but as the
mystery of the Gospel preached by the Apostles could not be read in Scriptures
nor learnt by man at all, but only as it was Revealed in them by the Spirit, so
they spoke; yea, the Speakings of Christ out of Scripture was only as a
Minister of the Circumcision, Luke 4.17.
First reading a Text out of the Law, etc. as all our Gospell-teachers can do,
they cannot preach without a Text out of Scripture, they have not the
manifestation of the Spirit; neither can they manifest the mystery of the
Gospel, the mystery of Christ in us, of God manifested in our flesh, they
cannot present every man in Christ, and every man living in God, and God the
Savior in all men, etc. these glad-tydings there is no Minister can preach to
any people (much less to every creature, to all Nations, Ioh. 1.9.
having no gifts of tongues or interpretation) they cannot preach the Gospel to
those who deny Scriptures, Ioh. 4.12.
they cannot convince any man by the light in them, which is no other then
Christ in them, nor hold forth Christ from the appearance of God in the world,
from the light of the world that is in them, from inward experiments, from
outward providence, from the writings of Poets and profane Authors; yea, from
all the Creation. Therefore it is plain there is no preaching of the Gospel by
any Independent-Church or preacher whatsoever. But still our Ministers cry, Do
we not preach as the Apostles? did, not Paul and Peter hold forth Christ after
flesh? I answer again, The Apostles indeed did hold forth Christ after the the
flesh, 1 Because their Ministry was much in the Letter, having but the
first fruits of the Spirit, 2 They preached much of Christ after the flesh to
the Jews, proving him to be the Messiah by Scriptures: but to the Heathen who
know no Scriptures, nor expected the Messiah thereby, Christ after the flesh is
never named to them by the Apostles, but Christ only in Spirit, God in man's
flesh which they manifested, yea God manifest in the flesh of the Creation, as
we said before; for this is Christ in Spirit also. 3. Though the Apostles did
preach Christ after the flesh, yet not as the end, as the adequate or ultimate
object of their ministry, or of men's beleiving; but Christ being the only way
to the Father, by him men were brought to God, and by him did believe in God,
that all the Christian knowledge and faith of men might tend and end in God. 1
Pet. 3.18.
4. The Apostles were so much Ministers of the spirit; yea, could so minister
the Spirit to men, 1 Pet. 1.21. 2 Cor. 3.6. Gal. 3.5.
that in the man Christ Jesus they could manifest God, even the Father in
perfect union with Men, as with Christ, and so raise up believers from Christ
after the flesh; to Christ in spirit, to God in their flesh, as in his.
No Minister of the Churches this day has this ministry of the Spirit, neither
can they manifest the Mystery of Christ in us; but carry their hearers no
higher then Christ in flesh, and there leave them in the flesh, which profits
nothing: Joh. 6.63.
though God in his free grace and love takes up all his to himself, the
quickening spirit living in them, and revealing himself to men as he pleases.
Yet this we shall (with God) make good hereafter when we come to speak of
Doctrines; that the Churches know not the Doctrine of Christ, nor yet so much
as Christ after the flesh: for what was the Man Christ Jesus, but God in flesh,
the Savior of men? not the Man, but God in that man was Jesus the Savior. For
as God in Christ was the Reconciler, etc. 2 Cor. 5.29. so God in Christ was the
Redeemer of the world: God in him was the Head and Husband of the Church, God
even the Father was all in all in that flesh, brought forth of a Virgin; the
hypostaticall Union, so called, being not between the person of the Son and
humane Nature; but the humane Nature united to God even the Father was the
person of the Son. The preaching of the Gospel was thus to manifest God in the
flesh of men, as in the man Christ, and men in union with the Father as that
Man, that Man-God being in us, Act. 10.38, Isa. 8.8, 10.
because God was in him; for as God was with him, so God is with us, and God
with us is Christ, Immanuel. Without this knowledge taught of God, men preach
not Christ, but they preach Man, and themselves.

5. A Psalm was the music of Churches, and the melody of the Gospel but the
sound of the Gospel being not heard, how (...) we hear a Psalm sung in the
Churches: Indeed under the Law a Psalm was in ryme and meeter. Secondly in tune
and melody. Thirdly the multitude altogether did sing: but a Gospel Psalm was
no such thing, and the Churches of Christ had no such order; women were forbid
to speak in the Church, much less to sing. A Psalm then was a special gift of
the spirit whereby some one filled with the Spirit and word of Christ did
speak the praises of God with exceeding joy and full of Glory. I say it was a
special gift of the Spirit: how is it brethren? when you come together every
one of you has a Psalm, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a Revelation,
has an interpretation: let all things be done to edifying, 1 Cor. 14.26. The
Apostle does not there chide the Corinthians for their disorder, as speaking
together, but he commends their order and decency, ver. 40. that every one
spoke, that is, none spoke but according to the gift of the Spirit which each
had; some had a doctrine, that is, no common truth delivered, but some special
and glorious discovery of God, Esa. 29.24. again a tongue and interpretation
were two other gifts of the Spirit, and a Revelation, or the manifesting of the
Truth, that was long hid from the Churches, this was a gift, so was a Psalm,
not which every one had, no not all saints, but some had a Psalm, that is such
a one who was filled with the Spirit and word of Christ or Gospel knowledge. He
could sing, that is, speak the praises of God with exceeding joy; men think
they do not sing unless they make a noise like a bird, or tune their voice,
but to sing in the Gospel language is no more then to speak, Speaking to your
selves in Psalms, hymms and spiritual songs, making melody in your hearts to
the Lord; there was no tune in the voice but in the heart; no melody to men,
but to the Lord God; for to sing was to speak his praises as is plain, 1 Cor.
14 15, 16, Ephesians. 5.20. Col. 3.17. not that every speaking or praising God, is
singing; but such as was with exceeding joy; if any be afflicted let him pray,
if any be merry let him sing Psalms, Jam. 5.
let him express his mirth (the joy and melody of his heart) in the praises of
God, as those Re. 14.1. who had the Fathers name on their fore heads; i.e. who
had a full discovery of God in them, were as the voice of Harpers harping with
their Harps, ver. 2. none could sing that song but themselves ver. 3. now all
all can sing David's Psalms, the Churches songs, but those who sing the song of
the Lamb, have not David's harp, but the Harpes of God, the joy of the Holy
Spirit unspeakable and full of Glory. Rev. 15.2.


It Is too long at present to show how the Churches (as it was said of the
Princes of Egypt) do err in every work of their hand, Isa. 19.14.
erring in all their Ordinances, duties, days of Fasting, feasts of
Thanksgiving, conforming in all to the National Churches, but especially in
sanctifying the Lords Day. There is nothing they are more dark in then in this:
whereas the Lords Day is no more then the Day of the Lord, the Day of God, when
God shall reveal himself to men, and in them clearly, as John says of himself,
Revel. 1.10. I was in the spirit on the Lords day; that is, the manifestation
of God in flesh: when God did fully reveal himself in John, John was all in the
spirit, his flesh fell down as dead, ver. 17. as Isaiah and Daniel were both
undone, when they saw the Lord in glory appearing in them Isa. 6. and Dan. 10.
But how comes the Lords day to be the first day of the week; or the fourth
Commandment, speaking of the seventh day, prove the sanctifying of the first
day? Who can prove the change of the day by Christ; or that the Apostolic
Churches kept holy the first day as God sanctified the seventh? especially,
seeing the next succeeding Ages, even the primitive Churches of the first 300
years, kept the seventh day as the Sabbath; yea, celebrated the Lords day and
Sabbath together for a long time; (for the Apostacy presently succeeded the
Apostles departure.) Ignatius, being but about 100 years after Christ, shows
the same; After the Sabbath day (says he) let every one that loves Christ
celebrate the Lords day, the Queen of days, (for the Sabbath day was King, or
chief, as one expounds) Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. The celebrating of the Lords
day alone was first instituted by Constantine the Great, Hosp. cap. 9. page 27.
anno 300. Afterward it was established by the Laodicean Council, an. 364.
commanding Christians not to Judaise in keeping the Sabbath, but to work on
that day, and keep holy the Lords day, Hosp. Orig. Fest. cap 9. pa. 27. In all
this it is observed, that the Eastern Churches, which were the most part of
Christendom, did celebrate the Sabbath, as I said, and the Lords day together,
Socrates cap. 8. lib. 6. and cap. 21. lib. 6. Mr. Brierwood on the Sabbath,
against Mr. Bifield, page 77. Perk. 1 vol. on the fourth Commandment. But the
Romish or Western Churches would not have their Church Assemblies on the
Sabbath, as in all other Churches of the world: so the Centuries report, Cent.
4. c. 6. p. 477.

I am the more large in this, that Independent Churches may see their Judaisme
in their strict observance of an outward Sabbath, their simplicity in
sanctifying the first day of the week as the Lords day; Their ignorance or
connivance, not clearing those things which are so certain; Their conformity
with Popish Churches, Their carnal complying with the Protestant State
Religion; Their Laodicean condition, thinking they are rich, and have need of
nothing, that they need no Order, nor Ordinance, nor Officer; whereas they are
so poor, blind and naked, that they have no Gospel Ordinances, nor a Day at
all: but walking in the dark, deceive themselves and others.

The observation of the Lords Day therefore depends much on Popish Churches,
and the command of Christian Princes, to which the Independent Churches are as
conformable as ever Prelates were.

What I conceive of the Sabbath, I shall in a few words declare: 1. That the
fourth Commandment is mystical as well as moral; for there is a mystery in the
four first commandments, even the mystery of God is there manifest. In the
first Commandment God, the One only true God, even the Father is acknowledged.
In the second, Ephesians. 4.6. Col. 1.15. Heh. 1.3.
the same God and Father is known in the Son, the express or graven image of
his substance; and no other graven image is to be made of God, but the Man
Christ. In the third, God, even the Father, so known in the Son, cannot be
acknowledged, Ephesians. 2.18.
nor worshipped in spirit and truth, but by the Spirit; without this, whatever
men think of God and Christ, they take his name in vain. The fourth Commandment
holds forth man's spiritual rest in God alone so known in the Son by the Spirit.
And this indeed is the morality of the fourth Commandment, the Ceremonial part
thereof being the sanctifying of the seventh day, which was so commanded to the
Jewish Church (not as a law natural to all Nations, as other commandments are
written in every man's heart; but as a positive law to that particular people)
now not a Sabbath or a seventh day, but the Sabbath, and the seventh day from
the creation is that which the command speaks; contrary to all our Protestant
Interpreters, who teach, that the Christian Sabbath, or Lords day, is grounded
on the fourth Commandment.

Now this Sabbath, or the seventh day was merely ceremonial, as it is called a
sign between God and his people the Jews; that I the Lord sanctify you; and
that you are a people sanctified and set apart only for God. Therefore that
God is all in all to us and in us, and that we are to rest in God only and
alone in the true mystery and morality of the Sabbath, Prophets and Apostles
witness.

The Prophet Isaiah speaking of the Sabbath, says thus, Isa. 58. If thou turn
away thy foot from the Sabbath, doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and shall c
all the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor
him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
thine own words; then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, etc. Observe,
that the Sabbath indeed is nothing else but the Lord God rested on, and
rejoiced in by us, when we turn away our foot from the Sabbath, and turn to God
only: else he had said rather, If thou turn thy foot to the Sabbath, from
doing thy pleasure on my holy d^y: but this last is not so read as we do, from
doing etc. as if we were forbidden to do our pleasure on his holy day, on the
Sabbath. Nay, we are there commanded to do our pleasure, as the words read: For
the Sabbath should be our delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and we
shall honor him: For he himself is the Sabbath that is so honorable; the holy
day of the Lord is the Holy One, the Lord himself only whom alone we are to
honor in all our ways, works and words: for if God be all in all in us, it is
not our words that are spoken, nor our works that are done; but as Christ
says, The words that I speak, I speak not of my self, but the Father that
dwells in me, he does all the works: yea, verily the son can do nothing of
himself, John 14.10. John 8.28.
but as my Father has taught me I speak these things: this indeed is the
sanctifying the Sabbath, not to abstain from worldly thoughts and words, and
from working on the seventh day of the week, but to sanctify the Lord alone,
when he only is our All, when we are nothing, but he is our Being, and our
being in Him; when we do nothing, but the Father dwelling in us does all our
works. When we thus find not our own ways, nor speak our own words, nor speak
words, as it is in the Hebrew. Man neither speaks nor does any thing indeed, but
God does all, and is all in us.

This the Apostle holds forth to be the Rest, or sabbathkeeping of the people
of God, Hebr. 4.9. not as if this were ^o rest to be entered into in this life,
ver. 1. for we which have believed, do enter into rest, ver. 3. and what is
this Rest? When do we enter into this Rest? when we cease from our own works,
as God did from his, ver. 10. Therefore it is plain, that the seventh day or
Sabbath of the Lord, was a sign or type of the Lord himself being our rest or
Sabbath in truth, ver. 4. Yea, as the Rest which Jesus (or Joshua) gave to the
people in the Land of Canaan, was another type of this Rest or Sabbath, ver. 8:
So surely the Rest which Jesus Christ in truth did take in the Father, in the
Fathers dwelling in him, and doing all in him, was but a type of the same to
us, that we should be and abide ^n God, and God in us all in all, as in Him,
Ioh. 14.10, 19, 20. John 4.15.

But as Churches know not the mystery of Christ, of Christ in us, of the son
revealed in us, etc. for they know not the mystery and morality of the sabbath;
For how simple is it, what they say of the Lords day? as if the eight or first
day of the week were the morality of the severth or Jewish sabbath? as if
Christ's appearing so often after his resurrection on the eight day, were a proof
of his changing the Sabbath to that day, as if that day were now to be kept
holy, when as Peter with the Apostles went out a fishing on that day, Joh.
21.1, 2, 3. his appearing so often on the eight, or the first day of the week,
was rather to show, that the observation of the seventh was gone, as the
Aposties also meeting that day was no more. For as their assembling in their
Synagogues on the Sabbath day was only to preach unto the Jews meeting in
most multi udes on that day: so the Apostles usual meeting on the first day of
the week was merely for order only to set in order something in the Churches,
and to perform some Ordinances among them in the Spirit, 1 Cor. 16.2.
as breaking of bread* Act. 20.1.
etc. But we have preved and shall more abundantly (with God) that the present
Churches are in no Order of the Gospel, and have no Gospel Ordinance among
them, else they might meet that day indeed to break bread as another day of the
week to preach a lecture.

And truly for love and peace sake, I can rest and refrain from labor on that
day, not in conscience, but in a civil respect, that men might show some
kindness to the poor creature, that in mercy the beast might have some rest,
and that laboring servants might have a day to rejoice in; therefore I will
not trouble the State in this, but entreat them to consider their own liberty
and ours, not to the flesh, but in God alone.

There is a Scripture though not written in our Bibles, but it is in the
original (there being indeed no less then 15 several greek Copies of the new
Testament; I say the original copy reads thus, Luke 6. next to the 5 verse
this follows,

(...). Exemplur velustissimum in Italia ab amiti^ collatum Complutens.
proximum. Stephanns Gr. Test. at large.

That is on the same day (jesus) seeing a certain man working on the
Sabbath Day, said unto him, o Man, if thou did know indeed what thou do,
thou were happy: but if thou know not, thou art cursed, and a transgressor
of the Law; that is, if men knew the liberty of the Gospel and their Christian
Liberty in the Sabbath day indeed, they were truly blessed but if men do they
know not what, and wilfully offend, they obey neither law nor Gospel, but are
cursed in both.

It Is plain by all and has been proved from Scriptures, That Church Fellowship,
the last great Ordinance, indeed, Act. 2.24. I say that the fellowship of
Churches this day, is the fornication of the great whore, or wine of her
fornication: Rev. 17.2. Act. 2.13.15, 16. verse. Ephesians. 5.18.
so as the Baptism of the Spirit, the Spirit poured forth in the manifold
gifts was that new wine where with the primitive Church of Christ seemed drunk,
being filled with the Spirit: for the present Church having not this fellowship
of the Spirit, must needs appear as the whore, though seemingly the Spouse,
having saints in fellowship with them, their forms and false worships, the
wine of her fornication.

All this was typified by the Whoredoms of Israel, whose fornications and
false worships are so often published by the Prophets of the Lord the Prophet
Hoseas taking a whore to his Wife was a Type of this Hosea 3.1. The Prophet
(being a principal man, and chief member of the Church) joined with a woman
and adulteress, shows forth the adulteryes of the whole Church in all her
members and ministry, who look after other Gods, and love Flagons of wine,
that is false shows of the spirit; But see what a poor whore the Prophet takes
unto him, I bought her to me for 15 pieces of silver, for an homer of Barley,
and half an homer of Barley, Exodus 21.32.
ver. 2. Fifteen pieces of silver was but half the price of a slave; thus
saints embondaged to fleshly forms, value themselves at so low a rate, that
rather then they will be of no Church, they will be of any Church or fellowship
though never so poor and mean: yea, feed themselves with Ordinances, though
coming far short of the spirits presence or purest institution, that's also
signified, by an homer of Barley, and half an homer of Barley or as it is in the
Heb. Half of Barley. Barley is not the best for bread, and half an homer is
but a pottle at the most, a small measure; besides the grain is not pure, for
it is but half of barley, the other half of fetches, of cockle or chafe; this
is clear; the present Churches are content with the smallest measure of the
Spirit; how else dare they enter into fellowship before they have the fullness,
or Baptism of the Spirit? nay their Ordinances are not all the best; for the
Baptism of the Spirit was the first Gospel Ordinance, as Prophecy, a Psalm, a
doctrine, a Tongue, a Revelation, an Interpretation, were all for the Edifying
of the Church; these the Churches have not at all: and those Ordinances they
have, are but half of barley, there is a mixture, much of man, half is of
man's invention, of man's tradition.

Therefore I said unto her thou shall abide for me many days, and thou shall
not play the harlot, and thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be
for thee. ver. 3. the Prophet here speake^ in the person of God to the whorish
Church (that was so much for man, for the traditions and teaching of man, and
for humane additions to divine institutions or ordinances) well says God thou
shall abide for me many days, and thou shall not play the Harlot, that is,
when the Law was to be abolished, when the old state of the Legal Church was
to vanish, and a new state of a Gospel Church to be instituted, the Apostles
and Disciples were to wait for the Baptism of the Spirit, before they should
sit down in Church Fellowship, or perform any Gospel Ordinances, Act. 1.4.
Act. 2.47. yet their abiding or waiting then was not many days hence. But the
Church being since fallen away, and lying under the Apostasy having lost that
Gospel glory, and manifestation of the spirit in manifold gifts not appearing,
The saints are called upon to abide for God many days: to wait with patience
for the second coming of Christ, and appearance of the Great God, that was the
Lord their God, and David their King, ver. 5. For the children of Israel shall
abide many days (400 years says Junius) without a King, and without a Prince,
and without a sacrifice, etc. that is, all the days that men find themselves
in the Apostacy, they must abide for God, without any Ordinance or sacrifice,
without any Church Officer or King.

Yea, but the discoveries of God in the Saints in the later days (that is the
anointing) shall take off the yoke from off their neck, and the burden from off
their shoulders, that Saints shall be no more embondaged to fleshly forms, nor
burdened with carnal Ordinances, nor yoked to Church Fellowship any more. What
some Saints scoff at others, and others say of themselves, that they are above
Ordinances, I cannot judge nor condemn; but for my part, I do not profess my
self above Ordinances, but far below them in mine own feeling, though I may be
above in the favor and knowledge of God, yet as far as I know, I am below any
Gospel Ordinance, having not that manifestation of the spirit that was always
with them in the Churches, nor that presence and power of the spirit appearing
in me (as was in them) to carry me up from living in Ordinances, to live in God
alone; nor yet that testimony of the spirit to tell me, that in the use of
Ordinances as they are, I may be preserved pure from that uncleanness which
sticks upon them through the Apostasy; for if every thing in the Church is
counted unclean by God, which is not wholly according to his word, the
Independent purest Churches are not clean, not being conformed to the first
Churches of Christ in any Gospel-Ordinance nor Order, but mere forms and
confusion in all; therefore it is that I am thus a nonconformist still, and
separate my self from the Churches and their Ordinances as unclean. Common
prayers, and the prayers of Churchs are both alike to me, the Prelates weekly
Friday-Fasts, and the Presbyters monthly Wednesday-Fasts, yea the Independent
Feastings and days of thanksgiving, are but as the holy days of Bishops, so
is their Order, Ordination, and every Ordinance or work of their hands, says
the Prophet, it is unclean, as we shall show anon from Haggai 2.14. Truly 'twas
this that called upon me, Depart, depart, touch no unclean thing. For that life
and peace which once I found in Ordinances, is departed from me, and my self
dead unto them, as I believe many others are; though some Saints have still
satisfaction and sweetness in them, and God seems to accept their prayers: yet
this is no more then was before, when in our ignorance we used common Prayers,
and mixed Communions, etc. How sweet and satisfactory was God then unto us,
though the use of those carnal Ordinances was as unclean as the high places
were of old to the people of God. God appeared to Solomon in Gibeon, though
that great high place was never appointed by God for his people to worship in,
but was contrary to his revealed will, yet he appeared to Solomon as well in
Gibeon, as in the house of the Lord, 1 King 9 2. Thus the Lord God and Father
of mercies, who is free in his grace, abundant in goodness and truth, being not
bound up to means, might appear for a time even comfortably to his people even
in Gibeon, in corruptest forms and fellowship not that he aprroves them, but
that in his good pleasure he may manifest his everlasting love the more to his
people, whose life is in their blood, as well as when they are washed, and who
look as beautiful before God when they are black, as when white and ruddy, yea
the love of God is the same to the Saints however they are, it is not their best
performances that please him, but he is pleased and rests in his love, yea that
love may appear more to his people in lowest performances, then in highest
seize.

And surely though God may bear awhile with this singing of Psalms* yet the
time is come that he will say, T^ke away from me the noise of thy songs. Mark
it, it is but a noise that their singing makes, and it is the noise of Babel
confusion of tongue in all their Psalms; but God who has silenced that
Prelatick Pricksong, and is now silencing Presbyterian plain-song, will also
cause the songs of Independent Churches to cease; now indeed they have a jolly
time of it, here Fasts are turned into Feasts, their tears into triumphs,
'twill be quite contrary when their songs shall be turned to lamentation, their
mirth to mourning, their fullness to famine, and their forms to fire to be
consumed by the Spirit.

Now these are Babylons last Plagues, Death, Mourning, Famine, and Fire, which
all the people of God abiding in Babylon shall partake of, and as death is the
spirits absence from all their fellowships. So the spirits presence, (at the
second appearing of Christ shall torment their flesh, and burn up all their
forms as with fire; but mourning and famine comes before. First mourning, when
the joy of the holy Spirit unspeakable and full of glory, shall not be heard in
their habitations, but a fleshly carnal joy, built upon creaturely and worldly
contents, and complyances with worldly powers, all which falling, the Kings and
Merchants of the earth shall cry, alas, alas, that is, the principal men, and
Ministers of Churches shall cry and mourn because Babylon the great City is
fallen. Again, Famine shall follow their Feastings and days of thanksgiving,
for these are the Whores delicacies. Days of Fasting was a courser fare, fit
for their times of persecution; but now the Churches having rest and rejoicing
together, the Lord comes and disquiets the inhabitants of Babylon, turning
their joy into mourning, their fatness into famine.

For this all the Prophets point at, even an extreme Famine to come upon all the
Churches. That Is the extremity of Famine, when there is such a want of food,
that men will eat the flesh one of another.

Both these shall come to pass upon the Churches. First they shall be in want
of food, that is, the means of grace, as thep call it, shall not be any more
their meat, not give them any sustenance at all: indeed they may, as the
Prophet says, feed on the wind, and follow the Eastwind (that is the most
hurtful wind for cotn) they may as men in a dream, think they eat abundantly,
but when they awake their soul is hungry, for indeed their best food is but
ashes, the fire of the spirit having consumed all that was substance, strength
and life in the means. For behold the Lord, the Lord of Hosts does take away
from Judah and from Jerusalem, the Stay and the Staff, the whole Staff of
bread, and the whole stay of water. Esaias. 3.1. Judah and Jerusalem, are all the
Churches, the purest of them, bread and water are the least and lowest means of
sustenance, as breaking of bread, and baptism of water, has been the best
support of Churches, the stay and the staff upholding their fello^wships* and
some food they have found formerly in those means, though far short of their
primitive institution; but now the Lord, even the Lord of Hosts (God appearing
in wrath as a man of war against them) takes away all their provisions, even
the whole staff of bread, and stay of water, there shall be nothing in any
means of grace to do them good, or give them strength; and not only the means,
but the men of strength, men of parts and arts, yea all the gods of the earth
shall be famished, the Lord takes away the mighty man, and the man of war, the
Judge and the Prophet, and the prudent, and the Ancient and the Captain, and
the Counceller, and the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator, and the
honorable, all shall be so famished, that neither gift nor grace shall appear,
nor gift to govern or rule others, for they shall be babes and children in
knowledge, v. 4. nor grace to govern themselves, for they shall be oppressers
one of another, v. 5. This is the extremity of Famine when men oppress and feed
one upon another flesh; when such want of food, when men's gifts shall fail,
that they shall swear to be no Officers, nor bear any rule, nor take upon them
any place of preferment, yea though they be sought unto, yet shall they swear,
I will not be a healer, make me not a ruler over his people, for in mine house
is neither bread nor clothing.

It Is much that men judged fit to rule and bear sway in the world, should be so
poor and naked as not to have bread nor clothing: This famine and scarcity may
come in the letter upon those who are in highest places, who are fullest fed,
and walk in Scarlet; but sure 'twill be in the spirit fulfilled on all the
Churches, and upon all their ruling Elders, who knowing that all Authority, and
Power and Rule is going down at the coming of Christ, yet contend still about
Government, the government of the Church is the only controversy among the
Churches, not the great Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in flesh, no matters
of Doctrine or worship are questioned by them; but the Government of the
Church, whether the Church or Elders shall rule: This the Independent Churches
deny; though their ruling and teaching Elders be as proud as Presbyters; but
sure the time is come that men who are so much for Government and Rule, shall
swear they will be no Rulers, nor Ruling Elders any more, for I have neither
bread nor clothing in mine house, that is, they shall confess that they have
scarce enough for themselves, scarce so much knowledge and spiritual
understanding as to satisfy and instruct themselves, muchless to convince and
teach others. And as there is a famine on their gifts, so in grace they are so
famished, that they fall to oppress one another, that is to eat each others
flesh. That Is the extremity of famine which comes upon the Churches, as another
Prophet phraseth it, they shall eat every one the flesh of his brother, Zaoh.
13. this is spoken of the whole Church, and of all the Pastors or Shepherds, v.
who are called three Shepherds, for that was the number of those that were
eminent Teachers in the Jewish Church, as Junius shows; and these three the
Prelatick, Presbyterian, and Independaut Ministers, are the only men that have
been Teachers in this Church and Kingdom, now God will cut off all three in one
month. How? By setting them one against another, to oppress and vex, and eat
the flesh one of another; for as the Prelates have formerly eaten up the
Priests, and all that maintenance for the Popish Church which was in the Land,
so the Presbyters have eaten up all the livings and livelihoods of Prelates:
The Independent Ministry are now the third that feed on the flesh of
Presbyters, whose Preferment, Places, Privileges, and Parsonages, is now
become food for Independent Churches.

Yet the Famine is soarer, for not only mothers eat the flesh of their tender
babes, but the Fathers eat their children, and the children their parents, Ezekiel.

That the fathers eat the children is plain in the Churches: for whereas the
Apostle says that the fathers ought to provide for their children, as he
himself would rather work and labor night and day with his hands, then that
the Gospel should be chargeable to the Saints, especially the weak, now not
only the weak, but the world must be at charge to provide for the Fathers of
the Church, for our Preachers of the Gospel. But how the children can eat the
flesh of their fathers, is very strange, seeing the flesh of elder men is
wrinkled with age and watery humors* and worse for food then the flesh of
children: But so it is, though not in the Church, yet in the Kingdom, there are
men counted children, who eat up the flesh of fathers, Divines, Doctors,
Pastors, Teachers, and the flesh of Elders, all their forms of Doctrine and
worship, with their professed holy walking, is but food for babes and young
beginners in the Lord to feed upon, but to consume, as fire which is fed with
the fuel that it devours. For indeed there is none whom the Lord feeds with
understanding and knowledge, there is scarce a knowing Christian this day, that
grows in knowledge, though he be small, simple, yet he sees the vanity of
Churches, the emptiness of their Ordinances, then in the fall of their
Officers, their famine appears.

For as the Lord before takes away the whole staff of bread, and stay of water:
so they eat their bread by weight, and their water by measure.

This is much, that water which is so common should be drank by measure, and
the measure so small, but the sixh part of a hin, a hin being no more then a
pint. Yea the Prophet himself, the only Minister of the Church must eat his
bread baked with man's dung, which must needs make the bread unsavory and
unclean, v. 12, 13. and though the Prophet complains of this to the Lord, as a
hard thing for him to undergo, to eat bread leavened with man's dung; yet
nothing is granted to him but this, that instead of man's dung, he might prepare
and leaven his bread with the dung of a beast: this was but little better. All
this shows thus much, that the reprobate Churches eat their bread, and drink
their water with measure, whereas the Churches of Christ had the spirit given
without measure,: so the chiefest Ministers have nothing b^t what comes of man
to make and bake their bread withal, therefore their bread which they break
must needs be unclean, or as the Prophet calls it, the bread of mourners.

This mourning and famine of the Churches we shall speak of once more, when we
come to show the judgment of the great whore; but now our business is only to
make her naked; for this man chosen before to be a Ruler, swore, that as he had
not bread, so neither clothing in his house to cover his nakedness.

This naked estate which the Laodicean Church could not see, is nothing but the
discovery of her shame and secret parts. For this we shall see anon, not only
Babylon the great whores legs made bare, as that which is much spoken of by
the Prophets, to make bare her skirts, but even Zyon's secret parts must be
made bare also.

These secret parts are those spiritualities in men of parts, as we call them;
their Parts and Arts, and all their ability shall appear to be nothing but
emptiness and vanity, for that is the nakedness that the Famine also foretold.

What is this famine or hunger? It Is the vanity and vexation of spirit (out of
the darkness of understanding) whereby the Churches vex and fret themselves
that they cannot destroy all others who conform not to their forms.

This definition is clearly delivered in Scripture, and applied also here to
the Churches, as was showed in part before, of Ephraim feeding on the wind
that is vanity or emptiness, and upon the Eastwind that is vexing and annoying
the grouth of corn: As by hunger is there an emptiness of the stomach, and a
fretting of the guts with wind; besides, in famine men will feed on another
flesh, yea eat their own at last.

That which we said of the Churches eating the flesh one of another, is that
which we speak of here, their seeking to destroy each other, and others who
conform not to them, and this out of a darkness of understanding.

All is clear, Isa. 8.18. Behold, I and the children whom the Lord has given
me, are signs and wonders in Israel. Israel is the Church State, as those who
are given to the Prophet, are Saints carried forth to that glory which the
Prophet speaks of, even to God himself, from all dead forms, false Teachers,
and teachings of men. v. 19. that such Saints are secretly wrought against by
strong confederacy of the Churches, is proved before v. 7. for sure according
to man, here is much cause of fear, dread, and destruction to such Saints who
will not conform to their forms of Churches.

The Lord spoke thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me, that I should
not walk in the way of his people. That is, the Prophet could scarce forbear to
walk in Church Fellowship with them, had not God spoken by a strong hand, and
which held him from their societies; for who would not walk with so many
thousands in association, joined and gathered together? But those who are
instructed of the Lord, know that the gatherings of the Nations, yea of
National Saints, is for no other end, than as sheaves are gathered to be
thresht, or as dry sticks are gathered to be broken. Both these are Scripture
expressions, Mich. 4.12. Zeph. 3.8. the breaking in pieces of Churches, is that
which is here spoken of, Zech. 11.10. For as Judah and Israel are by Ezekiel
called two dry sticks, dead bones, so the Prophet here breaking his staff
Beauty, shows that the Lord is breaking his Covenant that he made with all the
people, that is, all the Churches are broken, for their Covenant which once
they thought and taught to be essential to the Church, that Church Covenant is
now broken; they are ashamed to call it so any longer: It Is now an Agreement or
Association. For as Church Fellowship is now called an Agreement of Saints to
walk in the ways of Christ: so when Saints differ, or some great controversy
arises, here is an association of Churches nothing differing from a Classical
or Provincial Presbytery, though the Independent Elders are not pleased to call
it so.

But what says our Prophet, Isay 3.8. Associate your selves O ye people, and
ye shall be broken in pieces, gird your selves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces, etc.

Formerly there was a gathering of Churches, but the everlasting Gospel shall
be yet preached by an Angel flying in the midst of heaven, with more freedom
and fullness of salvation, with more light and glory then the first Apostles,
who preached the Gospel, with the holy spirit sent down from heaven, which the
present Churches have not received, yet conceive they can preach the Gospel,
having not the gift of the spirit to manifest the mystery: but when Christ
shall come again in spirit, when Christ shall appear the second time without
sin to salvation: surely then death shall be quite abolished, and that last
enemy destroyed, and utter destruction shall be no more, for sin and evil shall
be seen no more, but salvation only, and life shall be again brought to light
with more glory then ever, as I shall show another time, in another Treatise
(with God.)

But now two parts of the Lords Land shall be cut off and die, two parts of
Gods people I count are scattered (from God) in gathered Churches, these shall
be cut off and die, till they come out of Babylon, till they return to God that
is, till they be gathered up to God; such Saints are said to live, whose life
appears in God.

The next Judgments are Mourning and Famine: this the Churches make to be the
excellency of a Christian, to be mourning for sin, and complaining for the want
of grace; whereas this is but the weakness of a Saint, the weak, low, and legal
estate of Christians, the Churches shall have enough of mourning and famine to
the full, while the Saints in the spirit shall be filled with joy, joy in God,
and feast on the Godhead dwelling in them: My servants shall eat, but ye shall
be hungry, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty, my servants shall
sing for joy of heart, but ye shall howl for vexation of spirit: and ye shall
leave your name as a curse to my chosen; for the Lord God shall slay thee, and
call his servants by another name, Esa. 65.13, 14, 15. These whom the Lord God
will slay, are the Apostate Churches which separate themselves, having not the
spirit, which say (not only to the world, but to Saints not in fellowwip with
themselves) stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holyer then thou, v.
5. These are said to remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, v. 4.
because they are dead, and the dead are there as in the Whores house before,
yea though they would build a house for God, Esa. 61.1. yet all their
sacrifices and ordinances are but as the cutting off a dogs neck, or slaying
of a man, because they see not God dwelling with men, the great God appearing
in the least and lowest Saints, v. 2. whom yet they hate, casting out their
brethren for his names sake, that is, because of God manifest in them: but he
shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed, v. 5. they shall leave
their name, their name is a curse to my chosen, that is, the legal Churches
shall be left as accursed, lying under the curse of the Law: But the chosen or
elect of God as they are called Esa. 65.22. (not saved persons, for such may be
deceived by false Christ's, that is, by false Churches, for the Church is Christ
in truth) such elect or chosen persons I say, for whom it is impossible to be
deceived by those false Prophets and Apostate Churches, not deceived by all the
fairest forms and flesh of the Whore, these servants of God, wait on God only,
who wait for the appearance of God in them, these that wait thus on God, shall
not be ashamed, but God shall appear (in them) to their joy, yea God shall call
them by another name, not the shameful name of a Church, but the name of
Christ, yea the name of God shall appear in them, they shall feast on God, and
all the Gods of the earth shall be famished, that is, all men (and members of
Churches also) men of highest parts, and purest graces shall be famished by
God, by Gods appearance in men, for man shall be nothing, and God shall be all
in all.

Next to Famine, to Judgment of the great Whore, shall be fire, she shall be
utterly burnt with fire. There is nothing so formidable and dreadful to
Churches, and to all their fleshly forms as fire.

This fire is the spirit; this spirit shall burn up all the flesh and forms,
and fellowship of churches. The fire which first set up the churches in the
first appearence of Christ, the same fire shall burn down churches, at the
second appearing of Christ, God shall appear with more yower in the Saints. So
that as God spoke to the church of Israel, They shall go from one fire, and
another fire shall devour them: so the christian churches have gone from one
fire, and another fire shall devour them; or as it is in the Hebrew, they shall
go from fire, and fire shall devour them; it is the same spirit is the first
and second appearing of Christ, the churches have gone forth from that fire in
the first appearing of Christ, the fire that comes forth in the second
appearing of God in scattered Saints, shall burn and devour all gathered
churches; only the fire of the last day is greater then before; that is, the
manifestation of the spirit shall be more at last then ever in former ages.

To clear up this, know that all outward forms, and Church-Ordinances at the
best are but flesh; but these forms defiled, are called the flesh of the Whore,
the defilement of these forms and ordinances came by the loss of that fire and
baptism of the spirit, which did first constitute the Churches of Christ, and
kept their Ordinances pure; for as Christ in flesh foretold that every one
should be salted with fire; so it came to pass that afterward the Church was
baptized with the holy spirit and with fire. The Apostles themselves, though
they had a call and a Commission before, to go forth to all the world, to teach
and baptize, yet they could do neither, till they were baptized with the
spirit, and with fire. They had the spirit at first, and Christ breathed the
holy spirit on them after his resurrection, but the baptism of the spirit was
not till after the ascension, till Jesus was glorified it is said the spirit was
not yet given; or as it is in the Greek, the spirit was not yet: the spirit was
before, yea abundance of the spirit in some, but the baptism of the spirit was
not till afterward, till then it is said the spirit was not yet: and therefore
this was the first command (not to baptize, or be baptized, as baptized
Churches cry, but) to wait for the spirit, not to depart from Jerusalem, but to
wait for the baptism of the spirit and of fire. This was the first Command
which these last Churches will not obey: It Is confessed they have been in
Babylon, and called to depart, but yet they should not depart in haste, or go
by flight, not fly out of their Country, nor hasten into Churches, till the
Lord should go before them, and the God of Israel should gather them up; as the
Hebrew reads, 'twas nor man, but God that gathered the first Church of Christ;
the Apostles and primitive Saints were assembled and gathered together in
company 120 at first, but they were not gathered into Church Fellowship, till
the baptism of the spirit came upon them, Acts 2. no preaching the Gospel, nor
baptism with water in a Gospel way could be but by the holy spirit sent down
from heaven. The spirit (as I said) was in them before, and God was in men from
the beginning. God was manifest in the Saints with power also, that is spirit,
God powerfully appearing in the Saints, and this is in Jerusalem indeed; and in
this sense the Disciples at first were commanded not to depart from Jerusalem,
and so the Saints in these last days are commanded not to depart out of
Jerusalem, but to abide still in God, to stay and wait on God in them, till he
should come forth in power and spirit, till the appearance of the great God
should be. There was the appearance of Christ then, when God did powerfully
appear in the Church in manifold gifts,; there were not only gifts of the
spirit, but the spirit was so given to the Churches, that the spirit did appear
visibly among them, as first in tongues of fire; so still afterward the spirit
said to the Churches of Antioch, Separate me Barnabas and Saul. Again the
spirit spoke to Philip, and to Peter plainly; so the spirit spoke expressly to
Paul many a time, likewise to John, He that has an ear, let him hear what the
spirit says the Churches, Rev. 1.10.12. Rev. 2. and Rev 3.

But the Churches are deaf of that ear, they will not hear of the spirit, they
are sore afraid of fire; but this was the baptism of the spirit and of fire
(which did set up the first Churches of Christ in a Gospel order) the
manifestation of the spirit in manifold gifts. The Church under the Law had
some gifts of the spirit manifest among them, as the gift of prophecy, the
gift of healing, yea raising the dead, with signs and miracles, and the Angels
moving the waters of Bethesda, wherein all diseases were healed at an instant,
this continued in the Jewish Church to the last; this is more then present
Churches have, having less of the manifestation of the spirit then that under
the Law, therefore must needs be more in bondage in Babylon, not having one
gift of the spirit to continue their Church State to be of a Gospel-glory,
wherein was the baptism of the spirit, and all the gifts of the spirit were
poured forth as rivers of living water on all the Churches of Christ, for
though every believer had not the baptism of the spirit nor those rivers
flowing out of his belly, because many believers, then being carnal, not
spiritual, had not a Gospel-faith, faith in Christ, yet every church of Christ
was baptized with the spirit, and had those manifold gifts manifest among them;
as the church of Corinth being most carnal, yet came behind in no gift, 1 Cor.
1.5, 6, 7. the church was adorned with all the gifts of the spirit, and the
manifestation of the spirit was given to every one to profit withal, the
spirit dividing to every one severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12 7. to 12. and that
his was the Gospel order which God set up in the church, is plain, v: 27, 28.
now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular, and God has set some
in the church, first Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly, Teachers, etc. This
was the Ministry of the church, and gifts of Christ; not extraordinary, as men
say, for that time; as if Pastors and Teachers were the only Ministers to
continue in the churches to the last. For though Teachers are last named, Ephesians.
4.11. yet Teachers are also mentioned with the first, with Apostles and
Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.28. and if God did set this order, this ministry, if Christ
gave those gifts to the church? how could the Church be wanting of those gifts
of the spirit, or gifts of Christ, but by the spirit of Antichrist, and
Apostasy of the Church, whereby the spouse became an harlot, and the Christian
church the great whore.

For what Scripture speaks of those gifts as extraordinary? the gifts of the
spirit were as ordinary for the church, as the Ordinances? why should
Ordinances continue, and not the gifts? why should baptism and breaking of
bread abide more then the baptism of the spirit, and all those gifts, seeing
the spirit was given to abide with them for ever? who promised that indulgence
and dispensation, that (though the first churches of Christ were set by God in
that order with manifold gifts of the spirit) yet the churches afterward might
stand in a Gospel order, without any one gift manifest among them? who made
those Apostolic commands Apochrypha? desire spiritual gifts, be zealous of
spiritual gifts, that ye may excel to the edifying of the Church? Where is a
Psalm, or a Doctrince, or a Tongue, or Interpretation, or Revelation, all
being unto edifying? and how is the church edifyed or built up now, unless unto
a Babel? what confusion of tongues must needs be, when there is no gift of
tongue, either to translate Scriptures truly, or truly to interpret them in
the gift of the spirit, or to reveal the secrets and spiritual mysteries in
them that have been hid from Ages and Generations since the Apostasy? and is
there not as much need of the spirit and power to restore all things that have
been lost, as to confirm the Gospel when 'twas first published by the Apostles?
And is not the Ministry of Apostles as necessary now to preach the everlasting
Gospel to the world, seeing Pastors and Teachers must only attend their
particular churches? But where are there those Pastors and Teachers, and
Elders, whom Apostles were to appoint and ordain? where are the Apostles hands,
with the laying on of hands of the Presbytery? Was it not the Apostles Office
in chief to ordain Elders in every church? and were not Evangelists designed by
them to ordain Elders in every City? were not Apostles only to set in order
things in the church? What church then can be in order, without an Apostle?
were not the Apostles the only speakers, who concluded and did all in Synods?
what can a Christian Synod do without them? how can a church excommunicate, or
cast out, but by the spirit of an Apostle, who is still said to deliver to
Satan? In a word, what Gospel can be in the world, or Government in the church
without an Apostle? yea what ordinance can be in order without them? for the
very baptism of water, as it was not to be before the baptism of the holy
spirit and of fire on the church, (the doctrine of Christ being not baptism,
but the doctrine of baptisms) so none could baptize but the Apostles, or such
who had a special commission, confirmed with gifts of the spirit, as Philip and
Ananias,: For not every one that could preach, but he that could teach all
Nations, was to baptize, and that could not be but by the gift of tongues, yea
none could baptize but with the promise of the gift of the spirit annexed, as
none could preach the Gospel but by the holy spirit sent down from heaven,
which the baptized churches have not attained to, nor can promise to their dipped
believers.

Next to Baptism, the Doctrine or Ordinance of laying on of hands follows,
whereto as the Apostles hands must be joined, so the gift of the spirit was
ever with it, without which the laying on of hands is but an empty ceremony, as
it is in all the churches, only the church of Scotland is more subtle and wise,
not to use that foolish complement, but to ordain without any laying of hands,
knowing no gift is now given thereby, unless it be a good Parsonage, as in the
English Presbytery; but in the primitive there was a gift given by the laying
on of the hands of the Eldership with the Apostles on the Elders to be
ordained, who also received the gift of healing by the laying on of their hands
on the sick, anointing them with oil, signifying the spirit, which was given
indeed, as the hands laid on did show the same thing, even the spirit and power
from on high, given to those who were ordained and approved for the ministry.

Now where are such administrations, or such a ministry? where is that
manifestation of the spirit in these last Laodicean churches, who are just like
the church of Laodicea in this, first that they are last of all the churches
that have been or shall be. Secondly, that as Laodicea in the Greek imports,
(...), the judgment of the people or Nations, so not only the National
churches, but the separated ones are now judged by Christ. Thirdly, as the
church of Laodicea thought best of her self, being therefore the worst of all
the churches; the former six churches, though some evils and failings were
condemned in them, yet were commended for some good, which was not to be found
at all in Laodicea, that thought she was rich, and had need of nothing, whereas
she was blind and naked: So Presbyterian churches may justly be condemned of
much evil and failing, yet are to be commended that they pretend still
Reformation; but the last reformed and most refined churches of the Separation,
say they are rich, and have need of nothing, they need no order, nor ordinance,
nor officers of the church, they see and know all the truths of Christ:
therefore by the judgment of Christ they are blind, and men shall shortly
behold their nakedness. Fourthly, Laodicea was neither hot nor cold; these
last churches are not so cold as National churches, but they have not that heat
and fire which was in the first churches of Christ, therefore Christ will spew
them out of his mouth, and not take up their name into his lips any more, nor
love them as his church and spouse, but loath them as the filth of the great
Whore.

Now to return to return to that we said before. All the Ordinances in the
church became defiled, unclean, and her forms the flesh of the whore, not being
salted with fire, that is, when the sacrifice was no more salted with salt,
which is of a fiery substance, and keeps flesh from tainting: When that holy
fire was found wanting in the church, all her flesh, her forms and ordinances
did stink, and became defiled, as those that touched an unclean thing, or dead
body: for the manifestation of the spirit being departed from the church, the
church must needs be a dead body, as those dry bones in Babylon signified the
state of the church in the apostasy, in spiritual Babylon; where the church is
not in the unity of the spirit and bond of peace; but as those divided sticks
in the Prophets hand, the one for Judah and his companions, the other stick for
Joseph and his companions: this is the dead divided state of the church in
Babylon, which is a city not in unity with it self as Jerusalem, but divided
into three parts, so Babylon is, and so the churches in Babylon are,
Presbytery, Independent, and baptized churches: For though in the primitive
times there were divisions between brother and brother in the churches, yet
never was there a division between church and church, as at this day. All the
brethren walked in one church way, worshipping God with one consent, one
church order, ordinances and officers were all by the same spirit alike in all
the churches, who in this sense at least kept the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace; for as there was one body among all, so but one baptism; but as
the churches are now divided bodies, so their baptisms are diverse, one church
baptizeth the whole Nation; another church baptized only the children of
believers; the third baptized only believers themselves. Thus we may truly say
the whore sits upon many waters, many baptisms; besides those rivers of living
waters, those manifold gifts of the spirit are dried up in the churches, much
less does the spirit show them that pure river of life, proceeding out of the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb in the new Jerusalem; the churches being
destitute both of fire and water, having not that holy spirit given to the
church of Christ, must be but a dead body; and he that touches them is unclean.

This the Prophet Haggai hinted at, when he asked the Priests, that if one bear
holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread or
pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? and the Priests
answered no. Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body, touch any
of these, shall it be unclean? and the Priests answered saying, It shall be
unclean. So is this Nation before me, says the Lord, and so is every work of
their hands, it is unclean, Hagg. 2.12, 13, 14.

Every Saint in the spirit, freed from church-forms, or not embondaged to
partiality, can easily interpret that text, That though there be Saints by
calling in the present church, and she bear holy flesh in her skirt, that
cannot make any thing clean to her or them: and if they touch a dead body, as
the church now is, all that they touch therein it is unclean; so is this
people, and so is this Nation before me, says the Lord, and so is every work
of their hands (and every ordinance among them) it is unclean.

If this be true, as true it is, that the forms of churchfellowship being
defiled forms, are become the flesh of the whore; then must she be utterly
burnt with fire, yea those ten Kings which have received no kingdom as yet; but
receive power as kings one hour with the beast who with one mind give their
power and strength to the beast, who make war with the lamb (that is with
Christ in us, with God in the Saints) when the lamb shall overcome them (and
the power of God in the Saints appear above them) then these shall hate the
whore, and make her desolate, and naked, and burn her flesh with fire.

If the honorable Parliament would but be pleased, God so appearing in them,
to judge things in the spirit, and see how dead and desolate the churches are
of the gifts of the spirit, how naked they are, not adorned with one spiritual
gift, they would no more dote on the whores flesh, though nevee so fair, nor on
any forms though never so often reformed, but burn her flesh with fire; when thus
the powerful appearance of the great God shall be manifested in men; and
Magistrates, the churches shall appear no more.

This is the second appearance of Christ, of God in men; in the first
appearance of Christ, the church appeared, yet clothed with all the gifts of
the spirit, that is, God appeared in power in the midst of Saints; but when God
shall appear now the second time God dwelling among men, which is the new
Jerusalem, then that church, nor those first gifts of the spirit shall appear
any more; but the spirit, even God himself shall minister in his own glory and
power, nothing but God shall appear in man, and man shall appear no more; no
need of churches or ministers when God shall be our church, and the house we
live in, when God in us shall minister all light unto us. Thus in the new
Jerusalem, there is no Temple, no churchstate, nor ordinance: and the city has
no need of the sun, or of the moon to shine in it, for the glory of God shall
lighten it, and the lamb is the light thereof. Sun and Moon are now the lights
of the world, these are the ordinances of heaven, and have been the ordinary
means of conveying light to the earth; the sun the light of the day, the moon
and stars the light of the night: so there has been a ministry by day and
night, in the day of Christ, and the first appearing of God, there was a
ministry of Apostles, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, as the ordinary means of
light to the world, and to the church: when the church came under the night of
Apostasy, and while the spirit of Antichrist was come in power, darkning the
sun and the air, there was still a ministry of men, as the means of light, yet
as the moon to the night, ever changing in several fosms, of Popery,
Episcopacy, Presbytery, Independent, and baptized Ministers, here the ministry
changed as the moon, yet God in his free grace was pleased in all the times of
the Apostasy still to appear enlightening the world by the ministry of men, in
some dark discoveries of himself: But when Christ shall appear the second time,
when the day of Christ shall dawn after the night of Apostasy is ended, when
the day of God shall be again, and God shall appear the second time binding up
the breath of his people, and healing the wound that was made by that spirit of
Antichrist prevailing in the church; then the light of the moon shall be as the
light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be as the light of seven
days, that is, there will be a perfect light, for God shall appear to be the
light of men, as Christ was ever indeed the light of the world, and God in
truth was the light of men from the beginning, shining in darkness, though the
darkness did not comprehend it, and though men did not know God in them to be
their only light; but as I said, God shall appear in the last days to be the
light of men, then men and ministers shall be no more the means of light; the
sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon
give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and
thy God, thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon
withdraw it self, but the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the days
of thy mourning shall be ended; as mourning was Babylons plague, the judgment
of the great Whore; so thou shall never mourn for want of a minister, for the
Lord God in thee shall minister light unto thee; men and ministers may go down,
yea the sun may set at noonday, and there may be a withdrawing of all light,
and all left in darkness; but in darkness the Lord will be thy light, as well
as when thou art in clearest light, when thy light shall be the Lord God in
thee, then God thy Sun shall not go down, and God thy Moon shall not be
withdrawn; yea God shall appear not only thy light, but the light of the world,
the light of every man, and the light of every creature, thou shall then
clearly see the invisible things of God even the eternal Power and Godhead in
the whole creation' and no more sun or moon shining in the heaven, but God'
himself shining in both, and his glory filling the earth also, and every thing
in heaven and earth, as the appearance of God.

This is that fire that burns not only churches, but every creature in heaven
and earth, God appearing in all. This is the fire which all the Prophets and
Apostles speak of, to come in the last days, this fire came down at the first
coming of Christ in spirit, when the spirit, when God in power first appeared
in the Gospel Church, then the church under the Law, the Jewish church was burn
up, the sun was turned to darkness, and the moon to blood, all the glory and
light of the Law was darkened, the Temple, Priesthood, Sacrifices, and all their
Ordinances were change, and became as blood: So the same signs in heaven
above, and signs on the earth beneath shall be again (in kingdoms and churches
also) blood and vapor and smoke, all this was in spirit then performed, it
shall again be so fulfilled with greater power; when the appearance of the
great God shall be, this fire, even God himself, that consuming fire, and
everlasting burnings shall not only burn up churches, and the flesh or the
Whore, but the purest flesh of men, and pride of all glory; when God our glory
shall appear as the glory of heaven, and his glory the fullness of the earth,
then all the works on the earth shall be burnt up with fire (as all the works
of man shall be burnt up in God; that is, as now we see the works of men, and
not God working all in all: so now we see only the outward forms of the
creation, every creature being that form of God; but when we shall see God all
in all, we shall never see no more forms of creatures or churches.

FINIS.

