THE English Villain: Of the GRAND THIEF.

Being

A full Relation of the desperate Life, and de^^^ved Death of that most notable
Thief, and notorious Robber, Richard Hanam: Who for his arch Villainies, and
notorious Robberies committed both in England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Denmark, Sweden, yea, Rome it self; far exceeds that arch Villain the Spanish
Gusman, and the late famous Robber of England Captain James Hind; yea, and all
the notorious Thieves that ever yet were heard of: the like to whom has not
been known.

With the manner of the Execution, and his Speech at his last farewell to the
World.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for John Andrews, at the white Lion in the Old Bailey.

The English Villain.
CAptain Hanam the subject of this discouse, was by birth an Englishman, and a
most proper complete man for person; but for thieving and picking of locks and
bolts, and other such like exploits, he was so expert, that scarce ever the
like was heard of. For being several times apprehended both for murders and
robberies, he always escaped by breaking out of prison; insomuch that he
himself boasted, that he had broken forth almost all the prisons in Holland,
when he had bin several times committed: the like to whom has not been heard
of before, as shall be made appear in this following discourse.

How Hanam passed beyond sea; and how he first robbed the King of Denmark, and
after passed into Sweden.

HAnam having now for diverse years exercised himself in his accursed and
wicked Art of Thieving, whereby many were utterly undone by him; and being
guilty of very many horrid and bloody murders by him committed; for to secure
himself from the claws of the Hangman, he passed over into Denmark, where
among several other exploits and robberies by him committed, he having
intelligence where the Kings Treasure lay, by the help of his Picklocks, and
other instruments, in which wicked, but cunning Art he exelled all others, by
which he soon got himself master of a very rich Treasury of the Kings, out of
which having sufficiently furnished himself, he departed thence into Swedeland.

How Hanam Robbed the Queen of Swedes, of all her rich Jewels, with other great
sums of money, to the value of five thousand pound.

HAnam having committed the foresaid robbery on the King of Denmark for fear of
being apprehended for the same, departs into Swedeland, where coming to the
Court he made himself familiar under the pretense of an English Gentleman, and
being very conversant about the Queen, he soon heard out where her Treasure
lay, for that was the thing he aimed at, and he had not been long acquainted
thereof, but he attempts the gaining of it, which by the help of his Picklocks
he soon made himself master of all, and got a rich booty, being all for the
most part very rich and costly Jewels, which, with other great sums of money,
amounted to five thousand pound: After this, Hanam being apprehended confessed
the business, and was for this bold attempt committed close Prisoner to the
common Goal, or main Prisoner, there to remain until the times of Assizes,
that so he might receive the reward that was due unto him.

How Hanam broke out of prison, and after got into France, and there robbed the
King of France of several great sums of money.

HAnam being now a prisoner, and the time of Sessions, or Goal-(...) drawing
near in which he knew'h should be brought to Execution for his roguery, and not
being willing as yet to be hinged; he made a desperate attempt, and ^o broke
the prison, notwithstanding it was made sure with several strong bolts and bars
of Iron, which as was conceived, all the (...) and art of man could not undo:
All which Hanam undid by his instruments, and so escaped thence into France.
Where Gentleman like he continued a while about the Court, waiting for some
opportunity: which having gotten, he soon made use of, and so robbed the French
King of several great sums of money.

How Hanam after this, departed out of France into the Low Countries, and how
he committed several Robberies there: Among others, how he robbed the King of
Scots at the Hague in Holland.

HAnam having by his subtilties got himself out of prison, and after robbed the
King of France, durst not (being an English man) continue any longer within the
French Kings dominions; whereupon he departed thence into Holland, where in a
very short time he committed several murders and robberies up and down the
Low Countries. Afterward coming to the Hague, where the King of Scots then
lay, Hanam likewise robbed him of that small portion of stock which he had for
his necessary relief and sustenance. After which, committing several great
robberies upon diverse persons of quality, he was at last taken, and committed
to prison: where he had not long been, but he (as formerly he had done) broke
out of prison, and so escaped.

How Hanam came into England again: and how he made an attempt to have robbed
his Highness Treasury of the Exchequer.

HAnam being now at liberty again; and having as he thought quite slipped his
neck out of the halter, he began to grow very bold and insolent, and to glory
in his vileness, supposing himself able to get forth of any Prison whatsoever,
be returned again into England, and so came to London, where not contenting
himself with other robberies, his thoughts were to have robbed his Highness
Treasury in the Exchequer; and for that purpose, having taken a view thereof,
he began this (...) in the beginning of the night; but (...) being taken of his
foresaid viewing of the place, and some other information of his design aimed
at, Musketeers were set to watch his coming, Hanam not mistrusting any
discovery of his design, proceeded in the business, opening five or six double
locked doors, through the help of his Picklocks and other instruments for that
purpose, the soldiers all this while watching him, ^uffered him to go on, till
at last being got to the door of the Chamber where the money say, which being
very strong, and also barred on the inside with three several strong Bars of
Iron, they (...) he could not easily get open; but notwithstanding, he soon got
loose all those and entered the room, but hearing the Soldiers begin to bustle
up stairs after (...), he could not take his opportunity but got through a
private passage, and so escaped.

How Heynam was after taken, and so brought to Newgate.

HAnam being disappointed of the last intended design, and by the blessing of
God hindered by the Soldiers from robbing the Common wealth of five or six
thousand pound, which lay ready in bags in the Exchequer Chamber, great search
was now made for him in all places suspected; and in a small time after he was
by the industry of the Soldiers discovered and apprehended, and so brought
before the Judges at Westminster, where being examined, he openly confessed
that he had committed several Robberies, and gloried, that he could easily
open any door or lock whatsoever; and pretended, that if the Judges would go
along with him themselves over the water, he would show them where his
instruments were made. But the Honorable Judges suspecting some wicked Design
upon their persons, committed him to the Gatehouse, from whence he was shortly
after removed to Newgate, there to be kept until the time of Sessions.

How Hanam being prisoner in Newgate, was brought down to the Sessions House in
the Old Baily, and tried for his life before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and Recorder of the City of London: where after a short
examination, his facts being also notoriously known, he was condemned to suffer
death at Tyburn.

HAnam being now a prisoner in the prison of Newgate, in short time after his
coming thither, the General Sessions and Assizes began in the Old-Bayly: Where
the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the rest of the Justices of the Bench
being set; Hanam was brought before them; and being examined by the Honorable
Bench, was presently found Guilty, and convicted of several horrid and
desperate bloody murders, and notorious robberies, and was by the Jury found
guilty of the same. Whereupon the Right Honorable the Recorder then present,
immediately passed sentence of death against him, That he should suffer Death
at the place of Execution, by being hanged by the neck till he died. After
which, he was conveyed back to Newgate again, there to remain till the day of
Execution.

How Hanam after he was condemned to die, made his escape out of Newgate: and
how little Grimes, the under Clerk, was hanged for consenting to his escape.

HAnam being now condemned to die, and the day of Execution drawing nigh, he
resolved to make one desperate attempt for to make an escape; quickly effected,
to the wonder of all that beheld the same, the like having never been seen or
done before, and this his design be mane on Grimes formerly a Prisoner in the
same place, and one who had been condemned for having two Wives; but was
afterward Reprieved for that offense and at that time executed the place of an
under Clerk in the said Prison of Newgate; now this Grimes lying in the room
with Hanom, was made Privy to his escape, which he willingly contented to, and
so suffered him by his women cunning to take off his Irons, with which he was
fettered; which as the said Grimes confessed before the Honorable Bench, he
did use to do with ease every night, and so put them on in the morning: Now
Hanam having taken off his Iron chains, presently breaks open three or four
great doors, and breaks in sunder all the great Chains and Iron Bars, and so
escaped clear away, leaving little Grimes to answer for his Treachery, who
afterward, contrary to his own expectation, was condemned to die for the same,
and accordingly suffered death at Tyburn for the said fact.

How Hanam was pursued after, and retaken again, and how he was brought to
London, and within sight of Newgate, and yet made his escape again.

HAnam being now at liberty by breaking of Prison, great search and inquiry was
made after him and within a while after was taken in the Country and so sent up
to London, and so conveyed toward Newgate; but coming within the fight of
Newgate, he made a desperate attempt, and got from them, and so escaped again.

How Hanam after his second escape went to Rome, and there committed several
robberies more, especially, he robbed the late Queen of Sweden in her Nunnery.

HAnam being now gotten at liberty once more, to prevent his being taken again,
got over again beyond sea, and so steered his course toward Rome, where being
arrived, he began to exercise his old accustomed trade of thieving and robbery
again. And having robbed several rich persons, he resolved once more to make an
attempt upon the late Queen of Sweden again: Which he effected in the Nunnery
where she frequented, and to which she had betaken her self, and where she
had laid up her treasure; which Hanam having taken notice of, presently made
himself master thereof, And having continued in this trade a while, he returned
again toward England.

How Hanam after his return to England was taken near Swithins Lane, London, on
the 14, of June, and so brought to Newgate the next morning, and afterward
executed for all his former villainies, on the 17 of June, 1656.

HAnam having employed himself a while in his arch-trade of thieving at Rome,
he returned again toward England, and so came to London; where being in
company near Swithins Lane, London, a drinking, he endeavored to make himself
master of a sum of money, which he had some notice of, that was in the house,
which they thought to have possessed themselves of while they staid there
drinking: But notice being given thereof, endeavors were used for to apprehend
them. And the thieves (of which Hanam was one) being shut up into a room, got
away over the houses: but returning again, he was taken, having desperately
wounded two or three men first, and so kept in safe custody till the morning.
Which being come, it being the Lords Day, he was very strongly guarded to
Newgate; and the Keepers to prevent his further escape, bound him hands and
feet with strong chains and fetters of Iron, where multitudes daily flocked to
see him, expecting his Execution: which to give the Gallows and Hangman their
due, was performed in Smithfield the 17. day of this present month; where as
he lived wickedly, he also died wilfully and desperately, and so bid farewell to
the World.

Thus have you heard a brief, but true account of the rude life, and notable
Villainies committed by this wretched and unparalleled Villain, with his
desperate but deserved shameful Death; the like to whom has not been, nor I
hope never will be again.

Thus Hanam's dead and gone,
and bids the world adieu:
And for his Thefts and Villainies,
at the Gallows had his due.
FINIS.

