Equitable and Necessary CONSIDERATIONS AND RESOLVTIONS FOR Association of Arms
Throughout The Counties of the kingdom of England, and principality of Wales:

Against the now In the Earl of Newcastles Declaration, printed first at York,
and since reprinted at London.
professed Combination of Papists, and other Enemies of the Protestant
Religion, and English Rights and Liberties.

To be presented to the Gentry and Commonalty of the County of Middlesex, at
their meeting at Hix-hall the 26. of December, 1642.

And no less conducing to the safety of other Counties, especially of
Yorkshire, Lancashire, and Cheshire, where the Malignant Commissioners of
Array have been most rampant.

HAB. 1.13. Wherefore look thou on them that deal treacherously, and hold
thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then he?

JUDGE. 6.12. The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valor.

London, Printed for THOMAS UNDERHILL. 1642.

Equitable and Christian Considerations and Resolutions of diverse worthy and
Well-minded Inhabitants of Middlesex, published in Print (rather then
communicated in written hand, that they may be more speedily divulged and more
readily used) by a true Z^lot of the welfare, as of all the Counties of England
in general, so especially of that County in particular: For assistance and
succor to the Religious and well-aff^cted Ministers and people there residing,
against the injurious and licentious violation of their persons, liberties and
estates; By Popish, profane, and other malicious and mischievous disturbers of
the public Peace, threatening thereby (as by the like Tyranny and spoil in
other places) the utter ruin of the Kingdom, if the true Patriots (in all
parts) do not quickly and courageously make head against them.
1.IT is apparent to all (who are not naturally stupid, or wilfully blind)
that of late there is risen up (in arms) a combination of boisterous and
violent men, who (uniting themselves under the specious pretense of loyalty,
and service to the King) endeavor to make the breach betwixt His Majesty and
the high Court of Parliament, unreconciliable, and (with all the power they can
raise in His Name) so to pull down all the Privileges and Proprieties of this
noble Nation, as to make it of a Kingdom of ingenuous and freeborn Subjects, a
Thraldom of mere servile and slavish Vassalls.

2. That these men (if we may call them men, who for a great part of them seem
to have put off the appearance of humanity, by their barbarous manners) have
most exercised their outrageous wrongs upon those who have been most noted for
Religion, civility, and united fidelity to King and Kingdom.

3. That (howsoever they have had, and showed their greatest spite at such)
they have spoiled many others, who neither in profession nor in affection
forted with them; (...)^ ^x locio ^e quo ^ixitd^l^is edor ^ucr^ex ^equali^et.
therein making no more difference betwixt their goods, which they equally love
(though their personal hate be excessively bent against the best in all states)
then Vespian did betwixt the money he received from the Impost of Urine, and
that which came in from the noblest tribute.

4. That being such, it is not like that (of themselves) they will set any
reasonable bounds, to their own proceedings, nor will give over their violent
invasion of the persons and estates of men and women, until (by some adverse
and prevailing power) they be stopped.

5. That though His Majesty (as became a good and just Prince) has set out
severe Proclamations against plundering of His people by the Soldiers of his
own Army (and he means not to give that liberty to any other, which he
denies to them) and have engaged his Royal word for the righting of them who
suffer wrong by their hands; yet we see (by sad experience) that these
prohibitions produce no further effect, then to clear His Majesty from
approbation of such notorious injustice (for they are not Daunted by a printed
paper from their practice of pillage, since they impute His Majesty's dislike
of such doings, to his ignorance of the privilege of their military
profession, and the oppressed are discouraged from having recourse to him for
remedy against them) for they may have just cause to fear, that they who claim
a license (by the sword) to carve out of other men's estates what portion they
please, will waylay the co^plainants, and find a way not only to frustrate their
desires of relief, but to return them with an increase and aggravation of
their injuries.

6. That if this spirit of violence should march on (as hitherto it has done)
for want of seasonable and sufficient ressistance, it would prevail to
victory, and by a warlike conquest would subdue both King and Kingdom. For
although we think so well of His Majesty, and honor him so much, that we
cannot find in our hearts to make any culpable comparison betwixt him and the
Turk, we must needs think so ill of them, who have not only withdrawn him, and
do yet withold him from his most wise and faithful Council (the High Court
of Parliament) but abuse his power, to manage a most pernicious hostility
against them, and (in them) against the whole state and people of England, that
they would prove no better then the worst sort of Turkish Janissaries, (who have
some times insolently Lorded it over their own Lords and masters, so as to make
him but a Royal Slave, as well as exercised a tyrannical Domination over his
Subjects, though His Majesty's name should still be used, and his authority
strained up to uphold them, and bear them out in all their exorbitant and
abominable excesses; And therefore though the King should prove more prudent
and constant then Solomon in perseverance to defend the faith in the best and
soundest sense of His Royal style, and should shut his ears to the
solicitations of the Queen, while she opens hers to listen to the inspirations
of the Popish Faction, who have plied her with persuasions to double the spirit
of her mother upon her, and to make her the midwife of that pernicious Plot,
against the Protestants, which is so furiously driven on, for their utter
destruction as well in England as in Ireland, and will draw on the like danger
upon Scotland and the Netherlands, if they make themselves but mere spectators
of our manifold miseries; that we must expect no sincerity or purity of the
Protestant Religion to be established amongst us, but either the whole Mass of
Popish Superstition and Idolatry, to be obtruded upon us, or some mungrell
compound (like the Childish-Dialect, descended from the mixed marriage; of the
woman of Ashdod with the men of Israel*) made up of many ownces of Popery,
Arminianisme, and carnal Liberty, tempered with a few Drams of Orthodox
Doctrine, but without so much as one scruple of precise practice in the
profession of piety.

No Peace without submitting our necks to an Iron yoke; No Parliament but such
as would establish oppression and tyranny by Statute Law, and (besides other
deposed pressures) would restore the Tyrannical Prelacy, High Commission, and
Star Chamber, which (in their return) will bring (with them) the malignity of
seven spirits, worse then the former, to make the persecution of all true and
real Christians (like Nebuchadnezzers fiery-furnace) seven times hotter then
it was before.

No Justices of Peace but such as are professed friends to the Apostaticall
part of the Parliament, and fomenters of that burning fever (now inflaming the
blood through all the veins of the body politic) or rather of that furious
wildfire [of the Commission of Array] which has put the whole Kingdom into a
terrible Combustion: and as professed enemies to the constant part of the
Parliament, (the faithful careful courageous Patrons of our Religion, Lives,
Liberties, and estates, who remain as the sound, and solid wheat, when the
hollow and empty chafe is blown away) and to those, who in conscience (out of
true grounds of grace, and gratitude) account themselves bound (for the just
and necessary security of what they desire to enjoy) to adhere unto them.

No Assizes without such a Sheriff, Jurie and Judges, as would take away the
lives and estates, of the worthiest persons, in a worse way, then by the sword
of War: for so (if their cause be good) they might dye as Martyrs; but in
such a formality of justice, as they must come under, (if such as those get the
upper, hand) they shall be first robbed of their innocence, and (that done)
they must forfeit their lives, and all they have, (as convicted Malefactors)
that was Nabothes case, under the tyrannical Reign of Ahab and Jesabell.

8. That these professed enemies to all true Protestants in belief and life,
have advanced so far, in their way toward the ruin of the Kingdom;

Neither by the greatness of their number, (for in their musters, they have
many who hate their Conditions and carriage, in the present cause, and long to
be delivered from the bondage, to which some relations of dependence have
betrayed them.)

Nor by their power, for i^ is very small in respect of that, which is engaged
to the safeguard of the whole Kingdom, from their destructive designs.

Nor by their courage, though many of them may be the more forward to fight,
because they have little to lose, having forfeited their lives and estates to
public justice, which they hope to escape, rather by boldness in Battle (a
boldness more desperate then valorous) then by yielding up themselves to the
trial of the Parl: [much less have they -- any good success; by the
goodness of their Cause, which the more it is known, the more it is condemned
by all truly wise and welminded men, and which at last must come to naught,
(though for a time God may suffer them (as he did the wicked Amorites to make
up the measure of their iniquity) because it is a most impious and bloody
Combination against God and the godly.

[But by their subtilty, in guilding over their treacherous intentions toward
the state, with glorious pretenses of dutiful vindication of Royal Majesty,
from unsufferable affronts and wrongs, and in defaming the defense (by the Law
of Nature and Nations allowed to oppressed people) with the odious imputation
of Rebellion and Treason; [By falsifying their words and oaths, when by others
credulity they were admitted to a power to do mischief; [By lying Relations
to countenance their own cause and party in Print, which are not Printed
without their knowledge and against their wills, as those Pamplets are, which
seem to be published in favor, but indeed both displease and dishonor the
Parliament, and that so much, that it is probable (at least of some of them)
that they may be put out, by some Anti-parliamentary Politicians, to make the
world believe that they make lies their refuge, and so are no more to be
believed then themselves; [by confident outfacing of any truth that makes
against them; [by hypocritical protestations of integrity toward preservation
of the Protestant Religion, and the Realms, and the presumptuous appeal, to
the majesty of God, when they make them; [By witty and well-pend Declarations
(wherein sound reason and true Logic is drowned in the overflowings of
Rhetoric, as Bees are sometimes drowned in their own Honey) giving as fair
words as need to be spoken, to make the people content to put up as bad and
injurious deeds, as ever were done in a Protestant Kingdom: by this means many
are beguiled (if not rather bewitched) who are not of capacity to comprehend
the whole state and condition of the present War on both sides, with the many
causes whence it arose, the means by which it is promoted, and the ends whereat
they would have it arrive; [by terrible threats and outrageous Acts (conjuring
down feeble spirits from their hearts to their heels) [By intentive vigilance
for all advantages, and vigorous industry (Like his, who goes about as a
roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour) by Civil War to bring that
desolation upon their Country, in a few Months, from which a whole age of
peace cannot redeem it; [But especially by the inconsideration, and remisnes
of those, who (while they enjoyed their own estates free) were not
apprehensive of the spoiling of others, nor considered how soon it might come
to their turn, to be rifled and robbed in like manner.

9. That the Parliament (the representative body of the whole Kingdom, and the
great Council of the King) having upon such grounds as these, or some of them,
concluded and resolved, that it is not only lawful but needful to withstand
such dangerous and desperate invadors of our Protestant Religion, and our
English Rights; we hold it our duties, to resolve and presently to put in
practice, all just and warrantable ways of Association and mutual aid, for
the freedom of our selves, children, neighbors, and Country men from their
lawless lusts, and intolerable tyranny, as from a confederacy of thieves,
murderers and Anabaptists, not of Christian Anabaptists (who out of mistaken
charity would have all things common among believers) but of such, as are
Unchristian and Antichristian who would take away the bounds of men's proper
interests, and being (in Condition) like the wild Beast of the Forest, would
break down all partition walls, and pales of propriety, that they may make
spoil of our Houses, Gardens, Fields and pleasant Pastures, and finding the
Land as a Garden of Eden before them, may leave it all behind them as a
desolate Wilderness, from whom we cannot hope to be delivered by the service
of mere mercenary sword men (who take up the practice of killing for a trade
of life) but chiefly by our own undertakings, and the blessing of God upon our
endeavors, and adventures, directed to his glory and welfare of our Country.

10. That (not meddling with any disputable points of questioned privileges) we
will engage our selves (according to the duty we owe to christian piety and
common humanity) to a just defense of our own and our fellow Subjects undoubted
rights, especially in these particulars.

1. That the Ministers and people of England may sociably and safely meet for
the celebration of Gods public worship, and the salvation of their souls,
without fear of violent attempts and assaults upon their bodies, which are most
endangered on the days of their solemn assemblies, whereof the sons of Belial
make an especial choice for cruel encounters, having no respect at all to the
Lords day, unless it be to make the Dominicall Letter a Symball of bloody
slaughters of the Lords servants.

2. That every one may enjoy that particular portion of comfort in his wife,
children, and estate which God has given him.

3. That Tillage, without which, neither King nor people can be supported, may
not be interrupted by giving the Husbandman cause to fear, that the pains and
cost of seed time, shall not be recompensed by an harvest.

4. That the provision of corn, in Barnes and Garneries, may not injuriously
be taken from the owners, nor wastfully bestowed upon beasts, whereby a famine
may be like to be brought upon men.

5. That the high ways may be safe for intercourse of posts, carriers, and
other travelers, upon their just and lawful occasions.

6. That markets and other means of common commerce for the general benefit
of the Kingdom may be continued, without force or fear of armed enemies of the
Kingdom, in Cities and Towns of most trade and traffic.

7. That Justice may be done upon such, as make no scruple (but rather make it
their delight and glory) to undo the best affected and behaved people of the
Land: and that while poor thieves for petty pilferies, (pricked on unto them
happily by the sharp goade of necessity) are kept in rags, fettors and
dungeons, such great thieves and burgliers may not be suffered to ride in
scarlet, and to range about and rob and spoil at their pleasures, as now they
do, to the great scorn and contumely, of the justice of the King and
Parliament, and of all the judicatories of the Kingdom.

And while we take up arms to these ends, we hold our selves not more bound
(with our hands) to resist the personal assaults of such pernicious enemies,
then with our true manners to oppose theirs, their bold impieties with our
lawful fear of the Majesty of God, their profaneness with our holiness of
life, their desperate and God damne-me Oaths and execrations, with our making
scruple conscience of an Oath; their unruly lusts, and corcupiscence with our
regular continence, their drunkenness with our sebrietie, their unreasonable
rapine with our equitable justice; their violence and boldness with as much
moderation and mildness on our part, as the necessary defense of so good a
cause, and so many good people will possibly permit. And in all this we shall
endeavor faithfully to perform, the duty we owe to God, the King, Parliament
and people of His Majesty's Dominions, Deeply charged upon us, by our late
solemn Protestation; and while we do this we will encourage our selves in the
service by the words of holy Hezekiah (as pertinent to us in our present cause
and condition) Be strong and courageous, be not afraid or dismayed at the
number or power of your enemies, for there be more with us then with them, with
them is an arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to
fight our Battles, and the people rested themselves upon these words. 2 Chr.
32.7, 8. And so will we do. Finis.


