THE ENGLISH TYRANTS. OR, A brief History of the Lives and Actions of the high
and mighty States, the Lords of Westminster, and now (by usurpation) Kings of
ENGLAND.

Containing all their Rebellious and Traitorous Proceedings and Transactions in
Parliament.

With their levying of War, and bloody practices against their Sovereign, their
sinister and Military designs to alter and subvert the Fundamental Government
in Church and Commonwealth, by destroying Monarchy, and making themselves
Free-States, by the power of the Sword.

Continued from the first Convention of this Parliament, 1640. until the Kings
Death, Jan. 30. 1648.

Usurpers are Murderers, 2 Reg. 11.1. and Math. 12. 38, 39. LONDON, Printed in
the Year, 1649.

THE ENGLISH TYRANTS.
Policy of Princes.
Policy in Princes, or States, is but circumstantiall dissimulation, pretending
one thing, intending another: Some will so far allow it, and say, That faith is
but a Merchants, or Mechanique virtue; and so they may make it higher, by
making it a Regal vice. There is an order that out-goeth Michiavel, where he
confesses, Vsus fraudis in caeteris actionibus detestabilis, in bell^ gerendo
laudabilis: That fraud which in war is commendable, is in other actions
detestable. Prerogative of Princes.
It Is certain, there is a prerogative in Princes, which may legittimate
something in their negotiations, which is not allowable in a private person or
subject: But even the grant of this liberty has encouraged them to too great
an enlargement. State policy.
State policy is now become an irreligious riddle; As Lewis the 11th of France,
would wish his Son to learn no more Latin, then would teach him to be a
dissembler: Godly pretenses.
But when godly pretenses, backed with frequent promises, and sealed with
Oaths, Covenants and Protestations, appear deformed under the veil of
hypocrisy, Self-interest.
self-interest and private ends, especially when the safety of a Nation and
people solely depends thereupon: The hands of the Omnipotent shall uncover
their nakedness, and their shame and actions shall be punished with speedy
ruin.

Plausible beginnings.
Fair and plausible beginnings are not always the forerunners of good end; many
honest meaning, and loyal Englishmen (who eight years since viewed the
Parliaments Actions, and judged of their integrity by their Protestations and
Declarations) entertained a very charitable and honorable opinion both of them
and their Cause, and therein hazarded both their lives and estates with them,
who are long since sat down in the Chair of repentance; having found by sad
and woeful experience, their fair and large pretenses to prove but shadows of
weak performances, and their greatest labors to produce no other effects, then
to burden this distracted Nation with unheard of tyranny, and miserable
oppression.

But they that beheld their proceedings and actions, even in their primitive
and best times, with a considerable and judicious eye, did easily perceive them
to pursue their own ambitious and self ends, more then the welfare of their
native Kingdom: That they were men whose thoughts and intentions were filled
with blood: Who could expect better things from the illegal and rebellious
proceedings of those men, who presumed from Servants to become Masters, and
endeavor to bring in Democracy and destroy Monarchy? Whose horrid and bloody
actions has produced such monstrous and strange effects, that it has set open
the floud-gates of ruin to overflow this miserable and bleeding Kingdom.

Courteous Reader, Beginning of the Par. 1640.
Take here then a Breviate or Narrative of all the proceedings and traitorous
actions of this Parliament and Army from their first convention by the K. Writ,
1640. where in the space of ten years you shall find the greatest mutation and
change of Government in this (late flourishing) Kingdom of England, that has
befallen any Nation or State in Europe, since it was a Monarchy, acted (under
the specious pretenses of Religion, Monarchy turned to Anarchy.
Laws and Liberties) by the most rebellious, perjured and bloody Tyrants, that
ever carried the name of Subjects or badge of Christianity in the whole
Universe.

Take here also a view of the illegal Acts of these traitorous Tyrants at
Westminster, Illegal Acts.
for the accomplishment of their private and bloody designs, to subvert the
ancient sundamentall constitution and government of the Kingd: in destroying
the King, his Posterity, together with Monarchy, and to invest themselves with
power and greatness thereof, as States and Lords of the Land.

1 Act. The Earl of Strafford.
First They strike at an eminent pillar that upheld the fabric of the
Commonwealth; a wise Statesman and Counselor unto His Majesty (as a great
obstruction in their original designs) by taking away his life, Ap. 12. 1641.

A Bill against Bishops. And the Militia.
Next, they persuade His Majesty (and bring in a Bill) to take away Bishops,
root and branch: Another, for taking away the Militia from the K. and setting
it in other hands (both which Bills were rejected in a full and free convention
of Parliament) Also to pass by tumults raised in Dec. and Ja. 1641. Tumults in
Dec. and Jan. 1641.
For reviving and carrying on the Bills before rejected, by driving away the
dissenting Memb. and new moulding the 2 Houses of Parl.

Acts for a Trienniall and perpetual Parliament.
His Majesty after this (according to their desires in their petition) passed
two several Acts, the first, for a Trienniall Parliament; the second, for a
continuance of this Parliament: In which Acts he gave his prerogative and power
out of his own hands, which proved his and the Kingdoms ruin.

Fears and Jealousies.
They begin to invent Fears and Jealousies, and possess the people with
pretenses or designs for destroying the Parl. City and Kingd: But these Fears
and Jealousies (of their own contriving) has destroyed the K. and People, and
preserved themselves.

Petition for the Militia.
This party of the House of Commons thus possessed with Fears and Jealousies,
petition His Majesty to put the Tower of London, and all other Forts, and the
whole Militia of the Kigndom into their hands, Jan. 28.

Also they tender His Majesty an Ordinance for settling the power of the
Militia in the Houses of Parl. Feb. 24.

The Kings Fears and Jealousies.
Which Petition and Ordinance begot in His Majesty also Fears and Jealousies of
a design against Himself, and against the Crown, to take away His Rights, and
to alter the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom: as appears by
His Answer, Jan. 28.

The K. gives the Parl. the Tower, Forts and Custles.
His Majesty (to comply with them) promised, That the Forts and Castles should
be in such hands ((...) only such) as the Parliament may safely conside in,
Jan. 28.

Also His Majesty accepted of Sir John Conyers to (...) Lieutenant of the
Tower of London, in place of Sir John Byron, Feb. 11.

The Militia of the Kingdom.
Lastly, He accepted of the Lieutenants by them nominated to be entrusted with
the Militia of the Counties, and offered to grant them Commissions and powers;
promising also to continue the same so long as there should be cause, Feb. 28.

Vote the settling of the Militia.
But they are not herewith satisfied, they enforce their petition, March 1. They
vote the settling of the Militia, and they set forth a Declaration of the
grounds of their fears and jealousies, March 9. They resolve and vote, in case
of extreme danger (as at this time) and upon His Majesty's refusal; the
Parliament have power to order the Militia of the Kingdom; and the Ordinance
agreed on by both Houses for the Militia, does oblige the people, and ought to
be obeyed by the Fundamental Laws of the Land, March 15.

The K. grants the Militia to them.
His Majesty condescended, That as the Militia was disposed according to their
desires, so it should not be executed without their advice, April 28. 1642.

And then also he granted the same for Corporations, which he had formerly done
concerning the Counties.

They seize the Navy Royal.
But yet they are not satisfied; and secure they cannot be (in their own
opinions) unless they have the sole power of disposing and executing the
Militia without the King; nor unless they have the Navy Royal also, which
they seized and disposed of, March 28.

Now whether those Lords and Commons did put themselves into the strength of
the Kingdom, to prepare against danger, or for a design, let the sad
consequents manifest: preceding actions of this nature (set the deceitfulness
of man's heart) being not rightly to be understood but by subsequent managements.

Deportment to the King.
And in their deportment afterward you may find more of confidence then of
fear, more of andaciousnesse and conspiracy against the King, then of
solicitousnesse for the Kingdom; an endeavor rather to subvert and destroy,
then to preserve and maintain the fundamental constitution and government of
the Kingdom and Parliament.

Sir John Hotham keeps the King out of Hull, April 23. and the Parliament
justifies his traitorous act, Sir J. Hotham.
April 28. When to hold a Fort or Castle against the King, is to levy War
against the King; which is high treason by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3.

Not long after, Mr Martin.
Mr Henry Martin says openly in the House of Commons, and unreproved, That the
Kings office is forfeitable, and that the happiness of this Kingdom did not
depend upon His Majesty, or any of the Royal branches of that root.

And Sir Henry Ludlow, Sir H. Ludlow.
That he was not worthy to be King of England; which doubtless was the sense
of the Parliament; for May 26. 1642. both Houses declare, That they should not
want duty or modesty, if they followed the highest presidents of other
Parliaments: That is, Of deposing and murdering the King.
if they should depose and murder the King, as other unparalled Parliaments
had done Edward and Richard the Second.

Declare against the Kings Negative Vote.
The Crown it self cannot escape them; for in the same Declaration they deny
the Kings Negative Vote in Parliament.

And to deprive the King and Crown of their power, not only in Law making, but
also in governing, Propositions destructive to Monarchy.
June 2. they offer to His Majesty Propositions destructive to Regality and
Monarchy, viz. for the Parliament, 1. To nominate all the great Officers and
Ministers of State, and the chief Judges of the Land. 2. To the reform
Church Government, and the Liturgy as they shall think fit. 3. To dispose and
execute the Militia of the Kingdom according to their Ordinance. 4. To approve
those to whom the command and custody of Forts and Castles shall be committed.
5. To admit such Peers as shall be made hereafter, to sit and Vote in
Parliament.


Parliament take up Arms.
June 10. They sent forth Propositions for bringing (...) Plate and money, and
raising an Army, To make good what they had taken from, and declared against,
and proposed to His Majesty, viz. to keep the Forts and Castles, and the
Militia, and Navy from him; and to take from Him, and from the Crown, the power
of making Laws, and governing the Church and state: and to depose and destroy
him; and to root out his posterity, together with Monarchy. Is not this by
force of arms to shake off subjection and to rebel?

Declaration to raise an Army.
Then put they forth their Declarations to the Kingdom, telling the People, that
the King, seduced by evil council, intended to levy War against the
Parliament, City, and Kingdom; And to destroy their Religion, Laws and
Liberties: persuading them to rise (as one man) for defense thereof (with these
delusive pretenses)

Protestation and Vows.
That they did not sight against his Majesty's Person, but to deliver Him from
His popish and wicked Counsel* and under this notion, they raised their Armies;
and to that end they made Protestations, Vows, with Leagues and Covenants, and
(upon invitation of the Scots (into this Kingdom) to their assistance, declared
that they sought for the preservation and maintenance of the Kings Person,
Crown and Dignity; the true Protestant Religion, Laws and liberties, with the
privileges of Parliament, against all Popish and Malignant Cavaliers, and all
other disaffected persons.

These were the golden baits, Delusions.
the poor delude people of England, were ensnared with; and in prosecution of
their demands, and Rebellious sinister ends, did they prosecute and continue
the War, until they had subdued the King and all his party. 1646.

The misled people of England.
And how could the abused and misled people of England, but be enraged against
you, who under the pretense of preventing present dangers, wound themselves
into the chief power and government of the Kingdom? And under the specious
pretenses of fighting for Religion and Liberty, engaged them in the maintenance
of their usurpation, and made them isntrumental to promote Rebellion, under
this veil of Hypocrisy, and under the gloss and notion of Reformation, have
they hatched all their bloody practices, whose ambitious ends, private
interests and designs, was to destroy our Religion, Laws and Liberties,
Murder our King, and triumph in our destruction.

The King coming to the Scots Army. Bought and Sold.
After His Majesty's coming to the Scots Army, The Parliament disburses 200000
l. for His Person (a Royal exchange) the Parliament got the King; the Scots
their Arrears; bought by the Parliament, sold by the Scots; sold to be restored
to His Crown; bought to be made a Glorious Prince, as they promised him; sold
by His Native Subjects for gains, and bought by His Traitorous Subjects to be
Murdered.

His Majesty being now in the hands of the Parliament, they restrained him at
Newcastle, and Holmeby: The King Restrained at Holmeby.
where Cromwell gave command to the private Soldiery, to seize upon His
Person: being now in the power of the Army; observe how Lieutenant General
Cromwell corrts His Majesty (both by members of the Army, and Gentlemen
formerly in the Kings Service) into a good opinion and belief of the
proceedings of the Army, and into a dis-affection and dislike of the
proceedings of the Parliament; pretending to show, that His Majesty's Interest
would far better suit with the principles of Independency, then of Presbytery;
when the King was at Newmarket, did not Lieutenant General Cromwell, and
Commissary General Ireton promise His Majesty any thing he should desire, as
Revenues, Chaplains, Wife and Children, servants of his own, Visitations of
friends, access of Letters saying also, they were not a people hating His
Majesty's Person, or Monarchical Government, but that they liked it as the
best, and by him; saying further, That they did hold it a very unseasonable
thing for the Parliament to abridge him of them: often promising with vows,
protestations and oaths, that if His Majesty would, and not act against them;
they would restore him to all his desires, settle him in his just Rights and
Liberties, and make him the most glorious Prince in Christendom, that they
would carry such an equal hand, between him and the Parliament, in order to
the settlement of the Kingdom by him, which besides their own judgment and
conscience, they did see a necessity of it as to the people: Commissary
General Ireton, saying, that what was offered in the proposals to him, should
be so just and reasonable, that if there were but six men in the Kingdom that
would fight to make them good, he would be seventh, against any power that
should oppose them: See how they kept a fair correspondency with His Majesty,
until they had obtained their own ends; The King at Hampton Court, Cromwell
and Ireton plot to convey him to the Isle of Wight.
Then Lieut: Gen: Cromwell sending a Letter to Colonel Whaley at Hampton Court
(where the King then was) intimating that His Royal Person was in some danger,
by the commotions of Colonel Martin, and Colonel Rainsbrough, and their
adherents, which Letter was showed to the King by Colonel Whaley; which
Traiterous design of Cromwell and Ireton, and the rest, was to convey away his
Majesty privately into the I Will of Wight, The King prisoner in C^^risbrook Castle
where they did strictly imprison him in Carisbrook Castle: Never was any King
of England imprisoned by his Subjects, but he was deposed and murdered.

Thus they who at first took the King from Holmeby into the power of the Army;
cried down the Presbyterian Government, Policy and power.
and proceedings of the present Parliament, and their perpetuity: And in stead
thereof held and earnest inclination to a moderate Episcopacy, 11 Members
impeached.
with a new Election of Members to sit in Parliament, for the speedy settlement
of the Kingdom; 7 Lords impeached.
and afterward when the eleven Members had left the House, and the marching
through London with the Army, the seven Lords impeached, 4 Aldermen committed.
four Aldermen of London committed to the Tower; then again, they coyed up the
Presbyterian Government, and the perpetuity of the Parliament: Cromwell further
pleasing himself with the great sums of money, which was his Arrears, due to
the Army, and the Tax of 60000 l. a month; Tax of 60000 l. per month.
Now says he, we may be an Army (for ought I know) as long as we live.

After this, Orders of Parliament were sent forth for calling their Members
together: Cromwell perceiving the Houses will not answer his expectation, Self
end.
he utters forth words to a prejudice against the proceedings of Parliament,
Cromwels interest.
again crying down Presbyterian Governmet, setting up a single interest, which
he calls an honest interest.

The Army seized of sixty Members some Citizens and imprisons them.
To this purpose he puts the Army upon choosing new Adjutators, and to draw forth
of the Parliament sixty or seventy of the Members thereof. And a considerable
party of the chief Citizens, and some of every County, to be clapped up in the
Castles; saying what a sway these men keep, and that he was as well able to
govern the Kingdom as any of them; so that nothing more appears then his
seeking after the Government of King, Parliament, City and Kingdom.

Concluding further, Hypocrisy.
that it is lawful to pass through any forms of Government for accomplishing
his ends; and therefore either to purge the Houses, and support the remaining
party by force everlastingly, or to put a period to them by force, is very
lawful and suitable to the interest of honest men.

No addresses to the King, January 1.
After this, they passed those Votes; Of making no more Addresses to the King,
nor receiving any Message from him, Jan. 1. And they set forth a Declaration
expressing the reasons of those Votes, Feb. 11. And the Army resolved to live
and die with them in maintenance of those Votes, and in settling their designed
Government without the King, and against him, Jan. 9.

Their resolution to govern without a King.
And though they seem to prosecute the King upon emergent provocations ( that He
made War against them, etc.) yet from Harry Martins and Sir Henry Ludlows
speeches, and from the Declarations of the two Houses of Parliament (before
Arms were taken up, and before any Propositions sent to the King) it appears,
that from the beginning they had a design against His Majesty to murder him,
Their design to murder the King and destroy his posteriy. His death.
and to destroy Monarchy: And what was spoken and declared then, was agitated
and pursued at last.

In order whereunto, they declare against His Family and Posterity.

Thus you see, Usurpers are ever Murderers, 2 Reg. 11.1. and Math. 12.38, 39.

I am come now to speak of His Death, who was butchered and murdered by the
most barbarous, perfidious and perjured Villains under the Sun, whether
Christian or Infidel.

Which whosoever takes into their sad and serious consideration, the
proceedings and actions of this confederate party of Rebellious and
bloodthirsty Cannibals, sitting and acting in the Parliament and Army, who
(contrary to their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, their Protestation, the
Solemn League and Covenant, and sundry Declarations and Remonstrances of both
Houses, to His late murdered Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, to the whole
Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and to all foreign States and
Nations; and have most presumptuously arrogated and usurped to themselves the
title of, The Supreme Authority of this Kingdom; and by color and pretense
thereof, have wickedly and audaciously presumed, without and against the
privities or consents of the people and His Subjects of England, The unjust
Court of Justice.
and against the Vote of the House of Peers, to erect a High Court of Justice,
(as they term it) though never any Court themselves, to arraign and condemn
His Majesty, against the Laws of God, and the Municipall Laws of the Realm:
Which Court (consisting for the most part of such partial and engaged persons,
who had formerly vowed His Majesty's destruction, and sought His Blood) most
illegally and unjustly refused to admit of His Majesty's just Reasons and
exceptions against their usurped Jurisdiction; and without any lawful
Authority, or proof against Him, or legal Trial, presumed most traitorously
and impiously to condemn and murder Him.

And since that, have arraigned and put to death some Peers, and other free
Subjects of this Realm, contrary to Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, Duke
Hamilton, Holland, and Capell.
the Laws of the Land, and the Liberties of the Subjects, to the great
enslaving and endangering of the lives and liberties of all the free-people of
England.

And whereas the said confederated Commons have likewise tyrannically, Acts of
Parliament made by the Committee.
and contrary to their Oaths and Engagements aforesaid, to take upon them to
make Acts of Parliament (as they term them) without the joint consent of the
King and House of Lords, contrary to the use and privileges of Parliament; and
known Laws of the Land: And by pretext thereof, have traitorously and wickedly
endeavored to disinherit the Illustrious CHARLES, Prince of Wales, next Heir to
the Crown, Treason to proclaim Charles II. King.
and Actual King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, immediately after
His said Royal Father, barbarous murder, by right of Descent; and proclaimed
it Treason for any person to proclaim Him King (whereas it is high Treason in
them thus to prohibit His proclaiming) and have likewise traitorously and
impudently encroached a Tyrannical and lawless power to themselves to vote
down our Ancient, Kingly and Monarchical Government, and the House of Peers;
Change of Government
and to make a New Great Seal of England, without the Kings Pourtraicture or
Style; and to alter the Ancient, Regal and Legal Style of Writs, and
proceedings in the Courts of Justice; and to create New Judges and
Commissioners of the Great Seal; and to dispense with the Oaths of Supremacy
and Allegiance, and to prescribe new Oaths unto them, contrary to Law, Statute
or Custom to administer. And have traitorously attempted to change and alter
the Fundamental Laws and Government of this Kingdom, and to subvert the being,
freedom and privileges of Parliaments: For which Treasons, Strafford and
Canterbury (though less criminal) lost their heads this Parliament.

States and Lords of the Land.
To conclude, you are become (by Rebellion, Treason, Tyranny, Blood and Murder)
Lords of the Land, Kings of a poor distressed and miserable Kingdom; And you
are pleased in your greatness to style your selves ( The Free Estates of the
Kingdom) you have violently, forcibly and unjustly got the riches, treasure and
wealth of the Land into your hands by the power of the Sword, under which the
poor people of England are ruinated and destroyed.

Yet consider this (you that forget God) the vengeance of Heaven hangs over
your heads for oppression and blood; your reprieve is not your salvation; you
are grown to a height of confidence and presumption upon your successes; your
necks are as iron, and your brows brass, and you walk uncontrollable in your
way, triumphing as the only Princes of the Earth; as fit to sway the Scepter of
England, and all Nations; as the only righteous and honorable people in the
world, the great Lords of the Land: Yet, Remember for all these things you
shall come to Judgment; you shall give an account for all the treasonable and
bloody actions you have perpetrated against the King and Kingdom.

Thus far have I traced your footsteps the space of eight years, not without
admiration, from the time His Majesty sat on His Throne, to His unfortunate
Death by His Subjects, before His own Palace; where you may observe the most
Virtuous and Wisest Prince in the Christian world murdered and put to death by
the most villainous, barbarous and bloody people upon the Face of the Earth.

FINIS.
I shall shortly recommend to you the second part of this History, which (as
yet) is not finished, containing all their Actions from His Majesty's Death to
this present.


