THE English Mountebank CASTING The Sickly Water OF THE STATE: Opening the
several causes of her desperate Disease, and prescribing certain Sovereign
Antidotes for the speedy Cure of all her Maladies. Dedicated to all true hearts
that heartily desire Great Britains perfect Cure.

Printed in the Year 1647.

The English Mountebanke, etc.
ROmes poison Spaines complots, the French designs,
My skill foresees discovers undermines,
And Scotlands too; that for our guodes or Gold;
Kings, States, Laws, Religion's bought and sold.
Why Saint-like Sacrilege does impropriate,
And calm Oppression swallows Church and State?
Why close Hypocrisy bends his Courtly knee,
Though (wanting all faith) would have all faiths free.
I cure blind Eyes, Ears deaf, Tongues dumb, and tell
What duller Spirits in the flack Nerves dwell:
And by my Learning, and deep skill can show
How humerous and irregular vices flow,
And why the liver boyles with lust still blood;
What makes the Stomach brook no meat that is good;
Why the loose Palsy makes the Hands to tremble,
Whether for love they spoke, or they dissemble,
Why that the gouty Knees so stiffly bend,
And Feet are swift for blood, but no good end.
I cure all these and more, and seldom fail
To draw all Humors through the guts or tail.
My Antidote.
TAke in the declining of the Sun, of the precious Herb called Christian
Obedience, a good quantity: Of Uniformity in Religion, as much: Of Allegiance
to Sovereignity; with a little of an herb called Supremacy, pick them (...)
then put them into the Chafer of a good Conscience, clean scoured from the
Rust of Ambition, Rebellion, Sacrilege, Perjurie, Hypocrisy and
Coveteousnesse, etc. Then put into them some few drops sliding from the
Crystal fountain of and obedient and (...) the clear fire of fervent love;
keep them stirring and in perpetual motion, till they become a Sovereign
Salve; then take it off, and cool it with the breath of a sanctified Spirit;
then treasure it up carefully in a vessel made of the pure clay of English
Honor; apply it every Morning to your queasie stomachs, it undoubtedly cures
you of the bloody issue, the Kings Evil, the frenzy in your Heads, the aching
of your hearts, and the Consumptions of your (lately lost) Liberties, and
Estates; and make you as healthful as ever you were in all your lives, and
your Land once more happier then ever, by dispelling all the Contagious
vapors, and misty fogges that have so infected you with a deep Lethargy, and
robe you of the sense of all your former happiness: Apply this Antidote, it
will cost you little, considering the preciousnesse thereof.

This passes our Elixar, or the Stone
Sought for by many, but obtained by none:
The obstruction of the Liver, or the Spleen,
This opens, mollifies, and purges clean:
A secret it is assured for madness, folly,
Wild jealousy, or cloudy Melancholy:
It cures the Gout, it qualifies the Cause,
Supplies the Commons Purse like the oil of the Laws:
This dries up Humors, Humors that abound,
And our weak bodies this makes safe and sound.
Buy then this Antidote at any Rate,
It cures the sad disease of your sick State.
Next (dear Countrie-men) my man Jack Pudding shall show you a new fashioned
Looking-glass, which once belonged to one Janus, wherein you may see backward
at your former happiness, and forward to your ensuing misery: I am feign to
show it you first in the dark, because you may see how each Meteor, or Ignis
fatuus seems a Sun; but in the day coming near the Sun, they cannot be
seen: Next in one of the new Lights (called Reformation) wherein you may
perceive that some aspiring too high, have presumed too far. All persons are
not fit for all places: Fools mistake, and overdoe; wise men warm themselves
at the fire, where children burn their fingers. Our Age sees many of these
Babels, whose Ruins will seem greater a far off then at hand: But to the
matter:

First (without the help of State-Spectacles) behold a King selected, whose
Royal and Christian Reputation, Envy it self could not, nor dared to sully,
enthroned in the hearts of a numerous and Loyal People, thrice happy in his
Royal Consort, and (...) pledges of their mutual loves, and our succeeding
peace in their assured Succession; stored with crowded Magazines of Military
provisions; at Sea powerful above his Ancestors, by a formidable Navy;
governing his people in peace and prosperity; a King altogether worthy of such
a Kingdom.

Next cast your eye upon a Church so full of Luster, Order, and Discipline, so
garnished and enriched with Learning and Piety, so pure a form, as any Story
or observation can attribute to any since Christianity became a profession.
Next look upon a lustrious Nobility, a flourishing Gentry, plentifully
sharing dignities and trusts in the Military, and Civil Magistracy, an
obedient, peaceful, and contented Commonalty. The few opposers or interrupters
of the peace of both Governments, being so few, that they scarce justified the
name of a number: our Cities envied by our neighbors for their Government,
opulency in present enjoyments, and assured growth of an increasing Trade; a
Land populous, plenteous, and at unity with it self, admitting of no means,
or diminution, but Miracle or War to bring it to misery and confusion, and the
means how to beget such a War, so soon to ruin all this happiness, being of
no less extent then a Miracle. Now how unhappy we are, look backward at so
much blessing, and to say it was; let the Ingenious Reader judge.

But now let us look forward to our own present Reformed condition of all this
happiness; See a King rejected in his good name of King, and Christian,
blasphemed: made poor by the loss of the poor deceived, and seduced hearts
of an abused and seduced people; divorced from his Royal Consort, (a crime
cursed upon Record) kept from the sight of his dear and Princely Issue;
dispersed like a scattered Couvie; His succession become disputable, and though
a King, yet truckt for, bought and sold, and now reduced to far less power
then the Master of a private Family; A new Modelled Court, having not so much
as the footsteps left of its former Beauty and Civility; A Church shuffled to
indistinction; degrees unadmitted; Sects, Schisms, and Blasphemies, in this
time, and Kingdom, vying with all those of past Ages, and Foreign Nations:
Behold a Nobility clouded by the promilenous foggs arising from their
inferiors, their Honors made Arbitrary, and no longer to continue then the
Common Rout shall think convenient; A Gentry discountenanced by an introduced
Party, awed by Tenants, and Servants, impoverished by long Sequestrations, and
second purchases of their own lawful Inheritance; A giddy Communalty,
tumultuous, desiring something, but as yet they know not what, nor bound to
discover till they know themselves: Their freedoms, liberty of person, property
of Estates given away, and become mere Notions, and not vindicable, nor
preservable by Law; Cities dispeopled, untraded, and impoverished by reason of
extorting Committees, and Excises, etc. and as much confusion of Government, as
diversity of opinions; All able proficients in Divinity and Law, upon the
refusal of a not understood (or too well understood) Covenant, outed their
free holds, and Lawful Rights, and in their places a supply of men would
persuade the world there were a design to increase and propagate Devotion by
an Introduction of Ignorance, which appears by Lawyers pleading, and Ministers
Preaching; Ordinances against the known Laws of God and the Nation; A Land
overwhelmed with inundations of Blood, harrassed and worn out by pays and
quarterings, and almost grown wild for want of husbandry: And all this by a
War raised by our selves for Reformations sake, acted and prosecuted by and
upon our selves, as if we had in Cymerian darkness lost the Spirits of sober
Christians, and grop't out the fury of inflamed Bacchinalls, and could find no
place to scour our long rustied Swords, other then our own natural Bowels.

It is a heightened and Superiative affliction to a diseased person, so only to
be made to understand his defects, as to know them to be irrepairable.

To close up all, I have annexed a Moral Table worthy the perusal, Entitled
Gryps.

GRYPS.
THe Griffon well allied, and great in power,
Made challenge to be general Emperor
Of beasts, and birds; whose title to decide,
A general Council was proclaimed wide
Through all the world, and every bird and beast
Together met, the greatest, and the least.
Amongst these some crawling serpents, some with feet,
And some with wings did at this Council meet,
And claimed the place of piece, and did allege
Full many ancient Laws of privilege
For their high honor; but the chief was this;
They proved themselves beasts out of Genesis.
But when that Law was read, and it was found,
Their treason brought a curse upon the ground;
That ever since their poison did annoy
Both birds and beasts, and often did both destroy;
Cloaking their fraud, guilding their villainy
With ancient universal unity;
Betraying truth with dark ambiguous lies,
And cosening man of blessed Paradise:
Adulterating, purging of the sense
Of holy Writ under a good pretense:
They had by general voice, strict banishment
From coming near this Court of Parliament:
And now the rest proceed; but by the way
Arose another cause of some delay:
Coming to choose a Speaker, bold Jack-daw
Would interpose his skill, and vouch a Law,
(The Law of Parasites) that each one might
Speak what him list, against reason, or against right,
And that no speaker needed, ought to be,
Where such a mixture was; for if quoth he,
We choose a bird, the beasts will all dissent
If they a beast, we shall be discontent.
This speech, though true in part, did all off end,
Because they saw his busy tongue did bend
To cross all business, and his wit devise
To change the firmest knots to nullities.
So they agreed together in this sort,
To cut his nimble tongue a little short;
For saucy tatling, where he should not teach.
And being silent where he ought to preach.
But he avoids this sentence with a quirke,
Pleading of old he longed to the Kirk,
Though seldom he came there; and each one took
Him for no Clarke, until he claimed his book.
Then they perceived his skill, and soon discerned
How he to flatter and backbite was learned;
Could mount a steeples top, and with the wind
Turn like the weather-cocke his ready mind,
Serving the time: therefore they onward pass
To choose a Speaker; some would have the Ass,
Because he could diminish naught nor add,
But truth deliver, were it good or bad:
Yet most mislik'd that choice, and those pronounce
The Parrot fit, and some the nimble Ounce;
Some the sweet Nighting all, and some the Dog,
And some the Fox, the Baboone, some the Hog;
Some Robin red-brest, or the speckled Thrush;
Some Chantecleere, and some the Woodcock flush;
Some chose the Ape, and some mislike his voice,
So sundry factions rise from this hard choice.
At last the Elephant persuades withal
To take an equal course, and man to call
As speaker, Judge, and umpier in this thing,
Being by nature the worlds general King.
And he most fit to appoint and to depute
His own Imperial bird-beast substitute.
To this they all consent, and to this end
In humble wise to Man this message send:
That he their Patron, Governor, and Lord,
Would daigne this mighty difference to accord
With reason and authority. His consent
Is soon obtained: now gins the Parliament,
In which the Griffon thus begins his plea:
Grand Emperor of Air, Earth, and Sea;
I challenge by prerogative and birth,
To be your Vicar general on the Earth,
Over birds and beasts: The beasts I ought command,
Because upon four feet like them I stand.
The birds I ought to rule, cause I can fly
With these my wings like them, and soar as hie:
I do surpass the beasts in having wings,
The birds in legs, in tail, and other things:
My force does match the Lions, and my heart
The Eagle, or excels them in each part.
Your doom I therefore claim, that I may be
Placed equal to my worth in sovereignty:
And next your self the Emperor be of Earth,
According to the privilege of my birth.
Then spoke the Elephant, and said, that he
Ought over beasts the only Lord to be:
His strength was great, and more then others far,
His Honors more purchased in manly war:
His learning more, the letters understanding,
And aptly doing all, wise man commanding.
Against him up rose the Sire of Banks his horse,
And challenged him to try wit, worth, and force.
This grew to heat, but then the mighty Rucke
Soon parts the fray, each did from other pluck;
Desires she might be heard, her challenge was
To rule all birds, since she all birds did pass.
The Wren straight hopt about, and said, his name
Did show from what a royal stock he came.
And every bird and beast, the great and small,
Had his ambitious aim to govern all.
Which having made, in silence all sat down,
Being overawed with man's Imperial frown.
Each feared, each hoped, until at length the Man
Rose up, and to determine thus began:
I was your Master made, you made for me,
And whatsoever in the Globe there be,
Hid or revealed, it is mine. And I alone
Sole Emperor am, under that only One.
Nor doubt you this; the question now in hand
Is for the under Kingship of my land;
For it is not fit that I should troubled be
With every toy, when subjects disagree:
But that my President should still be nigh,
Your doubts and jarres to appease and rectify.
It only rests to show what parts are fit
For government: That Is courage, strength and wit:
Mercy and justice, and the guard to those,
Awe to command, dexterity to dispose.
If any part of these be separate,
The rule is most imperfect, and the State
Falls to contempt, the laws are trodden down,
The scepter broken, and despised the Crown.
This shows how many here have vainly sought
For one good part, the wreath that many ought.
That nor the Ruck, the Elephant nor Horse,
Are fit to govern for their matchless force:
Nor for their wit alone; for then the Ox
Might make his claim too, and the subtle Fox
Much less the silly Wren for honored house,
Nor the cat-fearing, Elephant-frighting-Mouse
For these would breed contempt, and Athens owl
Might challenge so night rule of every soul.
Nor is it meet this Griffon should obtain,
What by pretense of right he seeks to gain,
Because his title halts on either side,
Except in halves, he will himself divide.
He is no beast: his tallents, wings, and head
Conclude against his challenge in my stead.
Nor yet a bird: his body, leg's, and tail
With evidence his arguments do quail.
But if where proof lies hid, we may proceed
By probabilities; from spurious seed
He took his being, and would neither love,
Being like to neither, but a Tyrant prove.
And where he boasts his wondrous strength and heart
It Is false he does pretend, because that part
Which shows him Lyon-like in shape, hide, hair,
Does of the Kingly-Lyon stand in fear.
And that birds part which he from the Eagle took,
On the sky-towring Eagle dares not look.
The Lion therefore I ordain and make
The King of beasts; his awful voice shall shall
The proudest spirit. And the Eagle shall
Be King of Birds, and overlooke them all.
This sentence past, the Parliament arose,
And with these rules of truth the Sessions close.
Epimythium.
Who seeks two swords to sway, has right to none,
Who seeks two offices is not fit for one:
Who seeks two callings, takes too much in hand:
Who has two faiths, does true to neither stand.
One sword, one office, Calling, and one faith
Is fit for one Man; so this story says.
FINIS.

