ENGLANDS, Sole Remedy:

OR, A Wholsome Directory, for the recory of our languishing Kingdom: Drawn
from the Law of God, and the Land.

CONTAINING Some necessary and pertinent Queries, with their Resolutions, by
Scriptures, Law, and Reason: very fit and convenient to be thought upon by all
Englishmen, for the begetting of a sure, safe, and well-grounded Peace.

Collected and intended for the good of all.

By a Lover of Peace and Truth.

Printed in the Year 1648.

To all English Subjects.
REader, whoever thou art, Peace is that we all cry out for, and that we all
seek after; but few there are which in a right way endeavor thereafter:
wherefore in this juncture of time, to help forward so good and blessed a
work, it may be very seasonably advantageous, for all English Subjects,
seriously to consider of some Queries, and their Resolutions, concerning the
Political frame and constitution of this our Kingdom; which being well and
conscientiously thought upon, and digested into act, doubtlesly would beget a
sure, sound, and well grounded peace, which out of a real and sincere
affection, and endeavor thereafter, I have composed and contrived as
follows; wherein thou shall find me,

Thine in Christ Jesus, Christianus Philopater.

Englands sole Remedy.
Quaerie 1.

Monarchical, that is government (...) one which is a King. Aristocraticall,
that is government by a few of the best, Nobles. Origarchicall, that is,
government by a few of the most wealthy and powerful.
Whether the government of this Kingdom, ( which has ever been Monarchical)
since His Majesty's departure from the two Houses, has been Aristocraticall,
or Oligarchicall?

Resol. In the resolving of this Quaerie it is observable, that the matter
doubted, is the ordering, and mannagement of the affairs of this Kingdom, by
the two Houses at Westminster, within a certain time, which is, from His
Majesty's departure from them, unto this present; wherein the shaken and
tottered condition of our distressed Nation, has wrested out a strain, very
improper, thereby seeming to take it for granted, that the exercise of the two
Houses, over this Kingdom, since His Graces departure from them, has been a
government, which will not bear water for these reasons.

Reasons why the usurpation of the (...) cannot (...) be a Government.
1 No Commonwealth may be said to be governed, but by lawful Authority, which
lawful Authority, where there are established Laws and Sanctions, do uphold
and maintain the rule, and power of that Government; which the Laws and
Sanctions of this Kingdom, do not uphold and maintain in the two Houses;
wherefore must it needs be most certain, that they have no authority for their
over-swaying of this Kingdom since his Majesty's departure.

2 In this Kingdom, where there are established Lowes and Sanction; that
cannot be said to be government, but what is in conformity and obedience unto
the said established Laws, and Sanctions; therefore their managing of the
affairs of this Kingdom, contrary and in opposition unto the Laws of our
Nation, by an arbitrary and tyrannical power, must needs conclude their
usurpation to be no Government.

3. Because the end of Government, is the good and perfect state of the
Commonwealth, which cannot be kept but by an union of the whole, whereas they
have made the greatest disunion that can be imagined, by disjoynting and
rending this Kingdom in neglecting the Laws thereof, and begetting several
factions, divisions, and parties therein, wherefore their undertaking the rule
and command of this Realm is an absolute usurpation, and no Government, which
phrase in this Quaerie is to be understood, as they pretend themselves to be
Governors, and others do confess themselves to be governed by them; which
taken in their own sense cannot be said to be Government Monarchical, (which
is the state and constitution of this Kingdom) seeing they have ever since
acted, not only besides, but against his Majesty, contrary unto both the Law
of God and the Land; therefore if their usurpation must be accounted for a
Government, it must either be Aristocraticall, or Oligarchicall, whereof it
cannot be the former, that is Dominium Optimatum, Government by the best
Nobles, for this has been in that sense, Regimen Communium, the government of
Commons, by a few, or a party of the lower House of Commons, therefore must it
needs be Oligarchicall, because it is an usurpation of a few of the said House,
who contrary to Law have exploded the gravest, wisest, best learned, and most
conscientious men from amongst them, not suffering them to perform that trust,
which their Country had committed to them: wherefore the Resolution of this
first Quaerie must be thus, that since His Majesty's departure from the two
Houses, this Kingdom has been tyrannized over by an Oligarchy.

Quaere 2. Whether or no it may be accounted a sin against the Word of God in
the most moderate Subjects of England, to believe the constituted Government
thereof to be (...), and not (...)?

(...), i. e Rignum Regale, when a people are governed by a King* according to
the Law of the Land. (...), that is, where a King reigns so absolute that, his
word is a Law.
Resol. This Quaerie sets the people of England in three ranks, whereof two are
in extremes, and one in a mean, the one extreme are they who would attribute
all that power and authority which is attributed and given unto a King in the
Word of God, unto the King of England, and so make him the most absolute King
in the highest degree: the other extreme are the Sectaries, who will not put
any difference betwixt a King and other inferior Magistrates, which is
directly against the Word of God, and the Law of the Land: but the best are the
middle and moderate men, who hold our Kingdom to be ruled by a King according
to Law, concerning whom this scruple is raised, whether or no they sin against
the Word of God, in so holding? To which it is answered, the King of England in
himself being as absolute as any in the world, it must needs be most certain,
that at first he had all that absolute power, and then to have holden this had
been a sin against the Word of God, but as the King of England has freely of
his own accord by the great Charter of England made the same (...), that is, a
Kingdom wherein the King is to rule according to Law, and thus to hold cannot
be a sin against the Word of God, because holding otherwise we hold contrary
to the Kings Law, which is a sin against the Word of God, besides the King of
England having made this perpetual pact, and agreement with his people, this
therein is most certain, that volenti non fit injuria; Therefore it can be no
sin against the Word of God, in the most moderate Subjects of England to
believe, the constituted Government thereof, to be (...), and not (...).

Quaerie 3. Whether or no at the time of the Reformation, that good which was
done, by casting the Popes Authority out of men's consciences was overballanced,
by therewith casting out the authority of Scriptures concerning Regal
Authority?

Resol. The full solution of this Quaerie requires a larger Tract, and a more
able pen, then for present is alloted unto me, wherefore herein to move greater
judgments. I will but therein deliver mine own opinion, which is this, that
heretofore the Pope overruling men's consciences, did not only usurp that
authority, but thereby did also greatly injoyne gross Idolatry, and
Superstition: directly against the Word of God: wherefore our exemption and
freedom therefrom, must needs be unspeakable good unto this Kingdom, but on
the contrary, the casting out or at least neglecting the authority of
Scriptures, concerning Regal Authority, has brought an unspeakable hurt unto
this Kingdom, by begetting and causing blasphemy and profanation, sacrilege
and impiety against God, treason, and rebellion against his sacred Majesty,
ruin and destruction to the Church, faction and division in the Kingdom,
which though at first they were not discerned, this our age has had thereof
too dear and deep experience; but whether or no these evils, do counterpoize
or overballance, that good which was done, by exploding the Popes Authority out
of this Kingdom, I leave to be determined by greater abilities.

Quaerie 4. Whether or no, a right and lawful King, has power from God, to
bless, or curse his People?

Resol. This question is to be holden in the Affirmative; for whosoever has
any (much more this) power, has it from God, because every good and perfect
gift comes from him, who has given this power unto all that call upon him,
thus giving, unto the poor, is a casting our bread upon the waters, which we
shall find, after many days, and almesdeeds do prevail, as far as heaven, God
hears the cries, and sighs of the afflicted, and the cries of the poor
fatherless, and widows, all which are as the power of blessing, and cursing
from God; and if God have granted this unto all, and ordinary people, how much
more unto Kings, who are said to be Gods, whose hearts are unsearchable, Prove.
25.3. A divine sentence is in the lips of the King, Prove. 16.10. and the honor
of Kings is to search out a matter, Pro. 25.2. They sit at the stern to
distribute justice, and mercy, which is blessing and cursing eminenter, thus
Moses yet both a blessing and a curse before the People, Deuteronomy. 11.26. The
exercise of both which we find in particular.

1. That of blessing, thus Moses blessed the children of Israel before his
death, Deuteronomy. 33.1. And Joshua sent away the two Tribes and half with a
blessing, Josh. 22.6.7. and David blessed his people in the name of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 16.2. 2 Samuel 6.18. and Solomon stood and blessed all the Congregation of
Israel with a loud voice, 1 Kings 8.55. And David kissed (...) and blessed him,
2 Samuel 19.39.

2. That of cursing, (...) cursed the rebuilder of Jericho, Jos. 6.26. which
was executed above 520 years after, upon Hiel the Bethe^^^, 1 King. 16.24. And
David laid a very heavy curse upon Joah, 2 Samuel 3.24. therefore unto some
purpose, has Solomon said, the wrath of a King is as the roaring of a Lion,
Prove. 14.12. which God having given unto all Kings, it must needs also be given
unto the King of England, which God has made manifest and apparent unto all
the world, and that in an extraordinary manner, in that his touch does heal
that disease, which has received name from him, which is a great and certain
blessing; and having the one he has the other, (as well as the Kings of
Israel) for it is a maxim in Logic, Contrarioru^ eadem est ratio. It is true,
I have heard some say (how truly I know not) that his Majesty's touch in this
last age has not proved unto all so effectual as in former, the answer
whereunto (if it may be granted,) is very clear and obvious: was there ever
age more traitorous, treacherous, and rebellious against their Sovereign then
this? which are the effects of incredulity, which were so praevalent amongst
the Nazarites, our Saviors own countrymen, that he did not many works there
because of their unbelief, Mat. 13.58 and that abating the power in the giver,
we herein may see Gods great mercy, that it is not quite obstructed in the
gifted, though a King. Therefore it is to be believed, that a right and lawful
King has power from God, to bless or curse his People.

Quaerie 5. Whether or no that form of Government Ecclesiastical and civil
pretended or intended by the two Houses may stand with the nature of this Age
and People?

Resol. This Quaerie consists of two parts concerning government: 1
Ecclesiastical, 2 Civil:
in both which I will but deliver mine opinion, which I conceive to be truth:
and in the latter I will but only give a word or two, (referring it unto the
learned in the Laws of the Land, unto whom it is most proper) which shall be
this, that the Civil Government of this Kingdom, by the Ordinances of the two
Houses, must needs prove destructive unto this Nation; because,

1. They are destructive unto the established Law of the Land, which is the
preservation of the people.

2. The good and peace of no Kingdom, can stand in continual change and
mutability, full whereof are their Ordinances, which have been ordered,
unordered, and counter-ordered, at pleasure for their pleasures; without
respect unto the good of the Commonwealth.

3. This kind of Government (if it may be so called) is absolutely the most
Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and Licentious, that can be imagined, and therefore can
stand with no age nor People.

2. Ecclesiastical Government, that as the former, no man can tell what is,
but something they would seem to put upon us, by the name of Presbytery, which
cannot stand with this age nor people, for these reasons; in respect unto 1.
The People of the Land. 2. The Law of the Land. 3. The Law of God.


1. In respect of the people of the Land, because all the Kingdom which are
noble, wealthy, wise, knowing, honest, and conscientious, (which are numerous)
and most fit to sit at the stern of the State, are of a contrary judgment:
besides the greatest part, the most sober minded, and moderate men, have ever
been educated and brought up in so contrary a way, that they will never submit
thereunto, but with murmuring, heartburning, and repining, which at least will
bring disturbance, if not ruin unto this Kingdom.

2. In respect unto the Law of the Land, this imaginary Ecclesiastical
Eutopia, would so cut, clash, thwart, cross, and interfere all the old Law of
the Kingdom, that it must be destroyed, and either a new made, which what it
may prove, no wise man would put unto venture, or it would give us over unto
all liberty and license, or beget arbitrary and tyrannical Government.

3. In respect unto the Law of God, this kind of Government is plainly, and
directly against the Word of God, and never dreamed of until Calvin's time; and
therefore if it be set up, we must expect Gods severe curse, upon and for the
same: so that what has been said in this Quaerie may make it clear unto all
that are not wilfully blind, that their pretended or intended Government,
neither Civil nor Ecclesiastical may stand with the nature of this present
age and people.

Quaerie. 6. Whether or no the Lords now sitting in the upper House of
Parliament, having so much failed in their trust, may not more justly be
deprived of sitting there, then Lords formerly for decayed Estates?

Resol. How the Law of the Land will precisely resolve this Quaerie, I leave
unto the learned in that profession, but to them ignorant in the constitution
of any Commonwealth, halfe-eyed reason will make it good in the Affirmative,
considering the end wherefore Parliament Men sit in the two Houses, is to
consult, and advise with their Prince, concerning making Laws for the good of
the Kingdom, whereunto bona fortunae, the riches of fortune, whereof are
wealth, Revenues, honor, and the like, are nothing essential, but only
additionall thereunto, for honor, credit and supplying of outward necessities
sake, but bona animi, the goods of the mind, as are learning, especially in the
Law of God and the Land, tenderness of affection for the glory of God, and the
good of their Country, for the execution whereof it is requisite they be
qualified with fidelity, resolution, discretion, judgment, and justice,
without which they can never attain unto that end for which they sit; as the
one therefore is of more use for the attaining of that end, at which they are
to aim, then the other, it is in an answerable proportion, more necessary then
the other, and the want thereof must necessarily the more disable the parties
so wanting from the charge and trust of so great an employment. The Lords
therefore now sitting in the upper Parliament House, having failed in their
trust and fidelity, do more justly deserve to be debarred from sitting in the
House, then Lords formerly for decayed Estates.

Quaerie. 7. Whether or no by the Laws of this Kingdom the two Houses their
raising of Armies without his Majesty's consent, is a rebellious riot, (besides
the Statute Law of the Land) considering they neither have, nor could knight
their most deserving Soldiers for their Martial service?

Resol. The Law of the Land resolves this doubt clearly in the Affirmative, St.
30. Die Octobris, An. 7. Ed. 1. the words are these: Now in our Parliament at
Westminster, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of the Realm,
there assembled to take advise, have said that to us it belongs, and our part
is through our royal Seignory, straightly to defend force of Arms, and all
other force against our peace, at all times when it shall please us, and to
punish them which shall do contrary, according to the Laws and usages of this
Realm, and hereunto they are bound to aid us as their Sovereign Lord at all
seasons, when need shall be: but thus to raise Armies, against their Sovereign
Lord the King is downeright Treason, St. 25. Ed. 3.2. If a man do levy war
against their Sovereign Lord the King in this Realm, or be adherent unto the
Kings enemies in his Realm, giving to them aid and comfort in the Realm or
elsewhere, and thereof be provably attainted of open deed by people of their
condition. And if a man counterfeit the Kings great or Privy Seal, and if a
man slay the Chancellor, it is to be understood in the cases rehearsed, that
ought to be judged Treason, which extends to our Lord the King and his royal
Majesty, which Act concerning Treason is re-established, 1 Edw. 6.12. therefore
their taking up of Arms without his Majesty's consent, is against the Law of
the Land, and high Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King.

Quaerie. 8. Whether or no the two Houses in statu quo nunc, wanting the head,
heart, and integrall parts of a Parliament; may justly be accounted as the
representative Body of this Kingdom?

Resol. They do no more represent the body of this Kingdom, then a statua or
picture without head, heart; and many other members throughout, and those which
it has being mangled, and abused, do represent a man: for all men know this,
that in these two Houses are wanting, the King, which is the Head of the
Kingdom, the Judges of the Law, which are the heart thereof, and the Bishops,
which are the breasts, and the most of the temporal Nobility, which should be
as the back unto that Body Politic. They know likewise how it is mangled, in
the lower House; wanting the head, heart, and integrall parts of a Parliament:
It cannot therefore be gainsaid, but these two Houses in statu quo nunc, are no
representative Body of this Kingdom.

Quaerie 9. Whether or no the Kingdom of England, by the Judges of the Land,
the Master of the Rolls, and the Secretaries of Estate, being put from the
Woolsacks, is thereby deprived of one of their greatest interests and
concernments?

Resol. For the solution of this, let the Kingdoms own experience speak, and
we shall find it in the Affirmative; for The Judges of the Land, the Master of
the Rolls, etc. ought to sit upon Woolsacks in the middle of the upper House,
because wool being the chiefest commodity and benefit of this Kingdom, they
might thereby be put in mind thereof, to cause them to think and study for the
same good of the said Kingdom, and there ever upon all occasions, to be ready
to acquaint the Lords of the upper House, with what is Law, the greatest
Interests and concernments of the Kingdom, whereof without them there can be
no wise, prudent, wholesome care taken: They therefore being put from the
VVoolsacks, the Kingdom thereby is deprived of their greatest interests and
concernments.

Quaerie 10. Whether or no the two Houses, wanting the constitutive part of a
Parliament, may justly be called a Parliament?

Resol. No more then a Body without a Soul may justly be said to be a man: for
as a reasonable soul is that constitutive part, which makes a man; thus the
King is the soul and life of the Law and Parliament, as is sufficiently
maintained by all Orthodox Divines, and sound Lawyers. The two Houses therefore
without the King, which is the constitutive part of Parliaments, cannot justly
be called a Parliament?

Quaerie 11. Whether or no the Speaker of the lower House, having the first day
of this last Parliament, promised in the name of the Commons, that they should
not abuse, but have such regard, as most faithful Subjects ought to have, to
their Prince, considering their carriage toward him for these several years,
have thereby forfeited their honor, trust, right, and interest in the
Commonwealth?

Resol. What every rational man, if but poized with mean moderation, will
conclude of this, is easily to be conjectured; and what the Law of the Land may
determine herein, I leave unto them studied in that Profession; only hear
what the Civil Law says in such a case, concerning Councillors failing in
their trust, Si quid praeter spem accesserit, and non inveneris eum
custodientem tibi fidem justam, illum quidem expelles; alio vero uter is
consiliario, legem and justitiam cum puris servante manibus, Par. Vol. Col. 3.
de Mand. Princip. Titul. 4. If any thing shall fall out besides hope, and thou
shall not find him keeping right faith with thee, thou shall expel him, but
thou shall use another Counselor, which keeps the Law and Justice with pure
hands, and if this sentence was justice upon one private Counselor, how much
more upon public Parliament Men, which have failed in all trust and fidelity.
But herein I will but only hint what may be the judgment of the Holy Ghost,
whereunto all other Reason, Law and Authority, ought to veil and submit, and
it shall be thus: amongst many conditions requisite to make a man a fit
inhabiter of heaven, the Psalmist, Ps. 15.4. gives this for one, that he that
swears to his own hurt and changes not; he then that swears to his own
good, and the good of the weal public, and changes, shall never (abiding in
that condition) come in heaven: but least they should take a starting hole at
the Old Testament, let them undergo the sentence of the New, which is this, that
Covenant-breakers are in number of them, who knowing the judgment of God, and
that they who commit such things, are worthy of death, not only to do the same,
but to have pleasure in them that do them, Romans 1.31, and 32.

Thus you see it is an invincible truth, that the Speaker of the lower House
having the first day of this last PARLIAMENT promised in the name of the
Commons, that they should not abuse, but have such regard, as most faithful
Subjects ought to have to their Prince, considering their carriage toward him
for these several years, have thereby forfeited their honor, trust, right,
and interest, in the Commonwealth.

Quaere. 12. Whether or no, the two Houses, by dissolving the privy Counsel,
did not dissolve a greater and more honorable authority then themselves?

Resol. The very terms of this Quearie lay down the state thereof, for it is
whether the two Houses, not the Parliament, by dissolving etc. And thus it
falls clearly into the Affirmative, for the Kings power lies habitually and
originally in himself, but more actually and effectually in his Privy
Counsel, which makes a King in the exercise of his Regal Power, and his Privy
Counsel inseparable, and the Law of this Land makes the Privy Counsel of
greater honor, and authority, then the remaining part of a full and lawful
Parliament. My reasons are these.

1. It appears so by their place and order, confirmed by Act of Parliament,
St. 31. Hen. 8 10. 2. It is an order in well regulated Parliaments, if any
speak unreverently, or seditiously against the Prince, or the Privy Counsel,
to send them to the Tower, Sir Thom. Smith Commonweal of Engl. Book 2. Chap.
3. 3. The Parliament Law of the Land makes it good St. 28. Ed. 2. the words are
these. Nevertheless, the King and his Counsel, do not intend by reason of
this Statute to diminish the Kings right, etc. Where you see the Statute there
sets both the King and his Counsel above the Parliament, as it is confirmed
again, St. 33. Ed. 1.20. The King and his Counsel, and they that were present,
at the making of this Ordinance, will and intend, that the right and
Prerogative of his Crown shall be saved, to him in all things, where the King
and his Counsel are preferred, before all that were present in Parliament: The
two Houses therefore by dissolving the Privy Counsel, did dissolve a greater
and more honorable Authority then themselves.
Quaere. 13. Whether or no, the usage of the two Houses, in their mannaging of
affairs for these late years, being approved, may not become president unto
other inferior Courts, to all in their several limits, and jurisdictions
without. Law, Statute, Ordinance, or other lawful Edict.

Resol. What is to be said of this, the late and present Practice of the Army,
the several Committees, Sequestrators, and Excize men, do give a sad and dear
experience, in all of them, by their acting not only contrary unto Law and
Conscience, but even contrary to their own Ordinances, whence it follows, that
the usage of the two Houses, in their mannaging of Affairs for these late
years, being approved, may become a president unto every other inferior
Court, to act in their several Jurisdictions, without Law, Statute, Ordinance,
or other lawful Edict.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
COurteous Reader, since the Authors composing of this, he has made another
piece, called a Commission or Position, wherein it is proved to be lawful, to
labor and endeavor, for the Restitution of his Majesty, though without
Commission for the same.


