ENGLISH Liberty and Property Asserted In pursuance of the Statute Laws of this
Commonwealth.

Discovering Isreal's Sin in choosing a KING, BY SEVERAL QUESTIONS humbly
propounded to the grave Senators at WESTMINSTER.

And to all others, who have the Power of this Nation in their hands.

That which is highly esteemed amongst men, is an abomination in the sight of
God,

Luke 16.15. I gave thee a King in my anger, and took him away in my wrath,

Hos. 13.11. Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord,

2 Chronicles. 19.6. Now let them put away their Whoredoms, and the carcasses of
their Kings far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever,

Ezekiel. 43.9. march LONDON, Printed for Livewell Chapman at the Crown in
Popes-head-Alley. 1657.

English Liberty and Property Asserted.
Qu. 1 WHether any King can possibly at any time be chosen with greater
consent and approbation of the people, than was the first King of Israel, Saul?
for it is said, 1 Samuel 10.24. That all the people shouted and said God save the
King, and chap. 11.15. That Saul and all the People of Israel rejoiced greatly.

Qu. 2 Whether notwithstanding the said free election and universal
approbation, the Lord did not from Heaven manifest this choice to be a
horrible wickedness in his sight, by sending thunder and rain in wheat harvest,
1 Samuel 12.17. And did not the People acknowledge as much, saying (verse. 19.)
we have added to all our sins this evil, to ask us a King?

Qu. 3 Whether Gods severe punishment of Saul in rending the kingdom from him,
for one sinful act (which man would take to be an act of mercy at first
sight, in sparing Agag, and zeal in preserving the fatlings for sacrifice) does
not evidently declare Gods indignation against King-ship, 1 Samuel 15.23.

Qu. 4 Whether did not the Lord reckon with the People of Israel for their
Kingly Government; and for this their great sin of making themselves rather
Beasts than men, by submitting the reason of the whole Nation to one man, when
he destroyed seventy thousand of them by the Pestilence in three days, for
David's one sin of numbering the people 2 Samuel 24.15. the Heathen could say,
delirant reges, plectuntur Achivi.

Qu. 5 Whether the Lord by permitting Solomon (the wisest of the mere sons of
men) to become a Fool by leaving the true God, who had twice appeared to him,
and turning aside to Idols, and going after the abominations of the Heathens, 1
Kin. 11.5. did not point (as it were) with the finger at this beastly folly of
Israel, in advancing one man to so great a height, as to put him above man, and
to make him a King, that so they might even fall down, and worship the great
Idol which they had set up?

Qu. 6. Whether though the People of Israel had thus rejected the Lord in
setting up a King, upon the revolting of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam, when
they cried what portion have we in David, to your Tents O Israel, because he
hearkened not to the counsel of the old men, 1 King. 12.8. having all this time
well smarted for their folly, and the Government of Kingship proving very
burdensome and tyrannical (as appears 1 King. 12.9, 10) does the Lord either
blame or condemn the said ten Tribes for their defection, or in any kind
testifye his displeasure against them? nay, does he not plainly justify them
therein, by sending Shemaiah the Prophet, to their brethren, that would have
gone out to war against them, saying, Ye shall not go up to sight against
your brethren, return every man to his own house; for this thing is from me,
says the Lord, 1 King. 12.24.

Qu. 7. Whether is it not probable that the Lord would give as good Kings to
his own peculiar people, whom he loved as the apple of his eye, as to any
other people whatsoever, and yet what horrid murders and cruel bloodshed, were
there continually among the said Kings of Israel to obtain the Crown; and how
were the people vexed with wars continually, by reason of those cursed Kings,
and how few of the said Kings have dyed in their beds, like other men. See the
books of the Kings and Chronicles.

Qu. 8. Whether does not the Office of King-ship in the very nature and being
thereof, tend directly by advancing prerogative to the enslaving of the people,
by whom it is established, and by magnifying its own power and grandeur
perpetually to prey upon the peoples liberty, and property, according to the
description given thereof, 1 Samuel 8. from 11. to 19. v. It being as
diametrically opposite to the Peoples Liberty, as darkness is to light,
Prerogative, and Freedom, being like two balances, when one is up, the other
is down, and has not the experience of all ages in other Nations, and in our
own, very lately given sad and bleeding testimonies to the truth hereof?

Qu. 9. Whether would it not make the heart and bowels of any Christian to
yern, tremble, and bleed within him, to consider how the poor people of Israel,
were punished from time to time, for the wickedness of their Kings, insomuch
as it is said, 2 King. 14.26. The Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it
was very bitter, and have not war, and the plague been (as it were) entailed
upon our own Nation on the account of Kingship from Generation to Generation,
and does not the mercy of God in freeing the great City and Nation, both from
the one and the other, since Kingship was abolished, give clear testimony
hereunto?

Que. 10 Whether did not judgment and justice run down like a might stream,
whilst the people of Israel in a free Commonwealth were under the government of
their good Moses, Joshuas and Samuels; but when they would have Kings like the
Heathens round about them; were not men made offenders for a word (though it
were the Word of the Lord) to the imprisoning of their persons, witness the
Prophet Jeremy, etc. Jer. 32.3. And many others; nay, were they not causelessly
stripped of their lives and properties, through the base lusts of their Kings,
(though some of them good ones;) do we not find Naboth, 1 King. 21. in a
solemn way of fasting, had his life taken away, that so his Vineyard might be
obtained by King Ahab; and Uriah, with many others lost their lives, most
trecherously, that so the Adultery with Bathsheba his wife might be covered
and concealed from the people, though it could not from the Lord, 2 Samuel 11.
and 12. chapter And for the pride of Hezekiahs heart were not the children of
Israel carried captive into Babylon, 2 King. 20.17, 18. And did not the Lord
for the wickedness of Manasseh, bring such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that
whoever should hear thereof, both his ears should tingle, 2 Kings 21.12.

Que. 11 Whether does it not appear as clear as the Sun at noonday, from the
Scriptures already quoted, that God did never institute or approve the office
of a King, or Kingly government, but that it is directly opposite to the mind
and will of God? On the contrary, did not the Lord himself ordain a free
Commonwealth for his own people, whom he chose from all the Nations of the
world, and then gave them a Government, not like to theirs, (which was
King-ship) and when they rejected this, does he not plainly say, 1 Samuel 8.5.
they had rejected him, that he should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7. and
does not God farther say, Hos. 8.3. Israel has cast off the thing that is
good, and verse 4. They have set up Kings, but not by me, they have made
Princes, and I knew it not.

Que. 12 Whether will this new modeled Kingship be the government of Jesus
Christ so much spoken of in Scripture, as also in the Remonstrances,
Declarations, and Papers of the Army, particularly in that Declaration from
Muscleborrough in Scotland, 1650. wherein they profess themselves not to be
Soldiers of fortune, nor merely the servants of men, but have proclaimed Jesus
Christ (the King of Saints) to be their King? Or will it be the New Jerusalem
descending from God out of Heaven, mentioned, Rev. 21.2. or the new Heavens,
and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness, promised and spoken of by the
Prophets, and in the New Testament, 2 Pet. 3.13. Or rather is not this thrust
on to prevent, keep out, and stand in the way of the said Government of Jesus
Christ, and will not that which is spoken of by Ezekiel the Prophet, be
applicable hereunto; Thus says the Lord God, Remove the Diadem, and take off
the Crown; This shall not be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase him
that is high. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it; and it shall be no more,
until he come, whose right it is, and I will give it him.

Qu. 13 Is not Kingship one of the ten horns of the Beast mentioned, Rev.
17.12, And has it not given its strength and power to the Beast for these many
hundred years past, and made war with the Lamb in this Nation from time to
time, to the pouring out of much innocent bood of the Saints, Rev. 17.13.14.
And has not the Lord broken this horn in pieces here amongst us, and
sufficiently poured forth contempt, upon this Kingship? And shall we yet again
make war with Jesus Christ the Lamb, and desert his cause and work, which he
has so miraculously carried on to the wonder and astonishment of all
Spectators; so that we could truly say whilst we were pursuing that, there
was no Rock like unto our Rock, even our enemies being Judges; Deuteronomy. 32.31. And
did not Englands Army once rejoice to see this horn of the Beast cut off, and
encourage Scotland thereunto, that they might become one in the Lords hand, and
join together in the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and to
trample down the Seat of the Beast, to hate the Whore, and burn her flesh with
fire? See the Declaration of the English Army in Scotland, 1650. p. 7. Armies
Declaration. Aug. 1. 1650.

Qu. 14 Whether the Lord does not by all these punishments of his inflicted
upon his own people, sufficiently threaten anger against any others, that being
once free, shall upon any account whatsoever give up their liberties into the
hands of any one man, to be a King over them? And whether these things where
not done as Types and Precedents for after ages; for says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
10.6. These things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after
evil things, as they also lusted, and Romans 15.4. Whatsoever things were written
afore-time, were written for our learning.

FINIS.

