The last Speeches AND CONFESSION OF THE Lord Maguire: The Jrish REBEL, that
was Hanged at Tyburne, and Drawn, and Quartered on Thursday last, the 20th. of
February, 1644.

With all the Questions that were put to him, and his several Answers.

And the Coppies of those Letters, and other Papers which he then had in his
hands and made use of, that were afterward delivered to Sheriff Gibbs.

And his Directory from the Romish Priests that gave him notice by the said
papers to know them, in passing to Tiburne with him; Also his several
Absolutions secretly given him, and all other passages at his death.

Printed and Published according to Order.

Imprinted at London, by Jane Coe.

The last speeches, and confession of the Lord Maguire the Irish Rebel.
On Thursday, Feb. 20. the Lord Maguire was drawn upon a sledge from the Tower
of London, through the city unto Tyburne which being c^^^e and the cart set
ready he kneeled upon the sledge and prayed for sometime after which the
Sheriff spoke to him as follows. viz.

Sheriff Gibs. MY Lord Maguire; It is now the last Declaration you are like to
make in this world; Here you stand justly condemned to be executed for a very
heinous crime, as is not paraleld by any History that was ever mentioned in the
Christian world, taking all circumstances and their manner of proceedings, if
you have done this, that you have done without any confession, why then
certainly you have much innocent blood lies upon you, and much to answer for at
the judgment Seat of God: It is one of the ten Commandments. Thou shall not
kill. There are many thousands, yea I may say hundred of thousands whose blood
you and your accomplices have taken away: Men, and women, and children, such as
you never saw, such as never did you any injury, and not only so, but they
were your fellow Subjects, and were of the same cohabitation with you: you have
now to answer for all this, as 'twas a confederacy wherein you were engaged, My
Lord, you have been an ingenious man as I have been told: you have been bred in
Magdalene College in Oxford, where you took the oath of Allegiance to our
Sovereign Lord the King: contrary to this oath; you took upon you to surprise
His Castles and slay his subjects without any Commission as you declare your
self, therefore now make some acknowledgement, and give us the best
satisfaction that you can that you do hold it a very grievous sin, and that
you are heartily sorry for it.


Maguire. God Almighty forgive me.


Sher. Sir we desire you before this people here to express your sense of
those horrid actions.


Maguire. I desire Almighty God to forgive me my fi^^^.


Sheriff Gibs. Do you believe you did well in those wicked actions.


Mag. I have but a short time do not trouble me.


Sher. Gibs. Sir, It is just I should trouble you, that you may not be troubled
for ever.


Mag. I beseech you Sir, trouble me not I have but a little time to spend.


Sher. Gibs. Sir, I shall give you as much time after as you shall spend to
give satisfaction to the people: I do require you as an instrument set in Gods
stead here to make an acknowledgement to the people, whether you are sorry for
what you have done or no? Whether it be good or no?


Maguire. I beseech you, do not trouble me.


Sheriff. I have told you, I would give you as much time afterward as I shall
take up.


Mag. I am not disposed to give you any Account.


Doctor Sibbalds. If the blood of one Man, of Abel, cried to heaven for
vengeance, how much more shall the blood of many thousands: Oh give glory to
God by confession of your sins, never any perished for want of mercy: Christ
Jesus is full of mercy. Make a faithful and humble confession, and there is
pardon with God: God pardoned Manasseh the greatest Idolater that ever was; the
sea of his Mercy is bottomless.


Mag. Pray give me leave to pray.


Doctor Sibbalds. Give glory to God that your soul may not be presented to God
with the blood of so many thousand people.


Sheriff. You are either to go to heaven or hell, if you not make an
ingenious confession, your case is desperate. Had you any commission or no.


Mag. I tell you that there was no Commission that ever I saw.


Doctor Sib. How then do you think to escape the judgment of the great God,
when you shall live, and die in such an outrageous sin as this is;


Sher. Who were actors or plotters with you, or gave you any Commission?


Mag. For God sake give me leave that I may depart in p^^ce.


D. Sib. There is no dissembling now: you are with in a few min^^s to be
presented before the Tribu^^^ll of that great Judge who will reward every man
according to their deeds. There is mercy with God, the penitent received mercy
at the hour of death. Christ Jesus Arms are still open with mercy for the
penitent.


Sher. Had you not some pardon or Bull from the Pope for what you did? I desire
you as a Minister of God to declare the truth?


Mag. I am not of the same Religion with you.


Doct. Sib. All your Religions agree in that: without confession there is no
salvation.


Alder. Bunch. My Lord, Be pleased to remember that text in the Revelation of
the souls that lie under the Altar crying for God to avenge their blood; those
souls that are in heaven now, where your soul must go or else go to hell. Pray
therefore, That God would give you a real and unfeigned repentance for all your
sins: Believe that there is a God will bring vengeance upon you if you
confess not; Do you know of any Bull or pardon.


Mag. I saw none of it. All that I knew of I delivered in my examinations.


Sher. Have you any pardon from the Pope.


Mag. I saw none.


Doct. Sib. I beseech you my Lord in the name of God to discover the truth.


Mag. What will you have me to speak?


Sher. What inducements moved you to it?


Mag. All that I said in my examinations are true, all that I said is right. I
beseech you. Let me depart in peace.


Sher. What grounds moved you first to attempt this?


Mag. I have delivered all this in my examination; Gentlemen I beseech you to
let me depart in peace.


Sher. Whither was that a sin or no to shed so much innocent blood.


Mag. For Gods sake Gentlemen I have --


Sher. Sir will you die like a stock, will you go to hell without mercy, and
not acknowledge your sorrowfulness for that foul crime?


D. Sib. Do you think a Jesuit will pardon you when you will not confess: The
question is, whether your Honor do think you did well or ill in this bloody
Act?

Here he answered not but continued mumbling over a paper as he had done from
his coming; whereupon it being asked what the paper was.


Sher. It is a Directory for his Devotion.


D. Sib. You are going to hell or heaven; oh discharge your conscience: Do you
know any plot or any thing is prejudicial to the State of England, Discover it
now.


Mag. I know nothing indeed.


Sher. Do you know any thing that is hurtful to the Parliament (...) State?


Mag. I know nothing, I have been a close prisoner.


Sher. I but since you were abroad, since you broke prison.


Mag. Truly I know nothing of it.


D. Sib. His crime is blood especially the blood of so many thousand souls. He
makes use of his paper to pore on, Its a dead letter unless you read it.


Sher. Search his pockets whether he has no Bull or pardon.

Here his pockets were searched where they found some Beads and a Crucifixe
which were taken from him.


D. Sib. Come my Lord, Leave those and acknowledge your offense to God and the
world: one drop of the blood of Jesus Christ is able to purge away all the
heavy load of blood that is upon you.


Sher. You do not desire such favor from our hands, unless you were more
ingenious then you are.


D. Sib. My Lord, no more of these it is not your Ave-Maries not these things
will do you any good but it is Agnus Dei qui tollit pe^^a^^ mundi.


Then the L. Maguire read out of a paper as follows. Mag. Since I am here to
dye I desire to depart with a quiet mind; and with the marks of a good
Christian, that is, asking forgiveness, first of God, and next of the world.
And I do forgive (from the bottom of my heart) all my enemies, and Offenders
even those that have a hand in my death I die a Roman Catholic, and although
I have been a great sinner yet am I now by God grace heartily sorry for all my
sins, and I do most confidently trust to be saved (not by my own works but
only by the Passion, Merits, and mercy, of my dear Savior Jesus Christ Into
whose hands I commend my soul.

I beseech you Gentlemen let me have a little time to say my prayers.


Sher. Sir, if you will answer ingeniously to those questions we shall ask
you, you shall have time afterward: Whether do you account the shedding of the
protestants blood to be a sin or not? And whether do you desire pardon of God
for that sin.


Mag. I do desire pardon of God for all my sins. I cannot resolve you in any
thing for my part.


Sher. You can tell what your conscience Dictates to you; Do you think it was
a sin or not; Declare it, and when you have dealt ingeniously and faithfully
with us, we will deal well with you.


Mag. For my part I cannot determine it.


Sher. Then now it seems nothing to you to kill so many.


Mag. How do you mean killing of them? To tell you my mind directly for the
killing I do not know that, but I think the Irish had a just cause for their
Wars.


Sher. Was there any assault made upon you, had you not entered into a Covenant;
had you not engaged by oath your self to your King?


Mag. For Jesus Christ I beseech you to give me a little time to prepare my
self.


Sher. Have pity upon your own Soul.


Mag. For God sake have pity upon me and let me say my prayers.


Sher. I say the like to you, in relation to your own Soul; whether do you
think the massacre of so many 1000. Protestants was a good act, for Jesus
Christ's sake have pity upon your own soul.


Mag. Pray let me have a little time to say my prayers.


Sher. So much good blood spilt and spent by you, and yet no remorse?


Here one of the Sheriffs demanding his paper which he had in his hand, he
threw it down and thereupon it was taken up and given to the Sheriff. D. Sib.
Acknowledge your own crimes and bloodshed; is it a sin or not that massacre
that has bin committed?


Mag. I told you my opinion that I thought the Irish had just cause for the
War, in what they had done,


Sher. Chapter You that have murdered so many as you have done with your own
hands, and no more penitent?


D. Sib. No, he was taken before he could act his designs, he was a prime
engine and confederate amongst them.


Sher. If this be all we can get of you, you must stand or fall to your own
master.


Here he expected to be suddenly turned off, and thereupon fell to his
prayers: uttering the word Jesus about 20. or 30. times together Sher. My Lord
before you die, we desire but one question and that is this: whether there were
not some Agreement made by the Comissioners that came over out of Ireland
before the Rebellion first broke out with the Recusants here in England and
whether they did not come back for further advice.


Mag. I take it upon my death I do not know that any man knew of it.


Sh. Then you cake it upon your death you do not remember it.


Mag. Of this fact wherein I am in barqued, in that I am brought into this
trouble for, for which I was taken in Dublyn; to my best memory or remembrance
there was never a one in England, either Catholic or Protestant but one, and
he was an Irish man and a Protestant.


Sher. Where is he now, is he in England?


Mag. I know not where he is, but he was in this Town.


D. Sib. Do you not know of any English man or Sc^tch man that did know of it?
you will do very well to declare it.


Sher. It was one of your Country men that was in this Town your Conscience
does make you intimate thus much that he is in England, tell us his name and
where he is.


Mac. Nay in that excuse me


Sher. Is he a Lord or what is he?


Mag. He is but a Gentleman, a Gentleman.


Sher. Where does he lie, or what manner of man is he? discover, discharge your
Conscience and then you will die with more mercy and comfort I hope.


Sher. Chapter My Lord, will you declare that Gentleman's name?


Mag. You must excuse me, I will accuse no man; he was never any man that came
to know of it but by chance, not as he was an Actor in it.


Shr. Will you go to Hell for him and your self, he may live to do more
mischief, prepare your self for death.


Mag. I do beseech all the Catholics that are here to pray for me, I
beseech God to have mercy upon my Soul.

Here when the Cart was going away, notice was given him of a Lord who was
there.


Ald. Bunch. Here is a Baron of Ireland, a Lord of Jreland that sat in
Parliament with your Honor, if you have any thing to say to him, or will
discover any thing to him.


Mag. I have nothing to say to him.

After this the Executioner did his office


A copy of the Papers which the L. Macquire carried in his hand to the place
of execution, which were delivered to the Sheriff.
A Letter of some of the friends of the L. Macguire, who (it seems) intended to
attend him to the place of Execution.
Most loving Sir,
MY Master his Coach shall wait on you infallibly. That day your friend William
shall go by the Coach all the way, upon a red horse, with a white hat, and in a
gray jacket, We may see what need there is that the Officers of Prisons (that
look to the Prisons) be purged.
and then you cannot choose (by the grace of God) but to know the Coach, of two
whitish gray horses, and then you may do or show that token only, as to lift
up to your face your hand, nodding (or inclining down) your head, and there
shall go two or three (diverse) Coaches for the same purpose, and be sure to
have plenary Physic as you desire. I send you this holy stone, by the virtue
whereof you may gain a plenary Physic, in saying any certain prayer, I
beseech you dear Sir, be of good courage, for you shall not want any thing,
for that happy journey, and offer you your self wholly for him, who did the
same for you. Pray earnestly for your Country, and for your own sons, that
God may prosper them, I do humbly entreat you to pray for me. Yours own poor
afflicted servant.

Your poor Gray.
This was in the margin of the Letter, as it were a postscript.
You shall do well to send your letters to morrow to that young man that comes
to me, and the wooden Cross that I have sent there of late, I beseech you send
me word, whether the Reliquary that came along with those two Crosses was your
or your companions Macmohan-
Hugh.



These words following were in an Irish Character.

Mo mhile beannacht chugad a mhic mhanma.

In English, My thousand blessings unto you, son of my soul.

This following was in a paper in Latin, (being, as it seems, the advice of his
Confessor to him) which is here translated.

BEloved son in Christ, believe, almighty God, who governes all the world by
his eternal providence, has appointed this way to thy salvation, and this
manner of death, though he could have brought thee to the land of bless by
another way, knew this to be more expedient. Therefore (my son) thou should
suffer this glorious kind of death which thy God has ordained for thee, with
an elevated mind, yea thou should desire it certainly this kind of death is
a great mercy of God. Is it not a special gift of God, to have a certain time
of sorrow and repentance for offenses committed? O with how great a desire did
the Kingly Prophet David wish, that he might know the length of his days!
expostulating thus with God, Make me O Lord to know my end and the number of my
days. This kind of death is granted to many, Psalm. 36.
who rather with a perverse mind with an improvident death falt to suffer
everlasting punishment. David being weary of the miseries and dangers of the
present life, said, Woe is me, because my pilgrimage is prolonged, as if the
time of his banishment seemed long; besides Paul says, O wretched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.
And out of a desire of living in the land of the living, he said, I desire to
be dissolved, Plil. 1.
and to be with Christ. Therefore (my Lord) bear this death which now hangs
over your head, with a quiet mind^, for Christ died for you; therefore
fervently meditate with the eyes of your heart, upon this bitter death of
Christ, and his torments. See, --

These Lines following were written on the backside of the paper, part of it
being before come, and no more brought by him then what is here.

-- his kingdom shall move thee, and sar, into thy hands I commend my spirit,
Thou have redeemed me O Lord God of Truth; Thou have created me, oh my God,
Thou have redeemed me, O most holy Father I am all thine: let thy will be done
in me; illuminate mine eyes that I may never sleep in death: Thou shall
invocate blessed Mary, for thy helper, saying: Mary the Mother of grace, the
Mother of mercy; do thou protect us, from the enemy, and receive us in the
hour of death, thou shall invocate also Saint Michael, the Archangell, and the
Angel thy keeper, and the holy Patrons. And lastly, all the Saints, that they
may intercede for thee and help thee with their prayers and merits, thou shall
also recite these words: O Lord Jesus Christ, I believe, that thou art my God
and my Redeemer; and I firmly believe whatsoever the holy catholic Church
propounds to be believed, and profess that I will live and die in this faith.
It grieves me that I have offended so great goodness, and it grieves me that
I can grieve no more for my offenses committed against thee, my Creator and
Savior, in thought, word and deed, and by omission: and I humbly beseech thee
to pardon me by thy blood, which thou have powered out for my salvation; and if
I have forgot any thing which has offended thy Majesty, or do not know it, I
desire to know it, and repent of it. And in the mean time I ask forgiveness
of all: and likewise for thy sake do from my heart pass by all offenses
whereby others have offended me: Also I pray them to forgive me, and if I have
detained any thing from any man, my heirs shall make restitution to them, to
whom ought is due.

Creed (dilecte in Christo fili) Deum optimum maximum, qui mundum hunc
universum aeterna quadam mentis provisione moderatur; hanc salutis turewam, and
hunc modu moriendi statuisse: qui quidem quamvis te ad foelicitatis patriam
alio tramite ducere potuisset, magis hoc tibi expedire praecognovit. Ergo (mi
fili) hoc genus gloriosum mo^tis, quod Dominus Deus sic tibi ordinavit, erecto
animo perferas, quinetiam cxoptes. Certe hujusmodi mors magnum Der beneficium
est; nonne speciase donum Dei est, habere certum tempus dolendi and poenitendi
de offensis commissis contra suam divinam Majestatem? O quanto desiderio
expostulavit sibi dari certum and notum vitae suae. spatium regius Propheta
David, expostulans a Deo sic! Notum fac mihi Domine finem meum, and numerum
drerum meorum. Hoc genus mortis enim qua^plurimis est concessum, qui perverso
potius animo improvisa morte ceciderunt, poenas daturi sempiternas. David
pertaesus miserias, and pericula praesentis vitae, dicebat, Heu mihi quia
incolatus meus prolongatus est; quasi longum illi videretur tempus cxilii.
Beatus Paulus dicebat, Infelix ego, quis me liberabit a corpore mortis hujus?
Et ex desiderio vivendi in terra viventium, dicebat, Cupio dissolui, and esse
cum Christo. Ideo (mi Domine) hanc mortem, quae tibi jam imminet, aquo animo
pro Christo acerbiter pro te mortuo, seras. Hanc amariffimam Christi mortem,
tormenta, and caeteras oculis tui cordis serventer meditare. Vide, --

These Lines following were written on the backside of the paper, part of it
being before come, and no more brought by him then what is here.

-- gni sui tepromovent, and dicas, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum
meum, redemisti me Domine Deus veritatis: Tu me creasti Deus meus, tu me
redemisti: Pater sanctissime, totus sum tuus, fiat in me voluntas tua; illumina
oculos meos, ne unquam obdormiam in morte. Beatam Mariam invoces in
auxiliatricem, dicendo, Maria matter gratiae, matter misericordiae, tu nos ab
host protege, and in hora mortis suscipe. Invoces etiam Sanctum Michaelem
Archangelum, and Angelum custodem, and sanctos Patronos, and demum omnes
Sanctos, ut intercedent prote, and adjuvent te suis suffragiis and meritis.
Recites etiam haec verba: Domine Jesu Christ, credo quod Deus meus, and
Redemptor meus es tu, and credo firmiter quicquid sancta Ecclesia catholica
proponit credendum, and in hac protestor me velle vivere and mori. Domine Jesu,
dolet mihi, quod tantam bonitatem offenderim, and dolet, quod amplius non doleo
de offensis, contrate Creatorem and Salvatorem meum, cogitatione, verbo, and
opere, and omissione perpetratis, and humiliter peto mihi condonari per
sanguinem tuum quem pro mea salute profudisti. Et si quid oblitus sum, vel non
cognosco quod Majestatem tuam offenderit, de eo illuminari cupio, and
poenitere; and interim de omnibus veniam peto: omnibus qui me offenderunt, ex
cord meo, and similiter omnes offensas propter te dimitto, and si quem ego
offendi, precor etiam veniam mihi dari, and si aliquid alicujus est apud me,
volo satisfacere per haeredem meum, omnibus quibus debeo.

The Copy of another paper, containing a direction for his devotion in his
passage to, and at the place of execution, sent from his ghostly Father with
the former.
Jesus. IHS Maria.

In your passage to execution remember as follows.

To think on our Lord carrying his Cross to Mount Calvarie.

Or on the proper meditation against the devils temptations.

Think that the pain is short, the reward eternal and everlasting.

Have mercy on me O God, etc. Miserere mei Deus, etc. Lord not in thy wrath.
Domine ne in furore tuo. The first penitential Psalm. Our Father. Hail Mary.
Pater noster. Ave Maria. In thee O Lord have I trusted, let me never be
confounded in thy justice. In te Domine speravi, non confundar in aeternum in
tua justitia. By the mystery of thy holy incarnation, O Lord deliver us. Per
mysterium sanctae incarnationis tuae libera nos Domine. Sanctify me with the
Spirit of Christ. Anima Christi sanctifica me Thou sought'st me being weary
Quaerens me sedisti lassus. I humbly pray. Oro supplex. O holy Angels. Sancti
Angeli. We fly to thee for aid, o holy Mother of God. Subatuum praesidium
confugimus sancta Dei genet^^^ Remember o maker of al things Memento rerum
conditor.

Remember the promises of God, That none shall be tempted, etc. Call upon me in
the day of etc. Come to me all ye that be heavy, etc.

It is very probable this paper might be sent to him from some of those Priests
that are in Newgate.
When you come to Newgate make your Token for an Absolution.

When come to the place of Execution, do as follows.

O Lord Jesus Christ, I worship thee in the Cross etc. O Domine Jesu Christ,
adoro to in Cruce, etc. Hail sweet Mother of Christ, etc. Ave dulcis Matter
Christi, etc. O holy Lady Mary. -- Domina mea Sancta Maria. Lord now let thy
servant depart, etc. Nunc dimittis servum tuum Domine. Miserere mei Deus. Have
mere you me o God. Quaerens me sedisti lassus. Thou sought'st me being weary
Oro supplex and acclivis. I humbly pray on my knees. Tu fons misericordia. Thou
art the fountain of mercy

This was written but cross^d out again, and another paper pinned upon it,
written in another manner, which also does follow
Pray for the Church of Ireland, M. Grea, say, Jesus Maria three times for an
Indulgence, also a Pater, and an Ave, and Jesus Maria three times for the same
end.

Then make either of these tokens, stretch out your hands in form of a Cross,
or (if you cannot) do so, join them together before your breast, with a
handkerchiefe twisted about your hand, (with sorrow for your sins, and
earnestly desiuing absolution of the Church) and God will absolve you.

Before you make this token, settle on your desire and say, I desire an
absolution etc. and say, Confiteor Deo omnipotemi, I confess me to Almighty
God, and then make your token etc. This paper was pinned upon that which was
crossed out.


Then say, O Amabilissima Bonitas! Confiteor Dea, with sorrow for your sins,
and settle your heart earnestly to desire an absolution from the Church (and I
desire an absolution) make your token (or mark) of lifting both your hands to
your face, and letting fall your hand kerchief, God will absolve you.

After that pray for you menemies and persecuters, and forgive them from the
bottom of your heart.

Then willingly resign your self wholly to the B. will of God and trust only
to be saved by the merits of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Then say these words following (publicly) that you may be heard. Did not
Canterbury die just in this manner?


Since I am here to die, I desire to depart with a quiet mind, and with the
marks of a good Christian, that is, asking forgiveness first of God, and next
of the world. And I do forgive (from the bottom of my heart) all my enemies
offenders, even those that have had a hand in my death.

Say moreover.

I die a Roman Catholic, and although I have been a great sinner, yet am I
now (by Gods grace) heartily sorry for all my sins. And I do most confidently
trust to be faved not by any of my own works, but only by the passion merits
and mercy of my dear Savior Jesus Christ, into whose hands I commend my soul.

Offer to God for your sins the merits of his Son Jesus.

Offer all thy sufferings to our Savior in union of what he suffered.

Lastly say,

O Lord Jesus Christ. Domine Jesu Christ. For that bitterness. Propter illam
amaritudinem. Thou sought'st me being weary Quaerens me sedisti lassus. I
humbly pray on my knees. Oro supplex and acclivis. Thou art the fountain of
mercy Tu fons misericordiae.

It seems the Priest was in sight to give it him.
Resign your self willingly and wholly to God. Upon the ladder make your sign
for an Absolution, and say, I desire with all my heart an absolution from my
mother the Catholic Church for my sins.

The whole Trial of the L. Macquire should have been published ere this, but
it could not be ready so suddenly: this being of such concernment, is thought
fit to be published in the interim.

FINIS.

