A GUIDE TO THE Humble: OR AN EXPOSITION ON THE Common Prayer. VIZ. I. The
Visitation of the Sick. II. The Communion of the Sick. III. The Burial of the
Dead. IV. The Thanksgiving of Women after Childbirth. V. The Denouncing of
GOD's Anger and Judgments against Sinners, with Prayers to be used on the first
Day of Lent, and at other times.


By THOMAS ELBOROW.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1675.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Presume, and take it for granted, that thou will prove a Christian, and if
thou art so more than in profession, I shall not question, but that thou will
be kindly and Christianly a spyer of the faults and errors coming into this
little Treatise, without my knowledge or approbation, and not prove rigidly
censorious. I confess that I have been always very much an admirer (but yet no
Idolizer) of all the Liturgick Offices, as they are now settled and established
in the Church of England, and this induced me to write my Exposition upon the
first part of the Common Prayer Book, and now to add this Exposition upon the
latter part; what lies betwixt these two parts, I confess I have taken the like
pains upon, but am not in a capacity to make public, (Bricks cannot be made up
to the full tale where straw is wanting) and I am the more willing to keep my
other Notes suppressed, till I can be assured that they, which are now
adventured forth to public view, can meet with a friendly acceptance, and in
some measure attain the desired end, which they were written for. The end (I
believe most Readers will agree with me so far) was not to persuade some People
to have any better opinion of me for vindicating our Church, but all to have a
better opinion of our Church, which to vindicate, may in the Opinion of some be
crime enough. The eminent Men that stand by me in this very Treatise, are
Persons so far from being thought mean and contemptible, by those who know how
to value what is truly valuable, that they were indeed the glory and ornaments
of our Nation, by exemplary liveing, as well as the Pillars of our Religion and
Church, by their sound, sober, and profound learning; such as the most
judicious Hooker, the most solid and searching Andrews, the most elaborate and
learned Hammond, cum caeteris, -- I have not, I confess, given them those
splendid titles, which they deserve, because they have by their own works
merited more than I can give, and exceeded all others praise or Eulogie; I
durst not presume to walk these dark and intricate Paths, without such bright
and eminent guides, and if by them, and some others as eminent, whom I have not
named, I can lead People to see that we have a true Church in England, in whose
bosom they may be safely nursed and bred up, I have my desire. Farewell.

T. E.

The Errors of the Press Corrected.
PAge 6. Line 14. read severe and strict justice. p. 77. l. 14. 1. Clerks. p.
117. l. 13. add in the Margin Revel. 14.13. p. 122. l. 9. f. thou, r. this. p.
132. l. 5, 6, 7. r. accidentium; jus est desideriorum, jus est superstriendi
extrinsecus. p. 137. l. 11, 12. r. all that is remarkable in. p. 141. l. 2, 3.
r. (...) p. 173. l. 17. f. my, r. any. p. 179. l. penult. f. as, r. than. p.
217. l. 4. r. in extremis. p. 260. l. 6, 1. s^nners f. servants. p. 273. l. 1.
r. Verse. 13.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To the Virtuous, and Religious, and truly Christian
Mrs. Anne Whalley, Wife to William Whalley, Esquire; of Norton, by Gaulby in
Leicestershire.
Dear Sister,
HOwever it was my great misfortune, by those who had a power to command me,
and did, to be taken from you, and from Two Parishes upon the matter, wherein I
am confident I wanted not the love of any, and I think none will complain
either of my want of care or love to them, yet I have ever since my forced
departure from you, had you in my thoughts, and a desire to leave some Memorial
amongst you, whereby you may bear me in your memories, when I am dead, and gone
out of this World, which is so bad, that I want an Epithet to speak what it
is; I know you were always lovers of the Common Prayer Book, and if you loved
me because I loved it too, ye are the worthier to participate of some of these
my poor endeavors upon it; To you I present them first, and chiefly, and if
they meet with your acceptance, I question not but they will be accepted by
many others of the Gentry about you, to whom You may, if you please to command
me, present them by Your own fair Hand, with my Prayers to God for You, and all
You^s,

I remain Yours to serve You. T. ELBOROWE.

Imprimatur,

Ex Aed. Lamb. Oct. 25. 1670 Tho. Tomkyns.

The ORDER for the Visitation of the SICK.
Rubric. When any Person is sick, notice shall be given thereof to the
Minister of the Parish, who coming into the sick Persons House shall say,
Note.
THis Office for the Visitation of the Sick, is undoubtedly g^ounded upon that
advise of St. James, chap. 5. verse. 14. where the Person visited with sickness,
being supposed not very well able to judge of his own estate, but one standing
in need of spiritual directions and counsel, is exhorted and advised to call to
his assistance some spiritual Person, the Bishop, or whosoever is by or under
Him ordained for such Offices. By Elders of the Church in that place, are
primarily meant the Bishops, who are Seniores Christianae Congregationis,
called by Polycarp, (...). Epist. ad Philip. One part of whose Office was to be
(...), To visit all the Sick; To afford them their best directions, to pray to
God with and for them. At the first, when the Church was small, and the number
of Disciples not great, the Bishop only attended with his Deacons did perform
all the Offices of the Ministerial function, the middle order which is now
called the Presbyters, came not in till after the Church became numerous, and
so the task of the Ministry too great to be discharged by the Bishop alone.
Vid. Dr. Ham. Annot. in Act. 11. verse. 30. Now it is undoubtedly a work of the
highest charity, a singular piece of piety and Christianity, and an eminent
branch of the Ministerial function, for Ministers carefully to attend upon this
Office of visiting the Sick. It is a Christian Office, and an act of charity at
all times to visit the People under their charge, and afford them all the
spiritual helps and aids as they make discovery of their needs, but in time of
sickness when they are in extremis, then the Ministers ought to be most
diligent, and in no case to neglect it, ever remembering that of our Savior, I
was sick, and ye visited me, Matthew. 25.36. But especially that of the Apostle,
that they are Persons who must give an account of their proficiency in the
Gospel, who are under their charge. Heb. 13.17. I wish the Ministers were so
careful of their People, as to go to the Sick when they call or send for them,
and that the People had so much respect for the Ministers, and for themselves
too, as to send for them upon all occasions, when ever they stand in need of
any spiritual aids.

Peace be to this House, and to all that dwell in it.
Note. This is clearly grounded upon that of our Savior. When ye come into an
House salute it, say peace, that is, all kind of prosperity be to this House,
Matthew. 10.12, 13. Luke 10.5, 6. And if there be any pious Person, or Son of
Peace in the house capable of so great a blessing, the^ the blessing of peace
shall rest upon him, if not, the blessing shall return to the Minister, and the
party visited shall receive no advantage by the Ministers coming to him, upon a
design of so much charity.

Rubric. When he comes into the sick Man's presence he shall say, kneeling
down,
Remember not, Lord, our iniquities, etc. Note. This short Prayer is warranted
from these Texts of Scripture, Joel 2.17. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Act. 20.28. Psalm.
85.3.

Answer. Spare us good Lord.
Note. This supposes a company joined in Prayers with the Minister, and to
return back, Spare us good Lord, in answer to the Ministers, Spare thy People
going before.

Rubric.
Then the Minister shall say,

Let us Pray. Lord have mercy, etc.
Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Note. I have already often accounted for
the frequent use of these in our divine Offices, and therefore I shall not now
say any thing of them; only give me leave to insert this short Paraphrase upon
the Lord's Prayer.

Our Father which art in Heaven, O Lord God, our Heavenly Father, who art the
giver of all goodness; who art the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ by nature,
ours by grace and favor, who dwell in Heaven the Throne of thy Majesty, the
Seat of thy Glory, attended by myriads of Angels ready to take Commissions from
Thee, in order to execute thy will and pleasure.

Hallowed be thy Name, Send down thy grace unto us, and to all People, that we
may glorify thy great Name, as we ought to do. Let thy blessed and glorious
Name be ever sanctified by us, and by all that draw nigh unto Thee, may we
never profane it in our common talk, abuse it by detestable oaths or
blasphemies, nor vainly make use of it in words or works, professing Thee with
our Lips, and departing from Thee in our Lives.

Thy Kingdom come, May the Scepter of thy Spirit so overrule our unruly
Spirits, that we may worship Thee, serve Thee, and obey Thee, as we ought to
do; Lord, remove from us the Kingdom of thy Justice, for if Thou should
strictly account with us, no flesh could be justified; bring us into Thy
Kingdom of Grace, that we may be comforted here, and into thy Kingdom of Glory,
that we may be crowned hereafter.

Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. So long as we are to live in
this Vale of misery, let not our own wills, but Thy will be done in us, and by
us, in our several stations, periods, and conditions; incline our hearts unto
Thee, that we may do all thy commands, sincerely, readily, cheerfully, and in
some proportion to what is done by the blessed Saints and glorious Angels in
Heaven, where there is no opposing, disputing, or resisting of thy will.

Give us this Day our daily Bread, And that we may go on the more cheerfully in
the discharge of our duties, not taken off, nor interrupted by any anxious
thoughts about the things of this life; We pray Thee to send us all things
needful, both for our Souls and Bodies, the necessaries of our lives from day
to day, proportioned to every Man's being or sustenance. Give us the day of our
life, and the life of our days, our daily bread, victual, for the nourishing of
our bodies, doctrinal, for the reforming of our lives, Sacramental, for the
sanctifying and saving of our Souls.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. We
beseech Thee also to be merciful unto us, and to forgive us our sins; punish
not on us those sins, wherewith we have offended, and provoked Thee to punish
us. Pardon all our sins of impiety committed against Thee, of injustice and
uncharitableness committed against our Neighbors; of intemperance and
uncleanness committed against our selves. These and all other sins committed by
us against thy Divine Majesty, in thought, word, or deed; we pray Thee to
pardon and pass by, as we forgive all, who have any way, or at any time
trespassed against us in thought, word, or deed, in body, goods, or Name.

And lead us not into Temptation, And to these blessings of thy Mercy in
pardoning what is past, add that other of thy providence to preserve us for the
time to come. Suffer us not through our own cor^uptions, (which are very many)
nor through the Devils malice (which is very great) to be brought into any
temptation or snare, or to be entangled in any dangers or difficulties, which
may not be easily supported by us.

But deliver us from evil, But let it be thy pleasure to save and defend us in
all dangers, ghostly and bodily, to keep us from all sin, and wickedness, from
our ghostly enemy, and from everlasting death. Deliver us from the
blandishments of the flesh, the allurements of the World, the plausible snares
of the Devil. From external evils, internal evils, eternal evils, by thy grace
from the evil of sin, by thy mercy from the evil of punishment, Good Lord
deliver us.

For thine is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory, for ever and ever, Amen.
These and all other blessings of thy grace, goodness, mercy and Majesty, we
trust Thou will bestow upon us of thy mercy and goodness, through our Lord
Jesus Christ, For thine is the Kingdom: and we doubt not but that Thou art able
to remove from us all those Evils and Judgments, which we have prayed to be
delivered from, For thine is the power: Both which we beg at thy hands in order
to advance, and to set forth thy glory, For thine is the glory. To Thee
therefore, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three Persons and One God, be ascribed
in our Prayers, and in our praises, all honor, glory, power, praise, might,
majesty, and dominion, to both Ages, the present, and the future, for the ever
of this World, which has an end, and the ever of that other World, which is
without end.

Amen. Lord, so be it.

Minister.
O Lord save thy Servant, etc.
O Lord look down from Heaven, etc.
Hear us Almighty, and most merciful
God and Savior, etc.
Note. These Prayers are all prescribed and delivered in the very Scripture
phrase, so full of piety, charity, and devotion, and so sitted to all Persons
any way visited or afflicted in mind, body, or estate, that I cannot conceive
them liable to any the least exception, they are most what taken out of the
Psalter, which is a rich Magazine of Devotions, furnishing all sorts of Men in
all conditions both to praise God, and to pray unto him. Psalm. 20. verse. 1, 2,
3, 4. Psalm. 25. verse. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. and other places out of the Book of
Psalms, will furnish us not only with the materials, but also with the very
phrase and manner of expressions, whereof the forementioned Prayers are made
and composed.

Rubric. Then shall the Minister exhort the sick Person after this form, or
other like.
Note. The Exhortation is left arbitrary for the Priest to use this or some
other at his own choice, as he sees occasion administered to him from the Sick
Person, for he is to apply his spiritual aids according to the Sick parties
needs; yet this Exhortation framed by the Church is so formed, that a better
cannot be devised to suit with all Men's conditions, however visited and
afflicted; and it is grounded upon these and the like places of Scripture, 1 Samuel 2.6. Job 5.17, 18. Job 12.9, 10. Job 12.14. Job 13.15. Job 13.26. Job
14.16, 17. Job 16.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Job 19.21. Job 19.25, 26, 27. Job
23.12, 13, 14. Job 27.5, 6. Psalm. 39.7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13. 1 Samuel 3.18. Jam.
1.2, 3. Jam. 1.12. 1 Thessalonians. 3.3, 4. Jam. 4.10. Jam. 5.11. 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. 1
Pet. 4.1, 2. 1 Pet. 4.12, 13.

Rubric. If the Person visited be very Sick, then the Curate may end his
Exhortation in this Place, or else proceed.
Note. By Curate in this Place is not meant only a stipendiary Minister, but
every Rector, and spiritual Incumbant, who has Curam animarum. He is left to
use his discretion, either in lengthning out, or cutting short his Exhortation,
as he sees the sick party in a capacity to admit of any longer or shorter
discourse. The following part of the Exhortation is grounded upon these places
of Scripture. Heb. 12.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 12.2, 3. Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Romans
8.29. Luke 24.26. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 4.13. 1 These. 4.14, 15, 16, 17.
Heb. 10.23. Heb. 9.27. 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 14.10. 1 Cor. 11.31, 32.

After this Exhortation, the Minister is to rehearse to the sick party the
Articles of our faith, that the party may know whether he believes as a
Christian Man should or no. Admirable is that saying of St. Augustine, Male
vivitur si de Deo non recte creditur, we live ill, and dye so too, if we
believe amiss of God. Heaven Gates are shut up against Male-fidians, as well as
Nulli-fidians, and Soli-fidians. If our faith be wrong, all is wrong; Christian
Religion is made up of these two constituent parts, a right faith, and a
righteous life, as a right faith without a righteous life will not save us, so
neither will a righteous life without a right belief. He, who lives justly, but
blasphemes impiously, cannot be safe. Vid. Haman Lestrange, Alliance of Divine
Offices. page 297. Dr. Sparrow Rational. page 327. Therefore this is a very
considerable question put to the sick Person, whether he believes as a
Christian ought to do, and there can be no better rule to try his faith by than
the Creed, which is the summary of all contained in both Testaments touching
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. August. Sermon. de Temp. 137. Ruffin. in
Symbol. Tertull. de praescript. Irenaeus. lib. 1. c. 3. and 19. Here I have
assumed to my self a liberty of inserting this short Exposition following upon
the Apostles Creed.

The Apostles Creed, or Rule of Faith.
Creed.
So called from the Latin word Credo, because it contains our Credenda; it is
Lex credendorum, all necessary points of faith are comprised in it. To believe
what is laid down there is necessary, for all points in it are fundamentals;
but to believe all deductions drawn from thence is not so absolutely necessary,
in regard they are but superstructures; in the fundamentals we should all
agree; and it were to be wished we could agree also in the explication and
application of the superstructures. Lis de nugis, ha tamen nugae ad seria
ducant.

The Apostles Creed.
So called, 1. Because they or their Disciples made it. Tertul. Apolog. cont.
gent. c. 47. August. Sermon. 5. de Temp. c. 2. Cyprian. in Exposit. Symbol.
Ruffin. in Symbol. n. 10. It is very ancient, in use before the Epistle to the
Hebrews was written. Calvin in Heb. 6.1. It was in use before any part of the
New Testament. Irenaeus, lib. 3. c. 4.

2. Because it contains the chief heads of the Apostles Doctrine. It is as a
rich Treasure dug out of the Golden Mines of the Apostles.

The Object of the Creed.
1. God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

2. The Church of God.

The general Heads of it.
1. Touching God the Father, and the Worlds Creation.

2. Touching God the Son, and Mankinds Redemption.

3. Touching God the Holy Ghost, and the Churches Sanctification.

As concerning the Church, it treats, 1. Of her signal properties. 2. Of her
sublime privileges.


The particular Heads of it.
Twelve Articles or Joints knitting together, the whole Body of Christian
says. Fides una and copulativa.

The 1. Article. I believe in God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and
Earth.
Where Note, 1. The Act, Believe. The Christian Religion is a Religion of
faith; wherein Reason is not so properly contradicted, Romans 1.16. Hebrews 11. 1
John 5.4. Hebr. 10.23. 1 Timothy 3.9. 1 Timothy 3.16.
, as raised up to a higher pitch, and supernaturaliz'd. Our Savior did not
clear Nicodemus his Quomodo, by any Arguments of Reason, but resolved the great
mystery of Regeneration into a principle of faith. John 3. Tertullian's answer
to Marcion was, I deo verum quia impossible. This honor has the Christian
Religion above others, that it rests upon surer Principles, than carnal
Arguments. 1 Cor. 1.20. Luc. 5.22. The first Lesson taught in Socrates School
was silence; and in Aristotle's to rest in the judgment of their Master. So in
Christ's School, Oportet discentem credere. We must not reason much about
matters of Religion, but piously rest in them. Pruritus disputandi scabies
ecclesiae; it would be more for the honor of our Christian Religion, did we
practice more, and dispute less. Minus Scientiae might be allowed, as to
unnecessaries, had we Plus Conscientiae, as to necessaries.

2. The Personality, I; we must pray for others, but believe for our selves. We
may put others into our Paternoster, Habak. 2.4.
we must put only our selves into our Creed. Matthew. 9.22.
No Man's says can do us good, but our own, we cannot believe by an Attorney,
Luke 7.50.
nor be saved by a Proxy. We are received into the bosom of the Church, upon
the faith of the Church, but when we are arrived up to the use of our reason,
we must make confession with our own mouths, and make a particular application
of these general Heads to our own comfort.

3. The Object, GOD, in God. Credere Deum; That he is* Credere Deo; That he is
true, cannot be deceived himself, will not deceive us. Credere in Deum; Because
a Father, so willing to hear us, and because Almighty, so able to help us. To
believe in God, is, Facere voluntatem Dei; to do as God would have us. God is
here manifested to us.

1. By his Title. Father. Principium Deitatis.

2. By his Attribute. Almighty. He can do whatever implies not a contradiction
in it self, or argues not imperfection in him.

3. By his Works. Maker of Heaven and Earth, Seculum Speculum. Creatura index
Creatoris. Artificem commendat opus. Psalm. 33.6. Psalm. 95.5. Psalm. 96.5. Psalm.
104.24. Psalm. 121.2. Psalm. 124.8. Psalm. 134.3. Hebrews 1.2. Act. 17.24.26
Let any make such a World, and let him be God: He made something of nothing,
and of that something, all things; How can we distrust that God, who has
proved Himself thus Omnipotent?

2. Article.
And, I believe in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. John 3.18. Romans 3.26.
Philip. 1.29. John 14.1.

This part of the Creed treats of Man's Redemption, wherein we are to observe
the Titles, and in Them the Natures and Offices of our Redeemer.

1. Jesus. So a Savior. Matthew. 1.21.

2. Christ. So a Savior anointed. Mat. 1.16. Matthew. 16.16. John 4.25.29. That
is, anointed with the Holy Ghost; the fullness of grace in him, and from his
fullness do we receive. John 1.16. Colos. 1.19. Others, Christi Domini; He
Christus Dominus. The anointing powered down upon him, dropped down upon others.
He anointed above his fellows. Psalm. 45. Others anointed Kings; so David.
Priests, so Aaron; Prophets, so Elisha. None King, Priest, and Prophet, but He.
Melchizedeck King and Priest; David King and Prophet; Samuel Priest and
Prophet; these saving Offices met doubly in others, but in Him they all meet.
Who is David's Priest. Psalm. 110. Jeremie's King. Jerem. 23.5. Moses Prophet.
Deuteronomy. 18.15. As a King, he redeems us from danger, as a Priest from sin, as a
Prophet from error.

3. His only Son. There his Divine Nature, of the same Power, Majesty, and
Eternity with the Father: John 5.26. John 10.30. 1 John 4.15. John 3.16.

4. Our Lord. There his humane nature. Nostram assumpsit naturam, non deposuit
suam.

Ours. 1. By Gift. John 3.16. 2. By Faith. Ephesians. 3.17.


Lord. 1. By Creation. John 1.3. 2. By Redemption. Gal. 3.13. 3. By Dominion.
Mat. 28.18.


All redeemed by Him, though all not actually saved by Him; as many Israelites
came out of Egypt, which dropped short of Canaan. That all are not saved, is
from our own default, not any defect in the meritorious price of our
Redemption. Incredulitas facit esse paucorum, quod alias esset commune omnium
beneficium.

3. Article.
Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 1.18, 20.

Born of the Virgin Mary. Luke 1.27. Isay 7.14.


This Article sets before us Christ's Humanity, as the former did chiefly his
Divinity; which is proved.

1. From his mysterious Incarnation, and Conception. 2. From his miraculous
Birth and Nativity.
Requisite it was that He should be God and Man, who was to Redeem Man to God,
and to Reconcile God to Man. Fit He should be one of both, who was to make both
one. A Jacob's Ladder in this coupling Earth to Heaven, standing upon Earth as
Man, reaching up to Heaven, as GOD.

4. Article. Who suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried,
and descended into Hell.
This and the Article preceding shows how, and by what means the work of Man's
Redemption was wrought: For as to Redeem us was the thing chiefly intended, so
it was done by steps, and there were many intervening acts to bring it about.

1. His mysterious Conception. By the Holy Ghost.

2. His miraculous Nativity. Of the Virgin Mary.

3. His active obedience, and holy life included in both; for He could not
possibly sin, whose Conception was so holy, and Birth so pure.

4. His passive obedience, and meritorious death; wherein we are to consider.
1. That He suffered; this He did from the Cradle to the Grave, from the Cratch
to the Cross. The whole History of his sufferings are recorded at large in the
Four Evangelists; all comprised in these words; He suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried. Whence Note.

1. The who. He.

2. The what. Suffered.

3. By and under whom. Pontius Pilate; one of the Chief to be noted in that
foul murder; For he was the Magistrate then in being, the Judge who swayed the
whole Bench, although the People swayed him.

4. What manner of death he suffered. Was crucified. Which is marked out in
Scripture for an accursed death; wherein was both pain and shame, and that to
the highest aggravation of his sufferings.

5. That he suffered death; for dead.

6. That he was really dead; for buried.

The words following are not to be understood of any part of his humiliation,
but of the first degree of his exaltation. Where by Hell we are to understand
the place of the damned. August. Epist. 99. Ne ipsos quidem inferos uspiam
scripturarum locis in bono appellatos potui reperire. So he. Vid. August. de
Genes. ad Lit. lib. 12. c. 33. By his descent, we are to understand, that as in
his Body he descended into the Bowels of the Earth, so in his Soul separated
from his Body: He descended into Hell. Vid. Dr. Howel's Catechism. in Locum.
Artic. 3. Edward. Reg. 6 ti. Artic. 3. Elizabeth. 1562. and Artic. 1. Vid.
August. Epist. 99. Athanas. Symbol. Tertul. de anim. c. 55. The end of his
descending was to dissolve the power of Hell. Aug. Epist. 99. To triumph over
Hell, and to fulfill that of the Prophet. Hos. 13.14.

5. Article. The Third Day He rose again from the Dead.
This Article presents us with Christ's Triumphant return from Death to Life.
Act. 10.40, 41. 1 Cor. 15.4. 2 Cor. 5.15. Whence we may observe, 1. That he is
risen. 2. That we shall rise.


For, Resurrexit solus, sed non totus. He is Primitiae dormientium.

6. Article. He ascended into Heaven. And sits at the right hand of God the
Father Almighty.
In this Article is noted to us Christ's Exaltation into Heaven, and his
investing with all Power and Rule, for the Father did put all Authority into
the Sons hands; and as Kings at their Inaugurations give gifts to Men, so did
He. Act. 2.33, 33, 34, 35, 36. Act. 1.9. Ephesians. 4.8, 9, 10. Philip. 2.9, 10.
Colos. 1.16, 17, 18. Colos. 2.10. Matthew. 22.44. Luc. 22.69. Romans 8.34. Ephesians.
1.20, 21, 22.

7. Article. From thence He shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.
This Article speaks of Christ's second coming at the end of the World, and the
Consummation of all things; a coming much differing from the first; then he
came as a Lamb, now as a Lion; then in weakness, now in Power; then in
ignominy, now in glory; then in the Cloud of our Flesh, now in the Clouds of
Heaven; then to be judged, now to Judge. Note 1. Who shall come, He. 2. Whence,
from Heaven. 3. When. No time set, it is certain come he shall, but most
uncertain when, Latet ille dies, ut observentur omnes. 4. What to do, To judge.
5. Whom. The quick, and dead. Act. 10.38.40, 41. Romans 2.16. 2 Timothy 1.8. Jam.
5.9.

8. Article. I believe in the Holy Ghost.
This Article is touching the third Person in the sacred Trinity, the Author of
Man's Sanctification; wherein we are to Note, 1. The Divinity. I believe in,
which we could not do, was he not God. 2. His Nature. A Spirit, an holy spirit.
3. His Nature and Office both. Holy. 1. He is so. The highest Holy. 2. He makes
us so. He is Spiritus Sanctus and spiritus sanctificans. 1 Cor. 1, 21, 22. 1
Pet. 1.2.



9. Article. I believe there is an Holy Catholic Church, which is a Communion
of Saints.
As the other Articles were touching God, and the chief works of God, Creation,
attributed to the Father. Redemption, attributed to the Son. Sanctification,
attributed to the holy Ghost.


So this and the following Articles are touching the People of God; called a
Church, or the Lords People, Catholic, for time and place. Apostolic, for
faith and government. Holy and a Communion of Saints, because sanctified in
Baptism by the holy Spirit, and dedicated to the service of God, which is an
holy service.

Note 1. There is a Church* 2. There is but one. 3. It is distinguished from
other Societies, by these badges or marks. 1. Holy. 2. Catholic. 3.
Apostolic. 4. A Communion of Saints.



Ephesians. 4.15. 1 Cor. 10.16. Heb. 10.25. 1 John 1.7. Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Ephesians. 2.21.
Colos. 1.22. Isay. 54.2. Psalm. 87.4. Act. 1.8. Ephesians. 2.14. Revel. 5.9.

10th. 11th. 12th. Article. I believe there is a Remission of Sins,
Resurrection of the Body, and a Life Everlasting.
In these last Articles are contained the privileges, and special immunities
of the People of God.

1. Touching the Soul. Remission. 2. Touching the Body. Resurrection. 3.
Touching both. Life Everlasting.
Amen. So it is. I believe, Lord help my unbelief.

Note here once for all, that a very great part of the Service Book, or
Common Prayer, may be resolved into this Creed, and was the Method of the
Common Prayer warily and considerately observed, the Apostles Creed would need
no other explication then what the Church in her Liturgick Office has in one
part or other, one office or other clearly made out to our hands. I am very
confident the Service Book cannot be faulty in any one thing, unless it will be
confessed that this confession of faith, according to which most of the Service
is composed, be faulty also. 1. The Te Deum. The Athanasian, and the Nicene
Creeds, are but explications of this, and the growth of heresies in the Church,
gave the occasion to those explications, that the Members of the Church might
be the better secured from the infection of them. 2. The Gloria patri, etc. so
often repeated, is but a shorter confession of the Trinity, which this Creed
teaches us to believe in. 3. The Lord have mercy. Christ have mercy, etc. Lord
have mercy, etc. which is the lesser Litany, used in all Divine Offices, is of
the same use and design. 4. The greater Litany, which begins, O God the Father
of Heaven, etc. is, as to the first part of it, the very same; and those
passages in it, which some scruple at, By the mystery of thy holy Incarnation,
etc. is but a pathetical enumeration of all those acts and passages of our
Redeemer mentioned in this Creed, by which we pray for deliverance, and without
which our deliverance we pray for could not possibly be obtained. 5. Many of
the Collects, Epistles, and Gospels for the Dominicals, and Festivals may be
reduced to this Creed, and may serve for a clear explication of it. As that for
Trinity-Sunday to the whole Creed. The Prayer for Rain. In time of dearth and
Famine, with many other Collects, to the first Article. The last Prayer but one
in the Visitation of the Sick, to the second Article, as also many other
Prayers and Collects. The Collects for the Annunciation and the Nativity, to
the third Article. The Collect for the Sunday next before Easter, and the first
Collect for good Friday, to the fourth Article. The Collect and Epistle for
Easter Even. The Anthems Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for Easter Day, for
Monday and Tuesday in Easter-Week for the first and second Sunday after Easter,
to the fifth Article. The Collect, Epistle, and Gospel for Ascension-Day, and
the Collects for the Sunday after Ascension, to the sixth Article. The Collect
for the first Sunday in Advent, to the seventh Article. The Collects, Epistles,
and Gospels for Whit-Sunday, Monday and Tuesday in Whitsun-Week; and the second
Collect for good Friday, to the eighth Article. The Collect for the 22th.
Sunday after Trinity, for all the Festivals of the Apostles and Evangelists,
especially for all Saints to the 9th. Article. The Confession and Absolution at
the beginning of the Service Book, the Absolution and following Collect in the
Visitation of the Sick. The general confession in the Office for the Communion,
and the Absolution, together with many other Collects and Prayers, to the tenth
Article. The most part of the Office for the Burial of the dead, and many other
passages in the Service Book, as the Collect for the second Sunday in Advent,
to the eleventh and twelfth Article. Hither all the Festivals touching Christ,
then Apostles, and Evangelists, together with the Collects, Epistles, and
Gospels, proper Lessons, and proper Psalmo may be reduced; and may serve not
only to explain every Article in the Creed, but to imprint it in our memories,
that it may have the greater influence upon our lives: So that I very much
wonder that any People can be offended at the Service Book, it being of so
admirable contrivance, and so singularly useful, would People but follow, and
observe as well, as follow the Churches method. I could easily reduce the most
of it to the Lord's Prayer, Apostles Creed, and Ten Commandments.

After the Minister has rehearsed the Articles of the Faith; The sick Person
is to return this Answer.

All this I steadfastly believe.
That by it, the Minister may be assured that the sick Person believes as a
Christian ought to do, and so may proceed to the other part of the Office in
that order, as the Church directs.

Rubric. Then shall the Minister examine, and^.
Note. It is not enough that the sick Person declare his assent to all the
Articles of Faith contained in the Creed, but that his faith may appear sound
and sincere, and be in some sort evidenced to the Minister, that so it is, by
the fruits and effects of it, the Minister is to examine him further, touching
his life and conversation. 1. Touching his charity, without which a bare
profession of faith is nothing worth, Fides non est fides nisi charitate
formata. As charity will accompany us to Heaven, so there is no hop^s of going
to Heaven without it. The sick Person, when he leaves the World, must forgive
the World, and, as the Athenian turned his Cup of Poison into a Cup of Charity,
so a dying Christian should digest every injury done to him, and requite it
with a kindness, rather than meditate a Revenge, as did our late glorious
Martyr King Charles I. of blessed memory, whom I should commend for the only
President of this kind, most signally imitable, only we have a fairer original
pattern of Charity to transcribe after, and that is, our blessed Savior, who,
when he was nailed to the Cross, was, Liber charitatis explicatus. Patebant
viscera per vulnera. As he commended forgiveness of injuries to us for an
Aphorism. Matthew. 6.14, 15. making our pardoning others to be as a condition
annexed to Gods pardoning us. So he enforced it on by his own practice. Luke
23.34. In persecutione positus pro persequentibus orabat; what his last and
dying words were in Cruce, such should be ours in Extrema hac luce. He dies
desperately, who dies uncharitably; how can he expect forgiveness from God, who
forgives not Man? The parable of the Servus nequam. Matthew. 18.33, 34. may
caution us to let go wrath and malice, before we leave the World. 2. The sick
Person is to be examined, how he stands disposed to make satisfaction to those
he has done injury to. For without this, Repentance will not profit, because
it can hardly be true and sincere without restitution. Fingitur non agitur. Non
remittitur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. August. Epist. 5. Chrysostom.
Homil. 15. in Matthew. Now in the business of restitution, it is intended only so
far to be made by the Sick party, as that the party injured may be no looser by
him. That he restore what he took away, if it be possible. Ezekiel. 33.14, 15. if
not that, yet to have a will and heart so to do, God will accept of a Quod
potuit, so far as we are able in such a case. Pro facto reputat Deus, quod homo
quidem vere voluit, sed non valuit adimplere. 2 Cor. 8.12. If a Man does
according to his ability, that shall be accepted at Gods hands, and rewarded,
neither shall that be expected from him, which he is not able to do. Now in
regard of a late prejudice against Ministers, and their maintenance, which bad
Men, by the advantage of bad times have contracted, People have been more
inclined to injure, rob, and defraud their Ministers than any other, to the
very great scandal of Christian profession, therefore it is not amiss in this
place to give some account of mortuaries which are still in force: by Statut.
21. Henri. 8 vi. c. 6. the end of them, and how they became due; it was upon a
general presumption that the deceased party did fail in the payment of his dues
to the Minister. Vid. Haman Lestrange, Alliance of divine offices. page 304.
Dugdal. descript. Warwick. page 679. Lastly, The Minister is to exhort the sick
Person to settle his Estate, a thing better done in time of health, that when
they come to dye, they may have nothing else to think on, but to secure their
future estate; indeed a minutes time lost in this extremity, may loose a Man
Heaven. Therefore in time of health, let a Man set his House in order, and not
defer it till the evil days come. The only full employment for a sick Man is to
prepare to dye, which should be the work of his whole life, but now he is to
intend it and nothing else, make it his Hoc age, his Unum necessarium. In his
life time, and time of sanity, he should keep his Lamp burning, and prepare his
Oil, but in extremis, he should trim it, and get it in a readiness, that he may
have nothing to do, but to go forth to meet him, when the Bridegroom calls.
Again, the Minister is to exhort the sick Person, if he be of ability to be
liberal to the poor; For this is to have mercy upon our own Souls: In not
forgetting the Poor, we remember our selves. This is Christum scribere haeredem,
to make Christ our Heir. Manus pauperis est thesaurus Christi. The poor Man's
hand is Christ's treasury. When the poor receives from us, Christ stands by,
and reaches out his hand to receive with them. Mat. 25.40. This is Ars
quaestuosissima. For by thus parting with the Riches, which we cannot keep, we
may gain those Riches, which we cannot lose. Quas dederis solas semper habebis
opes. This is not to throw away our Riches, but to lay them out with such
prudence, as to make friends of the unrighteous Mammon. Luke 16.9. This is to
make p^ovision for our future estate, by so using the fading wealth, which is
entrusted to us here, that when these transitory comforts forsake us, we may be
received into Heaven. A duty very necessary at all times, but most needful
then, when we are going to give up our accounts to God: for nothing seems more
powerful to procure absolution at God's hands, than liberality to the Poor.
Mat. 25.34, 35. Our charity cannot be complete without this, it is not enough
to forgive injuries, but to give alms; this is called doing good, and they, in
whom this grace has abounded, are said to be rich in good works. 1 Timothy 6.17,
18, 19. What we do for the poor, we do for our selves too, more for our selves
then for them; this is to do our selves good, this is to lay up for our selves;
this is to lay a sure foundation, and to make a sure and certain ground work of
the uncertainty of Riches. Our good works are our only movables, which shall
follow us to another World, and no time more seasonable for them then sickness,
when we are packing up to be gone. As Charity is Vita Sanctorum, so is it Comes
defunctorum. But he who desires more upon this argument, let him read Bishop
Andrew's Sermon, on 1 Timothy 6.17, 18, 19. and his Funeral Sermon, on Heb. 13.16.
There is only one thing more I am to account for, and that is the sick Persons
special confession of his sins, if he feel his Conscience troubled, and the
Ministers Personal absolving of him, if the sick Party humbly and heartily
desire it. Touching the first, it cannot be meant of that auricular confession,
which is corruptly practiced, for no more is intended by it, then that the
Minister should contribute his utmost aid and assistance toward the removal of
that great burden of guilt, which by reason of sin may lie upon the sick Man's
Conscience. This the Ministers ought to do, for this very end and purpose is
the Ministry of reconciliation committed unto them, they have a Commission
granted them to give reconciliation, peace, pardon, and absolution to sinners,
upon their sincere repentance, and renewing of their lives. And the Tenure of
their Commission is this, That God has used Christ as a means to make peace
between Him and the sinful World, not by pardoning their sins, whilst they
remain in them, but by admitting them to repentance, by calling them, and using
admirable methods of mercy in revealing himself unto them; which word of
reconciliation is put into the Ministers hands, that they may upon all needful
occasions make known the means of grace, and advise and persuade all who need
it, especially the sick and grieved in conscience, to make use of it. The
Ministers employment is to be as Negotiators for Christ, to supply Christ's
place on earth, and to treat with Men after the same manner, as Christ did when
he was upon the Earth, by calling them to repentance, and beseeching them to
reform their lives, and make themselves capable of the return of God's favor
to them. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. When the Minister has done this, and the sick
party has received some large measure of satisfaction from him, then upon his
serious and unfeigned repentance (if it be desired) he is to give him
absolution, saying, I absolve thee, etc. But here we are to take notice, that
there are three opinions, touching the Ministers absolution. 1. That it is only
optative and precarious: So in the Absolution for the Communion-Office. 2. That
it is only declaratory pronouncing the Penitent absolved, by applying God's
promises to the signs of his contrition: So in the Absolution at the beginning
of the Service Book. 3. That it is Authoritative, as deriving Power and
Commission from God, not only to declare the party absolved, but to absolve him
in words, denoting the first Person, so in this Office for the Visitation of
the Sick; not that the Minister can absolve any whom God absolves not, or that
any sick Person can receive any benefit of absolution, but upon the condition
of his sound and sincere repentance. The power of absolution is, 1. Absolute
and original, which belongs only to God. Mark 2.8. 2. Delegate, and in the
Charter of the Church, belonging to the Ministers, and them only. Matthew. 16.19.
Matthew. 18.18. John 29.23. Vid. Bishop Andrew's Sermon. in Locum. See the Form of
Ordination of Priests. Vid. Montag. Appell. Caesar. cap. 35.36. Vid. Fisher
Visitation of the Sick upon the Service Book, lib. 1. c. 16. Vid. Reeve B. D.
his Christian Divinity out of the Service Book. cap. 63. Vid. Bishop Morton, in
his appeal. page 270. Sacerdos utitur ipsissima Christi potestate in
remittendis peccatis. Bullinger in Diatrib, page 267. Sacerdos absolvendo
confitentem pronunciat absolutum non remittit peccatum. Sacerdotes dimittunt
ostendendo, and manifestando; habent se ad modum demonstrantis, non direct,
sed dispositive, ea adhibent per quae Deus dimittit peccata; and dat gratiam.
Aliter Deus solvit, vel ligat, aliter ecclesia. Vid. Montag. appell. Caesar.
cap. 36.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Note, This absolution is grounded on Matthew. 16.19.
Matthew. 18.18. John 29.23. And here the Minister first prays to God to absolve
before he absolves himself, and what he does he does in the Name of the
Trinity, acts so far as he receives Power and Commission from the Trinity, and
no further.

Rubric.
And then the Priest shall say the Collect following,

Let us Pray. O most merciful God, etc.
Note. This is the Principle and chief Prayer in the Office, every word
grounded upon Scripture, and therefore, Let us pray, is prefixed to make the
Minister and People present, more intent upon it, and serious and fervent in
it. It is grounded upon many clear Texts of Scripture, not only the Materials
of it, but the very phrase is taken out of the Scripture. Jam. 5.14, 15. Heb.
8.12. Psalm. 51. etc.

Rubric. Then shall the Minister say this Psalm. Psalm. 71.
Note. This Psalm is a Prayer for deliverance in time of distress, which
happens to a Man in the latter end of his life; and therefore very fitly is it
made to bear a part in this Office.

Paraphrase.
Verse. 1. Lord, all my trust and confidence is in Thee; I trust not in any
secular aid, but depend upon Thee only: Let not my dependence on Thee be
disappointed and frustrated.

Verse. 2. Thou art the Patron of all, who are in distress, and have promised
relief to all, who constantly wait on Thee for it; Lord grant me a portion in
this thy promised mercy, and let thy faithfulness and mercy give me a
seasonable deliverance at this time.

Verse. 3. Be Thou my sure place of retreat, to which I may resert in this time
of danger, and grant me the performance of that mercy, which Thou have promised
to all, who constantly depend upon thee for it.

Verse. 4. Keep me out of the snares of the wicked, and let not the enemy of
Souls have any advantage over me, nor approach to hurt me.

Verse. 5. I have ever depended, and relied upon Thee, as thy Creature and
peculiar Client.

Verse. 6. I acknowledge it thy work of continual protection, by which I have
been supported every hour of my life, and it is of thy primary gift, that I
ever had any being in the World, for both which I am obliged continually to
bless thy Name.

Verse. 7. Some carnal Men may wonder to hear me talk of relief from Heaven, who
am brought so low in the eye of Man; but yet I am not disheartened at this, I
know whom I trust, and there is no security like my dependence upon Thee;

Verse. 8. Therefore be pleased to send me relief, that so I may be able to
confute those vain Men, and divulge to others the glorious advantages of thy
service;

Verse. 9. Reject me not, O God, now I am in the Wane of my Age, feeble, and
destitute of strength, for I have none to fly unto, but Thee only.

Verse. 10. and 11. Refute the obloquies of those, who look upon me as a Person
forsaken of God, and confute their rash descants upon me, by sending me a most
gracious deliverance.

Verse. 12. Arise speedily, O God, to my relief, who have no other dependence
but on Thee.

Verse. 13. So shall those vain Persons be brought to shame, by seeing
themselves frustrate and disappointed.

Verse. 14. Whatever they talk and discourse, they shall not drive me from my
fast and sure hold, nor from proclaiming to all Men the exceeding goodness of
that God, on whom I wait. The less reason they conceive I have so to do, still
the more will I magnify thy greatness, and profess my dependence on Thee.

Verse. 15. My mouth shall number thy faithful and gracious dealings toward me,
though I know not the number of them; I will spend my whole life in this task,
and when I have so done, I will confess my self to fall far short of giving
Thee thy due praises, for thy goodness toward thy Servant is infinitely above
the imperfect measures either of my valuation or expression.

Verse. 16. Whatever I do, or undertake, shall not be in any confidence of my
own strength, but in a full reliance on thine; I will never talk of any
security, but that which I hold by thy free mercy and fidelity, by which thou
art obliged to perform thy promise, and never to forsake those who depend on
Thee.

Verse. 17. Blessed God, I have had experience of thy wonderful acts of power
and goodness toward me from the first part of mine Age, and I have made
declaration of them accordingly.

Verse. 18. Do not now withdraw from me in my declining Years, wherein I most
stand in need of thy support, but afford me matter of continual
acknowledgements, that I may proclaim thy attributes to many more than yet I
have done, and live to be an instrument of bringing in those to thy service,
who are not yet born.

Verse. 19. How infinitely great, O Lord, is thy bounty? How glorious are thy
works of power and goodness? There is none, that can in the least be compared
with thee.

Verse. 20. Thou have suffered me to fall into great afflictions and distresses,
yet I doubt not either of thy power or will to restore me again, and to rescue
me out of the lowest, and most disconsolate state.

Verse. 21. Thou can return upon me in mercy, and bring more comforts than
thou tookest away, by turning thy face from me.

Verse. 22. For this, and all thy rich mercies will I in most solemn manner
exalt and ^^aise thy Name, O thou great and only God of Heaven, who thus
graciously revealest thy self to thy People.

Verse. 23. And this shall be to me the most joyful employment in the World, joy
to my tongue, being honored to be the instrument of thy praises, joy to my
very life being rescued by thee from such present dangers.

Verse. 24. And as it shall be the most pleasant, so the most constant
employment of my life, to declare thy mercy, and the performance of all thy
good promises to me, in securing me from so great a danger, and sending me so
gracious a deliverance. For which, and for all. Glory be to the Father, etc.

Halleluiah.

Adding this.
O Savior of the World, who by thy Cross, etc. John 3.17. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.

Then shall the Minister say,

The Almighty Lord, etc. Psalm. 18.1. Philip. 3.10, 11. Act. 4.12.

And after that shall say,
Unto God's gracious mercy and protection, etc. Numb. 6.24, 25, 26.

Note. Here are now added to this Office four admirable Prayers composed in the
very Scripture Phrase.

1. For a sick Child.

2. For a sick Person, when there appears small hope of recovery.

3. For a sick Person at the point of departure.

4. For Persons troubled in mind, or in conscience.

All which Prayers may with a very little pains taking be clearly, and almost
verbatim extracted out of the Scriptures; in all which I cannot enough admire,
as the Churches prudence in their composure, so also her care in making so
necessary a provision for all Persons, who are any ways grieved or afflicted.

The Communion of the Sick.
Rubric. For as much as all mortal Men be subject, etc.
Note. The Communion is to be received by every Parishioner at the least thrice
a Year, whereof the Feast of Easter to be one. Can. 21. Eccles. Anglican.

The administration of this Sacrament to Christians in extremis, was reputed by
the Primitive Fathers a very necessary dispensation, Nicen. Can. 13. cod. Eccl.
univers.
so necessary, that they indulged it in that extremity, to such as were
excommunicated by the censures of the Church. Council. 1. Nicen. Can. 13. Bucer
says, this Office is framed according to the Rule of Holy Scripture. Censur.
page 487. The Argentine or Strasburgh exiles had in their Liturgy an Office
entitled, De Eucharistia ministranda aegrotis.

The Communion for the Sick is used in most reformed Churches, when any sick
Person desires it, and the same provision is made for a number to Communicate,
as is here made in our Rubric. Vid. Durel. Conformity of other reformed
Churches with the Reformed Churches of England. page 49. Mr. Calvin pleads very
much for it. Epist. 361.363. This is Ultimum Viaticum. Vid. Dr. Sparrow.
Rational. page 333, 334, etc. It is to be administered to all dying Persons
desiring it, in case they are found fit to receive it. Vid. Cyprian. Epist. 54.
The Sacrament is a great defensative in the last Hour, when the Devil is doing
his last and worst. Vid. Council. 4. Carthag. Can. 76, 78. Council. Auras. Can.
3. Council. Vas. 2. c. 2. See more in Dr. Sparrow's Rationale.

The Collect. Almighty ever-living God, Maker of Mankind, etc.
Note. This Collect or short Prayer is fitted to this Office, and grounded upon
Heb. 12.5, 6, 7, 8. Pro. 3.11, 12. 1 These. 5.23.

The Epistle. Heb. 12.5, 6. Paraphrase.
My Son kick not at God's punishments, but make that use of them, for which
they are sent, neither be discouraged and disheartened by them. For it is an
effect in God of Paternal love, that on his beloved Children and Servants, he
inflicts punishments for their farther amendment, and it is an argument of his
approving them for his own, that he deals thus sharply with them.

The Gospel. John 5.24. Paraphrase.
This is so perfectly the will of God, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that I must tell you, that if you believe in Christ, and entertain his
Doctrine as the message of God, thereon depends your Eternal well-being, by
this means you shall escape Eternal Death, and attain Eternal Life.

Rubric. After which the Priest shall proceed, etc.
Note. What follows are partly Rules and Directions, how and in what order the
Minister is to proceed in the Communion Office for the Sick. For Ministers, who
are to bring the People to a Rule, should keep themselves to an established
Rule, and not go some one way, some another. Partly they are comfortable
applications to be made to the sick Person, in case by reason of some just
impediments the Sacrament cannot be administered in that extremity; in such a
case, the Minister is to tell the sick Person, that if he be a sincere Disciple
of Christ, so believing the Doctrine of Christ, as to obey it also, embracing
all his promises upon the same terms as they are made, not only assenting to
the truth of them, but undertaking the performance of the conditions of them
too; If he transcribe Christ's Doctrine and Example, so as that both may have an
influence upon his life, if he sincerely and unfeignedly repent of his sins,
and depend upon Christ, and him only for salvation, resigning up himself wholly
to him, This is undoubtedly to eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and to drink
his blood, this is to be a member of Christ, and to be interested in that
spiritual and endless life, which Christ came to bestow upon all true
believers, and godly livers. He, who departs the world with these assurances,
shall receive no prejudice as to his future estate, however it may so happen as
to die without receiving the consecrated Elements of Bread and Wine into his
Mouth. For he that believes in Christ, embraces his doctrine, and is sincerely
his Disciple, shall undoubtedly live for ever. John 6.47.

Rubric. In the time of the Plague, etc.
Note. Note, Ministers are to visit the Sick by this Rule, be the Disease never
so infectious, but there is an indulgence granted them as to this particular
danger. Can. 67. Yet God forbid any Minister should decline this most Christian
and needful Office, merely intending his own private safety more than the
Sick-mans Eternal welfare; For undoubtedly God is able to protect his Ministers
from all infection, when they are sincerely discharging their Office, and
(provided they do not presumingly tempt God) decline no dangers for the good of
Souls.

POSTSCRIPT.
Christian Reader,
IF any seducing Teachers have told thee either in their private suggestions,
or popular Sermons, that the Common Prayer is nothing but the Mass Book turned
into English, and that it is Popish all over, if not worse; I desire thee to
take notice once for all, that they have told thee as great an untruth as ever
was told by any but the Father of Lies; and when thou shall see Popery it self
clearly confuted out of the Common Prayer, I desire thee to be so kind to thy
self, as to lend no Ear for the time to come to such notorious Preachers of
Lies; if thou have any value at all for thy precious Soul, have nothing to do
with these precious Seducers, who have found out such a pious policy to delude
the vulgar, as to carry the Doves Eye in the Serpents Head. Now before I
proceed to bring forth the Service Book to the Confutation of Popery, I think
it very requisite, first, that it be resolved on, what Popery is not, and then
what it is, for I have observed a very strange humor predominant amongst some
more peevish English of late time, and that is to brand every thing with the
infamous name of Popery, which they like not of; and which is not framed up in
every respect to please their fancies, and over-dainty Palats. Sure to read the
Book of Psalms, Chapters for Lessons out of both the Testaments, and Epistles
and Gospels, is not Popery; now this takes up the greatest part of our
Service Book; If to read the Bible, and so to read it as the Church prescribes,
that is, so as to edify most by the reading of it; be accounted Popery, I
profess my self so much for this Popery, as I could wish there were more
Papists; As for those Apocryphal Chapters we read, I am satisfied that the
Church enjoins them to be read only for example of life and instruction of
manners, but does not press them to be applied to establish any Doctrine by.
Artic. 6. The Texts of Scripture set before the Service Book, is not Popery,
unless the very Scripture be Popery; neither is the following Exhortation,
Confession, and Absolution, the Lord's Prayer, and the following Responses,
Popery, for all are grounded upon, and taken Verbatim out of the Scripture. The
Te Deum, the Gloria Patri, the three Creeds are not Popery, unless the
Confutation of Arianisme, and other gross Heresies of the Greek Church be
Popery. The 95th. Psalm. The Benedicite. The Benedictus, Psalm the 100. The
Magnificat, Psalm the 98th. The Nune dimittis, and Psalm the 67th. and all the
Responses following are not Popery, for they are all the very Scripture, either
taken thence, or may be reduced thither. The Collect for Peace. The Collect for
Grace. The Prayers for the King, for the Royal Family, for the Clergy and
People. The Prayer of St. Chrysostom. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. The
Collects at Evening Prayer, for peace, for aid against all perils. The lesser
and larger Litany, with the following Prayers and Responses. The Prayers
extraordinary for Rain, for fair weather. In time of Dearth and Famine. In time
of War and Tumults. In time of any common Plague or Sickness. The Prayers in
the Ember-weeks. The Prayer for the High Court of Parliament. The Prayer for
all conditions of men; And the Thanksgivings extraordinary, are not, cannot be
Popery, unless the Lord's Prayer be Popery, and St. Paul's exhortation, 1 Timothy
2.1, 2. be Popery, to which they may be all reduced. The Collects, Epistles and
Gospels to be used throughout the Year, have nothing Popish in them; nor any
one of the offices following any one thing tending that way. Some things we
have, which the Church of Rome may have in her formula's, but we have them not,
because Rome has them, but because they are agreeable to Scripture, because
the ancient Liturgies had them, because they were used in the Church before
Popery was in the World. The Church of Rome has many novel devices which we
have not, but have rejected as frivolous, erroneous, and of too late a date to
be retained in our Service. So far as they hold with the ancient Church, we
hold with them* and so far as they have departed from the ancient Church, we
have departed from them. Indeed our Service Book is a good defensative, not
only against all other heresies, but against all Romish novelties whatsoever.
What are those things then which the most severe and rigid enemies, in
appe^rance to the Church, or rather Papacy and Court of Rome, quarrel at, as
Popish? Give me leave to name them, only to put the same Persons to the blush,
who quarrel at Popery, and yet equally disgust the Common Prayer Book wherein it
is confuted, and so tell the World that they are Protestants in show, and
Papists in reality. 1. To hold the Pope Supreme, is taken for grand Popery, and
the chief hinge on which all other Popish errors depend: Now the Common Prayer
in all its Collects for the King, acknowledges the King to be Sovereign and
Supreme; and in the form for Ordination of Ministers, the Oath of Supremacy is
to be taken by all who enter into holy Orders, to acknowledge the Kings
Supremacy, in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as
Temporal. See more. Can. 1. c. 2. Eccles. Anglican. Artic. 37. Eccles. Angl.
Here it may be demanded, whether those Persons are to be taken for Protestants,
or not rather to be suspected for Papists, who will not take the Oath, wherein
the Kings Supremacy is asserted. 2. To hold an infallibility, and that the
Church cannot err, is said to be another Branch of Popery. By the
Common Prayer in the first general confession of sin, we are taught to say, We
have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost Sheep; and never had we so just
cause to say it, as since we left it off: besides, that Churches and Councils
may err, is plain. Can. 19. and Can. 21. Eccles. Anglican. 3. To hold
Transubstantiation in the Sacrament, (a term which many are frighted at, though
they know not what it means) is looked upon by some as a very gross piece of
Popery. Whereas our Common Prayer Book, in the very words wherein the Minister
delivers the Consecrated Elements to the people, as it holds a real presence of
Christ's Body and Blood in the Sacrament, saying, The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ which was given for thee, etc. The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ which
was shed for thee, etc. So it seems to shut the Door against
Transubstantiation, in saying, Take and eat this in Remembrance, etc. Drink
this in Remembrance, etc. Noting it to be a Commemoration only of his sufferings
in his natural Body upon the Cross, however spiritually his Body and Blood are
both exhibited and participated in the Sacrament. Again, our Church is
expressly, both in her Book of Homilies, and in her Articles against
Transubstantiation. Artic. 28. Indeed the form for administration in the late
Directory, did rather officiate toward the error of Transubstantiation, then
the form in our Common Prayer Book. 4. To withold the Cup of blessing from
the People in the Lords Supper, is looked upon by some as a very gross Popish
error, especially by those who have neither given the Bread nor the Cup to the
People for many Years together; Now our Common Prayer Book expressly injoynes
the Minister to give the Communion to the People in both kinds; and our Church
is urgent in one of her Articles to have it so. Artic. 30. Eccles. Ang. 5. To
restrain the holy Scriptures from the perusal of the People is branded for
Popery, and that by some who have indulged so great a liberty to the People in
this kind, that they have abused and wrested the Scriptures to patronize
Treason, Rebellion, Sacrilege, and any gross sin whatsoever. Now in our
Common Prayer Book, that Scripture which is most for edification, is not only
ordered to be read in the vulgar tongue, but so ordered to be read, and so
sorted out to all the best advantages, that would the People follow the
Churches order and method, it is not possible they should be so grossly ignorant
as they are. 6. To have public Prayers in a Tongue unknown to the common
People, and to which they cannot understandingly say, Amen, is condemned for
grand Popery, by those who yet have devised a way of extemporary Prayer, and
many times in such language too, that it is not possible for People safely to
join their Amen to those Prayers, which they cannot understand; But the
Common Prayer sums up all lawful and necessary requests, in so plain and pious
forms, that they may say Amen to, and edify by those Prayers, if they will.
7. To prohibit Marriage to Men in Holy Orders, is voted grand Popery,
especially by those who have so much invaded the Church-maintenance, that there
is scarce sufficient left to maintain the Ministers in a single life; whereas
our Common Prayer Book in the Office for Matrimony, admits all to the holy
state of Matrimony, that are allowed of by the Word of God; and the Church of
England expressly declares the marriage of Priests to be lawful. Artic. 32. 8.
To indulge Marriage to Persons within the degrees prohibited by the Laws of
God, is accounted another branch of Popery; But the Common Prayer Book in the
Matrimonial Office, declares against it; and so does the Church. Can. 99. 9. To
tolerate the liberty of Divorce betwixt Man and Wife, for more causes than the
cause of Fornication; is accounted Popery, and yet they did both allow it, and
practice it, who profess themselves to be the only Anti-Papists. The
Common Prayer now in the Matrimonial Office admits of no such thing; and our
Church is very cautious in so weighty a matter. Can. 105, 106, 107. 10. To
obtrude new Articles of faith upon the People, which have no ground in the Word
of God, is complained of for very gross Popery; especially by those who have of
late years done it, thrusting upon the People new Doctrines, new Catechisms,
new Covenants, which are in many things contrariant to God's Word, and did it
with such violence, as to refuse them communion, who refused to submit to these
impositions. Whereas our Common Prayer Book admits of no more Articles of faith
than what are contained in the ancient Creeds of the Latin and Greek Church.
And the Church expressly declares for them. Artic. 8. and as expressly declares
against any thing enforced as a matter of faith, which is contrary to Gods
written word. Artic. 6. Artic. 20. Artic. 21. 11. The Doctrine concerning
Purgatory, Pardons, worshipping and adoration, as well of images, as of
Relics, and also invocation of Saints; is declaimed against as very foul and
intolerable Popery; by those especially, who made of late Years Men's lives more
bitter then any Purgatory; who drew People off from their subjection, and
allegiance to their lawful Prince, and pardoned them when they had done; who
defaced all Images, which were only for decency, and a civil remembrance, with
that zeal and fury as if they saw some Religion in them more then ever was
intended; and who were so far from the invocation of Saints, that they ran
foully into the other extreme, obliterating all their annual days of observance,
and instead of allowing them any pious and civil remembrance, sordidly reviling
them, and disgracing so much as in them lay their very memories and names.
However the Common Prayer Book, and our Church teaches them no Popery, yet
both may teach them more civility and moderation. As for a Popish purgatory the
Common Prayer is against it in the Burial Office, holding the spirits of all,
who depart hence in the Lord, to be in joy and felicity: in bliss, though not
in their perfect consummation and bliss. As for pardons and indulgencies, the
Common Prayer takes notice of none, but only while Men are alive to beg for
pardon, and that of God, not for the merit of any Saint, but for the merits of
Christ, for most of the Collects conclude, Through Jesus Christ our Lord. For
worshipping and adoration of Images, there is not one syllable in all the
Common Prayer tending that way, but through all the Offices our worship and
adoration is terminated in God as the proper object, and offered by Christ as
the only Advocate, Mediator and Intercessor. And for invocation of Saints
departed, or praying to them, there is no thing so irreconcilable to our
Common Prayer Book: For, through all the Offices of it, we acknowledge no
Mediator, Intercessor, or Advocate but Christ only, indeed we honor the
memorial of some known Scripture Saints, by observing set days, and propounding
their lives as exemplary to us, and we praise God for their holy living here in
this World, Articl. Eccles. Anglic. 22.
and happy departure hence, praying that our lives may be as holy, and our
deaths as happy, but we do not pray unto them. If there be any other Tenants
(which some are pleased to call Popery, for all is Popery with some, which they
have not a ch^ef hand in the establishment) if they fear Justifying- Popery,
Free Will- Popery, Merit- Popery, Supererrogation- Popery, Satisfaction-
Popery, or what Popery soever, for they must name it, I fear I have not given
the names aright, but if it be Popery that is, a Romish error for all that Rome
holds is (...) ^oneous, let them take the Common-p^^^^^ ^ook, and Book of
xxxix. Articles, and the ^^eed look no further for a confutation. Truly I never
had yet the confidence which some Men have, to call the Pope Antichrist, and
the Church of Rome the Whore of Babylon, and yet the very same Men have fastened
the same titles of disgrace upon the Bishops, and Church of England; but I
could wish the Pope more l ke the Primitive Bishops, and Rome more like her
Primitive self, that so that Church, and ours may both be reconciled upon such
terms of reconciliat^on, as is consistent with Christian rules; and so upon
their union, it is to be hoped another party would be disappointed of their
foul ends, who are for the Church of Rome and England one while, and and
another while call them both Whores, only to destroy both, and to set up
themselves. Farewell.

The (a) ORDER for the Burial of the DEAD.
Rubric.
I. Here is to be noted, that the Office ensuing, is not to be used for any
that die (b) unbaptized, or (b) excommunicate, or (b) have laid violent hands
upon themselves.

II. The (c) Priest and Clerks meeting the Corpse at the entrance of the
Churchyard and going before it, either into the Church or toward the Grave,
shall say, or sing.

Annotat.
(a) ALl Offices to be performed to Christians, living or dead, are to be done
according to the custom of the Church, which is the rule of decency) and
according to the order, directions, and appointment of our lawful Superiors, 1
Cor. 14.40.

(b) These Three are denied Christian Burial: The First, because they were
never visibly received into the bosom of the Church, for Baptism is Introitus
in Ecclesiam. The Second, because for some notorious crimes, they are by just
censure cast out of the bosom of the Church. The Third and last, because guilty
of so foul a crime, which is directly contradictory to Christian profession;
yet ought we to judge charitably of the first, especially when born of believing
Parents, and where there was rather the want, than the contempt of Baptism.

The Second, we leave to the mercies of God, neither are they absolutely denied
the external rites of decent Funeral, when repentance for the faults of such
offenders is before their death signified to those, who have power to receive
them into the Church upon their repentance, as they had power to cast them out
in a legal way for their crimes. But, if they die in a state of impenitency,
then these and the last, who in their life and death would be as Pagans, are
not judged fit to be as Christians in their Burial. All that authority can do
to such Persons, is to put their Carcasses to shame, and to deny them the
honor of seemly Sepulture: For, it has been the practice of very Heathens,
Egyptians, Athenians, and others, to deny Burial to those, who were
notoriously wicked, and self-murderers. Athenienses decreverunt, ne si quis se
interfecisset, sepeliretur in agro Attico. August. de civitat. dei, lib. 1.
This difference God himself made in Jezebel, 2 King. 9.36. The King of Babylon,
Isay 14.19. Jehojakim, Jerem. 22.18, 19. And the Church has frequently done
the same, by this means, if possible, to keep others in good courses, and to
terrify them from committing those horrid acts, which have rendered some
incapable of Christian Burial. Those Grecian Virgins who feared not death, were
yet restrained with the fear of shame after Death; It has been a usual
practice thus to lay open the faults of Persons notoriously criminal, by
putting them to exemplary punishments, and denying them the solemnity of honest
Sepulture. So Eusebius calls it, Splendidissima Sepultura, lib. 7. c. 15.
Corah, who rebelled against Moses and Aaron, died not the common death of Men,
nor was buried after the manner of Men, but went down quick into the ground
opening under him. Numb. 16.32. Baana, and Rechab, who rose up against their
Lord, had their quarters set upon Poles. 2 Samuel 4.12. Bigthan and Thares were
fairly hanged upon a Tree. Esth. 2.22. So Absalom came to a strange end. 2 Samuel
18.14. So Sheba. 2 Samuel 20.22. All the punishments of Rebels and Traitors now
in use are collected and drawn together from the several examples we meet with
in the Book of God. Now these exemplary punishments are inflicted upon some to
terrify many, and vengeance is taken in such manner upon such sinners, that
the just, Cum viderit vindictam. Psalm. 58.10. may wash his Feet or Hands in the
blood of the wicked. And then do the just wash their Hands and Feet, when by
other Men's punishments they learn to amend their own lives. And there is a
necessity to make some. Persons thus exemplary in their Deaths and Burials. 1.
For the punishment of the offense, for sins not corrected are encouraged. 2.
For a vindication of the Laws and Authority, against which the offense is. For
such a disrespect unpunished would in time breed a contempt of all Law, and
Authority. 3. For a terror to others, that other Men's punishments may be our
instruction. As David intitles his Psalm, wherein he reports Israel's
punishments, a Psalm to give instruction, Psalm. 78.

That Man is desperately a Fool, whom other Men's harms cannot make wise. The
Fox was warned when he saw the tracks of other Beasts leading to the Lions Den,
but none returning. So the footsteps of others may be a warning to us, to fix
us upon firmer and better Principles, that we do not fall and perish as they
did. The Footsteps of the fallen Angels may check us for our pride. The ashes
of Sodom admonish us of our filthiness, Ex eorum cinere fiat nobis lixivium.
The Gibbet of Hamman, be an allay to our ambition. Achans heap of stones in the
Valley of Achor, give check to our Sacrilege. And the fearful examples of
Absalom, Corah, Zimry, Sheba, Judas, and others, antidote us against Sedition,
Rebellion, and Treason. Miror quorum facta imitamur, eorum exitus nos non
perhorrescere.

(c) By the Priest and Clerks, we are to understand the chief Minister of the
Congregation, and his Assistants, who are either Clerici, or Ministerialis
ordinis candidati; These are, for the more solemnity, to meet the Corpse, or
dead Body, at the entrance of the Churchyard; which Churchyard is the usual
and accustomed place of Burial, (Vid. Mins. Diction.) expressed in the
Teutonick, German, and other Languages, by such words, which signify Gods
Glebe-Land, the Churches Orchard, or Garden; noting unto us, that the dead
Bodies are there sown like Seeds in the Furrow of the Grave, and shall ripen
into a fruitful and joyful Harvest at the Resurrection. They are sown in tears,
but shall be reaped in joy; they are sown in dishonor, shall be raised in
glory; sown in weakness, shall be raised in power: 1 Cor. 15.43. As Trees and
Plants in the Winter, they are as dead for a time, but shall bud and spring out
again at the Resurrection. The Spring for the time, the Gardens for the place
present us with significant emblems of the Resurrection, sufficient to convince
Heathens to subscribe to the truth of it. And this is a critical reason given
by some, why Christ made choice of the Spring, and of a Garden for the place,
both of his Sepulture, and rising again. Bishop And. Sermon. in Mark 16.1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6. The Hebrew Doctors in their Language express the Place of Burial by a
word, which signifies, the House of the Living. The Greeks, Latins, and
others, by words, which signify Dormitories, Dortors, Sleeping-Places, Places
of Rest. Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 12. Where the Bodies of God's Servants rest in hope
of a joyful Resurrection. A carnal Man's hope is but Spes Spirantium, a hope
while he breaths, but a Christian Man's hope is Spes Expirantium, a hope when
he can fetch his breath no longer: Dum spiro spero, says the one, whilst there
is breath, there is hope: Dum expiro spero, says the other, when there is no
breath, yet there is hope. My flesh does rest in hope, says David, Psalm. 16.9.
And this is the Christian hope laid up in the bosom of every departing Saint
and Servant of God, that though his Body and Soul by a natural death, be for a
time separated the one from the other, yet they shall meet again at the time
appointed in inseparable unions. Now how^ver such consecrated Places are made
choice of for the Sepulture of Gods Servants; it is not to be conceived that
our Religion teaches us to call any place holy in it self (since the Temple)
only some we esteem of as more holy in their use than others; and these
distinctions of places are made only out of a respect to decency and order, and
to keep up that honorable esteem, which is due to Christian Profession, and to
show our selves charitably affected toward the remains not of dead Men, but of
dead Christians, and those whom we hope one day to see glorious. As we neither
scorn the Carcasses of our Friends with the old Troglodites, so neither do we
with the old Egyptians respect them more than when they were informed with a
living Soul, but we keep such an even mean betwixt both, in disposing of their
Bodies to the Earth, from whence they first came, that we keep as close as may
be to the Apostles Canon of Decency and Order, avoiding on one hand the
indelible brand of barbarous inhumanity, and on the other hand the more
tolerable error of being superstitious. What a more than common esteem the
first Christians had of these Places, where the Bodies of God's Servants sleep
in peace, we may be sufficiently taught out of Eusebius. Splendidissima
Sepultura: So He. lib. 7. cap. 15. lib. 7. c. 10. And out of St. Augustine,
Curatio Funeris, conditio Sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis sunt vivorum
solatia, quam subsidia mortuorum. So He. de civit. Dei. lib. 1. c. 12. And out
of Origin. Rationalem animam honorare didicimus. So He. Cont. Cells. lib. 8. And
out of our own Sir Henry Spelman, as much as any. de council. tom. 1. proem. Yet
in making choice of such places for Burial, and using such Rites and
Ceremonies, however in Origen's sense we may express a civil honor to
Christian Souls departed, in committing the instruments or cases of them
honorably to the Grave: We intend them not (says Augustine) as helps to the
dead, but only as comforts to the living, showing how great account we
Christians make of Heaven and of a Resurrection. Therefore in this pompous
manner are the Priest and Clerks to go before the Corpse, either into the
Church, or toward the Grave, saying or singing.

John 11.25, 26. I am the Resurrection and the Life (says the Lord) he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever lives
and believes in me shall never die.

Note, These words are Christ's words to Martha touching Lazarus, wherein our
Savior told her that he was able to raise the dead to life again, whenever
he pleased. One that is a Believer (said he) and faithful Disciple of mine,
such as thy Brother Lazarus was, I can, though he be dead and buried, raise him
presently to life again. And he, who is now alive, and so not capable of such a
present Miracle, shall, if he receive and obey my Doctrine, though he dies after
the manner of other Men, rise again unto life immortal.

Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redeemer lives, and that He shall stand at
the latter day upon the earth; and though after my Skin worms destroy this
Body, yet in my Flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my self, and mine
eyes shall behold, and not another.

Note, These are the words of holy Job, that Miracle of Patience, Tertullian
applies them to Christ's Incarnation, but the most as our Church does, to the
Resurrection. The words carry this meaning. Whatsoever terms I am forced to
make use of to express my grief, yet I know that he, from whom I expect my
salvation, is living, and that after he has tried my patience, he will bring
me out of that miserable condition, to which I am reduced. And I may well
believe it, since faith persuades me that I must rise again after my death,
that my Bones shall once again be clothed with Flesh, that in my own Body I
shall see the God who I adore, and hear from his Mouth a Sentence favorable to
my Innocence. This holy Job, who was poor even to a Proverb, was enriched with
this singular faith, I shall see God in my Flesh, that is, I in my flesh shall
see God. Videbo Deum in carne, hoc est, Deum incarnatum. I shall see God having
taken flesh on him.

1 Timothy 6, 7. We brought nothing into this World, and it is certain we can
carry nothing out.

Note, That Christianity is an advantageous calling is in one sense most true,
for a Christian life with a competent subsistence, is as much as all the wealth
in the World. For any thing above sufficiency for this life is no way
advantageous to us, for as we brought nothing into the World with us, so
neither can we carry any thing out, so that all that, which we do not spend, or
use, is lost to us.

Job 7.21. The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the Name of
the Lord.

Note, Job being prostrate upon the Earth, for to adore and kiss the hand which
struck him, said with sentiments of r^spect. I came naked out of the womb of my
Mother, and shall enter naked into the bosom of the Earth; the bounty of God
gave me Riches, Children, Friends, and his Justice takes them from me; the
loss, though it be sensible, is welcome to me, since it is he that ordains it,
and by whatsoever misfortune he tries my patience, his Name shall always
receive praises from my Mouth.

Now the Priest and Clerk go in this pompous manner before the Corpse, saying,
or singing these places of Scripture; to note the Christians Triumph over
Death, and to show that Christ by his Death and Resurrection has taken away
the sting from Death, and Victory from the Grave; an expression (1 Cor. 15.55.)
borrowed from the Heathen Romans, who used to paint Victory (whom they termed a
Goddess) in their Ensigns and Banners. The like custom we read observed by the
Ancients, Hieron. Ep. 30. ad Ocean. de Fabiola. Chrysostom. Homil. 4. in
Hebraeos. What mean (says the last of these Authors) the bright burning
Torches? Do we not follow the dead like Champions? These Followers are the
Friends of the deceased, and the People, not the Priest and Clerks; for it was
the general voice among the ancients of those who followed their friends to the
Grave, Vale, nos te ordine sequemur; hence came the word exequiae a sequendo,
from following after; and hence proceeded the custom, which we still retain, to
have the Corpse carried before, and they who attend it to go behind, thereby
figuring, and putting them in mind, that they must all one day follow, the same
way, Una semel calcanda via lethi. Hodie mihi, cras tibi; now is my turn, to
morrow thine. But the Father goes on, What mean the Hymns? do we not thereby
glorify God, for that he has crowned our departed Brother, that he has freed
him from labors, that he has with himself freed him from fear? All these are
expressions of joy, whereby we do in a holy valor laugh at death, Chrysostom. Now
what is this, but to show our selves truly Christian, that we fasten not the
anchor of our hopes here below? that we build not our felicities here upon a
sandy foundation, in the dirt and dust, Inter pulices, culices, tineas,
araneas, vermes; whereas should we go with dejected, and down-cast looks, as
Men without hope; Mortem Christi, qua mors superata est, calumniamur; we should
cast a blemish of disgrace upon the death of Christ, who has by his death
conquered death for us; we should manifest our selves to be so doubtful, as to
fasten a lie upon Christ's Resurrection, and so make his Cross, Passion, and
Triumphant Resurrection of none effect; in so much that very Heathens would
scoff at us, and say, as once they did, (which brought the use of the Cross
into Baptism) where is the crucified God in whom ye trust? if he has conquered
death, Why do not ye Christians contemn it? Why glory ye in his Passion, who
resent the death of your friends with so much impatience? Your sadness confutes
the Triumph of his Resurrection; certainly he is in the Grave still, he is not
risen, neither has he taken the sting from the Prince of Terrors (as ye say)
seeing the death of a friend and relation appears thus terrible to you. Now to
prevent the Objections of these Heathens, we bring the Bodies of Christians to
the ground in this Triumphant manner, the Priest who is Christ's Deputy here on
Earth going before, saying, or singing, I am the Resurrection, and the Life,
says the Lord, etc. The other Clerks and subordinate Ministers, where so many
are, saying after, as representing the dead Party, I know that my Redeemer
lives, etc.

Rubric. After they are come into the Church shall be read one, or both of
these Psalms following. Psalm. 39. Psalm. 90.
Note, These Psalms are admirably chosen by the prudent care of our Mother the
Church of England, to fit and prepare all her Children living in the bosom of
her for the time of their dissolution, and departure out of this life, that
they may like the wise Virgins in the Gospel, have Lamps always in their hands,
and Oil in their Lamps, and be in a readiness to go forth to meet Him, when
ever the Bridegroom of Souls shall come. The Psalms set before us the certainty
of death, and the shortness of life, as also many more excellent and seasonable
Lessons touching our Mortality, which I shall explain in this following
Paraphrase.

Paraphrase.
Note, This Psalm was composed by David upon the scandal he took at the
prosperity of the wicked, whilst himself was in misery; it sets before us the
vanity of all worldly things, to be as a motive to repress all impatience in us
upon any adversity whatsoever, which may befall us; he commended it to Jeduthun
a skilful Musician, and Prefect of his Music.

Psalm. 39.
Verse 1. I have steadfastly resolved within my self to set a very strict guard
over my self, especially over my tongue, which in time of affliction and
calamity is most provoked to utter things which are not fit to be spoken, by
Persons who have a tender regard to indear the reputation of their Religion. So
often as I see my adversaries, and consider in what a prosperous state they are,
it concerns me to keep my tongue well guarded, that I do not break out into
intemperate, and passionate speeches.

Verse. 2. Therefore I have resolved, that when ever I see them, or hear others
discourse of them; I will keep perfect silence, neither using words to
vindicate mine own innocence, or to blame their injurious dealings with me; Yet
after all, when I thus bridled my tongue, suppressed my sorrow, restrained my
passion; I did by this Method of mine but increase my sorrow and passion so
much the more, as the Watercourse stopped becomes the more raging, and fire pent
in is the more violent to make an out burst.

Verse. 3. So that while I was in this condition, the fire of my passion was
heightened into such a degree of heat, that it flamed out, and at last found a
vent toward Heaven; so that in all humility, I made my moan to God, and thus
addressed my self unto him.

Verse. 4. Lord, if it be thy will and pleasure, that I should live no longer in
this world to discharge that Office whereunto thou have called me; if my sins
have so far provoked Thee, as to think me unfit to be any longer employed,
honored, and owned by Thee here; yet be pleased to grant me this request,
which is, that thou would reveal unto me what I must expect more in this
world, and that thou would bestow upon me thy grace to fit and prepare my
self for it, what ever it is.

Verse. 5. I know my life is very short, a mere nothing compared to thy
Eternity; and this is not my state only, but the state of all Men living in the
World, who are all as frail, mortal, and almost as short-lived as the meanest
Creature; There is not that frailty and fadingness in any Creature, which is
not to be found in Man.

Verse. 6. The Life of Man is but as a Picture, shadow, or dream of Life, it
vanishes in a moment, and when we are gone hence, we have no power over those
riches, which we have anxiously scraped together here, and must leave behind
us; when we have run through all the labors of acquisition, and have nothing
visible to interpose betwixt us and our enjoyments, yet then we are uncertain
who shall enjoy the benefit of our labors, whether our selves, our Heirs, or
our Enemies.

Verse. 7. There is nothing therefore in this Life that is worth the patience of
our expectance, or the solicitude of losing what we have acquired. There is
only one thing, which is the matter of a sober Man's ambition, and that is, to
be in favor with Thee; O God, and to glorify thee in what ever condition thy
mercy shall chose for us.

Verse. 8. Therefore I desire thee to pardon my many sins by thy grace, and to
free me from those punishments which are due to them by thy mercy; and let not
wicked men thy enemies and mine prosper in their wickedness, least they triumph
over me and piety, and reproach my dependence on Thee as the greatest folly,
for this will turn to the dishonor of thee and thy service.

Verse. 9. What is hitherto befallen me, I take patiently, without either
murmuring or repining; for I know it comes from thee, whose disposals are most
wise; and be it never so sharp, I am sure it is less than I have deserved.

Verse. 10. Yet let it be thy pleasure now to set a period to my calamities,
that I be not utterly destroyed by them.

Verse. 11. It Is most certain, that when Thou by our sins art justly provoked,
the very withdrawing thy favor does insensibly blast and consume us every
way, in our health, and wealth, and beauty, and whatever is most precious to
us; so very a truth it is, that we Men, and all that we have are mere nothing.

Verse. 12. O Lord be pleased to hear this sad request, which I now pour out
before thee; that seeing my time, and all Men's is so short and transitory in
this World.

Verse. 13. Thou would give me a little space of relaxation from my present
pressures, and calamities that so I may devoutly serve and glorify Thee some
space of time longer here on Earth, before I depart hence to the Grave, and
Land of Forgetfulness, never more to return into this frail and brittle life,
to be seen and looked upon by any mortal Eyes.

Vid. Dr. Hammond.

Paraphrase.
Note, This Psalm or Prayer was either composed by Moses, that eminent Prophet
of God, who in Gods stead governed the People of Israel, and conducted them out
of Egypt, or else by some other as in his Person, for it reflects on those
times wherein Moses lived, when the children of Israel were many Years
afflicted in the Wilderness, and great Multitudes of them untimely cut off for
their provocations; it sets before us the afflictions and shortness of life,
together with a Prayer for the return of mercy.

Psalm. 90.
Verse. 1. Blessed Lord God, we have never had any Helper, refuge or place of
protection to fly unto for aid and relief from time to time, but Thee only;
Thou have hitherto been our only defense and safeguard, do not now forsake us,
and destroy us utterly.

Verse. 2. Before any part of this World was formed by Thee, or the Earth by thy
wise disposal brought forth the Mountains, thou had an incomprehensible power
and being within thy self; by which power this World wherein we now live was
at first created, yet thou remainedst immutably the same before it had
beginning, and so shall do when it shall have ending; O let thy afflicted
Creatures at this time receive the benefits of this thy Holy Power and Mercy.

Verse. 3. Thou art the great and most just Disposer of all events, when thy
Creatures fall off, and make defection from thee; it is just with thee to
punish them for their sins, and to return them back to the Earth from whence by
thy Creative Power they were at first produced; This was the Sentence passed
upon Adam, and according to the same art thou now pleased to deal with many of
us.

Verse. 4. And though some in the old World, who were great Offenders, were
permitted to live near a Thousand Years; yet what is that compared with thy
Infinity? a Thousand Years considered in thy duration are but as a drop spilt
and lost in the Ocean. It is but as a day past and gone, or but the sixth part
of it, the space of some hours in the night, which is insensibly past over in
sleep.

Verse. 5. As for us Men, we are frail and short-lived, our whole Age is quickly
at an end, by the course of Nature; but when thy wrath breaks forth upon us,
then death comes as a torrent, and sweeps us away in the midst of our strength;
our life is then but as a dream when one awakes out of sleep, a fancy at
first, and that soon vanished; whilst we live we do but seem to live, death
comes and the phansy of life vanishes.

Verse. 6. Our condition is no more stable and durable than that of the flower
or grass of the Field, which, when it flourishes most, is subject to soon
fading and withering, but if the Sickle come, the emblem of thy judgments upon
sinners, then it falls in the prime of its verdure; and so do we flourish in
the morning, fade and loose our beauty, moisture, life and all ere it be night.

Verse. 7. For by reason of our sins thou art provoked to cut us off in the
prime and most flourishing part of our Age.

Verse. 8. Our open and crying sins thou think fit thus to punish with
excision; and besides there are many secret sins unknown to Men, but not
unknown to Thee, which also provoke thy wrath, and call forth thy vengeance
against us, such are our Apostasies, turnings back, dislike of thy Methods in
the guiding and governing of us, preferring the satisfaction of our own lusts
before an obediential submission to thy Commands; and for such sins as these
are we swept away and consumed in a visible formidable manner.

Verse. 9. By reason of our provocations thy displeasure is gone out against us,
so that our Years are suddenly cut off, sooner then one can speak, and that is
as soon as one can think, like the Spider, we weave such Webs as the next Broom
sweeps away, our Age is spent in fruitless labors, which presently come to
nothing.

Verse. 10. Thy Oath being gone out to cut short our time here for our
impieties, multitudes of us die before we can advance to more than the
seventieth Year of our Age; few live up to eighty, and they who live beyond it,
have little joy in their life, being combred with weakness, weariness, and
diseases; so that our Age is nothing in respect of true duration, it being but
a thought or breath.

Verse. 11. Whilst thus we are daily cut off, the great unhappiness of it, is,
that no Man is careful to lay to heart these terrible effects of God's wrath
upon us; no Man is so far instructed by what he sees daily befall others, as to
be sensible of his own danger, and the shortness of his life, so as to live
well whilst he is permitted to live.

Verse. 12. But (O Lord) be thou pleased to give us this grace, so to instruct
us, and convince us of the shortness of our lives, that we may by this
consideration be brought to pay that constant reverence and obedience which is
due to Thee, and wherein the true wisdom consists; for there cannot be any
greater folly imaginable, than to provoke Thee by our sins, and to run the
adventure of being cut off by Thee in our sins.

Verse. 13. And (O Lord,) if it stand with thy good pleasure, reverse the
sentence of excision, which is gone out against us, let it suffice that thy
wrath has swept away so many of us, vouchsafe, at last to be pacified, and
reconciled with us.

Verse. 14. We have lain very long under thy wrath, delay not now to afford us
the full streams of thy mercy, which we have so long wanted, and impatiently
thirsted after; that so for the remainder of our time we may have some matter
of rejoicing after so much sadness.

Verse. 15. May the days of our rejoyceing hold some proportion with the days of
our mourning, and let our comforts be answerable to our calamities.

Verse. 16. Magnify thy glorious work of grace and mercy, which is properly thy
work, to us and our posterity.

Verse. 17. Show thy loving kindness, and light of thy countenance toward us,
look in mercy upon us, give us thy grace to direct us all our days, and in all
our ways, work in us both to will and to do, and then by thy good providence
prosper our designs and undertakings. Vid. Dr. Hammond.

Note, Why Gloria Patri concludes this and the foregoing Psalms, I have given
my Reasons in another Book upon the Common Prayer.

Rubric. Then shall follow the Lesson taken out of the Fifteenth Chapter os
the former Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.
Paraphrase.
Note, This Lesson, indeed the whole Office sets forth the peculiar hope of the
Church touching the Resurrection of the Dead. Which is Primarium Evangelii
caput. The Predominant Article that presupposes all the rest. It is Nexus
Articulorum Fidei; The tying Knot, upon which all other links of holy Faith
depend. By this hand Religion is held up by the head.

1 Cor. 15. verse. 20. ad finem. Verse. 20. All the hope of a Christian is not
terminated with this life of his here on Earth, for if it were so, Christians
would be the most unhappy Persons, and the most proper objects of compassion in
the World. But blessed be God for it, it is much otherwise; for Christ is
risen, and he by raising himself raises all others with him, as in the
consecration of the first fruits the whole Harvest is also consecrate: So that
we Christians, who are miserable here, shall be rewarded hereafter; for
Christ's Resurrection is a most certain proof of ours. As the Head must rise
before the Members, so the Members are sure to follow the Head.

Christus est typus Christianorum:

Christus resurgens non solum est auspex and exemplar, sed fide-jussor, and
chirographum nostrae resurrectionis.

Verse. 21. As one Man brought death into the World, so another Man brought
Resurrection into the World.

Verse. 22. For as upon Adam's sin, All, who are partakers of his nature, are
concluded under the sentence of his death; so all regenerate believers, who are
like to Christ, and belong to him, shall be raised to immortal life.

Verse. 23. But yet with some distance of Time shall this be, Christ the first
fruits shall rise some time before, and all regenerate Christians shall rise
after Him at his last coming to Judgment.

Verse. 24. And then at the Conclusion of this World, and of the spiritual
Kingdom of Christ in the Church here below, he shall deliver up all his power
exercised by Himself, and his Commissioners into the hand of God his Father,
having first destroyed all earthly Dominions, pronouncing sentence upon the
mightiest, as well as the meanest Men, subduing all to his Power, either by
their conversion, or their destruction.

Verse. 25. For this was the promise, which was made to Christ, Psalm. 110. that
his Spiritual Kingdom on Earth should last so long till God had brought all the
World to be subject to Him.

Verse. 26. The last Enemy to be subdued by him is death, and that must be
therefore subdued, that Men may be raised again from death to life.

Verse. 27. The evidence is clear, that God will subdue all enemies and things
without exception under Christ, only God is excepted from being so subdued,
from whom Christ has received this power.

Verse. 28. And when all things shall thus be brought in subjection to Christ,
then shall Christ lay down that Office, which til then he exercises, and in
which he is conspicuous in his Church. And then shall God Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost fill all the Elect with endless Bliss and Glory.

Verse. 29. Now if the dead rise not, why do Men at their Baptism make
profession of the belief of it? for the Resurrection of the dead is one of the
prime Articles of belief, into which Christians are Baptized, and to which
Baptism refers, as a significant emblem first of Christ's, then of our
Resurrection from the Grave; The putting in, and taking out of the Water, being
a sign of descending into the state of the dead, and ascending from thence. To
be a Baptized Christian, and not to believe the Resurrection is a ridiculous
thing, an Hypocrisy which will never be answered to God or men.

Note, These words of St. Paul, which are plain and easy and rational enough
in the sense before mentioned, are by some diversely rendered, and strangely too.

1. Stapleton, and others, prove from hence a Purgatory. Vid. Du Moulin in his
Confutation of Purgatory. page 268.

2. Thomas Aquinas, by the dead, understands sins, which are dead works.

3. Claudius Guiliandus understands it of Martyrdom for the Faith of the
Resurrection.

4. Some interpret (...), over the dead, as if it had been the manner of some
to Baptize over the Graves of the dead, to cherish their hope of the
Resurrection, but this custom is no where read of.

5. Others think it may allude to an ancient custom of the faithful Jews, who
to strengthen their hopes of a Resurrection, used to wash the Bodies of their
dead, and then embalm them before they buried them.

6. Calvin following Epiphanius, interprets it to refer to the custom of such
Conve^ts in Religion, who neglected Baptism til their death approached.

7. Franciscus Junius interprets (...) not super, but insuper; as if the
Apostle had said, why is Baptism still continued in the Church for the comfort
of the Living, as it was found of comfortable use to those, who are now dead,
if the dead rise not?

8. St. Ambrose understands it of a Sacramental washing applied unto some
living Man in the name and behalf of his Friend dying without Baptism.

9. Du Moulin applies it to the manner of Baptism used. By plunging the Body
in Water, to note the state of death, and taking it out again to represent the
Resurrection.

10. But Chrysostom. Tom. 3. page 514. and Theophylact, and others understand
Baptizing for the Dead, to imply this and no more, The being Baptized in the
faith and profession of the Resurrection of the dead. And so Harmenopulus
refuting the Marcionites, interprets (...) to be, (...) De Sect (...). Only the
Resurrection of the dead is expressed here by way of abbreviation by this word
(Dead.)

Verse. 30. And why do we Christians run hazards, and encounter dangers and
difficulties, which may certainly bring death upon us, if we had no assurance
that there was another life, wherein all our patience and valor for Christ
should be rewarded by Him?

Verse. 31. For my part I protest by my fidelity to Christ, which is the
greatest thing I joy in in this World, that I daily run the hazard of death,
which sure I should never do, if I had not confidence of another life after
this.

Verse. 32. Certainly all the hazards which I ran at Ephesus, Act. 19. being as
far as Man's purposes could go to have me sentenced and condemned, to have me
combat with wild Beasts upon their Theaters, (however I was by God's good
providence snatched out of those dangers) can be nothing at all advantageous to
me, unless there be another life after this. Besides, if it was so, that there
is no other life, it would excuse and justify that common saying which is used
amongst some of you; Let us enjoy the good things of this World at present, for
when Death comes, which cannot be far of; there is an end of all.

Note, This Place of fighting with Beasts at Ephesus is variously expounded by
learned Men. Tertullian, Theophylact, and others take it to be spoken
metaphorically of Men in shape, Beasts in condition; and Oecumenius says, That
these Beasts were the Jews at Ephesus, and Demetrius with his faction, called
Beasts in the same sense, as Nero is called a Lion, 2 Timothy 4.17, and Herod is
termed a Fox. Luke 13.32. David's Persecutors, Bulls of Basan, Psalm. 22.12. The
Scribes and Pharisees, Vipers; Matthew. 23.33. The Enemies of the Church, wild
Boars; Psalm. 80.13. with these did Paul fight by strength of Argument, proving
them to be no Gods which are made with hands, and so cut the throat of that
Ephesian Beast, Idolatry, as that all the Silver-Smiths of Diana could not
Hammer out a Reply to his Charge. Chrysostom, Ambrose, and others take it
literally, as if Paul did actually encounter with Beasts upon their Theater,
and Pareus inclines to be of the same judgment. For to fight with Beasts was a
punishment which Malefactors were condemned to in those days, it was used in
Asia, as appears by the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna about the Martyrdom of
Polycarpus. Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 15. For upon their Festivities and Solemnities,
they performed these barbarous inhumanities, as an honor to their gods; and
they made choice of such times for the punishing of Malefactors, not only to
make their punishments more exemplary, but to be as a piece of sacrifice to
their gods. Now that there was a Theater at Ephesus; for this purpose we read,
Act. 19.29. and that Christians, as Malefactors, were punished after this
manner; we find in Tertullian, that Christianos ad Leones, was a common word:
and of Damnatio ad Bestias and Bestiarii, we may read at large in the Jewish
Antiquities. But the most genuine and proper sense of this place, is by very
learned Men taken to be this, that Paul was condemned, at least by the
Multitude designed to this (...), or combating with Beasts at Ephesus, as
appears, Act. 19.30, 31. 2 Cor. 1.8, 9. The Sentence of this kind of death was
passed on him, but God took him out of their hands, and snatched him out of
those dangers, raising him as it were from the dead, by delivering him from so
great a death. 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. whereas Gaius and Aristarchus (two of Paul's
Companions) were hailed to the Theater. Act. 19.29. The devout Christians would
not permit Paul to come amongst them. verse. 30. and the Asiarcha, who had some
kindness for him, which was a work of God's Providence to him, sent unto him
that he should keep close, and not run the hazard by coming out, of being
carried thither: verse. 31. By which it is evident that (...), after the manner
of Men, signifies this, that Paul so far as Man's purpose extended concerning
him, was condemned to this death of fighting with Beasts at Ephesus, only God
by a wonderful providence delivered him from it. Now it had been very strange,
should the Apostle have exposed himself to so apparent danger of death, as Men
led on by nothing but that which is humane, such as vain glory, and some other
respect, have done, had not he by faith looked at a Resurrection, and at God
the Rewarder of those who suffer for him, at that Day.

Verse. 33. But have a care that ye be not seduced by any Philosophical, or
debauched Discourses to disbelieve the Resurrection; Take heed that such
Atheistical temptations to sensuality, under pretense of no other life after
this, do not work upon you; and the rather, because good natures, and the most
flexible dispositions are the soonest cheated, and deceived, by such corrupt
converse, and foolish dispute.

Verse. 34. Ye have all the Reason in the World, and now it is more than time
that ye should rouse up your selves out of the drouzy condition of sin, which
ye have been in for a long time, in so much that some of you by your behavior
and discourse show your selves to be very Atheists still, and mere Heathens; of
whom I am forced to speak, only to work shame in you for suffering such Men
among you, and that ye may not permit your selves to be tempted by them into
such Errors and Debaucheries.

Verse. 35. But some perhaps may object, that if Men die, How can they live
again? or what kind of Body shall they have, seeing that which they had is
rotten in the Grave?

Verse. 36. But this is a foolish Objection, for even in Corn that is sowed, the
rotting of the Corn is necessary to the enlivening of it, or springing of it up
again.

Verse. 37. And it is not the custom to sow that very thing which after comes
up, the Blade, and Ear, and Corn in it, but only the Corn without the rest, as
the Corn of Wheat, and the like.

Verse. 38. And whenever such a single Grain is sown in the Earth without any
Ear or Chaff about it, God causes it to grow up out of the Earth in this or
that form, with Root, and Blades, and Ears of Wheat, and of all other Seeds
proportionably according to their kind.

Verse. 39. And as amongst us here below one sort of flesh differs very much
from another; so the Bodies of Men here differ in their qualities from the
glorified Bodies in Heaven.

Verse. 40. For it is to be observed that in the Resurrection, there shall be,
1. An improvement of all Men's estates, who have their part in the Resurrection
of the just, above that which they here enjoy.

Verse. 41. 2. There shall be degrees of glory of one above another; as Heavenly
Bodies are more glorious than Earthly, and one Heavenly Body more glorious than
another, so shall it be in the Resurrection.

Verse. 42. For it is to be noted, which is indeed the chief thing notable in
this present Discourse, that the Bodies, which shall rise, differ from those
that die, and the state of the Resurrection differs from that of this life.
That, which falls into the Grave is a corruptible Body, that, which shall rise
again an incorruptible.

Verse. 43. The Body which we live in here, and must put off, is subject to many
dishonorable deformities, weaknesses, diseases, age; but the Body, which we
shall take up again, and put on, shall be a Body glorious and strong.

Verse. 44. The Body we carry about with us while we live, and lay down in the
Grave, when we die, is nourished and sustained by meats and drinks; whereas the
Body in our future state will be immortal, wanting nothing to sustain it. For
indeed such Bodies there are of both these sorts.

Verse. 45. For thus we find it written in the Scriptures, that we have one
nature from Adam, such a Body as Adam is mentioned to have had before his fall,
Genesis 2.7. we derive from him, who communicated it to his Posterity. But another
Nature, and another Body we shall receive from Christ, who at the Resurrection
shall restore us from the Grave, and change our vile Bodies, that they may be
like unto His glorious Body. Phil. 3.21.

Verse. 46. The mortal Body was first formed, which needed sustenance, without
which it must needs perish; and when this is put off by death, the immortal
Body shall be returned to us instead of it at the Resurrection.

Verse. 47. The stock of our animal life was Adam, so called, as an earthy Man
made, and taken out of the Earth. The stock of the life immortal is Christ the
Lord, who came down from Heaven.

Verse. 48. Such a Body as Adam had, such have all mortal Men; and such a Body
as Christ now has shall we have, who live according to his Precept and Example
at the Resurrection.

Verse. 49. As we have first been made like the mortal Adam here on Earth; so we
shall be made like the immortal Christ, when we come to Heaven.

Verse. 50. I shall add but this one thing more, that it is not possible for
these earthy, corruptible, weak, ignominious Bodies of ours, which are in a
state of growing and feeding, to come to Heaven; but they must first be
changed, purified, and immortalized.

Verse. 51. Therefore concerning those, who shall be found alive at the Day of
Judgment; I shall tell you a Secret not yet discovered to you, that though they
die not at all, yet they shall all be changed before they go to Heaven, for
these Bodies thus qualified as they now are cannot come thither.

Verse. 52. And this change shall be wrought in a minute, at the point of time,
when all the World shall be summoned to Judgment. For God shall make the Angels
alarm all the World of Men that ever was or shall be, as by the sound of a
Trumpet to appear before his Tribunal; and when that alarm is given all, that
were formerly dead, shall arise with immortal Bodies, and they, who shall be
then alive, shall from their mortal Bodies be changed into such.

Verse. 53. For it is most certain and necessary, that our mortal Bodies must be
changed into immortal.

Verse. 54. And when this is done, then shall that saying of the Prophet be made
good, Hos. 13. Verse. 14. that death shall be devoured and destroyed for ever,
never to recover strength again over any thing, nothing from thenceforth shall
ever die.

Verse. 55. In contemplation whereof, a Christian may look upon death as a
hurtless thing, the sting, or plague, or wounding power of it being by Christ
taken away; and look upon the state of separation of Soul from Body, to be such
as shall not last for ever.

Verse. 56. The only thing, which makes Death sting like a Serpent, and puts it
in a capacity to hurt us, is sin; for were it not for sin, Death would differ
nothing from a calm sleep; and that which gives sin any strength to mischief
us, is the Law, which prohibits it, and so consequently upon the breach brings
guilt upon us.

Verse. 57. But thanks be to God, who by what Christ has done for us, has
given us victory over Sin and Death, and by Conquest of Sin has made Death but
an Entrance to Immortality.

Verse. 58. These Arguments may suffice to teach any Christian constancy and
perseverance in doing Gods will, and in suffering Gods will too; and may oblige
him to the utmost industry and diligence in the service of God, knowing that
nothing, which we thus undergo, shall fail of receiving a reward.

Vid. Dr. Hammond.

Rubric. When they come to the Grave, while the Corpse is made ready to be laid
into the Earth, the Priest shall say, or the Priest and Clerks shall sing,
Note. Here follows another very seasonable part of the Funeral Office to mind
the standers by, and those who are yet alive, of the shortness, miseries, and
uncertainty of this life.

Job. 14. verse. 1, 2. Man that is born of a Woman, has but a short time to
live, and is full of misery; he comes up, and is cut down like a flower; he
flees as it were a shadow, and never continues in one stay.

That is, Man is born of a Woman and as he has received being from her, so he
has derived weakness; he lives here few Years, but in so short a time he
suffers many miseries. He is born like a flower, and passes away like it; he
is like the shadow of our Quadrants in a perpetual motion, and change is so far
passed into his nature, that notwithstanding all his endeavors, he cannot
remain one sole moment in the same condition.

Note here. That the sticking of the Hearse with Flowers, and the use of
Garlands at such a time, is a custom which has some resemblance with the Jews,
who, as they went along by the Corpse, used to pluck up the Grass. 1. To note
the shortness of Man's life, that Man is but as Grass, as the flower of the
Field: It was said of a great Emperor, that he was Parietira, a wall-flower;
and so are we all; our time is proclaimed, Isay 40.6. withering sooner than the
Grass, which is short, fading sooner than the flower of the Grass which is
shorter. From April to June; the Since comes, nay, the Wind but blows, and we
are gone. Hodie in agro, cras in clibano. Flourishing in the Morning, fading,
cut down, and withered before Night. 2. To note the certain hopes of a
Resurrection. Such Ceremonies are used in exprobration to Death and Mortality.
By them we show that we are not sorry for our departed friends, as Men without
hope; we look upon them only as Herbs and Flowers cropped off for a time, and to
spring up again in their season. We sow their Bodies in the Earth with as much
faith as we do our Seeds, and Herbs; and equally expect the spring of both.

In the midst of life we are in death; of whom may we seek for succor, but of
Thee, O Lord, who for our sins art justly displeased? Note, Our end borders
upon our beginning. Finisque ab origin pendet. Death and Life like Jacob and
Esau take hold on each others ^eel. Orimur morimur. We bring sin and death into
the World with us. Haeret lateri lethalis arundo. It Is in vain to hope for long
life, which is so short, that it is at an end whilst we are speaking of it. Dum
loquimur fugit vita. The Man in the Gospel sung a Requiem to his Soul for many
Years, when the summons came presently, Stulte hac nocte. Luke 12.20. Vitae
summa brevis spem nos vetat inchoare longam. A Christians hope is not in this
life only, which is not the only life, indeed not to be reckoned of as life at
all; Via non vita. A midling, betwixt life and death. Mortalis vita, vitalis
mors; but truly my hope, says David, is in Thee, O Lord; who can deliver my
Soul from sin, and my Body from the Grave. Psalm. 39.7, 8. Thou killest, and
thou make alive, thou bring down to the Grave, and bring up. 1 Samuel 2.6.

Yet, O Lord God most Holy, O Lord most Mighty, O Holy and most Merciful
Savior, deliver Us not into the bitter pains of Eternal Death. Note, As there
is a twofold Resurrection, a Resurrection from sin to the life of grace, which
is glory begun. Romans 6.4. 1 Cor. 15.34. and a Resurrection from the Sepulcher,
to the life of glory, which is grace complete, 1 Cor. 15.54. Philip. 3.21. So
there is a twofold death; The first death to which the first nature, which we
derive from Adam, is subjected; For upon Adam's sin, all that are partakers of
his nature, are concluded under the sentence of death pronounced against him. 1
Cor. 15.22. It was a statute made in Paradise, a Decree not to be reversed, a
Debt not possible to be declined, Genesis 3, 19. Statutum est omnibus semel mori.
Heb. 9.27. All Men must die the first Death. Wherein the Sepulcher, like the
Serpent, feeds on nothing but dust; it is not so much the death of the Body, as
the Death of the Corruption of the Body. Mortalitas magis finita est, quam
vita; And there is a second death, to which all regenerate Christians, who
belong to Christ, are not subjected, but as they derive another nature from
Christ, so in that nature they shall be raised again to the life immortal. 1
Cor. 15.22. Souls and Bodies both; For however there is a death of the Soul,
not that it cease to be, but when it cease to be righteous. Habet and anima
mortem suam, cum vita beata caret, quae v^ra animae vita dicenda est. August.
Perdere animam est, non ut non sit, sed ut male sit. So the gloss upon, Matthew.
16.26. Yet they, who belong to Christ, who live according to his Doctrine and
Example, shall be raised Souls and Bodies to an endless life of endless
felicities. They who have a part in the Resurrection of grace, shall have no
part in the Second Death. Which first Resurrection is proverbially applied to
the flourishing condition of the Church under the Messiah, after a long time of
Persecution. Revel. 20.5. According to that of the Apostle, speaking of the
Jews received to favor, as Persons raised from the dead again. Romans 11.15. and
the Second Death is applied to an ^tter, final, irreparable excision, and
cut^ing off, Revel. 20.6. Now against this Second Death, the bitter pains of
Eternal Death, in the burning Lake, where the Worm never dies, and the Fire is
not quenched, the Church here teaches us to pray, for as to the first Death,
which is a Debt to be paid to that nature which we derive from Adam, there is
no avoiding of it. Palvis es, and in pulverem reverteris; ^s Man's Epitaph
written with Gods own Finger, Genesis 3.19. But, Libenter mortalis sum, qui sim
futurus immortalis, is the faithful Man's subscription.

Thou know, Lord, the secrets of our hearts, shut not thy merciful Ears to
our Prayers; but spare us, Lord most Holy, O God most Mighty, O Holy and
Merciful Savior, Thou most worthy Judge Eternal, suffer us not at our last
Hour for any pains of death to fall from Thee.

Note, Here we pray to God, who is (...), the Maker of hearts, and so (...),
the Knower and Searcher of hearts, and of actions as well as of hearts, that he
would in mercy hear our Prayers, and in equal mercy pardon and forgive us our
sins, that he would sanctify us by his Holiness imparted to us, that he would
defend us by his power, save us in his infinite mercy; and as we must all stand
before him at the day of Judgment, so he would stand by us at the Hour of
Death, that so the Devil who assaults us in the heel, Genesis 3.15. and is most
busy at the end and close of our life, may have no advantage of us; but that
by the Shield of Faith we may put by all his Fiery Darts, and never come into
those everlasting Burnings, but dying as Moses did, Ad osculum oris Jehovae. At
a kiss of the Mouth of God. So the Chalde paraphrase, in Deuteronomy. 34.5. We may
depart in the arms of God, and so pass by Death temporal, to Life Eternal.

Rubric. Then while the Earth shall be cast upon the Body by some standing by,
the Priest shall say,
Note; This is left arbitrary for any bystander to perform, by which it is
implied, that it shall be the state and condition of every One one day. He,
that casts earth upon the dead Body to day, may have earth cast upon his
tomorrow. Hodie mihi, cras tibi.

For as much as it has pleased Allmighty God, of his great mercy, to take unto
Himself the Soul of our dear here departed, Eccles. 12.7. we therefore commit
(...) Body to the ground, earth to earth, ashes to ashes, dust to dust, Eccles.
12.7. Eccles. 3.20. Genesis 3.19. in sure and certain hope of the resurrection to
Eternal Life, Psalm. 16.9. 1 Cor. 15.20, 21, 22. 1 These. 4.13, 14. through our
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile Body, that it may be like unto his
glorious Body; according to the mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue
all things to Himself. Philip. 3.20, 21.

Note, When we perform these, officia postremi muneris, (as the Fathers call
them) and decently commit the Bodies of our deceased friends unto the Grave; we
do not lay up these precious Relics in the Wardrobe of the Earth as Carcasses
lost and perished, but as having in them a seed of Eternity; in sure and
certain hope of a Resurrection to Eternal Life; this is to bury Christianly,
the hope of the Resurrection being the proper hope of Christians. Vid. August.
de Civit. Dei, lib. 1. c. 13. Now this hope is grounded upon Christ's
Resurrection, who is our Resurrection and Life. John 11.25. He is Primogenitus
mortuorum, Colos. 1.18. As he rose in se, so he rose Pro aliis. As an Angel
proclaimed at his Grave, Resurrexit, non est hic. Mat. 28.6. So from his
Resurrection we have added on our Tombstones to -- Hic jacet, this happy clause
-- Spe Resurgendi: What is gone before in the Head shall follow in the Members;
if the Head be above there is hope for the whole Body, if the Root have Life,
the Branches shall not long be without. Christ the first fruits being restored
to life, all the rest of the dead, who die in him, are in him entitled to the
same hope.

Rubric. Then shall be said or sung,
Note, This following is another (...), or triumphant Hymn to be sung by
Priest, and People, or said by the Priest alone, to show our expressions of joy
over our deceased friends, whereby we do in a holy valor laugh at death.

I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, write, From henceforth blessed
are the dead, which die in the Lord; even so says the Spirit, for they rest
from their labors.

Note, This place of Scripture is primarily applied to the great Trials and
Persecutions, which were then to fall upon the Church within a short time,
which should be so great, that they should be counted happy, who were well dead
before, and were gone to enjoy their reward of peace and bliss, being taken
away from the Earth before such combats and storms as these should fall. The
holy Divine accounts those happiest, who should die soonest, and be taken out
of this life from having their parts in the evil to come. Isay 57.1. So upon
mention of oppressors, and strength on their side, and the no comforter; the
Preacher tells us that he praised the dead, which are already dead. Eccles.
4.1, 2. And to this belongs the answer of the Spirit in the words following,
they shall have rest from their labors, that is, from those Persecutions,
which attend them here, and which only death can put an end to. But our Church
very fitly applies it to all the Saints and Servants of God departing this
life, as finishing their warfare, and going out of the World to receive the
reward both of their Christian combat and conquest.

Rubric. Then the Priest shall say,
Note, Here the Priest is Vox Populi, the Peoples Mouth to Godward.

Luke 18.13. Lord have mercy upon us: To God the Father.

Mat. 15.22. Christ have mercy upon us: To God the Son.

Mark 10.48. Lord have mercy upon us: To God the Holy Ghost.

Note, This is thrice repeated to show our faith in the Trinity. This was
called the lesser Litany, and was of very early usage in Church Offices. Clem.
constit. lib. 8. cap. 5. and 6.

Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, Our Father Great in our
Creation, Good in our Redemption, Rich in Goodness, and good in the riches of
thy mercy; sweet in love, and slow to wrath; willing to hear us, for our
Father; able to help us, for in Heaven. Which art in Heaven, The Glass of
Eternity, the Crown of Felicity, the Treasure of all Complacency. In Heaven
Eminenter, chiefly there, but not only there; in Heaven, the Throne of thy
Glory, the Place of thy Majesty; teaching us both whither to direct our
Prayers, and where to setle our affections when we pray. Hallowed be thy Name,
in us, by us, upon us,
thy Kingdom come, That it may be as Honey in the Mouth Melody in the Ear,
Jubily in the heart.
as Holiness is chief in Thee, so let it be chief in our account, and esteem of
Thee. May thy Name of Father be so hallowed in us, and by us, in our words,
lives, and actions, that we may deserve the title of Sons. Thy Kingdom come,
Thy Kingdom of Grace come to us, that we may come to thy Kingdom of Glory: Thy
Kingdom come, that the Kingdom of Sin, Satan, and Death may be destroyed. Thy
Kingdom of Power to defend us; Thy Kingdom of Grace to Sanctify us; Thy
Kingdom of Glory to establish us in all bliss and happiness. We are in this
World, but thy Kingdom is not of this World, call us out of the one, into the
other. Here thy Kingdom is begun in us by grace, hereafter it must be perfected
in us by glory. Here is truth mixed with error, here is joy mixed with grief,
here is tranquillity mixed with trouble. Here thy Kingdom thy will be done in
earth, as it is in Heaven, has many enemies; who seek the division of it,
labor the ruin of it, malice the glory of it; though avert it they may, evert
it they cannot. The gates of Hell cannot prevail against the gates of Sion; nor
the kingdom of Satan against the Kingdom of Christ. But, O Lord, let it come in
its power and full glory that there may be in it Truth not mixed with error,
Joy not mixed with sorrow, Peace without trouble, Glory without shame; and a
Kingdom so settled, it upon us, and we in it, that there may be no more fear of
losing it. Thy will be done, etc. Thy will, not ours; be done in us, and by us;
Freely without coaction; fully without imperfection; faithfully, without fraud
or hypocrisy. In us, that is, in us men; as it is done in Heaven, that is, in
and by the holy Angels. So that we may love those things, which thou love,
hate those things which thou hate; shun those things, which thou forbidest,
and do those things which thou command, Give us this day and suffer those
things with patience which thou art pleased in thy wise providence to inflict
upon us. Give us this day, etc. Give, for we cannot have it, except thou give
it. Dicimus da nobis, ne putetur esse a nobis. We are taught to ask it of God,
to show that we have it not of our selves. Us, thou teaches us that we are not
to pray for our selves alone, but that we are to seek the good, one of another;
Pro se orat necessitas, pro aliis charitas. This day. Day is here taken for
life, so long as we live, so long shall we stand in need of God's givings, and
may say this Prayer, Give us, etc. This day should teach us moderation in the
pursuit of earthly things. They are Utenda not Fruenda, things to use, not to
enjoy. Like Israel's Manna, we are to feed upon them, only till we come to the
borders of our Canaan. This life is Via, the way,; Daily bread is the Viaticum,
the provision for the way. When we come to Heaven, which is the end of our
Journey, this our daily bread, shall cease; and then our Fathers house, and all
that is in it will be ours to enjoy, and that for ever. It is a corruption in
nature, that Men, Quo minus habent viae, eo plus quaerunt viatici, do still lay
up the more provision the shorter journey they have to go. Our daily bread,
Our, that is by just possession, lawfully and honestly got; that, which is got
by unlawful ways, and indirect means, is not ours by right, but by usurpation,
it is not bread given us, but bread taken rather: Again, ours by deputation or
assignation, not by propriety. God is the Lord, we are but the stewards, the
possession is in us, but the propriety is in him. Daily bread, that is, food
for our daily necessities; neither poverty, nor riches, but a competency. Prove.
30.8. Not quails to Minister to our wantonness, but bread to supply our want.
Bread doctrinal; in the word; bread Sacramental, in the Sacrament. Bread
supersubstantial, that is, Christ the bread of life who came down from Heaven,
born And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. in Bethleem, the City of Bread, who feeds up our souls to a blessed
immortality. And forgive, etc. Forgive; our righteousness stands not in our own
merits, but Gods forgiveness. Us, that is, all of us. For we all have sinned;
Nonne errant omnes? says Solomon. In multis omnes. So James. Our; nothing so
properly and truly ours as our sins. Trespasses that is, sins Original, actual;
of Omission, Commission, of weakness, of wickedness; of ignorance, of knowledge,
Personal, National; secret, presumptuous; sins of impiety against Thee our God.
Sins of injustice, against our Neighbor. Sins of intemperance, against our
selves. As we forgive those, who have trespassed against us. In thought, in
word, in deed, in our bodies, in our goods, in our name. Forgive us great sins,
that is, talents; as we forgive little sins, that is pence. And lead us not,
etc. That is, suffer us not so to be lead into temptation, And lead us not into
temptation. as to be overcome of the temptation: The temptation of the World,
of the Flesh, of the Devil.
There is Tentatio Probationis; so God tempts us as he tempted Abraham, to try
our faith, love, and obedience; against this we pray not. There is Tentatio
deceptionis, and seductionis. So the Devil and the Flesh tempts us. Jam. 1.13,
14. Against this we pray; Tentat Deus ut probet, tentat diabolus ut perdat. But
deliver us from evil, But deliver us from evil. Past, Present, To come.
From evil without us, The World. The Devil.
From evil within us the Flesh, the Lusts thereof.
Libera nos a nobis Domine. From the evil of sin, by thy Grace; From the evil
of punishment, by thy Mercy. From the Author of evil, Satan. From the Root of
Evil, Covetousness. For thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the glory, for
ever and ever. Amen. From the Evil of the Heart, Evil Thoughts, Of the Tongue,
Evil Words, Hand, Evil Actions.
From corporal, spiritual, temporal, Eternal Evil, Good Lord deliver us. This
Thou can do, For thine is the Kingdom, and Power. This thou will do, for
thine is the Glory. Thine first, and by Jesus Christ to all that are thine.
Thine, that is, from Thee, by Thee, to Thee, in the glory and safety of all thy
Servants: Kingdom, absolute, and in it self, Power, not depending upon others
Glory; shining about all, above all, and in all. Amen. This word is the Seal of
all our Petitions, to make them authentical, and it implies two things. 1.
Assent. 2. Assurance, that our requests shall be granted, and therefore it is
thought by some to be of more value than all the rest of the Prayer, by how
much our faith is more excellent than our desire. For this is a testification
of our faith, whereas all the Petitions are only testifications of our desire.

Note, I may say of the Lord's Prayer; only peruse it, commend it I need not,
for the Author's worth is so well known, that he needs not any Man's
commendation, nay he is above all commendation; and the work it self is so
perfect and complete, containing so much in so little, so short in words, so
large in matter; that it needs not any commendation neither. It Is the Lord's
Prayer dictated by our Savior himself in the behalf of his Disciples, and his
Church, to the end of the World. He to whom we pray, and in whose Name we pray,
has left us this pattern to be Forma and Norma Orationis. It deserves a very
high respect for the Author's sake. He composed it, who is Dei spiritus, and
Dei Sermo, and Dei ratio; Sermo rationis, and ratio Sermonis and Spiritus.
Tertul. de Orat. lib. It Is short, but withal plain, it is few in words, but
withal full in matter, like the best Coin it contains the most value in the
smallest compass. These reasons may be given for the shortness of it. 1. That
it may be the sooner learnt. 2. That it may be the better retained in memory.
3. That it may be the oftener used. 4. That there may be no weariness in the
saying of it. 5. That there may be no excuse for the not knowing of it. 6. That
it may beget in us a confidence of soon obtaining what we pray for. 7. To show
that the Efficacy of Prayer consists not in how much, but how well, not in the
multiplicity of words, but in the devotion of the heart. And for this purpose
has our Church, in imitation of this pattern, framed up all her Prayers in
short Collects, like many Flowers gathered into little Bundles. We know the
hottest Springs send forth their Waters by ebullitions, and doubtless the most
zealous hearts utter their conceits in the fewest words, and shortest forms;
in all the Bible we read not any Examples of very long Prayers: Our Saviors
Prayer in the Garden, short; our Saviors Prayer upon the Cross short;
Stephen's Prayer for his Persecutors short. The Publicans Prayer short; The
Thief's Prayer upon the Cross short. The Apostles Prayers all short; They, who
did Petition our Savior in the Gospel, did it in short forms. So in the New
Testament, and so in the Old. David's Psalms, which are most of them Prayers or
Praises, not very long; Solomon commends few words in the Old Testament,
Eccles. 5.2. and a greater than Solomon condemns long Prayers in the New, Mat.
6.7. Mat. 23.14. if not the Prayers, yet I am sure the hypocrisy of them he
does condemn. As the Scriptures, so the Fathers in all their writings are for
short Prayers. Hoc negotium plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur, plus sletu
quam afflatu. August. Epist. 121. Oration brevis penetrat Coelum. Augustine also
tells us, that it was the practice of all the Christians in Egypt to use short
Prayers, and he gives the Reason for their so doing. Dicuntur fratres in
Aegypto crebras quidem habere orationes, sed eas quidem brevissimas, and raptim
quodam modo ejaculatas, ne illa vigilanter erecta, quae Orationi plurimum
necessaria est, per productiores mores evanescat, atque hebetetur intentio.
August. Epist. 121. But I say no more upon this Argument, the shorter our
Prayers are, the nearer they are to the pattern of our Savior, who, when he
taught his Disciples to pray, prescribed them a short form; and the Reverend
Mr. Calvin in his Prayers after Sermon swerved not from this Rule, observing
ever both a set, and short form. See his Bidding of Prayer used at the end of
his Sermons upon Job. Again, the Prayer of our Savior, as it is short, so it
is most excellent in the use, being so framed, that it may suit for all Times,
Persons, Places and Conditions; other Prayers may be at some times
unseasonable, this never; it is not only Norma Orationis, a Rule to pray by,
Mat. 6.9. but it is Forma Orationis, a Form to pray in, Luke 11.2. As John's
Disciples had a Form, which none used but themselves, by which they were known
to be his Disciples, Luke 11.1. So Christ gave his Disciples a Form, which
Tertullian terms Orationem Legitimam; a Prayer, which Christ's own Law has
tied his Church to use in the same form of words, wherein he delivered it; and
ever has it been used in all parts of the World, where Christian Religion ever
was. He, who made us to live, has taught us to pray and doubtless if God will
hear us when we use his Sons Name, he will much more hear us, when we use his
Sons words; as Prayer in general, so this in special is of much efficacy and
necessity; for the good of our Souls there is not in Christian Religion any
thing of like force through every hour and moment of our whole lives. Therefore
if we may believe St. Augustine, as a witness of Antiquity, the Universal Church
of Christ has ever used to begin and end all her Prayers with this form; as
striving indeed by diverse other forms more largely to express the sense of
this, but being not able to come near to the high note, and most excellent
spirit of perfection in this, they ever concluded with it, as being assured
that however they may for diverse defects not attain to the depth of it, yet by
it they shall be sure to beg all things necessary at Gods hands. Vid. August.
Epist. 59. Hook. Eccles. polic. lib. 5. sect. 35. B. Andrews Sermons of the
Worshipping of Imaginations. And for this very reason it has been the custom
in our Church of England to place Christ's Prayer in the front of our prayers,
as a guide; and to add it near to the end of some principal Offices as a
complement, which fully perfecteth whatsoever may be defective in the rest.
Praemissa Legitima and ordinaria oratione quasi fundamento accidentia; imus est
desideriorum; imus est superstruendi extrinsecas petitiones. Tertul. de orat.
For this Prayer excels all other in many respects. It is the Gospels Epitomy,
compiled by wisdom it self, so large for matter, so short for phrase, so sweet
for order, as that it deserves worthily to have both the best, and the most
place in our Liturgy, the first as a guide to the rest, the most as a necessary
complement to supply what is wanting in the rest: Therefore is it used in our
Burial Office, and all other offices to be Tanquam sal omnium divinorum
officiorum. Durand. Rational. divin. offic. lib. 5. c. 5. sect. 17.

Priest.
Almighty God, with whom do live the spirits of them that depart hence in the
Lord. Mat. 22.32. Eccles. 12.7. Heb. 12.23. and with whom the souls of the
faithful after they are delivered from the burden of the flesh, are in joy and
felici^y: Revel. 14.13. Luke 23.43. We give thee hearty thanks, for that it
has pleased thee to deliver this our (...) out of the miseries of this sinful
World, beseeching thee, that it may please thee of thy gracious goodness
shortly to accomplish the number of thine Elect, and to hasten thy Kingdom,
that we with all those that are departed in the true faith of thy holy Name,
may have our perfect consummation and bliss both in body and soul, in thy
eternal, and everlasting glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Note, That the Soul dies not with the Body, is a received truth amongst the
wiser and better Heathens. Vid. Cic. Tuscul. quoest. Cato major. de Senectut.
Somn. Scipion. Pythagoras rather thought of a Transmigration of Souls, than a
dormition or dying. The Fathers all hold the same. Vid. August. de
immortalitat. animae. Ne in somnium quidem cadit anima cum corpore, quomodo
ergo in veritatem mortis cadet, quae nec in imaginem ejus ruit? Tertul. To
think our Souls shall sleep in dust, as our Bodies do, til the last doom, is
but a dream of the Psychopannychites, the spawn of the ancient Arabicks,
against whom Mr. Calvin has written a learned Treatise. It is an error
clearly confuted by the Scriptures, take one place, which is Instar omniem.
Mat. 22.32.

Note again, As the Souls of Gods Servants, when they are separated from the
Body, are in some certain definite place, so they are in a state of rest, and
refreshing the Scripture Phrase diversely expresses it, by being in the hand of
God, being with God, being in the Society of Angels, being in Abraham's bosom,
in Paradise, in the Land of the Living, in the Tabernacles of peace, in
Heavenly Mansions, in Heaven it self; that is, they are so disposed of, as to
have the Glory and Blessedness of Heaven communic^ted to them, and to enjoy the
beatifical vision in part wheresoever they are: and this may be the reason of
that usual Epitaph among the Jews upon their Sepulchers, Let his Soul be bound
up in the Garden of Eden, or in the bundle of the Living. Godw. Antiq. lib. 6.
c. 5. Yet I cannot say that they are in that very Heaven whither Christ as our
forerunner is entered, not in that perfect bliss and happiness, the Treasury
of which was first opened by Christ at his Ascension, and shall be more
completely showed and revealed upon all the faithful at the General
Resurrection, when they shall be where he is, and as he is, and partakers of
the same glorious felicities with himself at Gods right hand; as our Church
prays, that we may have our perfect consummation and bliss, which is the same
in effect with that Petition in our Savior's prayer, Thy Kingdom come.
Touching this I could say very much, but for brevities sake, I refer my Reader
to some Writers of Note upon this Argument. Irenaeus, lib. 4. c. 45. lib. 5. c.
31. Athanasi. tom. 2. orat. de Ascens. Chrysostom. tom. 5. page 637. Tertul. de
anim. c. 55. lib. 4. contr. Marcio. cap. 6. c. 10. lib. de anim. In which Book
Tertullian is very plain and full: Vid. Melanct. in Evangel. domin. in loc.
commun. And Mr. Calvin is very express, That Christ alone is entered into the
Sanctuary of Heaven, and that he presents unto God the Prayers of the People,
who remain in a remoter Court till the end of the World. Instit. lib. 3. c. 20.
Sect. 20. lib. 3. cap. 25. sect. 6. in Luc. cap. 16. verse. 22. vid. Marlorat.
vid. Calvin. lib. (...). in 1 Pet. 3.19. 2 Pet. 2.4. Luc. 23.43. Mat. 8. Genes.
5. de raptu Enochi. Job 14. Philip. 1.6. 2 Cor. 5.1. 2 Cor. 12.13. Instit. lib.
4. cap. 4. sect. 12. in Catechism. In all which places, he will not define or
determine any thing in terminis, only holds as we do, that they are in bliss,
but shall not have their perfect consummation and bliss, till the Resurrection,
and Day of Doom.

The Collect.
O merciful God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Resurrection
and the Life, in whom whosoever believes, shall live, though he die; and
whosoever lives and believes in him, shall not die eternally, Joh. 11.25, 26.
who also has taught us (by his holy Apostle St. Paul) not to be sorry as Men
without hope, for them that sleep in him. 1 These. 4.13, 14. We meekly beseech
Thee, O Father, to raise us from the death of sin, unto the life of
righteousness, Romans 6.3, 4. 1 Cor. 15.34. That when we shall depart this life,
we may rest in him, as our hope is this our (...) does, and that at the general
Resurrection in the last day, we may be found acceptable in thy sight, and
receive that blessing which thy well beloved Son shall then pronounce to all
that love and fear Thee, saying, Come ye blessed Children of my Father, receive
the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World, Mat. 25.34. Grant
this, we beseech thee, O merciful Father, through Jesus Christ our Mediator and
Redeemer. Amen.

Note, This Collect sums up all the remarkableness of the Burial Office in a
short devout prayer, and brings all home in pious application: Herein we
declare our hope concerning all who depart this life in the bosom of the
Church, for so long as we are in the bosom of the Church, we are in the state
of pardon, however if we are sometimes mistaken in our hope as to particulars,
yet it is ever a testimony of our charity. It is Error amoris, in case it
happen at any time to be an error.

2 Cor. 13.14. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with us all ever more, Amen.

Viz. The charity of God the Son, the love of God the Father, and the bounty or
liberal effusion of the graces of God's Holy Spirit be in us, with us, and upon
us, now and ever. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT.
Christian Reader,
IN the first place, I am to desire thee to have so much charity for our
reviving Mother the Church of England, as not to think her any way addicted to
an affected singularity in her prescribed Office for the Burial of her dying
Children, for as in her other Offices, so in this she holds exact conformity
with her other Sisters, the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, so far as they
may be permitted to hold conformity with her. Vid. Mr. Durel. Touching the
conformity of other reformed Churches with the Reformed Church of England. page
34. sect. 38. page 48. sect. 60. Besides, take notice of the words of the most
judicious Hooker. Take away (says he) these prayers, praises, and holy
Lessons, which were ordained at Burials, to show the peculiar hope of the
Church, touching the Resurrection of the dead, and in the manner of the dumb
Funerals, what one thing is there whereby the World may perceive that we are
Christians? Hook. Eccles. Pol. lib. 5. sect. 75. Some few Rites more I shall
add observed at Funerals, together with their Reasons annexed, only to give
satisfaction to those better sort of weak Christians, who quarrel at their use
more out of tenderness of conscience, than out of turbulency or any contentious
spirit; as for such, who are contentiously given, who are ill-willers to Sion,
who are enemies to the peace of the Church, who delight in nothing but dreadful
confusions, and make it a great part of their Religion to quarrel the ancient
practices of the Church, and just Orders of Superiors, I leave them to the
severest execution of the Laws of the Land, and the power of those who are
invested with Jurisdiction to punish them as schismatical, and seditious
Persons, and as the nature of their offense shall deserve; and truly I think
Superiors may be blamed for their indulgence in such cases, as well as for
their severity; Our Church will never be at peace, and our State never at quiet
from the working of some Men's spirits, and intemperate zeal, Si vitiis
Principum irasci liceat, and insidiari bonitati: But enough of this, I proceed
now to speak of the few other Rites rather practiced at Funerals than by Law or
Canon prescribed, and to account for them with what brevity and perspicuity I
can: 1. The ringing of the Passing-bel, or Soul-bell, as we call it, is not
intended to help the passage of the Soul when departed out of the Body, but
only to stir up devout Christians to pray for its happy passage out of its
Body, and to move those who are living to make reflections upon their own
mortality, and seriously to consider of their later end. This Bell is like St.
Paul's Trumpet, 1 Cor. 14.8. which gives such a certain sound, that all within
the hearing of it may prepare themselves to the Battle, which is to be fought
in the Field of Death. 2. It was an ancient custom, and is still practiced, to
bury the Dead with their Faces turning toward the East, to show that they were
as sure of an uprise, as the Sun that comes forth of his Eastern Chamber, and
that they lie waiting for that Sun of Righteousness, Malach. 4.2. who shall at
the last day return with his healing Wings, and quicken and revive all the dead
Bodies of his Servants by his healing and life-giving influence, when he comes
with his Prodi Lazare; or Surge qui dormis; then the Graves shall set open
their Marble Doors, and restore their deposita. When the Archangel shall sound
the Trump of Collection, then the scattered bones of Gods Saints shall be
gathered together with sinews, and those sinews incorporated with flesh, and
that flesh covered over with skin (all mortality, being purged away) and by a
new (...) (or rather (...) which Pythagoras never dreamed of) the same Soul
shall re-enter the same Body; These and the like Ceremonies the Church has
practiced in her Funerals, to be as (...) so many significant emblems to
strengthen and confirm her living Children in the hopes of a joyful
resurrection. 3. It was an ancient custom after Burial, to go to the holy
Communion, unless the Office were performed after Noon; for then, if Men were
not fasting, it was done only with Prayers: Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 29. Vid.
Doctor Sparrow, Rational. page 355. and the Book of Canons and Constitutions
Ecclesiastical set forth by him. 4. Funeral Doles were an ancient custom.
Chrysostom. Homil. 32. in Matthew. But as concerning them, the right use, and the
abuse, Vid. Haman L'estrange in his alliance of Divine Offices, in his account
given of the Burial Office. 5. The custom of Funeral Sermons and Orations may
seem to be first derived from the Jews and Heathens. For it was a custom
amongst the Heathens, Laudare defunctum pro rostris. Sueton. Jul. Caesar. c. 6.
And touching the Jews, we find it practiced by King David. 2 Samuel 1. And from
both Christians may have derived this custom, making it serve for these
purposes. 1. To make those, who are alive, more careful how they live, when
they know their departure shall not be folded up in silence: 2. To confirm Men's
hopes against the time of their own dissolution, and to mind them, 1. Of their
timely preparation for death. 2. Of their estate after death. 3. Of the
Resurrection, but chiefly of the Quatuor Novissima, Death, Judgment, Heaven,
Hell; that so all may bring us (if possible) to holy living, which is the
surest preparation to happy dying; that by every such occasion we may learn
something to better us in our spiritual estate, and not only wish with Balaam
to die the death of the righteous, but according to the Apostles advice, strive
to live their lives, treading so near as we can in the steps of their most holy
faith, considering the end of their conversation. Heb. 13.7. For my part, I
cannot speak much in the commendation of this, among some overmuch magnified
custom, only it is a good help to mend the Ministers maintenance where it is
(as it is in too many places) very scandalously small; I hope those, who are
now in place to do it, will consider of it, and by their prudent care enlarge
the too penurious proportions, for if this course was taken, I am very
confident it would give abundant satisfaction to the People, and undoubtedly be
a great encouragement to the inferior Ministry to lay aside their Placentia,
and to preach that doctrine which may be less pleasing, but more profitable,
when they receive any assurance from an established Law, that their maintenance
is legally due, and not altogether depending upon the courtesy and uncertain
benevolence of the People. But indeed in Funeral Sermons there has been
observed too much of the mode and gallantry, too much of applause and flattery,
too much of popularity and vanity, Encomiums and Elogies have been given, where
none due; The vile Person has been called liberal, and the Churl bountiful,
Isay 32.5. By some Parasitical Preachers; an absurdity better befitting the
Stage, than the Pulpit, yet neither place well, for both Comoedia and Concio
should be Vitae Speculum: Now in regard Funeral Sermons are so much in fashion,
indeed preaching for the most part is now but fashionable, as it was in
Ezekiel's time. Chap. 33. Verse. 30, 31, 32, 33. Therefore I shall conclude this
Treatise with a short Sermon.

The TEXT. Heb. 9.27. And as it is appointed unto Men once to die, but after
this the Judgment.

The INTRODUCTION.
FUneral Sermons are ordinary Discourses made over the dead, but intended for
the benefit of the living, and Funeral Offices, that is, set forms of Burial to
be read over the dead at the Grave, have the like holy end, and design in them;
Both are to mind us of the last things, which we cannot escape, and yet are
willing to forget, till such like ocular demonstrations as these bring them
fresh to our remembrance. Death, Judgment, Heaven, and Hell: He, that would
make these four his Vade mecum, and seriously consider of them all his life
time, would rarely do amiss. Were these as carefully laid up in our hearts, as
they are customarily by preaching poured into our ears, certainly they would
have a more reforming influence upon our lives than most what they have; How
should we be less proud, and more humble? How should we loath sin, and love
sanctity? How should we prize Heaven, and set all below Heaven at naught? How
evenly should we carry our selves betwixt both the Tables of Piety, and
Justice, of holiness and charity, toward God and our Neighbor, Superiors,
Inferiors, Equals? How careful should we be not to omit any duty? How fearful
should we be to commit any sin? How piously should we live as to Godward, how
righteously as to Man-ward, how soberly as to our selves, did we seriously
resolve to practice what we hear, as we customarily come upon such like
occasions to hear what we should practice; or would we but carry away the Text,
when perhaps much of the Sermon, like the good Seed in the Gospel, may be
catched up by the Birds of the Air, wandering thoughts, or choked by thorns,
the cares of the World; yet did we but carry this Text home with us, and
seriously meditate upon it, when we come at home, it might with God's blessing
do a great part of the work every Sermon should be designed for; and that is,
not to make us wiser, but to make us better, not to inform our Judgments, but
to reform our lives, and to settle us upon such a bottom, as not to dare to
live in that state of life, wherein I am sure we should not willingly dare to
die, a state of sin, a state of impenitency, a state of hardness of heart.
Certainly no Man willingly would have death find him in such a state as this,
especially considering, that death is not the (...), the (...), the last of the
last things, but only passes us over to something still beyond it, either to
eternal bliss, if we live in God's fear, and die in God's favor, or to a
miserable eternity, if we live and die otherwise. For, as it is appointed, etc.
The meaning of the words is so obvious, that they need no explication.
Desiderant potius pium auditorem, quam curiosum expositorem. They require
rather a conscientious application, than an explication of curiosity. The words
are plain; It is the condition of all Men, to die, and to die but once, and
then to be judged to all Eternity; Here Is enough for explication, any one may
see into the meaning of the Text, who will not be wilfully blind; I, but now
for the application; if this be the state, if this be the condition of all Men,
first to be under the arrest of death, and then to be arraigned at the Bar,
Luke 24.32.
and brought before the Judge; will not this make our hearts burn within us?
warm our affections, and beget in us a zeal to godly living more than ordinary?
Nay, will not this prick us at the heart, as Peter's Sermon did, and work
compunction upon our Spirits? Will it not bring the guilt of our sins to our
Remembrance, Act. 2.37. 2 Cor. 5.19.
and make us, as the Jews once did, passionately sue to those Ministers to whom
Christ has committed the word of reconciliation, that they would administer a
seasonable word of comfort to us, and give us directions what to do in such a
case as this. I know the Scripture Rule is, Is any sick among you, let him call
for the Elders of the Church: Jam. 5.14.
That is, seek out to some spiritual Person, who is over the Congregation, that
he may contribute his assistance, afford the sick man his best directions, pray
to God with him and for him, that God would pardon his sins, assuage his pain,
remove the disease, restore him to his former health, and the like; this being
a duty enjoined, would not be omitted. Better then in time of sickness, than
not at all; but better in time of health, I think, than in time of sickness. In
the midst of life we are in death, therefore in the midst of life we should
prepare for death; whether sick or well, that message to Hezekiah concerns us
all. Set thine house in order, Isay 38.1. There is a time when all Men will be
glad to seek God, and that is Cum occiderit, when he lays any scourge or
sickness upon us; when he slew them then they sought him, and turned them
early, and enquired after God. Psalm. 78.34. Even they, who kept not the
Covenant of God before. Verse. 10. who forgot his works. Verse. 11. who si^ned,
provoked him, tempted him in their heart, and spoke against him, Verse. 17, 18,
19. who neither believed in him, nor trusted in his salvation, Verse. 22. but
spent their Days in vanity, and their Years in turmoil in the World, Verse. 33.
never thinking upon God at all, in a pinch of danger and extremity, when he
slew them, did all turn seekers, to find help from the same hand, which hurt
and wounded them. This is the very Atheists time, and the time of the most
debauched Person in the World to seek God in, this is the time which brought
home the Prodigal; they who loose him in time of health, will be glad to seek,
and sue to him in time of sickness. Therefore let me recommend to you another
time, when ye will be more certain and sure to find him, because it is God's
acceptable time, and that is in time of health, when your Mountain is strong,
your Hedge and Fence about you safe and untoucht; when you have other
dependencies, yet then to slight them all, and to depend upon God, that is the
time, which pleases him. Now, now says Solomon, in the days of thy youth, in
thy prosperity, before the evil days come, Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy
Creator; However our memory is placed in the hinder part of the Head, yet we
must not defer our remembering to the hindermost part of our Life. I know it is
the desire of all Men, when they are going out of the World, to have a secure
Passport, and to get as much an assurance of their happiness and future estate
as can be; Now give me leave to be plain with you, I can give you no better
assurance then what the Scripture affords, God's word is the best security. If
ye look for an assurance of faith, Faith is but the substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11.1. If ye look for an assurance of
hope. Heb. 6.11. Hope carries us to that which is within the Vail, Heb. 6.19.
which we hope for, but cannot see; if ye look for an assurance in that which we
call Election, I know the foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal,
The Lord knows who are his; Yet have a care, Let every one, who names the
Name of Christ, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. Make your calling and
Election sure, How is that? by giving all diligence to add to your faith
virtue, to virtue knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, to
patience godliness, to godliness brotherly kindness, to brotherly kindness
charity; for, if ye do these things, ye shall never fall. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8
9, 10. We can be no further assured of our Salvation by Christ, than we can be
secured of our being in Christ, and conforming our lives to the Christian
Rules. The security we can have in this present state of grace may not be
imagined to be the same with that we shall have in the state of glory. It is
only the Saints departed, who have entered the Ark of Heaven, can sing that
(...) of the Apostle. Death is swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. We that
are below in this Church militant, must be ever upon our Watch, saying with
holy Job, All the days of my appointed time, or warfare here on earth will I
wait till my change come, Job 14.14. And our change will come sooner or later.
The wheel of nature, Jam. 3.6. is ever turning, and turning some off into the
dust every day; like Peter and John we are continually running one after
another to the Sepulcher. The best Antidote I can prescribe unto you, I will
not say against Death, but against the terror of it, that Death may loose its
sting, and the Prince of Terrors may not be terrible, is this, to look upon
your selves all your life time; if of the number of the predestinate, to be
predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of Christ, Romans 8.29. To live as he
lived, to walk as he walked, to make his spirit your guide, his word your rule,
his life your example; In all Scripture the holy Spirit of God has revealed
unto us but one way of preparing for death, and securing our future estate,
which is by an holy life. Faith may show us Heaven, as Moses saw the Land of
Canaan at a distance, but it is holy life, and an habitual sanctity must land
us there. The Text I have now pitched upon may settle us upon this bottom, if
we will but seriously weigh and consider of the two Propositions, which are
indeed two undeniable Doctrines arising out of it. 1. That all men must die. 2.
That all Men, after death, must come to Judgment; As the Tree falls so it lies,
and as Death leaves us, so Judgment will certainly find us. 1. All Men must
die. This is so unquestionable a verity, that I never yet heard, or read of any
that durst offer at a confutation of this Proposition. Jews, Heathens, Turks
and Tartars all confess it, and have in one kind or other their Justa, or
Funeral rites, their Officia postremi muneris, which they perform at the
Funerals of their dead. This statute of dying was made in Paradise, Genesis 3.19.
not yet repealed. Debemur morti nos nostraque, to die is as good a debt as any
the world knows, for the levying of which there is an extent upon all Mankind,
Romans 5.12. This mortal must be put off that immortality may be put on. Those
(...) of the first Age had this story told of them all, they lived so many
years, and then they dyed, Genesis 5. What Man is he that lives, and shall not
see death? The Prince and the Peasant are elemented of the same earth as Adam
was, like Nebuchadnezar's Image, though we may have Heads of Gold, yet we all
stand but (Lute is pedibus) on feet of clay. We are but like the Ark of God, In
medio pellium, in the midst of skins, living within Paper-walls, walls of
flesh; we dwell in Houses of Clay, whose foundation is in the dust and dirt,
which are crushed before the Moth. Job 4.19. I need say no more for
confirmation of the first Proposition. Let us see in the next place what use is
to be made of it; if we must all die and depart hence, this being not our rest,
not our home, but our way home. Let us make provision in our life time for that
time of dying, which will most certainly come upon us, though it be most
uncertain when; Let us think every day of dying, for indeed we die daily, as
soon as we are born we begin to die; Let us make death familiar by expectation
of it, by daily apprehension of it; Let us at all instants go out to meet it,
and think our selves always upon our Deathbed. He deserves not (says Jerome)
the name of a Christian, who will live in that state of life in which he would
not die -- Indeed it is a very great adventure to be in an evil state of life,
because we know that every minute of it has a danger, and we know withal,
that after death, there is something else to be looked after, which brings me
to the next particular. That all Men after Death must come to Judgment. This is
a Proposition carrying in it a very great truth, which Pagans, Turks, and
Infidels, I mean the most sober and best moraliz'd amongst them have not been
ignorant of. How Heathens came by this knowledge, whether by the light of
nature, or by some Revelation unknown to us, or happily by some light derived
from our Scriptures, I am not able to say, nor curious to enquire; for my way
has ever been to sit down contented with my own ignorance in things, which are
in the dark, and wherein I may spend much time in the disquisition, and find
but little satisfaction at last. In secret things which belong to God,
Ignorance shall be the Mother of my Devotion; That God shall judge the World is a
clear truth, Romans 3.6. That he shall judge the Jews, who sinned in the Law, by
the Law; the Gentiles, who sinned without Law, without Law; and Christians, who
have sinned against the clear light of the Gospel, by the Gospel, is a very
great truth also. Romans 2.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. When this final Judgment shall be,
I will not determine; Let curious heads meddle with these curiosities, I dare
not; I will not so much as desire to know what God was not willing to reveal.
There is a day God has appointed, in the which he will judge the World in
Righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, Act. 17.31. even Jesus
Christ, before whose Tribunal we must all appear, and receive according to what
we have done in our Bodies, be it good or evil. 2 Cor. 5, 10. God is pleased in
wisdom to conceal that day, that we may carefully observe every day. By way of
Application, I add but this. Knowing therefore this terror of the Lord, 2 Cor.
5.11. Consider, I pray you, and lay it to heart, What manner of Persons ye
ought to be in all holy conversation and godliness, 2 Pet. 3.11. And let this
be a comfort to all Christians, who have not their hope in this life only, nor
fix the Anchor of it here below, that the same Jesus Christ, who is now our
Advocate in Heaven shall hereafter be our Judge, etc.

Reader, A Funeral Sermon of this nature may not be impertinent, although not
very necessary neither, the Church in her Funeral Office having made such a
full provision already. But were the Funeral Orations and Encomiums o^ some low
spirited Preachers well examined, there is nothing in Print can appear more
unseemly, and misbecoming Christian profession, wherein great Persons merely
for being great, shall be applauded for that goodness which was never apparent
in them. Certainly these Elogies were intended as things extraordinary for Men
of extraordinary sanctity, and not else.

THE END.
The Thanksgiving of Women after Childbirth. Commonly called The Churching of
Women.
Note 1. OUr Church of England eminent in her Liturgy and public Offices, both
for her Charity to Man, and Piety to God, has prescribed to Us in Her
Service Book two notable Passages, as relating to Child-bearing-Women. 1. In
the Litany, we are taught to pray in a general way for all Women laboring with
Child, that is, for their safe deliverance in so great a danger, which is so
great, that the Spirit of God being to lay out a danger to the full, expresses
it thus, As travel upon a Woman with Child, 1 These. 5.3. noting both the
suddenness, and sharpness of the pains. Now there was a curse we know inflicted
upon Womankind for Eve's sin, That they should bring forth Children in sorrow,
or with sore travel at their birth, Genesis 3.16. Every Child should be to her a
Benoni, and Filius Lachrymarum; because the Woman was the cause and beginning
of sin and ruin on all Mankind. 1 Timothy 2.14. However God is pleased to
moderate the curse, so that Woman shall be able to pass through her
Childbearing safe, though not without some difficulty and danger; and this
curse no question is not so heavy upon Womankind, as that sin deserved, by
means of the seed of the Woman, the Messiah which should be born from her
Posterity. For no doubt he would redeem that nature which he was to assume, and
did assume, not only from the danger of Childbearing, but from a greater
danger of eternal damnation, upon condition that these Child-bearing-Women
continue in the Faith, and live in that Charity, Holiness, and Sobriety as they
ought to do, performing those Duties of Chastity and modest behavior, which
Christianity requires of them. 1 Timothy 2.15. Yet notwithstanding the curse of
Childbearing is moderated, and mitigated, it is not taken away, it remains
still so as to expose the Woman to very great danger; which motive puts the
Church upon it constantly to pray, for all Women laboring with Child. I wonder
ever any Women who have been sensible of these dangers, should be taken
captives by those spirits of error, and seducing Teachers, 2 Timothy 3.6. which
creep first into their houses, and then into their hearts, so as to be brought
to a loathing and dislike of that most excellent Prayer, which the Church has
inserted into her constant Morning-Service for their safe deliverance. 2. Here
is a peculiar Office for the purpose, wherein the Woman is to return her praise
and thanks to God for her deliverance, when the pain is ov^r, and the danger is
past. Had the Church never enjoined this, our own reason may tell us this is
fit to be done. First to pray to God for his mercy we would receive, and then
to praise God for his mercy received. That so our duty may keep pace with God's
bounty, and our grateful devotions answer in some proportion God's gracious
deliverances. Certainly as the Apostle speaks this is (...). A very rational
Service, a Service that has very much of reason in it, Romans 12.1. and none but
such, who have little reason, and less religion in them can be against it. No
Christian who has grace and gratitude in him, but will blush at that pitiful
and poor Objection which is made against it, as if, forsooth, in returning
thanks for every one thus delivered, and vouchsafed this mercy, we should be
like the Messilian Heretics, who do nothing else but pray. Indeed I think of
the two, it is better being like such Heretics, who do nothing but pray, than
to be like such Schismatiques and disquiet Spirits, who do nothing but rail and
quarrel at whatever is so prudently ordered and established by lawful
Authority; and this is the judgment of a very reverend Man. Hook. Eccles.
Polic. lib. 5. sect. 74. David tells us it is a good thing, a thing very well
becoming the just, and religious Persons to be thankful. Psalm. 92.1. Psalm.
33.1. I like not that godliness which teaches any Man to be unthankful. Among
the Ten Lepers, which were cleansed, our Savior took notice but of one that
returned to acknowledge the mercy. Luke 17.17, 18. Christ in commending of him,
condemned the other Nine. Yet we read not of any special command injoyning one
or other to return back, and to give thanks; only the nature of the benefit
received did in all reason require it. By which it is evident that when God is
merciful to us, we are bound up by reason as well as Religion to be thankful to
him. And where can a Woman express her thanks to God for so great a mercy,
better than in the Congregation, and that for these reasons. 1. To evidence her
own thankfulness. 2. To provoke others to the like thankfulness by her example.
3. To excite all to make some reflection upon the first sin, which laid so heavy
a curse, exposing them to so great a danger, upon Womankind. 4. To work in
Children an impression of love, duty, and obedience toward those Mothers of
theirs, who did undergo so much pain and sorrow to bring them into the World.
Neither know I, how or which way Children can ever make amends, or sufficiently
requite their Parents. Now in regard this return of Thanks is to be performed
in the public, and in the Face of the Congregation, it is entitled, The
Churching of Women. For so soon as God gives them strength, and they have
retired themselves so long time, as is consistent with the Christian rules of
modesty and sobriety, it is very fit they should come in decent and humble
manner, and make a public acknowledgment of Gods great mercy to them in the
presence of God's People, then met together in Gods house; neither do I
conceive how the great end of this Office, according to the Churches intention,
can be exactly performed and discharged, to have it hudled up in silence, and
obscurely in their private houses, nor indeed done at all, unless the Ordinary
grant forth a dispensation in a case of apparent necessity; which it concerns
the Church to be very wary in granting, in regard (as I have observed) in this
irreligious Age we have so many gross and dead-hearted Christians, that they
are apt to pretend a necessity where really none is, and Midwifes in such cases
made too often guilty of the midwifery of lies, by which means the public
Offices of the Church are too much abused, and scandalously slubber'd over in
private Houses.

Rubric. The Woman at the usual time after her delivery, shall come into the
Church decently apparelled, and there shall kneel down in some convenient
place, as has been accustomed, or as the Ordinary shall direct: And then the
Priest shall say unto her,
Note 1. By usual time we are to understand, so soon as ever she shall be able.
Statim post partum Ecclesiam ingredi non prohibetur Canon Law. Did. 5. c. Haec
quae -- Levit. 12.
Decretal. lib. 3. Tit. 4. And yet by the civil Law, and according to the
Tradition of the Church, in case the Woman be like to live, the usual time is
Forty Days after her delivery; not as if the Woman were so long time to be
adjudged unholy, or lying under any uncleanness mentioned in the Levitical Law
(which Law so far as Ceremonial we hold utterly abolished) but only upon a
ground of Christian modesty, and to chastize intemperance, and the like, are
Women so long restrained from the carnal delights of the Matrimonial Bed, as
appears by the Canon Law, Dict. 5. c. and the Constitution 17th. of Leo.
Neither can any modest or sober Christians cavil at this, unless they will
cavil also at that prudent advise given by the Apostle, for married Persons
upon occasion, by mutual consent to abstain from those things, which are
lawfully enjoyed at other times. 1 Cor. 7.5.

Note 2. By decent apparel is doubtless meant some distinguishing habit, by
which the Woman, who is to give her thanks, is to be taken notice of from other
Women; No such habit either commanded or forbidden, but left as an indifferent
thing.

Vid. Haman L'estrange.


neither can any conscience, which is not scandalously and shamefully weak, so
weak indeed as it may rather be interpreted stubbornness of will than weakness
of conscience, take any just offense at this, for according to the judgment of
Tertullian, I cannot conceive what hurt can possibly be in a Vestment, where
the wearers are not faulty. Tertul. lib. de pall. And St. Paul has fully
determined in the case touching all indifferent things, That to the pure all
things are pure, Tit. 1.15. that is, they who strictly abstain from unlawful
freedom, may with a safe Conscience use any lawful liberty. But the usual
Vestment worn for distinction at this time by the Woman, was a comely Veil, to
be as a token of her modesty and subjection; for the use of the Veil had that
meaning in it in the Apostles time, 1 Cor. 11.10. So Photius tells us in his
Epist. 210. The Woman ought to be subject to the Man, (...). and to bear the
sign of her subjection, a covering on her Head. Such kind of covering every
Woman ought to wear in the Congregation, 1 Cor. 11.5. But if the Woman be
singled out from the rest, to join with the Minister, in discharging any
Christian duty, as in this case; Then questionless she ought to have a Veil,
not only for decency, but for distinction too, as being to sit in a more
eminent place in the Congregation, to pay her thanks to God for her safe
deliverance from so great a danger; which Veil may not only mind her of her
subjection, but teach her also to make reflection upon that first sin wherein
the Woman was the first, which brought the Sex first under subjection, and
withal subjected them to the great danger of Childbirth. Indeed some
superstitious Persons, who are apt to create fears to themselves, where there
is no ground of fear, which is the right meaning of superstition taken in a bad
sense, scruple more at this Vestment than at the committing of a gross sin; and
wherever this Veil is used, I verily believe it may be to convince these
pitiful Christians of their gross ignorance, who scruple so at every
indifferent thing, that they do not only destroy all Christian duty, but all
Christian liberty too, which they so much contend for. I do not read it
enjoined by any Ecclesiastical Canon, nor by any injunction of the Church, only
it is a civil custom, and fashion of the Country, and has no more offense in
it, than the wearing of new Gloves at Marriages, or blacks at Funerals. Dr.
Whitgift. Defense of his Answer to the Admonition. Fol. 537.

3. Note. The Woman is to kneel in a convenient place. For kneeling, I suppose
no just exception can be taken out against that, for it has ever been the
manner in Christ's Church, Note 1. Book of Edward VI. unto the Quire Door.
whether we offer to God, or receive ought offered from him in this wise to do
it. Vid. Bishop Andrews Sermon. on Phil. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. Now the Woman at this
time has a peculiar offering of praise and thanksgiving to offer up to God for
her deliverance, and therefore it is fit she do it in most decent and humble
manner. But as to the convenient place, we must take our directions from
custom, and the Ordinary, however in case it be more within the public view,
and the public hearing, than any other place, the Chancel, and as near to the
Communion Table as may be approached, the Woman not pressing or presuming
within the Rail which is a place peculiar to the Priest only, is the fittest
place, and has ever been so accounted in the Churches practice. For that is
indeed properly the Sacrarium, where Oblations were wont to be made. They who
brought any gift, were to bring it unto the Altar, or to the Holy Table, which
in Ignatius is frequently termed (...), or Altar. According to that of our
Savior, If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, Mat. 5.23. which is clearly a
Christian injunction, implying when we bring any special gift to God, for any
special mercy received, thither we must bring it. It was the usual place
whither all oblations, donations, and gifts devoted to God, and the maintenance
of his Service, were brought. Vid. Capital. Caroli Magni Wormatiae. lib. 6. c.
285.

And then the Priest shall say unto Her,

For as much as it has pleased Almighty God of his goodness to give you safe
deliverance, and has preserved you in the great danger of Childbirth, you
shall therefore give hearty thanks unto God, and say,

Rubric. Then shall the Priest say this Psalm.
Note 1. In the former Liturgy this Preface, For as much as it has pleased,
etc. was left arbitrary to the Priest, these words, or such like, as the case
shall require, but since our Reformers very prudently noting of how dangerous a
consequence it is to leave things arbitrary in public Offices, especially when
some extravagant Ministers took occasion thereby to depart clearly from the
sense sometimes, as well as from the words, and assumed such a liberty, as did
exceed the due bounds of modesty and sobriety, therefore to avoid all such
extravagancies for the future, have tied up the Ministers to use these very
words, which words are to be applied to the Woman, who is to return her thanks,
and that she may discharge this duty of thankfulness with the more fervency and
devotion, she is in few words put in mind, 1. Of the greatness of her danger.
2. Of God's goodness to her in her deliverance.

Note 2. The Minister is to go before the Woman, I suppose in the reading of
the Psalm, and she to make her Response of every Verse after him, for in the
Preface she is to say, as well as the Priest is to say in the Rubric. The
usual Psalm both in the Scotch Liturgy, and our former Liturgy was Psalm 121.
which was a Psalm not abused, but very appositly applied, in regard the
Contents of it are expressly thus, That the faithful ought only to look for help
from God. But in regard some Persons have made their exceptions against it, by
reason of some passages in the Psalm, which were not plain enough to their
capacities, in their literal meaning, therefore our late Reformers being
willing to give satisfaction to all truly tender Consciences, have laid that
Psalm aside, and made choice of two other less liable to exception, for to
supply that defect.

Psalm. 116.
This Psalm is a grateful acknowledgment of God's seasonable deliverances, and
gracious returns to the prayers of his afflicted, distressed Servant, which are
to be answered with vows of new obedience, and entire affiance in God. This
Psalm indeed was not Penned for such a particular occasion as this, but yet it
is thought seasonable at this time to be used, and may very fitly be applied to
this occasion.

Paraphrase.
Verse. 1. I desired of the Lord, in whom I reposed my chief and only
confidence, that he would be pleased to hear my prayer, and in his good time
consider my distress, and send me a seasonable and gracious deliverance.

Verse. 2. Now seeing he has thus graciously heard my request, and bestowed
upon me the mercy which I prayed for, I shall when ever my calamities approach
me, or seize upon me, apply my self by my prayers chiefly and solely to God,
and however I neglect not any other lawful means, yet will I make him my chief
trust, and dependence.

Verse. 3. My dangers indeed, which by the strength and goodness of my God I
have escaped, were very great, menacing death.

Verse. 4. And when I had small or no hopes of rescue left me from any humane
means, I made my address to God's overruling help and providence, I humbly and
fervently besought him in my Prayers, that he would send me a seasonable
deliverance.

Verse. 5. For certainly thought I, be my dangers what they will, yet I have a
merciful and faithful God in whom I trust, who will make good his promise of
mercy, to all who depend upon his promises, and faithfully by prayer solicit
him for performance.

Verse. 6. It is his proper attribute to be the supporter of the weak, and the
reliever of those who are in distress, and accordingly has he dealt with me in
my greatest destitution.

Verse. 7. And now being thus rescued by him, and delivered from those dangers
which did encompass me, I have nothing to do, but to serve him in all
sincerity, and integrity of conversation.

Verse. 8. For he has rescued my life from death, wiped all tears from my eyes,
restored me from my weakness to a perfect strength and soundness.

Verse. 9. Therefore will I spend the remainder of my days, which he shall
afford me in this World, in his service, and at the present make my humble
address to the place of God's special presence, there to celebrate that mercy,
which he has afforded me in so signal a deliverance;

Verse. 10, 11. When my calamities were most pressing, and my dangers greatest,
by which I was clearly convinced, that the arm of flesh was not to be trusted
in for my relief; yet I knew there was one sure hold, to which I might
hopefully and successfully resort, the never failing Omnipotent hand of God,
therefore to that I betook my self entirely, and from that I received my
deliverance.

Verse. 12, 13, 14. For this, and for all other abundant mercies, which God has
so graciously bestowed upon me, I am bound up by all obligations, to make my
most thankful acknowledgment, and to do it in the most solemn manner, in the
presence of the whole Congregation, by way of public Festival, blessing and
magnifying God's Holy Name, who has preserved my life from so great a danger,
and kept it as a Jewel of his own Cabinet, as being by me humbly deposited with
and entrusted to him. And this is his gracious way of dealing, not with me
only, but with all who truly rely and depend upon Him. For which signal mercy
of his, I here present my self at this time, to pay that gratitude and oblation
of praise, which if I did not promise in my danger, yet am now bound up to
perform after my deliverance.

Verse. 16. O most gracious Lord, how am I obliged to Thee, by all the bonds
that any engagement can lay upon me? No Servant bought with a price, or born in
a Man's house, can be more closely bound to him, than I am bound to Thee, who
have rescued me by so great a deliverance from so great a danger.

Verse. 17, 18, 19. What remains now, but that I should return to Thee the
humblest offerings of praise and prayer, and spend my whole life as a vowed
oblation to thy service, rendering Thee all possible praise in the public
Assembly, and in the most solemn manner, saying, Blessed be the name of the
Lord, or, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost; As it
was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without end, Amen.

Vid. Dr. Hammond.

Or this Psalm 127.
Note, This, or the former, is left to the prudence and discretion of the
Minister, but the Church in both has made so good a choice, that the Minister
in either cannot make an ill one.

Paraphrase.
This Psalm was composed by Solomon, as a Compendium of his Ecclesiastes,
wherein is set down the vanity of worldly solicitude without God's blessing,
as in all things else, so in that of Children, the greatest blessing of life.

Verse. 1. There is no way in the World to attain any secular wealth or safety,
save only from the blessing of God, the author and dispenser of all good
things; The building up of Houses and Families, of gathering Riches, and
begetting Children to inherit them, is not to be imputed to Man's solicitude,
but is wholly imputable to God's blessing. Unless God by his special protection
guard a City, all the guards of Men can do but little to the securing or
preserving of it; and unless God build up a Family, all the industry of Men
will not be successful to it.

Verse. 2. It Is to little purpose for Men to deny Nature that rest, which God
has indulged to her, to moil incessantly, and to debar themselves the
enjoyment of worldly comforts, thinking by this means to enrich their
Posterity, for they who trust and depend upon their own anxious, and
sollicitous endeavors, are generally frustrated, and disappointed in their
aims and ends; whereas they, who take God's blessing along with them, thrive
insensibly, and become prosperous, though they never loose any sleep in the
pursuit of it.

Verse. 3. And for Children, that is a particular blessing of God's, from whom
all increase comes, and he gives them as he pleases and sees good, as a present
reward to the piety, and other virtues of Men.

Verse. 4. And of all blessings this of a numerous Progeny is the greatest,
every Child being an addition of strength and safety to the Father; Children of
Youth are as arrows in the hand of a mighty Man, and defend the House from
Hostil Invasions, as well as Weapons can.

Verse. 5. As the Military Man guards himself with Weapons, Arrows and Darts,
having them in a full quiver all in a readiness, and prepared; so the Master of
a Family is fortified from Hostile Invasions, and all other insolences and
molestations, by the multitude and strength of his numerous Children, who are
in a readiness to back and defend him at all turns from injuries of any kind,
which the open violence, or more secret fraud of Men can design against him,
either in the Field, or in any Court of Judicature, Vid. Dr. Hammond. Therefore
for other blessings, and for these amongst the rest. Glory be to the Father,
and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost, etc.



Note, Two more excellent Psalms could not have been selected out of the whole
Book of Psalms for this Office; which, though not Penned for this particular
occasion, yet are most admirably fitted to it, and most seasonably applied: and
no Church in the World is more happy for her Verba Opportuna, as our Church of
England is.

Then the Priest shall say, Let us Pray.
Note, This is like the Prophet David^s invitatory, Psalm. 95.1. and is
frequently used in other Offices of the Service Book, especially before the
Lord's Prayer, to show what requests we desire more particularly to sum up in
that Prayer at that time; For this reason is this clause inserted into the
Absolution at the beginning of Morning Prayer, Wherefore let us b^seech Him to
grant us true repentance, and his holy Spirit, etc. The meaning is, that we are
incited more particularly to pray for the grace of repentance, and the gifts of
the Spirit in the Lord's Prayer immediately following, which Prayer was
undoubtedly indicted by our Savior for such a purpose; or else it is set
before these Three Versicles, Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
which antiquity called the lesser Litany, and were of very early admission
into the service of the Church. Clemens. lib. 8. c. 5. c. 6. And fitly are they
placed before ^^e Lord's Prayer, because expedient it is we implore God's
mercy, before we resort to him in Prayer. Durand. rational. lib. 4. c. 12. It
is an address to the blessed Trinity, whereby we avouch our faith in God, One
in Essence, Three in Person, we are to pray to. But be this Oremus, or Let us
pray set where it will, the end and ^se of it is very good, to settle and fix
our intentions toward some ensuing duty; for unless we are thus stirred up and
called upon, we are apt to grow dull and drowsy, and to supplicate God to hear
those Prayers, which we do not hear our selves. This Oremus is very ancient, as
appears out of Chrysostom, Augustine, and others, and there was a practice
amongst the Heathens in their sacred (though erroneously so) Offices very like
unto it. Vid. Plutarch. in Coriolano.

Our Father, which art in Heaven,
Our, Teaches us to pray one with another, one for another; he, who prays only
for himself shall be heard only for himself. The prayers we put up to God should
be cast in the mould of love and charity. He, who is angry with his brother,
cannot offer a pleasing and acceptable offering to God his Father; without faith
no acceptable prayer, without love no true faith.

Father, This begets in us love, a humble confidence, a holy kind of
presumption; what will God deny us, who vouchsafes us this to call him Father?
Though we are sinful, he will not forget to be merciful; though we forget our
duties, he will not forget his Nature, Laesus est, sed tamen pater.

which art in Heaven.

This begets in us fear, and a holy kind of reverence; This minds us of our
earthly peregrination; shows our wants and whence we are to expect relief; it
notes us to be strangers and pilgrims on Earth, standing in need of his help
and assistance, who is in Heaven. It teaches us whither we are to direct our
prayers, and where to settle our affections when we pray, Orantis est nil nisi
coelestia cogitare. It shows whence every good comes, we can possibly want or
stand in need of; it shows God to be all-sufficient, able to help us, for in
Heaven; as willing to hear us, for our Father. It minds us that we are but
viatores, Travailours, Earth is our way, and Heaven is our home.

Our, Nos pudeat eum aspernari fratrem, quem deus non aspernatur filium.

Est vox charitatis, as this Prayer is Breviarium fidei, so is it (...).
Singuli pro omnibus, omnes pro singulis orant.

Pro se orat necessitas, pro aliis charitas.

Father, Magnum nomen hoc, sub quo nemini desperandum, Surgam and ibo ad
patrem. Luc. 15.18, 19. Pater etiamsi offensus est pater, filius etiamsi
nequam, tamen filius. He will never forget the nature of his Name, though we
forget our duties.

There is indulgentia paterna, and liberalitas paterna; Facilitas dandi, and
condonandi in patre.

Nomen patris explicat charitatem dei, excitat charitatem nostri.

which art in Heaven.

Other Fathers sub terris, he in coelis. Isay. 63.16. Psalm. 10.2.

(...). Col. 3. aquilarum hoc negotium non talparum, non milvorum.

-- Caelumque tueri Jussit -- - We do genus de coelo ducere. Act. 17.

We should look home with the Prodigal, Luc. 15. As Absalom desired to see the
King's face. 2 Samuel 14. So we the face of Christ, and God in Heaven.

Coelum petere, is the Unum necessarium. In this sense, Qua supra nos maxim ad
nos.

Pater, ergo vult,

In coelis, ergo potest.

Nullus pater talis pater. Tertull.

Hallowed be thy Name,
This shows as Holiness is the chief attribute in God, so it should be the
chiefest thing in our account; we should be holy, as he is holy; holy in our
words, holy in our actions, holy in our lips, holy in our lives. We must not
falsify Gods Name, set it where he will not set it himself, nor pretend it to
justify or legitimate any Action which is sinful. This is as if we should
carry God's Ark into the Field, to fight against himself: or fight the devils
cause under the banner of Christ, or wear Christ's livery in the bare profession
of a name, and do the devils service. We do not sanctify God's Name, but
profane it, when we profess him in words, and deny him in works; When we
pretend Christian liberty to destroy Christian duty; make use of Religion to
usher in Sacrilege and Rebellion; Paint the Cross upon banners, and yet by
actions most sinful and scandalous, put Christ as it were upon a new
Crucifixion: God is not to be named, but he is above every name; only he was
pleased to make himself known under the notion of names, that we might have
some directions how to invocate, and call upon Him.

This is Caput votorum.

Sanctificetur cannot come from any Persons that are profane: Psalm. 50.16, 17.

Not Jacob 's voice and Esau 's hands.

Not a Scriptum est from the Devil's mouth; nor the devils gloss and comment
upon GOD's Text.

In Nomine Domini incipit omne malum -- that ought not to be.

There are, Qui sub Christiano Nomine Christianam vulnerant Religionem.

Quid verba audio cum facta videam? En Testimonia rerum and loquentia signa.

God's Name is as a Castle, we must not fly to it, but in time of need, Prove.
18.10.

Deus Sanctificat nos faciendo Sanctos ex non sanctis; nos sanctificamus Deum,
non faciendo eum sanctum, sed agnoscendo, and praedicando.

Extrinsecus assumpsit sibi nomen ut invocetur.

Thy Kingdom come.
In this Petition we pray for the propagation of the Gospel, the spreading of
Christian Religion all the World over, that God's Name, which was only great
in Israel; may be known and acknowledged, reverenced and adored among all
Nations; we pray for the extirpation of sin, and the implantation of grace;
that we may be translated out of the Kingdom of Darkness into the Kingdom of
Light, freed from the slavery of sin and Satan, and entitled to the glorious
liberty of the Sons of God; That Christ would set up his Throne and Scepter in
our hearts; that the work of grace may be here in us glory begun, and the work
of glory may be hereafter in us, and upon us grace complete. We pray for the
means ordained and appointed of God to bring this Kingdom to us, and us into
it, the word, the Sacraments, and a regular and ordained Ministry to preach the
one, and to administer the other.

Thy Kingdom of God.

1. Universal: over all.

2. Special; over the Church: and this latter, 1. Regnum gratiae inchoatum in
hac vita. 2. Regnum gloriae consummatum post hanc vitam.


Rex hujus Regni Christus.

1. Quia Deus. 2. Quia Mediator.
Regni hujus cives, 1. Angeli. 2. Sancti.
Militantes in terris, Triumphantes in coelis.

Regni hujus Leges, 1. Verbum Dei. 2. Spiritus Dei.


Regni hujus Dona, 1. Fides. 2. Conversio. 3. Justificatio. 4. Sanctificatio.
5. Glorificatio.


Regni hujus hosts, 1. Diaboli. 2. Homines impii.


In Ecclesia.

Extra Ecclesiam.

Uzzah is not to touch the Ark.

Nor Oziah to meddle with the censer.

Nor Saul to offer the sacrifice.

Obedience is better than such Sacrifices, Quae sacra sed sacrilega; vota non
vovenda sed devovenda.

Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven.
Here we pray that we may readily and promptly obey all the Laws of the
Kingdom before mentioned; not to live as we list, but to live as we ought, to
make God's Word our Rule, his Spirit our guide, and his Sons life our example,
that we may as cheerfully do God's will on earth, as the Angels do it in
Heaven; do it sincerely not in hypocrisy; do it, not because we will it, but
because God wills it, though it be contradictory to our own wills.

We must not only do Gods will, but suffer GOD's will; as it must cheerfully be
done by us, so we must patiently submit when done upon us, when Gods hand is
upon our backs, our hand must be upon our mouths; Could we in all accidents,
and various changes of this world resign up our wills to GOD's will, it would
make the Cross easy here, and keep us from those everlasting burnings
hereafter. We must not only do what God wills, but as he wills it too, Voto,
desiderio, animo. We must not do it, Utcunque, in any manner, but with a sicut,
in the best manner.

1. Voluntas Dei est decretum. Haec est voluntas quam De^ vult. Voluntas haec
adoranda, non scratanda.

2. Voluntas Dei est mandatum. Haec est voluntas quam ipse nos velle vult.
Voluntas haec and scr^tanda and facienda.

Converte meum n^n velle Domine in t^^^ velle.

Toll volunt^te^ tuam O Homo, and ego extinguam infernum.

It Is Factum Domini. So Eli.

Obmutui quia tu fecisti. So David.

Modo occidat fiduciam non deponam. So Job.

Perdidit vitam ne per deret obedientiam. So Christ.

Bonum est verbum Domini. So Ezekiah.

Bonum been; God loves adverbs better than verbs.

Quid Deus vult, and quomodo Deus vult.

Give us this Day our daily Bread.
Here we pray that God, who is the giver of all good, would bestow upon us
those temporal blessings, which are convenient for us in this life. That he
would give us the necessaries of our lives from day to day, proportioned to
every Man's being or sustenance; neither do we pray only for our selves, but for
others, the motive of necessity puts us upon the first, the motive of Charity
puts us upon the latter.

Omne bonum Dei donum.

We must beg our daily Bread before we have it.

Dicimas da nobis, ne patetur esse a nobis.

In sudore vultus: Genesis 3.19.

Deus habet sinum facilem, sed non perforatum.

Jacob 's Prayer: Genesis 28.20.

Agur 's Prayer: Prove. 30.8.

Paul 's Dimensum. 1 Timothy 6.8.

(...). Meat and clothing are sufficient for us.

Non mihi, sed nobis, non meam, sed nostram.

And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
We are no sooner taught to pray for our daily Bread, but as soon as those
words are out of our mouths, to pray for the forgiveness of our sins; so apt we
are to make the blessings of God instruments of Rebellion against him, and to
enslave our faith to our present enjoyments. And in regard our sins hinder the
current of his blessings, and keep good things from us; we are taught to beg
that God would be merciful unto us, forgive us our sins, and work in our
hearts, though not in the like measure, yet in some measure, the same mercy
toward others, as he bears toward us. How can we expect pardon from God, when
we will not pardon our Brethren? Again in begging pardon we confess how much we
need it, and that our righteousness is depending on Gods forgivenes.

Least I be full and deny thee, Pro. 30.9.

Then beware least thou forget the Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.12.

Religio peperit, divitias, filia devoravit matrem.

Plenty causes forgetfulness; noted in Joseph's two Sons, Ephraim, and
Manasses, Genesis 41.51, 52. When GOD is most mindful of us, we are most unmindful
of him. Vid. Aristoph. Plut.

Quid alimenta proderunt si illis reputamur revera quasi taurus ad Victimam:
Tertul.

Quid est ad pacem Dei accedere sine pace? ad remissionem debitorum cum
retentione? quomodo placabit patrem iratus in fratrem? Tertul.

Qui petit veniam, delictum confitetur: Tertul.

And lead us not into Temptation.
In this Petition, seeing our own nature is so strong in its weakness as to
incline us to sin, we pray that God would support us by his grace to keep us
from falling, and when we are fallen to raise us up again by repentance.

Ne nos patiaris induci a diabolo, qui utique tentat. Tertul.

Christus a diabolo tentatus praesidem and artificem tentationis demonstravit.
Tertul.

But deliver us from evil,
Seeing we are exposed to many temptations in this World, and by reason of our
sins lie open to many dangers; so that in the midst of life we are in death,
one evil opening a way to another, the evil of sin to the evil of punishment;
therefore we pray that God, who is so powerful that he can, and so merciful
that he will, would keep us from the evil of sin by his grace, and keep from us
the evil of punishment by his mercy.

Haec clausula priorem interpretatur: Tertul.

Qui Deo se committit, diabolum non timet. Ambros.

Libera nos.

1. a malo mundi. 2. a malo carnis. 3. a malo diaboli.
Libera nos a nobis.

For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever.
This clause is an Appendix to the Prayer, and shows that when we pray in this
form, and take the meaning along with the words and our hearts and words go
together, we may have an humble confidence we shall be heard, and have our
requests granted either according to our desires, or according to our needs in
another kind, which may not be so well known to us, in regard He we pray to is
a King invested with all Power and Authority, and will deny us nothing, which
tends to the advancement of his glory.

Deus vult dare quod petimus, and potest dare quod petimus.

1. Ab officio regis. Tuum est regnum.

2. A potentia dei; Tua est potentia.

3. A causa finali; Tua est gloria.

This Doxologie is often omited: because in St. Luke it is no part of the
Prayer; nor is to be found in that most ancient Manuscript of St. Matthew's
Gospel, but is thought to be added by the Greek Church, and used in their
Liturgies, but divided from the Prayer, as if it were no part of it. Vid. Dr.
Sparr. Ration. page 28.

Amen.
This Word being an Index of the Peoples ascent to the preceding Prayer, was
usually in the Primitive Church pronounced by all the People with a loud Voice.
Jerome. in 2. proaem. comment. in Galat. Clem. Alexandr. stromat. lib. 7.
Optati^ est adimpletionis omnium petitionum.

The Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue answering each the other.
Lord's Prayer. Decalogue. God is our Father. Therefore No other Gods but Him.
God is in Heaven. No graven Image to worship it. God's Name must be hallowed.
We must not take his Name in vain. We pray that Gods Kingdom may come, and his
will may be done. Some portion of time must be consecrate for his worship and
service. We pray that he would give us our daily Bread. Having sufficient, we
must be helpful to others, and so honor our Father and Mother; and having
sufficient, we have the less temptation to be injurious to others in any kind.
We pray that God would not lead us into temptation. We must contentedly sit
down with what we have, and not entertain any covetous desires after that which
is another Man's.

Minister. O Lord save this Woman thy Servant. Psalm. 34.22. Psalm. 33.21.
Answer. Who puts her trust in Thee. Minister. Be Thou to her a strong Tower.
Psalm. 25.1. Psalm. 18.1. Answer. From the face of her enemy. Minister. Lord hear
our Prayer, Answer. Psalm. 4.1. And let our cry come unto Thee. Psalm. 5.1, 2.

Note, These Responds are the very Scripture phrase, taken out of the Psalms,
that Treasury of Devotion, and are fitted to the present occasion, wherein
Minister and People, as taking it one from the other, put up their Prayers to
God for a continued mercy upon the Woman, who comes devoutly to return her
thanks to God, for the great mercy already received.

Minister. Let us Pray.
Note, The Prayer following being clearly fitted to the occasion, this clause
is set before it to stir up the People to join heartily and unanimously with
the Minister, in begging of Almighty God those special blessings and mercies to
rest upon the Woman, which are there and then prayed for.

O Almighty God, we give Thee humble thanks for that thou have vouchsafed to
deliver this Woman thy Servant from the great pain and peril of Childbirth;
Grant, we beseech Thee most merciful Father, that she through thy help may both
faithfully live, and walk according to thy will in this life present, and also
may be partaker of everlasting glory in the life to come, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

Note, This Prayer seems principally to be grounded upon, 1 Timothy 2.14, 15. and
is an admirable summary of devotion, wherein the Church so far honors these
weaker Vessels, as to pray for as many blessings upon them, as they can
possibly be capable of, or as can be summed up in so few words! It is very
great pity that any Woman should be so silly, so over-laden with sin, and
over-led with lust, 2 Timothy 3.6.
as to be carried away as so many Captives by those Seducers and Instruments of
destroying Souls, who creep first into their Houses, then into their hearts,
into their bosoms, so as to depart from God, and from this Office of the
Church, which is purposely framed up for them, in reference to their present
and future Estate; being merely gulled out of their Religion, by those who
pretend it to be Popish, and fain would make it so, Sed avertat Deus, whereas I
do verily believe, there is no such Christian provision made in all the
Mass Book for Childbearing Women, not so sober, grave and serious without any
the least mixture of unprofitable and useless Ceremonies.

Rubric. The Woman, that comes to give her thanks, must offer her accustomed
offerings; and if there be a Communion, it is convenient that she receive the
holy Communion.
Note, These accustomed offerings, were some Evangelical Oblations, and small
Retributions given to God into the hands of his Ministers by the Woman, to be
as an evidence of her gratitude for the eminent blessing which she had
received; and when we offer up our special thanks to God for special mercies,
it is fit we should bring presents unto him; there is nothing Jewish in it, but
we are obliged to be thankful to God for his mercy no less then the Jews, Non
ore tantum sed opere. David was for a Quid retribuam: Psalm. 116.11. And
whenever we do offer to God, it is but, Tibi Domine de tuis. 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
Now that the Woman receive the Communion, if there be a Communion, is very
requisite, that by a new addition of mercies, she may have the more ties and
obligations upon her to spend the remainder of her days in holiness, and may
double her oblations, together with her mercies received, and return home not
emptier, but the fuller for her oblations, filled with joy and comfort, having
received a spiritual refreshment, as well as a corporal deliverance, and so
make it the business of her whole life to devote her self, and those Children
to God, which God has given her. Lastly, Here is to be noted, that neither the
blessing, nor the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, concludes this Office, in
regard it is a service to be performed betwixt the first and second service,
which does so conclude, as Dr. Sparrow observes* Rational. page 363. Neither is
such like Office altogether a stranger in the Reformed Churches beyond the
Seas, for in the Hungarian, Polonian, and Lithuanian Churches we read of an
Office of this nature used. Vid. Mr. Durel. page 48. sect. 59.

THE Primitive Church Discipline.
GENESIS III. xxiv. And he drove out the Man; and he planted at the East of the
Garden of Eden, Cherubims, and a flaming Sword, which turned every way to keep
the way of the Tree of Life.


THis is the first early instance we have in Scripture for Church Discipline.
Gratian derives it hence. Distinct. 50. c. 64. Epiphanius seems to derive it
hence. Haeres. 52. and so does Jerome. in Hos. lib. 2. c. 6. and Augustine in
Genes. ad lit. lib. 11. c. 40. and many others; and if so there is not only
Scripture for such a Discipline, but the most ancient of Scripture: An ancient
godly Discipline of putting notorious sinners to open Penance, which it seems
is lost amongst us, and we only wish, as there is cause enough for it, a happy
restoration of it. It was indeed when it was used as it ought to be, a very
laudable and edifying way to reform the scandals of Christianity, and to make
Christians in profession to be Christians in their lives and conversations too.
It is strange that the only reforming discipline should be abandoned those
Churches, which are styled the Reformed; that excommunication should be it self
excommunicate; and that driven out of the Church, which should drive out vice.
And I wonder a whole Nation should vote the restoration of it, and so few in
the Nation should endeavor it. It is a sign that vice has overtopt
Christianity, has gotten the upper hand of all Laws, both Political and
Ecclesiastical, and that may very well be, for we, who live in this age, cannot
be ignorant how many good Laws have been made for the correcting of vice, and
how few executed; either we love vice so well that we will not, or we have
indulged it so much, that we dare not bring it to open Penance. But God, who
was neither pleased with it, nor afraid of it, did; for when Adam, the first of
Mankind, and King of the whole World under God, had transgressed his positive
Law, and committed a great sin in breaking an easy Commandment, he brought
him to his confession, his open and full confession, though he came unwillingly
to it, and used many evasions and equivocations, which the Tempter taught him
to use, who first taught him to sin; he gave him an Ash Wednesday Lecture, for
the Ceremony of Ashes, from whence this Day derives the name, came from his
Pulvis es, Dust thou art, Genesis 3.19. and he put him to his Penance. In moerore,
in sudore. In sorrow shall thou eat, and in sweat. He, who abused his indulged
innocent pleasures, should live with afflictions, thorns, and thistles, Genesis
3.17, 18, 19. The promised Seed gave him hopes of pardon, Genesis 3.15. but he
must pass this Penance first, and that he might pass it, he must quit his
Paradise, be driven for a time from the presence of the Lord. So He drove out
the Man, etc. This was the first great Specimen of Church Discipline, it is
Primitive and ancient enough, as ancient as the Church it self, and it is
authentic and authoritative enough, for God himself was the author of it, and
it was practiced in the Church before the Law, till sin was so imperious that
nothing could reform it but a Deluge, and under the Law, till wickedness was so
predominant, that nothing could quell its power, but a Babylonian captivity,
and in the time of the Messiah, till Vice was so prevalent amongst the Jews,
that nothing could check the rage of it, till the Roman Eagles fell upon
Jerusalem, like Birds of Prey upon a Carcass, and in the Christian Churches of
the Apostles planting, till sin was grown so much in defiance of the light,
that God was pleased not only in Justice, but in Mercy too, to withdraw the
Candlestick; and in all Churches of the Christian World was this Christian
Discipline used, this godly Discipline (and where it was most used, there
Christianity most flourished) till corruption had gotten the start of
Christianity, and Christianity and Covetousness, or something worse had made a
match. But now it is every where either too much abased, or else almost totally
abandoned, so that it is no wonder Christians in name should be worse than
Heathens in manners, when the Christian Church is without Discipline, when the
Tares and the Wheat, the Goats and the Sheep, the Chaff and the good Corn, the
Dross and the Gold, the Unclean and the Clean, the Vile and the Precious must
all promiscuously make up one communion in the participation of most holy
things, and no Judicial Discipline is used to make so much as a tolerable
separation, so that in the Church Militant here on Earth, sin is only the
Triumphant part. But in Heaven, where no unclean thing shall ever enter, it
shall not be so, For flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither
corruption inherit incorruption, 1 Cor. 15.50. God has here in the History of
the first original of all our humane race opened to us this great truth,
wherein there is a History as well as a Mystery; what is spoken of Adam and
Paradise, of Adam placed in Paradise, whilst he remained innocent, and of Adam
brought to confession, penance, and removed out of Paradise, when he became
notoriously criminal, is historical, but it is written (...), by way of a type
and ensample in respect of us, and so is mystical, showing that all notorious
criminals, who live in the bosom and bowels of the Christian Church, and are a
reproach to the Christian name, and a scandal to Christian profession, are to
be removed, are to be brought to their confession, penance, and to remain
sometime separate from the community of Christians, whose holy Laws and Lives
they will not conform to. This was God's Law, and this was Gods practice, but
as godly as we pretend our selves to be, I do not see that we transcribe God's
Copy, and draw his practice into imitation: We suffer many scandals in the
Church, seek no removing of them, suffer Vice to be accounted Virtue, and
Virtue to be accounted criminal, and seek no redressing of it. Adam innocent,
and Adam a transgressor is all one to us, he shall remain in Paradise, though
the curse of briars and thorns grow up and remain with him, he may eat of the
tree of sin, and when he has done so, come without any control to the Tree of
Life, if it was possible, without doing his penance, so little do we regard who
comes, or what is done in the Church which is the Paradise of God. Church
Officers are much to be blamed as to this particular, who do not duly and truly
present such Criminals. But God would not have it so, would not suffer it to be
so. For, He drove out the Man, etc.

That I may give you an exact model of the godly Discipline which the Primitive
Christian Church used at the beginning of Lent, or much about this time of the
Year, I shall take my Scheme from this first pattern of it set by God himself,
in his severe dealings with lapsed Adam.

1. Adam, so long as he kept his integrity, remained innocent, and had done
nothing notoriously criminal, to deface that divine and glorious Image, which
God his Maker had stamped upon him, had all Paradise at his command; he might
freely take the fruition of God's Creation, and enjoy his Creator in a happy
and a contemplative life. Thus he was In statu instituto, in his first and
innocent estate; but when he became a delinquent and a Transgressor, and stood
convicted of a notorious sin against his Maker, when the Serpent in subtilty
had beguiled Eve, and Eve in simplicity had deceived Adam, and under the
specious pretense of being like unto God, and wise in knowing good and evil, he
made himself a sinner against God, lost that wisdom which he had by refusing
the good, and choosing the evil, then God took a severe course with him to
humble him for his pride, and to mortify him for his presumption, Paradise the
Garden of his pleasure was turned into a place of his penance and punishment,
and he lost the liberty of those fruitions, which he had made a forfeiture of
by a too great licentiousness, God put upon him his Penance Robes, clothed him
in skins, the badges of his sin, and the covers of his shame, Genesis 3.21. So in
imitation of this practice of God the Church in the Primitive times did deal
with her criminals, such as apostatized from Christianity in times of
Persecution, or such as were convicted of heresy, Schism, Contumacy, Perjury,
Adultery, Drunkenness; or any other notorious crimes, which were a scandal to
the Christian name, or a reproach to Christianity, and they were the stricter
and severer in this Discipline, not to magnify the power of the Keys, and
Authority of the Church above the mercies of God, for his mercies are
inexhaustible, and all our sins to them are but as a drop to the Ocean; but
they were the more severe in it, because Christianity was but then in the bud,
and the profession of it was thinly dispersed in the crowd of Pagans, where the
least moral scandal would have been a great blemish to the whole party, and
consequently have impeded the gaining of Proselites. For it is an infallible
rule that no Sect whatever can thrive and prosper, whose Professors do not
exhibit a fair front of moral Virtues in their outward actions: Upon this
account it was, and it was expedient too, that the Church under the penalty of
the deepest of her censures, required from all her subordinates, such a
practical and exemplary purity, as might render her most resplendent, even in
the opinion of her greatest enemies. Neither was the Church Catholic so
severe, but the Novatians the (...), Puritans in Afric, as they styled
themselves, were much severer, for they when they excluded criminals out of
their communion, did shut them for ever out, which severity Cyprian condemned
in them, and so did Ambrose, and wrote several Books and Epistles against them,
as being too over-rigid and cruel in their Discipline toward their lapsed
Children, exercising rather the authority of a Stepmother, than of a natural
and indulgent Mother; Yet though Africa was always very fruitful of Monsters,
this severe Discipline of theirs did keep out vice and scandalous crimes from
their Churches. And when the Church ceased to carry a strict hand of Discipline
over her delinquent Children, grew remiss and relax, and every day more and
more gentle toward notorious criminals, sin did quickly get the head of
sanctity, and vice justle out virtue, and debauchery driv out this very
Discipline it self, so that for want of it now we may take up the complaint of
Isaiah, How is the faithful City become an Harlot, it was full of judgment,
righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers. Thy Silver is become dross, thy
Wine mixed with Water, Isay 1.21, 22.

2. When Adam had sinned, Adam and Eve both, for Eve was the first
transgressor, and was first in the transgression. 1 Timothy 2.14. God did not
presently separate them, and cast them out of Paradise; but he called them
first to a strict account, and interrogated them touching their sin, of which
they were convict in their own consciences, as appeared by the covers which
they made for to hide their nakedness, Genesis 3.7. and by their hiding themselves
from God, when they heard his voice in the Garden, Genesis 3.8 9, 10. GOD summons
them to appear before Him, with all their sin and guilt about them. Genesis 3.9.
And although they used many wryings and turnings from the matter, minsings and
shiftings, translating and passing off their faults from one to another, Adam
confessing his nakedness, but not his sin: Genesis 3.10. And when he could not
hide his sin, laying it not upon himself, but upon his Wife, as his Wife did
upon the Serpent. Genesis 3.11, 12, 13. Yet God by his strict examination brought
them to such a sense of it, that they could not choose but see how notoriously
criminal they were, and unworthy to abide any longer in that Garden of God,
wherein they had injured the Majesty of so glorious a God, and abused the mercy
and goodness of so gracious a Creator. So in the Primitive Church of
Christians, before the notorious sinners and criminals were cast out of the
bosom of it, they were assigned their Confessors who were to examine them, to
take cognizance of their crimes, to lay open their sin, and their danger, and
to make them thoroughly sensible of the injuries and indignities they had offered
to Christ, and to make them see clearly how unworthy they were, to live in the
society and communion of Christians, and to partake of the Prayers, Sacraments,
and Privileges of the Church, who by their heinous sins, and notorious crimes
had so much defamed Christ, scandalized the Christian community, and brought a
reproach even amongst Heathens upon the Christian Name. Now this business of
confession, or taking confession, was not entrusted to any, but to those, who
were most eminent in the Church, for their prudence, piety, sanctity, and
integrity, and such as could be as Christianly sensible of the faults of
others, as if they were really their own, who had the wisdom of the Serpent to
discern, and the innocence of the Dove to determine in such cases, and knew how
to distinguish betwixt weak and wilful sinners.

3. When Adam, Eve, and the Serpent, whose shape the Devil had abused to
deceive them both, had passed their examination and confession, (but it is to
be observed the Serpent was not examined, neither did make any confession.)
Genesis 3.14. Then God promised to Adam and Eve a gracious Pardon in the promised
Seed: Genesis 3.15. But he brought them to do Penance first, the Serpents
punishment rather than his Penance, was to go upon his Belly, and to feed upon
dust all the days of his life. Genesis 3.14, 15. The Woman's Punishment and Penance
both, was to bring forth Children with sorrow, and to be in subjection to her
Husband, whom by her imperiousness she had deceived; Genesis 3.16. being assured
of hopes of salvation, through a Child that should be born of Womankind, that
is, the Messiah, if she and her Sex continued in faith and charity, and
holiness with sobriety. 1 Timothy 2.15. The Man's punishment and penance was to
eat his Bread in sorrow all the days of his life, to live amongst thorns and
thistles, and to spend his days in a kind of mortification for his
intemperance, Genesis 3.17, 18, 19. And when God had pronounced them this Penance,
he clothed the Man and the Woman like Penitents, in Coats of Skins, Genesis 3.21.
So in the Primitive Church, when scandalous Christians had passed their
examination, and confession, then they were assigned their Penance by their
Penitentiaries, (...), according to the rate and assize of their crime and
offense, which Penance they were to perform exactly, and to give some clear
evidences of their reformation, and amendment before they were to be readmitted
to Christian communion, but in some cases to those especially, who were in
extremes, the Church was indulgent, and did deal (...), more favorably. Now
when the Penance was assigned them, and they became Canonice poenitentes: then
as God clothed Adam and Eve with Skins, so they were clothed in silicio and
sordibus, in sackcloth and ashes, to testify to the World, that they were
fallen, and by sin become as the vilest things.

Fourthly, and Lastly, When Adam and Eve had passed their Examination,
Confession, had received the Sentence of their Penance, and were clothed with
Skins, like Poenitentiaries, then they presented themselves at the Door of
Paradise, and were driven thence. So He drove out the Man; and ancient Writers
conclude it to be much about this time of the Year; and therefore in imitation
of God's practice, did the Primitive Church (about this time of the Year) cause
all Penitents to present themselves at the Church door clothed in Sackcloth,
with their Feet bare, and Visages dejected, and while they were so presented,
they were led into the Church by their Penitentiaries, all the whole Church
lying Prostrate on the Floor to bewail their offenses; and after the Seven
Penitential Psalms were sung, the chief Governor or Bishop of the Church, the
Presbyters in a fraternal consociation joining with him, did sprinkle ashes
upon their heads, covered them with Sackcloth, and with sighs and sobbs
denounced this Sentence against them, that as Adam was expelled out of
Paradise, so they were thrust out of the Church for their iniquities, and after
this they were driven out, all the Clergy pursuing them with this Respond, In
the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy Bread, Genesis 3.19. That so these poor
sinners seeing holy Church so afflicted and disquieted for their sins, might be
made the more sensible of their Penance; This is briefly the Scheme of the
ancient godly Discipline, which may easily be proved, as to the most material
parts of it, out of the Evangelists, the Writings of the Apostles, and
Apostolical Men. But now there are scarce any Footsteps of it remaining, and
that is certainly the Reason why the Christian World is grown so prodigiously
vicious; only we have here an Office appointed in the stead of it to be read
upon this day, wherein we do not wish that curses may fall upon our own heads,
as some slanderously report of us, only we affirm with our own mouths, that the
curse of God is indeed due to such sins as the Church here propounds it. The
use of this Office is to make us flee such Vices for the future, and earnestly
to repent of them, if we be guilty, as we acknowledge that the curse and
vengeance of God does deservedly follow such sins and sinners.

A SERMON Upon Ashwednesday, Or the first Day of Lent.
Psalm. 95.7. To Day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your hearts, etc.


FRom the words, that I may bring the Text to the Time, and the Time to the
Text, and that we may be all the better for this Days Meeting, and depart not
only wiser, but better than we came (for the end of these Solemn Meetings is
not only to make us wiser, but to make us better; not only to inform our
Judgment, but to reform our lives) I shall observe unto you these Particulars
to be insisted on. 1. A Day to be taken notice of, To Day. 2. A Duty to be done
upon it, To hear his Voice. 3. A Direction to make the Duty suitable to the
Day, that we may do Opus Diei in Die suo, the Work on this Day, which is most
proper for this Day, Harden not your hearts.

1. To Day; Why, what is to Day? it should not be as Yesterday was; Yesterday we
were perhaps in the 6th. of Amos, devoted to our pleasures, feasting and
fatting our pampered Bodies for what was Yesterday according to the vulgar
mode, and corrupt custom, but Festum Bacchantium ante longum jejunium? A Day of
full feed, whereon we feasted our Bodies liberally, which we shortly after were
to came. Praejejunales feriae, (...); a Day most-what so spent, as if our Belly
was our God, and eating and drinking our Godliness. In Primitive times (it is
most certain) the practice was otherwise, but the best customs in tract of
time gather Corruptions. That which was once a Day of shriveing, confession,
and penance, and a more severe preparative to the Fast ensuing, has of late
Years by a too much indulged liberty gained a scandalous Name of
Guttage-Tuesday among the Plebs, as if, Eat, Drink, and be merry, was the Motto
of the Day, and Work of the Day too. Was it possible like the Philosopher
mounted on the top of a Hill, to have noted, and taken a view of all
Yesterday-passages, we should scarce have met with any like the passages of
this Day. No one passage fit to usher this Day in, but many administering cause
enough to have such a severe and godly Discipline, which the Church wishes the
restoring of, to follow at the heels of it. Yesterday, Vivebant Bacchanalia,
qui hodie Curios simulant. What debauchery and intemperance in many Places?
What lusting after the Fleshpots, which we were so shortly to leave? The Bell
that rang Yesterday, was no Saints Bell I am certain, no Service, no
Sermon-Bell. Venture non habet aures. We were too full fed, to be well taught.
Vox Populi; the Voice of the People was so loud, that Vox Dei, the Voice of God
could not be heard. The Cocks of Themistocles might be brought forth to prepare
themselves for the Battle, first to feast our Eye, and then to fill our
Bellies, but I am confident St. Peter's Cock could not be heard amongst them to
call us to Repentance, and to prepare us to the Battle, to fight against sin,
and to War against those Lusts, which War against the Soul. So that this Text
as Yesterday would not have timed right, well let us see what it will do to
Day! To Day if ye will hear his Voice. Why? what is to day? Dies Diem docet.
The very Day teaches us what the Day is, and what is to be done upon it.
Ashwednesday, The word is, Vox decomposita, twice compounded, and out of it we
may pick a double meaning. Wednesday, that was ever in the Greek Church, which
we follow in many of our Customs, a Day of Solemn Fasting, every Wednesday
throughout the Year, unless it chanced upon a Festival, and the Reason is,
because upon a Wednesday it was, that Christ was betrayed and sold by Judas, a
gracious Savior betrayed by a graceless sinner, a good Master sold by a wicked
Servant, Well, why Ashwednesday? This (...), or nomen superadditum, which
sprinkles the day with ashes, and Christens it by a new name, intimates
something, indeed it minds us of a Ceremony used by Christians as upon this
Day, as I noted before; which was to give Ashes one to another. The Ceremony is
gone, what is there of the substance left? The ashes are blown away, but I hope
not the memory of them; whatever becomes of the Ceremony, the substance would
be retained. Did these Ashes mind us of our Mortality, of (...), as St. James
phrase is, Jam. 3.6. of Natures Wheel ever turning, and turning some Daily into
the Dust: No, that was not the meaning of them. For Dust had been more proper
to have done that. Dust to dust, our Mortality is grounded upon Pulvis es, and
in pulverem reverteris, Genesis 3.19. But the Ashes were to mind us of something
more, as we use to say, No smoke but some Fire, so no Ashes but some Fire;
Ashes some derive from the Hebrew Esch, Ignis, Fire; So that the meaning of
that Ceremony of Ashes was to mind us of Fire, that Fire, which is of sins
kindling, which nothing but the Tears of Repentance, with the Blood of Jesus,
can quench; Non est iste ignis sicut qui ardet in foco tuo. This fire is
another manner of fire from that on our harths, or in our Kitchens; ours may be
quenched, that is unquenchable. It is a terrible thing to think of dwelling in
consuming fire, such as ours is; but ours as it consumes, so it will be
consumed it self, we could not always dwell in it, because it cannot always
last, the very Vestals themselves could not keep it always burning; but there
is mention of everlasting burnings, Isay 33.14. where the fire shall be ever
burning, and never going out, where sinners shall be like Moses Bush, always
burning, but never consumed.

Thus have you the meaning of this Day, why called Ashwednesday; and the
meaning of the Ashes, which gave it the Name, to mind us of those everlasting
Burnings, which by fasting and penance, mortification, and amendment of life we
may be kept from. This is the terror of the Lord, which this Day preaches;
knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11. That being forewarned,
ye may be forearmed, and the wrath to come may never come upon you. Matthew. 3.7.
Let not this Day be as Yesterday was, not a Day of Feasting, but Fasting, not a
Day of appetence to satisfy fleshly lusts, but a Day of abstinence, to
mortify them. If ye were in the 6th. of Amos Yesterday, ye must be in the 2d.
of Joel to Day, and thither the Church, by the choice of her Epistle for this
Day calls you. This Day is Caput Jejunii. The first Day of the Lent-Fast. Let
us not pass it over, as if we were to begin our Lent too soon, and put it off
till to morrow. Qui non est hodie aptus, cras minus; He who is unfit to amend
his life this Day, may be more unfit to morrow. Neither are we assured of to
morrow. This first Day of Lent may be the last Day given us to repent in.
Therefore begin your repentance to day, to morrow may be too late. Now says
the Lord, Turn ye unto me, Joel. 2.12. Do not ye turn God's Nunc into Nondum,
now into not yet, his Hodie, to Day, into Cras, to morrow. Felix, who thus
played with Religion, and put off hsi repentance, waiting for his own convenient
time, Act. 24.26. might never find it for ought I know, but I pass on from the
Day, to the Duty this Day calls for.

2. If ye will hear his Voice, That indeed is the end of our coming hither, to
hear God's Voice, to hear it, and do it; to know our Lenton-duty, and to do it
when we know it. It is not every Voice of God that must down with us this day;
not his Voice speaking in the cool of the day, yet that Voice was enough to
terrify our first Parents, and to make them hide themselves under the covert
of those Trees, of whose fruit they had furfetted. Genesis 3.8. Neither is it his
still soft voice that we are to hear, yet that made Elijah to cover his face
with his Mantle, 1 King. 19.13. Look not like those in Ezekiel for a jesting
Song, or for a pleasant Voice this day, Ezekiel. 33.32. Take the Psalm, bring
hither the Tabret, the merry Harp, with the Lute; that is the voice for a Solemn
Feast Day, Psalm. 81.2. but that is no voice for a Solemn Fast Day, such as this
is. David tells us of another voice, fitter a great deal for this Day. God's
voice in thunder, his mighty voice, such a voice as breaks down Cedars, divides
it self in flames of fire, and makes the very Wilderness to tremble, Psalm. 29.
A voice that could speak hard Rocks into standing Water, and Flint-stones into
springing Wells, Psalm. 114.8. That was a Voice proper for us now. What say you
to the Voice in Isay, which calls you back from your wanderings, saying, This is
the way walk ye in it, Isay 30.21. What say you to John Baptist's Voice, whose
voice was God's too, calling out of the Wilderness for Repentance and Amendment
of Life, Matthew. 3.2. Nay, what say you to the Echo of that voice, which speaks
more than the voice it self, and calls not only for Repentance, but for fruits
worthy of Repentance. That tells us, it is not enough to persuade our selves,
that we have Abraham to our Father, unless we do the works of Abraham, and
tread in the steps of his most holy faith, Matthew. 3.8, 9. Nay, what say you to
that Voice, which is like an Axe, laid to the Root of the Tree of Sin to cut it
down, a Voice threatening us, that if we will not be for fruit, we must be for
fuel, and out down by one Judgment or other, and cast into that fire, which the
very Ashes which give this Day a Name may forewarn us of, Matthew. 3.10. Many
such Voices there are in Scripture, that are the proper Voices for this Day.
Voices not to ravish the Ear, but to rend the Heart, Heartbreaking Voices.
Such Voices, I presume are now uttered in the Court, enough to make the Royal
Robe to be lined with Sack cloth, as it was noted of the King of Israel, 2
King. 6.30. and if the Court be in Mourning, it is not fit City or Country
should be in a posture of rejoicing. Away then with those Magistri secundum
desideria, those Teachers after our own Lusts, which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Timothy 4.3. This is not a time for Placentia. The most seasonable doctrine now,
is, that which calls for Fasting and Mourning, Tears and Prayers, Sackcloth
and Ashes. Now bring forth your Calves of Sin, which ye have been making all
the Year, and burn them in the Fire, turn them to Ashes, Exodus 32.20. and so
how-ever the Ceremony of this day be lost, Let us retain the substance. But I
shall not stay you longer upon this Subject; The Church, which enjoins the
strict observance of this day, that we may know what voice of God is most
seasonable and suitable for us to hear, has sorted out her Scriptures
purposely in the choice of her Epistle and Gospel for this day, taken out of
both Testaments, out of Joel for the Old, and St. Matthew for the New. We have
Gods Voice speaking in both, and preaching to us, Fasting, Repentance,
Mortification and Amendment of Life. The Epistle is part of Joel's Sermon, the
Gospel is part of Christ's Sermon, and both may make one complete Sermon, the
Heads of which are summed up in other words, in a short Prayer or Collect for
the day. But that I may not so keep this day now, as to break the Orders of the
Church, and by offering at a Sermon which is not enjoined, (although the
Court-practise may be our President) let go the very Office of the Day, which
is enjoined: Give me leave now to acquaint you with a penitential Service
placed at the end of the Service Book, which may be used at other times of the
Year, but must always be used upon this Day. It consists of the Litany, which
is a good penitential Prayer, and of choice Sentences taken out of both
Testaments, which are very fit for the work of repentance, and of Psalm 51.
which is a penitential Psalm, and other choice Prayers following fitted to the
state and condition of Penitents. But because there are many curses in it, and
the People are enjoined to answer, Amen, after every curse, lest any should
take occasion thence to quarrel the Service, as if we were enjoined to curse
our selves, and as Jacob said, to call down a curse upon our own Heads, and not
a blessing. Genesis 27.12. To remove this scruple, I am first to tell you, That
the Churches Voice herein is God's Voice, the Church enjoynes no more than what
God himself enjoynes. Deuteronomy. 27.15. Now for the word, Amen, give me leave to
explain it; it is not always a wish or prayer, but sometimes only an assent to
the truth of that, to which it is added; and so is it in this place; we do not
wish that these curses may fall upon our Heads, but only affirm with our own
Mouths that the curse of God is indeed due to such sins, as the Church here
propounds it. And the use of it is to deter us from such, and the like sins, to
make us repent of them, if we are guilty, as very well knowing that God's curse
and vengeance does deservedly follow such sins, and sinners: So that however we
are enjoined with Moses, as it were to go into Mount Ebal this day, and to
pronounce these curses, which can be no very pleasing task. For according to
the Hebrew Proverb, we must creep into Ebal, and leap into Gerizim, that is, be
swift to bless, and slow to curse. Let them note this, who were not many years
since so ready at their Curse ye Meroz, wresting and abusing a Text of
Scripture against the clear sense and meaning of it, rather than the King,
Loyal Nobility and Clergy, and all the faithful People of the Land should not
be cursed: which considering how this Church of ours, both in her Articles of
Religion, Liturgy, and Canons stands divided from Rome so far as she is divided
from her ancient self, may persuade any rational Man to believe that they
received their Orders from the Conclave of Rome so to do, they wanted nothing
but the Ceremony of Bell, Book and Candle to speak them as very Papists as ever
upheld the Popes interest, Their Curse ye Meroz, as they applied it, differed
nothing from the Pope's Bull, and his thundering Curse of Excommunication, for
how it wrought upon the seduced vulgar, and drew them off from their Allegiance
is apparent to all, but only those, who are resolvedly blind, and will not see.
But I go on now to speak of the Curses in the Commination Office. For if we can
but avoid the cursed thing, avoid the cause, which makes the Curse to fall, it
may hover over, but not alight, nay, it may fly over as a Bird, but not fall
down upon us as a Bird of prey. If we do but frame our practice up to the
Churches meaning, these Curses pronounced will be but like Jonathan's Arrows
shot to David, to warn us, but not to wound us. For be confident, whatever evil
of punishment may fall upon us for our evil of sin, if we go on, and continue
in it; The one will never fall the evil of punishment, if we fly the other,
the evil of sin: Our Repentance (if it be as it ought) will cause God's
Repentance. If we turn from the evil we have done, he will turn from us the
evil which he may justly do, and inflict upon us, even all those evils (as it
is in our Service Book) which we most righteously, that is, most justly have
deserved. So that unless we have a mind to continue in our sins, and to turn to
them, like the Dog to his vomit, or the Swine to her wallowing in the Mire,
rather than turn from them, as Moses from his Rod, when it was a Serpent, there
can be no danger in reading the Commination, and the many Curses in it; for
upon our turning from sin, and turning to God, God can turn these Curses all
away, and instead of them leave a blessing behind him. But then, as it follows
in the last part of this Text.

3. Harden not your Hearts. Hardness of heart was Pharaoh's great sin, and his
punishment as well as his sin: So that God is said one while to harden Pharaohs
heart, and in that sense hardness of heart was a punishment. God did harden it,
that is, God did not soften it. Pharaoh is said another while to harden his own
heart, and in that sense, Hardness of heart was a sin; Pharaoh did harden it,
that is, Pharaoh did stand out against Moses and Aaron by a perpetual
Rebellion, and would rather run the hazard of having all Egypt destroyed, then
let the People of God go out of his tyrannous hands. But those very People of
God, how little warning did they take by Pharaoh's wounding? How were they
guilty of that very sin, for which they saw Pharaoh, and all Egypt smarted?
insomuch that (...), hardness of heart became as it were the proper note of the
Jewish Nation. As little as Moses Miracles wrought upon Pharaoh, so little did
Christ's Miracles work upon them. The Miracles, which would have converted Tire
and Sydon, could not reclaim Chorazin and Bethsaida; The mighty Works, which
might have preserved Sodom, could not keep Capernaum from destruction, Matthew.
11.21. It was indeed their hardness of heart, their obstinacy, and resolved
impenitency that kept many out of Canaan, who came out of Egypt, and
transported many into Babylon, who came into Canaan. That brought them under
the scourge of Nebuchadnezar, and the Rod of Ashur, and at last under the Roman
Eagles to be preyed upon, wasted, and consumed to nothing; so that that Nation,
which was God's own Nation, adorned with many Privileges and Prerogatives
above other Nations, is now no Nation, but dispersed among all Nations, to be a
warning to all Nations. That as Tertullian has it, Ex cinere Judaeorum fiat
lixivium Christianorum; out of the very Ashes of that ruined Nation, we may
gather up some (this Ashwednesday) and make a Lee of them to besprinkle our
Eyes, and to supple and mollify our hard hearts, that the same sin, which
procured theirs, prove not also our ruin. Hardness of heart brought such a
fall upon them, that unless our hearts are as hardened as theirs, we cannot
choose but fear at their fall, and look to our own standing, when we read of
them fallen. Miror quorum facta imitamur eorum exitus nos non perhorrescere.
But what is it, think you, that causes this hardness of heart? Whence
proceeds it? Truly it proceeds from the heart it self, from some error
there. They err in their hearts, not in their heads, but in their hearts. Heb.
3.10. It lies not so much in the understanding, as in the will, a weak
understanding does not contribute so much to this Soul-murdering sin, as a
wicked will. Therefore the Apostle's caution is not so much against an
erroneous head, as an evil heart. Heb. 3.12. An unfaithful, unthankful heart, a
heart apt to tempt God, to provoke God, a heart that is more inclinable to
grieve God with sin, Forty Years together, then to be grieved for sin. A heart
that will depart from God, rather than depart from sin, from the living God,
rather than from any one beloved sin. When an evil heart, and the deceitfulness
of sin meet together, when Sin and the wily Serpent both join to deceive the
heart, and the heart is as willing to be deceived by them, this is it, which
produces in time hardness of heart. Heb. 3.13. But now to keep us from this
sin, which unless we are kept from, Salvation it self cannot keep us from
perishing, the Church has appointed such times of austerity as these, to
mortify our lusts, and to mollify our hearts: And has framed up a Service
proper for this Day, to bring the heart, if possible, into a good frame. So
that the sins which we are most prone to, are presented to us with a sting in
the tail of them, ushered in with a Maledictus, Cursed is such a sinner for
such a sin, and closed up with an Amen, so it is. God says it, and the People
seal it; The Minister goes before with a Commination, and the Congregation
follows after with a Confirmation. But that none of these Curses to be
pronounced by us may fall upon us, but all beside us, I desire you that as you
have heard God's Voice spoken by me, so now ye would with a little more
patience hear God's Voice spoken by the Church, and so having given you in part
the Reason for this Days observance: I come now to conclude with the proper
Office framed up for the better observance of it, and so in the close we shall
shut up with the Ministers Benediction, the better to secure us from Moses
Malediction, that when we have heard the severe curses against sin, we may
depart from sin, and so all the forementioned curses may depart from us, and we
depart with God's blessing.

Note. This Sermon was preached before the reading of the Commination Office,
the better to acquaint the People with the Reasons of it, and to remove some
scruples.

A COMMINATION. OR, Denouncing of God's anger and judgments against sinners,
with certain Prayers to be used on the first day of Lent, and at other times,
as the Ordinary shall appoint.
Rubric. After Morning Prayer the Litany ended according to the accustomed
manner, the Priest shall in the Reading-Pew, or Pulpit say,
Note 1. THe learned Bucer, as touching this Office, gives this full
commendation in few words, Cum primis salutaris est ceremonia, etc. And whereas
it was formerly used but upon one day, it was by his motion brought in to be
used at several times in the Year, which times are not settled by any
prescribed rule, only we read in the Visitation Articles of Archbishop Grindal
three days mentioned, as relating to this Office. Ann. Dom. 1576. One before
Easter, another before Pentecost, a third before Christmas; and Ashwednesday,
or the first day of Lent must be always supposed to have been another day, as
appears by the following Preface. However as sins abound and God's judgments
follow at the heels of them, in order to the Reformation of the one, and the
Removal of the other, it is left to the Ordinary of the place, and Men empowered
for the ordering of Ecclesiastical affairs, to indict days as they shall see
occasion, provided nothing be done contrary to any established Law, or
prescribed Rules.

Note 2. This Office is a very necessary Office to lay open Men's gross sins,
unreformed and unsanctified lives, for which the wrath of God is revealed from
Heaven. Romans 1.18. Romans 1.32. that seeing the guilt of their sin in the glass
of their punishment, they may reform their lives and so keep themselves both
from the wrath present, which is as a spark; and the wrath to come, which is as
a great Fire.

Note 3. It is an Office very proper for the first day of Lent, commonly called
Ashwednesday; because this was Caput jejunii, the Head of the Lent-Fast, and
was a day of extraordinary humiliation; called Dies cinerum, or Ashwednesday,
from a Ceremony of Ashes, wherewith Christians used to sprinkle themselves,
partly to mind them of their mortality, but chiefly to mind them of that Fire
which is of sins kindling, those everlasting burnings, Isay 33.14. which
nothing but the tears of unfeigned repentance, and the Blood of Jesus can
quench. This is the terror of the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.11. which the Ashes of this
Day once preached, that by our fasting, penance, mortification, and amendment
of life, we might keep our selves from the wrath to come, and the wrath to come
from us. Matthew. 3.7. However the Ceremony is gone, yet I hope the substance is
not, though the Ashes are blown away, yet the memory of them should remain, the
substance should not be blown away after the Ceremony. This and the three days
following were added to the Lent-Fast by Gregory the Great, to supply the Six
Sundays falling in Lent, which were never fasted on, ( Ignatius accounts them
Schismatiques, to say no worse, who fast upon the Lord's Day) and to make up
the just number of Forty Days, which is about the tenth part of the Year, by
which the Church seemed to devote to God, as well a tenth of their time as of
their fruits. Here is to be noted also once for all, Psalm. 6. Psalm. 32. Psalm.
38. Psalm. 102. Psalm. 130. Psalm. 143.
that there are proper Psalms now added to Ashwednesday, which were not in our
former Liturgy, Psalms admirably chosen by the Church, being Psalms penned by
David or others, upon some occasion of special humiliation, for confession of
sins, and averting of God's judgments.

Note 4. The Place enjoined the Priest for the reading of the Commination was
the Pulpit in the former Service Book, but now the Minister may make his choice
of Pew or Pulpit, and use his discretion to take the fittest of these two
places for the People to hear him, and join in their Amens to the Commination;
The Pulpit, which is now made use of only for popular Orations, was anciently
the place where a great part of the Service was performed. Injunct. 22. Edward
6. and Injunct. 4. Ann. 1547. Injunct. 5. Elizabeth. The Reading-Pew or Desk we
read not of till Can. 82. Ann. Dom. 1603. However the circumstance of place is
not much material, yet I observe the vulgar and grosser sort of Christians, who
have more zeal than light, make a great matter of it, and take the Ordinance of
Preaching (I think) to be of more universal concernment than the great duty of
Prayer, for no other reason, but because the Pulpit stands higher then the Pew,
in so much (I am able to speak it out of a known experience in places where I
have been) that the very same Sermon delivered in the Pew has been taken for
no Sermon, nor edified at all, which has wrought vigorously and powerfully
when passionately, and with another action and tone, delivered out of the
Pulpit; Nay more, I have known another experiment tried of the judgment of
these Zealots, who presume themselves to be the only knowing Christians, by
taking the Book of Homilies, which I judge to be none of the worst Sermons,
because composed by most able and learned men where were more heads than one in
the contrivance of them, these I have known read in the Pew where they had no
more relish or taste than Job's white of an Egg, but the same Sermons advanced a
step or two higher, and delivered (by the advantage of a Text of Scripture
fitted to the Homily only prefixed) with a graceful action or knack, as they
call it out of the Pulpit, have passed in the worst of times, when Preaching
was most in fashion, for most excellent and Soul-saving Sermons* By which it is
apparent that the very Pulpit and Place, especially when the Hourglass is
turned up to add the more solemnity, is very much to the making of a Sermon for
the pleasing, at least, if not for the profiting of some humorists; In so much
that I have often questioned it within my own thoughts, whether if Common
Prayer was advanced into the Pulpit, and Preaching brought down into the Pew,
these easy sort of Christians (and yet not so easy to be brought to order or
discipline) would not mistake Common Prayer for Preaching, and Preaching for
Prayer, and so become in time as very Recusants, in respect of preaching, as
they have been and still are in point of Prayer. But I hope, so long as we have
good laws made, there will not be that want of the due execution of them, as
that Ministers should make use of such wiles and innocent sallacies to seduce
the People out of their errors, and to cousen them into conformity.

Note 5. That however the Church upon the matter confesses this her Office not
to be ancient, but appointed instead of an ancient Godly Discipline, yet is it
a very useful penitential Service, either in public or private, consisting of
holy sentences taken out of Gods word, fit for the work of repentance, and holy
penitential Prayers, taken for the most part Verbatim out of holy Scriptures;
so that he, who prays this form, is sure to pray by the spirit, both for words
and matter. Vid. Dr. Sparrow Rational. page 363.364. The chief thing scrupled
at in it is the Amen to be pronounced by the People after the Curses first
pronounced by the Minister, but this scruple I have endeavored to remove in my
foregoing Sermon. For the present I desire you to take notice, that the
Maledictions or Curses, and the following admonition annexed are all taken out
of, and grounded upon the holy Scripture, which, because it is already cited to
my hands, spares me the labor; Therefore I shall proceed in the next Place to
my Paraphrase upon the following Psalm. which is adapted, and very fitly chosen
to bear a part in this Office.

Rubric. Then shall they all kneel upon their Knees, and the Priest and Clerks
kneeling (in the place where they are accustomed to say the Litany) shall say
this Psalm, Miserere mei Deus, etc.
Note 1. Kneeling was ever the posture of Penitents. Vid. Bishop Andrews
Sermons, on Philip. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. Hence the Penitentiaries were called (...)
from their prostration.

Note 2. That as the accustomed posture was kneeling, so the accustomed place
for the Litany was the midst of the Church, Injunct. Elizab. 18. Injunct.
Edward 6.23. For the Posture, Vid. Chrysostom. Homil. in Psalm. 4. Vid. Haman
Lestrange Alliance of Divine Offices. page 102. For the accustomed Place it is
grounded upon Joel 2.17. But this I suppose is left to the discretion of the
Ordinary for to order it.

Psalm. 51.
Note. This is a penitential Psalm, which David penned when he was brought to a
due humiliation for those sins which he committed in the matter of Uriah, and
to remove the scandal of them he commended it to the prefect of his Music to
be solemnly sung.

Paraphrase.
Verse. 1. O Father of mercies, suffer me, who am an unworthy Servant, and
therefore unworthy, because a miserable and vile sinner, to make my humble
address unto thee; and out of the abundance of thy melting compassions, be
pleased to look graciously upon me, and to be reconciled to me:

Verse. 2. Let not the least of my great crimes be permitted to appear in thy
sight, or to rise up in judgment against me, but seal me thy perfect pardon for
every one of them.

Verse. 3. For I do willingly confess that to gratify my carnal lusts, I have
committed horrid and heinous sins, which are a perpetual terror to my
conscience, and as an amazing prospect ever tormenting me.

Verse. 4. And however it may be possible for me to escape the judicature of
man, yet am I sadly culpable and liable to vengeance from thee the pure God of
Heaven; thou may justly proceed against me as against the most criminous
rebel, indite me, and arraign me of all those odious sins, which I am guilty
of; and whatever suit thou wagest against me, thou art sure to cast me,
whatever vengeance thou inflictest upon me, I must most deservedly and
inevitably fall under it.

Note. Though Kings are not subjected to humane Tribunals, yet to Gods they
are. Vid. Doctor Hammond. Annotat. in locum.

Verse. 5. and 6. Lord, I am a most polluted Creature, the very corruption of my
nature ought to be strictly watched and industriously rejected by me, and thy
grace continually solicited to enable me to overcome it. For I know thou
requirest purity of heart and the affections, and forbiddest the very first
thoughts of any unlawful enjoyments; and besides thy revealed will thou art
pleased to grant me thy grace to make me inwardly sensible of this part of my
duty, which does but aggravate my sin committed against all these obligations.

Note. Touching the doctrine of original sin. Vid. Dr. Hammond Annotat. in
locum. And the purity of Marriage asserted. Eod. Loc. We are not to charge our
actual sins upon original, as unavoidably resulting from it. Eod. Loc. Original
sin proved and asserted. Eod. loc.

Verse. 7. Lord be pleased to pardon me, and solemnly to declare and seal thy
reconciliation unto me, after the same manner as the Priest is wont to do by
using a solemn Ceremony for the Purification of sin (whereby the Blood of the
Lamb of God, and the death of the Messiah was prefigured) Levit. 14.6, 7. Numb,
19.6. So shall I be restored to that blessed estate, from which I have so sadly
fallen by my sinful miscarriages.

Verse. 8. I am yet in a sad and most wretched condition, thy wrath continuing
over me sets my soul upon torture, my own conscience under thee being my
dreadful executioner; but O be thou pacified unto me again, and that shall be
the most joyful news, which ever came to any poor tortured suppliants ears,
when he is taken from the rack, his bones set, and he restored to ease again.

Verse. 9. Lord pardon my sins, return thy wonted favor toward me.

Verse. 10. I have sadly fallen from my wonted purity and sincerity; but (O
Lord) by the good work of thy grace upon my heart restore me to it again, renew
me inwardly and thoroughly, my thoughts as well as actions, that I never fall
into the least beginning of any such pollutions again.

Verse. 11. It is just with thee to cast me from thy spiritual commerce, who
have resisted thy spirit; it is just with thee to withdraw thy grace to which I
have done such despite, but O do not thus severely punish me by withdrawing
that which I now more than ever stand in need of.

Verse. 12. Without thy gracious aid and assistance I am not able to get out of
this broken condition; the free assistances of thy Spirit are so necessary to
me, that without them I cannot endeavor in the least the recovering of that
purity from which I am fallen. Therefore Lord restore them to me, that I may be
restored unto thee:

Verse. 13. This thy exceeding mercy to me a sinner so sadly lapsed, may be a
means to bring wicked livers home to repentance; by mine own happy success I
shall encourage them to return, who have fallen as sadly as any of them can
have done, and yet have met with mercy; and many (I doubt not) encouraged on by
my example, by the assistance of thy grace will be brought home to thy service,
and the practice of the duties of new life.

Verse. 14. The sin of Murder is an horrid and crying sin, of a black and deep
die; deliver me from that so far as my conscience assures me guilty, though my
own hands have not been polluted with it. Blessed Lord, from whom all
deliverance comes, be pleased to deliver me from this, and all other foul
commissions, which will be welcome news to me, and make me with greatest
exultation of Heart to proclaim abroad thy abundant mercies.

Verse. 15. Thy work of grace toward me shall set my lips wide open in
praising thee.

Verse. 16. It is not any Hecatombe, or most chargeable oblation for sin thou
requirest of me; for the truth is my sins are such as for which all exterior
performances afford no reconciliation.

Verse. 17. It Is my sincere humiliation, confession, and renovation, which alone
thou admittest, and which thou art mercifully pleased to have respect to,
however I am in this foul condition; and to look upon them as the most
acceptable oblation. These with an honest heart presented unto Thee will be
sure to find a favorable and welcome reception.

Verse. 18. Be merciful (O Lord) not to me only, but to all that love and fear
thy Name, and meet uniformly in the place appointed for thy service; Be thou a
defense and succor to all such, Let them be walled about with thy protection,
and preserve them from falling into any wilful and presumptuous sins.

Verse. 19. For then shall all our services of Prayers and praises (typified by
the Legal sacrifices) our solemn acts of the most ardent devotion to Thee, and
most diffusive charity to our brethren be accepted by Thee, being upon an
humble but cheerful confidence of thy acceptance presented to Thee upon the
Altars of our very hearts.

Vid. Dr. Hammond.

Glory be to God the Father maker of all the World, and to God the Son Redeemer
of all Mankind, and to God the Holy Ghost Sanctifier of the Church, or all the
Elect People of God.

Answer.
This was the confession of faith taken up from the first beginning of the
Christian name, and grounded upon Christ's own institution, Matthew. 28.19.
therefore against all Arrians, and Antitrinitarians, we make confession of the
same faith in the ever blessed Trinity, and pray for the continuance of it to
the Worlds end, subjoyning our Amen of confirmation that so it is, and of
option that so it may continue.

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us.
Note. These Versicles are of very ancient usage in the Church Service,
mentioned in the Clementine Constitutions. lib. 8. c. 5. c. 6. Council of Vas.
c. 5. Ann. Dom. 440. received both in the Eastern and Western Church, called
(...), seasonable at all times, and therefore it has a part in all our divine
Offices; and is set ever or for the most part before the Lord's Prayer as a fit
preparative to usher it in. Vid. Haman Lestrange Alliance of Divine Offices.
Page 83. Dr. Sparrow's Rational. page 71, 72, 73.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Note. This Prayer is Tanquam sal omnium divinorum Officiorum. Upon which I
have here added this Paraphrastical Prayer.

Preface.
O Lord God, who art great in power, rich in mercy, whose glory is above the
Heavens, whose goodness is over all the Earth; who art Almighty, for in Heaven;
who art most merciful, for our Father; in Heaven so able to help us, our
Father, so willing to hear us: Lord, what art not thou able to do for us, who
art in Heaven? Lord, what art not thou willing to do for us, who art our
Father? Here we lie prostrate before Thee upon the Earth, yet pressing in our
affections toward the Heaven where thou art, and presume not for any merit in
us, but for thy mercies in Christ, that thou will deny us nothing which may do
us good, who vouchsafest us this to call Thee Father.

1 Petit. Thou art an Holy God, and delightest that all thy Worshipers should
worship Thee in the beauties of holiness; we desire Thee to shed thy Holy
Spirit abroad in our hearts, that we may perform this our bounden duty and
service in an holy manner, that we may lift up holy hands, with holy hearts to
Thee, who dwell in the Heavens; Thou, who art the sanctifier of all that is
made holy, make us to be holy as Thou art holy, give us holiness in our
thoughts, words, and actions; sanctify us inwardly, and outwardly in our Souls
and Bodies; make us holy in our lives, that we may be happy at our deaths. Let
thy Name of Father be hallowed in us, and upon us, that we may in our lives and
conversations walk before Thee in newness of life, and as it becomes the Sons
of God.

2 Petit. To this end we humbly beg of Thee to sanctify our corrupt nature,
and to beautify our debauched souls with thy grace; extirpate sin, that grace
may be implanted; break the power of sin in us, bruise Satan under our feet,
and set up the Throne and Scepter of Jesus Christ in our hearts; bring down
every exalting thought and proud imagination in us, to the obedience of Christ;
translate us out of the kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of thy dear Son.
Let not Sin, nor Satan reign in us, but let thy Son reign in us by the Scepter
of his Holy Spirit. May thy Kingdom of Grace come to us, that we may come to
thy Kingdom of Glory.

3 Petit. And, O Lord, we desire Thee to cloth our Souls with those Divine
affections, that we may love the same love, choose the same objects, and
delight in unions and holy conformities with Thee: Lord, so incline our hearts
and affections that we may make thy providence, which is the guide of the
World, the measure of our desires; that we may be patient in all accidents, and
conform to thy will both in doing and in suffering, that we may submit to all
changes, even to persecutions for thy Holy Name. Make us to do thy will in the
manner of Angelical obedience, promptly, readily, cheerfully, and with all our
faculties; as the Angels in Heaven serve Thee with concord, harmony, and peace;
so may we jointly serve Thee here on Earth with peace, and purity, and love
unfeigned. That we may have nothing in us that may displease Thee, but that
quitting all our own desires and pretensions, we may live in all Angelical
conformity; Make our Souls subject to Thee, and our passions to our Souls, that
thy will may be done by us here on Earth, as it is done by the Holy Angels in
Heaven.

4 Petit. And, O Lord, we pray Thee to give us all that is necessary for the
support of our lives; that portion of bread, which is Day by Day needful for
us; we pray Thee for the poor, who want it, and have it not, but as it is
deposited in thy hand. Let thy mercy (O Lord) ploughing the Fields of Heaven,
bring them in their Meat in due season; we pray Thee for the rich, who have it,
and yet may stand in need of thy blessing with it; From the highest to the
lowest we all wait upon Thee, that thou would be pleased to feed us with
food convenient for us. We beg but for a Day, that we may always have our
dependence on Thee to minister to us as we need it.

5 Petit. And seeing every sin entertained with a free choice, and a full
understanding, is an obstruction to our Prayers, keeping our Prayers from Thee,
and thy blessings from us; as sinful delinquents, and penitent Servants, we
desire Thee to pardon and forgive us all our sins, not only our sins of
infirmity, invasion, and sudden surprise, which through natural weakness may
adhere to most of our best actions, but also our sins of a deeper dye, our sins
of wilfulness, and wickedness; Pardon, O Lord, what is past in thy mercy, and
keep us from such presumptuous sins, and all other for the time to come by thy
grace; And when we ask forgiveness of Thee, incline our hearts to discharge the
obligation which thy condition of pardon has laid upon us in forgiving one
another. May the indearing mercy of Thee our Father lay an engagement upon our
Souls, not to contrive the least revenge, or entertain the least malice against
our erring brethren, and follow Christians, who have in the least been
injurious to us; we implore thy mercy to forgive our grand trespasses, which
are talents; and we beg thy grace, that we may forgive petty injuries done to
us, which are but pence.

6 Petit. And seeing, O Lord, we are in this World hemmed about with many
dangers, and lie exposed to many afflictions, as Persons placed in the midst of
dangers, we make our addresses to Thee the only great and most gracious
deliverer, humbly beseeching Thee to guard and defend us from all adversities,
which may happen to the Body, and from all evil thoughts, which may assault,
and hurt the Soul. Lord, suffer us not to be led into temptation, but if
through frailty and weakness we fall into any gross sin, give us the grace of
repentance to rise again, and work in us such a detestation of sin for the time
to come, that we may stand the firmer after our fall, may the fear of falling
with thy supporting grace be for ever after the best tenure of our standing.

7 Petit. Deliver us, O Lord, from the evil of sin by thy grace, from the evil
of punishment by thy mercy; From our selves, O Lord, deliver us; from the
allurements of the flesh, from the temptations of the World, from the
suggestions of the Devil; From evil men, from the Men of this World, from all
their plots, plausible snares, terrible threats, violent and rude arms, may
their power only prevail to exercise our patience, but not to subvert our
faith, or destroy our confidence in Thee. Shelter us under the covert of thy
Wings against all fraud, and every violence, that no temptation may destroy our
hopes, weaken our strength, alter our state, or overthrow our glories, this we
beg for our selves, for thy whole Church; hear them we pray Thee for us, hear
us for them, and thy Son Jesus Christ for us all:

Doxology. To whom with Thee and the Holy Spirit be ascribed all honor, power
and glory, for thine (One God in Essence distinguished in Personality) is the
Kingdom, Power, and Glory, now and for ever. Amen. So it is, Lord so be it.

Minister.
O Lord save thy Servants, etc.

Note. These short Ejaculatory Prayers by way of Response (for which the reason
is already given in my first essay upon the Service Book) are so grave, so
clearly Scriptural, that they are delivered in the very Scripture phrase; so
that I look upon it as a very needless task to put my self to any further
trouble about the recommending of them to the vulgar. I know rational Men are
able to give a right judgment upon rational things, and to acquiesce; and truly
for the inferior sort of People (whom I have no small value for, they costing
Christ as dear as the most Potent in Superiority) I advise them to trust the
judgment of the Church in the ordering of these external things which are not
contrariant to the Word of God, and assure them withal that their obedience in
such matters is better than Sacrifice, or any exterior act of Religion
performed merely in a customary manner, and for fashion-sake, as I fear too
many are guilty of.

Minister.
Let us pray.

Note. The reason for this I have given already, it is only, when we are
turning our selves as it were to any special part of devotion, required in any
special and distinct Office, to be intent upon it, and to make it our, Hoc age.

O Lord we beseech thee mercifully, etc.
O most mighty God, etc.
Note. These are for the substance Scriptur'd out in my Scriptural citations
upon the absolution, at the beginning of the Service Book; and I love not Actum
agere.

Rubric. Then the People shall say this that follows after the Minister.
Turn Thou us, O good Lord. Note. Here the People, as Persons very deeply
sensible of their sins, and nearly concerned to beg pa^don, and ask
forgiveness, are incited to do it after the Minister with unanimous hearts,
united affections, and the highest fervency of devotion, in such form of words
as is not only consonant with, but almost Verbatim taken out of the Scriptures,
Hos. 14.2. Joel 2.17. Joel 2.12, 13. Nehem. 1.4, 5, etc.

Rubric. Then the Minister alone shall say,
The Lord bless us, and keep us, etc. Note. This form of blessing is grounded
upon, Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. It is pronounced by the Minister as being an
Act of Authority, Heb. 7.7. Highly esteemed in the Primitive times, and none
durst go out of the Church till they had received it. Council. Agath. Can. 31.
Ann. Dom. 472. Council. Orlean. 3. Can. 22. The People kneeled to receive it.
Chrysostom. Liturg. The Jews received it after the same manner. Eccles. 50.23.
As God blessed by the Priests then, Numb. 6.22, 23. So we have the promise of
his assistance, and ratifying the Priests blessing, which they are to pronounce
with authority, under the Gospel. Matthew. 10.13. Luke 10.5. Where by peace
resting upon the party capable, and by Blessing returning to the Minister,
where the House resists and hinders the blessing, we may note that there is a
virtue goes out from the Minister, together with the blessing.

POSTSCRIPT.
Reader,
FOr the removing of all scruples, and to give satisfaction to some religious
Persons, who are perhaps of a different persuasion, and whose Consciences may
be so tender as to take offense where none is given, I have here joined by way
of an Appendix, a Paraphrase upon some places of Scripture sorted out for that
purpose; For truly I would have such Persons dealt with in the most tender and
gentle way that can be imaginable; I would have the Mote so discreetly pulled
out of their Eye, as not to pull out Eye and all, but done with so gentle a
hand as not to forget the tenderness of an Eye, and the nearness of Brethren;
we should make Christ's President our pattern, who would not break the bruised
Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax.

Romans chap. 14th.
Verse. 1. For the preserving of Christian charity among all, who profess
themselves to be Christians, take these following Directions. There are great
dissensions and divisions gotten in already amongst us, by reason of some
different persuasions, about some things in their own nature indifferent,
however all are not so persuaded; these have caused animosities, sidings, and
separations amongst us, so that the communion and peace of the Church, the most
precious thing to be preserved is more than likely to be broken. Therefore to
make up this breach, that it prove not incurable by continuance, I make this
seasonable application; and first I admonish those who do not think themselves
obliged to the use of those indifferent things, not to reject others who think
themselves bound up in Conscience to their observance; but to receive them to
their communion, and not to quarrel with other Men's resolutions and persuasions
as to such things, but to direct their own lives by what in conscience they are
persuaded is lawful or unlawful about such matters, in case the things
indifferent in their nature are left also indifferent in their use.

Verse. 2. For he, who is sufficiently instructed in his Christian liberty,
makes use of his Christian liberty, and makes no scruple at all about such
things, neither does he place any religion in them (further then to express his
obedience to lawful Superiors, which is not the least part of Christian
Religion) whereas he, who is weak, and not sufficiently instructed in the
nature of the liberty allowed him by Christ, so long as he remains in that
error, reckons of such things as unclean in themselves, and not to be
conformed to.

Verse. 3. But let not him, who discerns his Christian liberty in such matters,
despise him who is scrupulous and erroneous; neither let the scrupulous and
erroneous reject and cast out of his communion those, who are better instructed
in the nature of their Christian liberty, seeing God has admitted them into
his Church, and received them as Servants into his Family.

Verse. 4. And what commission can any pretend to judge the Servants of God
received and owned by him, or to exclude them out of the Church touching such
matters, seeing they must stand or fall, be cleared or condemned by God's
Sentence and not Man's; God is able to clear them if he will, and he certainly
will, having received them into his Family, and given them this liberty.

Verse. 5. Some Judaizing Christians observe the Sabbaths and other Rites
appointed by Moses; others, who know their liberty, make not that difference of
times and things which Moses Law requires; in such things, Let every Man act by
his own Conscience, and not by another Man's, what he is verily persuaded he
ought to do, and let not the unity and peace of the Church be broken for such
matters.

Verse. 6. and 7. He, who makes a difference betwixt days, as they were
differenced by Moses Law (this is nothing to our Christian Festivals observed
upon another account) thinks it is God's will he should do so; and he, who does
not make that difference, thinks it is God's pleasure now under Christ that he
should not make it. So is it for Meats, as well as for Days; some who
understand not their liberty make a difference, from the supposed obligation of
Moses Law; others, who are very well instructed in their Christian liberty,
make no difference as from Moses Law (however from Christian Laws a difference
may be made as to the use, but not as to the nature of Meats and Days which
Christian-Laws Christians who rightly understand their Christian liberty will
cheerfully obey) certainly when both sides do what they do, merely out of
conscience, and to do a thing pleasing to God, this is well done, for no Man is
to do what himself likes best, but what he thinks to God is most acceptable.

Verse. 8. For our life and death are very inconsiderable, but as by them we may
serve God, so ought we to do it in all other things.

Verse. 9. This being the great end of Christ's death, Suffering and
Resurrection, that he should have power over us all, and command and give what
liberty he pleases. (but further then he gives we may not take, nor pretend to
such a Christian liberty as unavoidably destroys Christian duty.)

Verse. 10. But why do we condemn our fellow Christians, or exclude them from
our Communion; Why do we vilify, set them at naught, or judge them, so long as
they only use, and do not abuse their Christian liberty in conforming to the
use of some things, (which not the nature of the things themselves, but the
just Laws of lawful Superiors make necessary) indeed neither are to be Judge
one of another in such things, but Christ is to be the Judge of all, being sent
by his Father, and commissionated to that Office.

Verse. 11. As it was long before predicted, Isay 45.23. which Prediction was to
have its completion in Christ incarnate, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. who is constituted
the one Supreme Judge of all, to whose Judicature every one must submit, and
give account for his own actions. Therefore it is very unreasonable that one
private Christian should judge another, and reject one another from Communion,
for this belongs only to Christ, and those Governors of his Church, who are
his delegates, and are endowed with the power of the Keys and Censures.

Verse. 12. Therefore let this fault be mended by you that are
Fellow Christians; do not any longer censure and separate from one another
communion for such indifferent and circumstantial things as these are; only be
careful not to scandalize the weaker Christians, by putting stumbling blocks in
their way to hinder their coming clear over to Christianity; cast no gall-traps
in the way of weak Judaizing Christians to wound their Consciences, and to
cause them to fall back from Christianity, which they will be in danger to do,
when they see those liberties used among Christians, which they deem utterly
unlawful.

Verse. 14. I am confident, and make no question but that by the coming of
Christ the Mosaical difference of Meats is taken away, and all Meats are lawful
in themselves to be eaten by Christians; but yet the same Meats are unlawful to
those, who are so persuaded in their conscience, and have not yet attained to
the right understanding of their Christian liberty.

Verse. 15. But if thou, who understandest thy liberty, do for a matter of
this nature despise and cast off thy Fellow-Christian, who understands it not,
and by so doing do discourage him from going on in Christianity; Surely thou
walk contrary to the rule of Christian charity, which is, to draw all to
piety, and to drive none away; and this will be a great fault in thee, for so
light a thing as this, to drive him from Christianity, and so destroy him, for
the saving of whom Christ was content to lay down his Life.

Verse. 16. Ye may use your Christian liberty, but ye do not well if ye so use
it, as to make it tend to an others hurt, for that will be the defaming of
that, which is in it self indifferent or innocent.

Verse. 17. Christianity consists not in such external matters, (when left
indifferent in their use, as they are in their nature, and not commanded by
lawful Superiors for decency and order) but in the practice of Christian
virtues, such as ^bedience to the Laws of Superiors i^ things not sinful,
mercy, peace, delight to do one another good, to build up one another in piety,
not dividing, and hating, and excommunicating one another.

Verse. 18. All these are acts of obedience to Christ, that are sure to be
accepted by God, and to be of good report among all good men.

Verse. 19. Therefore let us most zealously attend to these things, which may
thus preserve peace between all sorts of Christians, though of different
persuasions, and which tend to the drawing Men to Christianity, not driving
them from it.

Verse. 20. Let not so inconsiderable ^a^ters as these external things (wherein
no Man who is instructed in his Christian liberty, places any Religion further
than obedience to the just Laws of lawful Superiors) disturb that peace and
unity, which ought to be among Believers, though of different persuasions,
about indifferent things. For a Man may eat any thing simply considered, but if
by so doing he aliens others from the Gospel, by despising and avoiding them,
who dare not do so, this is a sin in him.

Verse. 21. It is not charitable to make use of any part of Christian liberty,
when by thy so doing another Man is deterred from the Christian faith, and by
some unhappy occasion of thy misused liberty, is so galled and wounded in his
Conscience, as that he cannot with any inward comfort or satisfaction go on in
the discharge of his Christian duty.

Verse. 22. If thou have a clear understanding of thy Christian liberty, it is
well for thee; but use it betwixt God and thy self, not always before Men, when
it may be in danger to hurt them, and when it is not necessary to reveal thy
pract^se in such matters (yet when commanded by lawful Authority, things
indifferent in their nature become necessary in their use) He is a happy Man,
who, when he knows a thing lawful, does so manage the practice of it, that he
has therein no reason to accuse or condemn hmself.

Verse. 23. But there is no reason that the scrupulous Christian should be evil
entreated by thee for not daring to do as thou do, when he thinks himself in
conscience otherwise obliged; for it would be a damning sin in him to do what
his conscience tells him is an unlawful action; For whoever does any thing
(though the thing be in it self lawful) which is in his persuasion sinful, and
unlawful, he certainly sins in so doing.

Romans 15.
Verse. 1. The more instructed Christians, who rightly understand the nature and
extent of their Christian liberty, ought to help, and relieve those, who do not
understand it; and to be watchful to keep them from falling into sin; not to
please themselves too much by presumeing upon their own strength and knowledge,
so as to neglect, and despise others, who have not so much.

Verse. 2. We should all of us rather do what good we can toward the
edification of other Men.

Verse. 3. Herein following the most imitable Example of our Savior, who did
not so much consider the pleasing of himself, as to do what was of public
concernment, reckoning all that befell his Father to fall upon him, and being
as tender of God's honor as of his own.

1 Cor. 8.
Verse. 1. We, who are Orthodox Christians, have that knowledge of our Christian
liberty, (and therefore ought not to be despised by those, who in pride of
heart separate themselves from us) that together with our knowledge, we hold
charity and the love of God, which inclines us to suffer any thing for Christ's
sake, so that an Idol-feast is no trouble to our Consciences, for we need not
to come at them to save us from persecution, a little of this courage and love
of Christ is much better than all the pretended deep knowledge of those, who
choose to comply with any Religion, which their own Conscience tells them is
false, rather than confess and suffer for Christ, and that Religion, which
their own Conscience tells them is the only true Religion.

Verse. 2. Therefore if Men please themselves with an Opinion of knowledge, from
such subtilties as these, and so come to despise other Men, and not consider
what tends to their good and edification, they are far from the true Christian
knowledge, or from directing it to the right end, which is charity, and the
edification of our Brethren.

Verse. 3. If any Man loves God sincerely, and so adheres to him in time of
danger, he truly knows him, and consequently is acknowledged by him.

Verse. 4. We know indeed that an Idol is nothing in the World, no part of Gods
first Creation, only an invention and fancy of M^n, there is but one true God,
all the rest are fictions of wicked Men, who were first the formers, and then
the worshipers of them.

Verse 5. There may be many such fictitious deities called by that title,
whether in Heaven or in Earth:

Verse. 6. But we Christians are assured the e is but One true God, the Creator
of all things, to whom all Men's Prayers must be addressed, from whom we had our
being, and to whom we are obliged to be his Servants, and to make all our
applications to Him; and there is but One Mediator and Lord Christ, by whom all
things were created, and by whom as the only Mediator betwixt God and us, all
our Prayers are addressed to Heaven.

Verse. 7. Yet all Men are not of this persuasion, that these Idols are nothing,
for sure if they thought so, they would not worship them; nay, some are of
Opinion that they are something, and are able to hurt them, and therefore they
continue their Heathenish custom, to be present at the Idol-Feasts,
notwithstanding these very Persons have received the faith of Christ; so that
their sick and sinful Consciences are defiled and polluted by so doing.

Verse. 8. Now a Man, who is not of this persuasion toward the Idol, if he goes
to the Idol-Temple with the Idol-Worshipers, may be a means of confirming them
in their Error, it being certain that they will think he comes as they come,
with the same Opinion of the false deity, and of reaping some benefit by it,
which inconvenience must needs be very dangerous.

Verse. 9. For though the being there, or not being there, be not of it self of
any great moment in the sight of God; yet this care would befit every
Christian, so to use his own liberty, as not to be an occasion of sin, or of
continuance in sin to others, by confirming them in their sinful courses.

Verse. 10. For if any Man, who through an erroneous Conscience goes to an
Idol-Feast, sees another at the same Feast, who knows within himself an Idol to
be nothing, and eats not out of any religious Opinion, but only as of ordinary
meat, Will not he by this means be confirmed to go on in his erroneous course?

Verse. 11. So that the Christian of an erroneous Conscience shall go on in his
sin, and be in danger to be ruined, by reason of the others practice, who
presumes upon his knowledge, and so goes confidently to the Idol, as a mere
vanity and thing of naught, not at all considering the erroneous Conscience of
his weak Brother; and so he makes himself guilty, not only of uncharitableness
to his Brother, but of injury to Christ, in betraying a Soul to ruin, for the
saving of which Christ died.

Verse. 12. And be it granted, that, for one who understands his Christian
liberty to be present at an Idol-feast, be not impiety against God, yet is it
an act of great uncharitableness against the weak Brethren, in bringing them to
a confirmation in those sinful practices, wherein through error they are
already, and so it may be an impiety and sin against God too, who is concerned
in them.

Verse. 13. Therefore if to eat a Feast in an Idol-Temple, or any use of my
liberty in the same kind, be an occasion of confirming any Christian in an
erroneous sinful practice, or of bringing him to do any thing, which is
unlawful, I will be sure to deny my self the use of that liberty (supposed it
be such, as by the Laws of Christ truly belongs to me) when it shall prove of
such dangerous consequence to my Fellow Christians.

Note. Whatever has been spoken by way of a plain Paraphrase out of the
forementioned places of Scripture, makes nothing at all against any Man's
conformity to the use of the Common Prayer Book, now by Law established.

1. Nothing out of Romans 14. makes against it, for these following reasons.

1. Because no Man, who is a Christian can possibly be so weak in the faith,
unless he be wilful too, as to scruple at prayer as such, it being the great
duty of a Christian, or at Prayer in a set-form, because it is authorized out
of both Testaments, and was ever the practice of Christ's Church so to pray, or
at the set-form of Common Prayer established in our Church, because it is
conform to all ancient Liturgies, and to the Liturgy of the Roman-Church too,
(is not denied) so far as that is conform to the Prayers of the ancient and
primitive Church, but no otherwise, besides every branch of it is reducible to
the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and Ten Commandments, is agreeable to Scripture,
and most delivered in the very Scripture Phrase; and framed up according to St.
Paul's prescribed Model. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Vid. Dr. Hammond. Annot. in Locum.

2. All this supposed, and as easy to be proved as supposed; I believe no
Christian can pretend to that tenderness of conscience, as to be grieved in his
conscience for doing that, which is so agreeable to God's Word, and the
practice of all the Church-Christian all the World over.

2. Nothing out of 1 Cor. 8. makes against Conformity, unless these weak
Christians will say, which I know they will not, least they should be accounted
wicked, rather than weak. 1. That God is an Idol. 2. That to pray to God in his
House of Prayer, or to be present at Christian Festivals and Services in his
Temple is Idolatry; besides if any should be so perverse, and yet mask it under
pretense of tenderness of conscience, as to be offended at us in so doing, and
by so doing discharging our duty, I do not see how we can leave off these
things to gratify them, for we have consciences as well as they have, and as
tender, apt to be grieved, as theirs; and we understand our Christian liberty
as well as they do, and it may be in some things better too, for we know this
liberty is not so in our power, as to use it and not use it, when we please to
gratify and comply with every passion and distemper, but we are bound up by
Laws, which by Authority derived from God's Laws, have power to bind the
conscience, to serve God in such set-forms, and at such set-times, neither do I
see how any power upon earth can disoblige us from obedience to those just
Laws, which are imposed upon us by lawful Superiors, how can we to satisfy
another Man's conscience, take off our obedience from those, whom we are
commanded to be subject to, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake,
Romans 13.5. our Christian liberty has freed us from the Ceremonial Law of
Moses, but not from any Christian rules left us by Christ and his Apostles. We
must not use our liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2.16. nor pretend
it to destroy Christian duty; Christ has freed us from many yokes, but not
from that of subjection to God, and lawful Superiors. I desire, as the Apostle
speaks, that our moderation, and meekness may be made known unto all Men.
Philip. 4.5. Yet we must not be so moderate to Men, as to be cruel and
injurious to God; whatever the Law of Christ forbids may not be tolerated, any
thing in its own nature besides is tolerable enough, there is nothing
intolerable but sin, and for Magistrates to tolerate that, who have a power to
restrain it, is to make themselves guilty of the commission of it. To deny the
true God, and set up a false is intolerable, it is against the first
Commandment. To worship God after our own wills, and not according to Gods
will is intolerable, it is against the Second. To take God's Name in vain in
words, or works, in words to swear for him, in works to swerve from him, to
pretend for Him in words, and practice against him in works, is intolerable, it
is against the Third. To make all things common, and nothing sacred, is
intolerable, against the Fourth. To destroy order, and bring in confusion, to
cry down Magistracy and Ministry, to bring in a parity, where God would have a
superiority, to empower the Servant against the Master, the Child against the
Parent, the Subject against the Sovereign, and so make one Man's will a Law to
take away another Man's life, is very intolerable, and a breach of the Fifth
Commandment. This is the Commandment we have most a spite a^, but it is the
commandment which p^eserves us all, and in the well keeping of it, consists
upon the matter the well observance of all the rest. To give another Man power
to take away my life, to defile the Matrimonial Bed, to injure a Man in his
goods or good name, to have a will to do it when he cannot, and actually to do
it whenever he can, are all intolerable, and breaches of the other
Commandments. If such things as these may be tolerated, nothing is
intolerable; nay, nothing but will be intolerable, though tolerated; for I
think it as intolerable to live where all things are tolerated; as where
nothing is. No Man, who has any Religion at all, can pretend a Toleration for
these things, which are against all Religion, and all Reason too. Now because
the Laws of God have so little influence upon Men's lives, unless there be
Custodes utriusque tabulae, in the Church, to see that both Tables be kept,
that of Religion, and that other of Justice; Therefore God has invested
Magistrates with a power and authority, and lest many Precepts to command our
obedience and subjection to them, for to make other humane Laws to press on the
observance of God's Laws, and that Gods Law of Religion may be observed in the
best manner, the Church has framed up Liturgies, instituted decent Rites and
Ceremonies, all according to Apostolic Rules. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. 1 Cor. 14.40. and
if Men may be indulged a liberty to be exempt from humane Laws, which are as
the Ark wherein Religion is preserved, God's Laws will in time be of very
little regard among us; Thus have I (good Reader) only to give some People
satisfaction, if possible, taken upon me this task upon the Common Prayer Book,
to work People into a better esteem of it, and that they may without any
scruple of Conscience conform to it.

Farewell.
FINIS.

