A Call to the Churches; OR, A Packet of Letters To the PASTORS of WALES
Presented To the Baptized Teachers there. WITH A Postscript of a Welsh Dispute.

By WILL. ERBERY.

What shall one then answer the Messengers of the Nation? That the Lord has
founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall repair unto it,

Isa. 14.32. The first shall say to Zion* Behold them, and I will give to
Jerusalem one that brings good tidings.

For I beheld and there was no man amongst them and there was no Counselor,
that when I asked of them, could answer me a word.

Isai. 41.27, 28, 29. Printed at London, 1653.

TO The Baptized Churches IN SOUTH- WALES.
Dear Brethren,
WHat I have written to the Independent Pastors in Wales, that I present to the
Baptized Churches there, that in the first Letter of Mr. Floyd you may see a
man in the Clouds, come with me to his A.B.C. after all his teachings; not
knowing what God is, where, when, or how he is above all, through all in all,
and all of him* etc. yet in this Cloud coming forth from the North, he begins
to see the Lord in the Air, Ezekiel. 1.4. Rev. 1.7.
and meets him there; yea in this confusion, he beholds Christ in him crucified
in his flesh, whose inward flesh, and former spiritual seize in life,
light, knowledge, etc. being so slain, so dead, so dark, so confounded, that he
knows not what he is, nor where he goes, and yet he is going into the internal
eternal spirit, as a blind man not seeing any thing of Men, Saints, Isa. 42.16.
Officers, Ordinances, Isa. 40.16.17, 29, 30, 31.
Spirits, Churches, etc. though there he be, and one of the best, yet now he is
nothing, God appearing in him to be all in all. There you may find him
following the intern spirit of the inward Heaven, Isa. 30.20.. Mich. 7.8.
dropping down in the Nights, and in darkness the Lord a light unto him; for
that is the great mystery of Godliness, when God is so manifest in our flesh,
Isa. 40.5, 6.
that he makes our flesh and the goodliness thereof to wither unto nothing,
that his glory may be revealed in us, and he to be All in All.

That being being blind to self, Isa. 29.18. Isa. 26.19.
we see all things in God; being deaf to men we hear God alone; in the death of
pure flesh, we live perfectly in the Spirit: thus we live in death, have light
in darkness, etc. or the Lord only is both life and light unto us, we nothing,
God being All in All.

All this you may behold in this honest man, acquainted at last with the
heave^ly nature, walking up to the Angelical world* and with drawing himself
into the inner world (the more spiritual chamber) to converse with the
inhabitants there, etc. looking down on the son of man as a vanity, a glance,
a branch, yea a shadow, yet an offspring of the eternal root, where the least
child of God (like the little little twig) co-saps with the other branches of
highest growth in the most high God, or glory that is in us.

All this I have hinted to you that you may (as I say) see a man in the Clouds,
where yet he meets with the Lord in the Air; on which though now the last vial
full of wrath is poured forth, Rev. 16.17.
yet there all the Saints shall meet at last in love, and be ever together with
the Lord; 1 These. 4.17.
who has already taken up some, and that Saint before, in whose Spirit you may
read those secret and spiritual discoveries of God those high and hidden
mysteries of Heaven, which are not yet in common revealed to the Churches, Isa.
19.18.
who scarce understand the language of Canaan, nor the Contents of those lines:
If any of you do* I desire your answer to him; for I cannot (in paper and ink)
though all his be written in my heart by the Spirit, and Himself in me.

I have many things to say unto you, which yet you cannot bear, but you must;
because it is a burden which the Lord lays on you, and a burden which the
Prophets have foretold upon your gathered Churches, even their confusion and
fall, though some of you may rise at last, with all the scattered Saints.

The first, only I would now convince you, that you and I, with all the Saints
this day, are still in Babylon, both gathered Churches, and scattered Saints;
Ezekiel. 37.11, 16.
like those two sticks in divided Societies (as I have often told you, and
those dry bones the whole house of Israel, even all the people of God are
declared to be by the Prophet, who yet foretells their first resurrection, nor
rising from their graves of forms and flesh; but as none can see God but the
blind, nor hear him, but the deaf, so none can rise but the dead; and the dead
in Christ rise first; while those who live in Forms in the flesh of Christ (who
are the rest of the dead) shall not live, nor be raised till the end of the
thousand years, Rev. 25. compared with Isa. 26.14.

The Prophet Isaiah there shows the cause of their not rising, Isa. 26.13.
other Lords besides thee have had dominion over us, and that is not only Lord
Bishops, but other ruling Elders beside what the Lord ordained; other
Ordinances in the Church, which never came to his mind, as I shall prove in
particular (with God) another time; there being no Gospel Order, nor Ordinance,
nor Office in any of your Churches this day.

Yea, I proved it plain at Bridgend, that you are not in a capacity to baptize
or be baptized* there being no true Administrator, nor a man sent of God with
power from on high to baptize: First, because you have not the faith of the
Gospol. Secondly, you are fallen from your first love, therefore the Apostasy
is complete and perfect, and appears most visible in your Churches,

How have you the faith of the Gospel, since the Gospel is a Mystery which none
of you know, having not that manifestation of the Spirit whereby 'twas made
known at first to the Apostles and Primitive Saints* and by them to the world?
Ephesians. 3.5. Col 1.27.29. Yea one of your own Pastors or Teachers (coming
purposely to oppose at Lantrishant, where I was speaking of the common
salvation, as Jude calls it) tells the people that this was not Gospel. What
then I pray you? why faith he, Mr Days of Kelliga^e.
the Gospel is that written in the four Evangelists. Then said I, Our Father
which art in Heaven is Gospel. No that is prayer; but the Gospel to be preached,
says he is, Math. 7.14.
Straight is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads to life, and few
there be that find it; for so it is written in the Gospel of Saint Matthew.
Sure this was not Gospel and glad tidings to all people, that so few should be
saved; and yet I could show in the Spirit the Gospel of Salvation, of Life, and
Love in that Letter, though few find it, or the way to it, as Christ tells
them.

Again said the good Man, this is another part of the Gospel, As many as
received him, John 1.12.
to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to those that believed
in his name. For so it is written in the Gospel of Saint John, says he; as if
all were Gosple which is written in the Evangelists; whereas Christ was a
Minister of the Circumcision, Romans 15.8.
or legal Teacher. Secondly, the Gosple that he taught was but in part, that
which was proper only to the Jewish Church, Mat. 15.24.
not that to be preached to the world. Thirdly, what Gospel or glad tidings is
it to tell the world, that none should be saved but the Elect and Believers?
whereas Christ came to save only the lost, giving a word of life to all men,
Act. 13.48, 47,
that they might believe, or shutting up all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all, Romans 11.32.

But the Man thought there was no Gospel, but what is written in the Gospel of
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.

These men you must know are Ministers of the Gospel, these are the Itinerants
in Wales, who know no further of the Gospel then that, or what is written in
the Epistles: whereas these were not that Gospel which the Apostles preached to
the world, but proper to the Churches only, to whom those Letters were written.

Again, Christ, as I said before, being a Minister of the Circumcised, or legal
Teacher, taught the Gospel (as 'twas also under the Law) darkly in types and
figures, in parables and precepts, Mat. 13.35. John 16.25.

Again, 'twas his design then to do so to the Jewish Church, to confound them
the more, Mat. 13.13, 14, 15.
to blind them, and harden them, that they might not hear any thing, but for
their own destruction; as I am persuaded the mystery of Christ, and of the
Gospel is for this cause a sealed book this day to all the Preachers and
Pastors of Churches, that they might be blinded, and stumble, and fall together.

Thirdly, as the rejecting of the Jewish Church was a way for the receiving and
call of the Nations; so the fall of the Churches this day, is for the rising of
the world, Isa. 2.3, ^. Rev. 14.6, 8.
to the knowledge of the everlasting Gospel, which God alone, and not man shall
teach, that is, the Ministry of the Spirit which shortly shall come forth with
power and glory in the weakest Saints, to raise up the former desolations (made
by the abomination or Apostasy) and to restore the waste Cities (or Apostate
Churches) yea the desolations of many generations, Isa. 61.3, Rev. 22.17.
4.

But to turn to our Welsh Teacher before mentioned: the man it seems afterward
bethought himself, and was ashamed of what he said; and therefore followed me
to my Inn, desiring to be friends with me; which I ever was, and am still to him
and to all men also.

But see how unconstant and unquiet the poor creature was; for because he had
then with his Clamors confounded the Auditory, and to his power made that which
I had spoken in public to be of no effect, or forgoten: I promised to speak
once more to my honest Countrymen there in that place, a fortnight after; when
he coming there again, stepped up before me to preach in Welsh; whom yet I
quietly heard all the time, till he had ended his Sermon, not contradicting him
at all, though I could in many things, and in most.

Afterward I began to speak to the English, (for many of the Welsh understood)
declaring something concerning the glorious appearance of the great God in the
last days; that he would so appear in man, that men should be made like him,
that God would be both a Heaven and a Hell to men, that most men should be in a
Hell upon earth, as that some should have a Heaven here; I mean the inhabitants
of the new Jerusalem, the only thing I was always upon, to my dear Country. I
also spoke of Gods coming forth as Fire in the last times, etc. but had no
sooner finished my discourse, but the Gentleman starts up again, and begins to
contradict and withstand my words the second time, to the trouble and tumult of
the company; who being strange to such open affronts, and public contests in
the Church, began to forget what they heard before, and to rise up on their
seats, as if they were to see a show.

Upon this, without answering a word, I went out of the place in silence,
leaving the man to speak what he pleased to the people; but as I was going out
of the Church, he turning about and crying after me I answered no more but this
word unto him; Mr. Davys, you will be shortly in the Fire (for the fire was
that I then had spoken of) and so I departed in peace.

But (as I said before) let all men judge from that aforesaid, whether such men
are fit to be Ministers of the Gospel, who think the Gospel to be that, which
is written in the four Evangelists, or in the Apostles Epistles; whereas the
one is but an Historical relation, or report of Christ in his life and death,
etc. The Epistles are only particular Letters of some special concernment to
the Churches, not that which the Apostles preached to the world; and as Christ
was a Minister of the Circumcision in the days of his flesh, while he was alive
on earth: so Christ never preached the Gospel indeed, Ephesians. 2.17.
till after he was dead; then he came forth in the Spirit preaching peace, etc.
in the Apostles.

And the Gospel which the Apostles preached to the world, 'twas not that which
they wrote to the Churches, nor yet what they read in the Scriptures of the
Prophets (for to what purpose was this to the Heathens, to tell them of Moses
and the Psalms?) But the Gospel was a Mystery, which in the light of God, they
could manifest to men, and make all men see themselves in God, that is in Christ.

Yet most of the Independent and Baptized preachers of the Gospel, know no
farther of the Mystery, then what is written in the letter of Scripture
especially in the Evangelists or Epistles, whence they can only take their
Gospel-texts.

Indeed Christ being a Minister of the Circumcision, and preaching the Gospel
in part (as I said) in a legal manner took a text of Scripture out of the
Prophets; as the Apostles also preaching to the Jews made use of the Scripture
to them, Luke 4.16. Act. 13.27. Act. 15.21. compare.

But preaching the Gospel to the world, they neither mentioned, Scripture, nor
spoke from a text; Act. 14.17. Act. 17.27, 21.
for what was Moses and David, and the Prophets to those who never heard of
such men, nor owned their writings? though indeed indicted by the Spirit of God,
2 Pet. 1.21. which Spirit moved those who spoke the same.

This I only speak, to show the Ignorance, or inconsiderate proceeds of our
Gospel-preachers, who know not what they say, nor the way they go, nor the work
they do, nor the word they speak, nor the Gospel which they pretend to preach
unto the world.

But because I now write to the baptized Churches, I would convince them also
of this, that they are not the true, nor can baptize in truth, having not a
Gospel yet manifest among them: I say not manifest, for there may be a seed of
it in them, as also was in legal Saints. I will not mind you of those two
Scriptures, mentioned in the following dispute, John 7.38, 39. and John 14.12.
nor yet a third proof, Mark 16.16, 17. He that believes and is baptixed shall
be saved, and these signs shall follow them that believe, etc.

Those signs did follow Gospel-believers, 1 Cor. 1.7. 1 Cor. 12.7. compare.
at least every Gospel Church of believers, in whose members as that faith was
manifested; so especially in the Ministers or Elders, who by laying on of hands
on the sick, and by prayer of faith, could save the sick from death. The Oil
then used being not a physical receipt, or chirurgical salve, nor yet an empty
Ceremony, but a sign of the Spirits presence in the Church, and power in the
Elder to heal the body as well as the soul, James 5.14, 15.

I will not mention that other laying on of the Presbytery or Eldership, in
ordaining by a gift of the Spirit ever given thereby, 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
compare.
as (with God) I shall show hereafter, only now it is clear, there is no
Gospel-faith in all the Churches this day.

Know then that in the Churches of Christ, there was both the gift of Faith,
and the grace of Faith; the one in some Church Members (as well as in
Ministers) 1 Cor. 12.9. the other was common to all believers; though some that
were carnal then in Gospel-Churches, had but a legal faith, because carnal, 2
Cor. 3.1. Heb. 5.12, 13. compare.

As for Gospel-faith suitable to that present state of the Spirit, and
spiritual Saints; it was (though not differing, yet) diverse from the legal
faith of Gods people under the Law: true faith was ever the same for substance,
but not for manifestation, as the Gospel is everlasting, and Christ the same to
day, yesterday and for ever.

But as Christ was only vayled in the Law, and revealed in the Gospel; so the
Gospel and Christ Jesus were both Mysteries hid since the world began from the
Sons of men, yea from the sons of God-under the Law, Romans 16.25. Ephesians. 3.5. Col.
1.26. compare.

This Mystery was not manifest till to the Apostles and primitive Saints by the
Spirit, Ephesians. 3.5.

That Spirit was not given before, yea the Spirit was not at all, as the Greek
there reads, John 7.39.

And so that Spirit is not now, not the Baptism of the Spirit, which the
Apostles themselves had not, John 20.22. Act. 1.5. compare.
while Christ was with them in flesh; and though after his resurrection he
breathed the Spirit on them, yet they were not, baptized with the Spirit, till
afterward. Before which given, they could not go forth to Teach all Nations,
and Baptize in a Gospel-way, Act. 1.4.

Therefore Gospel-Believers could not be before the Baptism of the Spirit;
that is, the pouring forth the gifts thereof, on the Church, Act. 2.33, 44. 1
Cor. 12.7, 9. compared

Besides, as the object of a Gospel-faith was a mystery, that is Christ in us
the hope of glory, John 4.20. Col. 1.27. Gal. 1.15. and 2.20. compare. 1 Cor.
2.2, 7, 10, 12, 13. verse. compare.
the Son of God revealed in us, living in us, and dying in us, and we crucified
with him (for both Christ and him crucified also was a mystery, as the Gospel
the object of that faith) so this Gospel-faith was a mystery likewise; the
mystery of Faith in a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9.

But the object of a Legal faith was no mystery, but a plain promise, or God in
covenant, not God in Christ; for this the Apostles themselves knew not in the
days of his flesh: Ye believe in God (says he) believe also in me, etc.
Legal Saints believed on God, not on Christ, (for Christ was a mystery not yet
manifest) or to believe on God by Christ is that which believing Christians
this day know not, nor consider. For what is this? why first, it is to know
Christ in the Father, and the Father in him, and he in us, and we in him, John
14.20. Secondly, to know Christ as the way to the Father for us, verse. 6.7. how
so? he that believes on me, believes not on me, but on him that sent me; and
he that sees me, sees him that sent me, that is the Father in me, John 12.44,
45. John 14.9. compared. What Is that? it is thus to me, he that sees God in
Christ, and the Father in him, Emanuel, God with us, that is Christ. Mat. 1.23.
Ephesians. 3.19. John 17.23. compare.
may as well see God even the Father in himself; for Christ is in us, and we in
Christ, that is God in our flesh as in Christ's; for Christ and we are perfect
in one, one with the Father; thus he is the way to the Father, and thus by him
(as the way) we believe on God, who raised him from the dead and gave him
glory, that our faith and hope might be in God, 1 Pet. 1.23. So that in truth,
to believe on Christ, is not to believe on Christ, but on the Father in him,
God in his flesh, and in ours also; for our faith does tend, and end in God,
yet through him and by him, as I said before.

So that here is the misbeliefe of Churches this day; their faith is only on
God as the Jews, or only on Christ as deceived Christians, not on God and
Christ, or on God by Christ.

And by this it appears, there has not been in the Churches a Gospel-faith, at
least formally, for vertually there might be in some, but formally and
effectually there has not been a Gospel-faith in the Saints these 1400 years:
for what sign has followed any that believed? who could ever show the Gift of
Faith, when the grace of Faith was scarce known? what mountain or mighty thing
has been done, Mark 6.17. Mat. 17.20. Mat. 21.21. compare. Josh. 6.13.
or done away and removed merely by Faith? for an outward force and strength of
man has always attended great acts in latter times; but where is the fall of
Iericho's walls by rams-horns? or Gideons conquest by broken pitchers, and
lights held up in his hand? Oh this new light believers are afraid of, Judge.
7.20.
or to hear the sound of a Trumpet.

All things, says Christ, what soever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye
shall receive it; that is, Matthew. 21.22.
asking in faith nothing wavering etc. though the man want wisdom, yet he shall
have it liberally given him of God, says James: James 1.5, 6.
how then are they who pray most the greatest fools, both Papists and
Protestants? then is not the wisest man as a wave of the Sea, when the Sea is
over the whole earth, Isa. 4.11.
and the best are in the waters?

Truly we are all sick, let us send then to the Elders of the Church, and see
if they have the prayer of faith to heal us, or heal themselves from the stroke
of their wound, Isa. 30.26. Jer. 30.17.

Who among all the gathered Churches can hold forth a Gospel-faith to the
scattered Saints? who of all their Gospel Ministers can go forth freely to the
world? Col. 24.15. 1 Pet. 1.12.
where is the Power from on high, or holy Spirit sent down from heaven, for
that work?

Yea, where is the Spirit of Faith in any of their Believers? Gospel-believers
were all of one heart and one soul, because but one body, Act. 2.44. Act. 4.32.
etc. ours are all divided: believers then had all things common, etc. our
Churches and Christians are all for self-interests, and to seek their own.

This is not love, as I shall show anon, nor faith indeed which works by love.

All have not faith, says the Apostle in those Gospel Times: no man has a
Gospel-faith in these times of the Apostasy, and being of the Saints in
Babylons captivity.

Yet this is the confusion that has ever followed the Churches to this day, to
take up the Apostles words and writings, and to apply that to our selves, which
was possible to those times, and proper only to primitive Saints and Churches,
where that power was, which is now wanting to all the world.

Thus the Baptists now take up the Apostles call and commission, which was
never given them by Christ much less by the Spirit afterward.

Again, like the Angel of darkness (or Devil) cutting off part of Gods word*
they still tell their Proselytes, Mat. 3.6. Mat. 28.19.
Go teach and Baptize, etc. whereas it is written, Go Teach all Nations, and
Baptize etc.

Thirdly, 'twas not directed to the Disciples, but to the Apostles upon this
ground, and the Eleven are mentioned by Matthew and Mark: Mat. 28.16. Mark
16.14.
for every Disciple had not that power from on high, to Teach all Nations.

Fourthly, Who can show unto us that he is sent of God to Baptize? seeing none
baptized but either the Apostles, or such who had a manifestation of the
Spirit, to confirm their call, Act. 8.6. Act. 9.17.
as Philip and Ananias.

Lastly, 'Twere well if they would not only choose their members by a
confession of faith, but catechize them, and themselves first, in the doctrine
of Faith.

For the mystery of Faith was more then men imagine, and it may be more then
Paul wrote to the Romans, and Churches of Galatia: Rom 4.2.
for both it seems had gone so far back to the Law (to begin in the Spirit and
end in the flesh) that the Apostle goes no farther then a Legal Faith: Gal. 3.3.
for Faith as justifying was no more; and Faith on the promise was no higher
then their Faith under the Law, as is proved in the dispute hereafter.

Gospel-Faith was wholly exercised in our union with God in Christ, and Christ
in us; which Paul rather points at in himself, then teaches the Church, unless
what he hints to some spiritual Saints therein, Gal. 2.20.
who had the anointing in them teaching them all things, that they needed not
any man should teach them: 1 John 2.27.
Therefore as Christ never heard any man preach; so neither did the Apostles
hear one another preachings, or sit at a Sermon, as our Gospel-preachers do.

This I only speak by the way at present and another thing, that the Apostles
never preached a common place of the nature of Faith or repentance to bring
people to repeat and believe, but so preached Christ to all, that they might
believe and repent.

Gospel-Faith properly was this, in knowing our followship with the Father and
the Son in the Spirit, to know our union with God in Christ, and Christ so in
us, that we are in one with the Father, as He, in the same love and life in God
with him. John 14.19. John 17.1, 20, 21, 22, 23. now the mystery of God, even
the Father and of Christ was not manifest to any under the Law, nor to Abraham
himself, who though he saw the day of Christ, yet 'twas a far off, Joh. 8.56.
Heb. 11.13.
for so the Fathers saluted the promises; whose Faith was on the promise or
power of God in performing the same, and so its justified, Romans 4.14. to 21.
but the justifying faith of Christians was on Christ dying and raised up, verse
24.25. though Abraham in a typical mystery believed on Christ dead and raised
in his son sacrificed and slain in purpose verse 17. and raised in a figure,
Heb. 11.19. But as Christ was a mystery, so his death and resurrection was a
mystery also, that none but the Apostles could manifest it by the Spirit; which
being not given to any one living, the Faith which comes by hearing is no
higher then theirs under the Law, to justify and to save; yea we know by
experience, the best Preachers when they would raise men to believe, pitch them
on the promise, not on that power from on high, or promise of the Father, which
they that believed on Christ did receive, and by which the first Preachers of
the Gospel brought men to believe.

But take faith in the lowest acceptance (for justifying Faith was but of a
legal temper) which the Church of Rome beginning to fall from, the Apostle is
feign to set before them the faith of Abraham and David etc, (to whom the
mystery of Christ and of the Gospel being not yet manifested by the Spirit,
Romans 3.13. Romans 4.3, 6.
as to the Apostles and primitive Saints) that Faith of theirs was but suitable
to a legal estate (I say) take Faith in the lowest acceptance, as justifying
before God and men, as working by love, where is it? when there is no love
among you, neither to other Churches or Saints differing from you, nor to your
own Churces who differ in doctrine (as I said before) much less love to all
Saints, The Sword doubled. Col. 1.4. Tit. 9.3, 2.4.
to those scattered ones, who cannot come to any of your Church-wayes: as for
love to all men, it is a thing you look not after, though this be a higher
degree of love, then brotherly kindness, or love to the brethren, 1 These. 3.12.
2 Pet. 1.7. compared.

But alas, the brotherhood is broken, Zach. 11.6, 9, 14. verse. there is not
love to the brethren among you; not only love unfeigned, but love out of a
pure heart fervently is not to be found (for the love of the best is but cold,
God knows) not that fervent unfeigned, that is, without Hypocrisy, 1 Pet. 1.
22. (...).

Oh how far are believers from that love the Apostle mentions in fifteen
several signs thereof, 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7: Love suffers long, and is kind;
love envyeth not; again, love seeks not her own, thinks no evil, is not
easily provoked etc. wheres's this in our passions, pride, self-seeking, evil
speakings' envy, strife together?

Again, Love is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly; what unseemly,
silly, frothy fellows are many Church Members and Ministers also? who know not
how to behave themselves before their betters.

Again, Love bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things. Pray tell me, if you have parts and patience, what
difference between bearing all things, and enduring all things? Love alone can
resolve the question.

But where is Faith or Love? for both are one, Faith works by Love, and love
believes also, believes all things: therefore there being no love, there is
no believer among you.

By this shall all men know that you are my Disciples, if ye love one another;
John 13.35.
all the world sees now there is no love in the Churches; how can they then be
the Disciples of Christ, who are thus divided and dash one against another? not
only brother against brother, but Church against Church: Churches of Saints.
Good-Lord, says the world what shall we do? whither shall we go, when Churches
go this way and that way, one against another?

Ah poor Wales, many Pastors have destroyed thee, and distract thee! how many
have I heard crying out, Jer. 1^.10.
where to find their Religion; their old Priests and Common Prayer are gone,
and new Pastors and Preachers are come in, who cannot agree together: Oh that
God would send men of one mind to minister a word to Wales, were it but to
speak love, or to show the Lord Christ, that is love in practice, in pureness,
in power and peace, 1 John 4.7, 8. to the end.

Indeed brethren, there is much love among your Church Members in word and in
tongue, calling one another Brother and Sister; but where is Lots love, to call
Sodomites and Sinners, Genesis 19.7.
Ah my brethren do not so wickedly! but when ye shall remember your ways and
be ashamed, then you shall receive your Sisters, your Elder and Younger, for
God gives them unto you for Daughters, but not by your Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.61.
Sodons and Samaria are the Churches sisters, verse 46. Samaria is the false
Church State; therefore the Jews hated the Samaritans, who yet walked in
Ordinances, and waited for the Messiah as well as they, John 4.20 45. Sodom was
no Church at all, but Sinners like Heathens; yet the Church of the Jews is
called in her Ministers and Members, Princes of Sodom, and People of Gomorrha,
though abounding in Ordinances, Isa 1.10. to 16. verse.

Yea I shall prove (with God) hereafter, that all those sins of Sodom spoken
of, Ezekiel. 16.49. are in the present Churches, who are worse then Samaria, verse
51. Papists, Prelates, and Presbyters, have not committed half of your sins;
yea the Independent Churches have much more love then you.

But when the Baptized Churches shall bear their shame, and be confounded in
all that they have done, verse 54. though your Sister Sodom was not mentioned
by your mouth in the day of your pride, before your wickedness or false worship
was discovered, etc. verse 46, 57. yet when God remembers his covenant with
you, Rev. 10 7. Rev. 14.6. compare.
manifesting his grace to you, and his love to the world with you (for so the
everlasting Gospel will, when the mystery of God is finished and fully known)
then you shall remember your ways and receive Sodom and Samaria as Sisters,
yea they shall be unto you as Daughters, verse 61. For your love shall be so
dear unto them, Mat. 28.20. Observing all things whatsoever I command you. The
Baptism of the Spirit was the first Gospel-command of Christ, before
water-baptisme in a Gospel-way. Act. 1.4. Act. 2.38. For John's baptism
before, was but a legal Ordinance.
not only love one to another, but toward all men: thus 'twas in
Gospel-Churches, this will be again, and more also but not by thy covenant,
says God, not by your Church Covenant (never known in Gospel-Churches) by your
Covenant none are called Brethren save those of your own Church; not visible
Saints, much less sinners.

Truly this want of love to all men, shows you have no true love among your
selves, no love unfeigned, out of a pure heart, fervently one to another. You
speak much of the command of Christ for baptism, but let me ask you one
question, why do ye not obey all the commands of Christ in his Apostles yea
what he commanded himself? Paul and Peter laid this command on the Churches of
Christ, Greet ye one another with a holy Kiss, 2 Cor. 13.12. greet ye one
another with a kiss of love, 1 Pet. 5.14. The Papists have a Pax to represent
this, for all must kiss the Pax when they come to Mass, in remembrance of this
kiss of love: but ye (brethren) have not so much as a show of this; less love
among the Brethren then among Popish Churches: how can you dispense with his
Apostolic command of Christ? how can ye omit this kiss of love? will ye say
of this, as ye do of the gifts of the Spirit, that 'twas extraordinary only
for those Apostolic Churches? this indeed is the Popish distinction, which
Protestants have learnt from them: but we have proved before, that those
spiritual gifts were commanded to be followed, because for the edifying of the
Church, 1 Cor. 14.26.

If those gifts were extraordinary, are Gospel-graces so? for that faith you
cannot show, nor their love we cannot see, not a show of it: for where is the
kiss of love so often commanded? 'twas not a Courtly ceremony, nor a wanton kiss,
but a holy kiss the kiss of love 'twas; when spiritual Saints at the sight of
each other (especially coming together as one body to break bread, as the body
of Christ) saluted one another with a kissed, with a hearty kiss they hugged each
other, they embraced and kiss when they met, as if their souls would move forth
and meet together at the lips: for as they were all of one heart and one soul,
so their soul saluted at each others lips; Act. 4.32.
that was their fervent love.

But again, where are your feasts of love, that were once in the Churches of
Christ? love is a stranger to you, you know it not, nor the feasts of love what
they were, 1 Cor. 5.8. Jude 12. compare.
wherein they did not coenare coenam sed disciplinam as Tertullian tells you.

This shows the falling away is come upon you and that Apostasy foretold by
the Apostles is come upon you in perfection, having no gift of the Spirit, nor
yet the grace of Faith; which because it is a secret thing and hidden in the
heart, you cannot so easily be convinced of; but love is a visible glory that
may be seen of men yea faith also; for show me thy faith by thy works: and as
faith works by love, James 2.8.
so the labor of love cannot possible be hid but 'twill appear to all; but in
you it does not: therefore the first appearance of the Apostacy or falling
away of the Churches, was in leaving their first love; Rev. 2.4.
for as the seven Churches of Asia; were types of the Apostolic Churches
enclining to an Apostasy: so Ephesus, the first, is charged with this, Rev.
3.26.
that she was fallen from her first love, as Laodicea, the last (being the Type
of these last Churches) is commended for nothing, but condemned altogether, for
want of zeal or fervent love; though the Baptism of the Spirit and of fire,
was that especially wanting in that Church, and in all this day, who are not
hot, nor have any Spiritual gift at all; yea, nor any grace of the Gospel, as I
showed before.

For this cause, Christ foretold, that at his coming, Because iniquity should
abound, Matthew. 24.12.
the love of many would wax cold: Noting, first, that iniquity would abound in
the Churches, as to be carnal, covetous, unclean, proud, and peevish, without
faith or love. Secondly, men looking upon Churches in this condition, would
have but cold love unto them, whose love is so cold one to another. But
thirdly, here is the height of love, (the love of such who are saved from the
Apostasy) to love those in whom iniquity abounds, to love the Churches, though
iniquity abounds among them; 1 Cor. 13.7.
for love believes all things, and hopes all things; believes the best of all,
and hopes they will be better.

But yet there is one mark of love I have not mentioned, that is Christ's love,
not in word and in tongue, but in deed and in truth; pray what is that? It Is 1
John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us, and we ought to lay down our life for our brethren. Here Is first a
Mystery that men know not, how God did lay down his life: for the death of the
man Christ, all conceive; but how that man was nothing but God manifest in
flesh, and how God shed his blood, crucifying that flesh to himself, is the
Mystery of Christ and him crucified, not known to the Churches: but because God
laid down his life for us, we ought to lay down our life for the brethren;
Here Is love to the brotherhood: and mark it, this love is commanded, as well as
baptism; we ought so to love the brethren, as to dye for them.

Oh that my dear baptized brethren could once dye to their own life, their
living in the world according to Ordinances, Col. 2.20. Ordinances that shall
be proved (with God) not to be of a Gospel-appointment or power: will you not
die to these? if it be proved unto you, that having not the baptism of the
Spirit and of fire in your Church, you have no power to baptize with water; I
mean, in a Gospel way. Secondly, that there is no true Administrator sent of
God to baptize. Thirdly, that Water-baptisme was not by dipping, but by washing
the Disciples feet, called Believers going down to the waters up to the Ankles.

Oh that you could dye to your own life, to flesh and blood, to that reason and
understanding of yours, raised on the traditions of men!

Yea, that ye could dye to your own credit, content, comforts; truly 'twill not
be to your credit to disown and lay down your Principles and practice of
dipping so long continued.

I know you have much content and comfort in your performances and gathered
Churches, while many scattered Saints are mourning over your Forms, and their
own flesh, yea to the flesh of Christ being dead unto them; Ioh. 16, 7.
as the Disciples did at the departure of Christ, when that pure flesh of his
must suffer withering and weakness, and his flesh be taken from them, they had
sorrow of heart, while the world did rejoice; that is, Ioh. 16.20. Rev. 11.10.
compare. Heb. 9.1.
while the Church of the Jews (which was but a worldly Sanctuary) were
rejoicing in their Ordinances, in their Temple, and Church Fellowship.

So many scattered Saints, are weeping and full of sorrow, in their
bewildernessed state* in the want of the solemn Assembly, because it cannot be;
yea, Zeph. 3.18.
by the waters of Babylon they sit down and weep, while you are dipping in
them; and while others are merry with singing of Psalms, your brethrens Harps
are hanged upon the Willowes, Psalm. 137.1, 2.
(on fruitless trees) because they cannot sing one of the songs of of Zion,
they being in a strange land, not in the life of God alone, but living still in
Babylon* in flesh, and self, in which they feel themselves imbondaged. We your
brethren are not alive, but dead in Babylon, as dry bones there we lie, even
your brethren.

And will ye not yet dye for us? have ye not that love as to give your lives
for your brethren? Truly if you did live indeed, you would give your lives; but
because you are dead, you cannot do it.

The Church of Sardis had a name, that she lived, and was dead; you have the
name of a Church, of Church in order, of Gospel Ordinances; but are they not
all dead Forms, are not your fellowships divided also?

This shows you are dead as the dry bones in Babylon, because you are so
divided, as those two sticks; so your best Societies are, even Judah and
Israel, Independants and Baptized Churches: For (as I showed before) the
Gospel-Churches were but one Body, had but one Baptism, there was the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace; but now not only the staff beauty, but the
staff bands, that is the brother hood is broken, between Judah and Israel, Zach.
11.10, 14.

So now beloved, whether you will dye or no for your brethren, you are but the
dead Body, and yet you are the dead body of the Lord; Ezekiel. 37.12. Isa. 26.29.
compare.
that is your comfort and mine, that you shall rise at last: Only know at
present, that you are but the dead Body; so indeed the Church under the Law
was, under a Ministry of death, and so the Gospel-Churches were Dead also; 2
Cor. 3.7. Col. 3.3.
for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. More life was
manifest in the Gospel then under the Law, their life being not in Ordinances,
as the legal Church, but their life was in Christ, 1 Cor. 13.9, 12. verse.
and with Christ in God; but because they knew God but in part, saw but in a
Glass darkly because their life was hidden from them, therefore they were said
to be dead still; and so the Gospel-Churches were but the dead body then.

Yea, their Gospel Ordinances indeed were but to death, they held forth nothing
but the death of Christ, Romans 6.3. 1 Cor. 11.26.
as in baptism, they were baptized into his death; in breaking of bread, they
showed forth the Lords death: and as the breaking of bread was the communion of
his Body; so the Church then must needs be but the dead body of the Lord; but
now in Babylon we are not only the dead body, but dry bones.

And as death appeared in their worships, so in their walking in the world they
were dead to it, and the world dead and crucfied to them; Gal. 2.20. 2 Cor.
4.10.
for they always bare in their body the dying of the Lord Jesus (which made
them wait for the resurrection of the dead) that the life of Jesus might be
manifest in their mortal flesh; in which when the life of Jesus appears, then
the body is said to be raised: this is the resurrection of the dead Paul had
not attained to, the redemption of the Body which Paul waited for, Romans 8.23.
Phil. 3.11.

And not only for himself, but he waited when all the Saints should rise with
him in the Body; for then the Body of the Lord, the dead Body of Christ, is
raised out of Babylon.

Now Brethren, we all in these days are not only his dead Body as the legal
and Gospel-Churches were, but we are the dead Body in Babylon; yea we are dry
bones, very dry; not only dead, but long dead, for many hundred of years the
Churches have been so, ever since the Apostacy; which Apostacy is now
manifestly revealed in the Churches: I say, we are dry bones, not only the
dead body, as Gospel-Churches were, who had the flesh of Christ on them, and
the Spirit of Christ in them; I mean the manifestation of the Spirit in
manifold Gifts; for that was the Spirit which Jesus gave when he was glorified,
which we have not, and therefore are dry Bones.

Again, we have no flesh, not the flesh of Christ on us, I mean his crucified
flesh (for that the Gospel-Churches had, and glorified in it) but the Cross is
a thing now we cannot abide to bear; as if we had tasted the delicacies of the
Whore, Romans 5.3. Gal. 6.14.
we with our Churches must bear rule in Commonwealths and Kingdoms, yea though
Christ's Kingdom was not of this world, John 18.3, 6.
yet the best of us fancy a reign of Christ on earth for a thousand years, and
the Saints to reign with him in an earthly manner and outward observation,
with rest and peace, and power, Luke 17.20, 21.
and plenty; this was not the flesh of Christ.

Thirdly, I showed we have not the flesh of Christ in us, not the Faith of the
Son of God, nor that love in the Spirit, nor so much as Scripture for any of
our Gospel Ordinances, as I have and shall prove (with God) another time.

Fourthly, we are dry Bones, very dry indeed, if our Faith be dead, and no
Gospel-Faith nor yet any knowledge, so much as of the Ordinances we live in:
for which of the Churches conceive all this while, that Baptism and Breaking of
bread did hold forth nothing else (even to Gospel-Saints) but the dead body of
the Lord, which they also were indeed?

But we (as I said) are dry bones, further from life then they, because we
think we are alive, when we are not only dead, but dry bones, yea very dry
indeed, that we know not our life at all, 1 Pet. 1.3. Ezekiel. 37.11. compare.
Ezekiel. 37.3. Yea we are so dead and dry, we have neither Faith nor Love, nor
yet any lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; the
fruit of whose resurrection we look not for, till many hundred years hence at
the last day, when we are dead and gone, and turned to dust, or dry bones; Esa.
26.29.
whereas we consider not we are dry bones already, and dwell in the dust this
day,

I do not condemn you (brethren) for this, that your hope is not lively, that
you look not for your resurrection from Babylon, for you are but dry bones, the
whole house of Israel was so, and they say, our bones are dried, our hope is
lost, and we are cut off for our parts, Ezekiel. 37.11. that is, it may be other
generations may see the glory talked to be in the last times, but we are cut
off for our parts, our children may possess it, but for our parts we have no
hopes to enjoy it, or in this life to be raised out of our graves.

But Oh my people (says God,) I will open your graves, and cause you to come
out of your graves, and bring you to the land of Israel, v. 12.

Pray (brethren) consider, God will not only open your graves, that you may
know you are dead and dry bones, but he will cause you (whether you will or no)
to come out of your graves (of forms and flesh,) and bring you to the land of
Israel, to live in the Spirit, to see your life in the Lord alone, that your
life may be no more hid with Christ in God, but that Christ who is your life
shall appear in you, and your life may appear to be in God.

The greatest work that God has to do with you this day, is to make you see
you are dead; that is the end why he does dash and divide you, disquiet and
destroy all your comforts; for I know you are shaking already, and it is a mercy
to you, that God will disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon, Jer. 50.34.
that you shall have no rest, till you return to his land, even to the Lord
that lives within you, and loves you as his own Son; though the Body be dead,
for then (when dead) the beloved of your Father was in perfect union with him,
as well as when he was living in the flesh, and doing wonders in the Spirit.

Oh brethren, see your selves at last the dead body of the Lord, for then you
shall arise and live; Thy dead men shall live together, with my dead body they
shall arise; awake, and sing, ye that dwell in the dust, (that is dry bones)
Isai 26.19. This cannot be meant of the last resurrection when all shall rise;
for here some shall not rise, v. 14. but you brethren shall rise; when? as soon
as you are become the dead body of the Lord, for so the words are read, Thy
dead men shall live, my dead body they shall arise; that is, when we see our
selves the dead body of the Lord, we rise and live immediately in the midst of
death, and sing in the dust; yea, though dry bones, and in the lowest estate of
flesh, we can comfortably wait for the Spirit, and for the coming of the Lord
in us, that by the same Spirit which raised his dead body, we the dead body of
the Lord may be raised up together with him.

Truly brethren, the living God knows, that all I have written, or shall, is
not intended by me to trouble your walkings, but to give our rest in the Lord
alone at last; not merely to throw down your Churches, or for your fall, but to
raise you up, that we all may live together with Christ in God. Farewell.

Yours, William Erbery.

FINIS.
A Call To the Churches: OR, A Packet of Letters to the Pastors of WALES.
For Mr. William Erbery.
THe Milk and Honey (ever remembered friend) which formerly I sucked in your
Ministration, makes me apt to conclude that your pit is not dried up, nor your
root withered, but that the intern Spirit of the inward heaven does reign in
you in the night. It Is many years since I looked on you as an Image; I never
heard (nor had a line) from you (as some hereabout had.) It may be you thought
me less teachable, and more incapable of understanding then some others; indeed
I am so. I knew not where to direct a line to find you by reason of your
private life, which to some is safe and serene, and to others tempestuous and
dangerous.

The Hermit is not very useful to man or beast (nor the Christ to him)
because Talents will rust and rot the living creature, unless they be thrown
out of your private chest and ship. The Prophets, Apostles etc. spoke to God
(the Eternity) listened to him; and spoke from him, they writ, they preached,
they charged their Embassage, as the heavenly true Spirit spoke to them; and
that creature was ever the basest, that did trade least between the mother (the
heavenly nature and angelical world) and the sinful children of men (now out
of Paradise, wandering in the heart of this shadowy world.) The more you be in
the heavenly action (which is public also to millions every day in the year)
the more like the God of all beings, and inhabitant of eternity. I do both long
and profess to become a little child again, willing to learn my A.B.C. anew,
if my once-dear Schoolmaster Erbery can teach it me (for I must not take
printed Pictures instead of real Letters.) I am daily longing to withdraw into
the inner world (the more spiritual Chamber) to converse with the inhabitants,
that know how God is the Father of spirits, lights, loves, and mercies, in his
begotten Word and generated Spirit. I desire you (according to your attainment)
to help me (I mean to scribble a few lines to me) in answering these things.
How is God above all, through all, and in all his people? How all things are of
him, through and to him? How do we live, move, and have our being in him? what
is that heresy of perdition the holy One (in Peter) mentions? and chiefly
what, where, when, and how God is?

I am not ashamed to enquire, or wait of a mere post near the gate of the
wisdom of God about these matters; neither do I disown you (as some strange
notionist, or sceptick gnostick) in what you in the light of the Father, can or
will hold forth, for satisfaction by the Spirit; for since I knew you, or
tasted the wine in you, I ever lodged respectful thoughts of you. I fear
neither truth nor its enemies; I would try all things (all spirits, bodies, and
beings in the light, liberty, rest and power of the Spirit of Jesus:) and
because a son of man is but a vanity, a very, glance, a branch, a shadow, and
offspring of the eternal root; therefore one branch may cosap with the other,
and the little little twig (near the root) does communicate in juce with the
highest-flown branch of the same tree. I doubt not but the whispering of the
melodious love from any (though from poor me) might refresh you under the sun
in this vain vaporary life: This is but a word in haste and heart, to invite
(if it seem good) a line from you, and then the few lines (that concern you in
my inward book) I may better transcribe. My true love (with my wifes) to your
self and your rib; begging we may rightly take in, and not mistake the first
and second man, and the third form that is at hand. I only beg of you a sound
about your grounds in Scripture-nature, and in the internal eternal Spirit
concerning Men, Saints, Officers, Ordinances, Churches, and Societies of men.
No more then, but that I am

Wrexham 1652. 29 of 4 Month. Your fellow-branch at the feet of the God of all
flesh, and Father of all Spirits. Mor. Lloyd.
I have a word with you, when first you be pleased to let me hear from you.



For Mr. Morgan Floyd.
Sir,
YOurs of the twenty ninth of the fourth month, I received at Roth near Cardiff
this 12 of August; and I return an Answer in silence, seeing we are both in the
Eternal Spirit, with the spirits of just men made perfect, where there is no
need of speech to communicate our thoughts or seize each to other; being
taken up into him who is our All, and all in All.

There the Mystery of the Resurrection begins, and the Apostle goes on in that
height from 1 Cor. 15.28. to the end; that this is the Resurrection, not that
last and general of the world, but the first Resurrection; the rising of the
Saints, or of the dead in Christ, who shall rise first: I say that this is the
Resurrection only of the just, and not of the unjust nor of all; any man (even
without the Spirit of Revelation) may judge by reason, and reading of that
Chapter; where the rising of the spiritual body t^ incorruption, immortality,
power, and glory, is the glorious appearing of the second Man, the quickening
Spirit, the Lord from Heaven (in us) to the heavenly Image; which is the third
estate of the Saints now approaching, and the latter part of your Letter points
at.

This I call the third dispensation, or last discovery of God unto and in men,
differing from Law and Gospel Order; yet comprehending both, and above both,
yea above all: for here all men and things are nothing, but God is all and
alone, yea God is All in all.

This third dispensation, as all the Prophets and Apostles did write and wait
for; so in this I wait in silence with God (though I speak sometimes to men)
for a full discovery of him in me, and to all the Saints with me; for when the
Lord my God shall come or appear, all the Saints shall come with thee, Zach.
14.5.

The Earthquake there spoken of is at hand, it is the same mentioned in
Babylons final fall, Rev. 16.18, 19. for a threefold fall of Babylon is
written, Rev. 14.8. Rev. 18.2. and v. 21. and that the third or last fall of
Babylon, will be in the fall of this form of Church Fellowship (so called) you
may see in your spirit, and in some printed scriblings of mine: therefore for
Order, Ordinances, Officers, Churches, Societies of men, all are in Babylon, in
confusion of Tongues; that is out of order, etc. though many of the Saints
conceive they are come to Sion already.

Babylon is a Mystery (as you shall see with God very shortly) Babylon or the
Beast is the mystery of man, Rev. 13.18. Rev. 1, 8, etc.
that is the woman also, or the Whore, the man of sin: and Christ is the mystery
of God, God manifest in the flesh, in his flesh and in ours; (for we and he are
perfect in one with the Father) and as the Beast is the Wisdom of man, and the
Power of man in the Church, that is the seven Heads and ten Horns, etc. so
Christ is the Wisdom of God, and Power of God, which was in the Church, and is
(though not known) and is to come; for that is his name, God with us, Rev. 1.4,
8, 9, 10, 13 verses.
Christ in us the hope of glory which is to come; when the mystery of God shall
be finished or fully known to men at the sounding of the seventh Trump, which
is the last Trump, the Trump of God, when the great Trump shall be blown etc.
which is the last discovery of God.

When this great Trump is blown, those who were ready to perish in the land of
Assyria, and the outcast in the land of Egypt, shall come and worship the
Lord in the holy Mount at Jerusalem, Isa. 27.13. That Is the new Jerusalem which
shall come down from God out of Heaven after Babylons fall, and freedom of all
the Saints from that double bondage now upon their spirits; not only of
gathered Churches, but of scattered Saints it is spoken, of the one as ready to
perish, and the other as outcasts, in Assyria and Egypt too (as I said) that is
the twofold captivity we are all carried away in, till the great Trumpet be
blown.

Then the dead bones shall rise out of Babylon, Ezekiel. 37.12.
and God will open the graves of his people, who shall all come forth out of
their forms and flesh, when the glory of the Lord shall cover them, V. 19.
and they live in the Eternal Spirit together: then the two sticks also, the
divided societies of Saints shall become one, etc. for that is the third
dispensation, called the dispensation of the fullness of time, when all things
both in heaven and earth shall be gathered up into one, Ephesians. 1.10, 11.
all the Saints of highest appearances, and of lowest performances, both those
of Legal tempers and Gospel seize, shall be gathered up into one, into
that glory, into God himself.

This Resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3.11, 12, 13.14. 2 Pet. 3.13.
the Apostle had not attained to, though pressing toward it: and Peter was
waiting for it in the new Heaven and new earth; for the old heaven and old
earth (both Legal and Gospel Dispensation) vanish away in God; Romans 21.1
yea, there is no more Sea (says John) no more of that dividing and destroying
Principle in man; for that is the Sea, which has made the Saints not only to
dash one against another, but every one to be as an Isle by himself, and so
indeed it must be in Babylons fall, not a man to be found, Isai. 13.12. but
every man flies to his own Land, v. 14. (to live solitary and alone in his own
light, Mich. 4.5.10. compared.
that light which shines in every man, and every man in his God) but every one
that is found shall be thrust through, and every one that is joined with them;
(that is not in the Hebrew) but every one that is joined [in Babylon] shall fall
by the sword, v. 15.

There Is no building of Temples in Babylon, nor joining there in
Church Fellowship; for that will fall, and we with it, till we retire alone
into our selves, or the Spirit rather in us; and this we must be, Zach. 12.12.
every man apart by himself; every Famlily apart, and their wives apart; man
and his wife, though nearest and dearest flesh, Jer. 31.9. So the Margent there.
must be separated, when the Spirit of Grace and Supplication (or favors)
begins to appear to take us up into glory.

Then the multitude of the Isles shall rejoice, when the Lord comes to Reign,
Psalm. 97.1. the Reign of God and of Christ, or the Saints with him, being the
same with their Resurrection, the first Resurrection, Isai. 60.1. Ezekiel. 37.25,
26. Zach. 14.5* 9. For as by the great Trumpet they are gathered one by one,
Isai. 27.12. so this shows that all the Saints shall be found as so many
Isles, every one alone by himself, made so by the Sea; but the Sea shall be no
more, when the new Heaven and the new Earth comes; Rev. 21.
then all the people of God shall become one Land, one Continent, wherein the
Lord alone shall live; Ezekiel. 37.21.
this is the Land so much spoken of by the Prophets, the Land of the living,
the land of Israel, who are promised to be brought to their own Land (being now
in a strange Land, in Babylon) but he that scattered Israel, will gather him;
Jer. 31.10.
and the Saints who are now scattered in and by their gathered Churches, yea
all the scattered Saints with them shall be gathered up into God, who indeed is
he who scatters as well as gathers; we do nothing, we can do nothing, but in
him who is All in all.

In this mystery of the Resurrection, all your Questions in the Letter will be
answered, your doubts satisfied, your darkness cleared, your Captivity ended;
for it is the glorious liberty of the children of God, the manifestation of the
sons of God, Isai. 52.8.
the appearing of the great God in us, when we shall be like him, see him as he
is, know him as we are known, see him eye to eye; Isai. 61.9, 10.
as he sees us, we shall see him, see his Face, and his Name on our foreheads;
that is, we shall not only see God, Rev. 21.3. Rev. 22.4.18, 19. Romans 8.
, but men shall see God in us; for all that see us, shall acknowledge, that we
are the seed which the Lord has blessed: the blessed seed is Christ the Son of
God, so all the Saints shall be in the glory of the Father, when the Son
shall be subject, 1 Cor. 15.44.
and God All in all.

This is the Adoption and Redemption of the body, the Resurrection of the body
when the body, Romans 8.23.
now natural or soully (as the Greek reads it) shall be raised spiritual, 2
Cor. 15.45.
the Eternal Spirit appearing to be all in all.

This will be in every one of us in particular (for we must be gathered one by
one) and this will be in all the Saints in general, who are the body, the dead
in Babylon, the dead body of Christ there; But thy dead men shall live
together, with my body they shall arise, etc. Isa. 26.19. together with is not
in the Hebrew; which reads, Thy dead men shall live, my dead body they shall
arise etc. that is, when the Lord God, in us all, shall sl^y us all; and all
flesh to himself, our gifts, our graces, and all shall be slain to God, and by
him. His sword, his spirit, the fire shall do it; we must all dye, come down
to the dust, lie there, as the dry bones (not so much as flesh or skin upon us
much less strength, spirit and life) yet we shall live, though now dead, yea
the dead shall live; that is, as none see God but the blind, none hear him but
the deaf (deaf to man and to self) so the dead alone can live, Isa. 29.18.
and they live in death, who find themselves the dead body of the Lord: my
dead body they shall arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, etc. in
the lowest estate of flesh, when the first man Adam is turned to dust, when we
are nothing, we are all in God, and God is all in all, and in this we may sing
together: For the third man bears the Image of the heavenly, which is the
second dispensation typified in the third days Resurrection of Christ, as I
shall tell you another time, with God.

I Will say no more: it is love, it is the Lord that makes the dumb to sing, and
the tongue of the Stammerer to speak plainly, or elegantly, as the margin
reads it, Isa. 32.4.

Your lines were so to me full of divine elegance, of love and delight: Ephesians.
3.17.18.19.
truly it is my love to you likewise, and the Lord in me, has made me in much
haste to stammer this much unto you; I am now silent, yea dumb; the Lord God,
who rejoices over you with singing, will sing and speak himself with delight
in you: There I leave you and all the Saints with you, your beloved wife, whose
I am as I am,

Yours, William Erbery.

For Mr. Henry Walter.
Dear Brother.
I Am bold thus to salute you; John 14.20. Gal. 4.26. Joh. 17.21, 22. Romans
8.18. Rev. 21.2. Col. 3.1, 2.
because we are both in the Father, and in Jerusalem that is above, which is
free, and the mother of us all, though all the Saints see not, nor the glory in
which they are already; but when the glory shall be revealed in them, they
shall then see the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven, and him
alone dwelling in them; that is the state of all the Saints that ever were or
shall be, their being was and is in God, and there they were from the beginning
and before the worlds: 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev. 10.7. Rev. 21.3.
and this we wait for to appear in us all in these last times, when the mystery
of God shall be finished and fully known, when that life and glory which we
have with Christ in God (though now hid from us) shall be revealed in us and
upon us also; so that not only we shall see God in us, but men shall see and
say, that surely God is in you of a truth, as my letter to Mr. Cradock will
tell you at large: this is the new Jerusalem; and then we see that holy City
coming down from God out of Heaven; when that which was hid with God as 'twere
in Heaven, shall be manifested to us and in us on earth; and our life (as I
said) which was hid with Christ in God, shall so visibly or clearly appear in
us, and to men, that it shall be seen a tree of life in the midst of us, not
only yiedling fruit every month to our selves to strengthen us; but holding
forth leaves, such an outward appearance of glory in us to men, that it shall
heal and satisfy them, Rev. 22.2. this is that pure river of life, clear as
crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and out of the Lamb, that is in
us, when all that glory of God in Christ shall be so clearly manifest on us,
that this river of life which is in us, shall run forth and stream abundantly
among the sons of men, who are as the sea spoken of, Ezekiel. 47.8. all whose Fish
shall be healed by the living waters coming to it, verse 9, 10. as the fruit of
the tree of life before, and here mentioned, verse 12. is for meat, and the
leaves thereof for medicine, for healing or bruises, as the margin reads, and
Rev. 22.2. for the healing of the Nations.

It Is not the Nations only, or National-Churches, but the gathered Churches and
scattered Saints also want this healing; such breaches and bruises are upon
Societies and Spirits, that God alone can heal us all, and will, in that day
wherein he shall reveal himself with glory in us, Isa. 30.26.

When that day comes, called the day of God, when God shall come, that is,
appear in us all, then all the Saints shall come with him, yea with thee, as
Zach. 14.5. How can this be, that all the Saints shall come with thee? surely
thus, when God shall come or appear in thee, all the Saints shall come or
appear with thee in God.

Therefore as Jerusalem of old was a City in unity, Psa. 132.3. Ephesians. 4.4. Act.
4.32.
or compact in it self, and as the Apostolic Churches or spiritual Jerusalem
had the unity of the Spirit, and bond of peace, being one body, and so having
all one heart and one soul; so in the new Jerusalem, much more unity, peace,
and love, will appear in all the Saints one to another, and toward all men.

Therefore though the City had twelve Gates, yet but one street; that is
strange, Rev. 21.21. yea the Gates of the City were never shut day nor night,
but always open to receive all; that is stranger yet, verse. 25. yet so it is,
Isa. 60.11. compared with verse 5. to 10. and as but one street in that City,
Rev. 22.2. so but one Tree on either side of the River, verse 2. that is as
strange, how on both sides the River should grow but one Tree. True Ezekiel
being under the legal dispensation saw many trees; but John in the second
dispensation, seeing the third approaching, saw but one Tree on each side the
River; one River in the street, and but one street in the City; so all the
Saints, though many in forms and flesh, shall be seen in Spirit, one in the
Lord, yea one Spirit with the Lord himself.

Oh, how many streets are in the great City Babylon? how many streets in our
Cities below? how many Societies? how many Churches divided in Spirit and in
Form also, one from another, and in themselves? Surely the Saints are in
Babylon, when their Societies and gathered Churches are become not only the
scattered bones, dead; but as the two sticks, Ezekiel. 37.2. verse 13.
divided and dry too; for it is but sticks, not living branches. I call the
Churches so, not the Saints therein: for the life of grace is in them, though
truly it be much hid from others, and hid to themselves this day; yea dead in
many, and in most buried with earth, and earthly mindedness. I Will say no more.

My dear Brother, let us wait together for the first Resurrection, if by any
means we may attain unto it, Rev. 20.6.
that the dead in Christ may rise first, that the dead and divided Saints may
rise out of Babylon, Ezekiel. 37.12, 23.
that God may bring us out of our Graves of forms and flesh, being defiled in
both. I do not by this deny the general Resurrection that shall be, but desire
you, and all the Saints with you, to look for this, Col. 3.1.
that is next and nearest to you, to rise not only from sin as those under the
second dispensation were risen; but to rise from self, as we shall in the
third, when God shall be all in all, that we may all hear him in us speaking
with power, Arise, shake thy self from the dust, Isa. 52.2.
arise and sit down, O Jerusalem! loose thy self from the bands of thy neck, O
captive Daughter of Sion. Farewell.

Your William Erbery.

For Mr. Ambrose Moston.
Beloved Sir,
I Wrote unto you once before I received yours last; but mine miscarried, and
it is no matter; for the whole contents thereof concerned outward things, as
Church Order, Ordinances, and Officers; which I proved then not to be of the
primitive institution, with power from on high, and appearance of the Spirits
presence in gifts, Luke 24.49. Act. 1.4, 5. Act. 21.4, 33.
which was the ordinary constitution of a Gospel Church. First in order, that
is, the manifestation of the Spirit in manifold gifts, called the Baptism of
the Spirit, this being the pouring forth of all the gifts of the Spirit; 1 Cor.
12.7, 12. 1 Cor. 14.1, 12.
for some the Church under the Law had, as gifts of prophesying, signs,
miracles, raising the dead, etc. which the present professing Gospel-Churches
are far below, even that legal dispensation.

Secondly, The Officers of Christ, Act. 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. James
5.14. Act. 20.23.
were as for number five, Ephesians. 4.11. so the lowest Elder, Pastor, and Teacher
was ordained with a gift of the Spirit given by the laying on of hands; by
which, as they were enabled for their ministerial work; so were they to abide,
and to sit down with their particular flocks; for the Apostles only were to go
forth to the world; Col. 1.23, 25.
as the Evangelists were appointed to ordain Eiders in every City, Tit. 1.5.
Act. 13.1, 2, 3.
and the Prophets to minister unto the Lord in the Churches, laying on their
hand on such Apostles who were successively sent abroad out of those Churches
to preach the Gospel, with the holy Spirit sent down from heaven, 1 Pet. 1.12.
Ephesians. 3.4, 5. Col. 1.27, 28, 29.
without which the Mystery of Christ could not be manifest to men. This was the
full ministry of Christ in those five, which the world could not want, nor the
Church be without; the want of which, leaves both in Babylon or confusion, as
it has been all along the Apostacy, and is now more visible this day to many
scattered Saints.

Thirdly, The Ordinances which are in the gathered Churches, are far from the
primitive institution in matter and form: For first, a Psalm, a Doctrine, a
Tongue, Interpretation, Revelation, were ordinary, 1 Cor. 14.26.
because for edifying, and therefore Ordinances of the Church of Christ; these
are not now at all; go, the edifice is fallen into confusion, that is Babel.
Secondly, the Ordinances, which are as the Childish tradition of Childrens
Baptism; the breaking of bread, which should be the Communion of Christ's body,
cannot be administered; because the body is not only dead, Ezekiel 37.3, 16.
as the dry bones of Babylon, but divided, as the two sticks there; and how
then can there be a communion, when there is no union of the body? for as there
was before in the Gospel-state, but one Spirit, one baptism; so but one body;
all believers and Gospel-Saints walked in one Church Way, one way of worship,
doctrine and discipline, etc. and though there was particular divisions between
brother and brother, yet not between Church and Church; for the body was but
one, as I said. Now the Saints by calling have diverse baptismes, and are
divided bodies: how can there be then breaking of bread, or communion of the
body? it is but the bread of Mourners, Hosea 9.4. read it in the Spirit.

I will not speak of our Common Prayers, and customary carnal singing of
Psalms; for though Prayers were publicly performed in the Jewish Church,
that Church being national, Act. 2.42.
yet in the Gospel-Churches (being a company of Saints) Prayers were proper
only in the Church (as fellowship and breaking of bread was only there) not
with the world or multitude; therefore Christ and his Apostles did never pray
with their preaching. Act. 3.1, 12. Act. 4.24. compared.

These were the things I then enlarged to you, in the Letter that was lost; and
truly I intended not now to speak a word of this, when I first put pen to
paper; there is a providence, and the hand of God in it, which led mine thus
far, that you might lay it to heart.

Indeed (Sir) these are but outward things; there are more inward spiritual,
and eternal truths, I purposed to present to your serious thoughts, that is,
the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven: what the Lord has taught
me therein, I cannot now express, only to tell you, that I teach nothing now to
man, but the new Jerusalem, in which when the Saints shall be gathered, as they
shall all be one (for there is but one street in that City) so there being no
Temple there, but the Lord God and the Lamb, the divided forms of
Church-worship (being fallen with Babylon) shall appear no more; but God will
be seen to dwell in his people, with that light and love, that many Nations
shall be joined to the Lord (in them, it is not said joined to them now) for God
shall be all in all.

This I call the third Dispensation, differing from Law and Gospel Order, yet
comprehending both and above both; for Jerusalem is above; and that was above
to the highest Apostle, will come down and appear to the least and lowest of
Gods people, Gal. 4.26.
for it is the mother of us all; yea the child shall dye a hundred years old,
Isa. 65.20. Ephesians. 4.13.
for the least child of God shall come to a perfect man, to the fullness of the
stature of Christ; that is, shall see himself filled with all the fullness of
God, as the most perfect man on earth, Ephesians. 4.13.

This third dispensation, or third discovery of God, all the Prophets did write
of, Romans 8.18, 23.
and all the Apostles waited for the glory to be revealed in us, the glorious
liberty of the sons of God, says Paul; 1 John 3.2.
the appearing of God (even the glorious appearing of the great God in us) when
we shall be like him, and see him as he is, says John; the new heaven and the
new earth, says Peter; 2 Pet. 3.13.
all this we wait for, say they: and John saw it coming down, even the new
Jerusalem, after Babylons fall.

The fall of Babylon will be by confusion: when this comes to the Churches, and
in the Spirits of the Saints, they shall then begin to see, what before they
were blind unto; yea the blind alone shall see, for they that see shall be made
blind, John 3.39. Isa. 29.18.

But this is the comfort to me and many with me, that as the ears of the deaf
shall hear the words of the book; so the eyes of the blind shall see out of
obscurity, and out of darkness, Isa. 29.18, 19.

This Scripture I spoke of at Brecknock, the last first day. The Book, I
showed, was God dwelling in men, Immanuel, God with us, that is Christ, God in
us; God manifest in our flesh, as in his, is Christ in us the hope of glory;
for all the Saints shall be taken up into the same glory with himself, and the
Nations by this called, and joined to the Lord.

This Book is sealed to the learned and unlearned Preachers, Isa. 29.11. yea to
the Prophets and Seers, and most seeing men; yea sealed with seven seals;
that is perfectly sealed, and from all Churches; for it relates to the seven
Churches enclining to the Apostacy which followed.

Secondly, It Is but a sma book, a very little one; for John could swallow it at
a bit, Rev. 10. and 'twas bitter in his Belly; it is so to flesh, for it suffers
by it, as Christ's did; but the little Book is no more then God manifest in
flesh, in his flesh, and in ours,

Thirdly, It shall be open, and that surely; for the ministry of God shall be
finished, fully known; and the Angel swears by God, that time shall be no
more; for all shall be taken up into eternity, into God himself, and God shall
be all in all.

I shall repeat no more; only the remembrance of the Lord, and his love to me,
in your dear deceased Wife, who lives with me and in me; for there is the Lord
in whom she is, and in whom we both are, though we know not; but we shall, when
the book shall be opened. My dearest salutes to all the Saints with you.
Farewell.

Brecknock the 23 of Aug. 1652. Your William Erbery.

For Mr. Vavasor Powel.
Dear Sir,
I Am owing to you in much love, and in a Letter you long since sent unto me,
but now I shall repay you an answer; which I had not so fit an opportunity to
return, till by the present bearer. I do not remember the contents of that;
only I conceive, 'twas something concerning Christ, and it is that alone I
shall in this confer with you; for your Church Fellowship is at an end, with
God; though some men may see somewhat in it, yet it is but a dead carcass they
look upon, the form of a man; but the Spirit, life, and power form on high
appears not at all to me, nor to many in it; as I have hinted in a Letter to
Mr. Moston.

This is not to direct you in preaching, but to desire your second thoughts in
the things you spoke of, the personal reign of Christ; which with confidence
you declare to be in that fleshly presence of his, with which he ascended, and
shall so descend to reign a thousand years on earth, and the Saints with him.

This has some show in the Letter of Scripture; but if the Spirit hid in your
flesh, and mine, shall be suffered to come forth, and truly to interpret,
without the Tradition and Teaching of men, God may show you another sense, then
what is commonly revealed by Christians and Churches.

The first ground whereon your foundation, or fundamental doctrine stands is,
Act. 1.11. Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? this same
Jesus which is taken up from you into Heaven, shall come so in like manner, as
ye have seen him go into Heaven.

To this, know, that the Disciples of Christ were too much taken with his
fleshly presence, while he was living with them in the days of his flesh; John
16.7. Joh. 20.13, 20.
and his departure from them, or dying of flesh, filled their hearts with
sorrow; as after he was raised, those who were weeping at his grave, John 20.17.
rejoiced to see him in the flesh again, and so to touch him; but that must not
be, says he, till I am ascended; and this touch could not be, but by the
Spirit, that in them was to take and touch the Spirit in him.

And what was he, even Jesus? but God manifest in flesh; for 'twas God who rose
and ascended up on high, Joh. 5.19, 30. Joh. 8.27, 28. Joh. 14.9, 10. compare.
Psalm. 68.1, 18.
that is God in flesh: and what was his coming? but when that Spirit and power
of God in his flesh, should appear in theirs, the same Jesus came again; for as
the shedding forth of all the Gifts of the Spirit on the Disciples, was the
same: so Christ tells Paul persecuting the Saints (or the Spirit rather in
them) I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, Act. 9.5.

Jesus was therefore come again; for his coming that he promised, 'twas nothing
but the promise of the Father which they heard of him, and in him; for as the
Father was all in all in his flesh, who dwelt and did all his works, spoke his
words: so when God even the Father should appear thus with power in their
flesh, as in his, then he came indeed, John 14. 18, 19, 20.

He that believes on me (says he) the works that I do, shall he do also, and
greater works then these shall he do; because I go to the Father. His going to
the Father was his disappearance in flesh; for when he no longer appeared to
them in flesh then he was said to depart; therefore his coming again was in the
Spirit: when he, who was with them, should be in them, then Christ was the
Spirit the quickening Spirit: because I live* ye shall live also, John 14.17,
19. thus Christ was the Comforter, verse 16. called another Comforter, because
he came in another presence then that of flesh; he came, and yet was he the
same Comforter; for I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you, verse
18. yet a little while, and the world sees me no more, but ye see me, etc. the
world, that is carnal Christians, could see no more of Christ, when his fleshly
presence was gone; but ye see me, ye who are spiritual, or when spiritual: ye
see me; how? sure in the Spirit, in the Spirit of life, v. 19. and in the
Spirit of light or knowledge, v. 20. At that day ye shall know that I am in the
Father, and you in me, and I in you. No more Christ in the flesh, but in the
Father, and Christ no more to be known after the flesh, but he in us, and we in
him.

This spiritual understanding of Christ, the disciples while carnal (yea while
Christ was in the flesh) were ignorant of; therefore he calls them in a common
name, Ye men of Galilee, Acts 1.11. and their gaping up to heaven after his
fleshly presence, is reproved there also. The spiritual knowledge of him is
then taught: This same Jesus which is taken from you (in the flesh) shall so
come unto you (in the spirit:) and ye shall see him, (as was said before, Joh.
14.19.) that is, after a little while they should see him, Joh. 16.17.) This
little while cannot be at the end of the world, after so many hundreds of years
to be seen in a fleshly appearence; but not many days hence, that is a little
while, Acts 1.5.

Yea, but how was this in the like manner? for they saw him go up in the flesh;
true, but they saw not the fullness of the Spirit dwelling in that flesh after
'twas raised; but when he should ascend and give gifts unto men, then God who
received gifts in the man (as the Hebrew reads Psalm. 68.18.) appearing in the
Saints and in their flesh, with that Spirit and power that was in Christ, is
said to come: and thus in the same sense, or in the like manner, Jesus came, as
they saw him go up to heaven.

Indeed he was taken up in the Cloud; but the Cloud was to take him out of
their sight, Act. 1.9. to take his fleshly presence out of their sight: this
they would fain see still, but should not, verse 10. and he will come again in
a Cloud; that is in our flesh, when most confused and dark (for so the
Disciples were, before the Spirit came at first.) The comfort is at his second
coming; when in our flesh we are most cloudy, dark confused Christ will come
(or appear in us) with more majesty, power, and glory, in the glory of the
Father in us.

Yea the Apostles themselves dreamed of a personal reign of Christ, or
restoring the Kingdom to Israel, Act. 1.6. But it is not for you to know the
times and seasons, which the Father has put in his own power; but ye shall
receive power after that the holy Spirit is come upon you, verse 7. Mark, I
pray you, how the times and seasons (of the Kingdom of Christ, and of Israel
with him) was in the Fathers power; this they were not to know, nor could they,
while carnal; but when the power of the holy Spirit came upon them, they should
then know the Kingdom restored to Israel, when they had received power from on
high; for the Kingdom of God is within us.

This, my dear Brother, shall be made know to you and me, that the Kingdom of
God comes not by outward observation; but seeing the Spirit shall again be
poured forth from on high, Isa. 32.15. let us wait for this together, though
our Palaces be forsaken, verse 14. though our Church-fellowships and flesh
fall; for so 'twill be, before the Spirit come, verse 9. to 13. for Christ's
pure flesh was crucified through weakness, before he was raised in power, or
received the Spirits fullness.

Then shall we know the reign of Christ and of the Saints with him, for a
thousand years, Rev. 20.4, 6. but as yet, what fleshly thoughts and
interpretations have passed over these words, by the Millenaries of old, and by
many gracious Saints of late? what, is all the book of the Revelation a
Mystery? and must these one thousand years only be literally understood, just
for ten hundred of years? and will not the Saints be more spiritual, but still
to think of a fleshly reign, a reign of Christ after the flesh, and of Saints
after the flesh? whereas, no man nor Christ is to be known so any more.

And may not the one thousand years be but one day, and that one day, the day
of God? (when God shall appear) for that day is called one day, Zach. 14.7.
known to the Lord, to the Lord alone in us.

Dear Sir, I shall leave but two things, and it may be a third, to your serious
considerations. First, you know the appearances of God, from the beginning,
have been more and more spiritual, and will be so to the end; how fleshly and
outward did he appear before, and under the Law, in visible forms? In the
Gospel, the presence of the Lord, and his power, was more spiritual, in inward
and eternal things; that is, in things not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18.

Therefore the third dispensation (which Mr. Mostons Letter tells you) will be
more spiritual yet; Heb. 5.7. who in the days of his flesh, etc. that was when
be was on earth, therefore his being now in the Heaven, is all in the Spirit;
for he is far above all heavens. Ephesians. 4.10.
for though Christ was in the days of his flesh, yet he was not fully come,
till the Spirit was sent; therefore this second coming will be more in the
Spirit yet; for the Apostles themselves had but the first fruits of the Spirit;
there will be a harvest, a fuller measure of the Spirit, then was in the
Apostles times, as the Prophets testify, Zach. 14.8.9.10.

Secondly, does not the reign of Christ, which you hold forth in a fleshly
presence, hinder the Saints from looking for the Spirit? that fullness of the
Spirit, promised by all the Prophets to be poured forth in the last days? when
he comes the second time without sin to salvation, with fullness of the Spirit
in us.

Lastly, does not that preaching of yours, cause many Saints to be more carnal,
earthly, looking for a Kingdom here below; for they begin to reign already as
Kings, but not with Christ, nor in righteousness, which is that alone (and not
in forms of Religion) that shall dwell in the new Heaven and new Earth, now
waited for.

My dearest salutes and service present to all the Saints with you: If I have
not tired your Spirit with these tedious lines, and if you shall please to
interpret my love and enlarged affections therein, with acceptance thereof, you
will much more oblige

Brecknock the 23 of Aug. 26. 1652. Your William Erbery.

For Mr. Walter Cradock.
Loving friend,
WHat was at first intended to all the Pastors in Wales, that is now presented
to you last who are first; but as the first shall be last: so He, who is the
last and the first, is now beginning to appear, not only in the scattered
Saints, and against the gathered Churches; but to gather up all into himself.
This is the hope and joy of

Your. William Erbery.


Dear Brethren,
Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen, etc. not only Judah the
National-Church, but the gathered Churches of Saints, that is Jerusalem; yet the
old Jerusalem was the holy City, a City in unity, or compact together, not
only in Spirit as Saints, but in Forms as Churches; but the Churches of Saints
being this day divided in both, and de filed also in their worships and
walkings, show, that they are fallen from their first love, and from that
Gospel-faith which wrought by love unfeigned to all Saints, and to all men;
besides, that pure conscience, peaceable converse, with holiness and heavenly
mindedness, self-denial, and zeal once appearing among the Saints in Wales,
being so far from their present profession. I could not but write, and print;
because not admitted, or not invited to confer in your Congregations. What I
have said and done in public, I am not sorry for; though sorrow and
sufferings are in my flesh, being forced in Spirit to make my self bare first,
and then my brethrens nakedness; Amos 6.1, 4, 7, 8. compared. Zach. 2.7.
Deliver thy self O Sion, that dwell the daughter of Babylon; so the Hebrew
reads, as if Sion were become the daughter of Bahylon. Ezekiel. 37.12.
which fact of mine, many, and my self also, sometimes have judged as that of
Cham who uncovered his Father; or like Edom, who looked on the day of his
brother etc. but finding you at ease in Sion and the daughter of Sion in
Babylon, ^artaker of her sins; ye thus partake of her plagues, having a Vial of
wrath poured on you all, being made naked by God, that men see your shame. For
my part, I am willing to bear my shame, and his wrath with you, and thus to
suffer with all the Saints, yea to dye, and lie down in the open valley with
the dry bones, till God raise us up together from Babylon and bring us out of
our graves of Forms and Flesh, which do even bury, and hide from the sight of
men, the glorious appearance of the great God in us now ready to be revealed in
these last times, when God shall appear; when he shall rise, and his glory be
revealed in us, the Saints in Wales will not only walk in the same light they
formerly did, but in higher discoveries of God, and of Christ; yea in more holy
and righteous ways with men. This is the new Jerusalem, and new Earth wherein
dwells righteousness: and because I hear a sound of the new Jerusalem coming
down from God out of Heaven among you; and one of you saying, that one Form
should knock out another till that come, etc. I am come in the Spitit of love,
with meekness and fear, to give an account of the hope that is in me, to my
own Country first, where I hold forth nothing but the new Jerusalem, in which
God shall gather all the Saints first, even those who look for his coming; in
whom he will so appear in power and glory, dwelling in the midst of them, that
many Nations shall join to the Lord in that day; and these Northern Nations* I
believe, will be the first fruits of the world; for the Nations of them that
are saved, shall walk in the light of the new Jerusalem, and men shall dwell
it, and there shall be no more utter destruction, but Jerusalem shall be safely
inhabited, Zach. 14* 11. Rev. 21.24.

What multitudes of men shall inhabit that City, the Prophets show; not only
that Jerusalem shall be without Walls, and that a Nation shall be born in one
day, but many shall flow in like the Sea; that our hearts shall fear and be
enlarged for the abundance of Savage people that shall come in and cover us
etc. Isa. 60, 5, 6, 8 9. I say* we shall fear at first, whether such may be
received by us; but again our hearts shall be enlarged to accept those whom God
doth^ causing them to come up to his Altar, Zach. 2.5. Isa. 55.5. Psa. 66.8.
and to beautify the house of his glory, verse 7.13. and though but little of
this appear at present, and it appears but to a few, yet a little one shall
become a thousand, and a small one a strong Nation. I the Lord will hasten it,
in his time, verse 22.

This was not fulfilled in the Gospel Dispensation (though it was in part
performed then) yet that the full accomplishment thereof is referred to a third
dispensation in these last days, appears by the parallel of Isai. 60.19, 20,
21. with Rev. 21.22, 23, 24, 25. this new Jerusalem being that third
dispensation differing from Law and Gospel-Churches, yet comprehending both,
and above both, as the glory of the Gospel was above that of the Law, and
darkened the light thereof, even as the rising Sun does the Moon when it shines
at full; but the light of the Moon, shall be as the light of the Sun, and the
light of the Sun sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in that day that the
Lord shall hind up the breach of his people, and heal the stroke of their
wound, Isa. 30.20.

The breach will never be made up among the Saints, nor their wounds healed,
till they come to the new Jerusalem, where there is a Tree of life (the living
God in the midst of them) the fruit whereof is fresh and new to feed them every
month (who are now cut off in one) and the leaves thereof, the very appearance
of God in the Saints shall be a healing to the Nations, much more to
themselves, Rev. 22.2.

This health and happiness, and a heaven upon earth (as well as hereafter) I
wish unto you, and wait for in my flesh, with all the Apostles and Prophets,
that the throne of God and the Lamb may be in you, that you may not only serve
him (waiting on him and for him) but see his face, and his name on your
foreheads, verse 4. that your selves may not only see the Lord fully in you,
but that all who see you, may say, Surely the Lord is in you of a truth, and so
join to the Lord with you; then ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord, men
shall call you the Ministers of our God (that is the glory of the Law and Gospel
in you) Isa. 61.6. yea all that see you, shall acknowledge that you are the
seed which the Lord has blessed, verse 2.

That Is more then many will yet say of you; but I can, knowing not only the
grace, but the glory that is in you; and when that glory shall be seen on you
(as it shall, Isa. 60.1.) then men shall see, and you will say that I am in the
truth.

Cardiff the 31 of Aug. 1652. Your faithful friend, and servant in the Lord,
William Erbery.


A DISPUTE at Cowbridge, Glamorganshire.
WITH Mr. Henry Nichols, Pastor of an Independent Church, and Parson of a
Parish Church: Ergo, None of the best (though a new-modeled Minister) Nor one
of the old Welsh Saints, who minded Godliness more then Gain, 1 Timothy 6.6.
Perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
supposing that gain is godliness. From such withdraw thy self,

1 Timothy 6.5.
For Mr. Davy Walter.
Worthy Sir,
I Wrote unto you in Wales a few lines, in answer to yours Your judging of what
I publicly spoke, because the weakest and worst of men would hear me, was no
argument with Christ, whom Publicanes and harlots willingly heard, and whom he
friendly received, yea feasted with, when Pharisees and Hypocrites were
offended. Truly, Sir, I know your sincerity and singleness of heart, yea your
unsetledness and looseness of spirit from all Church-forms, and empty forms of
godliness, waiting for a higher Power and Spirit to appear in the Saints, which
will gather up not themselves only, but many Nations with them into God.

This is all I have taught my dear Countrymen in Wales: yet indeed, Sir, I
should never have published this wild Dispute, but that I promised it on the
place: for it was so confused, and full of Soloecisms, and illogical proceeds,
that if all particulars were written, it would nauseate any Scholar, or
spiritual man.

Such a one I wished my Antagonist had been; for then he should have understood
me, or I him: therefore I desired Mr. Nichols in a Letter the week before, that
we should reason together in private, among Rational and Religious friends,
both his and mine. But he was resolved to have it in public, either that the
simple Welsh people might wonder at his wisdom, or that his folly and mine
might appear to all.

And truly I was a fool to accept of a dispute before an illiterate multitude,
and without a Moderator: for many sometimes would be speaking at once.

But it was agreed upon at last, that M. Nichols should be Respondent, because
I was by Argument to maintain the Truth that I taught; which he had rumoured
abroad to be Error and Heresy.

The things were these:

First, That the new Jerusalem is a state of the Saints in this life. This he
denied.

Secondly, That the Saints this day have not a Gospelfaith. This he affirmed.

Thirdly, That God is in union with mankind. This he was negative too.

But I was to maintain all three, in these following Arguments.

For the first, I had many grounds to build upon, and to prove that the new
Jerusalem, is a state of Saints in this life. First, because it must be
immediately after Babylons fall, which is in this lise; where Babylon must
fall, and rise no more. Rev. 18.21. Rev. 19. throughout. Rev. 20.1, 7. Rev.
21.2, 3.
Secondly, New Jerusalem comes down from God out of heaven, not goes up to
heaven from earth. Thirdly, there God dwells with men, not men with God: for
it is a new earth, as well as a new heaven. Fourthly, whole Nations are here to
be saved; and the Nations saved (with their Kings) bring their glory and honor
to it: which cannot be in heaven above (as men conceive) but it is a third
dispensation, differing from Law and Gospel Order. For the first was a nation
saved by the Lord. Deuteronomy. 33.29. Act. 2.47. Zach. 2.11.
In the second, believers of all Nations were saved, or joined to the Lord: not
to a Church, but to the Lord; not in any particular form of Religion, Isa.
60.21.
but in the power of righteousness.

The first Argument was thus:

The Nations of them that are saved, walk in the light of the new Jerusalem;
Rev. 21.24.
and the kings of the earth bring their glory and honor to it.

Ergo, the new Jerusalem is a state of the Saints in this life.

Secondly, Jerusalem shall be inhabited, Zach. 2.4.
as a city without walls, for the multitude of men and cattle therein.

Ergo, It Is in this life.

M. Nichols Answers to both, truly I remember not, nor his to most of my
Arguments; only to this second his answer was in laughter, (like Solomon's
wise man, Eccles 7.6.) crying aloud to the people, Hawer! here is cattle in
heaven: whereas my proof was, that New Jerusalem in Zechariah was not heaven,
because cattle are there.

Yet contrary to Order, Mr. Nichols would needs object; and what? That the new
Jerusalem is not this life: why? Because (says he) none shall enter in that
defiles, or tells a lie, Rev. 21.27.

I caught him presently in three, before witnesses. One was a great untruth:
for whereas I was saying upon occasion, that Zechariah's prophecy was after
the Captivity, M. Nichols would face me down before the people, that his
Prophecy was before; and Adeodate (says he) is of the same judgment with me.

The next day that I spoke, Adeodate was brought, and read in public; Adeodate
in Zach. 1.
whose words were quite contrary to that M. Nichols said of him: yea, the
Scripture is clear, that Zachary, prophesied in the second and fourth years of
Darius; that is after the Captivity, Zech. 1.1. and 7.1. Ergo, (said I) Mr.
Nichols must not enter into the new Jerusalem.

'Twas his own Argument. Isa. 65.22.
But my third was this:

In the new Jerusalem men shall build houses, plant vineyards; labor, and live
long.

Ergo, New Jerusalem is a state in this life.

The second thing that I held forth, as truth to me, was this: That none of the
people of God this day have a Gospelfaith. Which I proved, first, by an
Argument ex enumerat is or ex particularibus, etc.

Neither M. Nichols, nor any of the godly Preachers with him, nor the people of
God this day, have a Gospel Church.

Ergo, None have, etc.

'Twas proved thus:

Those who live not of the Gospel, Isa. 2.4.
have not a Gospel-faith (For, the just live by faith.)

But neither M. Nichols, nor any of the godly Preachers with him live of the
Gospel: Ergo.

The minor or second Proposition I proved thus:

Those who live upon Tithes, 1 Cor. 9.14.
live not of the Gospel.

But M. Nichols, and the rest of the godly Preachers in Wales live upon Tithes:
Ergo.

This was unanswerable; therefore to the people of God I proposed a second
Argument, thus:

Those that have not received the Spirit which Jesus gave after he was
glorified have not a Gospel faith. John 7.39.


But the Saints this day have not received that Spirit, etc. Ergo.

This I proved,

First, because that Spirit was not before given: or, (as the Greek there
reads, The Spirit was not: (...).

Secondly, the Spirit which the Apostles had before and afterward breathed on
them by Christ risen, John 14.17. John 20.22.
was not that Spirit which Jesus gave when he was glorified, or ascended: but
the Saints this day have not that Spirit as the Apostles had before* much less
the Spirit which Jesus gave after he was glorified. Ergo.

Thirdly the Spirit which Jesus gave after he was glorified, was the Baptism of
the Spirit (which the Apostles themselves had not received before, Act. 1.5.
till not many days after the Resurrection) that is, the pouring forth of all
the gifts of the Spirit on the Church; Act. 2.33, 38.
which present Churches and purest Christians are far from. Ergo, N^ne have a
Gospel-faith.

The third Argument was from Joh. 14.12.

Those who do not the works which Christ did, and greater also then those, have
not a Gospel-faith.

But none of the Saints this day, by all their faith, can do those works, and
greater also.

Ergo.

The Argument is stronger in Christ, who gives a double asseveration to it;
Verily verily: that is, not only assevers; but swears, as Calvin interprets,
Joh. 14.12.

Secondly, those who believed on Christ, did greater works then he did in the
days of his flesh: Act. 9.18. Act. 2.8, 41. Act. 4.4.
for some gave the Spirit by the laying on of hands. 2. Others could speak to
every one in his own tongue. 3. They converted many thousands at once. 4. Could
preach the Gospel to every creature under heaven; whereas Christ did only to
one Nation; Col. 1.23. Mat. 15.24. Mark. 6.4. Mark 16.17.18.
for his commission was no farther. 2. Converted but a few. 3. Spoke not with
tongues. 4. Gave not the Spirit by laying on of hands, as the Apostles did,
after Jesus was glorified.

Thirdly, the weakest this day, I mean many of the scattered Saints, (who do
not profess any Gospel-faith to themselves, yet dare not deny it in them, (for
there is a perfect confusion, a Babel in their spirits, as in gathered
Societies) I say, the weakest of scattered Saints this day do greater works
then Christ did in the days of his flesh; though the Spirit appear not in them
nor they as doing those works.

For first, Babylons fall is by them: yea, Babylon the great, from first to
last, has been ever laid low by the weakest of scattered Saints; Isa. 26.5, 6.
Zach. 12.7. Jer. 51.58.
while the gathered Churches in all Ages have been still building Babylon a
new, when and old Form or piece of the wall has been falling.

Secondly, the least of the flock draws for Babylon, for utter destruction,
Jer. 50.45. yea, draw them out: whom? Saints out of the Church.

Thirdly, the weakest, Isa. 41.15. Jer. 51.20. Psalm. 149.8, 9. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3.
even worms do this day thresh mountains, throw down hills, tear the rocks, and
whole armies in pieces, break kingdoms, bind kings nobles, and judges, yea,
judge the world, and angels of Churches: for the feeble (or fallen, Hebr.) is
become as David, and the house of David as God, Zach. 12.8.
and the angel of the Lord before them.

All this we see done by the Saints this day, and the Saints thus to be, though
they believe not: for now they begin to walk not by faith, but by sight,
(that is the third dispensation) which being full, Isa. 52.8. Romans 8.18, 24.
Rev. 22.4.
faith shall be swallowed up into vision, hope into o possession of that glory,
wherein we shall see God as he is, see his face, and the Father's Name on our
foreheads; yea, his Name so visible and clear upon us, that all men shall see
God the Father in us; and whole nations join to the Lord with us in that day.

This was the last truth which I taught,

That God is in union with mankind.

And this I was about to prove by Argument, That God is in union with man: And
this was all I taught the people. But M. Nichols fearing the Arguments that
might follow, would needs persuade, that I held a spiritual union between men
and God.

This I never said: but for Disputes sake, and to try the man's strength, I
undertook to prove,

That union which is by the Spirit is a spiritual union.

But the union between God and mankind is by the Spirit: Ergo.

This he could neither stand against; therefore falls off fairly again. Truth
(says he) the union is spiritual, but not of grace: God is not graciously
united to All men.

I was willing to follow the man, or the Lord in his weakness; therefore I
replied again,

The grace of God that brings salvation, Tit. 2.11.
has appeared to All men:

Therefore, the grace of union is to all, or God graciously united to Mankind.

[This is that Philanthropie, or kindness and love of God our Savior toward
man, which appeared, Tit. 3.4.]

This he grants again: and therefore cries quarter the third time. It Is of
grace (says he) there is a gracious union: but the union is not saving between
God and all men or Mankind.

Here I would follow him no further, but left him in the flight, because I
foresaw and Ambush laid before me, and that, in the salvation of all men, the
man sought my destruction. Therefore here the Dispute ended; and we both
departed in peace, as friends.

But though I desire not any Disputes with men, yet I shall (with God) make it
good in due time, That there is a Saving union between God and Mankind: for,
Tir. 2.11.
the grace of God that brings salvation to All men, has appeared; (so the
margin reads) and so I am ready to prove to all the world.

London, Jan. 18. 1652. Your William Erbery.

FINIS.

