THE EATING OF THE BODY OF CHRIST, Considered in its PRINCIPLES.

By JOHN DESPAGNE Minister of the Gospel.

Translated out of French into English, by John Rivers of Chaford in Sussex,
Esquire.

LONDON. Printed by T. N. for Anthony Williamson, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Queens Arms in Pauls-Church-yard, near the West end. 1652.

The following Lines are part of the Epistle Dedicatory which the Author sent
to a Prince, lately deceased.
GLORIOUS are all the Movables of the Spiritual Tabernacle, all the Doctrines
of Christian Religion: but the Table of Shewbread, the point of the Eucharist,
is one of those three things which the Law has honored with a Crown of Gold.
This is that Bread, which sustained David amidst his military travels. This is
that Honey, which the Nazarite of God found out, having rent asunder the Lion.
This is that hidden Manna, which is promised to the Conqueror. After so many
others which are gone before me, I make plain the way of this Bethlem. And in
these my exercises, my supplication is, that the Sun may stop his course to
lengthen the victories of Josuah; that at the sound of his trumpets, the
strongest Rampires may fall down and fill up their trenches; that his Squadrons
may scale the highest Towers; that the Rivers may run back toward their
Cataracts at the presence of the Arc; that the sword of God may prosper in the
hand of Gedeon; that the Stars may fight for Barak; that Zebulon may triumph
over the Ships of Tire and Tharsis. And that David having served in the Council
of God, may depart hence full of days, to enter into the joy of his Master.

The Argument and Apology of the Treatise following.
I Know it will be noted with diverse names: with Superfluity, with Novelty,
with Nullity and Rashness: And at the first sight its brevity will render it
contemptible.

With Superfluity; because men have already wrote so much upon this matter, and
have dug so much in this Mine, that it seems to be fully exhausted. Though
it be not my design to write nothing but what was said before, and present a
Mess that has been served in so many times; that the world has good reason to
be cloyed therewith.

With Novelty; because I lay such principles, and introduce such matters, as
men have not been accustomed to see in those who handle the point of the
Eucharist.

With Nullity, because being unheard of to many, they will seem to be to far
fetched, and nothing appertaining to the Subject.

With Rashness, because I have observed the errors of many great Doctors, which
men take no notice of. For are we greater then those Patriarchs, who gave us
this well, and have drank of it themselves, and their children, and their
flocks?

Truly, I reverence those valiant Champions, unsheathing the sword of the
Spirit, who environ the bed of Solomon, whose pillars be of silver, and
coverings of purple. But excepting their birthrights and other prerogatives,
although their wisdom be of as large an extent as the sand of the Sea, they
have not drained the Ocean. They themselves have not thought they have said
all, nor to be perfect in what they have said. We have not yet surrounded
Jerusalem, nor measured its towers, nor counted all its battlements. Of the
plentiful harvest of these rich men, may remain some ears, which we may be
permitted to glean.

As for the Novelty which men will charge me with, I know that many, seeing
Jesus Christ walk upon the Sea, and not the common way, do prejudg it forthwith
to be a vision: But it is not the tree of the forbidden fruit, but the true
tree of life, whereto I have fastened my Meditations. I open no new Springs in
the desert; it is a long time since they were broached. If they are new to any,
they ought not to complain that they are showed unto them. By my language I
shall be taken for a Galilaean. It is all that I can fear, and all that I do
desire.

As for other censures, I shall answer them in the Treatise it self. As I have
built upon the institution of the supper, so also have I promoted nothing which
answers not this foundation; which to verify there is no need to ascend into
heaven, nor descend into the bottomless pit. The materials which I employ in
this structure, are to be found in the very words of Jesus Christ, instituting
this Sacrament. These words are near us, and in our mouth.

The First Sect prepares us the entrance to them. The Second measure them. The
Third considers the circumstances of the Eucharist; its resemblance to the
Passover; their differences, and some questions which concern them. The Fourth
touches some points of a Christians practice in this matter In the Fifth I give
certain general addresses, which serve not only for the understanding of the
point of the Supper, but of the whole New Testament also.

In sum; men will find that these doctrines are as ancient as the words of
Jesus Christ in the Supper, since, that they are contained there. In this
regard, and laying aside what there is of mine own, I may say that here are the
mountains of incense. It is nothing but myrrh and aloes: they are nothing but
pearls and carbuncles. Here is that well-furnisht chamber, in which our Master
celebrated his Passover: It is here that we shall enter, as it were cross a
cloud, to see the wonderful things of the Sanctuary.

I regard not those who respect rather the quantity of the paper, then the
quality of the work; who esteem rather of the greatness of a Flint, then the
Beauty of a Diamond It were as easy for me, as for many others, to produce a
volumn extended with words, and swelling with allegations. But it is not my end
to enlarge my Phylacteries This is to abuse time, and wander out from the way
where one may go strait outright: Especially, since, I undertake no complete and
entire Treatise of the Eucharist, but only a supplement of that which seems to
want in other Authors, who have wrote upon this subject.

Finally, although I am not that learned Scribe in the Kingdom of Heaven, who
draws, from the Treasure of his heart, things both ancient and modern: I hope
nevertheless to please those whom ignorance or passion has not prepossessed,
and their approbation will give me wings to pass to other matters.

To his Friend the Translator, on the Subject of his Book.
1
WHAT stricter Jews durst not assay,
The Life of Beasts we now convay
(Misprising the Mosaic Rites,)
Into our licensed Appetites.
Our Stomachs are our Altars; All Days, Feasts;
To sacrifice the blood of slaughtered Beasts.
2
What Heathens moralliz'd would hate,
Man's flesh with greedy mouths we eat;
And then we breath forth purest Notes,
When first Man's blood has smoothed our throats.
Our Stomaks are grown stronger; and we can
Digest the unsodden flesh and blood of Man.
3
What Cannibals could not devour,
The Blood of very God we pour
Upon our guiltless Tables; where
Nor blood nor flesh of God we spare.
Digestion is sublimed; Our inward fire
Concocts what Cherubs did, and do, admire.
The old Childish Jew so long is schooled
By the Law his Pedagogue, till fooled.
The merely Morallist still Shrinkes
At the fancy of our horrid Drinks.
Yet we keep on our Diet. Our dry Souls
Drink their own Healthes in blood from the hallowed Bowls.
WILL. BEAU.

The Eating of the BODY of CHRIST Considered in its PRINCIPLES.
The First Sect.
CHAP. I.
To what the Instruction of Christians is now reduced, as concerning the Point
of the Supper.

Of an abuse which is found in many Divines treating of the History of the
Passion.

Of many circumstances of the Passion, of which we are ignorant of the
particular Causes.

THere is nothing of Religion this day more studied, and peradveuture less
understood among the common sort of Orthodox Divines, then that of the
Eucharist. Men learn nothing of it but what reaches to controversy; as if all
the Doctrine of this Sacrament consisted in that. To this very end many labor
to inform themselves of nothing but of the belief of the Fathers; as if it were
belonging to the purpose of the Supper, to know the opinion of Tertullian or St
Ambrose. Let this be spoken without diminishing the praise of those who have so
profitably Wrote of this Controversy. It is indeed necessary in these times;
but it is not that which nourishes the Soul. A man who receives the holy
Supper, ought at that time to think of other things, then to reason with
himself whether accidents may subsist without a Subject; whether or no mice can
eat the Body of Christ, whether Transubstantiation were before the Council of
Verceil or Lateran; and other ordinary questions. Or to dispute Philosophically
upon the words of Concomitance, Locally, Circumscriptively, and such like
Terms.

Many also study Tracks of Piety on the Subject of the Supper, in the most
part of which we may behold much discourse, but little matter: Or if there be
some substance, it is but the Rudiments and Alphabet of Christianity, amplified
with a multitude of words. In such sort, that, after having read a hundred such
books which are cried up among the people, we shall find heaped together much
speech, but little Doctrine. They who greatly esteem them, deceive themselves in
many respects.

I must advertise them of one abuse which cannot be dissembled. We have some
Writers who cause Metaphors to pass for Mysteries, and allusions of words for
very real matters, yea for demonstrative Reasons. When they treat of the
Passion of Christ (which is the true Subject of the Holy Supper) with its
particulars and circumstances, behold how they specify unto us the Causes! If
they speak of the kissing of Judas, they seek the reason from the mouth of
Adam, who sinned with his lips. If there be question of the Reed which was put
into the hand of Christ; it is (say they) to show, that he breaks not the
bruised Reed. If they talk of his Vestments which were divided into four parts;
they tell us they are the four parts of the World, to whom our Lord has
communicated his blessings. That he was stripped of his Garments, is as much as
that one day he will restore the Kingdom to God his Father. If they discourse
of his Purple Robe, it is because he wipes away our sins which are as red as
Scarlet. If he were pierced in the Side, it is to the end that we should have
him near our heart. If he were smoat on the face, it is as much as that we have
disfigured our face, (i. e.) the Image of God. Oh subtle Imaginations! Such
allegories are tolerable in an Oratoricall Discourse, but certainly they are
impertinent and abusive when there is question made of teaching exactly. This
Style, instead of framing a distinct and articulated voice, produces not hing
but a confused and extravagant noise; holding the minds of men in a childish
ignorance, and rendering the most important matters of Religion contemptible and
ridiculous; Yet nevertheless, the ignorant sort find these Conceits to be very
high, and take them for very solid Doctrins and current money.

It is to be noted that many labor in vain to give a particular reason of all
the Circumstances of the death of Christ. Certainly many of them have their
Causes pointed out by the very finger of God. That our Lord was fastened to the
wood; That he was lifted up; That he suffered among thieves; That the place of
his punishment was without the City; That they cast lots upon his Garments;
That his bones were not broken; That his side was pierced; That his hands and
his feet were boared through; That Gall was given him to drink, etc. All these
particularities have their allusion to some Oracle, or to some Figure which
has preceded them, from whence may be drawn Theological demonstrations. But
as for other Circumstances, whereof special reasons are not taught in the
Scripture, or verified by certain analogy, it suffices to consider them
simply as parts of the humiliation of Christ, and carry them up to the general
causes of his Passion. Otherwise it is as much as to feed on imaginary meats.

CHAP. II. Of an Usual expression among Christians subject to evil
Consequences.
I Have yet this to give advertisement of; That, in the common language of
Christians, there is a form of speech touching this matter of the Supper, in
which we ought to use no little caution. As for example: We say ordinarily; The
Altar of the Cross; The Cross is the Altar (say we) on which Christ was
sacrificed. This phrase is authorized by the pen of many excellent Authors: But
we must know that their end has been to apply themselves to the Vulgar. For
they are not ignorant that (to speak properly) the Cross was not the Altar of
the Sacrifice of Christ. Otherwise this speech would be dangerous for those
that know not its importance. And if we should dispute against a Jew, he would
force us to disavow it.

It is a Rule of Divine Right (Exodus 29. 37. Mat. 23. 18, 19.) That the Altar
is more excellent then the Offering. The reason is, because the Offering is
sanctified by the Altar. Whereupon we ought to observe, that the ancient
Fathers, giving the name of Altar to the Table of the Lord, show, that they
mean not there to sacrifice the Body of Jesus Christ for the expiation of sins.
For an Altar of wood or stone does not sanctify the Body of our Lord.
Therefore they so call the holy Table; but not in a sense that does in any wise
favor Transubstantiation, or the dependances thereon. Finally, it is true that
Jesus Christ was offered on the Cross, but it is false that it was held for an
Altar in the act of this venerable Sacrifice.

For 1. This wood on which Jesus Christ suffered, did it sanctify the Offering
of his Body? Was the Cross more excellent or more holy then the Sacred body of
the Son of God? 2. Add to this, that the Cross was a mark or token of
malediction; (Gal. 3. 13.) a quite contrary quality from that of the Altar,
which is to bless and to sanctify. 3. Also the holy Scripture, speaking of the
same Cross on which our transgressions were expiated, never gives it the Title
of Altar: and the holy Ghost always abstains from this phrase, although that,
in many places of the New Testament, it seems to come much to the purpose. 4.
Men speak very inconsiderately, to say that the Altar of Burnt-Offerings, or
that of Incense did represent the Cross on which Jesus Christ ought to be
sacrificed. There is more appearance, that the Cross, on which Jesus Christ was
put, was signified by the wood on which they placed their Victims. And indeed
Isaac, carrying the wood on which he was to be sacrificed, was a figure of
Jesus Christ bearing the Cross on which he was to die.

CHAP. III. What is the Subject of the thoughts which Christians ought to have
when they receive the holy Supper. The Spiritual presence ill understood among
the Vulgar.
TWo men shall produce an action of the same kind and the same quality, in
which nevertheless the one has more noble thoughts then the other. And for
example; both may give Alms with like sincerity of heart, equal measure of
charity, and with the same resentment of affection, and yet nevertheless in
this act one carries more fair and rich conceptions. So among many Christians,
who receive the Sacrament by faith, and are carried to this action by motions
tending to salvation, there are some whose thoughts surpass those of others,
being more sublime and complete, and so of a higher dignity, and which render
them nearer to the bosom of Jesus Christ. Now the most excellent thoughts,
which a Christian, communicating at the Supper, can have, are those which Jesus
Christ had and did suggest unto us in this action, expressing them in words
full of an incomparable richness. To know then what cogitations are there
required, the words of Jesus Christ rightly understood, will furnish us with
the Subject of them. But such a one presumes best to understand them, who is
not yet topic enough in every point appertaining to this matter.

For I let alone the superficial intelligence; wherewith Idiots content
themselves. When they can say that as the bread nourishes our bodies, so the
flesh of Christ nourishes our souls; they think they know enough. Even so many
do very ill understand this spiritual presence of Christ that is now so much
disputed of. Then, when they present to themselves a man nailed to a Cross,
they imagine by this Idea Christ is made present to their thoughts and that in
this act consists the participation of the body of Christ. It Is true, we cannot
call to mind his death and the manner of it, but by conceiving such an object,
namely a humane body, as it is painted in the history of the Passion; his side
being pierced, and the blood streaming from the wound, etc. But all this is but
an historical representation, much different from the spiritual communion of
the body of Christ. For when I represent unto my self Jesus Christ dying on the
Cross in the most lively manner possible for me to do; this figure or image,
which I have in my mind, is not all this while Jesus Christ himself.

CHAP. III. A Brief of all that men teach touching the Point of the Lords
Supper.
ALL that we consider in this Doctrine, is reduced principally to these things.
The diverse names by which this Sacrament is called. Its Institution and the
time of it. The two Signs employed at this Table, and the Censure of those who
deny the Cup to the people. The Analogy between the Bread and the Body of
Christ; between the Wine and the Blood; The breaking of the one and the pouring
forth of the other, with their signification. The Thanksgiving or blessing by
which Jesus Christ consecrated these Elements. The difference between the
corporal reception of the sign, common both to the faithful and the wicked,
and the Spiritual Communication of the Body of Christ peculiar to believers.
The examining of these words, wherein we find that there is a Figure; the name
of the thing signified being attributed to the Sign, according to the ordinary
custom of Sacramental locutions. That the substance of the Signs remain
entire. That the Body of Christ is not enclosed in the Bread of the Eucharist,
nor in any place of the earth. That this bodily presence is not requisite to the
true and real Communication of it. That this Communion is made by the efficacy
of the Spirit, on the behalf of Christ; and by the Organ of Faith, on our part.
That this Faith reaches even unto Heaven, and does truly join us unto Christ.
That the end of this action is not there to make an Expiatory Sacrifice, but a
Commemoration of him. That this Commemoration is not idle and vain, but full of
efficacy and affection. That the Supper is unto us a Seal of a new Covenant; an
earnest of our Resurrection; a tie of our Union with the Church, and a Badge of
our Profession. To these are joined the precepts which show the preparatory
Exercises; the examination which every one ought to make of himself, for to
partake worthily of it; and finally the acknowledgement or thanksgiving which
we ought to make for it.

But, as this matter is now almost all reduced to controversy, the most part
of those who undertake an exact description of all that may be said upon the
Point of the Eucharist, do make stop principally at those things which are in
dispute. And in this regard it is a hard matter to add to their writings,
having there neither question which they have not discussed; error which they
have not encountered; difficulty which they have not cleared; syllable which
they have not culled; argument which they have not pressed; objection which
they have not dissolved. But we shall find that we may yet bring hither many
other important considerations, and without which this Doctrine cannot be
complete.

CHAP. V. Observations extracted out of the Jews Liturgy.
THey, who have read the Books of the Rites of the ancient Jews, have drawn
from them some lights, which show the reason of many particulars expressed in
the Institution of the Supper. For the proceeding of Jesus Christ in the
Eucharist, answers to that which the Hebrews observe in the Passover. Now
besides the Divine Laws which prescribe the form of this sacred Feast; the Jews
had Rules for those Circumstances which were not mentioned in the Law. As for
example: Moses having pronounced nothing touching the Drink of this Solemn
Feast, their Ecclesiastical Canons ordained that which was convenient for the
Action. They relate therefore among the ordinary Formalities of this Banquet.

That at the beginning the Master of the house took the Cup, and, praising God,
caused it to pass from hand to hand, to the end that all who sat at the table
might taste of it. Thus Saint Luke relates, that Jesus Christ began his last
supper.

That after that, he took bread in his hands, and blessing the Divine Majesty,
brake it, and then gave it to every one that was present at the banquet,
telling them, that it was the bread which their fathers had eaten in Egypt.

That for the Close of the Repast, he took again the Cup, and presenting the
Wine, said, that it was the fruit of the Vine and the blood of the Grape. Terms
borrowed of the old Testament (Genesis 49. 11. and Deuteronomy. 32. 14.) and to which our
Savior made allusion, when, giving the Wine, he said, that it was Blood.
Whereupon is to be observed in what the last Cup is different from the first.
Also why Christ blessed not the Wine and Bread both together, but the bread by
it self apart, and so the Wine.

That in this Feast there was a Dish composed of Raysins and other Fruits
bruised and beaten together, seasoned with vinegar and made clammie like unto
clay (in remembrance of the Bricks of Egypt) wherein they dipped their bread.
It may be, it was the platter wherein Judas his sop was dipped.

That the washing of Feet, frequent among those of the East, was not practiced
at the end of all Feasts, but only in that of the Passover. From thence it
comes, that after Supper Jesus Christ washed the feet of his Disciples.

That their Custom was to close this Action with the singing of Psalms, the
113, and the 114. which is without doubt that Hymn which Jesus Christ and his
Disciples sang before they went forth.

That speaking of the Passover, they oftentimes give it a name which signifies
Annunciation, which is the Term which St Paul transfers to the holy Supper,
when he says, Ye shall Show the Lords death.

Without these observations drawn from the Ecclesiastical discipline of the
Jews, it is impossible to attain to a perfect understanding of the actions of
Jesus Christ in the Institution of the Eucharist. But the sense of his words,
touching his Body and his Blood, ought to be drawn from a higher Fountain.

CHAP. VI. Necessary suppositions for the understanding of the words of Jesus
Christ in the Supper.
THat which Jesus Christ said touching the Communion of his Body and of his
Blood, all that (I say) depends on certain Maxims, which our Lord has laid
for a Basis and Foundation of this Communion. Now there are very few people
which observe these suppositions, without which nevertheless it is impossible
to understand fully the Terms of the Son of God, and to know the importance of
them.

The words of the Institution advertise us that this Sacrament is a New
Covenant (in as much as it is the Seal of it) and by consequence, that it
contains, or presupposes articles quite new, quite different from those which
are contained in the old.

For we must know that the old Testament, speaking of the Blood of the
Covenant, of the effusion of it for the remission of sins, and of the flesh of
the expiatory Sacrifice (Symboles of the Body and of the Blood of Christ) did
contain certain Ordinances which prohibited that which Jesus Christ commands us
in the Eucharist. Let us retain this carefully. That which the Son of God
commands us to do in the Supper, is founded upon Maxims opposite to those of
the old Testament. And in this opposition consists the Foundation and the Life
of the words of Jesus Christ. I conclude then that it is impossible, without
the conferring of these clauses carried through the two Testaments, to construe
exactly the mysterious words of the Institution.

Further, Let not men think that here I mean to bring in Allegories. For the
relations and differences between the old and new Testament are not
Allegorical. And if any one will call them by that name, let him know, that
without such Allegories he shall never understand perfectly what Jesus Christ
had a mind to say. For these words, the Testament, the Blood of the Testament;
the Eating of the Flesh given for us; the effusion of Blood for the remission
of sins; are terms of the Mosaicall Law. It is therefore necessary to learn
that, which the Law ordained touching the communication of the Flesh and Blood
destined to the expiation of sinners, and compare this Ordinance with that of
Jesus Christ in the Supper.

This will furnish me with an answer to those, who would impose upon me to have
here introduced matters estranged from the subject of the Eucharist, under
color of being far removed from their own thoughts. The considerations which I
have to produce, are immediately fastened to the words of the holy Supper, and
show to what properly Jesus Christ had regard unto in pronouncing them, as we
shall see hereafter. On the contrary, many treat of the Eucharist, who imbroyle
it with an infinite number of other points, whilst they omit a good part of the
true substance of the Sacramental words, whereof they never express the
entire sense. None here refuses to hear spoken of demon strative pronounes, of
a verb substantive, of a subject, and of an attribute, of synecdoches, of
Metanomyes, and other scholastic Terms, which serve only for the grammatical
understanding. Why then shall the proper names of things which Jesus Christ
aimed at in the Eucharist, be reputed strangers in this matter? The new
Testament and the old; the blood shed for our sin, and the blood of legal
expiations; the eating of the flesh of Christ, and the eating of offerings, are
terms correlative in the words of the Eucharist, and do answer one another with
a loud voice. The understanding of the one depends on the knowledge of the
other.

CHAP. VII. A preparatory question to the following Considerations.
THere is none but knows, that our Savior explained himself more formally
when he spoke of his blood, in presenting the Cup; and when he spoke of his
body, in giving the bread: For these last words expound the former, and teach
us in what quality his body is produced unto us, and given in the Eucharist;
namely, in as much as it is the sacrifice of the new Testament offered for the
remission of our sins.

Now these words express the subject and the cause of our Communion with him:
For it is not enough to know that we have the body of Christ to eat, and his
blood to drink: we ought to know the reason and the virtue of it. Otherwise we
shall never understand the point of the Eucharist. This reason is manifest. Our
Savior in the 26 chapter of St Matthew, speaks thus touching the Cup, Drink ye
all of it: For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed for many
for the remission of sins. But there are but few who know the meaning of Jesus
Christ, and wherein consists the knot and connection of his purpose, That we
ought to drink his blood, Because it is the blood of the new Testament, shed
for the remission of our sins. And likewise why from the oblation of his body
do we conclude the eating of it? What is the consequence of the one to the
other? Here we have many excellent mysteries contained in these words of Jesus
Christ to discover.

The Second Sect.
CHAP. I. The first Consideration on the words of Jesus Christ in the Supper.
DIvines affirm that Jesus Christ, knowing the Law which forbids eating of
blood, has expressly mentioned a new Covenant which obliges us to drink his
blood. In which he makes the two Testaments to oppose one the other. The one
which forbids the eating of blood, the other which commands the drinking of
blood.

But I observe one point which is not so common, although very notable,
touching the reason by which Jesus Christ invites us to drink his blood.

There is a Law in the 17 of Leviticus, verse 11, and 12, which we must compare
with the Ordinance of Jesus Christ in the 26 of Saint Matthew.

The Law says, Jesus Christ says, I have given you the blood to offer upon
the Altar, to make an atonement for your souls: for it is the blood which shall
make an atonement for the soul. It is shed for the remission of sins, and
therefore I said to the children of Israel, none among you shall eat blood.
Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood of the new Testament, which is shed
for many for the remission of sins.

This Comparison shows that Jesus Christ commanding to drink his blood,
imploys the same reason for which it was forbidden to eat any blood at all. The
Law says, eat no blood; for it is shed for the remission of your sins. Jesus
Christ says; drink blood; for it is shed for the remession of your sins. It is
then expedient for us to drink his blood for the same reason which seems to
forbid it us.

From whence comes it, that the prohibition of the Law and the Commandment of
Christ are found to be built on the same foundation? Why does the same cause
which obliges men to abstain from blood, oblige us to participate of it? How
can one and the same reason serve to two contraries? that it should be
forbidden to eat blood, because it is expiatory; and commanded to drink the
blood because it is expiatory?

Some will tell us, that we must distinguish between blood and blood; between
that of Christ and that of living creatures; between the spiritual perception
of the one, and the corporal eating of the other; between the typical
expiations, and the real expiations. That Moses spoke of a blood which was but
a Seal and Symbol of expiaation, and on the contrary, Jesus Christ proposes
unto us a blood by which expiation has been made. That the one speaks of an
eating which was done by the mouth; the other of a reception which is in the
soul; And that thus they are two different reasons. But all this takes not away
the difficulty; the question remains still: For behold what I have to say
thereupon.

The Law forbids to partake of blood, because it is the seal of the remission
of sins. And Jesus Christ commands to partake of the cup, because it is the
seal of the remission of sins. Why do two so contrary consequences result from
the same quality The precedent distinction has no place here.

Moreover, we must know that the Law, speaking of the blood of living
creatures, which it says to be expiatory, considers this blood in the union or
correspondence it has with that of Christ, which alone is truly expiatory. So
that forbidding the corporal eating of the sign that has relation to the
blood of Christ, the same forbidding touches the spiritual Communion of the
blood of Christ represented by the sign.

Truly the terms by which they express the cause of the Commandment, are
equivalent to those by which the Law expresses the reason of the prohibition.
And it is not without some great reason that the Son of God commanding to drink
his blood, would speak as the Law does when it prohibits the eating of blood.

We shall therefore see from whence is derived this injunction on us to drink
the blood of the new Covenant, by the same reason which forbids us to eat that
of the old. But for as much as this question is linked with many other points,
we ought to propose them conjoyntly, before we dissolve the difficulties.
Behold then another which ought carefully to be considered, as being the center
of this matter, and the last of the words of Jesus Christ in the Supper.

CHAP. II. The Second Consideration upon the words of Jesus Christ.
WE speak of eating the Body which was given for our sins. Many Orthodox
Divines have these terms in their mouths, who know not their importance, nor to
what Jesus Christ had regard in uttering them.

It is a RULE in the old Testament, That a man cannot eat of that which is
offered for him for the remission of his sins. It is, I say, a point of Divine
Right, and a fundamental clause of the first Testament. That none can eat of
that which is offered for the remission of his sins. The same flesh cannot be
our atonement and our nourishment. These are terms which the Law declares
incompatible. And nevertheless against this Maxim, Jesus Christ commands us to
eat his Body Sacrificed for our sins; his body, I say, represented by expiatory
oblations, whose eating was forbidden. This here is one of the highest
mysteries of Religion, and the foundation of the Sacrament of the Eucharist.

Every one knows that the old Testament had two sorts of Sacrifices,
distinguished by the ends to which they were offered; The one the Eucharistick;
the other the Expiatory. The one for the Benefits of God; the other for the
Evil deeds of man. Now concerning the Eucharistick Sacrifice, all those, for
whom it was by name offered, had a right also to eat of it. This meat,
sanctified by the Altar and distinguished from common nourishments, was a most
favoury Mess unto them, as being sent from Gods Table, for an earnest of that
Communion which they had with him. And we even there meet with an admirable
correspondence with the subject of the holy Supper. For, by the Rule of the
Law, the flesh of such Sacrifices ought to be eaten either the same day it was
sacrificed, or the day after. But on the third day it was not permitted to eat
of it. It is an axiom of the old Testament, That no Sacrifice should be eaten
on the third day, Levit. 7. verse 16, 17, 18. This Law seems to have an eye
upon the eating of the flesh of Christ; which is meat to us, in as much as dead
for us. For he exhibits unto us his body; but in as much as broken. So that the
object of this eating is Jesus Christ, in as much as dead. Now for as much as
the third day, which is that of his Resurrection, represents him unto us
living, the Sacrifices, by which he was represented dead, might not be eaten
the third day.

But the Sacrifice which was offered for the expiation of sins, was yet of a
higher dignity, and much more mysterious. In this action Jesus Christ was the
entire body of the Figure, and was there represented more to the life. And the
flesh of this sacrifice is honored with a Title which is not given to the
other. For it is said, that it was most holy. An Epithet, which, according to
the Style of the Law, signifies not only a superlative degree in this quality,
but expresses abundance of efficacy which it had (by divine institution) to
sanctify those who eat of it, Levit. 6. 27. But (that which is carefully to be
observed) none of those for whose sin it was offered, had permission to eat of
it. so that this meat was ordained to sanctify sinners, and notwithstanding it
was forbidden them.

For either a sacrifice was made for the sins of any one who was not of the
order of the Priests. And in this case one part of the sacrifice was burnt upon
the Altar, and the other the Priests did eat. For the Law gave them a portion
of the offering which they presented for other men. Lev. 4. v. 22. and Lev. 6.
v. 26. 29. Lev. 7. v. 1. etc. But the sinner, for whom the sacrifice was made,
did not taste of it at all. Or it was done to expiate the sins of the Priest
himself, who offered for his own transgressions. And then neither he, nor any
else might eat of the Sacrifice, but it was to be wholly consumed with the fire.
Lev. 4. v. 8, etc. Or it was sacrificed for the whole Body of the Church:
either annually for the universal expiation of sins, which was done in the name
of the whole Congregation; or ordinarily at some notable meetting, which
required a general sacrifice for the sins of all the people. And in such a case
sometimes the Priests did eat the sacrifice which was offered in common for the
sins of the Nation; Lev. 10. v. 17. but none of the Israelites, for whom this
sacrifice was made, had permission to eat thereof. Most times, and ordinarily
such offerings passed wholly through the fire, to be there consumed; so that no
body eat of it. Lev. 4. v. 13. and Lev. 16.

For the better understanding of all these diversities, we must remember that
there were two sorts of Sacrifices for sin. The One, whose blood was carried
within the Tabernacle: The Other, whose blood was not admitted the holy place.
As for the first, it was a general Rule, that none should eat of it. For there
was a Law which did expressly forbid the eating of that sacrifice whose blood
was carried into the Tabernacle for the expiation of sins. Lev. 6. v. 30. This
first kind of sacrifice is mentioned by the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 13.
v. 10. As for the Other, whose blood came not into the holy place, they burned
one part of it, and the rest was for the eating of the Priests, For this cause
the sinners for whom the expiatory sacrifice was offered, had never the power
to eat any portion thereof.

Whereupon we are to observe one very considerable distinction in the Old
Testament. There were other signs representing the Body of Christ, of which
the eating was permitted to the people of the Jews. They eat Manna, which was
(in Figure) the Body of Christ; and drank of the Rock, which was Christ. They
eat the Passover, which was Christ. They eat the Eucharistick sacrifices,
wherein Jesus Christ was figured. But as for the Expiatory sacrifice, which
also represents Christ, it was unlawful for them to eat of it. Now we must know
that all these Sacrifices and Sacraments did not represent Jesus Christ in the
same respect, but every one of them had its different and particular
signification; one representing him in one quality, and another in another,
according to the diversity of his Offices and Benefits. As one and the same
King may have diverse seals, all bearing his image, but under diverse habits, and
in different postures. The ancient people then had power to communicate of all
these Sacraments and Sacrifices, in some respect, as they should represent
Christ, except only in that which represented him in as much as an Expiatory
Sacrifice, which is the quality wherein he is given to us in the Eucharist.

It is also to be noted, that among the Oblations which were represented for
sins, there was one of Bread and Wine, which are the same Elements which we
have in the Eucharist, Number. 15. v. 24. This Bread, and this Wine were also
Symboles of the Body and Blood of Christ. Now as for the Bread, the Law divided
it between the Priest and the Altar, reserving nothing for the sinners, for
whom by name it was offered. The Wine also was forbid them: for it was all
poured forth upon the Offering and served for nothing but to sprinckle upon it.
But, at this day the Bread and Wine, Symboles of the Body and Blood of Christ,
are exhibited to them for whom Jesus Christ offered himself in an Expiatory
Sacrifice.

From all these Statutes which prescribe the forms and solemnities of
Expiations, it appears; that the Law permits not men to eat that which is
offered for the remission of their sins. It is an universal Rule, drawn from
Mosaical Right.

Here then is very considerable the Opposition which is seen between the maxim
of the Law, and that of Jesus Christ. The Law says, Eat not that which is
offered for the remission of your sins. Jesus Christ says, Eat that which is
offered for the remission of your sins. For our Savior inviting sinners to the
eating of his Body, establishes a Principle unheard of before, and which is
among the Paradoxes, That man should eat the Sacrifice offered for his sins.

We shall see anon the importance of it. In the mean while I shall pass to
another point, which we have already a little obsetved in this here.

CHAP. III. The third Consideration upon the words of Jesus Christ.
THE Eating of the Expiatory Sacrifice is mentioned, as an act of great
dignity. But it was the Priests Prerogative. For the Law gave the Sacrifice to
be eaten, not to sinners for whom it was offered, but to the Priests which had
offered it for the sins of other men. It was the Priest, not the sinner, who
had charge to eat of it. Lev. 6. v. 26. and chap. 7. v. 7. The Priest who
offers the sin Offering shall eat it. It belongs to the Priest who shall make
propitiation by it. And it was not lawful for any of the people, although the
Sacrifice were offered for them, to touch it, or come near it, or to be found
in the place where it was eaten. For the Lawgiver permitted not that it should
be eaten any where but in the Tabernacle, whether the people entered not. The
Prophet Ezekiel (chap. 46. v. 20.) conformable to this Law, speaking of the
flesh offered for sins, forbids the carrying it forth into the utter Court, for
fear of sanctifying the People.

Now the privilege of eating the Offering for sin was given to the Priests,
for to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make an atonement for them
before the Lord. Lev. 10. v. 17. As then the Priests alone had the power of
expiating sins; so also to them alone did belong the eating of the Offering.

Hence follows. First, That the eating of it was a Priestly act, as well as the
immolation. Secondly, That this eating made a part of the Expiation it self, or
at least was required to the accomplishment of it. The Sinner and the Priest
who reconciles the Sinner, are persons much different, and their actions of a
very diverse nature. In the Old Testament then, the Priest eats that which was
offered for the sin of another. But Jesus Christ has changed this Ordinance:
For, by an Order quite new, and unheard of before, he enjoins even Sinners
themselves to eat the flesh offered for their sins. So this Right which was
only the Priests, is now transported to Sinners themselves. And whereas the
Priest eat it, for to accomplish the expiation of sins; now we eat it because
the expiation is already made and accomplished. This difference is very notable.

CHAP. IV. That the precedent considerations cannot be accused of Nullity,
whithout doing injury to the wisdom of the Son of God.
NOW if any man will affirm that Jesus Christ thought not of all that is above
said, or doubt whether these antitheses be the end of his words, instituting
this Sacrament, let him again consider, if they be not there formerly declared?
If the blood of the New Covenant, which he commands us to drink, be not
manifestly opposite to that of the Old, whereof none eat? If the reason
wherefore we are enjoined to drink the one, be not the same for which it was
forbidden to taste the other? If Jesus Christ commanding Sinners to eat the body
offered for their transgressions, thought not of the Law which forbids them to
eat the flesh sacrificed for their sins? If he were ignorant that it was an
action of the Priests wherein Sinners had no part? If he knew not that the
Communion of bread and and wine, representing his Body and Blood, in as much as
they were to be offered for Sinners, was absolutely forbidden them? And
finally; If he, who knew this Law perfectly, and represented his Body and Blood
by the same Elements which the Law employed to this effect, (which is set down
in the proper terms of it, to express actions unknown unto it,) has not seen
the consequence thereof, nor perceived that it introduced quite new principles
apparently contrary to those of the Old Testament; nor would observe a
difference so visible, when he spoke even to men that were Jews, and to all
future ages, who might easily take notice of this Noveltie?

Certainly, forasmuch as he lays down maxims altogether new, which may seem
strange unto them, he advertiseth them that he makes a New Covenant, which
abolisheth the first; which contains new Clauses, which gives new Rights;
which takes away the conditions held by the precedent, and imposes others
altogether distinct from them. And as the changing of the Sacrificing has
showed that there should be a change of the Law; so the draught of the Covenant
being changed, we ought not to wonder that we see new articles, and new orders,
which answer not to the form and tenor of the first Covenant.

It is no more to be doubted, that such is the sense and the end of the words
of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist, and those who see it not therein, do but half
understand it. Now the considerations here above produced may it furnish us for
what follows.

CHAP. V. The Freface to the fourth Consideration.
I Treat not here of Controversy, nor touch the famous Dispute of the manner
of eating the Flesh of Christ. Every one can say, that the Holy Ghost often
speaks by a Figure, and hides a Spiritual sense under the name of corporal
things: whereupon nevertheless is to be observed, as we go, that many put
Figures into those words, whose propriety may subsist, even in a most excellent
sense. The 146. Psalm teaches that God opens the eyes of the blind, and
makes strait those that are crooked. Some say that he only speaks of the
illumination of the Spirit, and of the health of the Soul. This is the common
place, and the wide gate through which they shift, who find themselves brought
to a strait in any difficult passage: For not being able to get out otherwise,
they cast themselves on a very easy way, saying, That all this ought to be
understood spiritually. All this while they eclipse the true light of diverse
passages, which have no need to be expounded by a figure. Such a one is that
which I have produced, which touches two excellent miracles, which were
reserved to the Son of God, in token of his Divinity. For before him never did
any give sight to the blind, nor make strait the bodies which were crooked.
Wonders which his Omnipotency has really accomplished, John 9. Luke 13. v. 11,
12.

Moreover, we examine not whence it comes that Jesus Christ speaks so often by
similitudes; whether because those of the East were accustomed of old to
propound their Doctrins under such representations, as we may see in many
places of the Old Testament: Or, because the Divine Oracles, observing in what
style the Messiah would express himself to men, had foretold that he would open
his mouth in Parables. Or, because he would render himself obscure to
unbeleevers, envelopping his mysteries, and covering them wlth names estranged
from the subject. Or, because heavenly things, not having name in the language
of the children of men, to whom they are naturally unknown, it was needful, for
to make them understood unto them, to speak to them in their own terms: Or,
because that supernatural objects do more easily insinuate into the mind, and
there form more lively impressions, being produced under the image of those
which are more perceptible to the senses, then being nakedly purposed in titles
more thin and subtle. As for this phrase which is now in agitation, there is
none but can say after St. Augustine, touching the eating of the Body of Christ;
That those words, which seem to command a wickedness, ought to be taken in a
figure. But this is not our question here.

CHAP. VI. The fourth Consideration upon the words of Jesus Christ in the
Supper.
SOME will demand why Jesus Christ would speak in such a figure, employing a
speech which seems to denote a wickedness. Why is an act so holy, so noble,
expressed by the name of an act the most barbarous, and the most unnatural that
can be? For what is there more holy then the action of the Soul which unites it
self to Jesus Christ? And what is there more abominable then to eat the flesh
of a man, and even to drink his very blood? Moreover, how can a cruelty
represent so amiable a Communion? And further, from whence comes it that our
Savior recommended this Communion, would give us a desire to it by the
expressing of an act which breeds horror? It suffices not to say that it is a
comparison. It will be wondered at, why Jesus Christ expresses himself by so
strange a comparison, since, that he might explain himself in other terms.

None ought to take it ill, that I handle such a question. There is no man
having common sense, into whose thoughts it does not presently enter. Moreover,
we must know how to give an answer to Jews and Atheists, who judge that these
words of the Son of God are unworthy even of the language of men.

Every lawful Similitude or Comparison is founded on the analogy or
correspondency which is found between two subjects, or else in some proportion
of the one to the other. So (to give some examples of it, and in like terms)
David, refusing to drink the water that some of his people had brought him in
the peril of their lives, said, that it was as much as if he should drink the
blood of these men. 2 Samuel 23. v. 17. So says the Psalmish, (Psalm. 14.) They
eat my people as it were bread. Expressing a barbarous act, (to wit, the
tyrannical exactions) by another barbarism, which is to eat men. But to
represent an act of Piety under the name of a prodigious Crime, this is (some
profane ignorant person will say) to represent a fair face under the shape of a
Monster.

It is a weak answer to say, that Jesus Christ did speak so occasionally,
because he gave them to eat: For it will always be demanded, why he would
represent the Communion of his Body by the act of eating, giving Bread to this
purpose. Certainly, the wisdom of God, which might have used to these ends any
other sign then nourishments, and other expressions, which might seem more
convenient, has not used this here without some most important reason, whereof
I shall speak hereafter.

CHAP. VII. The Conclusion of the Precedent Considerations.
WE find then that the Son of God representing this sacred and most blessed
Communion, has noted it with the name of two acts, the one whereof is repugto
the Ceremonial Law, the other to the Law Natural.

The one that we eat the body Sacrificed for our sins, against all the maxims
of the Old Testament; The other, that we eat the Flesh of the Son of man, yea,
that we drink his Blood, against all the Laws of Nature and Humanity.

Now we must re-handle all the points which I have proposed, and examine them
summarily. Each of them may be the subject of many large discourses. But mine
intention is to run them over but so far as they serve to make known the
Positions necessary for the understanding of this Sacrament, and of the words
of the Son of God.

CHAP. VIII. The Clearing of the first Consideration.
IN The first place we have seen this opposition; The Law says, This is the
Blood which makes atonement for your Souls, wherefore none of you shall taste
thereof. Jesus Christ says, This is the Blood which makes atonement for your
Souls, wherefore ye shall all drink of it. From one and the same reason proceed
two quite contrary conclusions.

It is then to be known, that this point of the Law touching the prohibition of
the eating blood, depends on the other, which runs -- That none might eat of
that which was offered for the remission of their sins. For blood was thus
offered to such ends; yea, no remission was made without effusion of blood. Now
as the Lawgiver had his Reasons for which he forbids all persons to eat that
which was offered for their atonement, so for the same causes it was in no
wise convenient that they should eat blood; yea, for so much the less, as the
blood was the most noble part, and as it were the soul of such offerings, and
that in it consisted all the force and virtue of the sacrifice. For, to deprive
sinners of it entirely, and to estrange them yet more, the prohibition extended
it self even unto the blood; which was not actually offered, nor employed to
these holy uses. As if all the blood which was in the world, had been reserved
and set a part until the atonement for sins had been accomplished in Christ;
For, till the Blood of Christ was shed, it was not lawful to eat any blood. All
this then depends on the general rule, which forbids men to eat that which was
offered for their sins:

But Jesus Christ advertiseth us, that he has changed this clause, and that he
has inserted another in his last Testament, whereby sinners are hereafter
enjoined to eat that which was offered for their reconciliation. In consequence
of which, they ought also to eat his Blood, as shed for the same purpose. Thus,
as concerning blood, the same cause, from whence came the prohibition of Moses
according to the Maxims of the Law, serves for the subject of the Commandment
of Christ according to the principles of the New Testament.

But it will be said, was this a point of so great importance to eat, or not to
eat the flesh of a sacrifice? What is the prerogative of the one, and the
disadvantage of the other? Or what is the mystery contained in these words of
Jesus Christ? Great every way: And this is that we ought to consider.

CHAP. IX. The Clearing of the second Consideration.
THIS difference is touched in part by the Apostle to the Hebrews, chap. 13.
when he says, That we have an Altar, whereof they who serve in the Tabernacle
have no power to eat. All this is reduced to the following observations.

That the remission of sins which God granted to the Fathers of the Old
Testament, was grounded upon the expiation, which should one day be made. Now
this expiation remained in suspense, until that Jesus Christ himself
accomplished it, by the Sacrifice of his Body. Therefore is it, that the
ancient Fathers were so careful to enquire the time when Jesus Christ should be
offered. It is not necessary to show at large how much their condition was
inferior to ours. God never pardoned them their sins, but by declaring to them
always that payment must be made, and that his justice must be satisfied. All
the assurances that they received of their pardon, presupposed always an
expiation which was yet to come. This held them in perpetual fear, and made
them fervently desire that this atonement might be accomplished in their
days, that they might dye with this joy, that the prize of their redemption
was paid, 1 Pet. 1. v. 10, 11, 12. They then aspired to this oblation of the
Body of Jesus Christ, and desired he would communicate himself unto them in the
same flesh, wherein he should expiate their offenses. For they had truly
Communion with Jesus Christ, but not with Jesus Christ Sacrificed for sins, as
we have him at this day.

Now the Law gave then to understand, that as long as it had its force, they
should not obtain this grace: for as the way of the holy placed was not yet
open, as long as the first Tabernacle was standing, (Heb. 9. 8.) because none
of the people were suffered to enter in; so the Holy Ghost declared that the
Communion of the body of Christ actually sacrificed for sins, was a benefit
which we should not enjoy during the subsistence of the first Testament, which
permitted not sinners to communicate of the flesh sacrificed for their sins.

Moreover, it was an infallable consequence that their atonement was not yet
made, whilst they were excluded from the Communion of the expiatory Sacrifice.

For why should they not have been admitted unto it, if by it their
transgressions had been already expiated? The Law then taught, that they should
not have the true Expiatory Sacrifice, whilst the Communion of Oblations, which
represented it: remained forbidden. This prohibition which hindered them to
participate of it, was a kind of excommunication, making a part of the Legal
Economy, whose severity accompanied the Old Testament, to the end they might
desire a new one. From all this it appears,

That the Communion which we have with Jesus Christ is more complete and
entire, then that under the Old Testament; and the application of it more
efficatious.

That we are at this day nearer to God, having communion with his Son exhibited
in the flesh.

That the certainty of the Remission of sins is now more clear and distinct,
then before the death of Jesus Christ.

That the Law knew it not: for it showed afar of the flesh of the propitiatory
sacrifice, as a most wholesome food, and yet all this while declared to sinners,
who had need of this remedy, that they should abstain from it.

That they who will yet practice the Ceremonial Law, cannot partake of Christ;
since, by the rules of it, it is not permitted unto them to eat of that flesh,
the blood whereof was carried into the holy place, for the remission of sins,
Heb. 13. v. 10.

Thus the New Testament established under better promises, and having more
favorable clauses, gives us this advantage above the ancient Fathers, This is
the New Rite which abrogates the Old Law. This is the difference, by which our
Lord, in the institution of the Supper, distinguishes the two Testaments.

When we ask the modern Jews, from whence it comes that their calamity has no
end, and why they are not restored to their perfection, after so long
expectation; They answer, that they have no sacrifice, the only means to
appease Gods wrath. It is fourteen hundred years, as Origin reports, since they
used this Language; our sins remain in us, forasmuch as we have no Sacrifice to
expiate them, for want of a Lawful place. But if they could look through the
veil which covers the face of Moses, they should find that he himself
refusing to make them part of such oblations, would advertise them to aspire
both to another Testament, and to another Sacrifice, whereof they should have
power to eat. For whilst that Sinners were put by the Table of the Expiatory
Sacrifice, it was a most evident sign that their Expiation was not yet made.
For to lead Sinners back to Christ, the Law had expressly frustrated them of
many benefits necessary to their perfection. The Communion of the propitiatory
Sacrifice was one of the principal point which they wanted, and a grace whose
dispensation was reserved for the New Testament.

CHAP. X. The Clearing of the third Consideration.
IN the Old Testament the Priest did eat the offering which he had presented
for the sin of another; whereas now Sinners themselves, for whom it was
offered, are charged to eat it. What is the secret of so great a diversity.

It is a principle not to be doubted, that none can Expiate the sins of
another, unless he charge himself with them, and bear the pain of them, which
is death. Now none can dye for the sin of man, but man himself. It was then
necessary that the Priest himself, who was to expiate the sins of others,
should sacrifice himself, to the end he might dye for them. Now the Levitical
Priest did not Sacrifice himself in this action, but a goat or a Sheep died in
his stead. But to the end that the death of the Sacrifice should be thought and
said to be the death of the Priest himself, the Priest became one with it. For
eating of it and incorporating of it into himself, he transported to his proper
person the name and the effect of the death which the Sacrifice had suffered.
In doing this, he bare the iniquity of the people, and made propitiation for
them, Lev. 10. v. 17. This eating then tended to the uniting of the Priest with
the Offering, because they were two diverse individuals; whereas now the Priest
and the Offering are but one and the same person, to wit, Jesus Christ.

But at this day, the atonement being made, another union is necessary, to
wit, of Sinners with the Sacrifice; to the end that having incorporated it
within themselves, the virtue of its death and passion might be imputed to them
for righteousness, even as if they had suffered in their proper persons. It is
from hence that we are enjoined to eat the body by which our sins are expiated;
whereas the sinners in the time of the Law could not eat it so, since, their
expiation was yet to come.

CHAP. XI. An entrance to the Clearing of the fourth Consideration.
NOw I must show the reason of this Phrase which seems to sound so ill in men's
ears. For to feed on the flesh and on the blood of a man, is an action whose
name alone brings horror; and thus as it seems, improper to represent this
sacred Communion of the body of Christ. Behold then what we ought to consider.
It is true that the Holy Ghost, to make himself understood, most times speaks
in terms conformable to the rules which common sense and natural prudence has
been accustomed to observe. For besides the propriety of tongues, wherein he
has bin pleased to express himself, there are certain universal Laws which
reason dictates unto men, and regulateth their expressions; and the wisdom of
God would conform his thereunto. From thence it comes, that to expound the
Scripture, we take our measures From arts which show the congruity of language,
the accord of figures, the nerves and sinews of discourse. But sometimes the
spirit of God has speeches and purposes altoghether entire, whose form answers
not to ordinary rules.

Thus the holy Bible begins with these words, that the Elohim (which are the
Persons of the most blessed Trinity) created the Heaven and the Earth. Terms
whose construction is not Gramatical; but which express as excellently, as
briefly, the unity of the Divine Essence in the Plurality of persons. Such a
Solecism surpasses all Elegance.

So among many discourses which Jesus Christ has uttered, there are found such
whose parts seem to be ranged without order; it being as it were impossible to
see what agreement there is of one with the other in the prosecution of the
same purpose, and to find their joyntings and connexions. They who Analise
such passages simply according to their Logic, give them a constrained, and
often a ridiculous sense. This style has transcendant prerogatives, which we
ought to understand, that we may know the method of the Son of God, which
otherwise will seem irregular.

There you find also similitudes which at the first sight seem rude and
monstrous; as when the coming of the Lord is compared to that of a thief in the
night, 1 These. 5. and in other places. In such comparisons we are wont to say,
that a comparison should never be pressed to the utmost; For to things alike in
one regard are unlike in another. But this caution alone will not content the
mind. For there has been always, whereat to wonder, that two subjects should
be compared and put together, and the one invested with the name of the other,
between which indeed there is some conformity, yet on the other part there
should be so great and so visible a repugnance of qualities, that it renders
the comparison enormous. In this then there is a secret, which is not always
perceivable. In the language of God, the more a phrase is estranged from our
rules, the more it is mysterious. That whereof the question is here, is one of
the most strange in all the Scripture. But if, instead of be holding only the
superficies, we put it in the balance, its weight will make it known for gold
of Ophir.

CHAP. XII. The clearing of the fourth Consideration.
WHEN mention is made of Eating the Body of Christ, that speech is not simply
drawn from the resemblance which there may be between Eating and Communicating,
and ought not to be put into the rank of simple similitudes. This phrase is of
a higher derivation. The intention of our Savior was to revoke a clause of the
Old Testament; which was this, that a man should not eat the flesh and blood
offered for the remission of his sins. We have seen the sense and importance of
it. Jesus Christ would show, that he gives us that which the Law refused us. It
was therefore necessary that he should express it in the same terms; that is
to say, that he should speak to us of eating the flesh offered for our sins.
And that he has done not only in words, retaining the proper terms of the
Testament, but also by the exhibition of a nourishment, whose sensible eating
is an expression of this other. We ought then to know, that this word of
Eating, denoting the communion of the sacrifice, is not simply used, because
there is a resemblance between the two acts; but forasmuch, as in the Law this
communion is called Eating. So Jesus Christ has not introduced this word for a
simple Metaphor or comparison, but has pronounced it as a term of a
Testamentary clause, whose repetition was here necessary for the cause
abovesaid. For this term being already in the first Testament to express this
Communion, must be retained in the second.

It Boots not to say, that the name of Eating, which denotes an act of the
mouth, and of the teeth upon the flesh of Legal offerings, is not convenient to
the Communion of a humane body, as is that of Christ's, and that the comparison
of it is rude. For to understand this term, we must take the entire sense,
which extends it self a great deal farther then a simple comparison. In the
institution of the Supper, this Communion is not simply qualifed, Eating of a
Body given for Food, but of a body given for the atonement of our sins. Now
this speech means, that the Communion of the Body of Christ, which we know to
be spiritual, is in effect what the eating of expiatory Sacrifice was in
figure. Moreover, that the body of Christ having succeeded Sacrifices, the
Communion of this Body has taken the place of eating (of) Sacrifices. This
title then belongs to it, not by simple resemblance, but (if I may so say) both
by succession, and in the same sort that Jesus Christ is called Passover and
Lamb; the truth taking the name of the Figure. As for the words of Jesus
Christ, in the sixth Capter of Saint John, although they have reference to
those of the Holy Supper, nevertheless their interpretation requires particular
considerations, which I omit, forasmuch as I treat of nothing here but what our
Savior said in the Eucharist. Nevertheless we may observe as we go, that the
Communion of the body of Christ, is there called Eating, not by a simple
similitude, but is as much as to say, that this Communion is in effect, and in
substance, that which the eating of the Manna was in shadow and similitude. For
the Jews had objected this eating of the Manna. Finally, for to measure this
phrase in all its dimensions, it is not enough there to consider the analogy
between the eating with the mouth and the Communicating in spirit. For this
resemblance is not the only cause of this expression, nor the only point we
ought to draw to in conclusion.

Moreover, our Lord would show that a spiritual life has principles much
different from a life animal. Both have this common to them, that their
subsistence depends on the union of man with some other subject, which we call
aliment: But in the life natural man has no proper aliments, which are not of
a kind inferior to his own. such are plants and their fruits, such is the
flesh of bruit beasts, which we lodge in our intrales, mingling their blood with
ours, and uniting them to our own substance. Man is constrained to incorporate
into himself these vile things, and which are much below him. On the contrary,
in a spiritual life he unites himself to a subject infinitely more excellent
then himself, to wit, to the Eternal Spirit; for it is the Spirit which
quickens. Now this Spirit Communicates himself unto us in the Flesh of Christ.
So that his Flesh is unto us Meat indeed. In which is seen this diversity; That
in the Life Natural, man and his food ought to be of different kinds: But in
the Life Spiritual, man and his food ought to be of one and the same kind.

Therefore it is that our Savior expresses the Communion of his Body by the
name of this act, contrary to Nature, (which is to eat the flesh of man) for to
signify, that a Spiritual Life is maintained by a means quite contrary to that
which Nature employs in an Animal Life. For to Eat the flesh of the Son of man,
signifies not only to have Communicated with him, but signifies also, that
this Communion is not according to the Laws of Nature. And the words of the Son
of God bear not only a similitude of qualities, but also note an opposition of
kind between the food of the Body and the nourishment of the Spirit. All this
abovesaid being duly considered, we shall find that this phrase which seemed
so strange could not be more pregnant, more complete, nor more convenicent for
the subject.

CHAP. XIII. The fifth Consideration upon the words of Jesus Christ in the
Supper.
SINCE Jesus Christ speaks of a Testament whose last seal is the Eucharist, a
Christian ought to learn what this Testament is, for to know the importance of
the seal which we see put to it: and principally it is necessary to have regard
to that which Jesus Christ said thereof when he instituted the Supper. For he
advertiseth us that this Testament is New; that is to say, succeeds another,
which is abolished by this latter. Moreover, that this Testament is with the
Blood of the Testator; that is to say, that he died in this last Will. Now I
omit to show, why he would make a second Testament, and if there wanted any
thing in the first, it will suffice to observe thence, that the first Testament
was of no force in comparison of the second. For a Testament has no virtue
during the life of the Testator; nor can it send forth its effect, unless the
death of the Testator intervene, Hebrews 9. v. 16, 17. So that the Old
Testament had no force in its time, because that Jesus Christ was not yet dead.
But the Testament which we have at this day has been made efficatious by the
death of the Testator.

Some Jew, who cannot persuade himself that God would abolish the first
Covenant by a second, that which nevertheless he ought to have learned of
Jeremiah 31. v. 31, etc. will tell us that this will make us doubt, whether or
no there shall be yet a third. But this is no reason; For the Covenant of God
was conceived in form of a Testament, or of a donation by reason of Death. Now
the Testator being once dead, there is no place for another Testament. The last
Will wherein he died, remains irrevocable for ever.

Finally, there is this thing extraordinary; that death permitting none to be
executor of his own Testament, Jesus Christ contrarily is come from death to
life for to execute his; forasmuch as none was capable of this charge; For he
is risen again for our justification. Romans 4. v. 25.

CHAP. XIIII. The sixth Consideration upon the words of Jesus Christ.
MY Blood, says he, is shed for the remission of sins. We know that his death
ought to be bloody, according to the Maxim, which says, that there is no
remission of sins made without effusion of blood, Hebrews 9. Now we demand not
here, why this remission could not be obtained otherwise, that is to say, why
it behoved that the death of our Savior, should not only be violent, but also
be marked with blood. Nevertheless, that which I have to observe thereupon,
deserves to be considered. Death, which is the wages of sin, began by effusion
of blood. The first that ever died, (which was Abel) died of a bloody death. As
then the blood of man has been the first fruits of death, so also was it the
conclusion and destruction of it. Death began by blood, and ended by blood.

Between this first blood which was shed upon the Earth, and the Blood of the
Son of God, there is a very remarkable opposition, touched by the Apostle to
the Hebrews, Chapter 12. to wit, that the Blood of Sprinkling, which is that
of Jesus Christ, speaks better things, then that of Abel: For this cried out
for the the punishment of sin; but the other cries for the remission of sins.

It is also observable, that the same man who died first of all, is also the
first (in the holy History) who had sacrificed with blood. For he was the first
that offered the flesh and fat of living Creatures, Genesis 4. 4. So the first
who felt death brought forth by sin, is also the first, who offered the bloody
Oblation whereby we should be delivered from sin, which is the sting of death.

Finally, The Jews, who think it strange that the Blood of a Man is our
Expiation, have nevertheless an imagination, which cannot subsist but upon this
principle, That there must be an humane Sacrifice to wipe away the sins of man.

They believe that God will give them grace, in contemplation of the obedience
of Isaac, who exposed himself voluntarily to be sacrificed. And they have
prayers, wherein they allege the merit of this Sacrifice, as a foundation of
the Redemption which they expect. Now as for the offering of this Patriarch, if
it had been capable to expiate the sins of his Offspring, even of those who
live at this day; why, after this Sacrifice of Isaac, should there be yet need
of so many expiatory Sacrifices? To what purpose has the Law, which is since
given, imposed upon them Sacrifices for the obtaining of pardon? But to speak
no more of it, Isaac was not sacrificed in effect, and his blood was not shed
in this Oblation. Which shows that it is not expiatory. For without an actual
effusion of blood, no remission of sins at all is made. The Law tells them,
that it is blood which makes expiation for the Soul. Lev. 17.

CHAP. XV. The seventh Consideration upon the words of Jesus Christ.
THE Institution of this Sacrament is comprised in few words, whereof not one
is vain. For Jesus Christ has said nothing which contains not some great
point. Now above all things, he shows what is the virtue and dignity of the
Blood which he presents unto us; and this in four diverse respects; to wit,

1. That it is his own Blood, the Blood of the Son of God. 2. That it is the
Blood of the New Covenant. 3. That this Blood purchases unto us remission of
sins. 4. That this Blood is shed for many.
As for this last, amongst many other matters therein contained, I think that
our Lord would yet touch upon a difference also between the Blood of the Old
Testament, and that of the New.

In the Old Testament, the Blood of the Sacrifice was sometimes employed only
for the expiation of one man among the people, who had need of a particular
sacrifice. Now this Sacrifice which was offered but for one man alone, was many
ways inferior to that which was offered for many, that is to say, for the
Multitude, or for all the Church. Principally in this, that the Blood shed in
Sacrifice for one man alone, never came into the Holy Place; But that did,
which was shed for the multitude. Jesus Christ therefore advertiseth us, that
his Blood was shed for many, for the Multitude, to the end that we might know
that his Blood has penetrated the Holy Places, and has opened them, Hebr. 9.
v. 12. And in this also is the New Testament more excellent than the Old. For
the Blood of the Old Testament did not always enter within the Holy Place.

Moreover, the Blood of the Old Testament, which was shed for one man alone,
was not sufficient even to Expiate (legally) all the sins of such a man, but
only a particular offense, for which by name there wholly needed a Sacrifice.
On the contrary, the Blood of the New Testament, was not only shed for many
men, but has also Expiated universally all the sins of every one of them. So
that if one of my sins has been Expiated in this Blood, all my other sins have
there their Expiation also, for it is general and entire.

So then the terms of the Institution, if we know how to weigh them, cause us
to know that Jesus Christ has sounded all the profundities of the Old
Testament, and draws from thence those points which show the excellency and
advantages of the New, by comparing them together.

CHAP. XVI. The eighth Consideration upon the words of the holy Supper.
I Intend not to reiterate that which has been so much written; how the Bread
is the Body of Christ; but only to observe something upon a question which is
common enough, viz. Why our Lord did not ordain Flesh, rather than Bread, for
to represent his Body. For it seems that this Symbol should be more analogick
and significative. According to the saying of many, it is forasmuch as Flesh
has served in old time in the Sacrifices, and in the Passover; and that it
behooves that the Sacraments of the Christian Church should be of other Elements
than those that have served under the Law.

But this answer is ill grounded, for 1. The Bread and Wine were also used in
Sacrifices. There was by name an Oblation of Bread and Wine, Numb. 15. not to
speak of the Shewbread, and of the Offerings of Cakes. 2. The Element of Water
served for Legal purifications: Under the Law there was nothing so ordinary as
the washing with Water, to signify the clensing of the Soul. Yet nevertheless
God would that Baptism should be with Water. 3. The contrary is rather true,
and this is that also which some ancient Fathers say of it, That in this action
Jesus Christ uses Bread and Wine, because that these Elements had already been
used under the Law to represent his Body and his Blood. And this, to the end we
should know, that it is the same Christ represented by the same signs.

But why then has not the Flesh of living Creatures as well place in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, since it has represented Christ in that of the
Passover, and in so many kinds of Sacrifices? We say indeed that Christ has
rather chosen Bread, because it is the most common, and the most nourishing
food, and so most proper to represent his Body. But this excludes not other
reasons which we may give thereof. Moreover, the Eucharist represents not the
Body of Jesus Christ simply, as nourishment, but also as dead. Now some may
say, (which nevertheless is not without contradiction,) that the Death of
Christ was in Old time more ocularly represented by the killing of a Lamb, than
at this day by the breaking of Bread. So it is, this is the point I am to
handle, that Jesus Christ instituting signs of his Dead Body, and of his Blood
shed, did choose things without life, and Elements wherein there was no Blood.
Whereby he would show, that after him no creature should any more lose his life
for the sins of man, and that no other Blood should be shed in Expiation. For
the Sacraments of the Old Testament were Bloody, to denote the Blood which was
to be shed by the death of Christ. But, this effusion being made, the
Sacraments which represent it as done and accomplished, are without effusion of
Blood, to show that there shall be no more Blood shed for sins. Hence it is we
have no more a Sacrament which requires the killing of any creature, but
Signs, wherein death does not intervene, as being of themselves without life,
and of another substance than of Flesh and Blood.

CHAP. XVII. The ninth Consideration upon the words of Jesus Christ.
MEn, principally the common people, do naturally love Similitudes, because
they are drawn from things perceptible to the senses, or otherwise common and
easy to be conceived. But similitudes represent not the essence of a subject,
and do not say what a thing is, but what it resembles. So our Lord would not
tell us simply, that his Body had resemblance unto Bread, nor only that the
Bread is a Seal unto us of the Communion of his Body, but also has showed us
the causes and qualities of this Communion. These words, To eat the Body of
Jesus Christ, signify not only to take it for the Sustenance of our Souls, as
we take food for the nourishment of our Bodies. This Similitude, if we specify
no more, teaches us but very generally the nature of this Communion, and does
not set forth the entire sense of the words of Jesus Christ. For in the
Eucharist our Lord does not propound himself as Flesh in general, but as Flesh
sacrifised for our sins, which is a point of great consequence in this matter.

I have already said that the word Eating is attributed to the Communion of the
body of Christ, which is as much as to say, that this Communion is in substance
that which was in Figure the eating of Sacrifices, of the Manna, of the
Passover, etc. And namely, that in this Communion we have that which the Law
forbad us, to wit, the eating of the Flesh offered for our sins. They, who
content themselves with the general similitudes between the Food of the Body,
and the nourishment of the Soul, attain not unto the specific difference of
the subject of the Eucharist. But I have yet somewhat to say of an abuse which
is committed in the deduction of this Similitude. For as many omit that which
is contained in the words of the holy Supper, so there are some (I speak even
of Orthodox Divines) who add thereto something of their own.

CHAP. XVIII. The tenth Consideration upon the words of Jesus Christ in the
Supper.
We know that we ought not to carry a Similitude beyond its end. For when two
diverse things are compared to one another, it is never in all, and through all,
but only in some regard. When (for example) our Lord in St. Matthew. 13. v. 46.
compares the kingdom of Heaven to a Pearl of great price, his intention is but
to express the greatness of the value and richness of the Gospel. Now he that
would, under pretense of this word Pearl, dispute philosophically of all the
kinds and proprieties of Pearls, search of what matter they are made, and how
they are formed, and subtly fit all this to the kingdom of Heaven would
surpass the bounds wherein Jesus Christ has confined the similitude. For he
does not in all qualities compare the kingdom of Heaven to a Pearl, but only
in the price or esteem which men have of it. Notwithstanding there are few
found among those who expound the Scriptures, who keep themselves within these
limits. There are even of those who regard no measure when they handle a
comparison. If our Savior say that he is a Vine, they will name all sorts of
Vines, and their differences, and tell you what territory is proper to them,
when they are to be planted, how they are to be pruned and kept; Also, what
are the parts of this Plant, even unto the least leaf. And likewise, if their
text speak of the Sower, they will display all husbandry. On a time a knowing
man, expounding unto us that which is said of the Longitude, and Latitude,
depth and heigh of the love of God, Ephesians. 3. v. 18. preached unto us all the
Matheticks, from a Point even unto the Squaring of a Circle; so that one would
have thought him an interpreter of Euclide, and not of Saint Paul.

Also many handle the doctrine of the Supper, who teach that among the
Analogies by which the bread represents the body of Christ, this is one; That
as the Bread was baked in the Oven by the heat of the fire, so the Body of
Jesus Christ passed through the furnace of torments, and of death. Also, that
as the Bread is made of Wheat which was ground and broken, so the Body of Jesus
Christ was broken to be made bread for us. Likewise, as for the other sign;
that as the Wine warms the entrails, so does the Blood of Christ warm our
hearts to Charity. That as the Wine does loose the tongue, so the Blood of
Christ makes us eloquent to confess his name. That as the Wine makes ruddy the
face of man, so the Blood of Christ drives away the paleness of death.

Now, saving the respect due to Predecessors, and not to speak of that which
would seem ridiculous in such Allegories, I cannot abstain from saying that
they stretch this analogy beyond the intention of the Son of God; for first his
death is not represented unto us by the baking of Bread, but rather by the
breaking of it, nor by the bruising of the grain under the millstone.
Moreover, in the Eucharist the Bread and Wine are not considered universally in
all their proprieties and conditions. For bread and wine have also qualities,
wherein they have no analogy with the body and blood of our Lord. And even all
the qualities wherein the bread and wine have any similitude with the body and
blood of Christ, are not sacramental, but only those that are comprised in
the Institution. That, which is Sacracramentall in them, is, that they are Meat
and Drink, that we Eat the one, and Drink the other; in which respect they are
signs of our Communion of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16.
The other conformities which are to be found between the body of Christ and the
bread, between the blood of Christ and the wine, have no place in the
Eucharist, neither are there to be considered. We ought not to multiply the
^nalogy between the sign inasmuch as a sign, and the thing signified. And
finally, when these analogies, which we there meet with, are not proposed as
Sacramental, but only as terms serving to illustrate or amplify, we see
manifestly that in the most part of them, in stead of fitting the Similitude to
the Subject which they would represent, they fit the Subject to the Similitude,
drawing it by force into the Comparison. Now this is not to clear, but to make
more intricate. And in such amplifications there is more words, than substance.

The Third Sect.
CHAP. I. Of the difference between the Evangelists reciting the Institution of
the Supper.
THe Apostle St. Paul and the three Evangelists who have wrote this History,
do report something diversely the words of Jesus Christ. This difference may
easily be perceived by hearing them speak together. Now it is not necessary to
repeat what the Expositors answer thereupon. The whole being well considered,
there will always be found an excellent harmony, and one and the same sense.
But, forasmuch as the Jews object unto us this diversity as a note of discord
among the writers of the New Testament, we must bring to their remembrance the
difference which is found between Moses and Moses writing the Decalogue in two
several places, viz. in the 20. of Exodus, and the 5. of Deuteronomy. By
Comparison of both, we see not only that there is diversity of terms, but
also in the one there are things which are not expressed in the other. I omit
the difference which we see in the order of words contained in the last
Commandment. We must observe that God does never repeat the same thing, but it
is with some diversity, at least for the most part. This is seen by comparing
the Histories which treat of the same subject; as Deuteronomy with the three
precedent books; the books of Chronicles, with those of Samuel, and of the
Kings; the Evangelists one with the other; Besides an infinite number of
passages which are of like sort, wherein is always observed some difference.
It is an effect of the care which God has of us, explaning himself by diverse
ways, by a diverse order, by diverse terms, and by diverse matters, to the end
that those things which are obscure unto us in one place, should be made
intelligible unto us by another. And indeed, the sense of Sacramental words is
better known by the diversity wherein they are propounded unto us, than if they
we^^ all rendered in the same syllables throughout all the Evangelists.

Finally, it may be observed as we go, that as the Decalogue (wherein God
speaks unto us,) is written twice at large, in the Law; so the Lords Prayer, in
which we speak to God, is written twice at large, in the Gospel, and also with
some diversity, viz. in St. Matthew. 6. and St. Luke 11.

CHAP. II. Of the first and last Sacrament of the Eating of the body of Christ.
FRom the fall of man, even until Moses, there was no Sacramental Eating,
during all that time the Church had no Sacrament which consisted in eating, nor
yet any Sacrifice whereof it was ordained to eat. Before Moses, they spoke
ordinarily of nothing but of Sacrifices, laid whole on the Altar, whereof none
was eaten. For this kind of Sacrifice was entirely burned. The first Sacrifice
which was ordained for meat, was the Paschall Lamb. The eating of Sacrifices is
come up since, as that of Manna, which yet was extraordinary.

Now this is worthy to be observed, that in one and the same supper Jesus
Christ celebrated the first and the last Sacrament of the Eating of his body,
viz. the Passover and the Eucharist. And from the same bread and wine which
made part of the Supper of the Passover, he has taken the signs whereof is
composed the holy Supper. So the first and the last Sacrament of the Eating of
the body of Christ are met and touch one another at the same Table; and the
first resigning his place to the other, has furnished it with matter whereof
it is formed.

CHAP. III. Of the first and last Passover mentioned in Scripture.
ALthough the Passover was celebrated yearly among the people of God,
nevertheless holy history recites particularly certain memorable Passovers
amongst others, solemnized at diverse times.

The first, when the Israelites prepared themselves to go out of Egypt, Exodus
12.

The second, in the Desert, the year after their going out of Egypt, Numb. 9.

The third, when they were entered into the land of Canaan, Jos. 5.

The fourth, at the Reformation of the Church, made by Ezekias, 2 Chronic. 30.

The fifth, under King Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.

The sixth, after the Return from the Captivity, Esdras 6.

This is the number of those which were mentioned in the Old Testament, four
whereof were celebrated in the Land of promise: But the seventh, which is the
perfection of all the rest, was yet to come. And it is that which Jesus Christ
has celebrated, the last of all, whereto immediately succeeded the Supper.

In this last Passover, the Lamb it self is there found in the very Flesh,
which had been represented by the Lambs of former Passovers.

We must also note that Jesus Christ, who celebrated the last Passover, was
there where the first was celebrated, to wit, in Egypt. Neither is it without a
mystery, that, as the Passover came from Egypt, so Jesus Christ, who is the
true Passover, was called out of Egypt. Matthew. 2. 15.

CHAP. IIII. Of the time of the Institution of the Supper, and that its durance
surpasses that of the Mosaicall Ceremonies.
AS for the Circumstance of time wherein the Eucharist was instituted, although
it be not of the Essence of it, nevertheless it is very considerable in that it
concurrs with the time of the most notable Ceremonies of the Law. There are
some Chronologers who think that the same year, wherein Christ was put to
death, was a year of Jubilee; For from the Conquest of the Land of Canaan, by
Josuah, until the death of Christ, they account 1400. years, which contain 28.
Mosaicall Jubilees; the last whereof fell just in the year wherein our Lord
made overture of the spiritual Jubilee, the day after the Institution of the
Supper. We might quote many other the like conformities. The hour wherein Jesus
Christ gave up the Ghost upon the Cross was the third in the afternoon, which
the Jew accounted the ninth hour of the day. The Law names it the time between
two evenings. And in that hour there was a daily Sacrifice for all the people,
Exodus 29. v. 39. So that our Lord presented his Body in Oblation in the same
hour wherein they offered according to the Law the last Sacrifice of the day,
making it also the close of all Sacrifices. But besides, the Sacraments of the
Christian Church have already dured longer than the Legal Ceremonies to which
they succeeded. For it is certain that from the first Supper until this day,
there is more time passed then between the first Passover, and the last
destruction of the Temple. And these Ceremonies of Moses have been already
buried longer than they subsisted. But this last Sacrament of Eating of the
Body of Christ, shall remain till he comes, 1 Cor. 11. v. 26.

CHAP. V. Of the difference of the style betwixt the Institution of the
Passover, and that of the Eucharist.
WE way see in the 12th Chapter of Exodus, the Institution of the Passover
recited very amply, whereas that of the Eucharist is comprised in very few
words. Now this difference proceeds certainly from this, that the one contains
a multitude of Ceremonies, which requires many more articles, and the other
consists in the simplicity of an action which may be declared in few words.
Hereby also we see that the Church has been discharged of many burdensome
observations. The Jews having calculated all the Commandments contained in the
Law of Moses, as well Moral as Ceremonial and Politic, have found them to
amount to the number of 613. Among which there are many which are yet
subdivided into diverse branches. Now of so many Commandments it is not
possible for them at this day to observe so much as the one half of them.

But I observe that the Institution of the Passover speaks much more of the
sign than of the thing signified. For Moses having described at large all that
concerned the Lamb and its eating, when he comes to the thing signified he
expressth it very summarily. Exodus 12. v. 26. 27. It is also the style of the
law to be prolix in the narration of Sacrifices, of washings, and outward
purifications, and to speak very briefly of spiritual graces represented under
such figures. Now this was the Method of the legal Pedagogy to teach men
rather by Emblemes and rudiments, than by an exact doctrine, Gal. 4. v. 3.

On the contrary, the Sacraments of the Christian Church are proposed unto us
with less Ceremonies and more doctrine.

CHAP. VI. That the Holy Supper consists in signs and actions common and
natural.
I Will add a Reason to those which are more ordinary upon this subject. We
know that there are many points of the Ceremonial Law, which the Jews cannot
practice at this day; not because they have no more a Temple; but because they
are gnorant of the form, and the qualities of many things which the Law had
prescribed to their forefathers. Among the examples which may be given in great
number, I shall observe only one or two. The Jews think themselves obliged
(by the words of the 30. of Exodus v. 13.) to pay yearly, for pious works, half
a shekel for each head. Now, as they say, they know not what a shekel was, its
weight, and its value. So that the practice of this Commandment, and of many
others whose sense is unknown, is altogether impossible for them. And if
suffizes not to say, that they might give more than the shekel was worth. For
this is to be always ignorant of the point wherein the Law consists, and whose
observation. (as of all the other Ceremonies) ought to be exact and precise,
under pain of non-acceptance. Likewise it is uncertain whether the Phylacteries
which the Jews will yet wear according to the Law, were of fringe, or else of
filleting or bordering; and of what color the thread or twist was, whether of
Purple, or of Skie-colour, or Seagreen. For they are not agreed of it. I omit
the disputes which there are concerning the Cubits and measures of the Altar;
concerning the figures of the Cherubims; the ingredients destined for the
anointing of the High Priest; Urim and Thummim, and things of like sort.

Now we must know, that God giving this Law, and nevertheless having an
intention to abrogate it after a certain time, and foreseeing also the
stubbornness of this people, who would never quit these Ceremonial Rudiments,
composed them of matters and forms subject to change and forgetfulness, to the
end that of themselves they might be abolished. For the weights and measures,
colors, and fashions of vestments, of Embroydereries and Pourtraitures, and
other differences, wherein consisted a great part of Ceremonies, are changeable
things, and which are destroyed with the time, as being more of Art than of
Nature.

But on the contrary our Savior willing to Institute Sacraments which should
remain to the end of the world, made them of matters and actions, which never
change nor vary, as being natural, simple, uniform, universal, and common to
all ages: Such is the washing with water, such is eating and drinking.
Forasmuch as they are actions invariable and perpetual, Jesus Christ has
chosen them for Signs, to the end that our Sacraments should not be subject to
change, and that the time might not make us forget a form.

CHAP. VII. That our Savior has not prefixed any time for the Celebration of
the Supper.
THe Passover could not be Celebrated but at a set time of the year. But Jesus
Christ substituting the Supper to the Passover, advertiseth us, that without
distinction of time, as often as we shall take this Bread and this Cup in
remembrance of him, we shall receive the Supper of the Lord. It is to be noted,
that the difference of Times, of Places, and of Persons, to which God has
restrained the most notable Ceremonies of the Old Testament, tended to the end
which we have named; to wit, to facilitate their abrogation. For he tied the
Sacrifices to one place alone; whose possession coming to destruction, all the
Sacrifices ought to cease. And consequently bound the Priestly office to one
family alone; which coming to be extinguished of it self, (as races are
destroyed in time) there ought to be no more a Priest. The which is also come
to pass. For if at this day the the Jews should recover, and build again the
Temple, they would find no Priest according to the Law: forasmuch as their
Tribes having been confounded, there is none left who can term himself of the
family of Aaron. Touching the distinction of times (without speaking of
Confusions which have since happened by the ignorance of the course of the
heavens, and of the continual retrogradation of the Equinox) the Jews have
lost the knowledge of the year of Jubilee one of the great points of the Law,
and know not how any more to find it.

But the Sacraments of the Christian Church were not subject to this
inconvenience, nor to diverse others which followed the Mosaicall Ceremonies.
Our Baptism is not fixed to the eighth day, nor our Lords Supper to the full
Moon, or to the Spring time, or unto the Sabbath it self. If some Christians
should be under those Climats where one day dures many months, and the night
as long, they would there have no week nor Sabbath day: and nevertheless might
celebrate the Supper of the Lord, and his resurrection as well as we upon
Easter day.

CHAP. VIII. Why Jesus Christ is represented unto us in the Supper as he was on
the Cross, and not as he is in heaven; also why he has not Instituted a
Sacrament which should represent him in his glory, as he has ordained two,
which represent him dead.
ALL the Sacraments speak of Death. As for Baptism it is said, that we are
baptized in the death of Christ, Romans 6. v. 3, 4. As for the Supper, We show
thereby the Lords death, 1 Cor. 11. 26. And both were Instituted when Jesus
Christ was yet mortal. For no Sacrament was established by Jesus Christ
glorified; but only he confirmed those which he had Instituted before his
death.

We know then that in the Supper Jesus Christ is exhibited unto us as dead,
and not as glorified. Now this serves to show the falsity of the corporeal
presence for which there is so much dispute. For if the body of Jesus Christ be
in the Host, he is not there living, since that he is in this action as dead. It
makes us also see the nakedness of that which is called Concomitance, and of
the unbloody Sacrifice. For the Blood of Jesus Christ is presented unto us as
separate from his body. This likewise makes unprofitable the exception whereby
it is maintained that a glorious body may be corporally in diverse places at one
and the same time. For were it so, the body of Jesus Christ is not exhibited
unto us as glorious, nor yet as living; but as dead, as broken; and his blood
as shed. Let this be said by the way; For Orthodox divines have made these
reasons of force enough.

But it may be demanded why Jesus Christ is represented unto us as dead, and
not glorified? Is it there spoken of his Death, and not rather of his
Resurrection? Why had he rather Institute a memorial of his ignomious
humiliation, than of his glorious exaltation? Why have we no Sacrament which
represents unto us his body glorious, as we have two which represent him dead?
For it is very true, that the consideration of his humiliation excludes not
that of his exaltation; on the contrary, it leads us to it: But properly and
formally the Body of Jesus Christ is not represented, nor considered in the
Supper but as dead and broken.

This question is easy to be resolved. The Sacraments are Instituted in favor
of men. And the end of a Sacrament is to assure us of our good and salvation.
So in the Supper, the intention of Jesus Christ was thereby to seal and ratify
that which concerns us, not that which concerns himself. And for this reason he
presents himself in this action inasmuch as he procured the glory of others,
not so much as he possesses his own. Now it is by his death, that he has
procured our glory. True it is that his exaltation is also our Salvation; But
he has received this Glory both for us and for himself, whereas his Death was
wholly for us. Moreover it is by virtue of his Death, that his Glorification is
profitable unto us. For that he has taken possession of the heavens in our
name, and that he intercedes for us at the right hand of God, all this comes
from the merit of his Blood, Heb. 9. v. 12. Furthermore Jesus Christ does give
himself unto us in the Eucharist inasmuch as he was delivered up for us, Luke
22: v 19, 20: Now it was in his Death that he was delivered; So that he gives
himself unto us as Dead. Finally he would leave us a remembrance of the love
which he bare us. Now the greatest effect wherein this love appeared, was that
he gave himself to Death for us. It is for this cause, that he represents unto
us rather his Death, than his Exaltation. From thence it is that in the Supper,
although we ought to lift our hearts up to heaven where he is now living in
full Majesty, nevertheless his body broken and his blood shed are the proper
and formal object of our contemplation. And the act of our mind consists in
this, that we there consider his Death past, rather than his present Glory.
This will furnish an answer for the following question.

CHAP. IX. Why in the Supper Jesus Christ instituted not more illustrious
Signs; and why they are not miraculous.
THere is none of us who has not this thought, when he sees that this
Sacrament, as well as Baptism, consists in such abject matters; Our eye is
astonished to see nothing more glorious. The Bow in the heaven which God made
Noah to see for assurance that from thence-forth there should no more an
universal deluge appear; The Pillar of fire, and the Cloud which witnessed the
presence of God among the Israelites; The going back of the Sun to confirm the
faith of Ezekias; had a more famous appearance than our Sacraments. We will
say, as it is true, that the elements whereof they are composed, are more
important to man. For the use of water, eating and drinking are more necessary
for us, than the sight of more majesticall objects. Now it is that God would
represent unto us benefits necessary for the soul, under the image of those
which are most necessary for the body. I omit the other reasons for which it
was necessary that the Eucharist should consist of Nourishment, of which I have
spoken here above, and could also allege them for the Water of Baptism.

But we think further, wherefore were not those Elements used in some
extraordinary fashion; or why are they not sent us from Heaven as the Manna; or
produced miraculously as the Wine at the Marriage in Cana? Or why was there not
some Miracle showed, as in the Loaves which Jesus Christ multiplied for the
satisfying of many thousands of persons? Or why has not the bread of the Holy
Supper the virtue of sustaining us forty days after, without eating or
drinking, as that which God caused to be brought to Elias? And likewise, why
did not an Angel descend into the water of Baptism, as in the pool of
Bethesda, for to heal corporal maladies? Why was Naaman healed of his Leprosy
in the water of Jordan; and nevertheless if a Leaper be Baptized, his Leprosy
is not wiped away?

To all this may be given one common answer touching the causes of the
Cessation of miracles. But there are particulars touching our Sacraments, by
name touching the Supper. The end of a miracle, is to show the greatness and
power of God: On the contrary, the end of our Sacraments, particularly of the
Eucharist, is to show the infirmity, the death and humiliation of Christ. Now
the disgrace could not be represented by a glorious spectacle and full of
splendor; nor the weakness by tokens of infinite power, such as miracles are;
nor the death and passion, by acts of an unchangeable life; nor the humiliation
of the Humanity, by the glorious demonstrations of the Divine Nature. Therefore
it is that our Savior who had multiplied the bread and turned the Water into
Wine, at other feasts, and for other occasions, has done nothing so in this
here, but makes use of Bread and Wine produced naturally, and such as they are
in their ordinary proprieties, without adding thereto any thing miraculous.
This ought to render the tales which men make of apparitions and other wonders
seen in the Eucharist, altogether suspected. For it is credible that if our
Savior would have authorized it by miracles, he would have rather employed
them in the first Supper, when the establishing of the New Sacrament was in
agitation. Finally, as the Sacraments which were instituted to be ordinary and
perpetual in the Judaicall Church, viz. the Circumcision and the Passover,
had nothing supernatural; So the Sacraments which at this day take place of
those, and which are ordinary and perpetual in the Christian Church, ought not
to consist in extraordinary and miraculous signs or operations. Moreover the
Eucharist succeeded the eating of Sacrifices, which was truly a sacred action,
but wherein no miracle did intervene. And lastly, because men have used to turn
into idols the signs whereby God has produced some wonder, (witness the Brazen
Serpent) or to make a stay there, as if the Grace and power of God were there
enclosed: if he had given us Sacraments of a more illustrious appearance, or if
some miracle had been done thereby, long ago Superstition would have deified
them; which yet is not left undone.

The Fourth Sect. Wherein are handled certain points concerning the practice of
a Christian in the receiving of the Supper.
CHAP. I. Of our ignorance or errors in some Cirstances of the death of Christ.
THe doctrine of the Roman Church bears in its consequences, That a man may eat
the body of Jesus Christ without knowing or thinking of it. For it may happen
that an host fallen into the hands of such an one, who knowing not that it was
consecrated may swallow it down, and remain ignorant of its being Jesus Christ.
And though he should think it, he would not know how to make it evident; since
that if he should put it into scales, against one that were not consecrated,
this would be found to weigh as much as the other. Finally, a mouse which
devoures the host thinks not to eat a Sacrament.

But this is an assured Maxim to us, That the flesh of Jesus Christ cannot be
eaten, without knowing of it or thinking of it. From whence follows, that
whosoever knows not Jesus Christ is incapable of this eating. Now I need not
repeat that which is notorious to all, whereto at the least ought to extend the
knowledge of a Christian; but only to speak of that which I have laid down in
chief. The end of the Supper is, that we declare the death of the Lord. This
requires the historical intelligence of the particularities of it, whereof
none is of any small importance. For it is not enough to know in general or
summarily that Jesus Christ is dead; but we must have a distinct knowledge of
the place, time, and other circumstances of his death. It is not in vain that
the Holy Spirit has so carefully marked them. They are all as so many stars to
guide us in the search of our salvation, and have every one some particular
influence. Nevertheless if a Christian comprehend them not exactly, this
ignorance (so that it be not wilful) will not hinder but he may communicate to
salvation. It is a point which imports us, to know how long our Savior was on
the Cross. The durance of his last sufferings is considerable in all sorts. It
is also represented more than once in holy History, viz. in St. Mark 15. v. 25.
and 33. and in St. John 19. v. 14. Nevertheless all Christians understand it
not. For some with more ground hold that Jesus Christ was upon the Cross for
the space of three hours; Others double the time, and believe he remained there
six hours. Now as it is known this difference comes from this, that the
Evangelists having used diverse terms to express the same thing, expositors have
taken them diversely.

But if we did know perfectly all the circumstances of this death, we should
not know all the particular reasons, nor all the mysteries there contained. As
for Example; upon that which was observed that our Savior gave up the Ghost at
the hour of the Evening Sacrifice, there are few who think of that which is
said in the 9. of Daniel v. 21. to wit, that the hour wherein the Angel
declared the time of the death of Christ to come, many ages before, was that of
the Evening Sacrifice; which is to be admired, and full of Consolation.

Now our ignorance in such matters is no small fault. And we ought not to
flatter our selves with this pernicious Maxim of the vulgar, viz. we have no
need of so much knowledge. But on the other side, a Christian who strives to
instruct himself more and more ought not to think that these omissions which he
is forced to make up, do deprive him of the saving Communion of the Sacrament.
Not without cause does the scripture give us to know that even the Apostles
themselves when Jesus Christ gave them the Eucharist with his own hands, were
defiled with notable errors. Luke. 22. v. 24. And it is certain that we know
more of the mystery of this Sacrament, and understand better the grounds of
this doctrine, and the causes of the death of Christ Jesus, than his disciples
did, when they were admitted to that first supper.

CHAP. II. Why does not the reading of the Passion of Jesus Christ move us so
much as the reading of many other histories of the Scripture.
WE know that the Remembrance of the death of Jesus Christ which we declare
in the Supper ought not to be naked and idle, or to remain in the Brain. It
must descend into the heart, and stir up the affections. Now there is nothing
which ought to move us equally with the Passion of the son of God: and the
least of his anguishes ought to be more sensible unto us than those of all men
together. Nevertheless if we read that sad preparation of Abraham going to
sacrifize his son; or the pitiful words of Jacob, when they told him that some
beast had devoured Joseph; or the sacking of Jerusalem by the Babylonians, yea
how they handled that miserable King Zedekias, we are touched more lively, and
these stories will draw more tears from our eyes, than the history of the
sufferings of Jesus Christ. And as there are tears of joy, they will sooner fall
from our eyes in reading how Joseph met with his brothers, and of the cry which
he cast forth when he made himself known unto them, than in hearing of Christ
coming forth of the sepulcher, and the joy which his Disciples had to see him
risen again. Yet so it is, that neither the knife which was to cut Jsaacks
throat, nor the bloody coat of Joseph, nor the desolations and crying in the
streets of Jerusalem, are not to us of such importance as the sufferings of the
son of God. And his Resurrection is more considerable to us than the exaltation
of Joseph. For to resolve this question we have diverse things to consider.

First the sufferings of those who were but men, do easily move us, because
there is nothing more natural than to have a fellow-feeling in the Calamities
of those who are like us; but the griefs of Jesus Christ present themselves
unto us in a person which cannot be the object of any commiseration or natural
commotion. For we think of God himself suffering in form of a servant. This is
the reason wherefore he forbad the tears of those who bewailed him as a man
whose affliction is pitied, or the loss of whom is much lamented, Luke. 23.
v. 28.

Whereupon it is that the history of the Passion is not written in a pitiful
and pathetick style, as the Lamentations of Jeremiah, or the complaint of David
over Saul and Jonathan; or the ulcers of Job; or the sad solitude of the
Jsraelites by the Rivers of Babylon. For the Gospel does not propound unto us
a spectacle of human calamity, but a point of higher consideration.

Moreover this condoling which has place in other subjects, is found either
excluded or swallowed up in this here, by more noble and more spiritual
motions, as are the horror of our sins which have crucified the Prince of
glory; the terror of that dreadful severity which God has displayed upon his
own Son; the admiration of his incomparable wisdom, who could join his Mercy
with his Justice; the unspeakable joy of salvation which is derived from thence
unto us; and the ardent Love which we bear toward the Father who has given
his Son, and toward the Son who has given himself to death for us. For these
are the true resentments which we ought to have of the sufferings of Jesus
Christ.

Now the subject of the spiritual resentments is not naturally perceptible of
our affections, but is a stranger unto them. Therefore it is that they are not
moved toward it but as they are drawn unto it by the finger of God. And even
this is the cause they are not carried thither with so full a vigor, and so
much readiness, as toward those objects whereto they are enclineable of
themselves.

Moreover the spiritual affections, although they are strong and vehement, are
not so easy to be moved and to be felt. For forasmuch as they lodge as it were
in the center of the Soul, they are far from the sensitive faculty, which is
the source of tears: so that they come not thither so soon nor so easily. That
which I have yet to say belongs to the question following.

CHAP. III. From whence comes it that the Superstitious are sometimes more
moved with the Death of Jesus Christ, than true Christians.
WE see sometimes Idolaters who, having but very little understanding in the
mysteries of redemption, will weep at the reciting of the Passion of Jesus
Christ; And nevertheless a well-instructed Christian, and who prizes the
Sufferings of his Savior a great deal more than they that are ignorant, will
very hardly be moved with it. This difference proceeds hence, that the
Superstitious have before their faces the Passion of Jesus Christ as a
tragical accident, which does easily touch those hearts that are endued with
any humanity. But the Christian contemplates it with another eye than that
wherewith we regard the Calamities of other men. The one brings thereunto an
humane Commiseration, which tears do naturally follow: But the other finds
there the subject of many spiritual affections, whereof our heart is not so
easily susceptible, because they proceed not from flesh and blood. And the
means of framing them to it consist rather in instructions and doctrines
whereby we must handle this matter, than in the oratoricall representations of
those who reduce it into a Tragedy.

Moreover, it is not an assured proof that he bears most Love toward Jesus
Christ that shall have shed most tears for him. For oftentimes they proceed as
soon from a tender-heartednes which is more natural to some than others, as
from the abundance of piety. Many who never wept for the love of Christ,
nevertheless suffered Martyrdom for the love of him. Such a one could not give
him so much as one Tear, who gave him all his Blood.

CHAP. IV. Off the vehemence of the thoughts, and of the attention required in
the action of the Communion. And of the weakness of the humane spirit herein.
I do not here refute those, who for want of well understanding our Doctrine,
think that the spiritual Communion of the Body or Christ consists only in
thought of imagination: we could object unto them the Souls which they believe
to be in Purgatory, which according to the saying of the Roman Church enjoy the
Communion of Christ, and so of his Flesh and Blood. A Communion which cannot be
otherwise than in spirit. For these Souls have neither mouth nor stomach.

Neither do I content my self with that which is alleged for proof of the true
Communion; that sometimes some have fallen into an Ecstasy in the receiving
their host, through admiration of pretended wonders which they there
presuppose. Such Enthusiasmes are neither sufficient, nor necessary for the
Communion of the Body of Christ. For although it be supernatural: yet
notwithstanding it is not done by a miraculous transport, nor by a motion so
vehement, as that of the Prophets when they were ravished in Spirit, until
they had even lost their sense and remained unmovable; all the functions of
the soul (except in those of the Intellect) being at that time in their
intermission.

Nevertheless we know that a Christian ought to bring the most strong and
vehement thoughts that he is able to so high a mystery. All other cogitations
ought to be suspended, all other objects excluded. But it comes to pass often
that a Christian, after having duly prepared himself for the Holy Supper, will
find himself all on the sudden and unawares surprised with doubts and scruples,
at the same moment when he receives the Eucharist. I omit the inadvertencies,
the extravagancies, and the enormous thoughts which overtake men in this
action. These phantasms possess the place which ought to be reserved entire for
Jesus Christ: and although men strive to drive them away, it is nevertheless
impossible for them. This shows that a human spirit is not Master of it self,
since that it cannot stop its own thoughts, and that they depend not on his
will. Now although they are not voluntary, nevertheless since that they are
ours, and that they cross the attention which is due to an action of so great
importance, they offend the dignity of the body of Christ. And in this also is
seen the infirmity of man, who sins even against the Sacrifice which brings him
the remission of his sins. But if he condemn these evil cogitations, if he
strive to scare them as Abraham did the Birds of prey which came to devour his
Sacrifice; although (notwithstanding this) they intervene in the instant and at
the very act of the eating of the Sacrament, Jesus Christ will not refuse to
lodge in the soul of this weak Christian. For he who is dead for our
transgressions, has also expiated those which we commit even in applying this
expiation unto our selves.

CHAP. V. That the act of the Communion consists not in mourning for the
death of Christ, but rather in joy and contentment of Spirit.
THere is no need of disputing whether the faithful who lived before the
passion of Jesus Christ, had reason to be perplexed, not knowing whether they
ought to wish that the Son might suffer death, or rather desire with St. Peter,
that this might not happen unto him. They were invited to the one, for the Love
of their Salvation; and to the other, as it seems, for the Love of their
Savior. Our Lord decided this question, both before his death by that sharp
censure which he made of it to his Disciples, and afterward when he alleged
the Oracles importing that Jesus Christ must suffer, to the end he might enter
into his glory.

But it may be demanded whether the Holy Supper be an action of joy or rather
of sadness. Certainly the death of Jesus Christ, wherein we declare the
horrible anguishes of his Soul, the strokes of that holy Body broken with
griefs, the effusion of that innocent blood which we there consider as if it
were powered forth before our eyes, are a subject of Sadness unto us. And that
for as much more as acknowledging our selves to be the cause of his sufferings,
we cannot but be touched with regrete that we have procured them. Now these
resentments seem to exclude from our minds all manner of Joy in the act of the
Communion. The Law forbade the putting of incense and oil, which is the Symbol
of Joy, upon the Flesh sacrificed for sins. And the Jews at this day observe so
precisely, that which heretofore was enjoined them in the feast of expiations,
viz. to afflict their souls; that on all that day they refrain from reading
even any passage of Scripture which contains any matter of joy; as the coming
forth out of Egypt, the Conquest of Canaan, etc. On the contrary, their reading
is of nothing but sorrowful things, as are the destruction of Jerusalem, the
cursings of the Law, and such like points.

But omitting that which might be said of this Superstition, there is none who
knows not that the Eucharist is an acknowledgement of a benefit which is
offered unto us in this action, which we cannot receive but with joy. Also this
Sacrament is instituted for our consolation. True it is we ought to come unto
it with sadness, for the Reasons above said; That is a necessary fore runner:
But the proper act, wherein lies the Communion or reception of the Body of
Christ, consists not in that; but in the joy and contentment which our Soul
receives in that Jesus Christ has given himself for it. The Superstitious
deceive themselves who believe that the Commemoration of his death consists
only in much mourning. For in the Eucharist Jesus Christ is not simply
propounded unto us as dead, but as dead for us. To the end that as his death is
our life, so it should be also our joy.

CHAP. VI. Of an advantage which we have above those of the Church of Rome, in
the instruction required for the Communion, and of the distinctions, which the
Orthodox observe in this matter of the Sacrament.
A Roman Catholic has need of a great deal more time to learn his Religion,
than one that is Orthodox has to understand his.

Let a man behold a volume wherein is comprised the whole Roman Religion, as the
Doctors thereof have reduced their Divinity into one Body; he shall see that it
much surpasses the ordinary bulk of those wherein ours is contained. For I
speak not here of writings of Controversy; since that Faith consists not in the
Negative of Errors, but in the Affirmative of Truths. It is to be understood of
positive Divinity; whose extent if it be compared with that of our adversaries,
theirs will be found much more vast and swelling than ours. Their Religion is
composed of a greater number of articles: For they have many which our Theology
does not acknowledge; and in those which are common to us both, they have
heaped up a number of matters which also our Religion nullifies. Briefly the
Roman Theology contains almost all our Affirmative, but over and above that
which it professes to acknowledge with us, it has its own additions. From
thence it comes that that is more prolix than ours.

This is seen above all, in the doctrine of the Sacraments, wherein the learned
of the Roman Church are more copious than in other points. For amongst them
almost all Religion is reduced to Sacraments, and the Grounds of their Divinity
consist in this matter. Moreover as they have multiplied the Sacraments even
unto the number of seven, they have need of more stuffs to cloth them, than
we who have but two. And as for the Eucharist, besides that which they hold
with us, they have added to the Sacrament the Expiatory Sacrifice; to the
spiritual eating of the body of Christ, the eating with the mouth; to the
Analogy between the sign and the thing signified, the transubstantiation of the
one and the other; to the adoration of Christ, the adoration of the Sacrament
it self; and of other additions which have infinite consequences, all which
enter together hudled up in this point of the Eucharist. And as they are full
of Labyrinths, and rugged ways, wherein we cannot walk without either
endangering Faith or Natural Reason, or sense; The Roman Church has conceived
many distinctions, which it gives for marks and directions to walk by in
assurance. Now the multitude alone of them (leaving all that may be said of
them otherwise) shows that an Orthodox will sooner learn all that he ought to
believe of the Eucharist, than a Roman Catholic will the tenth part of that
which his Religion teaches concerning this point.

Nine distinctions, such as are these following, will clear to us all this
business. We put a difference between a Sacrament and a Figure. Every Sacrament
is a Figure, but every Sign is not a Sacrament.

Between the Sacramental eating and the Spiritual eating; The one regards the
Signs, the other the thing signified.

Between the Substantial being of Sacraments, and their Significative being.
The Bread is the Body of Christ Sacramentally, as the rock was Christ, that is
to say in a mystical signification.

Between Real and Corporal. All that is Corporal is Real: but all that is
Real is not Corporal. Spiritual actions amongst which is the eating of the
Body of Christ are Real but not Corporal.

Between the diverse manners of Presence. Many things are present to the Memory,
and to the Understanding, which are not to the Corporal senses. Many objects
are even present to us corporally, which are remote from us, by a greater
distance of places; witness the Sun and the Stars.

Between the diverse degrees of our Conjunction with Christ; which considered in
three regards, is either Natural, or Mystical, or Glorious.

Between Faith and the Communion of the Body of Christ. Faith is not the
Communion, but the Organ by which it is made.

Between a Sacrament and a Sacrifice. The Sacrament is a gift which God
bestows on man, Sacrifice is a present man which makes to God. In the
Eucharist it is not Man who offers Jesus Christ to God; but it is God who
offers Jesus Christ to Man.

Between a Sacrifice of Expiation, and a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving. This is
done in the Eucharist, the other was done only on the Cross.

The Fifth Section. Which is the subject of a greater treatise serving not only
for the understanding of the Eucharist, but also of all the New Testament.
CHAP. I. The Style of the New Testament is woven and composed of six kinds of
Phrases and terms of different original.
BY these terms and speeches I understand not (after the order of Grammarians)
the sound of words, or their Etymologies in the tongue wherein the New
Testament is written; but rather the sense and subject of expressions employed
in it. They come therefore from diverse Sources, to wit,

1. Either from the common use of men, which is as it were a language
universal to all Nations. As are the terms which represent the objects and
the acts of sense; Fire, water, the sun, the head, the feet, eating, drinking;
and generally all that is naturally and ordinarily known to men. For the new
Testament touches many things of this Nature either expressly, or occasionally.

2. Or from the Old Testament; which is either cited, or explaned, or applied
in the New.

3. Or from the 27 Interpreters, who having translated the Old Testament into
Greek, before the coming of Jesus Christ, have often expressed the Hebrew by
certain phrases particular to themselves; which are also entered into the New
Testament, because that the Apostles did often employ this Translation, which
was very common in their time.

4. Or from the Divinity or Ecclesiastical Discipline of the ancient Jews, of
their Synagogue, Policy etc. This Divinity being the same with that of the
Prophets. But to make it more intelligible, and more easily to prevent
heresies, the Jewish Doctors introduced terms which were not in the Old
Testament, signifying nevertheless the same things in substance. Or else they
had transferred by analogy some words of the Old Testament beyond their
ordinary signification. Now Jesus Christ and the Apostles have retained them in
part in the New Testament.

5. Or from the Morality of the Greeks, and their Arts, Proverbes and
Sentences, many of their terms are in the New Testament, because the greatest
part of the Gentiles to whom the Gospel was preached at the beginning, were
either Greeks by Nation, or seasoned with the wisdom and custom of the Greeks.

6. Or from the Style particular to the New Testament. For besides the
expressions drawn from the precedent fountains, Jesus Christ and the Apostles
have also many others, which are proper and particular unto them.

All this will be cleared by the following examples already observed by the
Expositors; whereunto I have added some few which my observations have
furnished me withal.

Terms of the common Language of men.
THese examples are infinite in number, and the common sense will make them
manifest enough. When Jesus Christ said unto Thomas, Put thy hand into my side.
When he commanded the Disciples to cast the net on the right side of the ship.
And those which were about the Sepulcher of Lazarus, to take away the stone
which was at the going in. All these speeches, and a thousand others the like,
bear simply the sense which they have in the ordinary language; and there ought
not any other to be given them, as do they who disguise them by allegories;
saying that Jesus Christ spoke of the Absolution of sinners, when he commanded
that Lazarus which was newly risen again should be unbound.

Terms of the old Testament.
THE finger of God Luke. 11. signifies his mervelous power, so expressed in
Exodus 8. v. 19.

He who is, who was, and who is to to come, Revel. 1. v. 4. This is the
expression of the name Jehovah, explaned in Exodus 3. 14. Eheje, I am that I am,
or that shall be.

The Conclusion of the Lords Prayer, for thine is the kingdom etc. is taken
from the seventh of Daniel. v. 14. and to him was given Dominion, Glory and
Kingdom etc. and his Dominion is everlasting.

Many Hebrew words, as Hallelujah, Amen, come also from the Old Testament.

Terms of the 70 Interpreters.
I Touch not here the passages of the Old Testament which are related in the
New with some difference, as being so found in the Translation of the
Septuagint, which the Apostles have retained in many places. The particulars
and questions which may be moved thereupon, have passed the examination of the
learned.

We will observe only for a pattern that the word Prophet, the word Church,
and diverse others, are come from the Seventy, who have employed them in the
Greek Traslation of the Old Testnament from whence they are passed into the New.

Terms of the Divinity and Discipline of the Jews
THE names of Paradise and of Gehenna are not in the Old Testament, in the
sense which they have in the New viz. to denote the places of Joy and Torment
after this life. Neither do we there read these words, The world to come, The
day of Judgment, The second death, The bosom of Abraham, and others which are
come from the Judaicall school, which had put them into use against the
Sadduces, denying the immortality of souls, and the points which presuppose it.

Now Jesus Christ has sanctified these terms, and would have them inserted
into the New Testament.

The Jews before the coming of the Messiah were wont in their prayers to pray
for the Coming of the kingdom of God. Jesus Christ also has put this Petition
into the prayer which he has taught us.

The same Jews speaking of this Kingdom of the Messiah which they expected,
called it the Kingdom of Heaven. Now they had drawn this phrase from hence,
that in Daniel this Kingdom was represented under the figure of Stars, Chap.
8. v. 10. And on the contrary the Empires of this world were set forth under
the form of earthly beasts. This name of the Kingdom of Heaven, as used among
the Jews, is also frequent in the mouth of the Son of God.

Terms from the Morality of the Greeks.
THis is very remarkable, the word VIRTUE, inasmuch as it signifies the habit
of good manners, is not found in the Old Testament. For the Hebrews have no
term which answers precisely to this here. The Greek word which has the same
signification is used in the New Testament, yet very seldom, for reasons whose
consideration belongs to another discourse.

Likewise we have the particular names of many Virtues, as also of many Vices
which are not read in the Old Testament. Such are the words of Temperance, of
Chastity, and diverse others; which also come from the Moral of the Greeks.

Even from thence is come the word of Alms, which is not also in the Old
Testament. The Hebrews express it by a more general name. For instead of
Alms, they say Justice. From thence comes it that the Syriack translating
these words of S. Matthew 6. Give not your Alms before men, has translated,
do not your Justice before men.

Terms particular to the New Testament.
I Will give but one example among many, The habitation of the most blessed is
called the. Third Heaven, 2 Cor. 12. This name is not given to it in the Old
Testament. The holy tongue, wherein Moses and the Prophers have written, naming
the Heavens, expresses them in the duall number; as if it should be said the
two Heavens. The name of the third is come up thereupon, only since that Jesus
Christ is entered therein. I omit other contemplations which may be brought
hitherto.

Finally all the writers of the New Testament, have also every one his style,
and particular terms, whereof it is not necessary to speak at this time.

Now as of all these expressions whereof we have seen the Originals, some carry
the proper sense and natural to the terms, and others are drawn (by a figure)
to a quite diverse signification, so we ought also to see the matters where-from
the figurative speeches are extracted.

CHAP. II. The Figurative speeches which are in the New Testament are taken
from five diverse sorts of matters.
THe way which we have here held above, is almost the same which conducts us
hither. Every phrase which bears a Figure in the New Testament, is drawn from
some of these subjects here mentioned, or from many of them, viz.

1. Either from things which are of the general knowledge, and common to the
most part of men.

2. Or from matters of the Old Testament, as Washings, Sacrifices, etc.

3. Or from Customs, Conditions and other things particular to the people of
the Jews, when Jesus Christ and the Apostles were in the world.

4. Or from the Customs of those of the Eastern people, Greeks and other
nations with whom the Church of God has conversed heretofore.

5. Or even from the proper matters of the New Testament, the one taking the
name of the other.

The New Testament contains then five Orders or Categories of figurative terms,
whereof we must give some examples.

I. Examples of the first Order.
Hence comes the similitude of the Sower, of Leven, of Occupying, etc.

The Apostles are called the Salt of the Earth, God is called Light, Jesus
Christ is named the Vine, the Dove.

The Holy Ghost is designed by the name of Water, of Fire.

II. Examples of the second Order.
Jesus Christ is called the Tree of Life, the Manna, Rev. 2. The first fruits
of those that sleep. 1 Cor. 15. Alms is called an Offering of a sweet smelling
savor. Phil. 4. by a term borrowed from the perfumes that were used upon the
Altar of Incense.

In this rank are many allusions: Jesus Christ in St. Luke 19. v. 42.
upbraided Jerusalem that they knew not the things which belonged to their
peace, that it was hid from their eyes. The agreement which is found in these
words, is not visible to any except those who know that Jerusalem (in the
language of the Old Testament) signifies vision of peace. For these words mean
that quite contrary to her name she saw not her peace, that Jersulalem was not
in Jerusalem.

Some Hebraisms may be referd hither. In the 13. of Leviticus, when the Law
would say that the Priest shall pronounce him clean who was healed of the
Leprosy, it says, that the Priest shall cleanse him; and when it would say,
That the Priest shall declare such a one defiled with a Leprosy, it says, the
Priest shall defile him. So Jesus Christ says that his Disciples shall pardon
or retain sins, that is to say, shall pronounce that they are pardoned or
retained.

III. Examples of the third Order.
The Parable of the Virgins; of the Children fitting in the marketplaces, and
diverse others, taken from the Customs of the Jews.

The Degrees of punishments used among them, viz. Of Judgment, of the
Counsel, and of Hell fire, are named for to represent the difference of pains
whereunto God condemns sinners, Matthew 5.

Our Savior says that one Iota or one Jod of the Law, that is to say the
least article of it, shall not pass away without being accomplished. This word
is taken from the Alphabet of the Hebrews, whereof the least letter of all is
called Jod.

St. Paul 1 Cor. 16. v. 22. denounces Maranatha against whomsoever loved not
the Lord Jesus, This was the term of the greater Excommunication used among the
Jews.

The Scribes and interpreters of the Law had the Key of the Chests and Archives
where were kept the sacred books. To this our Savior makes allusion, when he
upbraids them with having withdrawn the Key of knowledge and not to have entered
into it.

When a Doctor of the Law was created, they spoke to him after this manner, as
the Rabbines relate it; Receive the Authority to pronounce bound whatsoever
shall be bound, and to pronounce unbound whatsoever shall be unbound. This
explains the words of Jesus Christ speaking to his Disciples, whom he would
constitute Doctors: That which ye bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and
that which ye shall unbind on earth, shall be unbound in Heaven.

In the 3. of the Revel. Jesus Christ promises to them that shall overcome,
that they shall walk with him in white Rayments. These White rayments, say we,
are the token of purity and innocence; But some learned men have observed that
this term was taken from a formality used among the Jews, when any one was
installed into the Priesthood. For the Council having examined the genealogy
and other qualities required in him who pretended to this charge; if he were
judged incapable, they sent him back clad with a black robe, to signify that he
was rejected from the Altar. But if he gained his cause, they clad him with a
white robe, which was the habit of the Priests, and he entered the Temple with
his Colleagues. Our Savior seems to have a regard to this Custom, when he
promises the white Garment to those whom he made Priests, and assures them that
they shall walk with him. Revel. 1. v. 6.

IIII. Examples of the fourth Order.
In St. Matthew 5. v. 41. Jesus Christ says, if any one compel thee to go a
mile, etc. where the word translated (Compel) signifies to constrain one to
run post; The word came from the Persians, who called those (Angari) whom we
call Posts or Posters.

In the Revel. 2. v. 17. the white stone is taken from the manner whereby the
Greeks and the ancient Romans gave their voices in Criminal Judgments. The
black stone was the mark of Condemnation, The white of the contrary.

I omit the similitudes drawn from the Istthmian sports and the like, viz. from
the Race, from the Wrestling, from the Combats of the Amphitheatre, and other
Customs of the Greeks. 1 Cor. 9. v. 24, etc. and chap. 15. v. 32.

In Revel. 16. It is foretold that the River Euphrates should be dried up, that
the way of the Kings and people of the East might be prepared. It is an
allusion to the Stratagem whereby Cyrus made himself master of the City of
Babylon, having diverted the River Euphrates by many little channels.

In diverse places of the Revelation our Savior expressing the beginning and
the end of all things, takes the name of Alpha and Omega, which are the first
and the last Letters of the Greek Alphabet.

V. Examples of the fifth Order.
The phrase which imports that we are Crucified to the world* is borrowed from
the kind of death that Jesus Christ suffered. Many things which are said
properly of his person, are transferred to his Church; as when it is said, that
we shall come to the age of perfect man, and the measure of the perfect stature
of Christ.

In the 13. of St. Luke the Parable says, these three years I come seeking
fruit of this fig tree and find none. Some Chronologers observe, that Jesus
Christ makes allusion to the time of his ministry. For when he pronounced these
words, he had already preached three years to the people of the Jews, exhorting
them to bear fruit.

CHAP. III. The term of eating used to signify the Communion of the Body of
Christ, is in the second Order of Figurative Speeches.
ONe and the same figure may be taken from diverse matters; and so one and the
same phrase may be found in diverse rancks, in diverse regards; but in the one
more properly than in the other. The point it self, for the understanding
whereof I have laid down these distinctions, will explain that which I intend
to say.

When the Communion of the Body of Christ is expressed by the word of Eating,
this phrase is not simply and immediately drawn from this act natural and
common to all men, yea to other living Creatures, whereby we take our
nourishment; but of the action of the Israelites communicating of the Flesh of
Sacrifices and other sacred meats. An action which was truly natural
Materially, if we may so speak, since that it consisted in eating; but Formally
and properly it was a sacred action, and a point of the Ceremonial Law. So
that this speech, to eat the Body of Christ is amongst those which are drawn
from the matters of the Old Testament. The which appears also (not to repeat
all that which I have said before) in that Jesus Christ has retained the terms
of it. For among others, speaking of his Blood, he explains himself after the
manner of the words of Moses in Exodus 24. v. 8. Behold the Blood of the
Covenant. I shall conclude this with a very notable consideration.

CHAP. IV. Why do the two Sacraments of the Christian Church consist the one
in Washing, the other in Nourishment.
WE use to say that these are two similitudes or analogies, wherein our Savior
has shut these two Sacramennts; because that the washing and the eating
represent very properly the application of Jesus Christ, who is a spiritual
washing and nourishment unto us. But this reason goes not far enough in the
intention of our Savior. The Water is employed in Baptism, not simply because
of its natural propriety of washing and cleansing, but for a more particular
Reason. Likewise the nutritive virtue which is in the Bread, and in the Wine,
is not the only cause, nor the immediate cause, wherefore they were chosen for
signs of the Body and Blood of Christ.

We must therefore know, that in the old time under the Law, amongst the Acts
which represented the Application of future Redemption, there were two common
and ordinary, viz. Washing and Eating. There were indeed but these two acts,
whereby the people participated of Holy things. For they were exhibited to them
either in Washing; as the Water of sprinkling, and the Blood wherewith they
besprinckled unclean persons: or in Nourishment; as the Paschall Lamb, the
Flesh of Eucharistick Sacrifices, and other food sanctified by the Law. Also
the Apostle to the Hebrews Chap. 9. v. 10. teaches us that all these legal
matters consisted either in washings or in meats and drinks.

Now this shows clearly why Jesus Christ has Instituted the Sacraments to the
number of two; and why in these two manners abovesaid, the one of Washing, the
other of Nourishment. It is to the end that the same acts which had in times
past represented the Application of Jesus Christ in these two diverse regards,
should still represent it.

This Application was truly figured also by the Circumcision, whereto Baptism
succeeded: But we have seen that our Sacraments ought not to have any more any
thing bloody. Moreover, as I said, Our Savior seems to have regard to this
point, that all holy things, those which the Law made communicable to every one
of the people, were applied personally unto him in the one or in the other of
these two actions only, viz. either in their Washings, or in their Sacred
Banquets; To these two sorts of actions, wherein consists all the participation
of holy things answer Baptism and the Eucharist. If we contemplate there but a
resemblance between the Water, the Bread and the Wine, of the one part, and the
Body and Blood of Jesus Christ of the other; this consideration is too wandering
and general, and does not observe distinctly enough the intention of our
Savior. We know that the Communion of Jesus Christ is represented in
Scripture under the Similitude of diverse ^onjunctions; as of the Head with the
Members; of the Vine with the Branches; of the Husband with the Wife; of the
foundation with the edifice; of the Clothing with the Body; of Washing, and of
Nourishment. But it is a question to know why among so many similitudes, our
Savior would choose these two, viz. that of Washing, and that of Nourishment,
rather than any other, whereof to make the Sacraments of the New Testament. I
believe therefore we must seek the reason in the correspondence which they have
with these two actions of the Old Testament, wherein only lies the personal
application of holy things which the Law distributed to the people.

To Conclude, I shall add touching the Water of Baptism, that which I said
touching the Bread and the Wine of the Eucharist. Many Divines dispute
Philosophically of the proprieties of Water, by reason whereof our Savior
would it should serve for Baptism. For (say they) as Water or watery matter is
the principal of all natural production, so the Holy Ghost, represented by
Water, is the principal of our regeneration. Also as Water does fructify the
Earth, and make it fit to bear fruit, so the Holy Spirit bedewing our Souls,
makes us capable to bring forth the fruit of good works. Moreover, as Water
does quench the thirst, so the Holy Ghost does quench the thirst of earthly
things. To which is referd that which our Savior says in St. John 7. If any
one Thirst, Let him come unto me and drink. But certainly they who thrust
(...) Similitudes into Baptism are extravagant in diverse kinds. Water is used
in Baptism, inasmuch as it washes and cleanses, not as it refreshes, nor as
it allayes the thirst being drank. Otherwise we ought to consider it as drink,
and confound the Baptism and the Eucharist. Water is not considered in Baptism,
but as Washing. The other proprieties which it may have, are our of the
Sacramental analogy. If this Element should have yet more qualities proper to
represent the Blood of Jesus Christ, or the Holy Spirit, they are not of the
Sacrament, and it is not for us to place them there.

FINIS.
AN Epitome of this Treatise, comprised in these Aphorisms following.
I. MAny are learned in the Controversy of the Eucharist, who nevertheless
have not Knowledge enough of the grounds and mysteries of this Sacrament.

II. Many Treatises of Devotion, which have the vogue among the people, namely
touching the holy Supper, serve rather to foment ignorance, than to augment
instruction.

III. They are ridiculous, who, endeavoring to specify all the particular
Causes of the Circumstances of the Passion, give us Allegories for Reasons, and
Metaphors for Mysteries.

IV. This ordinary Phrase, the Altar of the Cross, is improper and subject to
evil Consequences.

V. The Historical representation whereby we call to mind a Man nailed to the
Cross, is not this Act whereby Jesus Christ is made present to ours Souls.

VI. The Reason why Jesus Christ invites us to eat his Flesh, and drink his
Blood, is understood of very few, viz. why we ought to drink his Blood,
forasmuch as it is the Blood of the New Testament; and why from the Oblation of
his Body we conclude the eating of it.

VII. The Reason consists of Maxims opposite to those of the Old Testament. For
the Law contained certain Ordinances which prohibited that which Jesus Christ
commands us in the Eucharist.

VIII. Jesus Christ invites us to drink his Blood for the same reason which
forbids us to eat blood. For the Law says, Ye shall eat no blood; because it
is shed for the remission of sins. Jesus Christ says, Drink ye this Blood;
because it is shed for the remission of sins.

IX. It is a Maxim of the Old Testament, that none can eat of that which has
bin offered for him for remission of sins. But Jesus Christ commands us to eat
his Body given for our sin.

X. In the Old Testament the Priests were to eat the Sacrifice, which they
offered for the sins of other men. But Jesus Christ has transferred this Rite
to sinners themselves.

XI. The Communion to which Jesus Christ invites us is marked with the names of
two acts, whereof one is repugnant to the Ceremonial Law, viz. to eat that
which has bin sacrifised for our sins; the other contrary to the Law of
Nature, viz. to eat the flesh of man.

XII. God had ordained that we should not eat of any Blood, until the Blood of
Christ should be shed.

XIII. The Law forbidding Sinners to eat the Sacrifice of their Expiation,
showed that the true Sacrifice was not yet exhibited, nor their Expiation
accomplished.

XIV. In the Old Testament, the Eating of the Expiatory Sacrifice was a
Sacerdotall Act, required for Expiation. But at this day this Eating is an
effect of Expiation already made.

XV. In the Scripture the more a phrase is remote from the ordinary Rules of
the Language of men, the more mysterious it is.

XVI. The Communion of the Body of Christ is represented by the act of Eating,
not simply by similitude, but to retain the Term of this Testamentary Clause,
which Jesus Christ has revoked in this Sacrament, which forbad man to eat the
Sacrifice of his Expiation. And this speech means; That the Communion of the
Body of Christ is in effect that which the eating of Sacrifices was in Figure.

XVII. In the Life Natural man and his meat are different Kinds; but in the
Life Spiritual man and his nourishment ought to be of the same kind.

XVIII. The Old Testament had no force in comparison of the New, because the
Testator was not yet dead.

XIX. Whereas death permits not any man to be Executor of his own Will, Jesus
Christ is risen again to execute his.

XX. He who dyed first of all men, dyed of a bloody death. The death of Jesus
Christ was signed with blood.

XXI. The first Blood which was shed on Earth and the Blood of Jesus Christ are
opposite one to the other in some respect.

XXII. The first that felt death is also the first that sacrifised with Blood,
representing the bloody Oblation of Jesus Christ.

XXIII. The Blood, which was shed for one man alone, or for some small number
of persons, never entered into the Holy Place; but only that which was shed for
many; (i. e) for the multitude, or for the Church in general. The Blood of
Jesus Christ has pierced the Holy Places, as having been shed for many.

XXIV. That, which moved our Savior to ordain Bread rather than Flesh to
represent his Body, is not because that Flesh has served heretofore in
Sacrifices. For Bread and Wine were also employed in Legal Oblations. But it
is, that he would show that after him no creature should any more dye for the
sin of man. Therefore it is that he has ordained Sacraments which require not
the slaughter of any Creature, as being compounded of signs which are of
themselves without life, and of other substance than of flesh and blood.

XXV. All the properties of Bread and Wine enter not into the Analogy or
Sacramental relation which these Elements have with the Body and Blood of
Jesus Christ. Many similitudes which the Learned introduce in this matter, are
impertinent and abusive, as when they represent the violent death of Jesus
Christ by the Baking of Bread in the Oven, etc.

XXVI. God never repeats the same thing but it is with some diversity. It is to
the end that things which are obscure in one place, may be made unto us
intelligible by another. This is the scope of the difference which is found
among the Evangelists, reciting the Institution of the Supper.

XXVII. Before the Passover there was no Sacramental Eating. Jesus Christ
celebrated the first and the last Sacrament of the Eating of his Body, viz. the
Passover and the Eucharist on one and the same table.

XXVIII. The Passover that Jesus Christ celebrated is the seventh and last of
those which are recited in the Scripture, as being the perfection and
conclusion of all those aforegoing. In this last Passover the true Lamb is
there found in person. Moreover as the Passover came from Egypt, there where
it was first celebrated, so Jesus Christ also was called out of Egypt.

XXIX. The Sacraments of the Christian Church have already dured longer time
than the Mosaicall Ceremonies have subsisted.

XXX. The Institution of the Passover is recited very largely, this of the
Eucharist is comprised in very few words. It is because That contained many
Ceremonies, This here but a very few. But finally the Institution of the
Passover speaks much more of the sign than of the thing signified. This is the
style of the Law to be prolix in the narration of Ceremonies, and to speak very
briefly of spiritual graces represented under such figures.

XXXI. The Sacraments of the Christian Church were formed of matters and
actions simple, natural and Common; to the end that they might not be subject
unto Change, but remain unvariable to the end of the world.

XXXII. The difference of times, of places, and persons, whereto God had bound
the most notable Ceremonies of the Law* tended to facilitate their abrogation.
But on the Contrary, our Savior hat^ not prefixed any time for the Celebration
of the Supper, to the end that it might be universally practiced in all times
and in all places.

XXXIII. That in the Supper, Jesus Christ is represented as he was on the
Cross, and not as he is in Heaven, as dead, and not as glorified, this is,
because the Sacraments tend rather to assure us of the glory that Jesus Christ
acquired unto us, than to describe that which he possesses himself. Now it is
by his death that he has gotten us this glory. From thence it comes, that,
having Instituted two Sacraments which represent him dead, he has not ordained
any one which might represent him glorified.

XXXIV. That Our Savior has not Instituted more illustrious Signs, and the
reason why they are not miraculous, is, among other reasons, forasmuch as the
end of Miracles is to show the greatness and power of God: But, on the
contrary, the end of our Sacraments, chiefly of the Eucharist, is to show the
infirmity, the death and humiliation of Christ.

XXXV. According to the Maxims of the Roman Church, a man may, without thinking
of it, and not knowing any thing of it, eat the Body of Christ Jesus.

XXXVI. There is none of us who knows all the particular Reasons of all the
Circumstances of the Passion.

XXXVII. That the History of the Passion of Jesus Christ does not move us so
much, as that of many others, whose afflictions are recited in Scripture, is,
forasmuch as the sufferings of Jesus Christ are not the Object of any natural
Commotion, such as we may have for other men, but of another kind of
resentment, which being Spiritual, is not so easy to be raised.

XXXVIII. From thence it also comes that the superstitious are sometimes more
moved at the rehearsal of the Passion of Jesus Christ, than the true
Christians.

XXXIX. Here we consider why it has been easier for many to resolve to suffer
death for the love of Christ, than to shed so much as one tear for the love of
him.

XL. Although the Spiritual Communion of the Body of Christ be a Super
natural Act, nevertheless it is not done by a miraculous transportation and
ravishment of Spirit, as was that of the Prophets.

XLI. A Roman Catholic has need of much more time to learn his Religion, than
an Orthodox to understand his. And particularly concerning the Eucharist, An
Orthodox man will sooner learn all that he ought to know concerning it, than a
Roman Catholic the tenth part of that which his Religion teaches him
concerning this point.

XLII. The style of the New Testament is composed of six kinds of phrases and
terms of different original; some proper, others figurative.

XLIII. The Figurative Speeches which are in the New Testament, are drawn from
five diverse sorts of matter.

XLIV. The Figure which is in this word [Eating] for to denote the Communion of
the Body of Christ, is not simply derived from the natural Act of Eating in
general, but from the Action of the Faithful of the Old Testament,
Communicating of the Flesh of Sacrifices, and other Sacred meats.

XLV. In the Old Testament there were but two other Holy, For they were
exhibited either by Washing, or by Nourishment. Baptism and the Eucharist do
answer to these two kinds of Actions. This i^ the Reason wherefore we have
these two Sacraments, and in these two manners above-sayd.

FIN^S.

