THE ENGLISH HERMIT, OR, Wonder of this AGE.

Being a relation of the life of ROGER CRAB, living near Vxbridg, taken from
his own mouth, showing his strange reserved and unparalled kind of life, who
counts it a sin against his body and soul to eat any sort of Flesh, Fish,
or living Creature, or to drink any Wine, Ale, or Beer. He can live with
three farthings a week.

His constant food is Roots and Herbs, as Cabbage, Turnips, Carrets,
Dock-leaves, and Grass; also Bread and Bran, without Butter or Cheese: His
Clothing is Sackcloth.

He left the Army, and kept a Shop at CHESHAM, and has now left off that, and
sold a considerable Estate to give to the Poor, showing his reasons from the
Scripture, Mark. 10.21. Jer. 35.

Wherefore if meat make my brother to offend, I will never eat flesh while
the world stands, 1 Cor. 8.13. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold in
Pope's Head Alley, and at the Exchange, 1655.

The Publisher to the Reader.
Honest Reader,
BEfore you come to the Authors own Epistle, and Narration, I shall mention
some remarkable passages, which I had from his own mouth, and find them not
mentioned in his writing; and I can assure thee this Relation is no feigned
story, or fable, but thou have it presented to thy view, as I received it from
the Author himself, with all the Verses of his own composing.

This Roger Crab is well known to many in this City and the Country; and while
this Book was printing, he stayed purposely here in the City till it was
published, and I think is in Town still; he lodged at the Golden Anchor in
white Cross Street, at one Mr. Carters house a Glover, where diverse people
resorted to see him, where such at doubt of it may be satisfied. I am informed
by himself and others, how that three years since: He was a Haberdasher of
Hats; and kept a Shop at Chesham, in Buckingamshire; and has since given ever
his Trade, and sold his Estate, and given it to the poor, reserving a small
matter to himself, being a single man, and now lives at Icknam, near
Uxbridge, one a small Roode of ground, for which he pays fifty shillings a
year and has a mean Cottage of hiis own building to it; but that which is most
strange and most to be admired, is his strange reserved, and Hermeticall kind
of life, in refusing to eat any sort of flesh, and says it is a sin against
his body and soul to eat flesh, or to drink any Beer, Ale, or Wine; his diet
is only such poor homely food as his own Rood of ground bears, as Corn,
Bread, and bran, Herbs, Roots, Dock-leaves, Mallows, and grass, his drink is
water, his aparrell is as mean also, he wears a sackcloth frock, and no band
on his neck: and this he says is out of conscience, and in obedience to that
command of Christ, to the young man in the Gospel, and in imitation of the
Prophets, and the Recabi^es in Jer. 35. who neither planted vinyards, nor
builded houses, nor drank wine, and were highly commended by the Lord for it: I
reasoned the case with him. and told him that I conceived Christ's meaning when
he had the young man sell all he had and give to the poor, was, that he should
part with all his dearest Sins, that were as dear to him as his possessions,
or else to try him for his coveteousnesse; he answered, how can a man give that
money to the poor which he sells his sins for: I perceive he is well read
in the Scriptures, he has argued strongly wiih several Ministers in the
Country, about this and other straing opinions which he holds; but I will not
be so tedious to the reader as to mention them all; he approves of civil
Migistracy, and is neither for the Levelers, nor Quakers, nor Shakers, nor
Ranters, but above Ordinances. He was seven years in the Wars for the
Parliament; he is the more to be admired that he is alone in this opinion of
eating, which though it be an error, it is an harmless error. I have heard
since this was in the Press that Cap. Norwood was acquainted with Roger Crab,
and being enclining to his opinion, began to follow the same poor diet till it
cost him his life; Felix quam facit alienem pericula cautem. In the Primitive
times we read of such persons that were weak, who did eat herbs, and made a
great scruple of eating flesh; but the Apostle says, That every creature of
God is good, if it be received with thankfulness, 1 Timothy 4.4. And in 1 Cor.
8.13. says he, If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat none while the
world stands. And in Romans 4.2, 3, 4. One believes that he may eat all things,
another who is weak eats herbs, let not him that eats despise him that
eats not, etc. The reason why this man betook himself to this Hermites
reserved life, he says was, that he might be more free from siane, as lust,
pride; and because of the many lies, swearing, and deceiving that is too too
frequently used by most Shopkeepers and Tradesmen, as the Prophet complains,
in Hos. 4.1, 2, 3. For the Lord has a controversy with the inhabitants of the
Land, because there is, no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God, but by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they break out,
and blood touches blood; therefore shall the land mourn, etc. But however, we
may see how apt men are to err, both on the right hand and on the left, and to
run into extremes, yet of the two extremes this is the better, and more
tolerable which this English Hermit has chosen, rather then that of our
English Anticks, and Prodigalls, who give themselves over to run into all
excess of riot and uncleanness, committing all sorts of wickedness with
greediness; Some given up to drunkenness, others to whoredom, and a third
sort to gluttony, as of late days it was reported of one Wood, called the
great Eater of Kent, who could eat a whole sheep at a meal, besides other
victuals; Also Mr. Marriot, the great Eater of Grays Inn, was such another
glutton. Eusebius reports of one Domitius, who receiving more meat at supper
then his stomach could digest, or his belly contain, dyed suddenly sitting
at the Table: and Doctor Tailor, that famous Preacher of Aldermanbury, in his
Book of the Theater of Gods judgments, makes mention of Maximinus the
Emperor, who was given to such excess and gluttony, that every day for his
allowance he had forty pound of flesh and bread answerable, and five gallons of
wine for his drink, which he constantly devoured, besides sallets and made
dishess.

Also the Emperor Bonesus would drink healths, and eat excessively; both
these came to miserable ends, this Emperor was hanged, and the former cut in
pieces by his Soldiers, see more at large in the second part of that book,
page 102. I will add but one more Relation he mentions, which had I not so
good an Author for, I should not give credit to it: A rich Citizens son
having left him by his Father thirty thousand pounds in ready money, besides
Jewels, Plate, and Houses richly furnished, was so prodigal as to consume all
his whole estate in three years, and he had a great longing to please all his
five Senses at once, and did accomplish it, allowing to each Sense a several
hundred pound, it would be too tedious to mention all the story; he grew at
last to all debauchednesse that could be named, and was forced shamefully to
beg of his acquaintance, and was after pressed for a common Soldier, see pathe
last of that Book above mentioned. I shall no longer detain the Reader from
the Hermits relation; these things I thought would be most pertinent to impart
to thee, hoping thou will make this good use of it, by avoiding these two
Extremes, and walking in the golden mean of true godliness, which has the
promise of this life, and of that which is to come. Vale.

One more remarkable thing he told me: That when he was in Clarken-well
Prison, the 17. of this January, 1654. His Keeper having a prejudice against
him, and ordered the Prisoners not to let him have bread with his water, and
shut him down in the hole all night. The next morning, being something hungry,
walking in the Prison yard, there came a Spannell and walked after him three or
four turns, with a piece of bread in his mouth: He looked upon him, and
wondered why the Dog walked (as he thought) with a Chip in his mouth: He looked
at the Dog, and he laid it down: and perceiving it was bread, he walked away
again, and the Dog walked after him with it again: then he stooped, and the
Dog laid it down to his hand, then he took and wiped it, and eat it.

Epist. 1.18, leave out 50. s. a year.



TO Mr. Godbold, Preacher at Vxbridge in Middlesex, I Dedicate this my
Discourse, Because he was my friend to help conquer my old man, by informing my
friends of Chesham, That I was a Witch, and was run away, and would never come
again. You being a public Preacher, may do me greater service in helping me
to dishonor him; for I have been almost 3. years conquering my old man by
dishonor. Therefore if you can stir up any more to forward this work, pray
do, if it be not hurtful to your self, and they that do so. I rest,

Your reserved friend, Roger Crab.

To the Impartial Reader.
IN whom malicious envy delights, to be for birds of a feather, draw together:
But such a Constitution is not to be condemned, lest we should condemn the
work of God in the flesh, but rather to be instructed with the light of the
Scriptures, that thereby he may know himself, and judge himself to be undone
and empty, that love and zeal may take possession, and then he will be more
valiant, and bold for God and the Scripture, then he that is moderately
constituted: Then let us labor for a single eye which makes the whole body
light; I mean a single heart in single designs, which cannot stand with
lindsey woolsey garments, nor with double tongues, nor varieties of fancies
after meats and drinks; for Christ himself was to eat butter and honey till
he came to knowledge to choose the good, and refuse the evil, Isa. 7.15. And
if natural Adam had kept to his single natural fruits of Gods appointment,
namely fruits and herbs, we had not been corrupted. Thus we see that by eating
and drinking we are swallowed up in corruption; for ever since Noah came out of
the Arc, the world being drowned, and no fruits nor herbs on the earth, man
was ordered to eat the flesh of the Creature which came out of the Arc, so
that by that means our desires were made strong after flesh; That when the
herbs and innocent food was come forth, we slighted it, calling it trash in
comparison of a Beast, or beastly flesh; so that by that means the
flesh-destroying Spirits and Angels draws near us, and frequently attends
man kind. This you may see by the Angels that came to Abraham to destroy the
flesh of the Sodomites: Abraham knowing their design, killed them a Calfe, and
made them a fleshly feast, so that we may see God has all sorts of creatures
for all sorts of designs, and for all sorts of food both in heaven and in
earth; Innocent creatures for innocent food, and beastly creatures for beastly
and fleshly food.

I rest your friend as you please, Roger Crab.
From my poor Cottage near Uxbridg, Jan. 1654.
THE ENGLlSH HER MITE AT ICKNAM NEAR VXBRIDGE.
SEeing I am become a gazing stock to the Nation, and a wonderment to many
friends in this my reserved life, I shall therefore indite a few lines as the
most high shall direct me, wherein I shall give an account of this my undoing,
owning Christ and the Prophets to be exemplary both in prophesying and
practicing, as far as God shall give power to any man; I having truly
examined it, and often disputed it with all Sexes and Ministers in most
Counties in England, and most of them grants me that the practice of Christ and
the Prophets is written for our Learning: and if this be granted, that we
ought to be imitators of their righteousness, hereby the judgment of God may
be seen to a Sodomite generation, living now upon English ground; but first I
shall begin with my self, who have transgressed the commands of God, and so
found guilty of the whole Law, living in pride, drunkenness, and gluttony,
which I upheld by dissembling and lying, cheating and cozening my Neighbors:
But now that light which enlightneth every man that comes into the world,
according to John's writing, bath discovered the love of God to my
understanding, which causes me to withdraw from what I have done; and instead
of strong drinks and wines, I give the old man a cup of water; and instead of
roast Mutton, and Rabbets, and other dainty dishes, I gave him broth thickened
with bran, and pudding made with bran, and Turnep leaves chop't together, and
grass; at which the Old man (meaning my body) being moved, would know what he
had done, that I used him so hardly; then I showed him his transgression as
aforesaid: so the wars began, The law of the old man in my fleshly members
rebelled against the law of my mind, and had a shrewd skirmish; but the mind
being well enlightened, held it, so that the old man grew sick and weak with the
flux, like to fall to the dust; but the wonderful love of God well pleased
with the Battle, raised him up again, and filled him full of love, peace, and
content in mind, and is now become more humble; for now he will eat
Dock-leaves, Mallows, or Grass, and yields that he ought to give God more
thanks for it, then formerly for roast flesh and wines; and certainly concludes
that this must be of God, if it be done out of love, and not out of selfe-ends;
for before the old man fought with his steel sword, with his fleshly power
against old men, and that envy in him begat envy in them, and both of the
Devil, in pretense of liberty and peace, it is easily judged of by the events;
for our sighting to regulate government in the Old men, we see it still as bad,
if not worse then it was before: Therefore let us put off the old man with his
fleshly Laws, which reached no farther then the government of earthly bodies,
so that every one for their obedience to God in this fleshly Law, receives a
reward to uphold his fleshly body here upon Earth, and would go no further then
reason could reach in the organs of flesh: Therefore this Law could never give
life in the spiritual Christ, but the practificers thereof were the greatest
enemies to Christ, as you shall see fully in their calling of Christ Devil,
and putting of him to death, Mat. 10. Luke 23. Far worse then bloody Butchers,
for they destroy their fellow creatures for gain, and to feed their bodies;
but these destroyed that innocent Lamb of God, merely out of devilish zeal
and envy against innocence; this moves the Butcher to the question to know why
I would forbear eating of flesh: To which I answer,

First, I do it exemplary from the Prophet Daniel, Chap. 1. which says, The
Kings meat defiles his body, and beseeches that he might eat pulse, and
drink water. This first we ought to believe, because the Scripture says so.
2. I believe it from experience. 3. From reason.

1. I have experience that God has enlightened my understanding in a great
measure more then before I took this course: So that all the Tithe-mongers and
selfe-ended people professing Religion, are afraid to meet me in any public
dispute; hut lest I should judge my self wiser in my own conceit then my
understanding will bear me out, I am here ready to be tried by any person or
persons whatsoever, and so much for Experience: Now I shall show some reasons.

My first Reason is, That God never accepted of any Creature for a Sacrifice of
flesh, that would destroy a body of flesh to feed on; and also forbid his
people the Jews to feed on them; for it is a practice of Dogs and Wolves,
Bears and Lions, Hogs and Ravens, Kites and Hawks, and many such like devourers
of flesh; and all or any of these have no need to fear their lives, but from,
or of some of that same kind; no innocent creature need never fear his life
from an innocent creature: If all birds would take the Dove for an example,
(...) all beasts take the Lamb for their example, and all men (...) Christ for
their example, then Mars and Saturn, the two (...) Devils would be trampled
under feet. Such a time is (...), but nor yet; but God waits with long
patience upon the vessels of wrath, whilst they prepare themselves by thirsting
after flesh and blood, which are thereby made fit to destroy each other:
Therefore hearken to the Doctrine of Christ, in Matthew. Chap. 5. 6. Deny your
selves, humble your selves, undo your selves of all righteousness of the flesh.
Become as little children, like Lambs, like Doves, then Christ is ours, and we
are his: Few words to the wise is sufficient. I shall return to the reasonable
part of the Law in this Nation, which excludes Butchers from being Jurymen of
life and death: Surely if they are judged incapable of being of a Jury, because
they kill the creatures, they that buy it with their money to devour it, cannot
be clear, for we always count the Receiver more subtle and worse then the
Thief; so that the buyer is worse then the Butcher; but Mars being the god of
War, is the governor of these destroyers: and while he can get flesh to feed
on, he will increase his desires to destroy flesh: so that Mars being servant
to the most high God, breeds them up with flesh, until they are full of
corruption. Then he raises up Trangressor against Transgressor to destroy each
other, as you have it in Isa. 21.2. where it says, A grievous vision was
showed unto me, the transgressor against the transgressor, and the destroyer
against the destroyer. Go up Elam, besiege Media, etc. Had my parents been so
innocent as to have taught me this Doctrine in the time of my youth, I had
saved my skull from being cloven to the brain in the late War for the
Parliament against the King, and also saved my self from the Parliaments two
years imprisonment which they gave me for my pains, and from my sentence to
death in the Field by my Lord Protector; but all those things wrought together
for the best to me, and in my estimation are of more value then an office of
five hundred pounds a year, for I in some measure know my self, and before I
neither knew God nor Devil, nor my self: but now having found out that my
body was governed by the inclination of my Constitution from the starry
heavens, having tried it with many sorts of food, and with much fasting and
praying according to the Scripure, which gave me light to the constitutions of
others, and enabled me to administer physic to others; so that I have had a
hundred or six score Patients at once, this gave me a great light of the evil
that came by eating of flesh: If my Patients were any of them wounded or
feverish, I said, eating flesh, or drinking strong beer would inflame their
blood, venom their wounds, and increase their disease, so there is no proof
like experience: So that eating of flesh is an absolute enemy to pure nature;
pure nature being the workmanship of a pure God, and corrupt nature under the
custody of the Devil: Now for the objection in 1 Timothy 4. v. 3. where it says
thus; Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God has
created, to be received with giving thanks of them which believe and know the
truth: And verse. 4. it says; For every creature of God is good, and nothing
ought to be refused if it be received with thankesgiving. This Scripture being
very useful for the purpose, and will give much light to the adhearers to this
opinion, and conform them of sound principles within themselves; for whosoever
shall forbear marrying, or abstain from meat, from the commandment of men
which pretends his commands to be of God, all that are obedient hereunto will
serve the Devil, and must needs be without the spirit of sanctification;
neither are they believers, neither obey the Truth; so that if they should eat
of every creature, there would a hundred be poisoned at a meal for want of the
spirit of power and sanctification which Paul and others had by the promise,
which promised them, if they drank any deadly poison, it should not hurt them,
and could take away Serpents: and if they laid their hands on the sick, they
should recover, as you may see in Mar. 16. verse. 18. Another Objection is
alleged from that Scripture in Matthew. 15.11. where he says these words: That
which goes into the mouth defiles not the man, but that which comes out of
the mouth, that defiles the man, which is murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, false testimonies, slanders, etc. If this be meant that any thing put
into the mouth cannot defile the body, then no man can can be poisoned: but
there has been many a man poisoned by taking things into the mouth: If so,
then nothing ought to be taken but that which is nourishable to pure nature,
except they have faith and power of sanctification to exclude the venom: so in
short, my judgment is of every place of Scripture which speaks any thing of
this nature, that to him that believes all things are lawful, as in relation
to Christ in the Spirit, but some things not expedient. Now to those that will
not unlink themselves from the world, as to deny father and mother, wife,
children, lands and livings, and all for Christ's sake in the Spiritual
essence, but will rather serve him according to the flesh in the ten
Commandments. Now this is the wonderful and admirable love of God, that he
will give them a reward also according to that dispensation they are under; for
he has promised them a blessing in basket, and in store, their children long
life in the Land for their obedience to their Parents in the flesh: but no more
then fleshly rewards can be given for fleshly obedience; for he that dies
with fleshly desires, fleshly inclinations, and fleshly satisfactions; this
being a composure of the spirits of darkness in this body, must rise agaiin in
the same nature, and must be taken into the center of Mars, the god of flesh,
blood, and fire, so that every man shall receive the things which are done in
his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil, 2 Cor.
5.10.

Then how happy are they that takes Christ and the Prophets for their example:
Christ being an innocent pattern to the whole world, exposed himself to all
danger and difficulty, not for his own ends in the flesh, but for others
sakes, even them that persecuted him and violated him with terms of ignomie,
calling him a Glutton, and a wine-bibber, blasphemer, and a Devil, and at
length killed him outright, and hanged him shamefully upon the Cross; the
persons that did it were the Priests, Counselors, Lawyers, and the rude
multitude instructed by them, filled all with envy against innocence, but all
this works together for the best to them that fear God, in humbleness and
meekness, together with love and charity, where envy cannot be; but some
glimps of the spiritual light which discerns all things, even the deep
things of God, according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 2.10. But reason it self
will discover a glimps of Gods proceedings in these our days; he has tried
almost every sort of men, and every sort of sects according to their Pedgree in
our Land.

1. The King and Bishops were exalted next to Christ.

2. The Parliament who found fault with them, not pulling the beam of
Covetousness out of their own eyes, and their Sects depending, were all
exalted in stead of the other.

3. The Army with their Trades and Sects depending upon the same account,
became exalted; So the Gentlemen and Farmers have had their turn in Offices and
dearth of Corn, and now they will try inferior Trades, as Journey-men and
Day-labourers, and their associates depending, even to the Orphan and Alms-man,
and now gives them the fullness of bread, and clothing, and silver, and all
according to their respective place and capability they are in: So that now we
look over all their proceedings, and judge by their fruits, and it will be a
hard matter for a low capacity to judge which of all these parties has been
most just: but I being of the lowest sort, and unlearned, being amongst
day-labourers and journey, have judged my self with them the worst of all
these parties, in pride, gluttony, drunkenesse, lying, desembling, swearing,
cursing, covetousness, disobedient to Parents, breeding up children to
disobedience, and all other abominations: Were not the most High wonderful
and merciful to us, one of these sins are enough to bring judgment and
terrors upon the whole Land, namely the sin of drunkenness, being explained,
will prove it; when the allseing eye looks into every Alehouse of this Nation,
and sees of which sort are most there, and they will appear to be laboring
poor men, which in times of scarcity pine and murmr for want of bread,
cursing the rich behind his back; and before his face, cap and knee, and a
whining countenance; and some are choleric, and discontented, and will not
speak at all, neither of them considering what they did in the time of plenty,
when they drank in one day as much as a bushel of barley will make, which will
keep two ordinary families a whole week in bread; this two men will do twice
or three times a week; and when Sunday comes, they will hear two sermons, and
have their child christened by the virtue of his faith, and receive the
Sacrament at Easter, and then all is well; his conscience being seared up, he
returns to his companions, and falls on as before, to drunkenesse, and
gluttony, spoiling, backbiting his neighbors, swearing and cursing, and
reviling against the Higher powers for oppressing him; making a good
construction of his fellowdrunkard which is drunk three or four days in the
week; they will say he is an honest fellow, and no bodies foe but his own,
although both he and they that so do are the greatest oppressors under the
Sun, and the greatest enemies to the poor fatherless orphans, widows, and
strangers, which are below them; for by their drunkenness and gluttony Corn is
made dear; and Corn being dear, Land is made dear, so that the Farmer must
give a great rent for his Farm, and is constrained to hire many more Acres. By
this means cattle and Corn has been at a high rate, the Farmer being
coveteous minded to uphold his wife and children in pomp and pride, feasting
and gluttony at Christnings and Banquettings, by which means surfets and
diseases drives them to the Physicians, who wait for their prey, to get their
money to purchase Lands and houses, that they may let it out to them again;
Thus you see that the body of England is become a Monster: God has created
eyes in us that are the feet, to discover her nakedness as far as the middle;
we have a little light of her arms, and her head, which keeps her pomp by
sword and violence; but our fight being weak, and most work to do at home, and
most convenient for every man to pull the beam out of his own eye, according
to the Scriptures, Mat. 7.3. that we may see clearer, and justly judge the tree
by his fruits, we shall try the inferior and lower sort of feasting among
women, called by the name of Christnings, which are these. First, to exchange
upon some body that is silly, or foolish, sluttish, or covetous, or an ill
Husband, or a Drunkard: Others be condemned for often feasting, and wearing
fine clothes, swearing and lying, so that all sorts are laughed at, and judged;
but our selves, whilst we our selves are doing the very same things, and this
is the fruit that grows upon the Tree called Christning, or baptizing the Child
into the Fathers faith; which is an admirable Tree, if it be true, that the
child can be in Christ by the Fathers faith, and no falling from Grace; then
let us consider whether Adam did believe in Christ: and if it be found he did,
then this baptism would have saved all the people from Adam to this day, and
will do from this day forward; for the Child being baptized into the Fathers
faith, grows up, and begets children, and cannot fall away, baptizing
children into their faith, and so forward: So that if God had been as wise as
we in our own conceit, he might have saved the lives of all his Peophets, and
Apostles, and people too, but the most High is now once more beginning to break
through the clouds of darkness in poor innocent forms of earth, raising them
up from carpenting fishing, and Tent-making, to confound the high and mighty,
for the wisdom of man is foolishness, 1 Cor. chap. 1. Now let us compare this
inferior feast called Christning with the feast of Christ among the multitude,
and see which was best exemplary to the people, and which produced most good to
soul and body; and consider the example of Christ's birth in a Manger, with the
pomp and pride of childrens births in our days: Again, consider what feast
there was when Christ was baptized of John, and I think we shall find none at
all. Then let us see what Christ had at his feast with the people, he being
able to command stones to be bread, or water to be wine, was also able to
command roast Beef or pig: but he was to be exemplary to all people on earth, in
all his actions and doctrine, made an innocent feast for the people with barley
loaves and fishes, Mat. 14. But some will object and say, he was able to work
miracles, and we are not; To which I answer; If we as he, were able to command
all things, and yet would have nothing at our feast but barley loaves and
fishes, what advantage would our power be to this Feast? the Feast being
innocent, without hurting any creature that breathed on earth; but on the
contrary, he endeavored to preserve; and to reconcile the people to God with
sound words of instructions uttered with love, peace, and meekness, with
motions of healing all people that were brought to him: So that you may see a
great difference betwixt his feast and the other. Again, he often went to the
Feast of the Jews, and to a wedding to show forth the power of his father, in
turning water into wine; but we never find that ever he was drunk, or eat
bit of flesh at any of their Feasts, or Wedding: The Passover was his own
Feast, and did belong to the fulfilling of the law of the Father in his flesh,
even for a disobedient people, which the Lord by Moses brought out of Egypt
from their flesh pots, into the wilderness, to purify their bodies with Angels
food called Manna, which they ground in mills, or beat in morters, to make in
Cakes: But they loosing their grosness, grew lean and hungry, and murmured,
and rebelled against the Lord, lusting after the flesh pots of Egypt: Their
desires being much and strong, the Lord granted them flesh, even as he granted
them a King, and his wrath and plegue came with it, as you may see in Numb.
11.33. and Psalm. 78.31. While the flesh was yet between their teeth, before it
was chewed, even then the wrath of the Lord was kindled against the people, and
the Lord smote the people with an exceeding great plague. Thus you see what
miserable creatures we are, being bred up with flesh and blood, onyons and
garlic, all under Mars, who God has made governor over that humor that
lusts after flesh and blood, which is made strong in us by feeding of it, as
I my self may speak by experience; for if God had commanded me to forbear
flesh before I had knowledge of this my discourse, although he had sent an Angel
or a man working miracles, I doubt I should have judged all to be of the
Devil, for the lust I had after the sweetness of flesh; even as the rich men
in these our days will deny the Scripture, wherein Christ commanded the rich
man in the Gospel, to sell his goods and give to the poor: But they will say,
it reached no farther, then that one rich man should; for say they, if we
should believe this Scripture to extend to us, we should make the poor richer
then our selves: So it seems by this, that they had rather deny this Scripture,
and many more that speak to this purpose, even Christ and all, rather then to
part from their riches; this would have been my condition in ignorance:

Therefore let not the rich men mistake me, and think that I would have them
sell their goods, before God has enlightened their understandings, and let them
see the danger of keeping it, for then they would play the Hypocrites, and do
as bad to themselves, as if they had kept it, although good to others; this
would be the condition of every one that shall forbear flesh, or beer, as in
relation to God, because it is a sin against the body, or bodies and souls
of men; Except any man thinks he sins against God in eating, to him it is
sin, because he is weak, and doubts: So he ought to forbear, because of
his scruple; as you shall see in Romans 14.8. 1 Cor. 8.10. For if any man see
thee which has knowledge fit at table in the Idols Temple, shall not the
conscience of him which is weak be boldned to eat those things which are
sacrificed to Idols? you may observe from this, that he that walks by
another man's light before he is fully convinced in himself, if he builds on
sand, he will fall in the Tempest, because he has lost his tender light of his
scruple, which Paul endeavored to strengthen in every one of his brethren, let
them be of what opinion they would in matter of conscience: Its very plain in
Romans 14. and very few in these days believes it; for we all cry out against
many opinions, yet every one would have his own opinion justified; we may as
well cry out and condemn every one his Neighbor, because they differ in
physiognomy, and so condemn the work of God without us, as well as within us,
but this is rebellion against our Maker; for the Scripture commands us not to
judge one another in matter of conscience toward God, but for the sin
against our brethren and neighbors; we ought to know the Tree by his fruits.
So that any man or men in Countries, Towns, or Cities, that shall defraud his
brethren, and shall advance themselves in pride by oppression and tyranny,
imitating Sodom and Gomorrah in all manner of abominations; if any see this
imitated in England, it is high time for we, or they that so see, to become
imitators of Christ and the Prophets; first in order of the Prophets that came
before Christ, who were ordered by their practice to show Israel their
transgressions, in drinking water by measure, and in making bread; for Ezekiel
took of wheat, barley, and beans, and lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put
them in a vessel, and made bread thereof; and instead of butter and spice, he
was to take cows dung, instead of men's dung, to prepare his bread with, and he
was to have his portion by weight, Ezekiel. 4.9. Thus the Prophet was to show them
their error in matter of food; and for clothing, you may see in Isa. 20. Who
was a Prophet of God, ordered not only to wear sackcloth, but to go naked,
and without shoes three years: If these Scriptures are written for our
learning, imitation, and practice, then we are to judge which are the Prophets
of God, by this practice in Scripture; and if so, where shall we find Prophets
of God: But some will say, we are to follow Christ and the Apostles in the New
Testament; and if you will have it so, then we must exactly see what orders
they had in their Commission, that we may know them from hirelings: We find in
the Commission, that they were to go and preach without money, or scrips, or
shoes on their feet, but to be shod with sandalls. Mark 6.8. So we may doubt
whether we shall find any Apostles too, if we shall judge by Christ's
Commission; but if you will not own these Scriptures, neither let us try them
that mark out the false Apostles and Teachers, namely John 10. where he says,
the hireling is not his Shepherd: and Mat. 7. where he says, ye shall know
them by their fruits, inwardly they are ravening wolves. Many more Scriptures
to this purpose there are; but if you have a mind to your hirelings still, you
will belive no Scripture that is against him, neither is there any for him; so
that all the true practical part of Scriptures must be laid aside, only talk
of it and dispute of it a little, and pick out of it a few places to preach out
off, and to write, to get some money to uphold their pride and honor in this
world, to please the old man in the flesh: Surely if John the Baptist should
come forth again, and call himself Leveller, and take such food as the
wilderness yielded, and such clothing, and Preach up his former Doctrine, He
that had two coats should give away one of them, and he that has food should
do likewise; How scornfully would our proud Gentlemen and Gallants look of
him, that has gotten three or four Coats with great gold and silver buttons,
and half a score dainty dishes at his Table, besides his gallant house, and
his furniture therein; therefore this Scripture must be interpreted some other
way, or else denied: and this is our condition, if the Scripture will not serve
for our own ends to fulfill: selfeish desires, to uphold the old man in his
fleshly honor, which belongs to the Magistrate only, who God has made a
Minister for thy wealths sake, and does not at all belong to innocence nor
Christ in the Spirit; for there is small sign of the old man's dying or
putting off, whilst he smites his fellows for the liberty of his fleshly
desires; and this is our condition that loves the world, in whom the love of
God cannot be, 1 John 2.15, 16. Love not the world, neither the things of the
world: If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him; for all
that is in the world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world: These Scriptures have
I endeavored formerly to interpret some other way, by absurdities and
consequences; how that if we should not wear superfluous things, thousands of
people would starve for want of Trading, and so by consequence bring greater
evil upon us: So I being not willing to loose my pride and worldly pomp, I
questioned the truth of the Scriptures, and even God himself, and all for want
of some glimps of spiritual light, which my natural eyes in reason could not
discern. Therefore the most high was pleased to convince me with natural
forms, namely birds of the Air, which every day brought me intelligence
according to my worldly occasions; for almost three years space I have observed
them, for they would foretell me of any danger or cross, or any joy from
friends; I mean any danger or dishonor to my person, or loss of cattle, or
corn, or any other disadvantage to my advancement in the world; and this
clearly convinced me, that there was a power above man. Then I considered the
wise man's saying, Eccles. 10.10. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought,
neither curse the rich in thy bed chamber, for the fouls of the heaven shall
carry the voice, and that which has wings, shall declare the matter: Also I
considered that God made use of a bird to feed Elias the Prophet: by this I saw
that he made use of natural causes to fulfill natural desires, so I came to
know God in nature. Moreover I considered the Scrptures where the Lord speaks
against the Soothsayers, and against Astrologers, Sorcerers, and wizzards; all
these I found to be the spirits of darkness, and will reach no further then
the old man in the flesh, yet very necessary to be known, that we may avoid the
evil thereof: Christ and the Prophets knew all these things, or else they
would never have spoken against them, but we in the old man have often spoken
against things that we knew not, out of blind zeal, but not according to
knowledge:

Therefore let the Scripture rule us, that we judge no man's heart which
belongs to God only in the Spirit, but our judgment must be external of
every tree according to their fruits; For by their fruits we ought to know
them: So to reprove every man his Neighbor to his face, leave off backbiting
and slandering one another, and making up our laughter in deriding the actions
of others, which we cannot do, unless we think our selves wiser then they;
This sad thing have I observed in many Families, when they have happened in any
discourse, it seldom or never ended without backbiting, or deriding one another
behind their backs with their tongues, which causes envy, and sets on fire
every man that uses it against his Neighbor, according to the Scripture, Jam.
3. and this comes for want of mortifying the old man in the flesh, Romans 8.13.
These and many other helps there are in the Scriptures, if we will believe it,
to overcome the flesh; for Christ says, Mat. 7.8. Whosoever asks receives,
and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall it shall be
opened: This Sccripure seems to reach further then the Disciples in some czses;
for some that did not believe, made use of his name to cast out Devils, and it
seems the power of God assisted them therein; for they could not do it by the
power of the Devil, for then they would not have made use of Christ's name.
Again, Christ himself says, If Satan cast out Satan, his Kingdom cannot
stand, Mat. 12.26. And it is contrary to any reason, that God should cast out
God, or the Devil cast out the Devil: So we find according to the whole
tenor of Scripture, that God answers all sorts of people according to that
dispensation they are under, if their desires are servent, whether it be for
their good, or their hurt, as have proved sufficiently in my discourse
concerning the flesh given to the children of Israel, 1 Samuel 8.7. where God
says to Samuel, Hear the voice of the people in all that they shall say unto
thee. So God condiscended to the desires of the people for the hurt of their
bodies in granting them a King; but if any out of zeal toward God in the
Spirit will pray unto him, and yet would uphold the righteousness of God in
the flesh; God answering them with such spirits as may dishonor them in this
world, by lying or false prophesying, to destroy the honor of the old man in
them, that they may be brought forth as tried in the fire, more pure in the
spirit of Light: but if any shall enquire after God at the mouth of his
Prophets, only to uphold the honor and ambition of the old man in this world,
God will send them false spirits to preach lies, of purpose to destroy them;
and this will come upon those that are for their own ambitious ends, as you may
see in 1 King. 22. where the false spirits wait on God for their message, and
God sends them forth, and bids them prosper, to please Ahab in his request;
Thus we see for the love of this world people are destroyed. Then let us
conclude, that it is high time to cast off the old man with his rudiments, with
his malice and envy, and entertain light, love, and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost; That this may be our treasure, leading us up to that throne of grace,
full of unspeakable joys, where Christ sits in the Council of his Father,
with all his Angels, entertaining all with fullness of joy, that enters in at
this narrow gate, wiping away all tears, and all desires shall cease, and
sorrow shall never more come near them; and instead thereof such joy, that
neither tongue of men or Angels can express.

If men and Angels do prove silent, than
Why should not I, an inferior man:
Now am I silent, and indite no more,
Pray use no violence then against the poor.
O Mortal form what do thou mean!
To make such long delay;
Keeping thy soul so poor and lean,
Against the dreadful day.
To whom we all must once appear,
To receive our sentence deep;
The sorrowing hearts, and terrible fears,
Making our souls to weep.
Two (...) ^^ere are to us proposed,
Whilst we on earth do dwell,
In choosing one, the other's lost,
Let it be heaven or hell.
Then must our choice be circumspect,
Without a worldly mind:
Lest God one day do us reject,
And we no mercy find.
If heaven we choose, then hell is lost,
we cannot it embrace;
But to the glory of joy we must,
Swallowed be in endless grace.
If hell we choose, the world is gained,
Which is that flesh desires:
Then need we nothing to refrain,
That pride and lust requires.
Such is our lusts and covetousness,
The belly and back to please;
With selling and buying, dissembling and lying,
Yet we cannot live at ease.
But still in discontent abide,
Desiring after more:
Our envy would that all had dyed,
That loved not the whore.
Her Merchants they do bowl and weep,
Their traffic none will buy:
They wishing now to sow or reap,
One year before they dye.
In Revelation, Chop. nineteen,
In truth there you may read;
Who it is shall bear the Scepter,
When the old whore is dead.
Thus to the wise in their conceit,
As I my self have been:
They now shall know that once they might,
Have left the greatest sin.
O England then repent
For the misery thou art in!
Which have all by consent,
Lived on each others sin.
If pride should banished be away,
Then Tradesmen out would cry,
Come let us kill, eat, and slay,
Or else for want we dye.
Then would the Gentry mourn,
Without pride they cannot live:
And slaves to get them Corn,
Whilst they themselves deceive.
Thus pride becomes our god,
And dear to us as life;
Whose absence makes us sad,
And cannot please our Wife.
If the poor laboring men,
Live of their onne increase;
Where are your Gentry then,
But gone among the Beasts.
If any would know who is the Author.
Or ask whose lines are these:
I answer, one that drinks water,
And now a liver at ease.
In drinking cannot be drunk,
Nor am I moved to swear:
And from wenching am I sunk,
My bones are kept so bare.
For it is the grossnesse of the flesh
That makes the soul to smart:
And is the cause of his own lust,
That commits adultery in his heart.
FINIS.

