The Second Centurie.
1 CORNELIUS Holland, his father died in the Fleet for debt, and left him a
poor boy in Court, waiting on Sir Henry Vane then Controller of the Princes
house; he is still Sir H. Vanes Zanie: But now a cc-Commissioner with his
Master for the Revenue of the King, Queen and Prince: He has, with the help
of his Master, made himself Farmer of the Kings feeding -- grounds at C^slow
in Buckinghamshire (worth 1800. or 2000. l. per an.) at the Rent of 200. l. per
an. which he discounts: He is possessor of Somerset House, where he and his
family lives: He is Keeper of Richmond House for his Countrey-Retreate: He is
Commissary for the Garrisons at White hall and the Mues: He has an Office in
the Mint, He has ten children, and lately gave 5000. l. with a daughter,
after which rate the State must find 5000. l. for portions.

2 Sir Henry Vane senior, has the Bishop of Durbam's Manor, Park and
Demeasnes of Evenwood: had given him 5000. l.: Is Chairman for the King's,
Queene's and Prince's, Revenue, the Epitomy whereof is Lord Treasurer. His man
Cozens is Clearke to the Committee, and gets 1500. or 2000. l per an. by it,
And if the Man such profits have,
What then must he that keeps the --


3 Sir Henry Vane, junior, son to the elder, Has totally outed Sir William
Russell, and is sole Treasurer to the Navy, a place worth at least 6000. l. per
annum. in time of war, especially when the Lord Treasurer as his friend; more
when he is his Father.

4 Sir Thomas Trenchard, had given him 1200. l. thus: He married his daughter
to a Malignant, gave security for payment of 1200. l. portion, beside
Parliamentary courtesies: got his son in law sequestered, discovers the debt,
and has it given him for his fidelity to the State. A very Parliamentary way
to pay Portions.

5 John Trenchard, brother to Sir Thomas, but a better father in Law, He is
Governor of Wa^ham; He married two of his daughters to Master Bingham and
Master Sid^nham, he procured them to be made Colonels of horse and foot,
and Governors of several Garrisons, gets them to be chosen Members of the
House of Commons, and so makes them free of his own Trade by their Fathers
Copy.

6 * William Bingham, Coll. of horse and foot, Governor of Poole, and had
given him 1000. l.

7 * John Sydenham Coll. of horse and fooote, Governor of Waymouth and Melcom
-- Regis, and Commander in chief of Dorsetshire; had given him 1000. l.

8 John Brown married Sir Thomas Trenchards sister, is a prime Comm tree-man
for the County, seized 1000. l. worth of the Stock and goods of Farmer Wades in
Portland, the Committee quitted him of Malignancy but could not his goods,
being in the hands of a Member; so they are Malignant still, and secured in Mr.
Brownes hands.

9 Richard Rose has the house and furniture of Master Bagley the Kings
glasier, which he got thus. He and Master John Trenchard went to several
houses about the Strand to hyre lodgings for Maliguants, gave good rates, but
would have the best furniture; and they being Members of the house, would
secure them; Master Bagleyes was one, Master Rose caused it to be Sequestered
and got it to himself; for which he and Master Trenchard fell out: But Bagley
(though an honest man) got not his goods again; Which crosses the Proverb.

10 Dennis Bond, a most insolent woollen Draper, he takes by his trustees his
Sons and Brother; one son he made Master of Trinity-hall in Cambridge,
another Auditor of the Excise worth 500. l. per annum, and his brother
Governor of Portland and Receiver of the Kings rents in Southampton and
Somerset.

11 John Glynn made Recorder of London, and Clearke of the Pells, in Sir Edward
Warders place, worth 1000. l. per an. He has made his father in law, Master
Squib, Clarencieux Herald, in Sir William Neve's place worth 800 l. per an.
and has made his creature and kinsman Folconbridge Controuler of the excise,
worth 500. l. per an. and also receiver general of the King, Queen, and
Princes Revenue worth 2000. l. per an. Mr. Glynne conferred, on his Cosen
Lawrence Swetnam the wine Office, worth 300. l. per an. and made him Receiver
of the first Fruits, worth 200 l. per an. But Mr Swetnam dying Mr. Glyn got
both places for his Brother in Law Mr. that they might not go out of the tribe.

12 John Bell, Apothecary to the body Politic, has as little given him as
he deserves in honest times; but to preserve the Priveledge of the house; is
protected for what he can get; he is a trustee for the poor of Westminstor:
Received of Mr. Antrobus and others money for the poor, was sued for an
Account, said he could not answer without breach of privilege of Parliament,
and that he durst not; by which m^anes Parliament Men are the surest keepers of
a trust.

13 Sir Walter Earl, Colonel of horse, and Lieutenant of the Ordnance, in Sir
John Heydons place, worth 1000. l. per an. in time of Peace; but in time of
War, worth 5000. l. per an.

14 Thomas Earl, son to Sir Walter, Captain of a Troop of horse; seldom
attends the house, but follows his business in the Country, where he is a
great Committee-man; punishes his, and his fathers enemies, and rewards
himself and his friends.

15 Thomas Atkins, Alderman, as honest as sweet; he was a Treasurer at War,
and lick't his fingers.

16 Gregory Clemens Merchant in both senses, has been a member two months,
and protests he has scarce cleared the purchase money, which was but 60. l.
but says Trading will mend.

17 John Rowles Merchant, has given to him 1500. l. out of Sir John Worsenhams
estate.

18 Sir Thomas Jarvis, has Mr. Webbs place in Richmond little Park.

19 Edward Ash Woollendraper, Treasurer for the providing of Clothes for the
Irish Soldiers.

20 Sir John Danvers, Colonel after the death of his brother, the Earl of
Danby, he proved him to be a Malignant, and by Parliamentary proceedings
ovorthrew his brothers will, outed his sister Gargrave, and Sir Peter Osborne
of the State, worth 30000. l. and has it.

21 * Thomas Harrison Major, when the Wars began he was Servant to Mr. Hulke
an Attorney at Law.

22 Edmond Dunes, Constable of Wallingford-Castle.

23 Sir Robert Harlow, Mr. of the Mint, in the Place of Sir Ralph Freeman, and
Sir Thomas Alesbury: Before the Parliament was much indebted, very poor, and
could not pay, now he is rich and will not pay.

24 Edward Wingate, Captain of a Troop of horse.

25 Thomas Grantham, Colonel of horse.

26 * William Ashcough, Captain of a Troop of horse.

27 James Fienn^, Captain of a Troop of horse.

28 Sir John Merticke, Major General.

29 Henry Herbert, given him 3000. l. and the plunder of Ragland Castle.

30 * Fenwick, 500. l. so small a some deserves not a Christian name.

31 Gilbert Millington, given him 1000. l.

32 Sir Henry Chomley, Colonel. of horse, and the zealous Commissioner of
Yorkshire.

33 Phillip Lord Listle, General for Ireland had an allowance of 10. l. per
diem, as my Lord of Essex had, besides pay for his Regiment and came safe of at
the Battle of Rosse.

34 * Arthur Owen, Colonel.

35 Henry Darly,

36 Richard Darly, Given to their father for them 5000 l.

37 Thomas Toll, has the Customers place of Linne in his sons name worth
300. l. per an. yet it is another by Grant.

38 * Elize. Grimes, Captain.

39 Thomas Hatcher, Colonel, Governor of Lincoln, and plunder Master
General of the County.

40 * Thomas Lister, Lieut-col. and Deputy Governor of Lincoln.

41 Sir Christopher Wraye, Colonel, since dead.

42 * William Wraye, his son Colonel.

43 Henry Pelham, Recorder of Lincoln, in the place of Sir Charles Dalison.

44 Sir William Armin, Agent in Scotland for the State.

45 William Armin; his son Colonel.

46 Richard Barveyes, Colonel, Governor of Carlisle:

47 * Francis Russel, Colonel, Governor of Cambridge.

48 Richard Shuttleworth, Colonel, and has very many of the Recusants Lands
in Lancashire, in Sequestration; himself being the chief Commissioner for
Sequestrations.

49 John Hampden, Colonel of foot; killed at Chalgrove field, where he made
his first muster.

50 Arthur Goodwine, Colonel of foot, since dead.

51 Anthony Nicolls Mr. Pyms nephew; by him is made paymaster to the Messengers
of Intelligence; by which in a shorttime he put himself into a Parliamentary
equipage of Coach, horse and attendants, got money, and contrary to the
privilege of Parliament paid his fathers debts; but was afterward suspended
the house.

52 Robert Cecill, son to the E. of Salisbury, Col. of horse, procured one
Collins to be made Auditor in chief for the Revenues of the King, Queen and
Prince, worth 2000 l. per an. but in trust for the Col.

53 William White Colonel, and was Treasurer at War to the Army in the
North, under the command of the old Lord Fairfax.

54 * Francis Bacon, Recorder of Ipswith in the place of Mr. Laney.

55 Alexander Popham, Colonel.

56 * Edward Popham, Colonel.

57 * Bramton Gurdon, Colonel.

58 * Sir Thomas Barnardiston, Colonel.

59 * George Fleetewood, Colonel.

60 Sergeant Wild, Justiciarius itinerans, anglice; journey-man judge, had
after the hanging of Capraine Burlye 1000. l. out of the privy purse of
Darby-House: it is thought he afforded a great penniworth in his service; which
another would not have done for 10000. l. and it is affirmed he had 1000. l.
more, upon the acquitall of Major Rolfe; so it is all one to him whether he
hangs, or he hangs not.

A LIST Of such Aldermen, and Common-Councell-men, as have great profits, by
the continuance of the War, Excise, Taxes, and proceedings of the two houses
of Parliament.
1 JOHN Warner, Lord Major before his time: One of the Treasurers at War;
has three pence a pound for what he receives in, and as much by Ordinance for
what he pays out, besides great gratuities to help men to their moneys, and
buys good penniworths of bad debts, then pays himself: He is also Treasurer
for receipt of all moneys that were due upon the Ordinance of the third of
August 1643. and by the Ordinance of the 18. of August 1643. he is made
Treasurer for lone money. Judas carried but one bag and is said to be a
thief. Warner thou see has three but my modesty will not say say so of him,
yet he has purchased at easy rates the Arch Bishop of Yorkes best house the
Castle and Manor of Caiwood, but he is one of the new Militia for London,
and therefore the City forces must justify whatsoever he does.

2 Sir John Wollaston, Alderman, at first he was one of the Treasurers for
plate etc. a Treasurer at War Treasurer for lone money, he is Say -- Master
of the Mint; A trustee for safe of Bishops lands, and has bought the Bishop of
Londons land at Highgate, and he is one of the new Militia.

3 William Gibs, Alderman, was a melter of the Guildhall plate and bodkins by
which he got 7. or 8000. l. he was one of the Treasurers for 200000. l. to pay
the Scots; which was done in Earemarked halfe-Crownes, called Gibists: He is a
trustee for Bishops lands, and Treasurer for Rents and money raised by them;
and for what he receives and what he pays, has 1. d. per pound allowed by
Ordinance besides what he allows himself; he also is one of the new Militia
because he must stand upon his guard.

4 John Fowkes, Alderman, he was a Commissioner for the Customs; refused to
account upon oath, because his tender conscience might not discover ought
against his profit; he has reformed (cheated is obsolete) Jews and Gentles,
Papist and Protestant; for the Jews he says he may under the Gospel, as
well borrow their carrings, as they under the Law did the Egyptians; his
Christian reformation would fill as much paper as the Declarations and
Ordinances of the houses: for foreign Reformation, enquire of Maddock Sawes,
a Greek of Zant, for whom he was Factor; for home Reformation, you may learn
from Mr. John Plumpton, Thomas Milsoy, Mr. Clearke a Cooper Mrs. ^eadell etc.
all whom he has reformed, he is so terrible in the City, that at his name
children hide their nuts and apples fearing a reformation: he was treasurer
for payment of Waggoners, he is a trustee for Bishops Lands and controwler of
account for them, had first 200. l. per annum, and after by an additionall
Ordinance 300. l. a year more, standing fee, and were it more the K. deserves
it.

5 Tho. Atkins, Alderman, is a Member of the House of Commons, and the
Treasurer at war that lick't his fingers; as before.

6 Isaac Pennington, Alderman, a member of the House of Commons, while Lord
Major he got much money by passes out of town, more by turning men out of
their places, for pretended malignancy, and putting others into them: He was
Lieutenant of the Tower of London: He was trusted by Sir John Pennington with
6000 l, which he discovered, begged and had it: By privilege of Parliament
he is protected against creditors and therefore will not pay debts; yet has
bought store of the Bishops lands.

7 Francis Pack Alderman, Commissioner for customs, treasurer at War has
3. d. per pound for all money paid to him or received from him, has bought the
Bishop of Lincolnes Manor, and house at Bugden; and one of the new Militia.

8 Thomas Andrews, Alderman before the Parliament, a great dealer in projects
was treasurer for the plate and money brought into Guild Hall, he is treasurer
at War, has 3. d. per pound as others, and was a Commissioner for customs.

9 Samuel Avery, Alderman, a Commissioner for the customs, a treasurer for
sepuestrations, and a trustee for sale of Bishops lands.

10 Thomas Culham, Alderman, Commissioner for excise worth 1200. l. per annum.

11 John Kenrick, Alderman, Commissioner for excise worth 1200. l.

12 Thomas Foot, Alderman, Commissioner for excise worth 1200. l.

13 Sim. Edmons, Alderman, Commissioner for excise worth 1200. l. per annum.

14 John Langham, Alderman, treasurer for the excise, and as Alderman Fowke,
treasurer for payment of Waggoners, and a trustee for Bishops lands.

15 Owen Roe, Lieutenant Colonel, keeper of the Magazine of store; received
5000. l. to provide Arms, not yet accounted for; one of the new Militia.

16 Walter Boothby, Commissioner for the customs.

17 Robert Manwaring, Collonell, Register accountant for moneys raised by
Bishops lands, has a standing fee of 200. l. per annum.

18 John Dethwicke, a treasurer at War and has 3. d. per pound for all money
received by him and 3. d. per pound for what he pays.

19 Edward Hooker, Collonell.

20 Natheniel Campsfield, Lievetenant-Collonell.

21 Richard Chiverton, a Receiver of one per cent, of Merchants goods for
redemption of Captives.

22 Richard Hill, likewise a receiver of one per cent, of Merchants goods for
redemption of Captives,

23 Stephen Eastwick, a trustee for sale of Bishops lands, formerly a
Commissioner for the Customs, one of the new Milicia, and has gotten a great
estate since this Parliament.

24 James Russel, a trustee for sale of Bishops lands, one of the new Militia,
formerly a Commissioner for the Customs.

25 John Bellamy,

26 Thomas Arnold.

27 Richard Glide.

28 John Babington.

29 Richard Vennor, Captain.

30 Robert Meade.

31 James story; These seven last past are trustees for sale of Bishops lands.

32 William Antrobus.

33 Richard Turner.

34 Thomas Brumfeild.

35 Edward Bellamy.

36 Hugh Norris.

37 Nathaniell Hall.

38 Peter Jones.

39 Thomas Blackwell, treasurer at Weavers hall.

40 John Hayes.

These are all Common Councell-men, and have such employments as thou see,
and have besides been doublers of lone moneys, and buyers of others lones at
9. and 10. s. in the pound; receive their full interest at 8 l. per centum, out
of the excise, and their principal in good penniworths out of Bishops lands,
buying 6000. l. worth of land for 1000. l. in arreares, or lone money which they
bought for 4. or 500. l. The benefit of which bargains, is so great, both to
Parliament -- men, Soldier and Citizen; as ('it is feared) they will not admit
of the Kings offer to repay them their purchase money, and preserve the Church
Land for Church maintenance, but rather break the Treary, continue the Army,
Excise, Taxes; their employment, and our Ruin, which, God Forbid.

THAT thou may know, Reader, the benefit of Military Officers, I have thought
fit to set down their several pays according to the establishment of the Army
of my Lord of Essex, viz: A Collonell of foot 1 l. 10. s. the day, which
amounts to 42 l. the month. A Lievetenant-Collonell 15 s. the day, which
amounts to 21 l. the month. A Serjant Major 9 s. the day, which amounts to 12
l. 12 s. the month. A Captain 15 s. the day, which amounts to 21 l. the
month. A Collonell of horse 1 l. 10 s. the day, which amounts to 42 l. the
month for himself; and for six horses 1 l. 1 s. the day, which amounts to 29
l. 8 s. the month. A Lieutenant Collonell of horse 15 s. the day, which
amounts to 21 l. the month. A Captain of horse 1 l. 4 s. the day, which
amounts to 33 l. the month; and for six horses 1 l. 1 s. the day, which
amounts to 29 l. 8 s. the month; in all 52 l. 8 s. the month for his own
personal entertainment; besides false musters: And thou must know, that every
Colonel, Lieutenant Collonell, and Major does receive pay for a Captain,
besides his pay as a field Officer, so that a Collonell received monthly 42 l.
as Collonell, and 21 l. as Captain, and 29 l. for six horses; in all 94 l. the
month, besides he receives pay for his whole Company which should be 120.
men in a foot Compay, the pay whereof is 158 l. 4 s. the month while his
Company perhaps is not 60. men. But the monthly entertainment of a troop of
horse was 349 l. 6 s. and advance money to raise regiments for every Company
390 l. but more for a troop. This good pay plunder and Free Quarter, made very
many members of both houses take the employment, so that of 19. Regiments which
were raised at first 16. of them were Commanded by members of both houses viz.

Earl of Stamford, Earl of Peterborough, viscount Say and Seal, viscount
Mandivile Lord Roberts, Lord Brook, Lord Rochford, Lord St. John's, Lord
Wharton, Mr. D Hollis, Sir William Constable, Sir Henry Chomly, John Hampden,
Arthur Goodwine, Thomas Grantham, Sir John Merrick, and diverse of these besides
had troops of horses, some members put their sons into Command, but themselves
took the pay, the Lord Say received for 13. months, from the 30. of July 1642.
to the 26. of July following 9081 l. 16 s. being the pay for the two troops of
Mr. James Fiennis and Francis Fiennis his sons; Mr. Pym for the same months
received for his son Alexanders troop 45 40 l. 18 s. although his son
never had 26. men in his troop besides Officers. Thus thou see why our
Loans, taxes, excise, and sequestrations are continued, how they and Bishops
lands are devoured; and yet neither the Army nor Parliament men Satisfied.

READER I intended before this time to have given thee this Century as
promised, and also a Catalogue of such of the Aldermen, Common Council, and
Militia-men of London as receive pay and profit by the continuance of the
Excise, Impositions, War and Discord between the King and His houses of
Parliament, that the world might know the reason of such Votes and Actions as
promote the War, prolong our Payments, detarde the Kings Return, obstruct
our Peace and Happiness; but besides my weekly employment (which thou
know) I have been necessitated (danger approaching) to remove my quarter
before Michaelmas, to my great trouble and hindrance; yet that thou may see
I intended what I promised accept this Motly-Century; not that I will defrand
thee of any one Parliament man or Citizen, if (as formerly) I may be connived
at in the perusal of the Journall-bookes, and books of the Committees.

M. El.


