(...) perilous time, by a few, who have been bewailing their own, and others
Abominations, and would not be comforted, until their Redeemer, who is holy, be
exalted in Righteousness, and his Name which has been so much blasphemed, be
sanctified in the sight of the Nations.
THough we cannot but see cause bitterly to bewail our own great iniquities
and failings, under the profession of Christ, both as King of Saints and
Nations, and the abominations also of an haughty and abusive spirit, found in
the late single Person (in a professed pursuit of Reformation) not
distinguishing the precious from the vile, in the force he exercised upon the
long Parliament (after the Lord had so long honored them in his work, and
preserved in the very fire a faithful Seed among them) which, with the like
insulting and contempt, that afterward triumphed over a faithful people in the
little Assembly that followed, has returned in just reproach and shame upon
their heads who so insulted, and could not, therefore in that spirit, make any
blessed use of the best of men who cleaved to them, the most hopeful means
bringing little forth, but mere confusion, yet we cannot but acknowledge to
the glory of God on high, that such rebuke was justly poured out upon the
prevailing party of the said Parliament; and none but the upright and truly
penitent amongst them, in sense both of neglect of duty and great Corruptions,
ought of right, or acceptably in our esteem, to be sharers in the trust of
Rule, over the so hardly ransomed People of this Nation.

First, Then we do in humility and fear, witness against the setting up or
introducing any Person whatsoever, as King, or chief Magistrate, or a House of
Lords, or any other thing of like import, under what name or title soever, or
any power arising from the Nation, as a Nation upon the old corrupt and almost
ruinated constitution, apprehending that the great work of taking the Kingdom
from Man, and giving it to Christ, has had its beginning in the revolutions
we have been under.

Secondly, We do humbly witness against the foundation of future Violence, of
bringing into, or continuing in Authority any who joined with the late single
Person, otherwise then by first manifesting fruit meet for repentance, for
such misdemeanors, by which our Rights, both as Christians and as men have bin
so much betrayed, and the name of our heavenly Father, after all his works of
wonder with us, so much thereby profaned, to our greatest grief even
throughout and beyond the bounds of these three Nations.

Thirdly, We do hereby humbly witness against the employing in the Armies, or
Navy, any Commanders who have been active in the Resignation of the Government
to the deceased single Person, or in the abusing any Christians met to mourn
over their backslidings and abominations, or that informed against or
supplanted their dissenting Brethren, or were principal in contriving or
presenting any of the blasphemous or flattering addresses, or were Jaolers or
Keepers of their Brethren, in Holds or Prisons, or that received extraordinary
rewards or titles of honor from the late single Person or his Successor, or
any deriving power from them, or that acted by either of their Arbitrary
Commands, to the banishment of any (without legal Trial) out of the Nation,
or that contrived or acted in the unrighteous and shameful proceeding against
such of the late Enemy as lived peaceably, and had no hand in the insurrection,
by decimating of them contrary to Articles and public faith of the Nation,
unless some good proof of repentance in truth, be manifested for these, or
such of these abominations, as they shall be found guilty of.

And positively, we do now desire witness for, and humbly assert, that the
right of making and giving Laws unto men, is originally in God, who has given
this power, as well as the execution thereof, unto Christ as he is the Son of
man, and See New-Havens Laws in New England, sold by L. Chapman, p. 12. and 17.
therein made universal Lord and Sovereign over the whole World, and under
Christ as his Ministers, a certain number of men qualified and limited
according to his Word, ought to be set apart to the Office of chief Rule and
Government over these Nations, as part of Christ's universal Kingdom. And we
do claim, that only men of courage, fearing God, and hating Covetousness,
might be employed in the trust of Rule, and in all places of public
Judicature; yea, if it be possible, in every place of public Trust in these
three Nations. And that all the Laws respecting the right of men, might be so
truly ordered by the Scriptures to the exaltation of Christ, our Lord, King,
and Lawgiver, as that in point of right no difference might be made betwixt
good and bad, nor this or that profession in Religion, but by one right Role
the offender may be punished, and the injured effectually relieved with
expedition: the said Laws being first so plainly declared, as the poorest in
the Land may understand their Case; and that it be dispensed so nigh their
dwellings, as that Judgment might not be turned into Wormwood, as hitherto it
has been, through partiality, intricacy, vexatious delays, and distances.

That as an intolerable burden and oppression, inconsistent with the Rights
aforesaid, or true liberty of Conscience unto all, the Rulers over men forbear
for ever to impose any national, parochial Ministry, so as to enforce any
form of Worship suited to their interest, or compel men of one persuasion, to
maintain any man of another, in the Ministry.

That thus doing Justice, loving Mercy, and walking humbly with our God, which
is the good he has showed to us, as only tending to true Settlement, the
whole Nation may be blessed, and all iniquity may stopp her mouth, is the
Public good Old Cause, we desire may be so revived in truth, as that all the
upright in heart throughout the Land may follow it, against every private
factious or Carnal (though national) spirit and opposition whatsoever, which
under the shadow of the Lord our God Almighty, we set forth as our Testimony,
and Subscribe

John Owen. Hen. Jessey. Va. Powell. J. Vernon. H. Courtney. Will. Allen. Phil.
Pinchon. John Poortmans. Clement Ireton. Rob. Rumsey. P. Goodricke. R. Price.
James Hitt. Jo. Wigan. H. Danvers. Rich. Goodgroome. Hen. Parsons. To. Overton.
Rich. Saltonstall. Wentw. Day.


THe preceding Testimony was prepared, and ready to be published at the
breaking forth of the late insurrection, which occasioned a forbearance, least
it might seem at that season to gratify the Adversary; concerning which
insurrection, some of us have bin eye witnesses of such abominable treachery,
malignity, and enmity in many in eminent power, and in Arms under them, and in
the public Ministry, as more exposed the good Old Cause and people engaged
therein, then these who openly without such power rose up against them, which
in due time, if not prevented by effectual reformation herein, we intend to
witness against with full evidence, to the conviction of such upright ones, as
might not see themselves so immediately exposed, as their brethren were, by the
new raised Militia in many places of the Nation.

Judges. 19. 30. Consider of it, take advice, and speak your minds. Printed
for Giles Calvert at the black Spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's. 1659.


