A PERFECT DIVRNALL OF THE PROCEEDINGS IN HARTFORD-SHIRE, From the 15. of
August to the 29.

Wherein is declared how the Earl of Bedfords Troops searched the Lord Capels
house, where they found arms sufficient to arm a thousand men.

Also how they searched Sir Thomas Fanshaw's house, where they found two Pieces
of Ordnance, barrels of Powder, Muskets and Pikes.

With a true discovery of the great preparation that the said Sir Thomas
Fanshaw has made for the space of three months for some dangerous design,
being one of the Commissioners of Array for that County.

Whereunto is added an Information given by Sir Thomas Dakers (a Member of the
House of Commons) intimating that he suspected the Earl of Bedfords Troops
should have battle given them by Sir John Watson before they came to Hartford.

Printed for W. M. September. 1. 1642.

A PERFECT DIVRNALL of the Proceedings in the County of HARTFORD, From Tuesday
the 15. of August, to the 29. 1642.
ON Tuesday the Earl of BEDFORDS troops (by reason of an alarm from
Hartford, that the Cavaliers were within six miles of the Town) were commanded
at one a clock in the morning to put themselves in a posture of defense, and
march toward Hartford; which they with great willingness performed. But on
the way toward Hartford, at Hodsdon, Sir Thomas Dakers, a Parliament Man, met
them, telling them, he feared they should have a battle betwixt that and
Hartford, and, as he thought, near Sir John Watsons house, withal encouraging
them to proceed valiantly, intimating the justness of the cause, with many
noble encouragements: which indeed served but as an addition to that honorable
fire that ardently warmed their breasts, the Captains and Soldiers being so
truly noble, and religiously valiant.

Having parted from Sir Thomas Dakers, and arriving near the place where this
supposed battle should be, Captain Ankle gave command that every man should
charge with bullet, and by reason that every man was not accordingly provided,
he desired those that were provided, to impart to others, promising supply when
they came to the town. Nevertheless the Cavaliers appeared not, neither found
they any opposition til they came within sight of the town, where they saw a
Court of Guard, and some three bow-shoots on this side certain Centries: which
Captain Ankle seeing, sent out a Party to discover what they were: who coming
up to the Centries, they demanded the word, and for what cause or pretense they
came so armed? Our Party told them, they had no command to resolve them any
such demand, only that they were sent to demand the cause of their warlike
appearance, and for what cause they had taken Arms: the Centries desired the
Party of Horse to march up to the Court of Guard, but they refused, only
caused the Centrie to march to the head of their troop, which being done, they
having informed the Captain what they were, the Captain drew out a Squadron of
Horse, and (being conducted by the Centries) marched up to the Court of Guard,
where he found almost five hundred men completely armed, with their mu^kets
presented against them, and their pikes half ported or charged: and at the
entry of the town stood the whole Train band in a full body placed in a
warlike equipage. The Court of Guard where he was demanded the word, which was
Prevention: having given it them, he was by them conducted to the second Watch,
being a Company of Pikes with Bows and Arrows, they conducted him to the
Captain, who demanded by what authority he had brought his Forces to the town?
The Captain told him that his Troup was raised by the Earl of BEDFORD, for
the maintenance of the true Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, the
safety of His Majesty's Person, and His Royal Posterity, the High Court of
Parliament, and the Liberty and Propriety of the Subject: and having
intelligence that the town was in danger of being opposed by the Cavaliers,
against whom he and all his followers were resolved to adventure their lives,
obliged thereunto by his duty to the Parliament, and his own honor, to give
them his best aid and assistance against the distu^bers of the peace of the
Kingdom. Having spoke thus to them, they gave him a general welcome,
conducting him through the Watches to his own Troop, opening their whole Body
to the right and left, leaving a large distance for the Horse to pass through
them, and giving them an unexpected welcome, showing themselves such fire-men as
can hardly be bettered. Notwithstanding they find but hard usage in their
provision both for Horse and man, paying eight pence a meal, come or come not,
for mean diet. Wherefore they intend to petition the Parliament, that there may
be a reasonable rate for diet set down, and for Oats and Hay, that this
exaction may not continue.

Since their abode there, Sir John Lucey and Sir John Watson came to the Bell
at Hartford with certain Cavaliers, giving out that they intended to put the
Commission of Array in execution, which caused us to arm our selves, and stand
right against the Bell, which the valiant Knights perceiving, stole out of the
town.

We march out daily to exercise, because we daily expect to be opposed. All our
Troops from the greatest to the least stand well affected to the Parliament,
and (I am confident) will do good service, if occasion serve, our Captain being
a well experienced soldier, and our other Officers suitable both in skill and
behavior.

On monday the 29. of August a Troop of Horse under the command of the Earl
of BEDFORD, with the assistance of some Horsemen from London, marched to the
Lord Capels house, where they found arms sufficient to arm about a thousand
men, with ten Horses, great Saddles, Pistols and Carbines. Likewise at Sir
Thomas Fanshaws house were found two Pieces of Ordnance, with several barrels
of Powder, Musket and Pikes: and is thought in the country that he is a great
deal better provided, having kept two Gun-Smiths these three months in his
house to mend and make arms clean, but for the present they cannot learn
where they are bestowed.

These are the chief of our Proceedings in the County of Hartford, being in a
very good Posture. The next return you shall hear from me. So I rest,

Your loving friend, R. E.
Hartf. Aug. 29. 1642.
FINIS.

