The Envy of The Popish Prelates, Against the City of LONDON AND Faithful
Ministers of Gods Word.

Showing also their willingness to help against Scotland, and their
slacknesse and want of pity to the poor Protestants in Ireland.

Likewise their readiness to raise a tumult at Westminster, by stirring up the
Constables to withstand the Citizens of London in Christmas last.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London for I.C. 1642.

The envy of the Popish Prelates.
H. Stalbridge h^s Epist: printed at Basil.
1.AS the prestigious Priests in their Woolfe-like ravening under Romes
cruelty, Ann. 1530. were as deceitful as crafty foxes; in whose dens were
bred such cruel Adders as have ever since carried stings in their tails to
oppress the Church of God, So are those Foxes whelps now become not only as
subtle as their Dammes, but as cruel as their Sires in their subtilties.

2. In that Reforming Parliament, Rho, Mors his Lamentation, title of Chapter 23 B.
Hall his Remonstrance, and Replies, and any of them all will now confess it.
the Prelates pretended to be fearful of the destruction of the Church, and
the ceasing of that glory in which this Kingdom then was, and therefore
pretended to take great care for both. And thus do our Prelates imitate them;
if we remove them and their Discipline, they traduce us to believe, there will
never be any settlement in the Church of England, and if they be taken from
their palaces, and dignities, all the glory of this Nation will be eclipsed.

Hol. Chronicle Prelates like Satan can transform themselves in^o Angels of
light.
But for all the cruelty of those Romish Woolfes that were then resident in
this Island, yet were they such subtle foxes, that when they saw that the
Roman jurisdiction was contemptible, they then put upon them the skins of
those Lambs which before they had devoured, as if they had been those
harmless ones: they joined, a^ they had been both associates, and assistants
in the work; and therefore pretended not only to write, but to swear solemnly
against that Roman jurisdiction; nay they would pretend any thing, and
transform themselves into any shape, so they might but hold their livings, and
be permitted in their dominions, and dignities, as they did Anno 1534. And just
of their disposition are our Prelates now, They are apparent by the
Protestation, enemies.
for whereas (as who will may clearly enough perceive) that they are more
cruel now against the poor Protestants, then any woolfes: witness their
cruelty (to their power) executed in their Courts, their forwardnes against
the Protestants in Scotland, to work their overthrow; The Pr^l^tes were willing
to help against Scotland, but have no pi^y to the poor Protestants in Ireland
to help them H. S^^ Epist.
their backwardness to have the poor distressed Protestants in Ireland
relieved, or the Rebels there subdued: they would give great sums to devour
the Protestants in Scotland or England, or any where indeed; But where is one
of them now, that will part with any thing to hasten the expedition against the
cruel Adders, and viperous Rebels in Ireland, that have crept from under the
Rubbish of their heaps, that have been bred in their dwellings, And yet now
they see the whole Land to lament for these poor distressed Protestants in
Ireland, they dare not be so bold as to make a show of siding with the Rebels,
but we may easily perceive what lies at their hearts, when the Scots rose, they
soon procured them to be proclaimed Rebels; but now the Devil and Rome, and
Prelates, and Papists, and Rebels, rise in Ireland, they never solicit the
King for any such matter (I warrant you.) They sit in Parliament, and they will
make a show to the world to join with the Parliament in the great work they are
about. But have we not just cause to complain against them, that they are but
as knots in the thread that should sew up the Seames and Rents of these
Kingdoms, and yet they sit as Agents in the work; And what has been done
there, they (but how unwillingly who does not know) have assented to? Nay, they
have taken the Oath too, Prelates took the Protestation only to color and
daube over their Popery and Innovations.
in which they have protested against all Popery, and Popish Innovations; they
have grown brazen faced ever since, they are hardened now, they have got whores
foreheads; and instead of scarlet blush (which they affect well enough too)
they have got black and white obstinacy, and will be daunted with nothing. And
yet indeed now as the case stands, they are willing a while to preach, they
will be ruled by the Parliament, they will forsake their Canon Law, they will
be the Kings Bishops, they will stoop to any thing now, so they may abide in
their livings, and enjoy their dominions and dignities, which if they be let
alone, they hope in short time to rise up again as high as ever.

4. Now if we do but examine the matter, B. of Martyrs, Rh. M^. Chapter 23
we shall find how deceitful those Prelates were. For after they had thus
bound themselves by their own cords, Foxes Acts and Monuments. See Tho. W^lf.
Ypodigma Neustriae, Ann. 1371.1.132.
and past it over as before, which they did to make the King and State believe,
that the Popes jurisdiction, and all Popery was utterly banished out of
England, and that all was now settled for the conforming of the Protestant
Church here; But see how both the King and the State was deceived by them; a
company of base dissembling Prelates (that they were) for the very same day
they both by word and letter, at home, and abroad, took all occasions to draw
back King Hen. the 8. his Highness from Reformation.

And are not our Prelates now as false as they? who for all they have passed
the Oath, and protested against Popery, and entered into Covenant with the Lord
by the said Protestation, to make the King and State believe, Prelates are
Juglers, even the most modern of them are faulty therein. B. Hal Arch. B. of
York, etc.
that all Popery was banished from their hearts, yet how have they juggled in
the business, and dealt deceitfully with us already, even since their
Protestation. Themselves still maintain their former Popish dominions, and
government, and discipline; many and great points of Popish doctrine, laboring
to bind men's consciences to observe their Liturgy, and many of their
Innovations; and those of them in whom was the greatest hopes (if any:) One
has since purchased an Archbishopric, How notorious is their Protestation
against the high and hono^^ble Assembly in Parliament, December. 30. 1641.
and what his Adherents be, the exploytes of his Abbey-lubbers can testify:
And is it not too apparently manifest to us all, how active the whole body of
the Popish Prelates have been against Reformation: Have not they been the
greatest trouble both to his Majesty, and both the Houses of Parliament
hitherto in the great Work they are about.

5. On the other hand, 8. Martyrs, Ep^st of Gr. F. La Is. Cr.
those Prelates, Anno 1540. did procure Injunctions and Articles, with
penalties attended; and themselves sat in Commission, and were the chief
prosecutors of such as withstood them. And is not the spirit of our Popish
Prelates at this day so qualified also?

The Prelates labor to hinder Reformation all they can.
Have they not already procured votes in the Upper House for the strict
observance of their Liturgy, and a Proclamation from the Kings Majesty also,
have they not taken all the pains, and made all the friends they can, and used
all the policy that they can invent, to have Reformation broken off, and their
tyranny to be brought on foot again; have they not (even at this day) set the
Land in a great fear of them? Witness December, 30. 1641.

6. Their attempts afterward appeared more plain, to be both against the King,
the Queen, the State, the Church: Queen Katherine Par, Earl Cromwell, etc.
yea and the whole Land too; for all their pretenses, and deceitful boastings:
They appeared to be but Woolfes in Fox skins, for they were the chief cause
then in attempting of the death of the Queen, of some good Nobles, and many
faithful subjects besides.

They by their dealings with us expose both King, Queen, Prince, Parliament.
etc. to danger.
And our Prelates are their right shapen sons, qualified with as blood thirsty
spirits as they; Do they not to this day expose the whole Land to danger for
them, sparing neither King, Queen, Prince, States, Parliament, Church, nor the
whole land? Do they not more earnestly solicit for seven condemned Jesuits,
then for the poor distressed Kingdom of Ireland? nay does it not easily
appear, that they had rather expose us all to the merciless cruelty of the
Popish, then themselves to be bereft of their Pope-like domineering.

They are blood suckers.
In a word, how do the Papists Prelates in Ireland suck the English Protestant
blood there? And how do the English. Prelates labor daily to make England to
become a slaughter house to them, that thereby they may share our blood amongst
them, and so we become their prey.

7. King Henry his Prelates caused diverse godly Citizens of London, and other
Ministers, English Cro. B. Martyr.
and godly people to be imprisoned; cast into the fiery flames, and stirred up
the State against them, even at the same time, when others died for executing
their office under the Pope, and adhering to the Bishop of Rome.

They are Jesuits friends, but Protestants enemies
And at this day when such care is taken against Popish Priests and Jesuits (as
God be thanked there is) and some have suffered: and if it were not for the
Prelates, doubtless the others would also: yet how do our Prelates enveigh
against the City, and diverse godly Ministers, and people of God, witness
Ireland, who has been the cause that Kingdom had relief no sooner: Was it not
the English Prelates? Who was it that stirred up the Constables about
Westminster, to withstand the City, was it nor they? Do not they agree in
Parliament with the votes of the Popish Lords against Reformation?

They would take upon them to settle the Land, a fine way to bring in Popery,
if they could obtain it.
Oh how they take upon them, how they could settle the Land in quietness, when
as themselves have been the boisterous winds that have so disturbed our waves;
yet they boast, that if the Puritans, and Brownists, and some Sectaries, as
they call them, were cut off, and some of the Citizens, oh then the Land would
be quiet. And this they do to the end that they might gain an opportunity
again to share the Romish government of the Land amongst themselves; which
could they obtain, they would so reduce us, that they would soon reduce the
Land to Popery, and (we may justly fear) bring us under as much cruelty as ever
Queen Mary's Prelates, or King Henry 8. his Prelates subdued them. Therefore I
conclude with Rodericke Morse in his Lamentation, Oh England England, The
Conclusion.
if thou will banish Antichrist, and the Pope out of this Realm, thou must fell
down to the ground those rotten Poasts the Bishops: (which be clouds without
moisture) and utterly abolish all and every his ungodly Laws, Decrees,
Traditions, and Ceremonies, without significations; No s^curity can be expected
till they be removed.
for they do but wait for a time, to rob some Nobleman of his wit. And this is
certain, that as the Pope is enemy to the Gospel, so be his children the
lesser Bishops; therefore they cannot be suffered thus to reign, except we be
partakers of their iniquitie^ and spillers with them of the blood of the
Righteous.

FINIS.

