A PRECIOUS And most Divine LETTER FROM THAT FAMOUS, AND Ever to be renowned
Earl of ESSEX, (Father to the now Lord General his Excellence) to the Earl of
SOUTH-HAMPTON, in the latter time of Queen ELIZABETH'S Reign.

Printed according to Order.

printer's or publisher's device

London Aug: 14. 1643

To the READER.
THis Letter, many Years since received from the hands of a most Honorable
Person, eminent in the Court in those Elizean days, (when Honor crowned
Virtue, and Virtue was the glory of the Times) I have long stored up for my
own private, as a Gem and Treasure inestimable.

Earthly Treasures waste, but Heavenly increase by Communication! Besides, I
fear (with the Lepers of Old) I do not well long to conceal, what all that
read will judge to be a Common Treasure. What the Author was for Height and
Greatness all know; What for Grace and Goodness (though Envy or Ignorance,
have as it were Conspired to Veil over his Orient Luster) thou may take
some scantling of by this.

His Magnanimity and Valor the World knew, as far as Hercules his Pillars,
and the utmost Extent of the Hesperian Pride. His Humility and
Plaine-heartednes (which heightened Him above all his Honors) those that knew
him were not ignorant of.

That Noble Hero yet lives in the true Successor of Honor and Virtue, our
Noble GENERAL.

(Neque degeneres pariunt Aquilae Columbas.) His incorrupted Fidelity, Valor,
and Wisedonme, are above the reach of Ignorant or Envious Malignants.

His immovable Resolution (ever, and of late expressed) to deny his Honor, his
own Wisdom, yea his life for the Common Safety, shines so bright in the Eyes
of all Judicious, that neither the malicious fomentings of Malignant Spirits,
nor the weak Clamors of impatient Ignorance, nor the Necessity of Gods most
holy Providence, (exercising his Excellency and the Kingdom, I hope for good)
I say that none, nor all of these, can justly cloud and Eclipse his Shine and
Luster.

There is nothing within the Circumference of Political and prudentiall Arts,
that has more uncertain and various Events then that of War: Eventus Belli
incertus.

The protracting lengthning, shortning, lies in the hand of a higher
Excellency, even only his, in whose hand is our Way and Breath, as Daniel told
Belshazzar.

The Greatest and best Commanders that ever the World yet saw, must remember,
in whose hand is their Way and Breath, and both they and all Men must with
Patience see (for often it comes to pass) both Months, and Summers spend beyond
their Thoughts, Desires, Endeavors, and yet no Blemish to their VVisdome,
Valor, Fidelity, or Vigilance.

He that is the God of Peace mercifully show us the Paths of it, even of that
Peace, which no Man can give nor take from us.

A LETTER FROM That famous, and ever to be renowned Earl of ESSEX, to the Earl
of South-hampton, in the latter time of Queen ELIZABETH'S Reign.
My Lord,
AS neither nature nor custom ever made me a man of complement, so now I shall
have less will than ever for to use such Ceremonies, when I have left with
Martha to be solicitus circa multa, and believe with Mary, unum sufficit: but
it is no complement or Ceremony, but a real and necessary duty that one friend
owes to another in absence and especially at their seave taking, when in man's
reason many accidents may keep them long divided, or perhaps bar them ever
meeting till they meet in another world; for then shall I think that my
friend, whose honor, whose Person, and whose fortune is dear unto me, shall
prosper and be happy where ever he goes, and what ever he takes in hand when he
is in the favor of that God, under whose protection there is only safety, and
in whose service there is only true happiness to be found. What I think of
your natural gifts or abilities in this age, or in this State, to give glory
to God, and to win honor to your self, if you employ the Talents you have
received to their best use, I will not now tell you, it suffices, that when I
was farthest of all times from dissembling, I spoke truly, and have witness
enough: but these things only I will put your Lordships in mind of.

First, that you have nothing that you have not received.

Secondly, that you possess them not as Lord over them, but as an accomptant
for them.

Thirdly, If you employ them to serve this world, or your own worldly delights,
(which the Prince of this world will seek to entertain you with) it is
ingratitude, it is injustice, yea it is perfidious treachery. For what would
you think of such a servant of yours, that should convert your goods committed
to his charge, to the advantage or service of your greatest enemy; and what do
you less than this with God, since you have all from him, and know that the
world, and Prince thereof, are at a continual enmity with him? and therefore
if ever the admonition of your truest friend shall be heard by you or if your
Country which you may serve in so great and many things, be dear unto you; If
your God, whom you must (if you deal truly with your self) acknowledge to be
powerful over all, and just in all be feared by you; yea if you be dear unto
your self and prefer an everlasting happiness before a pleasant dream, which
you must shortly awake out of, and then repent in the bitterness of your soul;
if any of these things be regarded by you, then I say, call your self to
account for what is past, cancel all the leagues you have made without the
warrant of a religious conscience, make a resolute Covenant with your God, to
serve him with all your natural and spiritual, inward and outward gifts and
abilities, and then he that is faithful (and cannot lie) has promised to
honor them that honor him; He will give you that inward peace of Soul, and
true joy of heart, which till you have you shall never rest, and which when you
have, you shall never be shaken, and which you can never attain to any other
way than this that I have showed you.

I know your Lordship may say to your self, and object to me, this is but a
vapor of melancholy and the style of a Prisoner, and that I was far enough
from it, when I lived in the world as you do now, and may be so again when my
fetters be taken from me. I answer, though your Lordship should think so, yet
cannot I distrust the goodness of my God that his mercy will fail me or his
grace forsakeme; I have so deeply engaged my self, that I should be one of the
most miserable Apostates that ever was, I have so avowed my profession and
called so many from time to time to witness it, and to be watchmen over me, that
I should be the hollowest hypocrite that ever was borne: But though I should
perish in my own sin, and draw upon my self my own damnation, should not you
take hold of the grace and mercy in God which is offered unto you; and make
your profit of my fearful and wretched example? I was longer a slave and
servant to the world and the corruptions of it. then you have bin, and
therefore could hardlyer be drawn from it. I had many calls, and answered some
of them slowly; thinking a soft pace fast enough to come to Christ and my self
forward enough when I saw the end of my journey, though I arrived not at it, and
therefore I have been by Gods providence violently pulled, haled, and dragged to
the Marriage Feast as the world has seen. It was just with God to afflict me
in this world that he might give me joy in another. I had too much knowledge
when I performed too little obedience, and was therefore to be beaten with
double stripes: God grant your Lordship may feel the comfort I now enjoy in my
unfaigned conversion, but that you never feel the torments I have suffered for
my too long delaying it; I had none but Divines to call upon me, to whom I
said, if my ambition could have entered into their narrow hearts, they would not
have bin so humble; or if my delights had bin tasted by them, they could not
have been so precise: but your Lordship has one to call upon you, that knows
what it is you now enjoy, and what the greatest fruit and end is of all the
contentments that this world can afford. Think therefore dear Earl, that I
have staked and bounded all the ways of pleasure to you, and left them as Sea
marks for you to keep the Channel of religious virtue; for, shut your eyes
never so long they must be open at last, and then you must say with me, there
is no peace to the wicked. I will make a Covenant with my Soul, not to suffer
my eyes to sleep in the night, nor my thoughts to attend the first business of
the day, till I have prayed to my God, that your Lordship may believe and make
profit of this plain, but faithful admonition; and then I know your Country
and friends shall be happy in you, and Your self successful in all you take
in hand; which shall be an unspeakeable comfort to

Your Lordships Cousin and true friend, whom no worldly cause can divide from
you ESSEX.


