THE ENGLISH POST From several parts of this Kingdom, Lately sent to LONDON:
Viz: From Truro, July 26. Exeter, July 29. Newcastle, July 30. York, July 29.
Lancaster, July 30. Dorchester, July 31. Banbury, July 28. Canterbury, August
2. Caermarden, July 27. Lincoln, July 29. Ely, August 1.


Printed in the year, 1641.

The English Post.
From Truro July 26.
THE Western Seacoasts in Cornwall are not yet secured of their fears or
dangers, from their common enemies, the Turkish Pirates, they are in great
hopes, that the large sums of moneys, collected out of so infinite a
scarcity as the poverty of this country has long groaned under, shall
speedily be employed in shipping for the safety of the Seas, against an
invasion of the land. No suspicion of further peril remains, but that the
prevention (long looked for) may come at last. However, the parley about it, and
preparation for it, takes up so much time in the year, that their doubts are
not few, the remedy may come too late for the disease. Speramus meliora.

From Exeter July 29.
The dismission by Parliament of the tyranny and irregularity of some Courts in
York and Wales, give us some assurance, that the intolerable abuse and
corruption shall be taken away, which reigns in the Stanneries in Devonshire
and Cornwall. A greater mischief and oppression by subordinate Ministers, can
never rage in a more unsufferable violence. If the grand Council of this
Kingdom now assembled, take not into consideration this desparate calamity,
and remove it, the whole body of two Counties are upon an irrecoverable loss:
for now we expect redress, or never.

From Newcastle July 30.
Here our weekly comforts in particular letters from London of the departure of
the Scots, prove in effect but f^int cordials. What our losses have been by
subj^ction to so many hourly thraldomes, the rest of the land may conceive, we
only feel. Their moneys being received, they will (no question) remove. Power
and compulsion for the most part, effects more peace then either treaty or
reward. Our Coals (which are our treasure and subsistence) are cheaper then
the labor in working for them: Our returns for the commodity we cannot call
our own, since we are daily accountable for all we can call ours. E^ther we
unconfidently look for a quick deliverance, or must uncomfortably perish in
our miseries. Our last refuge is our continual refuge, our prayers. No war
is so terrible as that which devoures and consumes under the visor of Amity and
p^ace.

From York July 29.
It is hard to write in ^^w many straits this City and Country are encumbered.
The disbanding of those Soldiers, who have too long p^stered our Co^^trey,
proceeds not with so easy success as is desired. They move hence with such a
slow pace, as if they retreated b^ckward with their faces forward. No doubt
needs a resolution for their passage to their own homes. It is most likely
they will prove as troublesome in their ^^^urnes, as they have been in their
stay and abode here. Let us once quit these disorders, and we resolve
hereafter (if the wisdom of the supreme authority will give us le^ve) to be
safest in the defense of our own strength, yet (^owever my Lord General very
nobly endeavou^s) we know not what will follow till we be utterly cleared of
this burden.

From L^ncaster July 30.
Discontented persons, and Popishly affected (of which conjuration our country
yields not a few) upon hearing of the Priests execution at Tyburne, July 26.
l^st, begin to mutter, that now the Crown of Martyrdom is burnishing for their
traiterous brood. That this Saint (so they miscall Walker the seducer) is only
a Harbinger for the glorious (villains and) professors which must follow. They
talk generally, how banishment or death is the mercy they must expect. Some
emissaries have been intercepted between their confederates in Cheshire, in
Wales, and the locusts in this County. They desist not from plotting, but we
trust that he who fitteth in heaven dot^ laugh them to scorn, and will in his
own blessed time discover both them and it.

From Dorchester in Dorset July 31.
It is not an easy grief to hear how many pestilent Sects and Schismatics
are couched in London, the name of Puritan lies too long br^n^^d, the more
refined Protestants of England. Infinites in number have coveted the addition
of that reputation, whose l^berty insensu^lity, perfidiousnesse, cozenage,
ignorance, and all licentious reproach, rendered them not more odious then
inexcusable: neither have some eminent Prelates of our Kingdom forborne
advantage without distinction to contemn and pluck up those wholesome seeds
in steed of the other tares. We in this town have tasted too deeply of that
imputation, though our lives and actions have pleaded an integrity: for we
never kicked against the holy office of a Bishop, but have heartily sorrowed for
the avarice, ambition, etc. of such as usurp the Episcopal See; we wish, pray
for, and expect a pious reformation, not confusion in the church, or absolute
abolition.

From Banbury July 28.
Since the memorable execution of the Tinkers in this town, no severity of any
itinerant Judge has been filed upon our records. Here is a strong rumor of the
charges and delinquencies of the Moderators in law, who determined suites in
the four Westminsters terms; but what satisfaction any of them has made
either by defense or sufferance, we are clearly ignorant of. The brethren
amongst us (so termed and covetous to be termed so) are as ignorant as
heretofore, but more malepert. They trust they shall be allowed (not a Church
but) a formality of discipline independent on any superior, but whom they
shall choose out of their pack. Insolent are their presumptions, and they have
an intolerable measure of the Spirit amongst them; excuse them, it is the evil
spirit, which we hope will ere long by the lawful exorcisme of authority be
conjured.

From Canterbury, August 2.
Having lost our country man (lately A L. keeper) we are as naked and
unprovided of our Summer Hospitality in our Archbishops Restraints. An old
saying has in times past galloped about our Island, that Kent and Christendom
were two, let that be true or not, sure we are as the stream runs, London and
Canterbury are not Christians alike: you at London enjoy too much plenty,
though you keep your own close enough; and we at Canterbury complain, that
we have little of our own to keep, and yet are as willing as you, to part
with part of that little by the poll. It is better (says the proverb) to be
fortunate then wise; we will add no more at this time, only it is better to
say nothing and live without answer, then by over much talk to be found guilty
of want of silence.

From Caerwarden, July 27.
Great is the joy throughout Wales, since the Act and the Rate for collection
of moneys is come to their view. They (I mean the Welsh) content themselves
with the single payment of six pence a man, though they be all and every one of
them severally and jointly a Gentleman per se; yet they envy not the Esquires
so reputed, their titles purchased with the large and unknown sum of ten pound.
A Yeoman of Kent (say we in wales) may have a thousand per annum, and not
compare with one of us for a long pedigree from the beginning of the world.
Here we live in peace, not troubled with fear of enemies, nor overprest with
our few frie^d^ the Scots; the Irish, indeed, sometimes visit our coasts, but
as newtralls for we neither much reward their begging, nor they thank or
commend us for our Alms, and charity.

From Lincoln July 29.
How the changes of times work effects in other Shires, we l^st not after. The
old saying was, the Devil looks over Lincoln, but we defy the moth-eaten
proverb, and hope one way or other, that Lincoln shall over look the D^vell.
Mistake us not, for though we have a fatt country, which is a shrewd
temptation, yet we are not prouder then we were wont, for fear we may be
fl^eced as some of the northern parts have been. Being neither too near
London, nor too far off, we stand as free from the thunder of Excommunication
as from the Bulls of the ^ope. The fall of Doctors Commons (if it be true) has
much disheartened our Officialls, (with whom this county swarmed) and the ruin
of the High Commission and Star Chamber Courts, puts us in comfort (a cold one)
that more Mercy might be found in the Kings Bench. We acquaint you with our
state for the present, but have else little matter to write of, till in another
letter, you may chance to here something of the drained land and Marshes.

From Ely August 1.
Cambridge is in no small doubt of some of his chief Divines; and we for
neighborhoods s^ke, are with child to hear some good of our Bishop. It Is
wondrous strange that businesses of expectation are carried with so miraculous
a Justice and Secrecy. We dare not inquire into a wisdom, which we know we
cannot attain unto, but will therefore humbly w^ite upon the issue, which in
actions or any nature returns the Instrument, either reward of honor and
profit, or punishment.

FINIS.

