THE ELDERS DREAM. WITH THE ARMIES Message or Declaration to both Houses of
Parliament.

Printed in the Year. 1647.

The Elders Dream.
WHen Phoebus had withdrawn his Glittering light,
And all the world was muffled up in night:
A reverend Elder lying in his bed,
Legions of idle fancies stormed his head;
Making assault upon his giddy brain,
Which he strove to repel, but all in vain;
His conscience pleading guiltiness within,
Weakened each faculty till they got in:
Then to his apprehensiou did appear
Sad apparitions ushered with despair,
Cruel apparitions with proud usurpation,
The Kingdoms Fate, and Churches desolation:
Foul error like a Gangrine does spread,
Infecting all almost from foot to head,
Makes way for Atheism, and infidelity,
Warranted by proud changes mutability.
Distrust and doubt come bringing up the rear,
Whose looks much frighted this poor Presbytere.
Rebellion as the sin of witchcraft is,
Who like an ugly hag accost him this.
Proud Presbyter, I on thy breast must ride;
Whereat this affrighted Elder vainly tried,
Help house of Commons, help oh house of Peers,
To free me from rebellious guilty fears.
With that the King stepped in, and did demand
His Crown and Seepter that should sway the Land,
Saying they were discourteous, to bereave him
Of those just Titles which the heavens gave him.
The Queen and royal Issue came together,
She clairnes a Husband, they demand a Father:
She asks a reparation of her honor*
Whilst he affrighted, strangely gazed upon her.
The Bishops and the Clergy did appear,
Who threatened this dressed Presbytere
With an account which one day must be given,
If not to Charles, yet to the King of heaven.
Nor was this menacing Message only sent
To him alone, but to the Parliament,
Whose actions patronise much horrid sin,
With that Lord Straffords ghost come frowning in,
Requiring justice to revenge his blood,
The which the Lords and Commons must make good:
If eye must eye, and tooth must tooth supply
Why should not they want heads as well as I:
Such guiltless blood must once avenged be
On them or theirs, who shed it wilfully,
But ere he ended had his tragic tale,
Skips in a gentle soul with vissage pale;
'Twas Canterburie's Ghost, who once did seed
A graceless flock, which made his heart to bleed;
A late made martyr by the Parliament,
Whose cries for revenge to the heavens were sent,
Pleading for justice, yet e're he had done,
Steps in old Hotham and his murdered son.
Sir Alexander Carry likewise came,
Who much did his discourteous Judges blame,
Who would not add a few days to his life,
At the request of such a virtuous wife.
Who begged him, till Lucina brought to light
Her timely birth whereat she took a fright,
Seeing her poor request by them denied,
To meet her love in spite of pity died.
Tomkins and Chassiner, who long before
Received their doom, came in, and many more:
Bucher and Yeomans, though at Brist^ll they
Were executed, do expect a day
Of retribution, England cannot hide
Her blood, till it with blood be pacified
A thousand wandering souls did likewise come,
Which could not pass to the Elysium,
Because enforced by the Parliament
To take a most abhorrid Covenant.
He heard most heavy dismal sighs and groans,
Breathed out before a crew of walking bones
which wanted flesh^, for they have starved bin,
Their eyes were hollow, cheeks looked pale and thin.
These have bin clothed in Skarlet, and have fed
At bounties table which are famished,
Not having food or raiment to supply
Their wants amongst whom the young Lo. Dochrey
Bewailes his fate since from poor Ireland they
For safety fled to find this uncouth way
To meet their destiny, whose bleeding veins
Shall spot the Cities Arms with progins stains,
That so to after Ages may be known
What truthlesse Peter Sonzous zeal has shown.
God did the Irish cruelty prevent.
To heap their blood upon the Parliament.
How do the Widows and the fatherless,
Wait at the Commons door without redress,
Who lost their friends and fortunes for their sake,
Which now on them but little pity take.
What one good act have they this six years done,
If any, let them show is, so^e says none.
But e're this sleeping Elder could awake,
He saw the Independent Army shake;
A powerful rod, which vexed his spirits more
Then all their superstitions seemed before.
He fears they are appointed for a scourge,
Which will the Elders of their Jews ears purge.
He saw the City taken by their pow're,
And every horse tail a conqueror*
Adorned with bays, for which poor London lost
Their Charter, but may find it to their cost.
The Nightmare left him, he with joy up started,
Resolved with himself to be converted.
FINIS.
The Armies Message or Declaration to both Houses of Parliament.
TO you who Phaiton-like aspire,
To guide the Sun, till earth you fire;
The Army sends greeting plain,
You must surrender Charles his waine.
You call us servants, but shall see
We shortly will your masters be:
Nor shall you longer voting sit,
Tenor wise General thinks fit.
What base aspersions have you thrown
On us which have the business done:
Was it not we who conqur'd all,
Which now you Independents call.
And it is not long since this opinion
Wa^ voted down by your chief minion
Proved Presbyter that saucy jack,
Who wears his orders at his back.
You learned Senate for their glory
Composed a reverend Directory:
They sat six years e're they could be
Resolved which way to worship three.
Let all be satisfied in mind
As they in conscience are inclined;
Who is constraind, and has not bin
Resolved, but doubts remains in sin.
It was not Waller Massy, Poyntz,
Who put an end to these sad times,
Nor yet your holy brother Sco^,
That could have won what we have got.
Yet they were pai'd, whilst we may stand
Like your poor suppliants, to demand
Those just arreares, the which are due
From such ill pay-masters as you.
You say we keep the King to show
Him like a Popet, but shall know
We^le fix him shortly on his Seat,
Where he your purpose will defeat.
Was it not we who did maintain
Your honors, who like Kings do reign,
And should we not protect you yet,
You could not long in safety sit.
Your base Excise-men, and Committee,
Which has undone both Town and City
Have made such holes in your gay coats,
The which perhaps may cut your th^oa^s.
Then send us Money, or be sure
Your greatness shall not long endure;
Who now like candles-shine we doubt
Will blaze, and stink, and so go out.
But if you mean to live at ease,
Then run away and cross the Seas,
Where some of your consorts are gone,
Be wise, and do as they have done.
And do not stay to give account
Of those vile actions, which will mount
To such a reckoning, and may rise
Your heads like Hamons to the skies*
FINIS.

