A LIST OF The names of the Members of the House of Commons: Observing which
are Officers of the Army, contrary to the Selfe-denying Ordinance: Together
with such sums of Money, Offices and Lands, as they have given to themselves,
for service done, and to be done, aginst the King and Kingdom.
Note, Reader, that such as have this mark (*) coming immediately before their
Names, are Recruiters; illegally elected, by color of the New-Seale, the power
of the Army, and Voices of the Soldiers, and are un-duly Returned, and serve
accordingly.
The first Centurie.
1 WILLIAM Lenthall, Speaker of the house of Commons, worth 2000 l. per an.
Beside rewards for courtesies (not to say Bribes) Master of the Rolls, worth
3000 l. per an. beside the sale of Offices: Chamberlain of Chester in the Earl
of Darbies place: And until of late Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
worth 1200 l. per an. and one of the Commissioners of their great-Seale, worth
1500 l. per an. and had 6000 l. given him at one time by the House. 2 Bulstred
Whitlock, Commissioner of the great-Seale, worth 1500 l. per an. and had 2000
l. given him out of Mr. George Minn's estate. 3 Edmond Prideaux, formerly a
Commissioner for the great Seal, worth 1500 l. per an. Now by Ordinance
practices within the Bar, as one of the Kings Council, worth 500 l. per an.
and is Post master for all Inland Letters, worth 100 l. every Tuesday night,
beside his supper, and it was thus got: The Lord Stanhop, the Post masters, and
Carriers of England complained, in Parliament, against Mr. Witherings and
others, touching the carrying of Letters: whereupon the benefit of foreign
Letters were given to the Earl of Warwick, worth 5000 l. per an. and the
Inland Letters to Mr. Prideaux-Good Parliament Justice. 4 Roger Hill, a
Barrester of the Temple, in no practice, nor of a considerable Estate; till
this Parliament: Has now from the House, the Bishop of Winchester's Manor of
Taunton-Deane, being the best of England; and worth 12000 l. per annum; when
the Estates for lives determine. 5 H^mphry Salway, the Kings Remembrancer in
Mr. Fanshawe's place, worth 200. l. per annum. 6 Francis Rous, Provost of
Eaton, in Dr. Steward's place; worth 600. l. per annum. 7 John Lesle, Barrester
of the Temple, Mr. of St. Croosses, in Dr. Jews his place; being a place for a
Divine; and worth 800. l. per an. 8 Oliver St. John, by Ordinance both
Attorney, and Solicitor to the King; worth what he please to make it; and has
the passing of all Pardons upon Compositions; worth 40000. l. 9 Sir William
Allison, Alderman of York, Clarke of the Hamper; worth 1000. l. per an. 10
Thomas Hoyle, Alderman of York, Treasurer's Remembrancer in the Exchequor, in
Sir Peter Osborne's place; worth 1200 l. per an. 11 * Francis Thorpe, Receiver
of the moneys in Yorkshire; and charged by some of the County for detayning
25000. l. 12 Thomas Pury Senior, first a Weaver in Gloucester; then an ignorant
Country Solicitor, had 3000. l. given him, and Mr. Gerrard's place in the
Petty-bag; worth 400. l. per an. 13 * Thomas Pury Junior, Son to the Elder,
Receiver of the Kings Rents, in Gloucester, and Wilts, Clearke of the Peace of
Gloucester shire; worth 200. l. per an. and Captain of Foot, and horse the
first year of this Parliament, servant to Mr. Towneshed; an Attorney of Staple
Inn. 14 William Ellis, Steward of Stepney; worth 200. l. per an. and by him
sold to one of the Temple. 15 Miles Corbet, at the beginning of the Parliament
3000. l. in debt for himself and his Mother, more then he was worth: Now one
of the Registers in Chancery; worth 700. l. per an. besides Chairman for
scandalous Ministers; worth 1000. l. per an. And has money in his purse. 16
John Goodwine; the other Register in Chancery, worth 700. l. per annum. 17 Sir
Thomas Widdrington, a Commissioner of the great-Seale; worth 1500. per an. 18
Edward Bishe, Garter Herald, in Sir Edward Walkers place, Worth 600 l. per an.
19 * Walter Strickland, Agent in Holland for the two Houses of Parliament,
worth to him 5000. l. 20 Nicholas Love, Mr. Speakers Chamber-fellow, one of the
six Clerks in Chancery, in Mr. Penruddocks place; worth 2000. l. per annum. 21
Sir Gilbert Gerrard, much in debt before the Parliament, Paymaster to the Army,
and had 3. d. per pound allowed, besides Gratuities; worth 60000. l. and now
Chancellor of the Dutchey; worth 1200 l. per an. 22 Gilbert Gerrard, his second
son, Clarke of the Dutchey; and for whose benefit the Clarkeship of the
Assize in Norfolk, is granted to Mr. Edward Garret his Cosen by the
procurement of Sir Gilbert, and is worth 500. l. per an. 23 John Seldom, had
given him 5000. l. which he refused to accept; keeps his Conscience, and
often dissents from the Votes of the House. 24 * John Bond, (Son to Dennis
Bond, a Parliament man) made Master of Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, which Mr.
Seldom refused to accept of. 25 Sir Benjamin: Rudiard given him 5000. l. And
has he not deserved it? 26 * Lucas Hodges, Customer of Bristoll. 27 Sir John
Hipsley, has the keeping of three of the King's Parks, Mary-bone-Parke, that
was Mr. Carews, Hampton-Parke, and Bushey-Parke, and given him 2000. l. in
Money. 28 Sir Thomas Walsingham, the honor of Eltham, that was the Earl of
Dorsets, the middle Park and house, which was Mr. Whites, and has cut down
4000 Timber Trees. 29 Benjamin Valentine, given him 5000. l. 30 * Sir Henry
Heyman, given him 5000. l. 31 Denzell Holles, given him 5000. l. 32 * Nath.
Bacon, given him 3000 l. 33 * John Steephens, given him out of the Lord
Astley's Composition 1000. l. 34 * Henry Smith, made one of the six Clerks,
worth 2000. l. per an. 35 Robert Reynolds, had 2000. l. given him; Besides
Abington Hall, and the Lands, worth 400. l. per an. Has bought a good
penniworth of Bishops Lands; has 20000. l. beyond Sea, as he made appear
upon his marriage. 36 Sir John Clotworty, Treasurer for Ireland, and by the
Army charged with defrauding of the State of 40000. l. which may be one
reason, the King could never get an Account of the moneys raised for the Irish,
though he desired it. 37 John Ash, given him out of Mr. John Coventryes
Composition 4000. l. out of Sir Edward Moseley's 1000. l. out of Mr. Edward
Phillip's 1200. l. out of Sir John Stowell's Estate 8000 l. And (which is worth
all this) is the great Chaire-man at Goldsmiths-Hall. Is not this better then
Clothing? 38 * John Lenthall, son to the Speaker, made one of the six
Clerks, worth 2000 l. per an. 39 * Francis Allen, a poor Goldsmiths at St.
Dunstans in Fleete-str^ete, now made a Customer for London. 40 Giles Green,
the Receiver of Yorkshire, being put out of his place got it for his soon in
Law; is Chaire-man for the Navy, and for Sir Thomas Dawes his estate, and what
it was worth to him, Sir Thomas Dawes his Creditors will tell you; for they get
nothing. 41 Francis Pierpoint has the Archbishop of Yorkes Lands lying in
Nottingham-shire. 42 William Pierpoint has 7000. l. given him, and all the
Earl of Kingston's personal Estate, worth 40000. l. 43 * John Palmer, Mr. of
All-Soules in Oxford, in Doctor Shelden's place, a Divine. 44 * John Blakeston,
a poor Shopkeeper in New Castle, was Executor, to the Executor of Sir John
Fenner, trusted with 6000. l. for Charitable uses, and was sued in Chancery to
perform the Trust; but got himself returned a Burgess for New Castle by the
Scotch Garrison there; had 3000. l. given him out of one Gentleman's
Composition, and out of others, as much as made it up 12000. l. as was made
appear at a Committee before Mr. Sandis of the Temple, Chaire-man; has also a
Cole-meter's place, worth 200. l. per an. and the Bishop of Durham's Castle at
Durham, and Lands of great value. 45 Tho. Ceely, long a Prisoner for debt,
helped out by the Parliament and made Recorder of Bridgewater. 46 * Thomas
Moore, an Officer in the Custom house; And his brother, Governor of Ludlow.
47 * (...) Seawine, given him 2000. l. 48 Isaac Pennington, twice Broke; once
Lieutenant of the Tower; a year and a half Lord Mayor of London before his
time; had 7000. l. given him; and has store of Bishops Lands. 49 Samull
Vassell, given him 1000. l. 50 Oliver Cromwell, Lieutenant General has 2500.
l. per an. given him out of the Marquess of Worcesters Estate, for which 4000.
l. per an. is set out at the rate of 2500. l. 51 Sir William Brereton, Colonel
General for the Cheshire Forces; has Cash^bery, and other Lands of the Lord
Capell, worth 2000. l. per an. and the Archbishops house and Lands at Croiden,
where he has turned the Chapel into a Kitchen. A goodly Reformation and
fits with his stomach, as well as his Religion. 52 * Thomas Wait Colonel,
Governor of Burley, where he thrives so well, as he is now buying 500. l. per
an. who before was not able to buy 5 l. a year. 53 Sir Oliver Luke, decayed in
his estate, Colonel of horse. 54 Sir Samuel Luke, his son, Colonel, and
Scout-Master for the Counties of Bedford, etc. 55 * Thomas Gell* Lieutenant
Colonel to Sir John Gell. made Recorder of Darby, in Master Allestrie's place.
56 Valentine Walton, Colonel and Governor of Lin Regis. 57 * Richard Norton,
Colonel, Governor of Southampton. 58 * Edward Harvey, late a poor filke-man,
now Colonel, and has got the Bishop of London's house and Manor of Fullham.
59 * Edward Rossiter, Colonel, and G^nerall of all the Lincolneshire forces,
and Governor of Belvoir Castle. 60 * Sir Michael Livesey, Colonel,
Sequestrator, and plunder-master general for Kent. 61 * Henry Ireton (son in
law to Lievetenant-Generall Cromwell* Colonel and Commissary-Generall. 62 *
Richard Salwey, Colonel, formerly a Grosser's man. 63 * John Birch, formerly a
Carrier; now a Colonel. 64 * Edward Massey, General for Gloucestershire, and
Governor of Gloucester; and Sir John Winter his estate given him. 65 * Thomas
Rainshorow, a Skipper of Lin, Colonel, Governor of Woodstock and Vice Admiral
of England. 66 * Robert Blake, Colonel, Governor of Taunton. 67 * Francis
Russell, Colonel. 68 * Rowland Wilson, Colonel. 69 * Robert Harley, Colonel,
son to Sir Robert Harley, 70 * Richard Brown, Major-Generall, and Governor of
Abingdon. 71 * Peter Temple, Captain of a Troop of horse. 72 * f^hn Ven,
Colonel, Governor of Windsor 73 * Algernon Sidney, Governor o^ Dover Castle.
74 * Richard Ingolsby, Colonel, Governor of Oxford. 75 * John Hutchinson,
Colonel, Governor of Nottingham. 76 * Sir John Palgrave Colonel at the Siege
of Newarke. 77 * Edmond Ludlowe, Governor of 78 * Sir Anthony Astley Cooper,
Collon^l. 79 * Philip Skippon, Serjeant-Major-Generall of the Army, Major
G^^erall of London, and Governor of Bristoll. 80 * Charles Fleetwood, Colonel.
81 * Thomas Westrow, Captain under Sir Michael Livesey, was nothing worth,
until a Captain and a Parliament Man; And now has gotten the Bishop of
Worcesters Manor of Hartlerow, which proves he has two good and beneficial
Offices. 82 Henry Marten, Collonell of a Regiment of horse, and a Regiment of
Whores. 83 Nathaniel Fiennes, Colonel, once Governor of Bristoll. Thereby
hangs a tail: 84 Anthony Stapley, Colonel, Governor of Chichester. 85
Alexander Rigby, Colonel, and Governor of Bolton. 86 Charles Pym, Captain of a
Troop of horse. 87 Sir Arthur Haslerig, Colonel, Governor of Newcastle, and
has the Bishop of Durham's House, Park, and Manor of Aukland. 88 William
Jepson, Colonel. 89 Sir Thomas Middleton, Major General for Denbigh and five
other Counties. 90 Godfrey Boswell, Colonel. 91 The Lord Gray of Grooby (son
to the Earl of Stamford) Collonell; and has given to him the Queens Manor
house, Park and Lands at Holdenby, and there is a great fa^l of the woods. 92
William Constable, Collonell. 93 Sir William Purefoy, Colonel, and Governor of
Coventry, fought resolutely against the Cross in the Marketplace at Warwick,
and against the ancient Monuments in the Earls Chapel in Saint Mary's Church
there; for which he had 1500 l. given him; but when he should have fought with
the enemy, hid himself in a Barley-field, for which, a water man at
Temple-staires, (that had been his Soldier) refused to carry him. 94 Sir
Edward Hungerford, Colonel, famous for plundering Warder Castle; has the
Lands of the Countess Dowager of Rutland; worth 1500. l. per an. and she
allowed but 500. l. 95 Harbert Morley Collonell, plunder Mr. of Surrey. 96 John
Moore, Collenel of the Guards, and for some time had the benefit of Passes out
of London. 97 Walter Long, Colonel, had 5000. l. and the Office of Register
for four years. 98 Sir William Water General, and lost two Armies, yet a
gainer by the employment. 99 John All^^ed Colonel. 100 Michaell Oldsworth, no
Colonel; but Governor of Pembrooke and Mongomery, and has a share with his
Lord out of Sir Hen^y ^omp^on's Office; worth 3000. l. per annum and is keeper
of Windsor Park.
Besides these Offices, Commands, and Gratuities; every Member of the house of
Commons, being in all 516. are by their own order allowed 4. l. per week a
man; which amounts to 110000. l. per annum.

By the Ordinance for sequestring Delinquents [1. April 1643.] it was declared
that their Estates should go for maintenance of the Public affairs, and
several Ordinances designed Bishops Lands for pay of 200000. l. public debt:
Yet by this and the following Centuries thou shall see how both Delinquents
estates and Bishops Lands are by Members of Parliament shared amongst
themselves, whilst the 200000 l. is unpaid, the public affairs supported by
unsupportable taxes and that Dutch Divill Excise that insensibly devoures the
poor, and will impoverish the rich.

These are they that with Hananiah; Break the wodden yoke from our necks,
[28. Jeremiah] and put on one of Iron; free us from a little Ship Money paid
thrice in an age, and impose as much at once for a Monthly Tax, quit us of the
Monopolies of Tobacco, and set up excise on Bread and Beer. The first eases
the wanton rich man, and the latter grindeth the needy and poor. Yet these are
thy Gods O London! these are the Idoll-Calves the People have set up and do
worship; These be the Molec to whom ye Sacrifice sons and servants by
Troops, Regiments and Armies, to maintain their Sovereignty, Rebellion and
Profit.

And that these and other their Actions may never be questioned, they His
Majesty's Loyal and Obedient Subjects will always imprison their King;
continue their Army; perpetuate their Parliament, and intaile their Memberships
(as the Priesthood on Levi) upon confiding Families, to furnish them with
Votes, as Mr. Gilbert Gerard and his two sons, Brampton Guidon and his two
sons; Sir Robert Harley and his two sons; Three Fines, 3 Ashes, 4 Stephens,
4 Pelhams, 4 Herberts, 4 Temples; it were endless to name the Father and the
Son; Brother and brother that fills the House; they come in couples more then
unclean Beasts to the Arc. 2 Vanes, 2 Puries, 2 Chaloners, 2 Bacons, 2
Pierponts, 2 Bonds, 2 Onslowes: 2 Lenthalls, etc. And that our Ecclesiastics
may comply with our Temporal Governors, the Houses abolish (as superstitious
because Legal) the Convocation of learned Divines (regularly summoned by the
Kings-Writ, and duly elected by the Clergy) and the House of Commons nominates
an Assembly of Gifted Divines (indeed wicked Simons) that slander the godly
O^ias [2 Mac. 4.] to out him of his Priest's place; so that at this day there
is not one Assembly-man but is illegally thrust into another Benefice, a
Catalogue of whose names and preferments expect shortly, and with them a view
of the Militia and Common-Councell-men of London, observing what Places,
Offices and Salaries they have from the Houses of Parliament, and then thou will know the Reasons of their Votes and Actions in the City.

Reader, I would have presented thee at once with the entire List of all the
Names, Offices and Rewards of Parliament Men, but I could not steal so much
time from my weekly employment, and am therefore necessitated to divide them
into Centuries; the first thou have, and shall the other four, whereof the
next begineth with Cornelius Holland, and Sir H. Vane. Farewell. M. El.


