MINISTERS FOR TITHES, BEING A manifest proof That these Men are No MINISTERS
of the GOSPEL, Who follow the Magistrate for a worldly maintenance, and Fee the
Lawyers to plead for Tithes.

By WILLAM ERBERY.

But they shall proceed no farther, for their folly shall be manifest unto All
men,

2 Timothy 3.9. London, Printed by J.C. For Giles Calvet, at the Sign of the
Black spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's, 1653.

TO Doctor SEAMAN, Doctor BURGESS, AND The rest of the Ministers FOR TITHES.
Gentlemen,
I Have been a Minister of the Church of England, as you are; Master of Arts of
both Universities, and might have been Dr. in Divinity as well as you, had I so
much money, as the Ministers have in their purses.

But coming last Wednesday to the Committee for Tithes, I expected there the
Ministers for Tithes, Sept. 2.
to hear what they could say for themselves. A Committee for Tithes is a proper
name, Honorable and honest men, being on a debate for Tithes on a civil
account in point of Law: but Ministers for Tithes is such a thing, and
Ministers of the Gospel to demand it as their spiritual due, its such a
monster, that it made my Welsh blood to rise at your English religion. I heard
that Dr. Seaman was that day to prove himself and his fellows Ministers of the
Gospel: but because he is a Godly man, and may serve to make a Chaplain for the
Navy at Sea, I shall rather deal with Dr. Burges, because he is a landed man,
and has a great deal of money, being the better Sailer, who can shift his Sail
and turn with the wind: Rev. 18.17.
for as the Ministers are Merchants; so they are those Ship-masters and Seamen,
who have all the trade this day. Truly, I will not meddle with Dr. Burges his
money, nor covet his Achans wedge; only because his Babylonish Garment is so
thredbare, I took him once for a poor Sir John, or Welsh Curate, not for a Dr.
or rich Divine, he was so meanly clad. No wonder that he and his brethren
Petition for maintenance, for the Rich Ministers are the poorest Men of the
Nation; but because I see the Priests and University-Doctors join together for
Tithes, I Will tell them a Geneva note worth their learning, Act. 6.9. The first
bloody persecution of the Church of Christ, began from a council of Priests,
with the suggestion of University-Doctors. And I believe the last persecution
of the Church, and of Christ in the Spirit, The Churches of Devon. Exeter,
Bastabl^, etc.
will be by such; for as the present Churches comply with the Presbyters in this
of a settled maintenance, so this being only by Tithes, or some like thing,
these must be accounted persecuters of the Spirit as well those. I will not
speak of men, how much they suffer by this, but the blood of God is shed this
way, yea shed in vain, when made but the blood of a dead man. Act. 20.28. Rev.
16.3. Joh. 19.24. Act. 1.4, 5.
'Twas water and blood came forth from Christ's side in his death, to show that
the Spirit of life, or living water was shed forth with it; as it is expressed
Act. 2.32. the promise of the Father and power from on high, or Baptism of the
Spirit, Act. 13.2.
being only that which constituted a Gosple-Church, and made Ministers of
Gospel; to go forth without this, is not only to deceive men, but to deny God,
to crucify Christ, to stifle the Spirit, and strangle the babe, even the
newborn glory, Zach. 2.5, 6, 7, 8. Dan. 7.27.
beginning to rise on the Saints of the most High.

The Saints of the most high being men whom the Ministers know not, I shall
forbear to busy their heads with this, only because the Committee have business
enough besides, and better work to do then to wait on Ministers for Tithes,
therefore I shall propose two words to their Honors consideration.

1. That you have not the Mission,

Nor 2. 1 Timothy 4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6.
The Maintenance of Gospel Ministers this day.

I say, not the Mission nor Commission of Christ; because no gift of the Spirit
by laying on of hands. You are all Antichristian Priests, and
Parliament-converts at best: I speak not of your persons, but of your proper
office, it is Antichristian: being made Ministers by holy orders, Deacons and
Priests, therefore you plead for Tithes, having not repented of your Episcopal
ordination, nor publicly disowned your Mission by them. Ezekiel. 45.10, 11
Thus being not ashamed of your whoredoms, nor putting away the carcases of
your Kings (or Bishops) you cannot see the pattern of the House of God, the
fashion and form thereof, the going out, and the coming in thereof, and the
ordinances thereof.

Secondly, What are you but Parliamentary converts? not like Master Strong,
who was of the Kings Army, a Cavalier Chaplain, now an Independent Pastor; but
you are so weak, that you are fallen not only from your old professed forms of
Parish Churches, Common Prayers, mixed communions, etc. but far below French and
Scots Presbytery, who live not by Tithes (as you do, like legal Priests) nor
having any tincture of a Priestly Ordination.

Secondly, As your Mission, so your maintenance is not according to the Gospel,
being merely by custom, compulsion, or compact with the people, contrary to
the express command of Christ, and practice of the Apostle, who lived (next to
God) on the Free contribution of the people.

First, Matthew. 10.9, 10.
says Christ, The laborer is worthy of his hire, that is, when he sent them
forth without money in their purse; therefore money, or a customary pay, is not
according to Christ.

Secondly, If we have sewen spirituals is it a great thing that we should reap
your carnal things? 1 Cor. 9.11.
Mark, this is said only to the Church. Again, if to the world, those who have
received spirituals ought to return their temporals, else how can Ministers in
reason seek to reap where no fruit grows? Again, if any of the unconverted
world, are willing to give, it is God and not man, Who can hinder their
free-gift?

Thirdly, says the Apostle, Even so has the Lord ordained that they which
preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14.
should live of the Gospel. True, it is ordained of God, not by Ordinance of
Parliament. Again, you must Preach the Gospel; that I question, Ephesians. 3.3, 5.
Col. 4.3, 4.
and you can never answer (as I'lle tell you another time) the Gospel being a
Mystery you know not, nor can manifest to men. Again, to live of the Gospel,
is not by custom, compulsion, or compact from people, but by divine
providence, on that power and love of God in Men, to whom the Gospel is
preached, who would freely give, if you had that glad tidings to teach. But
because you still oppress their estates and spirits by your legal teaching and
Tithes; 1 Cor. 9.18.
therefore you are far from making the Gospel without charge: which Scripture
you dare not mention to the Committee.

Lastly, let it appear to the Parliament and people of the Nation, that you are
Ministers of the Gospel, that you have a Mission and Commission from Christ,
and the maintenance of Christ also; you may have liberty to preach the Gospel
freely, and go where you will, which is more then ever your forefathers saw,
and a greater favor then any Governors of England gave to the godly preachers
or people of God.

If you will plead still for Tithes as your right by law of the land, much more
might the Bishops do for theirs; who had the law for them, yet no lawyer to
plead their cause: these fell to a worse condition then you are yet, having not
the fifth, nor a farthing of all their Lordly revenues allowed for their wives
and children: The same wrath is coming on you apace, if love carry you not
forth freely to Minister the Gospel to men: but this you cannot do, therefore
you must dye in want, though you are never so wealthy, that is your doom. Ah
blessed God! how good men, and godly Ministers are discovered this day? Sure
it is the day of God, because it is the discovery of man, Isa. 40.5, 6.
to make all flesh bare before him, and the goodliness of the flesh to wither
also.

The man of sin, and Mystery of iniquity must be first manifest in the Saints
(that is a Mystery indeed) I mean fully manifest: 'twas revealed in part before,
Isa. 40.5, 6.
in the Popish and prelatique Clergy. Again, 'twas no dispute, but their own
discovery threw them down: That is, by their iniquity, the Mystery of iniquity
came forth. 'Twas blood in the Papists, pride in the Prelates, persecution,
covetousness, and cunning designs, in the Presbyter and others, makes it
appear to All Men, they are no Ministers of the Gospel, But Ministers for Tyths.

I was forced in my Spirit to write this to the world, to whom the Lord God
will speak good things, when all the Ministry of Man is silent.

The Lord will be terrible to them: for he will famish all the Gods of the
earth: Then men shall worship him every one from his place, even all the Isles
of the Heathen, Zeph. 2.11.

FINIS.

