THE Declaration and Standard Of the Levellers of England; Delivered in a
Speech to his Excellency the Lord Genesis Fairfax, on Friday last at White Hall,
by Mr. Everard, a late Member of the Army, and his Prophecy in reference
thereunto; showing what will befall the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, by
their submitting to community; With their invitation and promise unto the
people, and their proceedings in Windsor Park, Oatlands Park, and several
other places; also, the Examination and confession of the said Mr. Everard
before his Excellency, the manner of his deportment with his Hat on, and his
several speeches and expressions, when he was commanded to put it off.
Together with a List of the several Regiments of Horse and Foot that have cast
Lots to go for Ireland.



Imprinted at London, for G. Laurenson, April 23. 1649.

A DECLARATION OF THE Levellers, Delivered in a Speech to his Excellency the
Lord General Fairfax, by Mr. Everard, a late member of the Army.
UPon the 19 of this instant April, 1649. the Council of State received
information that one Mr. Everard formerly of the Army, who calls himself
profit, with others, came several days last week to St. Georges Hill in
Surrey, and began to dig, then to sowing the ground with Parsnips, Carrets, and
Beans; their number increase every day, they began with five, and are now
about fifty, but they say they will shortly be above five thousand: They have
prepared Seed Corn, and intend to plow up the ground in Oatlands park, Windsor
park, and other places, and to level the pales, etc. inviting all to come in,
and promise them meat, and drink, and clothes, declaring to the people, that
they will shortly make them come up to the Hills and work; and threaten the
people, that if they let their Cattle come in amongst them, they will cut off
their usurping heads, and the four-footed legs. For, Our thoughts are lofty,
proud, and full of ire,
We can be good, or bad, as times require.


Upon the 20, of this instant, the said Mr. Everard and one Wistanly came to
White Hall to give his Excellency an account of their proceedings in digging up
the grounds on St. Georges (...) as aforesaid, Everard, declared, That he was
of the Race of the Jews, and that all the liberties of the people were lost by
the coming in of William the Conqueror and that ever since, the people of God
have lived under tyranny and oppression, worse then that of our forefathers
under the Egiptians.

But now the time of deliverance was at hand, and God would bring his people
out of this savery and restore them their freedoms in the enjoying the (...)
and benefits of the Earth: And that there had lat^ly appeared a Vision to him,
which bade him (...) dig, and plow the Earth and rec^ive the ^r^ (...) And that
their intent is to ^ore the (...) former Condition: And that as God (...) make
the barren ground fr^^tfull. So (...) did, was to renew the ancient Com^ (...)
Joying the fruits of the Earth, and to (...) ^nefits thereof to the poor and
Needy (...) ^gry, and to cloth the naked; And that they intend not to meddle
with any man's propriety, nor to break down any pailes or Enclosures, but only
to meddle with what was common and untilled, and to make it fruitful for the
use of man. But that the time would suddenly be that all men should willingly
come in, and give up their Lands and Estates, and willing to submit to this
Community; and for those which shall come in, and work, they shall have meat,
drink, and clothes, which is all that is necessary for the life of man; and
that for money there was not any need of it, nor of any clothes more then to
cover their nakedness; and that they will not defend themselvei by arms, but
will submit unto Authority, and wait till the promised opportunity be offered,
which they conceived to be near at hand: and that as their forefathers lived
in Tents, so it would be suitable to their condition now to live in the same.

Here (they say) they are resolved to stand, and do account their fore fathers
principles, a perfect Rule and Standard for them to walk by.

It is observeable, That while Everard and Wistanley stood before the Lord
General they stood with their Hats on, and being demanded the reason, said,
He was but their fellow Creature: Being asked the meaning of that place, Give
honor to whom honor is due. They seemed to be offended, and said, That their
mouths should be stopped who gave them that offense.

WHereas by order of the late Lord Major of the City of London, and the
Commissioners, a precept or order came to the Deputy and Common Council men of
the Ward of Walbrook, requiring them to call to their assistance, such able
persons as they shall think meet, to assess upon the Inhabitants of their Ward,
the sum of 50 l. which was in arrears of the 4. former assesments of the 12,
10, 6, and 4 months, for the L. Genesis Fairfax his army, the Common counsel men
in obedience to that precept, did call to assistance 8. other persons
Inhabitants in their Ward, for the more qual rating and assessing of the
aforesaid sum, and afer long and serious consultation and debate, did find
that the real estates, viz. the Rents of houses had not been rated at all, or
not considerable in those 4 assessements; did therefore adjudge it, to be just
to lay some considerable part of the 500. l. upon the aforesaid Rents, and they
also finding that the Assessors in those 4 assesments had exceeding overrated
the poor people of small estates, and also had exceedingly under rated
themselves, and the men of great Estates in the Ward. The now Common council
men finding this great partiality and inequality, did Judge it just before God,
and all just men, to lay the greatest part of that which remained and not laid
on the real estates, upon those of great estates that had bin so much
under-rated, that if the rich men had bin rated, proportionably to those of
small estates, there would have bin little or none of those arrears, judging it
very unjust and contrary to Gods command, to and oppression to oppression, also
contrary to the true intent and meaning of the Ordinances of parl. Having taken
this course for the more spedy getting in of the aforesaid arrears, and also to
prevent future arrears, did finish the books, and according to order sent them
in. But upon the complaint of some of the War^, together with such of the
Comoncouncel as were assessors of those unequal assesments, to the Lord Mayor
and Commis. We the now assessors were sent for before them, and notwithstanding
we made it clear to the commis. that we had so assessed it as was most
agreeable to Gods command to take of heavy burdens, and to relieve the
oppressed, which we also declared was the true intent and meaning of the Ordi.
of parl. and also discharge our trust; yet were we overawed and commanded to
take the book and alter it, to take off from the rich, and to lay it on such as
we knew to be over rated before, and yet had paid which we judged
unreasonable, we also told the Aldermen, that their evil example in rating
themselves so low in every assesment upon occasion that no rich men in any
Ward, would be rated proportionably to the estates, and did plead and do still
plead that an Alderman was but so much, and should they be rated equally with,
or more then an Ald. We also told them that we did expect that as it was their
duty so they would have given us incommand all the assessors of every Ward in
London, to have considered such as had bin over-rated to have eased them, and
also such as had been under rated, to have laid the more on them. This was much
stood upon and by some answred with bitter expressions, and angry countenances;
but our conclusions was with them thus, That we did hope in the sincerity o^
our hearts we had obeyed Gods (...) demand, in taking often heavy burdens and in
relieving of some of the oppressed and letting others that were more oppressed
go free, and that if they (the Commissioners) did lay those burdens on again,
the sin should lie at their doors, and they should answer for if we had
di^charged our trust. We know it to be just, that he that is worth 1000. l.
should be rated ten times so much as he that is worth 100. l. and so
proportionably from the least estate to the greatest, and he that has the
greatest estate has the greatest advantage by this Rule of proportion, and if
the Wards men be wise in their elections of common council men, let them look
upon such as are godly, wise men, of the middle rank of men, and make choice of
such men they will find will act most and best for them and the public. What
injustice, unequality, and oppression has bin used and exercised upon the poor
and men of small estates in all former assesments, the like has been in a
great measure in every Ward in levying men and arms to attend their Captains
and Commanders in the Trained Bands, as an Alderman, or great rich man to send
three men and peradventure sends but one, it may be none at all; when a poor
man of small estate shall go forth, and find his own arms; this is also a
great injustice and oppression,

Letters from Sir Charles Coot in Ireland, say That he is straightly besieged
in Londonderry, and unless he have speedy relief, he will be forced to
surrender upon mercy. Dublin is in great distress, and col. Monk in the North
even at the last gasp: But several Regiments of Horse and Foot are now designed
for their relief, and the Council of the Army to avoid all differences,
resolved, that lots should be cast for those Regiments that were to go, and
accordingly on Friday last, the Colonels of each Regiments casting, the Lots
fell upon those Regiments to go, viz.

Of Foot, Colonel Ewers, Col. Cooks, Col. Deans, Col. Hewsons. Of Horse,
Commissary Genesis Ireton, Major Genesis Lamberts, Col. Scroops, Col. Harloes.

Of Col. Okey's Dragoons, five Troops, viz. Major Abbots, Capt. Mercers, Capt.
Fulchars, Cap. Boltars, and Captain Garlands.

FINIS.

