AN EXACT DESCRIPTION OF A ROUNDHEAD, AND A LONG-HEAD SHAG-POLL: Taken out of
the purest Antiquities and Records.

Wherein are confuted the odious aspersions of Malignant Spirits: Especially in
answer to those most rediculous, absurd and beyond comparison, most foolish
Baffle-headed Pamphlets sent into the World by a S^inking Locust, viz.

The Devil turned Roundhead. The Resolution of the Roundhead. The
Vindication of the Roundhead. and Jourdan the Players exexercising.
depiction of a Roundhead and a Cavalier with views of London and York in the
background Lon:
view of London and the Thames YORK
view of the skyline of York This Man of hair whom you see marching here,
Is that brave Ruffian Mouns^ire Cavilier.
But let him not make so much have for he,
Must be drawn' back, and stayed by Gregore.


London, Printed for George Tomlinson, and are to sold in the Ould-Baily. 1642.

A True description of the ROVND-HEADS.
ANd first there is laid down in these eight general heads: First, the
Original of them both, Genesis 2.7. Revel. 9. Secondly, where they were made, as
in the same record you shall find. Thirdly of what made, the same records also
declares. Fourthly, by whom made, there you shall find it also. Fifthly, how
they are qualified, there you shall find it also. Sixthly, of the number of
either of them, that you shall find Mat. 7.13. Revel. 9. of their use and
particular end Psalm 73. Eighthly, and lastly of their last, and final end that
is Mat. 25.


All these are severally handled more plainly and largely in their order by W.
P.

A faithful soldier of the sixth legion belonging unto the chief general of
the most victorious regiment of the Roundheads. Written upon the ^laine of the
earth, in the midst of an innumerable rabble gathered together by the Devil of
shag poll locusts, for the destruction of the Round heads.

And first to begin with the Roundheads Original:

Secondly, for the place where your Roun-head was made: why; he was made in a
place incomparable, more excellent than wherein your shag-pole Locust was made,
as you shall hear hereafter, he was made in a delicate place, even in
Paradise a place of spoilesse purity, and delightful content; a place fit for a
Roundheaded puritan and semy-separate to be made in: your semy-seperate,
puritan, and Round head, are computable 3. objects comprehended in one subject,
being all made of one and the selfsame matter, as also of one and the
selfsame nature, differing only in the pr^cedency of the titles, the title
semy-separates, and Roundhead, issuing out of the as the stream issues out of
the fountain being all one as the fountain and his stream is.

Thirdly, by whom was your Puritan or Round head made? your Puritan or
Roundhead was made by him who made the round world, and all that therein is,
by Jehovah Elohim in most perfect beauty, shape, and form, most admirable,
composed in most comely proportion and order, his Round head not Ass-Head like
but round indeed; which being looked upon by God himself, he saw that it was
good, yea, most exceeding good and liked it wondrous well, so that he blessed
his roundhead by him made, bids him increase and bring forth fruit, yea even
that fruit that should destroy the shagpolle locusts, all the works of the
Devil from off the earth.

Fourthly, of what made? he was made of that matter which that name which God
gave him signifies, of red earth this Adam which the shag polls in derision
calls a Roundhead, was made of red earth or of red dust, which to prevent some
foolish objection, signifies one and the same thing.

Fifthly, how is this Round head qualified? admirably, with grace and virtue of
unvalued worth, as, first with innocence of lift composed and mixed with rare
ingredients, of mercy, truth and love, as also with rare wisdom and
understanding, so that he did know the composition, and secret natures of all
the creatures in the world, and so was able to give them names according to
their nature, and so he did; thus internally and externally was this Roundhead
qualified with Admirable Wisdom, Beauty, Comelines, and strength.

Sixthly, for his number and increase: why, for his increase of number it was
small, excellent for quality, but sew for quantity, in regard as the time now
is and ever was, but here and there one; excellent and exquisite things being
always scant, and rarest to be found, and that is the thing, together with
their secret virtue, that makes them be of such account with those that knows
their worth, which knowledge of them, as they are, it is only in God and
amongst themselves, for foolish shag-poll locusts have no knwledge of their
excellency, nor are no more able to discern their splendour, then a blind man
that never saw the Sun, is able to judge or discern the glory or the
illustrious beauty of the Sun.

Seventhly, of the Roundheads use, what is he useful for? the Roundheads use
is manyfold, of many sorts and kinds, but all for good; and first to set forth
the splendid glory of the justice of God, his grace manifested to them in the
face and favor of Jesus Christ, but never unto the shag-poll locusts.
Secondly, to set or show forth the virtues of Jesus Christ, the second person
in Trinity, that has therefore called these Round heads out of darkness into
light, that they should show forth his virtues, and so they do as on the
contrary the Shag-poll shows forth the vices of the Devil. Their third use is
to be store houses of wisdom. Their fourth use to be temples of the living
God. Fifthly, to be teachers and instructers of men for the praise and glory of
God, his secrets being made known unto them only. Sixthly, to denounce his
Judgments against the world. Revel. 18. about the beginning, for these
Roundheads are called his Angels. Revel. 2. Angel being a name of Office, not
of nature always. Seventhly, they are useful to keep off his Judgments,
sometimes from the Shagpoll, as that Roundhead Lot while he was among the
shagpoll Locusts Sodomites, the fire and brimstone could not come down to
burn them; as also here in England, how does these Roundheads keep off the
pestelence, sword, and famine from the shagpoles here, and are the cause that
many temporal blessings does come upon them, which notwithstanding these
shagpoll locusts know, that it is for their sakes that they receive these
benefits, yet they cannot endure them.

Eighthly, and lastly, what is the final end of the Roundheads? their final
end next the glory of God is the salvation of his own soul, his final is the
redemption from all miseries in this mortal life here and for ever, hereafter
which no shagpoll locust must enjoy his final end is to be a king, to reign
with Christ for ever, to be an heir with Christ, an inheritour and possesser
of all things with him to all eternity; as also to praise and glorify God for
ever in an everlasting state of blessedness in the highest heaven, out of
which all slanderous lying, scorning, barking, shagpoll locusts must be shut,
Revel. 22.15 without shall be dogs, shagpoll locusts, he means inchanter^,
whoremongers and Idolaters, and whosoever loves lies or makes lies, be they
Priests, or Pesants, or whatsoever.

And thus have we finished your Round head.

The second general head to be handled is your Shagpoll locust origirall when
it was.

Your sh^g poll locusts original was the opening of the bottomless pit (...)
9. the smoaky pit, out of that smoke, came those shag poll locusts, that wear
hair like women, which was long after the making of the Roundheads: therefore
are they of no such antiquity as your Roundheads are: and therefore according
to your own rules are not so honorable as your Roundheads are.

Secondly, the place where they were made: why, they were made in the
bottomless pit, as is above mentioned, they came out of the bottomless pit,
at the place from whence they came, there were they made.

Thirdly, by whom were they made? why, by the devil the father of all
slanderers and liars, such as these locusts are, whether locusts teachers, or
locusts hearers, who made them all in uncomely, and in unmanly order, for they
had hair like women, faces like men, and teeth like a Lion, Rev. 9. ver. 7.8.
all like deformed monsters, as well inside as outside, exceeding bad and vile,
full of confusion and deformed disorder, as well the Priests as people.

Fourthly, of what made? why, as first his case or outside he is made of dust
as your Roundhead is, although he knows it not as your Roundhead does, but
for his pitch or inside it is semen incubae, or sperma diaboli he is made of
the seed or spaun of the Devil: as concerning the constitution of his mind,
murderers and liars are they, and so is he.

Fifthly, how are they qualified? why, clean contrary to your Roundheads, not
with innocence of life, but with nocency, with gross and palpable ignorance,
and blindness in spiritual and heavenly things, full of conceitednesse of
having that which they are utterly empty of, but being full indeed of the
spirit: now I know to hear the name of Spirit will vex them, for they defy
such as are full of the Spirit: but to quiet them a little, I give them to
understand, that that Spirit which they mean, is not the Spirit I mean, the
spirit that I mean here that they are filled with; is the spirit of lying and
slandering, and false accusing of the Roundheads, the spirit of whoredom and
unsatiable lust, the spirit of envy; malice, and murder, of drunkenness,
epicurisme, and all manner of loose profaneness, the spirit of hatred against
the appearance of any goodness, though never so little, for they nothing
almost but profit impiety like the devil himself, which reigns effectually in
them, and he it is that has thus qualified them, and which has also blinded
them in their judgments, that they cannot discern the nature and difference of
things, but judge good to be evil, and evil to be good, John 16.1.2. They shall
excommunicate you and he that kills you shall think he does God good service:
whether this be so or no, I refer you to your selves, all you shag-poll Locusts.

Sixthly, for their number and increase, it is wonderful, in number they exceed
the Roundheads, to speak comparatively, more then the muscatoes and flies
exceeds in number the Eagles, they darken the light of the Sun with their
multitude, as did the flies of Egypt.

They are not rare to be found, as are the Eagles and the Roundheads, there
are whole swarms of them in every place; and as hurtful and troublesome to
your Roundheads in old England; as your Muscatoes are to your Roundheads in
New England, and every way as evil to be dealt withal, for the more you
strive to beat them off, the more they muster and swarm about you, so that
there is no way of quietness for a Roundhead but to avoid them.

Seventhly, for their use, that also is diverse, but tending all to hurt, yet
contrary to their minds it effects good, not to themselves, but to the
Roundheads, whom their whole intent and desire is to hurt. Now their first use
is, to afflict the Roundheads, which if your shag poll did know, what good
they did unto your Roundheads, by afflicting of them, by their wrongs and
injuries they do unto them, then would they never do it unto them: for first
they teach them experience of the worlds vanity, secondly, they make them weary
of the world, and weane them from the love of the world, the love thereof would
be their destruction: thirdly; they make them by their outrageous wrongs and
injuries they do unto them, more splendid, bright, and lovely in the sight of
God and good men; fourthly by the shag-polls hatred of them, they come to have
certain knowledge, that God loves them, which otherwise they could not have:
for if the shag-poll Locusts loved them, it were a certain sign they were
hated of God, for your shag poll loves none but such as God hates: fifthly they
increase the Round heads glory in heaven, for the more they scorn them here,
the more shall they be honored there: sixthly, the shag polls by reason of
their out-ragious wrongs and injuries that they do unto the Round heads they
make this world a hell unto the Round heads, wherein these shag polls like
devils do torment them, so that they shall have no hell hereafter, as your shag
polls shall: other sorts of uses that they serve for is, first to make vessels
of dishonor: secondly to declare the justice of his wrath upon, and to teach
the Round heads, that though he do for a time spare his and their enemies, that
yet he will not always spare them: and lastly to be such firebrands of hell,
as shall never be taken forth.

Eighthly and lastly, of their final end, their final end next to the glory of
the justice of Gods wrath, is to be damned, for their end is damnation, thy
mind nothing b^^ earthly things their God is their belly, they glory in
shameful things, their con^ation i^ not in heaven, therefore by God his
definitive sentence, their final end is damnation.

And thus much for your Roundheads and your Shag-polls.

Only this by the way of Advertisement to the honest-hearted Christian Reader,
that though some do either through ignorance, or some infirmity occasioning,
wear their hair longer then may in some men's judgment seem fitting, for men
professing themselves to be Christians to wear; know you that we intend not a
definitive sentence against any particular person for weari g of their hair,
but yet do wish them for the better informing of their judgments to consider
the Apostles rule concerning hair, in 1 Cor. 11.14. where he may have full
satisfaction; and further also we give you to understand, that we are so far
off from a particular sentence that we believe that their are many among the
Long-heads, that may belong unto the Roundheads, and that may in time declare
themselves; and this also, that there are many Locust among the Roundheads,
that now seem to be Roundheads, yet are not so, and will declare themselves to
be but Locusts; yet notwithstanding that, all that we are not long hair are not
Locusts; as also, all that wear not long hair, are not Roundheads yet is long
hair the visible sign or mark to distinguish a Locust, Rev. 9.8. And they had
hair like women. Not long agone a Champion came from Hell.
To bid defiance to the host of Heaven:
But with the Puritans he has no mind to deal,
Because with them to no end he has striuen.
A periwig instead of Helmet on his head he wears,
To prove, if he by that can hide his Midas cares.
His armor loose profaneness is, and Hatred strong,
Disdain, contempt of God and goodness all:
Murtherous desire, by him retained long:
By which at last he hopes to make to fall
The Puritan, which now be Round head call:
A term by which he thinks to overthrow,
And beat all goodness from the earth below.
By this design: he doubts not but to stop
The breath and life of goodness in this land:
And spoil that strength that Puritans have got,
And by this title Round head to set all good at stand.
But silly Long head that hair is not thine own,
It Is but some harlots, though by thee it is worn.


FINIS.

