AN EXACT AND TRVE RELATION of that Tumultuous behavior of diverse Citizens and
others at Guild Hall, December the 12. 1642.

Wherein is related the business they pretend, their Conference with my Lord
Major and Court of Common Counsel, their cruelty to the Soldiers, their
breach of peace, and shameful abuse to the Citizens, with other remarkable
Things.

By a sad Spectator.

Printed for B. A. and R. D. December. 13. 1642.

An Exact and True Relation of that tumultuous behavior of diverse Citizens
and others at Guild Hall. December 12. 1642.
By a multitude under the pretense of PEACE.

IT is a sad thing, that such strange tumults should arise in such a well
Governed City, especially from them whose pretense is altogether for Peace, but
whose words and carriages do declare the contrary, as may appear in their
carriage at Haberdashers Hall the ninth of December, and in those desperate
speeches that came from them that night, as will appear largely upon proof,
as does more evidence it self upon the twelfth of December, upon which day my
Lord Major called a Court of Common Counsel, and being on serious debate,
these men of several conditions, some Proctors, some Tapsters, some Players,
witness Cain the Clown at the Bull, and others came in great multitude, and
filled the Hall and Yard, as full as if there had been some extraordinary
common Hall. So they sent some of their company up to the Court, at their
coming in my Lord Major asked them what they would have one Master Osbinstone,
Tole taker on the Bridge, being one of their chosen men, said, for Peace, and
for the petition, which would admit of no delay. It Is so, said he, the Kings
Army and ours do face one another, and much blood is like to be spilt,
therefore there is speed of our Petition. My Lord spoke of some passages in the
petition, and upon discourse they all seemed to be satisfied. Then my Lord and
the Court told them they did as really desire peace as they, but they did not
approve of their way, and to that purpose he had called a Court to advise about
it, who had chose seven Aldermen, and fourteen Commoners, to draw up a
petition to the King and both Houses of Parliament, and they hoped it would be
such, that it would give satisfaction to all.

In the mean time the Spirits of those men that were in the Hall and in the
Yard, were so up, that they were ready to quarrel with every man that they had
any suspicion was not of their Society, insomuch that many men of civil
quality went away for fear of danger; at length they grew to this resolution,
they would force out all they apprehended to be Soldiers out of the Hall.

Sergeant Major Skippons man passing through the Hall, speaking to no man,
says one there goes Skippons dog, upon that they jousled him, knocked him
down often, and robbed him of money and other things to the worth of six
pounds. A few Soldiers there were up and down the Hall, waiting on their
business as at other times, out they must by head and shoulders where ever they
found any, though they gave them very good words, and an account of their
business. The Soldiers being thus disgracefully turned out, by what authority
they knew not, resolved they would go in again, and some ten or twelve drew
their swords and in they got, being in they wished them to clear the Hall,
offering no blow nor assault to any; the most that were in the Hall drove up to
the Court of Hustings, others got behind the Soldiers, closed in upon them,
and wrested their swords out of their hands, then presently the multitude cried
out shut the doors, shut the doors. So they did, and barracadoed them up with
Forms and other things they found in the Hall, in the interim they most
cruelly beat, cut, and wounded the Soldiers, 20. or 30. upon one, kicking
them like dogs, after that they fell upon some Citizens, calling them round
head rogues, beat them black and blew, and abused them in most shameful
manner, multitudes on one, with their fists about his ears. The beaten,
wounded men, cried out murder murder, those without labored to get open the
doors, and by force got open a little crevice one of the Horsemen that were in
the yard, shot in at the crevice to frighten them that so they might open the
door, but they shut it fast, and in a hubbub up stairs they got, where my
Lord Major and the Court sat, forced open the doors, Master Osbinstone told
my Lord and the Court if they would send the Soldiers away that were in the
yard and at the gates of the Hall, he would undertake that every man should go
home to their dwellings; This Osbinstone being in custody, and passing by the
Conduit at the lower end of Cheap side, was by force drove into the Miter
Tavern, no sooner was he in, but they shut the street doors, presently he
was creeping out of a window at the top of the house, getting on the leads of
Mercers Chapel, to make an escape as is conceived, but being deserned by some
on the other side-they discovered him and got him again; Many were committed
for speaking desperate words, and one with his head broke for beginning a Fray
in the yard, the issue of such desperate carriages I hope will be carefully
looked to in time, that they may not grow to such a head, that Religion, and
Liberty, and all safety may be hazarded.

FINIS.

