An exact and true RELATION OF A most cruel and horrid Murder committed by
one of the CAVALIERS, ON A Woman in LEICESTER, Billetted in her House: Who was
shot into the back, being within five Weeks of the time of her delivery.

REad in the house of Commons, and Ordered to be forthwith Printed and
published:

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for E. Husbands and I. Franck, and are to be sold at their
shops, in the middle Temple, and text door to the King's Head in Fleetstreet.
Sept. 17. 1641.

An Exact and true Relation of a most cruel and horrid Murder, committed by
one of the Cavaliers, on a woman in Leicester, etc.
Sept: 13. 1642.
FRancis Coltman of the Parish of St. Martins in the Town of Leicester
Maulster, being one of the Coroners Inquest, for the inquiry upon the death of
goodwife Woodlane, wife of Henry VVoodlane of the said Town of Leicester
Chandler, taken before Thomas Blunt, and William Spichley, Coroners of the said
town, who being examined, does voluntarily protest, as he shall answer before
Almighty god, that what he shall deliver upon this examination in this business
is the truth, and says, first, that he being summoned to serve upon this
Inquest at the Guild Hall of the said Town of Lecester, and having received the
charge given by the Coroners with the rest of the Jury, was thereupon with the
rest of the Jury required to go and view the body of the said party diseased
which he did accordingly, and did find her to be shot under the back into the
belly, being very great with child, and within a Month or five weeks of the
time of her delivery (as the women there present did verily believe) And he
further says, that it was given in evidence to the said Jury, that this cruel
fact was committed by one Chumley a Cavalier Trooper in the Kings sarvice, who
had formerly fallen out with her husband, beaten him, and threatened to be
revenged upon his wife, being billited in the said Woodlands house.

Thomas Todd of the said Town of Leicester Tailor, being likewise examined
upon the same business, and being one of the same Jury, upon the like
Protestation does affirm, that what the said Francis Coltman has delivered
upon his examination (being now read unto him) is the truth, and in witness of
the truth hereof, these parties examined have Subscribed their names, the day
and Year first above written.

Francis Coltman: Thomas Todd.

MEmorandum, these Examinations were taken by me Robert Chambers, Secretary to
the Army, under the Command of the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Essex his
Excellency,

the said 13th day of September, 1642. And in the presence of Jo: Meyrick.
William Strode. Ph: Stapleton. William Purefoy.


FINIS

