THE STATE OF FRANCE, As it stood in the IXth year of this present Monarch,
LEWIS XIIII.

Written to a Friend By J. E.

LONDON, Printed by T.M. for M.M. G Bedell and T Collins. at the middle Temple
gate, Fleetstreet. 1652.

The State of FRANCE, as it stood in the Ninth year of this present Monarch
LEWIS the XIIII, Written to a Friend.
SInce I had first the honor to be one of those whose Conversation you have
cherished with so many signal obligations, and, as it were, currents of
civility; I can hardly think, that (when by so many literal expresses and
personal commands, you enjoin me to deliver something in writing, touching the
late subject of our discourse) you have either cause to delight in my trivial
conceptions, or design my discredit: For however your instances have at last
prevailed, yet your Honor is no less concerned to be tender how you publish my
defects, whilst in them only (though the faults be mine) men will so
peremptorily conclude your want of judgment, and condemn your Election. But you
have promised to be discreet, and I shall then make a saving adventure of my
Reputation with you, who have candor and charity not from the Multitude, but
the stock of your own worth and ingenuous Education; of which this Essay will
be rather an History, then any thing otherwise capable to inform you, who know
already so much more, and better, then I can possibly either write or relate.

But to begin once, since it is my fate to obey you; I shall nothing alter the
Scene, which was then Presented you, when you were pleased (as it since
appears) to take notice of those casual Discourses of mine, wherein I posted
over the best Remarks, and most material Observations which my weak Judgment
had been able to recollect, during my so many Pererrations, and unprofitable
Sojourn abroad, and especially in this Kingdom of France.

Nor will I vex your patience with any Topographicall Descriptions, as being the
daily subject of your Contemplations, when at any time you please to refresh
your self amongst those exquisite Cards of the latest and most accurate
Editions: But represent, in as succinct a Method as I am able, what in order to
Affairs (as in the Government of this most active and Illustrious Monarchy
they now stand) I conceive to be chiefly proper and requisite for a Gentleman
of our Nation (under the notion of a Traveller) to be able to render an account
of at his Return: And therefore, before I proceed further, I will complie with
your desire, and speak a word or two (by way of Introduction, or Digression
rather) of my sentiment and opinion touching Foreign Travel in General,
wherein I shall also deal very impartially with all the world concerning mine
own particular, as being (I hope) taking my long farewell thereof.

That which first rendered me of this Apodemick humor, (I shall not discourse
here of Mercuriall complexions, whom Physiognomists affirm to be Individua
vaga's, like my self) proceeded from a certain vain Emulation which I had to
see the best of Education, which every body so decrying at Home, made me
conceive, was a commodity only to be brought from a far Country; and I cannot
say, without a little ambition too of knowing, or at least of having the
privilege to talk something more then others could reasonably pretend to, that
had never bin out of sight of their own chimnies smoke: All which was a
Ridiculous affectation, contracted first from the ordinary Radomontadas of such
as have seen strange places, and great want of discretion, and so fondly
transported with the pleasure only, and temptation of Novelties, the very
instrumental causes of this unsettled extravagancy.

True it is, Non omnis fert omnia Tellus: for the great and good God has
discreetly, and very wisely disposed, in the furnishing and adorning (as I may
say) of this Terrestrial Cabinet, having left no one part or corner thereof
without some thing specially different, and admirably remarkable, either in the
composition, quality or use; all of them, according to their position,
situation, and effects, admirably commodious, and dependant; of which divine
Economy there may be infinitely more spoken, then will be suitable to this
design, after I have inferred that for these respects only, a Traveller has
some excuse, as well as encouragement to go abroad and see the world.

Now then, for as much as the end of all our Appetites, wisely inquired into,
ought to be the principal Mira, and term to all our actions, he that would
travel rationally, and like a Philosopher, must industriously apply himself to
the pursuit of such things, as (throughout all his Peregrinations) may result
most to the profit, and Emolument of his own Country at his Return; whether in
the accomplishing of his person or affairs, there being nothing more veritable,
then that saying of Homer, (...).
Turpe quidem mansisse diu, vacuumque redire.
And therefore Peregrinatio animi imperio, and corporis ministerio debet
perfici: For so it was that Ptolomies young Noblemen, of whose rich freight and
return we read of; traveled, and brought home with them wares of more value,
then if they had transported Gold and Pearls. For the same cause PYTHAGORAS
took leave of his Friends and native Country, to which he afterward returned
with the Learning of the Egyptians, as Strabo in his seventh Book and
fourteenth Chapt. (...). And not as Pliny affirms, Exiliis verius quam
peregrinationibus susceptis: Nay, his passion and thirst after this excellent
Commerce was so admirable, that the same Author in Siren. tells us, he made
nothing of Circumcising himself, that so he might with the more freedom, and
less suspicion pry into their profoundest Mysteries: For therefore were the
Egyptian Priests called (...), incommunicable, and (...), imparticipable. Clem.
Alex.

Such a design led THALES, EUDOXUS, APOLLONIUS, nay PLATO himself, and diverse
other renowned Personages, (...). To comprehend (says Plutarch) the Mysteries
of Philosophy and Divinity: As it seems, esteeming the Egyptians to be the
most Ancient and Noble people of the whole World, both for the wisdom of their
Constitutions, and exceeding Reverence which they bare to Learning: These being
indeed the fruits and most noble acquisitions, which a Gentleman (who is a
qualified Traveller) should study and endeavor to furnish himself with whilst
he is abroad.

But these, some may object, are Heathen examples, Christians are content to be
less curious, and stay at home: Saint Hierom shall be mine Instance on this
occasion: and truly, it is worth the reading what he has delivered in one of
his Epist. ad Paulinum, you shall find it praefixed (amongst several other) to
Sixtus his Edition of the Bible, when (after those words, Legimus in veteribus
historiis quosdam lustrasse provincias, novos adisse Populos, maria transisse:
ut eos quos ex libris noverant, coram quoque viderent, etc.) making a very
ample repetition of what I have before spoken in the persons of other men, and
especially of the incomparable Pythagoras, and those noble youths who went out
of France and Spain, only to hear the eloquence of Livie, when quos ad
contemplationem sui ipsa Roma non traxerat, unius hominis fama perduxit,
referring us to the eight volums which Philostratus has purposely written on
this subject; thus he expostulates, Quid loquar de saeculi hominibus, etc. what
do I troubling you with old stories? when the Apostle Paul himself, that
vessel of Election, and Doctor of the Gentiles dispersed the Christian
Religion through so great a part of the world; by his almost perpetual
Peregrination, after his miraculous conversion; the like may be affirmed of the
rest of the Apostles, and even our Blessed Savior himself: but I recommend you
to the Author. On the other side, as we have justly censured those who merely
run abroad out of that vanity of spirit, and such trivial considerations as I
have already reproached in my self, so are we likewise to disband another sort
of travelers, whose Cynical reservednesse, declares to the world that they
have only minded the sensuality and satisfaction of a private Gusto:
communicating usually at their return but what may justly merit that repriment
which Socrates once gave to a young man who would render him no account of all
his long absence, quod secum peregrinatus fuerit: in the mean time, as much to
be abhorred is all manner strangness, disdain, Affectation and loquacity, by
which so many travelers now a days (for the most part) distinguish themselves
from the Vulgar, to that over acted degree of mimicall folly, as one would
easily imagine they had all this while lived in Pension rather amongst Apes,
and Parrats, than ever either seen, or conversed with persons of Ingenuity or
Honor.

To proeeed therefore, presuppose Travel ut suscipiatur propter unum aliquem
finem, as we have already constituted it: we are yet to give our young subject
leave to be so far practical, as that he do not slip any opportunity by which
he may inform himself as well in things even Mechanically curious and useful,
as altogether in the Mysteries of Government and Polity, which indeed are more
appositely termed Philosophical. Those who have imposed on themselves, and
others, so many different species of travel, as it may be said to contein
Theoreticall parts in it, that is to say, the Metaphysicall, Physical, and
Mathematical, are, in my apprehension, more exact and tedious in their
Analyzing, then perhaps they needed to have been; of them therefore I say no
more: it shall be sufficient for him whom I send abroad, that he conform
himself to such precepts as are only necessary, not cumbersome; which Rule he
shall likewise do well to observe even in his very necessary accoutrements and
port-manteau.

First then, supposing him to be a Young Gentleman apt for all Impressions, but
from his primary education inclined to the most worthy: having set his Foot
upon the Continent, his first study shall be to master the tongue of the
Country wherein he resolves to Reside; which ought to be understood perfectly,
written congruously, and spoken intelligently: after which he may do well to
accomplish himself in such exercises, as are most commendable at home, and best
attained abroad; which will be a means of rendering him very fit, and apt for
the general society of that Nation amongst whom he converses, and
consequently the better qualify him to frequent, without blush, such
particular places, and persons by whom he may best profit himself in the
Mysteries of their Polity, or what other perfection they are renowned for,
according as his particular Genius and inclinations import him. But this he
shall never attain unto, till he begin to be somewhat ripened and seasoned in a
place; for it is not every man that crosses the Seas, has been of an Academy,
learned a Corranto, and speaks the Language, whom I esteem a Traveller (of
which piece most of our English are in these countries at present) but he that
(in stead of making the Tour, as they call it) or, as a late Ambassador of ours
facetiously, but sharply reproached, (like a Goose swimms down the River)
having mastered the Tongue, frequented the Court, looked into their customs,
been present at their pleadings, observed their Military Discipline, contracted
acquaintance with their Learned men, studied their Arts, and is familiar with
their dispositions, makes this account of his time. The principal advantages
which a Gentleman thus made, may observe, and apply, are Truth, Taciturnitie,
facetiousnesse without morosity, courage, modesty, hardiness, patience,
frugality, and an excellent temper in the Regiment of his health and
Affections, especially in point of Drink and Tobacco, which is our Northern,
National, and most sordid of Vices. It is (I confess) a thing extremely
difficult to be at all times, and in all places thus reserved, and as it were
obliged to a Temper so Statick and exact among all conversations; nor for mine
own part, do I esteem it in all cases necessary, provided a man be furnished
with such a stock of prudence, as he know how, and when to make use even of his
companions extravagancies, (as then frequently betraying more freely their
inclinations, then at times of their more serious recollection, and first
addresses.) Seeing I find it generally impossible for a Traveller to evade some
occasions and encounters, which (if he be at all practical) he will nolens
volens, perceive himself engaged into at some one time or other. But to recover
this deviation, and return to our purpose; the virtues which our Traveller is
to bring home when he does Repatriare (as Solinus terms it) are either public,
such namely as concern the service of his Country; or Private, and altogether
personal, in order to his particular advantage and satisfaction: and, believe
it Sir, if he reap some contentment extraordinary, from what he has observed
abroad, The pains, solicitations, watchings, Perils, journeys, ill
enterteinment, absence from Friends, and innumerable like inconveniences,
joined to his vast expenses, do very dearly, and by a strange kind of
extortion, purchase that small experience and reputation which he can vaunt to
have acquired from abroad.

Those who boast of Philologicall Peregrinations (falsely so called) which they
undertake merely for the flourish and Tongue of a Place, possess only a
Paret-vertue; It is one of the Shells of Travel (though I confess, the kernel
is not to be procured without it: And Topical; in which I find the Dutch
(...), generally most accurate and industrious; both of them serve well for the
entertainment of Women and Children, who are commonly more imported with wonder
and Romance, then that solid and real Emolument, which is (through these
Instruments) to be conveyed us from abroad.

It is written of Ulysses, that he saw many Cities indeed, but withal his
Remarks of men's Manners and Customs, was ever preferred to his counting
Steeples, and making Tours: It is this Ethicall and Moral part of Travel,
which embellisheth a Gentleman, in the first place, having a due respect to the
Religion, which accomplisheth a Christian: In short, they are all severally
very commendable, accommodated to Persons and Professions; nor should a
Cavalier neglect to be seen in all of them: But for that my intention is here
to make an Introduction only into mine own OBSERVATIONS, I shall forbear to
enter so large and ample a Field, as the through handling of this Argument
would insensibly oblige me to do, it having likewise been so abundantly
treated of almost by every Pen which has prevaricated on this Subject; though,
in my slender judgment, and under favor, I must confess, without any real and
ingenuous satisfation either to Truth, or Curiosity.

To conclude (Sir) and contract this tedious transgression, I conjure you to
believe, that I offer nothing to you in this discourse, out of any the least
self opinion, censure of other men, vanity, or ostentation. No, I am assured
you will find me far enough from that IdiopathiaE, and common distemper of
Travelers; all I shall pretend being but to communicate unto you, how I have
lost part of those seven years, and more; which, not being (as in truth they
ought to have been) wholly exercised in the Benefit I might have reaped from
your society at home, I am obliged in Honor, and for Justification of my self,
to render you an Account how they have been dispensed abroad. I am very
conscious to my self, how much mine own little interest has suffered, during
mine absence, in the judgment of your stayed and more Thriving Geniuses, and
such as might justly indeed derive Characters, and Prognostics from a raw and
unsettled spirit, such as was mine: but considering that all those transirory
Accidents of Fo tune and the world, can no way farther extend themselves, then
to a very imperfect satisfaction of our regular and honest Appetites, (besides
that which they ought yield unto others,) neither he who stays at home, nor he
that goes abroad, is (in mine opinion) to be altogether censured and blamed;
and truly, he that can accommodate himself to so retired and contemplative a
life, as certainly that of a pure Country Gentleman's is, frees himself of an
innumerable Host of troubles, and importunities which a Traveller runs through,
and is in a manner compelled to entertain. Conformable to that of the most
incomparable

Claudian, De Seen Veronensi, Epig. Foelix qui propriis aevum transegit in
arvis:
Ipsa domus puerum quem videt, ipsa senem:
Qui baculo nitens, in qua reptavit arena
Unius numerat secula longa casae.
Illum non vario traxit fortuna tumultu^,
Nec bibit ignotas mobilis bospes aquas.
Non freta mercator timuit, non classica miles:
Non rauci lites pertulit ille fori.
Indocilis rerum, vicinae nescius urbis,
Adspectu frui^ur liberiore poli.
Frugibus alternis, non Consule, computat annum:
Autumnum pomis, ver sibi flore notat.
Idem conditager Soles, idem que reducit,
Metiturque suo rusticus orb diem.
Ingentem meminit parvo qui germine quercum,
Aequae unumque videt consenuisse nemus.
Broxima cui nigris Verona remotior Indis,
Benacumque putat litora rubra lacum.
Sed tamen indomitae vires, firmisque lacertis
Aetas robustum tertia cernit avum.
Erret, and extremos alter scrutetur I beros,
Plus habet hic vitae, plus habet ille Viae.
The serious contemplation whereof, made me sometimes (being at Naples) break
forth in this youthful, but natural Ode against Travel, which I will here
pronounce for my final Scal. lib 3. Poet c. 106. dict. (...): being a speech
which was made to the Citizens by him that was returned home after his long
travel.
Epibaterium.

Happy that man who lives content
With his own Home and Continent,
Those chiding streams his banks docurb,
Esteems the Ocean to his Orb;
Round which, when he a walk does take,
Thinks to perform as much as Drake.
For other Tongues, he takes no thought,
Then what his Nurse or Mother taught.
He Is not disturbd with the rude cries
Of the The guide or Messenger in Italy, which in the Morning calls to Horse.
Procaccia's [Up and Rise.]
But charmd in down, sleeps by the side
Of his chaste Love, or Loyal Bride,
In whose smooth Arms no sooner hurld,
But he enjoys another world;
Where his Enfranchised hand may stray,
Over the warm snow, or milkie way,
And thence as often as it declines
Haec Comice dicta, cave ne male capiat.
Toward those more rich and hidden Mines,
Scorns us that travel Lands and Seas,
Believes no Kingdoms like to these.
If then at home such joys be had,
Oh how unwise are we, how mad^
This I did once write, and this I so believe, (as if God bless me with a
successful Return into my Native Country) I shall endeavor Vivere, non
dicere huic veritati: and though the Conscience of my personal inabilities,
can never tempt me with the vanity to think of any public Advancement, for
having spent the prime of my years and youth abroad; yet the contentment, and
satisfaction which I purpose and fancy to my self, if I may obtain leave but
to enjoy that private condition and Fortune, which Heaven has decided me at
home, so that I can but rubb out of this, into a better world, without the
least impeachment to my Religion and Loyalty, Sublimi feriam sydera vertice: I
shall have arrived at the sum and very top of mine innocent wishes. But, if in
the mean time, it be otherwise ordained, I have learned likewise to submit my
self unto the will of God, as being very apt to believe that excellent
Apophthegme of the Wise man, Quod Omne solum sit Forti Patria.

But now to our TRAVELLER again.

The principal places of EUROPE, wherein a Gentleman may, uno intuitu, behold
as in a Theater the chief and most signal Actions which (out of his own
Country) concern this later Age and part of the World, are the Netherlands,
comprehending Flanders, and the divided Provinces; which is a perfect Encycle
and Synopsis of whatsoever one may elsewhere see in all the other Countries of
Europe; And for this end, I willingly recommend them to be first visited, no
otherwise, then do those who direct us in the study of History to the reading
first of some authentic Epitome, or universal Chronology, besore we adventure
to launch forth into that vast and profound Ocean of voluminous Authors. From
thence I would advise him to traverse Germany, (altogether contrary to the
Vulgar Method) by reason of that so useful Tongue, which he will find very
difficult, and with much regret, and many conflicts attained unto, after the
facill, and more smooth Languages are once thoroughly imbibed, not omitting
(comparatively) even the French it self. From this Region you naturally slide
into Italy, and then Embarquing for Spain, return by a direct course unto
Paris; where indeed, I would have the Principal abode of a Gentleman to be,
not only in Relation to the Court, and exercises acquired in that City; but
also in respect to his expenses. This may seem a Paradox to some; but for my
part, I never found any wood to a great town; and when my Traveller has cast
it up, and made a true Audite of all Extraordinaries, he will find, what for
removalls, and what for the peril of disbauched and frequent collationings
(for in all other little towns his acquaintance will be universal, the English
perpetually intervisiting, with a gross ingredient of Dutch,) a very little,
or inconsiderable disproportion in the total Account.

Thus I propose France in the last place, for many other respects which here I
purposely omit to enumerate, that I may avoid the taedium of so long a
discourse; but especially, for this, that our Traveller may have the more time
and resolution to conquer the Language, and go through those hardy and most
eminent exercises which are there to be learned in their choicest perfection
and native luster; after which, with a competent tincture of their best
conversation (for the over reservednesse of the Italian, and severity of the
Spanyard, as well as the blunt garb of the Dutch, would in an Englishman be a
little Palliated; for fear it become affected) he may return home, and be
justly reputed a most accomplished Cavalier.

To the other part of your Request, Sir, that I should give you some touches of
the Low Countries, and other places (besides the wrong I should do to those
perfect relations already extant) observing them at a time when my judgment was
not altogether so mature, and my self so much a Dutch Traveller, (as I have
before rendered you the Character) I had rather make an Apology for what I have
already, and promise yet to say, then proceed to depose allegations under mine
own hand, of the loss of so much precious time; and betray mine Ignorance.

Touching Italy, the States are so many, and their policy so different, that it
would cost me more leisure then I have now to spend, to reduce, and discipline
my scattered papers, and such indigested collections as require a more formal
Method, and indeed, a better pen.

Nor could your Servant in truth, have been possibly induced to discover thus
far his egregious imperfections; did not your Arguments carry in them some
specious reproach, as well as your Person so great an authority over me, when
you please to persuade your self the Advantage I must needs (say you) have had
by my extraordinary Relations to Persons of affair, as well as what I might
happly in this case gather lawfully out of such as have the latest written on
this Subject. So that however (and as indeed the very truth is) I was least of
all inquisitive how others were governed, finding it so difficult a Province to
Regulate my self, yet mine endeavor to pacify your importunity, and render you
a demonstration of mine inabilities to co^ply with any future expectation of
this Nature, has in fine, extorted this from me, as an entire resignation and
sacrifice of my reputation to that obedience which I professedly ow you, ever
more preferring the satisfaction of so noble a Friend, to the very promulgation
of my own shame and most visible imbecilities.

So then (to approach our purpose) seeing all those Nations (before spoken of)
and several governments seem at this instant Epoche of time, to conspire as it
were, and deferr to the present Grandezza of the French Empire, as likewise
considering in what Relation we of England are concerned, I have esteemed it
best meriting my reflections and your patience, to finish, and dress this
Piece, as judging it most worthy the consideration.

ERRATA's committed (in absence of the Author, almost the whole time this Book
was in Press) the ingenuous Reader is desired to reform, thus: Page 8 in marg.
for ate read late. page 10 in mar. r. Character. p. 27 r. Marshall. p. 32 l.
ult. a [,] betwixt Deuanes Tailles p. 34 lin. 9 a parenthelis at certain (etc.
page 16 r. Treasurers p. 36 r. of the Tailles p. 50 r. which is drivin of that
Trade, page 51. lin. 1. a parenthesis at (for etc p. 52 in mar. r. Cap. p 53 r.
whom we p. 56. after Legate dele [,] p 57 r. it will be etc p. 6^ r France. p
62. r. each Soldiers head. ibid. read in Garrison. p. 68. r. their hands. p. 69
r. but for that p 70 after State Affairs dele[:] Ibid. r. of far greater etc. p
73 r. poverty. p 74. r. objects p 78 r. are estimated. p. 81. dele or before
interests p. 87 for of strength r. a strength. p. 90 r. must of consequence
etc. with diverse ^o her misinterpunctations.

The STATE OF FRANCE.
I Will begin with a saying of Nich. Machiavels saying of France,
Machiavel: La Corona e li Regi di Francia sono hoggi piu richi, and piu
potenti che may. The Crown and Kings of France, are at this day more opulent
and mighty then ever they were; so that Prince of Politicians, a great while
since: and without controversy, had he any reason to give it out so in his
time, we have much more to affirm the same in these our days, wherein they
have emerged, as it were, the sole victorious and Flourishing Nation of Europe,
in whose bosom Nature has even built this goodly Kingdom.

That where a Sovereign Prince is able to maintain an absolute and
unarbritrary jurisdiction over his subjects, Victory and greatness the effect
of sovereign power and prudent Council.
managed with an active and prudent Council, there, and rarely elsewhere, does
victory and greatness bless and favor a Nation with any permanent success,
is a verity most demonstrable: whether we reflect on the present Age, From the
example of the Romans, Athenians.
or those frequent Examples of the Romans and Athenians, whose desertion and
abandoning of their Royal superiors fomented such confusion and distraction
amongst the Noblemen and Plebeians, as could never be afterward composed even
to the ultimate destruction and lamentable catastrophe of those most
illustrious Republics.

But in vain do we seek for other Instances of this great Truth, then the
present progression, and almost quotidian conquests of the now flourishing
Ottoman Family; which, and Ottomanians; though now a dangerous Truth.
as it is the most invincible upon earth, so must we needs acknowledge it to be
the most independent and absolute which these later times have likely produced
unto us. But for that this is a Verity which may now adays cost a man his
Teeth (to lose nothing else in the pursuit) I shall prosecute it no further
then may serve to illustrate what it is which has of late rendered so potent
and aggrandized this present aspiring, and formidable Monarchy, France; of
which I shall next essay to give a brief Character.

And now, as in description of Bodies natural, Dissections begin ever with the
supreme and more noble Regions; so in anatomising the Kingdom of France, which
consists of a Body Politic, I will commence with the Head, that is, the King;
The Kings of France absolute since Lewis the 11. his saying.
whom here I may call as Absolute, since Lewis the Eleventh has so long since
(to use his own expression) put them horse de page; that is, freed them from
that grand authority, which, till his time, the Parliament indeed exercised
over them; so that now the same reason which moved the late kings to depose or
translate Saint Denis their ancient Patron, S Denis the patron of F. deposed,
to gratify the B. Virgin.
and to put his Kingdom formally under the protection of the blessed Virgin,
is esteemed good reason, For with these words of course, the Secretary (it
seems) concluded the Arrest, whereby it was conferred, which gave many occasion
to reproach it.
and sufficient Logic for all his present Commands whatsoever: Car tell est
nostre bon plaisir: for such is our good will and pleasure.

Sic volo, sic jubeo, Stat pro Ratione Voluntas.
For so we will, so we command,
Our will does for our Reason stand.
The Monarchy of France (from a Democratick state) was founded Anno, The
Monarchy of Fr. when founded.
420. and has continued it self under three several Races; viz. of Merouese,
cont nued under three Races.
Charle mayn son of Pepin, and lastly, Hue-capet; from whom this Royal house of
Bourbon derives its succession, branched from Robert Earl of Clermont fourth
son of, Saint Lewis; so that the King at present Reigning is the sixty fifth
Monarch of France, without that any of the Feminine Sex has ordinarily
intervened; no woman intervening.
as they affirm at least, From the Salick law; being a mere pretense to
invalidate the title of England:
from a very inveterate Law, which they entitle the Salique, being indeed but a
mere Romance of their own feigning, a piece of legier de main, by which they
have so long pretended with the great shadow of Justice to elude and invalidate
the title of our former and ancient Kings of England, as to succession in the
right of their Mothers and Wives.

Touching that other Legend of their Saint Ampoule, as well as their Saint
Ampoule.
which in the time of Clouis first Christian King of France was (as they give
out) brought by an Angel from Heaven, and reserved at Rhemes for the Royal
Chrisme, we will give it leave to pass as a vulgar, yet not impolitick error,
or impertinent tradition: The Daughters of Fr. sometimes married to private
persons, yet reserve their Titles and Surnanes.
however, by the device aforesaid, the Daughters succeed not to the Crown,
some of them having oftentimes martied themselves unto private men, but still
reserved their Titles, together with the Surname of France, which it seems is
an honor permitted them during life, to show from what stock they originally
derived. And the Queens admitted to the Regency during the minority of the
Kings.
Notwithstanding this, the Queens of France, are usually admitted to the
Regency during the Minority of the King, which is at the age of fourteen years,
in choative; until which term, they with their counsel administer the public
Affairs of State, without equal or Control.

Concerning the Title or adjunct of the Kings of France, The title of the F.
Kings
which is most Christian, and eldest son of the Church, they make no small
boasts; for not having been a complement (as they name it) sent them from Rome,
as were those of other Kings; but descended, time out of Mind, from their own
virtue, merits, and Piety.

The Eldest son of France is during the life of his Father, of his eldest son.
called the Dauphin, from a stipulation (as it seems) made with Vmbert: who
bequeathed that Province conditionally to Philip de Valois.

To speak something particularly of this little-great Monarch Lewis the
fourteenth, born Sept. Birth and Character of the present King.
5. 1638 after the Queen his Mother had been above twenty years without Issue,
as his production was almost miraculous (not to repeat here any bold
disquisitions, with those who give themselves a liberty in these days, to speak
evil of dignities) so is his person a Character doubtless of no less Majesty,
and fair hopes; and certainly, if his Education be fitted to the prognostics
of his Nature, he cannot but emerge a Prince of singular Qualities and
egregious perfections: This I am willing to add from that Mechanic and
Artificial breeding, Artifice of the French Queen and public ministers in the
are kings Education.
which men conceive some of his progenitors and nearest relation received; that
so not being altogether so dextrous and knowing in King-craft, as their high
calling required, they might with less suspicion and more ease suffer
themselves to be governed, by the counsels and inclinations of such, whose
mystery and ambition it has ever been to continue by this means their
Greatness, and reinforce their Authority.

This present King has one only Brother, Duke of Anjou his Character.
who is called the Duke of Anjou: but more frequently distinguished by the name
of Monsieur; a child of an extraordinary prompt and ready spirit.

The other principal branches of this Royal Family, Duke of Orleans his
character.
are in the first place, Gaston Jean Baptist, the Kings Uncle, and Duke of
Orleans, Lieutenant General of the K. and Governor of Languedoc; the same, who
during so many years as his Brother was without offspring, had those fair
hopes of a Crown; which however his merit and abilities for such a jewel be
commonly disputed, to his no great advantage, certainly there is no man alive
in competition with him for his exquisite skill in Medailes, Topical memory,
and extraordinary knowledge in Plants: in both which faculties the most reputed
Antiquaries and greatest Botanists do (and that with reason) acknowledge him
both their Prince, and superior.

The Eldest daughter of this Duke, is Anne Marie D'orleans, Mademoiselle her
character.
particularly called Mademoiselle, Sans queue per eminentiam, as being the
first in praeeminence, and (after the Queen) greatest Lady in France, to give
whom the Epithetes of her great worth, were to spoil all her sex of their
Praises, and make her as much envied, as she is indeed justly to be admired.

The next in Blood and Rank is Louis de Bourbon the Prince of Condy, Prince of
Condy his descent and haracter.
the son of Henry de Bourbon, who (to so little purpose) was yet so
miraculously saved in the last bloody and inhumane Parisian Massacre. This
Prince is Grand Maistre of France, Governor of Bourgongne and Bery, descended
by a direct line masculine of Francois de Bourbon, second brother of Antonee of
Bourbon, Earl of Marle, afterward Duke of Vandosme, and King of Navarr, the
Father of Henry the Great, and of Charlot Catherine de la Trimouille, his
second Wife.

A Prince, whose merit in field, and successful Achievements, high
extraction, and extraordinary parts, prompt him sometimes to Enterprises beyond
the duty or praise of a Loyal subject; for their lives not a more Ambitious
young man upon earth, having outlived his imprisonment, once chased his enemy
the Cardinal; and not satisfied with this revenge (or what ever other
assurances the State can render him) puts fair by a fresh Rebellion to speed a
prosperous Traitor; or perfect his Infamy.

His brother is Armand de Bourbon Prince of Conty, Prince of Conty his
Character.
seemingly designed for the Church, but susceptible of any other advantage; a
prince of a weak fabric and constitution, but sound intellectuals. They have
likewise a Sister called, Mary, Wife to the Duke de Longuevill.

How the daughters of France have been disposed of into England, Spain, Savoy,
Mantoa, daughters of F. how disposed of.
etc. will be here superfluous to relate. The natural issue of the K of F. how
esteemed.


Touching the Natural issue of the Kings of France (who are ever in this kind
Country in very great Reputation and place, suitable to their birth, (by their
fathers side) I cannot learn that the late King had any; nay, it is reported,
he did so abhor Paliardize, that he scarce thought any other act to be sin in
comparison of it: contrary to the opinion of his wise Counselor and Cardinal
de Richlieu, who (as I have sometime heard) did use often to say, that a
Concubine was the honest man's recreation: a Priestly Aphorism, and spoken like
a Churchman.

Now to say something of the Soveraignety of the Kings of France, The
Sovereignty of the French Kingdom, how it became so absolute.
we will step a little back, and see by what means and degrees it became so
absolute.

Whilst the Nobility of France were in a manner free and independent Princes
(for such was heretofore the most part of them) how are Histories loud with
their carriages and deportment toward their Sovereigns? What checks upon every
occasion were they ready to give them? Witness those frequent impresses of a
certain Duke of Gienne, Bourbon, Bretagne, and others of the same rank; nor
has these later times exempted the Crown it felf from the dangerous
consequences which so many fortified Towns, Governments, and Places of
importance have so often menaced, and in effect notably brilding the head of
Majesty; until the defunct and great Cardinal de Richlieu found out a speedy
and fortunate expedient to reduce them to obedience, C. de Richlieu his
subtility in reducing it to that independency.
and that not only by subjugating the Posts themselves, which he performed by
strength; but likewise by so dexterously interessing the Gentry and refractory
Nobility, both by honors and blood, to the Court and his faction, which he did
by policy: In fine, he so handled the Cards, that the better sort of people
became tractable out of mere respect to their Relations; and the meaner by an
inevitable constraint, as well as the example of their Chiefs, were compelled
to a due submission; so that now the Sovereignty of France is become so
Independent and absolute, that albeit it do still retain a shadow of the
ancient form, yet it is, duly considered, a thing heavenly wide and different:
The Kings absolute power, both,
For in the Kings sole power it is to resolve of, and dissolve wars; by him
are the Laws interpreted; Letters of grace, of Naturality, and other Acts
given out; he it is imposes Taxes, from which (by a special decree) the
Church her self is not exempt; In Church and State.
nay, albeit the Pope his own holiness consent not; from all whose
Ecclesiastical Censures, Fulminations, and Anathema's he esteems himself also
privileged, and therefore nominates all Spiritual persons to their
preferments and dignities: Notwithstanding all this; the handsomer to disguise
and apparel these his volunties, and render them at the least specious
proceedures of Justice, Thou^h under color of Justice and
he permits none of his Edicts to pass as authentic until the Court of
Parliament (who is absolutely at his devotion) have first verified them; a
favor, this likewise out of complement too, Complement.
non tam necessitatis, quam humanitatis, as a Civilian (whose gloss it is)
has warily termed it. Parliament of France a name only.
So that as for the Parliaments of France (besides the name and Formality)
there is in truth, now no such thing in Nature; which together with their
ancient liberties, how deservedly they lost them, may be easily discovered in
their frequent Rebellions. In a word, he who would perfectly, and without more
ado understand by what Law and Rule the Kings of France impose on their
Vassals, may see it summarily, yet very legibly engraven by that forementioned
Cardinal, upon that excellent Artellery, which defend his Majesty's Citadell
at Haver de grace in Normandy; where you may run and read the best of Tenures,
as the times are now, in this Epigraph, -- RATIO VLTIMA REGVM, though for this
slavery of theirs, they may in some degree thank our Countrymen, By what means
discomposed.
whose forces being embowelled amongst them, hindered the Assembling of the
Three Estates (as they should have done:) whereupon the King being necessitated
to make his simple Edicts pass for Authentic Laws (although this power were
delivered to him during his wars only) was the reason why the people could
never recover or seize on them since. A Jewel this of too great value (some
think) to be entrusted to one person, upon what pretense or necessity soever.
To the King and his immediate Issue, in dignity and rank, are the Dukes and
Peers of France.

But first, It is to be observed, that the Princes of the Blood of this Kingdom
possess their Lands and Revenues under the name of Appanage, Their Estates
revertable to the Crown by Appanage.
and not as absolute Proprietaries; by which means all their Estates return
again to the Crown by the right of Reversion, to the end that the domaine abide
entire; and for other the like reasons: the Duke of Sully Henry Richmont,
heretofore called Bois Belle (on which there hangs a Story) only excepted.

We will pass over their original, which would be extreme difficult to
investigate, Their Original, Authority,
and proceed to their Authority, which was first established by Hughes Capet
and his descendants, who thereupon obliged them to hold their Lands of the
Crown immediately; by which means he also gained many that before were
disaffected to him; as the Earls of Flanders, the Archbishop of Rheims, and
diverse others, who had been at the first great opposers of this Usurper. Now of
these Peers, there were at the first Twelve only ordained: and Number.
to wit, six of the Spiritualty, and as many of the Temporalty: but at this day
their number is become indefinite, depending solely on the pleasure of the
King: And these are so named, not for that they pretend to any equality of
Dignity with their Sovereign, but their mutual parity in authority one amongst
another.

The Ecclesiastics were
1 The Archbishop and Duke of Rheims. Ecclesiastical,
2 The Bishop and Duke de Laon. 3 The BP and Duke de Langres. 4 The Bishop and
Earl of Beauvais. 5 The Bishop and Earl of Noyon. 6 The Bishop and Comte de
Cha^lons in Champagne.
The six Temporal were
The Dukes of 1 Bourgongne. Temporal.
The Dukes of 2 Normandy. The Dukes of 3 Guyenne. The Compts of 4 Toulouse.
Temporal.
The Compts of 5 Champagne. The Compts of 6 Flanders.
These twelve Peers composed likewise in times past the Parliament of France;
from whence it is to this day called (as once with us) the Court of Peers.
Their immunities and privileges.


Now, amongst sundry other Immunities and Privileges which they enjoy, this is
none of the least, that they can neither be disposed of, nor appealed in
judgment, but only in the Court of Parliament, where they have their Places as
the Princes of the Blood have: for before the Institution of that high Tribunal
in this Kingdom, the Peers were those which judged all Causes that were
ordinarily brought before the King; nor did he manage any thing else either in
War or Peace, without their special aid and assistance. Moreover, this
dignity to some has been granted for life, some personal, others only to the
Males descending, Women capable of Paireries.
some for ever; yea, and even women themselves are alike capable of Paireries.

It would take up too much time, should I trouble you with their several
Functions and Charges at the Coronation, Charges at the Coronation.
more fit for an Herald, than an Historian; this only is observable, that
albeit there were never so many Peers present, Those only who bare the Titles
of the six Spiritual, and six Temporal before noted, officiate at the
Ceremony; for which very purpose, those who are wanting, or extinct, have yet
their Representatives, who upon this occasion stand for, and supply their
Persons.

We have spoken now of the King and prime Nobility; The Crown of France, and
Officers belonging to it.
Let us next survey the Crown, and the prime Officers thereunto belonging.

The late Author of the Estat de France has divided them into three Ancients,
three Modern, and three Domestique; which truly, is not an unequal trichotomy:
But for that I intend to perfect what I have already established touching the
Court, I will commence with the three last in this partition, and so come to
those which more immediately appertain to the State afterward.

The Domestique Officers.
The three Domestic Officers and Charges are,
The Grand Maistre of France, The Grand Chambellan of Fr. The Grand Escuyer of
France.
The office of the Grand Maistre de France, The office of the Grand Maistre de
France.
is superintendent of the Kings house, and has absolute jurisdiction over all
the domestic officers and Provisions of his Majesty's table; and is a place of
so supreme Authority, that it is seldom conferred save upon one of the Princes
of the Blood; The Prince of Condy at present undeservedly inheriting his
fathers charge therein.

Under the Grand Maistre, Subordinate officers to him.
are many subordinate officers; as Maistres de Hostel, Butlers, Carvers,
Gentlemen waiters, and a whole Regiment of others, which are reduced to no
certain number: One thing is to be noted, ceremony at the ^eath of the king.
that when the King dies, the Grand Mastre breaks his staff of office, not
only as an emblem of the dismission of the rest, but likewise to show that
their charges are only dependant upon the life of the King, albeit afterward,
the successor for the most part re-establish them. The high Cha^berlain and
officers subordinate to him.


Next to the G. M. is the High Chamberlain of France, who has the supervisall
and disposition of all officers of the Kings Bedchamber and Wardrobe, gives or
denies access to his Majesty; under him there are four chief Gentlemen of the
Chamber, called, les quatres premiers gentiles hommes de la chamber du Roy; one
of these ever lies in the Kings Bedchamber, or very near to it. Under these are
the Masters of the Wardrobe, very lucrative places, to whom are subordinate the
Pages, etc.

Lastly, the Grand Escuyer, The Grand Escuyer, his authority.
or Master of the Horse, superintendent of the Premier Escuyer and other
Officers of the stables; his charge it is to march on Horseback before the
King, bearing a Sword and Belt, when his Majesty enters into any City; but in
those towns which have a Parliament he carries (in place thereof) a Casque of
blew velvet semeed with flower de lys, his own horse Caparisoned with the like.
He pretends also authority over the Masters of the Post, Offices of wonderful
gain; but it is now otherwise settled. The Master of the Horse has likewise
under him four and twenty Pages, who being the sons of prime Noblemen, are
educated in all such exercises as become their quality. The Grand Escuyer is at
present the Prince of Harcourt.

The Premier Escuyer (whom I have before mentioned) has particular care of the
Kings little Stable, Premier Escuyer.
where the coach horses are kept, as also over the Pages, who be no less then
fifty in number, and the Kings footmen; in effect he commands equally both the
great and little stables, so that the charge of the Premier Escuyer is not much
inferior to that of Master of the Horse himself. Secretaries of the Kings
Chamber and Cabinet


The King has likewise four Secretaries of his Chamber, and three of his
Cabinet: to speak truth, the multitude of those who style themselves
Secretaries to the King, is such, that what with the greatness of their
number, and inconsiderablenesse of most of their persons, the dignity of the
charge is extremely Eclipsed.

The Kings Bibliothecarius, The Bibliothecarius, Controlers Treasurers,
Mareshals des Loges.
Superintendant of the Movables of the Crown, Controlers, Treasurers,
Mareshals des Loges, la Captain de la Port, Capitain de la port, etc.
who has under him a guard of fifty Halberds, etc. and of other inferior
officers of all sorts under those above five hundred more, though never half of
them waiting at a time, and so not constantly eating at Court, Order, splendour,
and hospitality, of the English Court preferred.
as did heretofore most of the officers of the Kings of England; the splendour,
hospitality, order, and decent magnificence of whose service and attendance in
this kind, I am confident no Court of Europe has ever approached or
Paralleled.

There are likewise of Church men, The Great Almoner.
The Great Almoner of France, upon whom depend all of that Robe in the Court;
under him is also the Premier Almoner, Chaplains, Clerks, confessors.
and subordinate to him the several Chaplains, Clerks, Confessors.

Now before I proceed, something I should speak of those Royal officers which
superintend the Kings pleasures and ordinary Recreations, pertaining to the
Kings pleasure: as Veneur, Fau connier' etc.
such is the Grand Veneur and Fauconnier, the chief Hunter, and master of the
Game, places not only of very great honor, but also of Command; but a word of
them shall suffice, as offices rather of dignity then policy.

Touching the officers belonging in particular to the Queens household, Officers
belonging to the Queens in particular much like those of the Kings.
I shall herein likewise much contract my self, having so amply discoursed of
those which appertain unto the King; and the rather, in regard that in most of
the subalternate, they so much resemble the one the other: Except maids of
honor. Knights, etc
Yet she has differently one Dame d' Honneur, of Extraordinaries many more;
six Maids of Honor, twelve Chamber-maids called Filles de la Reyne: a Knight
of Honor diverse Masters, Cupbearers, and carvers; a chief Groom, under whom are
a great many pages and footmen: also Secretaries, Treasurers, etc. She has
likewise her Grand Aumosnier and a Premier Aumosnier, Ecclesiastics, and the
like, as before was said of the King.

And now having surveied the Principal officers of the Court, I know you are
ready to enquire of me where the Guard of this great Monarch is all this while?
I will but only mention the grand Prevost, The Grand prevost, his command.
at present the Mareshal d' Hoquencourt, whom I may not omit, and then I will
draw them forth in their several orders:

Not only the Grand Prevost is an office which extends it self over all the
officers (already mentioned) which belong to his Majesty's Household, but it
has likewise command absolute for six leagues round about Paris, and the
Court, every way, which is in truth a very great and noble jurisdiction;
besides he is judge of all causes, as well civills, as criminels, which are
incident in Court, and has for this Respect two Leutenans, Fifty Archers of
the Kings Guard, and several other officers: To him appertains the imposing
of the price of Bread, wine, flesh, fish, hay, Guard of the King of F.
oats, with sundry other very important privileges. But behold, here comes
the Guard, The first which present themselves are. 100 Gentlemen.


Le Cent Gentiles hommes, so named from their primary restriction (albeit now
double in number) they are called the Kings Company, and wait on him upon all
days of Ceremony, and like occasions. Musketeers on horsback
Next

The Musketeers on Horseback, which during the Regency have been dissolved,
but are now in great probability to be reestablished by the King: they were
composed of a hundred and fifty horsemen, chosen out from amongst the prime
youth of the chiefest families of France, and at the first instituted by Lewis
the thirteenth, Late Kings curiosity in choosing them.
father of this present King, who was so Physiognomically punctual in their
Election, that it is reported, he would admit none who were of a Red hair:
These waited on his Majesty in Person when ever he went abroad: but after
these, and the more Ancient far (who besides their immediate attendance on the
Person of the King we are to account as principal and solid Forces of the
State) are the Guards of French, Scotch, and Swisse: Of all whom, because those
who approach nearest to the person of his Majesty are the Scotch (by an
extraordinary and special good fortune (it seems) ever esteemed faithful to
this King and Crown only, for they are very near his person, and therefore
called the Guard de La Manch) I will first begin with them. Scotchguard or
guard de la Manch.
They consist of an hundred Archers, and four Exempts, who carry a staff or
Truncheon in stead of an halberd, with the rest, from whence they are so
denominated: These wait on the King, and observe him in all motions, joined
also with some other of his Majesty's guards, whereof some bear halberds, others
Carabines, whether the King be at Table, in Coach, or in his bedchamber. But
this guard of Scots, as sympathizing with the calamity of their Nation, is of
late years very much impaired, diverse French suborned in their places, Decay of
the Scots at present.
and many of their privileges lost and infringed, insomuch as it seems at
present to retain rather a name then a real Being.

The Swisse (for being likewise strangers) I produce in the next place: Guard
of Swisse.
The guard of this grim Nation, is composed of sixteen Companies: but of these
the more immediately attending as the Kings constant Guard are only an hundred
of them, who all wear the Kings cloth, marching which halberds on their
shoulders, drum always beating, and fife playing before his Majesty, when'ere
he stirs but into the City.

Lastly, the Guard of French, Guard of F. or Regiment des Guards.
called the Regiment des Guards, with the Swisse (composing two entire
Companies) guard all the avenues and precincts of the Kings Palace: They are
both of them two Regiments, whereof each is made up of 30 companies, consisting
of two hundred men a piece, if full; and Besides these there is also another
Company de Gens d' Arms, Gens d'arms Cavalry.
who are Cavalieres, and serve quarterly on horse back.

Thus is this great Monarch so environed with men of iron wherever he goes,
that one who should meet him abroad, though but upon the most ordinary
occasion, would suppose them an Army Marching rather to defend or invade some
distressed Province, then the private guard only of a Princes Person; so
careful have the Kings of France ever been to maintain this principle of
greatness and security the very quintessence certainly of true Polity, True
signatures of Absolute Monar hy.
and infalliblest signatures of an absolute jurisdiction.

It would now peradventure be thought proper here to speak next of the Militia,
having already placed the Guards, who indeed compose so considerable a part
thereof: but because we have now done with the court, Officers of State.
we will in the next cast our eyes upon the State, and afterward secure it.

But first a word or two touching the Kings Revenue, and Counsel; Ks Revenue
as being the very Nerves and Pillars of all earthly grandeur.

The ordinary Revenue of the Kings of France is extremely uncertain, albeit
vastly augmented within these late few years, and (besides from the Domains
formerly engaged to the Crown) are infinitely increased by the Douanes
Tailles, and other customs arising upon all manner of Merchandise; a treasure
altogether uncertain, and therefore imposed still as occasion requires, and at
the pleasure of the King. In order to this, are established several grand
Officers of whom in order first.

The Superintendent of the Finances, Superintendent des Finances, or Cuostumes.
equivalent to our quo^dam Lord High Treasurer, and officers depending on him.
This is he who does absolutely dispose of the Farms and Customs of the King,
has the charge and dispensation of the Revenues: In short, it is a place so
immensly lucrative, and prodigiously rich, (as being obnoxious to no Account)
that there is no man able to make a just estimate of their gain. Subordinate
to him are four other Intendents, Thres^tiers de l' Espargne.
and as many Treasurers de l' Espargne, whereof one of each wait every month,
and these are those great Financiers, who suck the very blood of the people;
for which (like the Jewish Publicani their Brethren) they are sufficiently
blasphemed by them upon all occasions.

The Tresoriers de l' Espargne (which are as Chancellours of the Exchequer have
an alternative office; because the number of them is not always certain,
places of that vast Revenue, that they are frequently sold at no less then a
million of livers: for this the Espargne is resembled to the Ocean sea, into
which, like so many rivers, all the other Receipts, general and particular, of
the Kings Revenue, do praecipitate themselves, and pay their tribute. From
hence all other the Treasures, as well ordinary as extraordinary, of the Wars,
Generals of the Provinces, Maritime Officers, Payers of Public rents, Courts,
etc. receive money, and advance for their several and respective distributions.

There are likewise besides these, the Treasurers of the Parties Casuelles, who
are four. The Treasurers of the parties Casuelles.
These have charge to receive all moneys proceeding from the sale of offices,
(which is a gain here openly avowed.) But that which much countervails the
inconvenience of their casualties, unto which they are incident, is, that
though a man deposit a vast sum, and even exhaust himself for the purchase,
they are yet hereditary, Casual Offices hereditary even to Widows, and how.
so that even the Widow of the defunct, may delegate it to a Deputy, or Proxy,
the King only reserving a small annual rent, which they call La Paulet; in
default of which payment, or that the person die without having resigned his
office. These Treasurers dispose of it to the Kings use and benefit.

The Controuler General des Finances, Comptrollers General of the Customs.
his office it is to register all receipts and expenses; but for the present,
it remains extinct.

These Treasurers are distributed into Generalities or Buraux Bureaux and
Generalties
(so called from a stuff of that name which covers the table, Bureaux and
Generalties.
as our Exchequer) the Generalties are twenty two great Cities, and each of
those have their general and particular Receivers, which last bring the moneys
of Tailles (which certain elected officers impose or assesse upon the Parishes)
unto the respective Collectors who receive it: How the taxes are collected.
and these at Paris render it into the Office aforesaid.

The ancient Kings of France had other ways then these to subsist, Kings of
France had other ways of subsisting till King Pepin.
till Pepin and some later Princes of the third Line, so much augmented the
Domaine of the Crown; as by Appanages, which through defect of Issue Male now
revert unto it; also by possession of Lands and Seigniories annexed to the
Crown, by Rents, Fifts, and other rights proceeding from Fiefs. Impositions by
Edicts.
By Impositions and dues which are payable by Edicts. By a number of Lands who
owe faith, and do homage to the Prince. Droict d' Aubaine, death of strangers,
Bastardy, Vacancy through death, First Fruits and dues from Ecclesiastics.
By the Droct d' Aubaine, by which the goods of strangers dying in France, most
inhospitality escheat to the King; putting (in this respect) no difference
between them, and Bastards unnaturalized. By the goods vacant through death,
etc. By Annates or First fruits, Dues from certain Archbishopricks and
Bishoprics, to the number of 30, and more: as likewise innumerable other
ways, which here it were too long to reckon up.

Nor can the Domain be otherwise alienated, then (as already has been said) in
case of Appanages: The other upon some extraordinary and desperate necessity,
as in occasion of war, yet then also but upon condition of Redemption, and
that they be both first verified in Parliament. But these it seems of late, not
sufficing the public expenses of so great a Prince and his many Armies; Those
Tailles and subsidiary assistances before mentioned, have been more frequently
levied; The ordinary entertainment of the Soldiery.
yea now (since Charles the seventh) made the Ordinary Entertainment of the
Soldiery. Notwithstanding the Gentry and Nobility (for these terms are
coincident and convertible in France) Churchmen, Gentry and Clergy exempt of
Taxes.
and their dependants are exempt from these contributions; an immunity which
they enjoy as a distinction, which ours of the same quality in England never so
much as tasted off; so that (amongst us) if a person be not Rich, let him be
never so well borne, Nobility no advantage in England.
the Peasant is as good a man every whit for any privilege which the other
enjoys above him; through which defect, as there remains little encouragement
and reward for ancient virtue or future industry, so must it needs, in time
both utterly confound, and degenerate the race of the most illustrious
Families, which have yet hitherto remained.

The Aides (which I therefore the rather mention, The Aid^s, what, and when
instituted.
because it was instituted upon occasion of King John's imprisonment in
England) is now become a perpetual and general Tax upon all sorts of
Commodities whatever, All commodities taxable in France, wheat only exempted.
excepting wheat only, which is the sole individual in all France free from any
Impost.

But that which seasons all the rest, and is indeed a principal ingredient to
the Kings Vast revenue, is the Gabels upon Salt; Gabels upon Salt.
which yields this Monarch more then Twenty Millions of Livers: for which
respect there are diverse officers appertaining thereto, some whereof have power
to constrain men to buy a certain quantity of the King whether they will or no;
Rigor of exacting.
a rigor, some interpret extremely approaching the very height of extortion:
some particular places yet of the Kingdom, (as toward the Frontiers, and sea
towns) are exempted, and have their salt quit of any impost at all.

These are in fine the most principal quarries from whence this Monarch diggs
forth and fetches his treasure and revenue, K. of Frances's Revenue 14 millions
sterling.
which those who are yet thought to have made a favorable Audite, do not blush
to affirm, ammounts unto more then an hundred and forty Millions of Livers,
which is about fourteen Millions of our money: nay some, that in Cardinal
Richlieus time, it was brought to an hundred and fifty: which portentous and
monstrous Treasure, together with the mannagement and manner of exacting it,
might (as some think) serve a little to extenuate that which was yet thought a
proportion too large for a most excellent prince, whose whole Revenue could
never yet be stretched to above one Million sterling in all, viis et modis.
Which is some thirteen short of that, which the Kings of France at present
enjoy.

Now 'ere we define the more distinct Ministers of State, Supreme counsels of
France.
we will first speak severally of the supreme Counsels which are two: The chief
is called the secret or (more frequently) le Conseil d'en hault, that is, Le
Counsel d'en hault, of this counsel are the Duke of Orleans, Prince of Conde;
The Cardinal and 4 principal Secretaries of State.
(after our old English style) the Cabinet Counsel; because it is commonly held
in the Kings Bedchamber: for which respect you may reasonably imagine it to be
composed but of few, and those the prime and most illustrious persons of charge
and title in the Kingdom: so that (according to the nature of affairs) it is
sometimes reduced unto two or three only: but upon intelligences and
transactions of State, as those which concern matter of war, foreign
Alliances, etc. Then there is a fuller number of other Ministers required to be
present.

The other Conseil is termed le Conseil d'Estat and prive where, The counsel of
State.
when the King himself sits not, the Precedence is given to the first Prince of
the Blood then present, and in default of their absence, to the Chancelour,
who, together with the Treasurer or Superintendent, has principal authority in
all those Courts I have, or shall speak of; and this Court (besides the above
named who are chief) is composed of many Counselors of State, who are all
persons of great merit, and commonly such as have given signal testimonies of
their abilities and address by their long services, as Ambassadors and Orators
to foreign Princes; or officers in other jurisdictions and Counsels: also to
this Court appertain four Secretaries that serve quarterly: eighteen Maistres
de Requests, who (according to the nature of the affair) with the Intendents,
make the Reports, having first resolved the business amongst themselves,
according to which the Arrest is sometimes given.

In this Counsel pass all matters belonging either to War or Peace, and all
other concernements of the Crown whatever; for here they determine
definitively, which judgment so passed, is termed an Arrest or Act of Council;
howbeit, in causes of high consequence they are often revoked both from this
Tribunal (yea, and the Parliament it self also) unto the Counseil d'-en-hault
although a Counsel but of a later Initiation. Branches from this are also the
Counsel of the Finances or Customs, called the Council of direction; The
Counsel of direction.
where all the affairs of the Exchequer are disposed: likewise the Chancellor
holds another Counsel, The Counsel of Parties.
called the Counseil des parties, wherein the Processes of particular parties
and Recusations have their proper hearing; and to this also belong quarterly
Secretaries apart.

Now the manner of proceeding in these Courts goes according to the disposition
of the several affairs, The manner of proceeding in these Courts.
by the Reports made ready, reformed and first signed, which is by them, then
by the Chancellor if it be at the counsel of parties; if at the Finances, by
the Duke of Orleans, Monsr, the Prince, and Superintendents, who deliver them
to the Grefier or Clerk, by whom they are to be allowed, that is paragraphed in
Parchment, to which they subjoyne a commission which is sealed by the
chancellor, if they are to be immediately executed. Other Arrests and Acts of
Counsel are executed by an usher or Sergaent of the Counsel, who wears a chain
of Gold about his neck, with a Medail pendent, wherein there is impressed the
Kings picture. Grand Conseil.


There is likewise another Council, called the Grand conseil, in which also
the Chancellor presides virtually, though seldom present in person; and this is
Composed of four Presidents, and a hundred and fifty Counselors, who serve by
Semester: and this court is chiefly, and indeed only conversant in affairs
Ecclesiastical, such as concern Bishoprics, Priories, Hospitals, etc.
collation and presentation to Benefices in the jurisdiction either of King or
Pope within this Realm; and therefore here is the Kings Advocate, and proctor
General continually attending.

And now (returning to our former division) we may remember that the more
ancient officers of the Crown were likewise three: viz. The Connestable, the
Marshall and the Chancellor: I shall forbear a while to speak much of the two
first, till I come to treat particularly concerning matters of war: Officers
of State and Justice. Chancelour of France.
we are now in affairs of State and Justice, wherein this last in our division
as chief and sovereign; his office is to dispatch and modifie all the Graces
and gifts of the King, is keeper of the Great seal, with which he confirms
all the Ordinances, Edicts, declarations and pleasure of his Majesty; for which
respect he has in Parliament his seat on the left hand of the King, when he is
there present. But there are no days properly designed for sealing, that
wholly depending upon the will of the Chancellor. Days and manner of Sealing.
The manner thereof is this: The chancellor sits at the middle of a large
Table, upon which is placed a cabinet or coffer (wherein there is locked all
the public seals of France) the key of which he carries about his neck: at the
End of this Table are two Masters of Requests, with whom he may advise in case
the affair require it; and over against the Chancellor one of the four
Referendaries of France who reads all the Letters, Arrests, and other
expeditions, which if approved, are accommodated with Yellow wax fitting and
ready for the seal, and so put up into a box to be controuled by the Kings
Secretaries, who must first allow and Paragraph them, and then they are sealed:
for Expedition of highest consequence, as Treaties, Edicts, Abolitions, etc. in
green wax: but the seals of Dauphine are in red: Moreover the character of the
Chancellor is esteemed so sacred and Inviolable, that it remains altogether
indeleble but by death only; Guard des sceaux.
yet notwithstanding upon decadency, or disgrace with the King, there is
commonly one called Guard des Sceaux, who executes his charg and has also the
same authority; for the Seals may be taken away at his Majesty's pleasure, but
not the Chancelorship, which as it is never to dye, but with his Person, so may
he not put on Mourning for the King himself, his Father or Mother if any of
them decease, as being insensible of all other Relations, and considerations
besides the sole interest of the People: his habit is a Robe of black Velvet
doubled, or lined with Crimson plush: before him go two Searjeants, with
chains of Gold, who bear 2 rich maces of gold on their shoulders.

The Secretaries of State and commands of the King are four in number;
Secretaries of State.
whose functions, for being different, deserve to be mentioned in the next
place. One of these Secretaries is for Expeditions altogether foreign: one for
affairs Ecclesiastical and benefices; a third for matters only appertaining
to the Kings house, and the fourth, serves for affairs and concernements of
war; and thus have they the whole Kingdom so cantoniz'd betwixt them, that upon
all particular Exigences of the Provinces, every one knows his division: In
Court and presence of the King, they wait alternatively by Months; for he uses
them likewise in affairs of the cabinet, which for not being matter of State,
he will not have made known or divulged.

Lastly, Masters of Requests.
The Masters of Request (of whom there are at present no less then seventy)
are as it were Assessors of the Chancellor, and compose the body of the Court
of Parliament, (of which we shall shortly speak) and have their Seats next to
the Counselors, but not exceeding four at a time. In absence of the
Presidents, they preside also in many other Judicatures, and Bailliages: these
make report and sign the Request of Justice, and sometimes the affairs of the
Exchequer: they are likewise many times chosen for Extraordinary Embassades, as
well as Commissioners for his Majesty in the Cities and Provinces, where they
judge and determine upon all affairs of the Crown with most absolute power and
authority.

The rest of the Officers more immediately belonging to the Kings Revenue I
have touched at large already. I come now to the Parliaments of France, of whom
there has hitherto been so much talk.

The Justice of France (in the equal dispensation whereof should be the glory
and diadem of a Prince in Peace, Parliament of France,
as is the multitude of people his visible strength in war) is doubtless very
good, but wonderfully ill executed; which happens through the sordid corruption
of such as dispense it for money and favor, without which there is nothing to
be hoped for in this Kingdom: and good reason there should be some gain made
of that which the dividers thereof buy so dear, purchasing their places and
offices at such excessive charges, that they are constrained to fell their
Virtue to him who bidds most for it. But this is not (I suppose) the only
Monopoly which drives that trade. by whom established.


Philip the Fair established the Parliament of Paris; for before it was
Ambulatory, and only observed the motion of the King) whither both
Ecclesiastics and seculars repaired. As it is now constituted, it is composed
of Five houses or chambers: La Grand Chamber has twenty five Counselors, La
grand chamber des Enquests.
who take cognizance of affairs of highest Consequence: and of five Chambres
des Enquests, to either of which there is also about the same number of
Counselors: likewise two other Chambers, one whereof is called La Tournelle,
La Tournelle.
wherein are pleaded only matters Criminal, composed of two Counselors of
the Grand Chamber, and of two of every Chamber des Enquests. The Chamber del'
Edict that is of the Edict of Nantes, which only touches the affairs of the
Protestants, and is also composed of two Counselors, out of each of the six
other Chambers, who are nominated every second year by the Chancellor and the
Protestant deputy General. De l' Ed^ct for the Protestan^s P^esident au
Mort^er. because there stands a cup ^ade in fashion of a mo^^er over the
mantling of the Arms in lieu of a wreath and helmet.


In the great Chamber presideth the President au Mortier, who presents the
ancient Dukes and Peers: these presidents are Counselors of State the first
day of their reception, and have about their neck an hood of velvet, lined with
furr, from whence some affirm they derive their name: they are now in number
seven or eight, having of late been increased.

To all the other Chambers of Parliament there are likewise Presidents:
Presidents, Conseillers, Advocats and ^rocteurs.
viz. two at the Tournelle, and one at the Edict: To each Chamber des Enquests
are two, but these last for being only commissionated Counselors, have no
places as presidents in full assemblies of Parliament. Besides presidents and
Counselors; there is moreover a Procureur, and two Advocates General, who
intervene in all Causes which concern either the King or State: besides an
Infinity of other Advocates who are rather to count by m^^titudes then numbers
established, only the proctors have of late years been reduced to about 600.

There is likewise a Greffier en chef, or clerk of the Parliament, Clerk of the
pa^lia^e^t.
one of the most luerative charges of France, as esteemed to be no less worth
then an 100 Crowns of Gold a day: This office having now successively remained
in the family of Monsieur, du Tillet near three hundred years, we could not
pass his name in silence; Lastly, of Commises, Searjeants, Vshers, and under
officers there are in very great numbers.

All the Officers of Parliament wear a long Gown, Rob^rs of the Officers of
Parlia^.
and square cap, but the Presidents au Mortier and Counselors, upon solemn
occasions, put on Robes of scarlet, which are trimmed with black velvet.

The Solemn Arrests or Acts of Parliament are pronounced four times the year:
Arrests of Parl. when pronounced.
viz. on Christmas Eves eve, on the Tuesday before Easter, on Whitson Eves eve,
and the seventh day of Sept. till which, from the morrow after the feast of St
Martine it continues: but the Parliament does not open until such time as the
King renews their Commission.

there are besides Paris, Cities besides Paris, that have parliaments
these nine Cities which have Parliaments, 1 Toulouse. 2 Rouen. 3 Bourdeaux. 4
Dijon. 5 Grenoble. 6 Aix. 7 Rheims. 8 Pau. 9 Mets.


Whose Constitution and Composition are alike to that of Paris, In what they
differ from the Par. of Paris.
except that of Mets and Rouen, whose President and Counselors of late serve
semestraly, that is half during one six months, and half the other: some of
the Parliaments also have no chamber of Edict, as Rheims, and Dijon, so that
the Protestants of those parts repair to Paris to plead; and in Toulouse,
Bordeaux, and Grenoble, for default thereof, those of the Religion have
established them Chambers Miparties, that is, of equal numbers of Romanists;
nor have the other Parliaments so many chambers of Enquests, as not (in truth)
needing them

Likewise this Prerogative has the Parliament of Paris, Prerogative of the P.
of Paris.
that it has the sole honor to be called the Court of Peers; for here only
can they of right be judged: yet this privilege was not able to protect them,
at what time the late great Cardinal de Richlieu made bold to infringe it, when
it served to his purpose.

In all these Parliaments aforesaid the Advocates plead covered, How the
Advocates and proctors plead.
but the Prectors both bareheaded and kneeling.

Moreover, the business of the Parliament of Paris, besides the verifying of
the Kings Edicts, Ordinances, and letters Patents (as has been already
touched) is the dispensing of all other Justice Civil and Criminal: here the
Appanages of the crown are regulated, the erection of new dignities,
Modification of the Popes Legates, Commissions, procedures to Banishment,
Letters of naturalty, Pardons and the like supreme transactions of State have
their genuine and natural source.

The Bishops in Parliament have right of place, Bishops and ecclesiastics in
Parliament have place, no deliberative Voice, except B. of Paris, and abbot of
St. Denis.
but no deliberative Voice, except only the Archbishop of Paris, and Abbot of
Saint Denis. Thus much shall suffice to have been spoken touching the
Parliaments.

The Chamber of compts (which comes next in order) is a jurisdiction and Court
apart, Chamber of compts, its high authority and number.
that concerns and judges the account of all the Receivers, Treasurers and
officers paid into, or received out of he Kings Exchequers, for which cause all
their Letters, Edicts, Ordinances, etc. are read, registered, and verified. Here
it is that homage for Feifs moving from the Crown are acknowledged. It has
belonging to it ten Presidents, Monsieur Nicolas, who is the first (having from
Father to Son conserved this charge near two hundred years in his Family) has
refused for his charge 1400000 Livers, which the late D'Emery offered him for
it. To it also appertains seventy Maistres des compts, eighty Auditors: in
fine, it is a Court of that high Authority, that it has sometimes stood even
in competition with the Parliament it self. There are eight of these in France.
Chambers des Requests du Palais.
Besides this Court, there are likewise the two Chambres des Requests du
Palais, where is pleaded the Privilege of the Royal offices, and household;
and therefore they consist of Counselors of parliament, etc.

The Cour des Monnoyes composed of three Presidents, Cour des Monnoyes.
twenty four Conseillers, these concern the Mint in all particulars. Mint.


Also the Admiralty, Admiralty and Table de Marbre.
called the Table de Marbre instituted for Maritime affairs. And lastly,

Les Eaux and Forests, Waters and Forests.
with some other inferior courts, whereof we have already sufficiently spoken
elsewhere.

And so I am come out of Westminster Hall to the other two of our three ancient
Officers, viz. the Connestable and Mareschall of France, being the last of our
division and will naturally lead us to discourse something of the Militia.

The Connestable, Military officers, and first the Connest able of F.
albeit an office, to a greater then which the King himself can promote no
subject, yet for that it is not a charge which is always in being, but upon
extraordinary Emergencies and grand occasions, will be needless to say more of
it, then that this Office holds rank immediately after the Princes of the
blood; The D. of Orleans is as it were Connestable now.
and in Parliament it is before the Dukes and Pairs: The Connestable therefore
is chief, superior, and Generalissimo over the Armies of France, for which
respect he has his jurisdiction in the Court of the Table de Marbre; but at
this day the Mareschals supplying this high office (although properly speaking,
but his Lieutenants) come next to be spoken of. Mareschals de Fr.


The Mareschals de France, or rather, so many Generals, are the only persons
of Enterprise and Action in their Armies, both at home and abroad; being
commonly men who are elevated to those Charges, purely by their own Valor and
Demerits: so that as their number is indeterminate, so there is no Soldier, of
what condition soever, but may possibly by his virtue aspire to this
preferment. I said even now, that their Jurisdiction did much resemble that of
the Connestables; nor can they be divested of this honor during their lives.
Before these Mareschals are determined all matters of private quarrels and
defies incident to the Noblesse; for which cause they have their Provosts or
Lieutenants in all the greatest Cities of the Kingdom. They bear in their
Achievements a Truncheon Salterwise azure, semeed with Flowr de lyces or.

Finally, Last divisio^
(which is the last part of our division) the three Modern Offices of the
Crown, viz.

1. The Admiral of the French. 2. Le Colonel de l' Infanterie. 3. Le Grand
Maistre de l'Artillerie.
In the first place the Admiral, (who holds likewise his place during life) is
General of all the Kings forces by sea, Admiral.
and under him are all the Marine jurisdictions. The charge has in times past
been divided unto more, both Guyenne and Provence having enjoyed theirs apart:
but the defunct Cardinal de Richlieu (who has left this high office to his
Nephew) united them all under one: his jurisdiction also is at the Table de
Marbre, where (for being but subalternate judges) their places in Parliament is
at the lower end. The charge is now in the person of the Queen Regent, some
say, the Duke of Vendosme: likewise the General des Galeres has here his
seat, General des Galeres.
which is a place of very notable gain and Authority on the coasts of the
Mediterranean seas, where his Majesty's Galleys do both harbor and ride.
Colonel of the Infantry


Next is the Colonel of the French Infantery, which is a charge one of the
most considerable in all respects, of France, especially for Gain, receiving
eight solz every Muster for every soldiers head his authority being generally
over all the French-foot, Masters of the Camp.
and has for his Lieutenant Colonels the Maistres de Camp: under his name
issue all Ordinances of War.

There is likewise a Colonel General des Suisses, Colonel General des Suisses
who has jurisdiction over all those Mercenaries, as well those of the Kings
Guard, as those who serve in the field and in the Garrison; of which there are
constantly about eight thousand in this Dominion.

Last of all, Grand Maistre de l'Artill^r^e.
the Grand Maistre de l'Artillerie, which is a charge equal with a Mareschall
of France: under his tuition and conduct is the Arsenall of Paris, all the
Cannon and Ammunition of war in the Kingdom, for which cause he has his
Lieutenants, Captains, and other officers belonging to the Carriages in great
number: besides all this, he has the management of five millions of Livers,
together with the arbitrary disposition of above eight hundred Officers; of all
which he is obliged to no particular account. Grand pricurde France Mr. of the
Religion of Malta.


There is likewise the Grand Prieur de France, which for being a quality of
high reputation is not to be pretermitted. The Mastership of the Religion and
Order of Malta for the French being not less worth then 10000 pounds yearly:
his ordinary Residence is at the Temple, a quarter in the town of Paris as is
that of ours in London so called. Counsel of War.


The Council of War is commonly held in the Palace of the Duke of Orleans, as
being Lieutenant General of all the Kings Forces, and therefore little remote
(as has been said) from the dignity and charge of high Connestable. Thus we
have done with the Courts and Officers of France: now we will take a Prospect
of the Forces.

The King of France has commonly four Armies in field: Constant armies of Fr.
viz. that of Flanders, of Germany, of Italy, and that of Catalogna; wherein
the King, Queen, Monsieur, the Duke of Anjou, the Duke of Orleans, Princes of
the Blood, and Mareschals of France have their several and individual
Companies, whose Lieutenants enjoy many singular precedencies above other
Officers of the Armies: All these consist of well armed horse.

The light horse are at present commanded by the Master of the Camp. Light
horse and other forces under continual pay.
The King has commonly under pay about a hundred and forty Cornets of cavalry
distributed into 56 Regiments, besides of Strangers twelve: Of Infantry the
King has two hundred and ten, whereof some Regiments have thirty Companies,
and every company paid for eighty men effective. Moreover, his Majesty has
diverse Regiments of strangers, whereof enough has been said in the beginning.

The Armada Naval may be composed of about twenty men of War, and as many
Galleys; Armada Naval.
I have showed you before how these Forces are paid, and therefore we will
proceed to the Governors of the Provinces, as being likewise Men of Arms.

The Governors of Provinces have their Commissions (which are simple and
depending on the pleasure of the King) verified in Parliament, Governors of
prov^nces, cities and sorts.
where they have their seats next after the premiers presidents: they are in
some degree equivalent to our Lieutenants of the shire, but exercise a much
more vigorous power, which is yet restrained to matters of Arms; for in other
justice they meddle not at all. So likewise the Governors of Cities,
Fortresses, and places of strength, all which are chosen of persons of Blood,
Valor and merit. But before we altogether quit this subject of Arms, it will
not be impertinent to say something here of the order of Knighthood in France.

I shall not much amuse you with those orders which are so far antiquated,
Orders of Chevalrie in France.
that even the Heralds themselves can scarcely render us any certain account:
Such is that which is named de la Genette, Instituted by Charles Martel, or the
Order de l'Estoile by King John, the Order of the Croisant, Porc Espic, nor
much concerning the order of Saint Michael it self, Instituted 1469 by Lewis
the eleventh.
although not many ages since first instituted, and for a long while, the
principal Order in the Kingdom; composed but of 36, because (as the manner of
this Nation is to be as soon weary of their new invenons, as children are of
Rattles) they begin to have this Order already in contempt, Order de S. Michael.
albeit the chain and pendent badg be commonly reserved in the Coat Armours,
together with that which is now in Vogue, and next ensues. Order du S. Esprit.
Institution.


L'Ordre du S. Esprit was instituted on new years Day, Anno 1579, by Henry the
third, and honored with that name, because he was both born, and afterward
Elected King of Polonia on Whitsonday: This Prince restrained the number also
to thirty six; but that is likewise as indefinite as it pleases the King:
however, it remains yet the Order of greatest esteem, and therefore let us
look a while upon the Ceremonies of the Inauguration.

The day of their Reception they appear all in Cloth of silver, Reception.
their cloaks (especially the capes) cut a l'antique, of black velvet; which
they put off and change, to receive on them a robe of green Velvet full of
Embroydred tongues of fire: then remaining on their knees, the King hands
between the palms of his own, striking them lightly upon the shoulder, and
kisses their Cheek.

Ordinarily they wear a Flame, Order.
or Orange color Cross of velvet upon the left side of their cloakes, in the
midst whereof is embosted a dove of silver, and about it a glory of Rays, like
that which our Knights of the Garter in England do wear, as having first
assumed that mode from the French, albeit for Antiquity of the Order, ours
stands much before it.

About their bodies likewise they wear a blew ribbon which of late they have
watered, and at the end of that a Cross of Gold in the midst whereof there is
ennamailed a White Dove: and this is all which I find observable.

We have been hitherto very silent of the State Ecclesiastic in particular,
State Hierarchical.
which although it come last in Order, yet was it one of the first in mine
intention, as consisting of Persons who besides their qualities both for
Extraction and Letters, possess alone one third part of the total Revenue of
France.

The Arch Bishops of this kingdom are in number fifteen, Archbishops and
Bishops.
whereof he of Lions is the Primate and Metropolitan, and some of these be
Peers. Bishoprics, two hundred and one.

Of this Hierarchy is composed l' Eglise Gallicane, L'Eglise Gallicane.
which by the concordats made with the Pope, has sundry rights and privileges
extraordinary, which for that they are not much incident to our discourse, we
will purposely omit, and content our selves with what has been briefly spoken.

Having thus, as I was able, finished my design and your request, with what
succinctnesse and perspicuity I might (for herein I am obliged to some
Relations, more discourses, and a little experience) I will make bold (the
better to let you understand the full nature of things as they subsist and are
governed at present) to reassume the Argument, and deliver you the best and
more solid opinions of men concerning the particulars already spoken of.

The Government of France does at present rather totter then stand upon the
late great Cardinals substruction; Present Government of France.
Q. Regent.
the Queen Regent having ever since his decease continued in the principal
ministry of State affairs: Card. Mazatini.
Her favorite Mazarini, a person of (to speak with the world) far greater
fortune, then either extraction or virtue; however he has steered this great
vessel of Monarchy a long time, and that amidst so many storms, and in such
foul weather, as whether his craft or courage exceeds it is not yet decided:
certain it is, that as he has longer held in, then by some wise men it was
judged he could, so some late actions of his (interpreted to have been
ungrateful enough) make othersdaily confident of his absolute ruin: and in
truth, he does play so hazardous a game at present, that as the hand is
universally turned, it were great odds to lay on Confusions side, so prodigious
a fatality now threatening Princes, that if France compose not suddenly, these
calamities I am confident, will epidemically visit Europe for a time. And why
it should be that this active Nation have endured so many Strangers to govern
them thus in chief, Government by strangers incident to this monarchy.
I am much to seek for a reason, when I steadily behold the universal
promptness of the Noblesse; unless peradventure to avoid emulation at Court
'twixt so many greater Princes and Subjects, as might else pretend to highest
Authority, they rather submit themselves to the meanest Alien. But this by way
of gloss and species, not opinion. The subtle have ever been too hard for the
simple: and though the law deny women succession to the Crown, yet the Fate of
the kingdom, and addresses of the sex, furnished them a title which has fully
recompensed for that injury.

The Noblesse of France comprehend the Gentry, Noblesse of France, and Gentry
the same thing.
under one and the same common term; nor indeed is there in any Kingdom (save
ours only) that severe distinction of Minores and Majores amongst the
Nobility: a difference which some think neither suits with true policy or
justice. But quitting this decision to whom it belongs, we are (as I said) in
this Dominion to take, the Noblesse (that is the Gentry) for the sole visible
body, and consequently the Plebeians of a far more vile, Plebeians, their
misery.
and naturally slavish genius, then they really are in any part of Christendom
besides; which meannesse of spirit I easily conjecture to have been long since
contracted from the over severity and liberty of their Superiors; their
incomparable paucity, and excessive oppression.

Other immunities, besides the fore rehearsed, which the Nobless enjoy in
France, is, that with their Pensions and Governments, they are likewise
exempted from all Contributions upon their own demains; which does so far
oblige them to their Prince, that there are none which render him such real and
considerable service, upon all urgent and brisk occasions, Service the Nob^lity
of France ^^eld their Prince. Ban and Ar^er^Ban.
as do the Gentry; especially, at what time the Ban and Arrier-Ban be summoned
to their several assignations: And to this Heroique life of the Field,
Chevalry, t^ei^ general profession.
they are generally addicted, as being thereto excellently disciplined from
their very Cradles; by which means, certainly they become the best esteemed,
and most adroict Cavalry of Europe; nor does this early education of them
abroad, prejudice the State at home; for being kept, and dissevered from
projecting of commotion in the Country, Rebellions for the most part
improsperous in France; and why?
their Rebellions have been for the most part, though frequent, yet
improsperous, so considerable a party ever remaining with the Prince, whose
personal presence with them in the Field, gives an extraordinary life, and
loyalty to their Actions.

As touching the Plebeians or Roturiers of France; Commons, their litigious
nature in France.
truly I esteem them for the most miserable object, that one may likely behold
upon the face of the Earth; especially, those which live toward the Frontiers,
so immeasurably exhausted by Taxations, Gabels, Impositions, Spoils, and
Contributions, unto which they are generally obnoxious: The rest of the two
first Estates, together with all their dependants, living only upon their
Revenues, remain free and exempt; but that which adds not a little to their
Ruin, is (for all this) their extraordinary litigious nature, and vindicative
disposition, especially those of Normandy, Bretagne, Gascogny, and Provence; so
that, what with the premises, delay of their Process, and the abominable
corruption of Justice, this rank of people seldom or never arrive to any
considerable Fortune or Competency, by their own wit or industry, as do so many
of our Yeomen and Farmers in England. Farmers in England.
By these means also, their spirits becoming so abjectly debased, they are not
able to afford their Prince that ready service in matter of Arms, as indeed
their multitudes and necessities, both promise and require: To supply which
defect, in all Expeditions of Consequence, the King makes use of the Gascons
and Biscaians, Auxiliaries in the French Armies.
who being bred about the Confines and Frontiers of Spain, are much the better
Soldiers, and esteemed for the best Infantry of France; as also of the Dutch,
Scotch, Irish, Italian, and others, in whom, together with the Suisse (a most
principal Ingredient) consists their greatest Foot confidence; the more
considerable part, whereof being mercenary Auxiliaries, and very frequently
left in great arrears, might peradventure administer to Politicians sufficient
cause of suspicion and discourse; but the event having hitherto, for many ages
past, been nothing prejudicial, takes away any farther occasion of dispute.

The People of Trade and Mechanics, Mechaniques of France.
are nothing so contemptible as the commonsort, of whom we have spoken a
little; many of them living very decently and handsomely in their houses,
especially the better sort of Merchants, Merchants.
who are better furnished then the rest; howbeit, in competition with our
Countrymen of the same quality, to be esteemed, in truth, but as mean
Mountebanks, and inconsiderable Pedlers. Those of greatest Wealth and Commerce,
being some crafty Italian or Portugues, who (during the time of the late, and
present Cardinal) have amassed very considerable Estates, and great Riches And
here we may properly observe, That no Gentleman will in France bind his
youngest son to any Trade or Mechanique Calling whatever, under that of a
Military life, Appren^isage c^unted a diminution of honor in France.
as esteeming every Apprentisage and subjection, a stain and diminution to the
Honor and Dignity of his Family; the like also, they for the most part observe
in their Marriages and Alliances: but herein the German is most religious.

The Nobility and Gentry of this Kingdom differ much from the garb of living in
England, No^ilities Garb of living in France.
both within, (and till of late) without doors: They have many of them vast
estates, either in Lands or Offices; the Revenues whereof they choose rather to
spend at Paris, and other great Cities, in a specious Retinue of Coaches,
Pages, and Laquaies, then suffer themselves to be eaten up at home in the
country in the likeness of Beef and Mustard, among their unthankful
Neighbors. This affection of theirs to reside for the most part in the chief
Towns of the Kingdom, Corporations.
is the reason why the Corporations are little considerable, as not daring to
be brewing and hatching such Factions, as where the Gentry and civiller sort of
Mankind are universally given to solitary and unactive lives in the country.
Besides, the Gentlemen are generally given to those laudable Magnificencies of
Building, Magnificence of the Nobility and Gentry.
and furnishing their Palaces with the most precious Movables, much of the
luxe and excess of Italy, being now far entered amongst them, as may well serve
to exemplify, when in the Duchess of Chaulmes her Palace near the Place Royal
in Paris, the pennaches, or tusts of plumes belonging to one of her beds only,
is estimated worth fourteen thousand livers, which amounts to near a thousand
pounds sterling of our money.

Every great Person who builds here, Great pretenders to learning.
however qualified with intellectuals, pretends to his Elaboratory and Library:
for the furnishing of which last, he does not much amuse himself in the
particular elections of either Authors or Impressions; but having erected his
cases and measured them, accords with a Stationer to furnish him with so many
gilded Folioes, so many yard of quarto's, and octavo's by the great, till his
Bibliotheke be full of Volumes. And yet some of them, both have excellent
books, and are very polite Scholars: but the Noblesse do not naturally so
addict themselves to study, as the Gown-men do; accounting it a life so
contemplative, and below their spirits, Physic and Law despised by the
Nobility of France.
that no Gentleman's necessity whatsoever shall easily engage him to seek any
support, either by Physic or Law: both which Professions are (as in truth they
highly merit) in very laudable esteem and reputation amongst us in England.

The State Ecclesiastic (comprehending that of the Religion) is of two sorts;
State Ecclesiastic of France.
the greater part whereof being Pontificians, and the Protestants, Protestants.
commonly called those of the Religion, (and by them with this adjunct,
Pre^endue Reformee) who exercise the Doctrine and Discipline of Geneva.

The Roman Catholics of France are nothing so precise, Roman Cath^l^cks of
Fra^c^, how they differ from others of the same Religion.
secret, and bigotish as are either the Recusants of England, Spain, or Italy;
but are for the most part an indifferent sort of Christians, naturally not so
superstitious and devout, nor in such Vassallage to his Holiness, as in other
parts of Europe, where the same opinions are professed; which indifferency,
whether I may approve of, or condemn, I need not declare here.

As for the poor Protestants, Protestants, how eclipsed and weakened of late.
they are now so inconsiderable, since the late Successes of the Cardinal
Richlieu, and especially our Nations reproach, and their misfortune at La
Rochelle; that for the present they possess no one place of strength, or any
other singular immunity above others, as being defeated of all Eminent Persons,
either of Birth or Charge, who might be able to defend or Counsel them at need;
the Court having now rendered most of them Proselytes, by Preferments or
Interests, or other effectual means: Howbeit, such as remain (and of which too
there are likewise a very considerable body) are permitted peaceably to enjoy
their Consciences, upon renovation of the late Edict of Pacification; and are
undoubtedly, in case of any considerable Rebellion, capable to form a very
ballancing and pondrous party; but with nothing that front and confidence which
within these twenty years past, they might have done; when they durst even
beard the King, The cause of (...).
and protect such as retired to them, from his displeasure, in most of his, now
strongest Towns and places of Importance: But the Scean is now much altered,
and they shrewdly contracted, especially since the stir under that late and
incomparable person, the D. of Rohan: the folly of their own private Interests,
having evidently proved their fatal destruction; as it is most frequently seen
to fall out (first or last) amongst all contrivers of Civil and Popular
Dissentions. Fate of civil dissentions. Little Schism amongst the Protestants,
betwixt themselves, and why.
However, thus far I must needs vindicate the Protestants of France, That we
find not amongst them those frequent Schismatiques and broachers of ridiculous
Enthusiasms, as abound amongst us; every particular so unanimously concurring
with their Pastor, That, in truth, they are herein not unworthy to be
commended; though that virtue likewise were the more estimable, were it not
certainly constrained by the vigilance of their Antagonists, who watch all
advantages to discom, pose, and defame them. To be short, though they have lost
many great ones, and much strength, and that the form of their Discipline
invite few, yet the light of their attempts has invited so many to look into
the reason of things beyond the mask of Tradition, and mystery of Policy, that
it is both thought, and well known, That even diverse of those who are persons
of greatest eminency, both in Church and State, Inclinations of many great ones
to a Reformation.
have so good an inclination to change some points of the received opinions,
That were it not more out of secular consideration, to lose their preferments,
then any other inconveniency, many of them would openly profess themselves
Jansenianists, Jansenianists, Moulinists.
Moulinists, etc. Whose opinions, as they infinitely propagate amongst them, so
do they come on a great way toward a Reformation.

The Forces of France is that which renders it (as indeed it does Forces of
France.
all other Kingdoms) most formidable abroad, and secure at home.

The Frame and Positure of the Continent, Advantageous site of France.
situated as it were in the Navel of all the Christian World, qualifies it to
collect, unite and dispose of her forces; for it has Spain and Italy before
it, England behind; The Seas upon the right, and Germany upon the left hand;
at one corner the Neatherlands, and the Cantons of the Suisse at the other; all
of them potent, considerable, and active Neighbors; and where they intermit, it
is a worthy prospect to behold, how Nature has served and defended her with
the Pyrenes, Alps, Ocean, and Mediterranean Seas, whilst she sitting secure
from any subitaneous irruption or natural pretension, may well be pronounced, a
fair and most Just Empire; and especially, since the later accession of
Bretagne, Guyenne, Normandy (once the goodly portions of the English) and
Bourgogne, who are now all of them under one Prince, as having enjoyed
heretofore every one their proper Dukes; by whose favor or spleen there was
always a facile entrance for any potent stranger to disturb the rest of the
Kingdom; the consequencies whereof, have filled almost every modern Chronicle.
And to the stronger twisting of this Cord, such prudence has been had of late
times, that all those great and powerful houses remain now no more divided (as
still amongst the Princes of Italy and Germany) the Cadets and younger Brothers,
Cadets and younger Brothers, all Soldiers of Fortune.
minding for the most part no greater preferments, then what they cut out with
their Sword, and merit in Field by being Soldiers of Fortune.

As for the Forces by Sea, Francis the first, reproached, and why?
as it was never great, so we do not read, That ever any signal action has
been achieved by any of their Navigations; for which cause, Francis the first,
was once pretty well resolved to make use of the Turk, and call in that stout
Misercant, to the eternal reproach, both of that Prince and Nation;
notwithstanding, at this instant, Maritime Forces and Havens.
their Maritime strength is not totally so contemptible, having a very stately
and considerable Armada of handsome Galleys, in most of their Mediterranean
Ports, as at Toulon, Marseilles, and other places, which are Vessels of
excellent use and service upon those Seas: On the Ocean, I confess, both their
Shipping and Traffic have been alike trivial; and yet of late, they have
greatly augmented their Fleet, especially since the time (to our Nations
egregious shame and dishonor) that they have made so large inroads and gaps
into Flanders, Late Acquists.
toward the Sea Coasts; Witness those strong Towns and Havens of Dunkirk,
Mardike, etc. Stout Forts, and very commodious Harbors for shipping; so that a
little time (if we will still suffer it) may likewise furnish them with Ships
enough to make them stand in a bolder competition with their Neighbors.

But the more principal Nerve of the French Power consists in his Forces at
Land; Land Forces
and amongst them (as has already been touched) chiefly his Cavalry, which is
of strength and spectacle both of admiration and gallantry, Cavalry of France
the best of Europe.
they being for the greater part composed of Gentlemen, who generally so
bequeath themselves to this service, that he who (amongst them) has not made
two or three Campagnas (as they use to term it) by that time he is 18 years of
age (is esteemed as a person lasche, that is, of a soft education and small
repute: Besides, The Horse an exercise proper to the French youth. Their
Academies and other Gymnasticks.
the Horse is an exercise unto which they have so natural a disposition and
address, that the whole earth does not contain so many Academies dedicated
chiefly to this Discipline, and other martial Gymnastiques, wherein they
handsomely attain to competent perfection in whatsoever is active and proper for
their youth and inclinations.

And what incomparable soldiers this Country has in all ages bred, Soldiery
of France commended.
we need look out no further for testimony, then their many past and present
Acquisitions and Enterprises, under Harcourt, Condy, Gassion, and infinite
others: besides, (what is no trivial mark of our assertion) the multitudes of
such who are at present employed in the Services of Foreign Princes. Very
undeniable it is, Spanish and Fr. Insantry compared
that the Spanish Infantry is too hard for the French Foot: for the Peasants of
France (of whom they should naturally consist) are thought (and that upon good
grounds) to be more then accidentally improper and mal-adroict for that
service: Howbeit, we find (and that by quotidian experience) that Custom, or
something else more propitious, has much altered and reformed their Natures,
even in this particular instance: And for ought I perceive, they keep what they
have gotten, and become as good Soldiers, as those who brag so much of their
lousy and tenacious Epitheton: But I must confess, how few Indigene and
natural Spaniards serve now against them; all the old brave foot having been
for the greater part slain, or continued unrecruted, at and since the signal
Battle of Rocroy, where (though with their own destinies) they bravely made good
that general and worthy repute which the world has of the Infantry of that
Nation. And however, had this reproach a more solid ground, A saying of
Machiavel.
yet that saying of Machiavel in his Ritratto, That Le Fanterie che si fanno in
Francia non possono esser buono per che gli e, gran tempo che non hanno hauuto
guerra, e per questo non hanno sperienza alcuna, etc. Is now no more an
Argument, Then that the premises being changed, the Conclusion must needs
remain, considering that the Cause being taken away, through their present
exercise, and perpetual War, the Effect and Defect cannot of consequence ensue,
as we have already sufficiently proved: or admit it were yet so, I hope the
Suisse and other faithful Mercenaries to that Crown, abundantly supply all
these wants and prejudices; most of which, yet notwithstanding, for my part,
were, I think, first hired rather out of consideration of diversion, and since
custom, then otherwise out of any pure necessity. That likewise which made the
Armies of France so inconsiderable for native Foot Soldiers, may with much
reason too (if we please) be attributed unto Lewis the Eleventh his disarming
of the Commons; Consequence of disarming the Commons.
by which advice, the King indeed became more absolute at home amongst his
Vassals, but a great deal less formidable abroad amongst his Enemies: And
herein it was, that his Neighbors stood him in stead.

Another thing rendering this Kingdom very considerable for an Army, is, France
abundant in people and Victuals.
their Prolifique multiplying; for Europe embraces not a more populous Nation,
nor more abounding in Victuals, which is the belly of that cruel Beast, called
War; so Fertile, I say it is, That when Charles the fifth entered into France by
Provence, and afterward by Champaigne, it nourished (besides the many
Garrisons thereof) more then an Hundred and fifty thousand Ravenous Soldiers;
and even in the time of Charles the sixth, there were found in this Kingdom,
Twenty thousand Horse, and Thirty thousand Foot, all consisting of strangers;
and Fifteen thousand Horse, and One hundred thousand Foot, all of Natural
French. And verily, when we have seriously surveighed the complication of
Enemies, which once invested this Kingdom, when for Extent and Command, it was
far inferior to what it is at present, since the English have been
dispossessed, Navar adjoined, and other additions of great strength: I say,
when England, Germany, Spain, and Italy, invaded it on all parts, in the Reign
of Francis the first, as it will appear, how potent and able this Kingdom
united, is to defend it self: So does the consideration of it seem to me most
strange, and altogether portentous.

Add to these advantages, Store of Arms, Ammunition, and Artillery.
their store of good Arms and Munition, excellent Artillery, many famous and
well furnished Magazines; in sum, Why should I farther tire you with
particulars, when their present Exploits, and almost continual Triumphs, have
planted the Flower de Lyces where ever they break ground. Witness those
renowned adventures since Charlemaigne, Ancient and late Acquists
St. Lewis, Charles d'Anjou, Charles the eighth, etc. whose Heroicque
Achievements and glorious Trophies, have filled all Histories and Countries,
even as far as Asia her self; witness their Expeditions and Successes at
Jerusalem, in Egypt, Barbary, Cyprus, Greece, Naples, Saxony, Hungary, and
sundry other places, even in these our times, and before our own doors; witness
all their late Acquists and Conquests in Catalunia, Spain, Italy, Flanders,
etc. Besides the Signal Battles and Sieges of Nordlingen, Rocroy, Perpignian,
Theonvil, Arras, Dunkirk, etc. Not to repeat the miraculous, or rather
ingenious reduction of La Rochel, Montpelier, and other impregnable holds
appertaining to the Protestants: So that if now we see them begin to decline,
and refund what they have so hastily swallowed down, it is but the common fate
of all humane undertakings, The common fate of all humane Enterprises
all things having a period in this World, that had a beginning.

And now, Church near a third part of France.
albeit the Church (who is near a good third part of France) does in most
places (as the Proverb goes) neither lose nor defend any thing; yet here in
times of public and emergent necessities, have they been made contribute most
bountifully toward the maintaining of Armies and Supplies.

Nor are the Frontiers, Frontiers and Maritime coasts how fortified at present.
and Maritime coasts of this Kingdom so ill fortified now, as in former times;
but there has been of late so through a reformation and care had in that
regard, that it were hard to call to mind a considerable place at present but
is capable to support a long and strenuous resistance; especially those
Harbors and Keys of the Country which respect our Coasts: as Haver, Calais,
Diepe, and diverse other places of Importance.

In fine, State of Fr. at present.
France is at this present grown to that stature, so well planted, and
commodiously laid to it self, that (but for their own madness, and the feared
fate of these times, which already begins to work) in the real Interest and
balance with her Neighbors, High time that a Non ultra were fixed to her
greatness.
it were high time she were now a little observed, and a Non ultra fixed unto
her proceedings and future aspirings: Nor doubt I at all, but if the Low
Countries were able to preserve her Neutrality, but England with Spain (as poor
and contemptible as she is now grown) may one day so exercise this ambitious
Kingdom, as she may be glad to contain her self within her own Confines,
without molesting or incommoding of her Neighbors.

I deny not, The greatness of Spain suspicious, and how far it concerns us.
that even the greatness of Spain her self were as much to be apprehended,
equally as dangerous, did not her accustomed swelling and unnatural Plethory
most certainly incline to a Tympanie, rather then show it proceeded from any
strong and sane constitution: their overgrasping humor, The humor of the
Spaniard likened.
being much like his, who desiring a good handful of sand, by griping it over
hard, loses more through his fingers, then he can carry away in all his palm:
England's best bulwark and balance.
So that in this case, our only best Bulwark is France; and (vice versa)
opposed to their power, Spain, so long as this antipathie amongst them
continues, and they remain in one entire body. For this cause it was, Qu.
Elizabeth's policy
and for no other, that Queen Elizabeth would very wisely by no means consent
to that offer of Cantonizing this Kingdom, when in the time of the late League
she was offered a considerable share. But on the other side, Danger in the
Accession of the Low Countries to Fr.
the Accession of the Low Countries to this Empire, were beyond all comparison
more perilous, then if they had also never started aside from their lawful
Master; and this by reason of their Situation, Vicinity, Ports, Traffic, Towns
of defense, the infinite disadvantages whereof we should soon acknowledge to
our cost and ignominy.

As touching the Protestants, they are yet so numerous in France, That the
Spaniard has no pretense to alienate the French subjects, by his instruments
the Jesuits, and why?
and the Roman Catholics so averse in that point, as there can never spring up
the least appearance of hope that the King of Spain should ever pretend any
thing in this Country by way of inclination or defection; however, the late
Jesuits (notwithstanding all those strict Edicts and Bans made against them)
begin to swarm and re-establish themselves. And so I have done with the more
general remarks worthy your consideration. I shall only say a word or two of
the people, and of Paris in particular, and so finish this task. Genius and
nature of the people.


Concerning the Nature and Genius of the Inhabitants, that which the Prince of
Politicians gives out of the French, where he affirms, that I Francesi sono per
natura piufieri, che gagliardi o destri, Upon what Caesar of old said of the
Galli Insubres, Caesar's saying of the Galli Insubres.
that in the beginning they appeared more then Men, but proved in the
conclusion less then Women, retains in it still something of their present
promptness, and as sudden discouragement: Upon which observation, the
forecited Florentine notably advises, Chi vuole superare j Francesi si guardi
dal primo loro impeto, etc. That he who would vanquish the French, should be
sure to withstand and break their first brusk and onset; because they usually
rush on upon danger like a torrent, and in a desperate fury, when they first
charge and join battle: French fury at onset.
but as nothing which is violent is permanent, so expectation as soon ruins,
and utterly daunts their courage.

But as for their Intellectuals, and more noble part, such of them as dedicate
themselves to Letters and Erudition, Learned men in France.
prove as polite Scholars and as trim Wits as any Italian of them all. The
greater part of them, I confess, and ordinary Pretenders, please themselves
more in Analyticall and cursory speculations, to which one may take post at
every pillar in the streets, Pedantry of some professors.
where you shall never fail of some bragadocio Hippias, who like some
Intellectus universalis, professes, and will undertake to render any man an
exact and perfect Philosopher, Divine, Orator, Chemist; or to teach him all
Languages, and indeed, what not, within the space of a month or two: which kind
of Table Method and Lullian art, renders many of them, even to the very
Mechanics, most egregious talkers, and intolerably pragmaticall.

Add unto this, Their leveling of learning.
their levelling of Learning, and laying all Authors in common, by their
intemperate Translations, having but of very late put all the Orations of
Cicero into French, as it is long since that the Poets have been made Orators:
for there is nothing more frequent then the turning of them into prose.

Amongst the Faculties of Paris, The Faculties of Paris
there are some good and dextrous Divines; but their School Exercises are dull
and perfunctory things, in competition with what was wont to be performed here
in our Universities.

Generally, Physicians and Chirurgians of Prance, their Method and ill success.
the Chirurgians of France are Pretenders to Physic, and the Physician as
great a friend to the Emperick; especially in point of Phlebotomie, which is
their Panacea for all Diseases. And albeit they have bred some able and
accomplished Proficients of all these kinds; yet their common practice in
tedious and Chronique, as well as acute diseases, imports them rather to a
sudden ease of the patient, then any entire recovery, or security from relapse;
for they study more to weaken and enervate the Body, then the Disease: so that
they recover few of languishing Fevers, which relapse not as soon again, and
for the most part perish: contrary both to the Method and success of our
Physicians in England; Praise of English Physicians.
into one of whose hands I had rather put my life, then to a whole College of
these French Leaches.

In the Mechanics, French Mechanics incomparable.
they are universally excellent, inventive, and happy; and are of late too
become far more stayed and constant in point of habit and fashion then they
were wont to be: for I will undertake, our native levity and wantonness in
that kind, has of late years infinitely exceeded them.

The French Children are the fairest letter that Nature, I think, French
children and youth.
can show through all the humane Alphabet; but though they be Angels in the
cradle, yet are they more like Devils in the saddle: age generally showing,
that what she so soon bestows, she takes as fast away; for the French (after
twenty) presently strike forty in their faces, and especially amongst their
Women, Sudden decay of Women.
who are then extremely decayed, when ours, if not beautiful, are yet very
tolerable at those years; which, whether it proceeds from the siccity of the
air, drinking water, ill diet, or other accident, I dare not easily determine;
and yet I am the rather inclined to think, something of that nature it must
needs be, when we find the women of Quality for the most part as exquisite
Beauties as any the whole world produces, without disparaging our Ladies at
home, whom I would be unwilling this Paragraph should in the least degree
offend.

I cannot affirm that the youth of the Gentry and Noblesse of France are bred
altogether so literate as most of our English and Dutch are; Youth of the
French Gentry not bred to letters, and why?
being, as I said, of less phlegm, and more prompt then to fix to those
unactive studies; Nor are they at all so curious and inquisitive in their
Travels, unto which fewer also are inclined, Humor in Traveling.
but seem abundantly satisfied, to be able to say, They have been in such, or
such a place. No trust to the cu^wa^d p^^^earance


It is a true observation of one, That a French man appears a child at all
ages; but in practice and negotiation you shall find him a man. It is the
Field and Court which the Gentry affect as the best of Education; Indifferency
of the Fr. in religion.
and thence I am inclined to believe, they contract amongst them that
indifferency of believing and living, in which they are generally more open and
free then even the Italians; The French not so disbanched as ^he English youth
at present.
albeit yet not in all points so enormous as the depraved youth of England,
whose prodigious disbaucheries and late unheard of extravagancies, far surpass
the madness of all other civilized Nations whatsoever. Nor more given to Gaming
Gaming also they frequent, Nothing so much to drink and tobacco.
but are in no one vice so abandoned, as to the exhausting their Estates,
especially in point of drink and Tobacco; which, though it have of late got
some footing upon the more vile sort, and infected some Northern parts of the
Kingdom; yet few persons of Quality use either in excess: but adorers of bread
and pottage.
But what they do not in drink, they pay in bread, and are strange devourers of
Corn; they adore a good pottage (whatever the rest of the Repast be) as the
Egyptians did garlic: nor will a true Monsieur be brought at any rate to taste
a glass of wine, sans premier manger; which although they neither do so much,
nor sit so long at it, yet they use to collation more often, the most temperate
of them.

The passions of the people are suddenly imported and puffed up with a Victory,
Elevated and dejected suddenly with victory or loss.
and as soon dejected with the least repulse or loss. They are prodigal,
Splendid in externals.
and splendid in externals, but seldom undo themselves in housekeeping and
hospitality: The best sort eat like Princes, and far exceed our Tables; the
common worse then dogs: generally, so they flourish and appear for a month or
two in the Summer, they will fare hard enough the rest of the year besides;
Full of Interest,
and such as mind only their profit, have little charity, where they see no
evident Interest. They are exceedingly courteous, and have generally their
tongues well hung; which promptitude of theirs, of a joviall conversation,
handsome address, and well spoken
as it becomes them well in encounter, so they are for the most part, of
joviall conversation, and far from that constrained address which is natural
to our sullen Nation, who never think our selves acquainted, till we treat one
another with Jack and Tom; familiarities, Censure of the rude familiarity of
the English.
which, as we find no where else in use, so they commonly terminate in vain
and rude Associations.

The French are the sole Nation in Europe that do idolize their Sovereign,
French reverencers of their King.
unto whom the have likewise a more free and immediate access (without much
ceremony) then ordinarily is to be seen in any other Princes Court: and his
affability to them.
and this affability and freedom gains them as strangely to him; which
(certainly) is an excellent art in the one, and no less a virtue in the other.
But on the contrary, their choler thoroughly stirred, there never wants some
Raviliac or cutthroat to perpetrate their malice; so unstable is popular
confidence.

Finally, Their opinion and hate of the English.
they have a natural dread and hate to the English, as esteeming us for the
most part, a fierce, rude, and barbarous Nation: but their antipathy to a
Spaniard is deadly and irreconcilable.

For their Bodies, Stature,
they are both Sexes of mean stature, rather in good point, then either lean or
gross; complexion,
generally, swa^t of complexion, except such as have mixed toward the North
and East: the Women have commonly black eyes, rare teeth, and sweet voices; and
certainly, so gentile and natural an address even in their most ordinary
actions, that one may as easily distinguish them by it, as their tongues: In
fine, promptness,
they are extremely prompt, and imagine to comprehend all upon an instant,
which makes many to give out and tire in the journey before they be half way:
for all which, and cheerful supinity of the people.
and their oppressions to boot, there lives not under the cope of heaven a more
frank galiard, and supine people: howbeit many of them will not stick to
repine, Victories unwelcom, to the Fr. and why?
and censure even their own Victories and successes, whereof every one but
seems to add a heavier weight to their Oppression.

Now, The best and most compendious Map of a Country.
as every Metropolitan and Royal City is likely the best Map of the Country
wherein it stands; so may Paris be esteemed the most exact Compendium of France.

Paris is a City in a Ring, Paris, site, Edifices, etc.
whereof the Louvre or Palace of the King is the Diamond: And truly,
considering the vastness of its circumference, so incomparably built all of
the living Rock, whereupon it is seated (which for beauty, easy working, and
lastingness, renders it a pre-eminence above many more costly Materials) I
think no City in the whole world equalizes it. I have seen Naples, Rome,
Florence, Genoa, and Venice; all stately Cities, and full of Princely Fabrics;
but then I compare the extent, and here are many Centuries of Noblemens Houses,
both within the Town and the Environs, which altogether approach, if not exceed
the best of them. This I will boldly affirm, that for the Streets, Sububrs, and
common buildings, it infinitely excels any City else in Europe: for public
Edifices, some of the Hospitals are fair Foundations and handsome Piles; but
the Convents and Churches come far short of the Towns before recited: yet that
of the Sorbonne and Jesuits, are not much inferior to some of the best and
most modern Pieces of Architecture extant.

The River of Seine, The River of Seine.
which divides it, is nothing comparable, for sweetness and good condition, to
our Royal River of Thames: yet it would deceive any man in the use, when he
shall seriously examine and consider the huge Vessels of burden (though not
Ships) it brings up, full of Commodities and necessary Provisions. In
conclusion, Paris wants nothing but clean Streets, and a redress of the
multitude of Coaches, Laquays, and throngs of Mankind; with all which, Number
of people etc. in Paris too great.
it is generally so pestered, that it appears a miracle to me, how so many
backs are clothed, and bellies maintained (in a Town of no eminent Staple) as
you may behold in one day, if you walk the streets and public Carfours; Most
of the Houses ordinarily harboring six, True cause of our reproaching their
Nastinesse.
as often ten families betwixt heaven and hell, the Garrets and the Cellars:
and this I take to be the true cause of that Nastinesse which we usually impute
to the Nation: Persons of Quality, Persons of quality more neat and sumptuous
then any in England.
and such as have room enough, being far more proper and sumptuous in their
houses, then the best of us here in England, however we arrogate the contrary.

Touching the Extent of this City, The extent of Paris and London difficult to
be compared, and why?
it has been, and is still a great controversy amongst our Contrymen
Travelers, which is the larger, This or London, every one speaks according to
his inclinations: But the figures of them both are so different, that it would
be a very difficult matter to reconcile them, by making an exact trial: and
peradventure, all things considered; there is as yet no very great inequality:
but if we may conjecture from the buildings at present, Prodigious increase of
buildings.
and prodigious enlargement of their Suburbs on all sides, what a little time
and Peace will render it, it must, without doubt, in a short time outgrow the
contention, and far exceed it. for I find no end of their erecting not only
of particular houses, but even of whole streets, and those so incomparably fair
and uniform, Beauty of the now new Edifices of Paris.
that you would imagine your self rather in some Italian Opera, where the
diversity of Scenes surprise the beholder, then believe your self to be in a
real City. This is only to be observed in their prime Builddings and
Palaces, that the best Fabrics commonly promise less toward the Front or
Street, then you will find them within the Court; which is caused by the high
walls and tarraces that thwart them: a piece of Modesty, which in other
Appearances and outsides they do not usually practice.

But what our City of London has not in houses and Palaces, London for Shops,
Taverns, other drinking Schools, and Noise, exceeding all C^^ies of the world.
she has in Shops and Taverns; which render it so open by day, and cheerful
in the night, that it appears to be a perpetual Wake, or Wedding to the
beholder; for so mad and loud a Town, is no where to be found in the whole
world.

The Government and Policy of this Preveste is exercised by Judges, Government
of Paris.
called Lieutenants Civils and Criminels; who, for purchasing their Offices of
the Court, sell their Justice at extraordinary rate, to such as have use of
that rare Commodity. Prevost of Merchand^
They have also a Prevost of the Merchands, and les Eschevins, which is an
Office more resembling our Recorder and Sheriff, then Major: Likewise the
Archbishop has a spiritual jurisdiction here; Archbishop of Paris, etc.
as also some particular Abbots and Priors: And with all this, I cannot say, it
is well governed; the disorders of every day and night will convince me,
Disorders of Paris in the night, how they might be prevented
if I should, when so many execrable Murders and Villainies are committed in
the streets; an inconvenience which might yet be easily prevented, if they
would but imitate our Policy, and form their Watches of constant and
responsible persons.

Neither is the strength of this renowned City any thing considerable in
stresse of a Siege, Strength of Paris nothing in a siege.
or respect of other natural advantage, save only fire: nay, so open it is to
the Conqueror, that Sr Denis (which lies but two leagues remote from it) has
oftentimes been the Frontier of France; and had not the late Marshall de
Gassion as deerly, Marshall de Gastion preserved Paris from the Spanyard.
as bravely purchased their Liberty at the signal battle of Rocroy, the
Spainyard, it is believed, might (without the least obstacle, have marched up to
the very gates of Paris.

But the incomparable Air of Paris is that which fortifies the Inhabitants:
The Air of Paris celebrated.
so that very seldom has a Plague or other Epidemical Contagion made here that
havoc and lamentable devastation, which it so frequently does in our putrified
climate, and accidentally suffocated City: contrary to that Vulgar (but most
false) Tradition, which I find in every man's mouth; The ordinary tradition
amongst us, that the plague is never out of Paris, refuted.
that the Pestilence is never out of Paris: but this (besides the siccity of
the air) many Naturalists ascribe to the over sulphurous exhalations of the
streets, and dry attracting quality of the Plaster, Quality of the Plaster of
Paris.
which, bears or gives the Name to this goodly city.

Cert e id firmissimum Imperium est, quo obedientes gaudent. Thus, Sir, by the
assistance of your Patience, I have adventured to draw the Curtain, discovering
a very ample Theater, in a short time, and represented it in as narrow a
Circumference, as those Artists who introduce a multitude of species through an
Optic, into some dark room or closet: And the similitude peradventure will not
appear unapt, when you consider the reversed Method, and confused Style in
which it is described. But as writing of Histories is not my Trade, I know you
have not commanded me to undergo this Task, to make thereby any advantage of my
Imperfections, but approve mine Obedience. And now, although I doubt not but
many able Persons have most excellently treated upon this very Subject,
appropriated to their Times; yet I will be bold to affirm, and that sans
vanity, none has lately performed it with greater faith, succinctnesse, and
in more natural Colors. For he that will truly comprehend the Government and
Genius of this Kingdom, must prospect and look out every day for new
discoveries; France being now no more the thing it was forty years since, then
the garb and fashion at that time, to the habit and Mode now in use amongst
them, equally as different, as incomparable: And in truth, (to disabuse the
World) the complexion and Crasis of this Body Politic is of so high
concernment to the health, and good estate of our poor Nation, that to presevre
her in entire habit and Constitution, there can never be too often inspections
into the State and Regiment of this Kingdom. This is the opinion of

Paris, this 15 of Febr. 1652. Stilo novo. Sir, Your most affectionate Friend,
and most obedient Servant, J.E.

FINIS.

