AN EXACT AND Humble Remonstrance TOUCHING The late Conflict of Armies in and
near the County of PEMBROOKE; and the present condition of the Harbor of
MILFORD.

Presented to the Honorable Committee of the two United Kingdoms, England and
Scotland, by such as were very lately resident in the said County.

Together with a word of Remembrance and Advice, seasonably they hope, directed
to the Committee of the said County, and Mayor of Penbrooke.

London, Printed by J. M. 1645.

Good Reader,
IT may be thy curious eye will not be satisfied with General Relations, and
if we descend to particulars, there may be some injury done to Truth against
our will; and it were great pity so rare a Grace should receive the least
blemish by Friends, seeing she is so oft-times wronged both by the ignorant and
malicious Enemy. If we should take on us to tell thee how many were taken, and
how many slain, we might say, we miss about 300. and speak our thoughts, and
yet not punctually (it may be suitable) to the verity of the matter. This I
would have thee note, That this unhappy clashing happened not many days after
valiant Crumwell took Heathen Sir Henry Vaughan Colonel and Welchman, with all
his Bare -- Foot going to Oxford. If thou will promise to be candid in thy
construction, thou shall have once more other matters come to thy hand, if God
will, very shortly. It is yet but Low Water at Milford, as soon as it it
Halfe-flood, our trusty Mercury, that loves not to talk so large as others,
will hoyse up sail and bring thee true intelligence, and very probably,
pleasing too, if thou be not a blood-thirsty Irishman, or his base English
confederate:

Farewell.
TO The Honorable Committee of the two united Kingdoms of ENGLAND and
SCOTLAND. A true Narration of the present Condition of the County of PEMBROOKE
and Army there, together with the Harbor of MILFORD, exhibited by such of the
said County, as have been eye witnesses, and have Solemnly Covenanted with God,
to advance to their utmost his glorious Cause, now managed by the two Houses of
PARLIAMENT.
WHo sadly Remonstrate to your Honors, That when it pleased God to give a
great blessing to the said County, not only plentifully to cast off, but also
for a good while to be nourished, and miraculously to be preserved by his great
power and providence, raising them so beyond all probabilities, from a handful
of naked men to become a pretty considerable body of armed men; the resolved
Commanders and Worthies there, for discharge of their faithfulness in so great
a Trust, having a tender eye also to the Exonerating and easing of a Country
almost worn out by the pillaging and oppression of the Enemy, and necessary
Quarter of friends; put on a resolution, and marched out of their own County to
Cardigan where after they had possessed themselves of the said Town and Castle,
and Indeed wonderfully releeving the said Castle afterward, when it was
strongly besieged by General Gerrard, they besieged the Castle of Emelyn about
six miles distant from Cardigan, being the enemies next and only Garrison in
that Quarter, where (after they had laid near a fortnight) upon the 27. day of
April last, being the Lords day about six of the clock in the morning, there
came a very strong party of the enemies horse from England, besides other foot
very numerous; who suddenly and secretly fell upon our men; flew and took most
of our best foot Companies, besides many horse, drove the rest into their
Garrisons, being about 30. miles remote from the place of their defeat; and
forthwith Advanced into the County of Pembrooke, faced the Town of Haverford
West, and sommond it. The Soldiers no sooner quit the said Town, by reason of
the openesse of it, and that they might the better preserve the other Garrisons
of Penbrooke and Tenby, being far mote strong and considerable, but the
Inhabitants were constrained to surrender it upon very slender Quarter, there
they ceaze upon much of our Ammunition and Arms, imprison, plunder, and abuse
the well-affected Townsmen; range every where about the Country, pillage and
destroy that which should be the present and future livelihood of an Army; and
have given us a sure testimony, that they will leave nothing undone, that
mischief and violence can invent against a distressed County. This done, they
drew all their forces toward the other two Garrisons of Pembrooke and Tenby,
and are very confident either to over-master them, or in fine to distress them
till they yield: Notwithstanding the Major General, Mayor of Pembrook, and
resolute Commanders there, have firmly by Gods blessing, determined to stand
to their trust, and resolve rather Honorably to lose their lives, together
with their said Towns and Garrisons then basely, by yielding, betray them with
their Religion and Liberties.

They further make known to your Honors the most dangerous condition of the
Harbor of Milford, which the Enemy doubts not to block up, by planting Great
Ornances to keep out such shipping as might relieve the Town and Castle of
Pembrooke, and this very probably they will speedily do, if a timely expedient
be not found out to prevent them.

It were but rashness and indiscretion in them to intimate the dangerous
consequence of a Delay, as of other things so well known to your Honors; The
public importance of the said Haven, being the only harbor to friend between
Plymouth and Leverpool, bloody Irelands greatest curb and terror; the
Mariners security, if preserved: nay, they are verily persuaded, and so are
all that know it, that there is not one place in England more considerable,
Consideratis considerandis, then that; though some ignorantly (we hope not
maliciously) to the great prejudice of the state do slight it. They presume no
farther but humbly submit themselves to your Lordships, and from a bleeding and
most tender heart, they do commend the condition of the public, and that
place, together with their own sad estate and condition to the Grace and Mercy
of a good God and the known Wisdom of this Honorable Committee, for their
more speedy relief.

TO The Committee established by Parliament, for the County of PEMBROOK.
Gentlemen,
IT is not unknown unto most of you, who they were that very lately departed
from your Country and Harbor of Milford. And albeit they had but small
encouragement to remain there; yet now, by Gods Providence, being safely arived
here, (a place of greater enlargement and love.) They cannot choose but
remember you, and in their remembrance, (though they never tread on your ground
again) to endeavor your future weal and happiness. They cannot but be
sensible how Offices and Officers in this kind have been entreated and
rewarded; namely, with cruelty and contempt for love and courtesy, (some if
they had Grace would blush at the conceit.) However it now falls out, that
water shall never be able to quench the flames of public Affection and
Desires. They humbly and earnestly crave of you, (and that in the bowels of
Jesus Christ) that in matters of such public consequence you lay by, and cast
away all sinister and by ends of your own selfishnes of all sorts, which
already have been your undoings, and have proved unto you more banefull, then
the Malice of your most Malignant Enemy: such as have contracted on many of you
a great Odium in the minds of many honest men, and have rendered you very meanly
spirited in good men opinions and judgments. Retention of old private
Star Chamber and Ludlow-grudges. Partiality where conscience and Equity should
bear sway. Coveteousnesse working by oppression on the poor undone- Commons,
reserving your old corn for the Enemy, or at best for the Vermin; when your
underlings and tenants in the mean time are ground to powder; having not corn
enough left for the Mill, to stop the mouths and refresh the bowels of their
crying children: besides the discouragement of those disheartened Soulders, that
have hazarded, nay lost, their own lives to save yours. Gentlemen, I pray give
us leave to tell you in love, and tender affection (for we regard not
Athesticall spurnings.) This has made a loud cry heavenward, and this
together with that Epidemicall vice called Excess, and that Coroding disease
called Malice, and that pleasing sin called Contempt and abuse of Gods
Ministers, was the dissolution and rout of that part of your Army, and
discomfiture of your men.

The thieves that stole away your Cattle, plundered your houses, betrayed the
persons of some of you into the hands of those that hate them: and surely if
you bottle not up many tears to extinguish and quench these flames of Gods
wrath and just displeasure, it will consume further, till it has consumed all,
dissolved gates of iron and walls of brass. Take therefore this course,
use.this Method. A Jove Principium. Begin with God and then no doubt but he
will go forth with your Army; nay, he will recruit and discipline the same, and
make you again gloriously victorious over those degenerate English, and
Egyptian Welsh, that now encompasse you, and are confederate with the bloody
Irish against you: As for us we confidently hope (and we have an assured
persuasion) that the enemy is near (or at least not far off) his fall, for
that he is now exalted so high in pride and presumption. Turn over a new leaf
then, and get but the Master head of your corrupt Affections, in any good
measure, and it will not be long ere you be again Masters of the field, and
prevalent in your undertakings.

London, May 24. 1645.
To Mr. JOHN POYER the most Vigilant Mayor of the Town of Pembroke.
Sir,
LEt it not trouble your mind to conjecture who it is that thus put you in the
Press, it may suffice that there is a hand in this publication that has but
little cause to be partial in this sense, or to sign any thing in your
praise, did not worth and your faithful service to the State call for and
command it. Private spirits are odious in public times. Sir, Go on in your
wonted constancy, and the Lord prosper you; only take this friendly word of
counsel, Love them that love GOD, and cleave close to him your self; get
first acquaintance with him, and renew it by hearing the Word and Prayer, and
walk on with him by a daily exercise of piety; this do, I say, and prosper.
There will never want a party to assist you. If all should fail, God has an
Army of Flies and Lice to destroy his Enemies like the Egyptians. As for us we
shall not be wanting to put up the most effectual prayers we are able for you
all; That such as are unsettled may be established, that such as are hollow may
have that vacuity filled up with substance and realities, that such as are
descreet in their moderate and cold expressions in these times, may be made
either hot or cold, or spued out: That such as would now be savers may be
loosers, and such as will be loosers may be savers; That such as are distressed
may be comforted, and straightened Garrisons enlarged, if they deserve it. These
are our votes.

G.F. A.G. V.S.
24 Maij 1645. Jmprimatur Gilb. Mabbot, Deputat. Joh. Rushworth.
FINIS.

