An Exact and True RELATION How eighteen French and Irish men, whose Names are
set down, were apprehended at Salt-come in Devonshire near Plymouth, and from
thence by order of Parliament, brought up to Newgate, on Monday the 7th March
1641. upon a suspicion that they had an intention to transport victuals and
munition to the Rebels in Ireland.

Whereunto is added very Good News from IRELAND, brought over by the last
post, 7 Mar. 1641.

depiction of a sailing vessel

LONDON, Printed for John Wright, 1641.

The manner how eighteen French men who were bound for Ireland, we brought to
Newgate, 7 March 1641.
It Was the Prophets expression to no less then a King, obedience is better then
sacrifice; but rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft. A crime most hateful
to God and odious to man bringing swift destruction if not timely prevented, as
upon particular presons, so more generally upon whole kingdoms: it being that
cursed root, from whence proceeds many hundred branches of impious and
confused actions, rapes, murder, famine, fire and sword, with infinite the like
bloody and cruel massacres, do ordinarily attend this hell hatched fury;
wherein the innocent suffer as well as the guilty, good and bad, one among
another till at last the hand of Justice continually pursuing, ith end
overtakes, and in a moment, confounds the wretched actors thereof in sudden and
shameful ruin.

This truth needs but little Illustration, the distressed condition of our
neighbor nation of Ireland at this present, occasioned by the unnatural
rebellion of her own ill-bred sons, too well approves it, where such in
human cruelties, and unheard of tortures, are daily practiced by the
barbarous enemy, that the very relation thereof, would melt a heart of flint to
hear it,

But now blessed be God, such has the painful endeavors, and prudent care of
our most gracious King, and his wise Parliament been, for the help and
assistance of those our oppressed brethren, that by their charitable
benevolenee, and friendly aid, the protestants are much strengthened, and the
rebels discouraged, great hopes being left of a quick and final conquest over
those tyrannical and merciless traitors.

Our royal King has long since proclaimed them such, let none therefore
presume to succor or relieve such a viprous geneneration, that gnaw and feed
upon the bowels of their own dear mother, lest vengeance reward their ungodly
designs, and sweep away both authors and abettors at an instant.

The cause of this my writing proceeds from a late passage, now fresh in
memory and the only talk of the City, I mean the 18 French men, who by an
order from the Parliament were apprehended near Plymouth, and from thence
brought to Newgate, upon a suspicion, that they had an intention to transport
victuals and munition to the rebels in Ireland.

Their names are as follows, Captain Butler. Capt. John Ryant. Capt. Daniel
Ryant. Addam Gould merchant. Thomas Levaleu. merchant. Daniell Dally. master.
servants.
Morgan Quirke. Garret Foy. John Ryant.
Nich Baggott. Darby Ryant. David Galloway. John Williams. Patricke Furlong.
John Dym. Richard Gallaway. Thomas Mattach. John Butler.


The Ship lies at Salt-come in Devonshire, and was bound for Cork.

These men being shipped in a small vessel, which as they say was only laden
with merchandise in France, and bound for Cork, though it is supposed twill be
sound otherwise, were by contrary winds driven upon the coasts of England, at
a place called Saltcome in Devonsh. where not without good cause they were
staid by the Governor of the Town, and notice given to the Parliament,
thereof, who presently sent down an order to stay their ship and bring them to
London, which was accordingly done in this manner. The sherisse of every county
with the constables, were commanded to conduct them from place to place, till
at list they came to Brainford, where they lodgd on Sunday night, March 6. The
next day the sherises of London went down to Brainford and from thence brought
them to Newgate the same day at night, a Constables riding one each side all
the way and the prisoners in the middle.

If they be guilty I make no question but the Parliament will quickly sift it
out, and inflict such punishment upon them as the hamousnesse of their offense
deserves.

The last News from Ireland, 7 March, 1641.
The 10. of February our men went to Artain, against a castle so called, which
had before done some mischief, to some of our men, the enemy being in it, But
the enemy fled before our second coming, and left the Castle, and a garrison
was left in it by us.

Upon the 11th. we had news, that the enemy was intrenching at a place called
Soughing Town, some 6. Miles south of our City, and some 2000 Foot, and 200.
Horse went out against them; The Lord Lambart commanding in chief; A small
battle they had, but the Enemy stood not, on the Enemies side some 70 or more
was killed, and but one hurt on our side, and so came home that night, and
brought home one of the Rebels Captains and two more of the enemies Captains
slain, many Letters of treason were found about him that was taken.

On the 13. a man was brought to our City being taken by some of our scattering
men scouting about our City, who confessed without constraint, that he had killed
an English woman at a place called Leslipesous, 6. Miles West of our City, and
washed his hands in her blood, being set on by the popish Priests so to do,
he was presently hanged, but dyed with much repentance and a protestant, which
few do.

Upon the 19. and 20. Arrived here from you 2000 Foot and 300 horse but little
or no money, which made us poor of the City fare harder then before; which was
to hard.

Upon the 21. We had knowledge that our Ships sent with vittaile to relieve
Tredath had got safely in, and in spite of the enemy, who had chayned up the
harbor, but our men brake the Chain, and got in, notwithstanding. And public
thanks was with us for that happiness, for in such a great strait was that
City, as to eat Horse flesh, as letters from my friends from the City to me
testified; Also Captain Bartlet who was the Sea Captain, in his coming home
met with some fore small Boats or Barks of the Wexford men, going toward the
enemy in the North to carry Lenten provision, but he spoiled their design in
sinking most or all of them, About the same time we had also Letters out of
Munster, that all that part of the Country was rose in Rebellion being carried
out by the Lord Muscry, and Lore Roch, who had professed much fidellity, and
many deceitful promises had past to the president of that Province, till they
saw their own advantage, And it is reported they are net less then 20000
strong, best appointed of all the Rebels, for indeed this Lord Muscroy is the
most monied man, of all the Irish Lords, So that now not one place in Ireland,
but is in Rebellion, for the Lord of Clanrickard, stands as some think Neuter,
does nothing at all, or cannot do any thing, or will not, But we hear that
our President of Munster was forced to betake himself to the strong hold of
Cork, and the Lord of Cork betook himself to Toyhall, which are reported
both to be besiged by the enemy.

Upon the 23. of this month, news was that at a place near Feleston six
miles from us, a great multitude of the enemies had strongly fortifide
themselves, and it is well fortifide by nature, having also a strong Castle in
it; Some 3000 of our men went against it, horse and soote, Our Lord general
the Earl of Ormond himself went, as did Sir Charles Coot, Sir Symond
Harcourt, and many more, John Moore being one of the Soldiers, and upon the
forelorne hope. had both his left and right hand man killed, he told me that
our general himself, led up the forlorn hope, with many words of Comfort to
them, able to make any man fight of see such a man as he go in such danger:
For the enemy had a great wood to shelter them beside trenches, but our men
after 2 hours Battle, beat them from their Trench, and from the wood, killing
some 80 of them, For all that advantage but 7 of our men was killed, but that
we lost one Captain Rochford, a man of such note, that never more was any man
bewailed; For all the good and valliant parts of a Soldier was in him, in this
bout Sir Symond Harcourts Regiment, behaved themselves valliantly but for the
Castle our men were forced to return home without taking it, having nothing
but field pieces with them, the way being to rotten to bear greater as yet;
many more of the enemies had bin stain but that the wood defended them, so
that the Trees took off all that was sent to them in this Castle is thought to
be much wealth besides all that have bin great men of the Rebles. But our men
will not so leave it, but will again try their forces against in shortly.

As yesterday our men came home, yet it is to be feared that a famine is like to
be in our City, in that still men come to us and provision is short, and none
of yours that come to us bring any vittailes, great taxes are upon us, more
then can be borne, He that had Butter, and Cheese, and Cloth at between 6 and
14 Shillings a yard here sent by any out of London, might make a good trade of
it; Cheshire cheese is sold here for six pence a pound already; Some of your
Londoners are come hither (acquaintance of mine) that will send for such
things, for great profit may be made by them, and quick return.

FINIS.

