THE DEEDS OF Dr. Denison A little more manifested. BY HIS ANSWER TO THE
DEFENSE OF John Etherington. Which he published in Anno Dom. 1641. against his
false accusations and the depositions of his false witnesses. Whereupon he was
censured by the High Commission Court.

And his reply to the Doctors Answer. Which answer he has added to his
Woolfe-Sermon Book.

PRO. 11.6.9. The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, But
transgressors shall be taken in their own naughtiness,

An hypocrite with his mouth destroieth his neighbor: But through knowledge
shall the just be preserved.

PRO. 12.6. The words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood, but the mouth
of the upright shall deliver them.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. and are to be sold by John Wright, in the little
Old Bailey, 1642.

THE DEEDS OF Doctor Denison, a little more manifested.
JOHN ETHERINGTON's Reply.
IN the first page of your Answer Mr. D. on the 77. page, as it stands in the
end of your novellish book not to reply to every word or saying of yours
unmateriall. I charge you with falsehood in this, that you say I complained
first against you; whereas I complained not first to go to law in the
High Commission Court which you would seem to infer, and make people believe,
but only in way of request to have things heard in peace and ended without law;
And this was after you had scandalized and reviled me by name in your Pulpits,
and that I had sought unto you often, and you would by no means be spoken with
according as I have declared in my defense. And to the Archbishop you prevented
me, and got letters Missive granted to sue me in the Court, all which you know
very well to be true. Let the Reader now judge who is here to be blamed for
false speaking, and evil doing you or I.

And in the second page of your Answer, in that you say you might have required
of me costs of suit, but did not; you tell the Reader a manifest untruth, for
you did move the Court for costs of suite the same time that I was discharged,
and were checked and reproved by some of the Court for the same, and bid hold
your peace, as can be proved by sufficient witness if need be; therefore let
the Reader consider how you favored me as you say.

And whereas in the same page, you deny that you sought after, or thirsted for
my blood; besides the report of a Minister, on Master Ward, that told it me
when I was in prison, as a thing that he heard from your own mouth. Your Woolfe
Sermon as you preached it at the Cross, did discover your desires in that
respect, to many that then heard you, and so judged. And in your book of that
Sermon, though it be much altered and refined of many hateful and
bloodthirsty words you then uttered; yet there is still enough therein that
proves the same: And in that you deny you said of me by name, Whether he be
dead or alive, with God, or the devil, I cannot tell, etc. There is witness
sufficient to prove that you did so speak in your Pulpit at Creechurch, and
that you were my chief accuser, except the chiefest wicked one, it is well
enough known to many. And concerning the Depositions of your witnesses, whom
you style honest men, Ministers, and Professors, no knights of the Post, etc.
Let the Reader but consider their depositions, which neither they nor you can
deny to be their own words, and my defense also; and he shall see if he be
judicious, and not partial, what honest professors they are. Men may profess
strictness in Religion, as the Pharisees did, and yet be no better then they
that bare false witness against Christ, and persecuted him.

And whereas in the third page, you blame me so greatly for that in my defense,
Mr. Robrowgh is set down Curate, if he had wrong done him therein, let the
Reader blame the Register, or Robrowgh himself; for so I found it in his
deposition Recorded, which I have yet under the Registers hand to show, and
whatsoever he is now, he might be so then for ought I know; and to have the
care of, or be a curer of souls, need be no disparedgement to him; nay rather
it would be happy for him if he were so.

And for your wondering that I so charge Sir Henry Martine whom you so greatly
extol, in the same third page, which you say I durst not have done if he had
been alive. Whereas it is well known I did it at least ten years before openly
to the Court, and in his own hearing and sight, and he was living after my
defense was published in print, though you (caring not to publish lies) say the
contrary. But Master Doctor, you have great reason to set forth the praise of
Sir Henry Martin, and to extol him, because he help you so well out of the
mire, wherein you had so unadvisedly befowled your self, not only in this your
evil and unchristian-like dealing against me; but also in respect of your
other business at Cree-Church, concerning some of the chief of your Parish,
for which the Archbishop and Court displaced you, and especially that of the
women for whch that Knight got you a purgation granted by the Court, that you
might thereby cleanse your self therefrom without any Repentance or Remition.

These are some of your sure signs that Sir Henry Martin was a righteous
Judge, and for which he suffered blame by some great men, as the Archbishop
and some other of the Bishops the same time as you know.

Your saying in your fourth page, and your glorying in the presentation and
dedication of your book to the King, I refer to the consideration of the
Reader that has or shall reademy defense, and request him also to read and
consider well your Epistle Dedicatorie (of your Wolfes book) to the King, and
see how you play the Sycophant and Colloguer especially with the High
Commission Court, and Bishops of Canterbury and London, Abbot and Mountney.

And in your fifth page, where you say I pretend I could never obtain to
speak with you, etc. and tell of Master Cleaver, Robrowgh, Stephens, etc. and
then say that I know you have met me diverse times in the streets of London, and
said unto me John Hetherington, I pray let me speak with you, etc. This tale
of yours is a very untruth, for until I complained of you to the Bishop of
London, all the while that you scadalized and reviled me by name in your
Pupits, which was the time wherein I say, and you know I often sought, and
could never obtain to speak with you. And within three days after we had
been before the Bishop of London, you entered your suit and got Letters Missive
out against me.

It is true, after you had gotten sentence passed against me, and that I had
enduted three years imprisonment, and being discharged and at liberty, I met
with you at the end of Cornhill by the Stocks; and I spoke to you, and
requested that I might now speak with you once after all my troubles; and your
answer or words first were, I am glad thou have renounced thy errors; and I
answered you, nay, not so, but I disclaimed before the Court those false and
evil things which you, and your witnesses had charged me with, I renounce
nothing that I held; and so we went together up Cornhill, and into the
Exchange, where I told you of your false and evil dealing toward me, and of
your false and wicked Sermon, full of bitterneste, malice, and lies, which you
had published and preached against me; and you took me up short I confess,
and reproved me for my boldness, saying; Do thou speak thus to a Doctor. And
upon some words of reproof that I used unto you for your wicked dealing; you
told me, Thou have not the keys, I have the keys etc. and then after other
words you slung away in a fury threatening me.

It is true also, that I have met with you, and you with me oftentimes since?
when you have given me very currish and threatening words as I passed by you,
once in Thames Street near Queen-hive, when you said, Hetherington, I hear you
keep Conventicles still, I must have you up agaiue, And another time in
Cornhill by the Conduit, when your foul matter concerning the women was in
suit in the Court? where you said to me I hear thou have a hand in my
business, and threatening me with something you would do if I had, your
conscience as it seems accusing you; whereas I had no hand in that business at
all from the beginning thereof, to the end. And once I confess about two years
ago, since your business with the women was past, I met you in the street
behind the Exchange, and you called to me saying, (not as you say I pray let me
speak with you; but John Hetherington I would speak with thee, and these were
the fauell words that ever you spoke to me, and this was but once not often, as
you say. And I answered you, speak with me, to what end, and so I passed by
you; but as for grinding at you with my teeth; or saying I scorn it, is a mere
lie, I never used any such gesture or words to you, or any man else. So that in
all this, you have showed your self to be both foolishly proud, to use your
own phrase, and a false canning equivocator in deed and word.

As touching your 6, 7, and 8, pages, I need not say any thing more then what
is in my defense.

And in the ninth page, where you mention sundry books, as an Epistle to the
Church of Rome the tree of Regeneration, T. L. upon some part of the
Revelation. And my book against Anabaptists; I advise the Reader not to
believe your bare report, but to read and consider the books, and then judge
as he finds.

And concerning the Sabbath, and the observation of the first day of the week,
I have declared my mind in my defense, and elsewhere; which I request the
judicious Reader to think of and judge as he sees cause, and not let D. D. be
the judge.

And in the tenth page you say that I vilify the Sacraments, particularly that
of Baptism; in that I say it does not convey grace, nor consume it to the
heart of any man, no more then circumcision did. Let the Christian Reader that
is not Arminiamish nor Popish, but truly Orthodoxall, judge if this be a
vilifying of Baptism, or if it be a holding of no baptism, but that of
Repentance and Regeneration, or a point of Familisme as you speak.

And to say that Caesar may command a place for the public worship of God, so
he forbid none in private, and explaining my indening as I have done in my
^^^^ence; if this be equivocation, or a familisticall wicke, or that of yours
M. Doctor, in your Wolvish-Sermon book, page 44. where you quote a page of my
book against Anabaptists; where these words Caesar may command a place for the
public, etc. are, and (...): out two of my words and put in one of your own
instead of them, as your reverend witness Henry Robrough has also done
affirming them upon his oath to be my words.

I pray you Master Doctor, why do you not answer this, and clear your self
and your witness of this equivocation, falsehood, and false-witnesse-bearing,
but smother it over with this new trick of your old lying and scandalous
speaking as before in your Pulpits and Sermons, so now here in your answer to
my defense.

And I pray you Sir, why do you not mention the words of those factious books
of mine (as you call them) that do condemn all Reformers? I own no such books,
or words. These are but your old scandalous and false affirmations; In my
defense it may be seen by my words what I mean concerning the Church of
England.

And whereas in page 11. you affirm, that because I say the true Church of
Christ consists of true regenerate servants of God, sanctified by faith in
Christ: therefore I hereby deny the Church of England to be a true Church of
Christ. It is manifest by this affirmation of yours, that your self do deny
the Church or England, to be a true Church of Christ; for if you deny it to be
of that holy universal Church which consists of Saints regenerate (as by
necessary consequence from your words) you do; then it is you that do it, and
not I.

I say the Church of England as it is, and may be called a true Church of
Christ, is and must needs be a part of that holy universal; although in the
outward estate thereof, there are, and may be many in it that are not
sanctified (and so not of it. And it is not your often clamor, and scandalous
terms of familisme, etc. that can make your matter good, or clear your
witness Henry Robrowgh (that deposes this very thing against me upon the same
ground) whereby he himself denies the Church of England to be a true Church of
Christ, nor prove any thing against me. Let the Reader consider and judge of
these things.

And in that you say, and your witnesses swear that I charge the Church of
England with teaching false doctrine, because I have charged you, and some such
as you are, therewith, as if the Church of England consisted of them, and you;
Nay, Sir, that is not so, neither will it so follow, though your false witness
has sworn it.

The Doctrine that I except against both in you, and them I will mention some
part. And first this of yours.

That the fourth Commandment touching the Sabbath was always, and in every
part mortal, and in no part Ceremonial; affirming for proof thereof, and
saying, It was command in Paradise, before any Ceremony was hatched.

2 That Christ between his resurrection and ascension did alter the
Commandment from the seventh day; to the first; and informed his Apostles
thereof.

3 That Christians are now bound by the same fourth Commandment, to as strict
an observation of the first day of the week, as the Jews were of the seventh.

4 That Christ when he bid the man that was healed on the Sabbath day, take up
his bed and walk, He commanded the the breach of a mortal precept.

All this he said in his inveying against me by name in his Pulpits; and
because I had once (many years before) done some small work upon a needful
occasion on the first day of thee week, which he had heard of, he brake out
against me vehemently affirming that I could not be of God; and saying for
proof thereof (using the words of the Pharisees against Christ) We know (as it
is written) this man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day,
John 9.16.

5 That; ustifying faith is before repentance, and affirming that it is a
damnable error, to hold that repentance does necessarily go before
justification from our sins by faith, or justifying faith.

6 That when God to prove Abraham, commanded him to offer his Son for a
sacrifice; he commanded him to murder him, and to break the sixth Commandment.

7 That the Isralitas in taking such things of the Egiptians. as they in favor
let them have, did steal from them and break the eighth Commandment, and that
God did approve of the breach thereof.

8 That God is not only a spectator, but a powerful agent in sin.

9 That God did preordaine that Adam should fall and break his commandment.

10 That the Prophet Elisha in saying to Naaman the Assyrian, Go in peace; did
say as much, as get thou gone thou hypocrite, get thee hence.

11 That Christ may yet personally descend from heaven to the earth before the
day of judgment, for any Scripture there is to the contrary, and that although
it be said the heavens shall receive Christ until the times of the restitution
of all things, Yet it is not said they shall contain him till then.

These are part of Stephen Denisons doctrine which he delivered in his Sermons
preached at Creechurch, and great Alhallowes, while he was reviling and
scandalizing of me, all which doctrine I account false.

And by some others whom I will not now name, but shall hereafter if occasion
require. It has been taught, that the Jews should be delivered (every one of
them remainig alive) out of all Countries to the land of Canaan, and be
converted all of them to be true christians, and dwell in the land in great
glory, with a great King of their own stock (either Christ himself, or some
other in his stead) for a thousand years before the end of the world.

And by others, that Christ shall indeed come personally and raise up all the
Saints that have suffered) or as some of them teach) all the Saints in general
that are asleep, and reign with them on earth a thousand years before the end
of the world, and resurrection of the unjust; which doctrine of these. I also
account false and contrary to the Scriptures.

And concerning Robrowghs false doctrine, I have in part spoken in my defense,
and I hope hereafter things shall be manifested more fully concerning that
passage between him and me.

And whereas in the end of your eleventh page you affirm of me that I stick
not to say, that I hold the Sabbath to be in force, and that the last day of
the week is to be observed. I pray Mr. Doctor, when, or where have I spoken or
writ these words, that the last day of the week is to be observed, who juggles
and equivocates now?

And in your twelfe page, how you have answered my defense, I refer to the
judicious Reader, that has, or shall read both, to consider. Your foul
terms with those that are wise, will work nothing against me.

And for your false clamours in the thirteenth page, that I will have no duties
pressed on the Lord's Day, neither prayers, nor preaching, nor coming to the
Sacraments; but christians left to do what they list. I hope the Reader will
discern you in this, because he may see in my defense it is otherwise, and
that you utter out false words of your own inventing, having no respect at all
unto truth, or a good conscience.

And for those Authors which I have quoated in my defense, whom you say I have
notoriously abused, I refer the Reader to their own Records; to see if I have
abused them or no.

And as touching the two last books of Esdras, I have declared my mind already
in my defense; only this I say further, that it is manifest by the account of
the Generalogie, and other passages in Ezra the 7. compared with 1 Esdras 8.
they are one and the same; and therefore in sundry former bibles these two last
books are numbered the 3, and 4, of Esdras. And for those words or names of
distinction, Canonical and Apocryphal, I take them to intend nothing but
this; That the one part of Scripture being found written in the Hebrew tongue,
and being for that cause, and sundry other more manifest, and certain proofs
concluded in the first times of the Church to be the Word of the Lord
certainly, was therefore called canonical. The other part not so found, nor as
yet for that present so evidently proved and manifested to the Church, to be so
certainly the word of the Lord, as the other was left as Scriptures, yet secret
and hidden; and therefore called Apocryphal; not but that it might (at least
some part thereof, be found and proved certainly to be the Word of the Lord, as
well as the other, and so concluded and received by the church of God; though
it be not, nor has any need to be called canonical, nor is ever the worse in
it self, for the name Apocryphal; nor unto such as understand in their heart,
and believe the truth thereof.

And in the 14. page, or 90. as it stands in the end of your wolvish
sermon-book, were you speak of private meetings by the laws prohibited, and
poisonfull doctrines, etc. what you please there to speak. As touching the
first part, I refer the Reader to my defense against your last Article.

But as concerning the other part which you call the seventh thing culpable;
where you say I affirm, and that most pestilently, that outward baptism does
neither confer nor confirm grace to the heart of any man, no more then
circumcision did etc.

I pray sir, are you a Papist, or an Arminian, or an Anabaptist, for belike you
hold it does, as they teach. I confess I hold that it does not no more then
circumcision in the flesh did, according as the right Protestants hold; neither
is this a most pestilent thing, as you blasphemously speak, but the very truth
in this point. Grace is conferred and confirmed to the heart of a christian by a
more supernatural power, then is or can be in the outward act of baptism,
even by the power and Spirit of God. Outward baptiseme, I hold to be an outward
seal of Gods faithfulness; in, and as touching his covenant to the faithful,
and their seed; as circumcision in the flesh was to faithful Abraham, and his
seed. And that it is an outward sign showing that we must be circumcised, or
cleansed in heart by the grace and Spirit of God, through faith in Christ, if
ever we be heirs with Abraham. And so I hold outward baptism to be in force
unto christians, as circumcision was to the Jews, contrary to your lying words,
that say I deny it. Neither is this a familisticall trick as you so
scandalously speak, according to your old customs in your wolvish book, and
in your former invective Sermons.

And although there be now no High Commission Court, as you tell me; implying
that you would complain against me again there, if there were; yet let me tell
you sir, there are other Courts as high and as good as that, and laws also as
just, and good to judge of these matters, unto which you may complain if you
please.

And whereas in your 91 page, otherwise the 15, you say I have a fling at the
Lords Supper (a fine phrase for a Doctor) And that under color of speaking
against the carnal eating and drinking the body and blood of Christ in that
Sacrament. You say I condemn also the opinion of spiritual eating; for say
you, these are my words; Neither do we by the actions of eating the bread, and
drinking the wine of the Sacrament, eat or drink the grace of God purchased by
the body and blood of Christ. I confess these are my words in my defense.

Now I pray sir, do I in these words deny, or condemn the opinion as you
speak, of spiritual eating and drinking the body and blood of Christ, or the
spiritual enjoyment of the grace and love of God through faith in Christ,
which that Sacrament of the Supper does show forth unto all true christians.
Nay, let the judicious christian Reader judge and consider what is further
expressed in my defense.

But you Mr. Doctor, your opinion and doctrine belike is, that Christians by
the very acts of eating the bread, and drinking the wine of the Sacrament, eat
and drink the grace of God. Is this your orthodoxall doctrine sir,, is this
your opinion of spiritual eating? a fit man sure, are you not, to preach the
Lecture of preparation to the Sacrament, as you are admitted to do at Buttolphs
without Algate, and well are the people taught there the while, are they not,
let the orthodoxall Reader judge.

That religious gentlewoman (as I suppose she truly was, which gave you that
legacy to perform that work) had done far better if she had given it to the
poor widow and fatherless, or have left the same to such overseers as
should have disposed it to some one that could and would have performed the
work better, and more found them so.

Now to make some use of your own phrase, M. Doctor, who does grossly abuse
divinity, who is the proud ignorant sott, who is meet to be censured to stand
at Pauls-Crosse with a paper on his breast expressing his grossly abusing
divinity, and venting false doctrine poisoning of others, with a thousand eyes
looking upon him, Doctor Denison, or who, let the judicious reader judge?

It is true, M. Doctor, that through you, and your false witnesses Henry
Robrostgh, and John Okeie, and by their false depositions; false I say, as the
Reader by my defense may plainly see. One Bishop said in passing sentence,
according as you in your answer at the end of your wolvish book have set it
down; which I had my self written in a coppie of my defense, which you had
unjustly gotten, and kept among you from me, otherwise I suppose you could not
so readily have mentioned them; but it is no matter, I have suffered a great
deal more then that, by your false and wicked dealing, and the rest of your
false witnesses, Rowland Thomson, Thomas Rogers, George Dun, Peter Worcester,
Christopher Nicholson, and the rest; as I have in my defense in some part
declared.

And now M. Doctor, let me propound a matter or two unto you. You may see, and
so may others by this and by my defense especial; how plainly and openly I
have declared and published the things by you charged, by your witnesses
deposed, and by the High Commission Court passed in sentence against me, and
what in part I have suffered, and do still suffer through the same. And you may
see how I refer all to the judicious christian Reader, to consider of, and
judge.

You know sir that after this cause of yours against me, there was (as I have a
little remembered you of before) a Cause or two commenced against your self in
the same High Commission Court, concerning some of the chief of your Porish of
Creechurch, and some several women, whom you were charged to have abused. They
of your Parish publicly in your Pulpit, and the women secretly in your
chamber; I will not here name the particular abuses, they were plainly enough
spoken and read in the Court; the foulness whereof being such, as caused all,
or the most part of the people there present, hearing the same, to hang down
their heads greatly ashamed thereat, when you stood holding up your head boldly
in the face of the Court, not seeming to be ashamed at all, which many did
wonder at to behold; and one Bishop observing you, and having heard the foul
matters that were deposed against you by so many witnesss (as you know) not
knight of the post sir, any more then as you tell me they were not, that
deposed your Cause against me; but such, as if the Reader please he may inquire
of as you speak. This Bishop as you may remember, reproved you very sharply;
and said, do you see how boldly he stands here before us, facing us, he has a
forehead of brass.

Now sir, if your Cause be so good, and your self so honest and innocent as
you would have all men think (which yet they do not) wright done all what your
accusers have charged you with, and what has been deposed against you, and by
what manner of persons, every thing in their own plain words, and what the
sentence of the Court was, and publish the same openly in print, with your
defense unto every particular charge and deposition, as you see I have done
that of yours against me. Do this I say if your cause be good, and clean, and
your self honest, and upright, (it will be no greater chage I suppose then the
new re-printing of your wolfe-sermon; that so all men may see plainly, and
judge of the cause, and you accordingly. But otherwise, if it be naught and
foul, and your self justly charged, as you in your own conscience know best;
then let it alone except in the way of humble confession of your sins unto God
in true repentance, if it be possible.

Another thing that I propound unto you is, concerning my self, and you, and
your witnesses; seeing my defense will not silent you, nor all that I have
unjustly suffered by your means, satisfy you; that you, and they will be
willing with me, to have all matters between us heard and considered of anew in
a fair way, either before the Bishop of London, and some other Ministers
chosen on both sides, or else by some Committee of the Parliament, if it may be
obiained, that so the blame may be laid rightly where it ought.

And as touching your Pauls-Crosse wolvish-sermon, that masterpiece of yours,
which you in the conclusion of your answer to my defense; say you have for this
Cause caused to be new printed, that so the Reader may see whether I have
answered what concerns me in it, or no, telling in print, of purpose, a
manifest lie, it being not in any part new printed, but only the rem under of
an old impression, printed in Anno 1627. foureteen years ago, to which you
have put a new title page, dated 1641. and added your answer to the end,
numbering the pages thereof, according to your old book, as if indeed all were
printed anew together according to your saying; so to delude the Reader, as
your usual custom and manner in all your matters is and has been to do, with
cunning equivocations, falsehood, and lies, whereof that wolvish-sermon book of
yours is full, agreeable to your Articles against me in the Court, and to your
witnesses depositions, for like master, like scholars and servants, like
accuser, like witnesses. And for your book, I say no more of it at this time,
but this, let it remain among the rest of your deeds, as it hitherto has
been a monument to the world of your wickedness and folly. And so I leave
you, and your witnesses together a while, to consider of all what you have
done, and of my propositions; though I have not any belief that you will
regard my motion, or have a thought in your heart to do either the one, or the
other.

JOHN 3. For every one that does evil hates the light. neither comes to the
light, least his deeds should be reproved.

But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest.

FINIS.

