THE VOICE OF MICHAEL THE Archangel, To his Highness The Lord PROTECTOR: For
the Salvation of himself and the three Nations.

Presented by ARISE EVANS.

Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see and ask after the old
paths, where is the good way; and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your souls; but they said, we will not walk therein, Jer. 6.16.

Also I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet: but
they said, We will not hearken, Verse. 17.

Printed 1653. or as the vulgar think it, 1654.

May it please your Highness,
MY Lord, your own words delivered, Sep. 12. as your speech page 36. shows,
that sometimes there is a necessity for a man to speak, and that pure necessity
has no law: I would there were no cause for me, after I had spoken so much for
you, to the coffeehouse of all my friends, and also to you, all for your
advantage. If you had followed mine advise, according to the prophesying of God
in your behalf, as you have it in all my books, specially in my book, called
your Vindication. I say I would there were no cause for me to have expostulated
these things with you now, and in such a manner as this is; seeing I have so
often by writting and printing showed what by right you should do.

And as this twelve months I have been, so I am now kept off, by them that
attend you, from having such conserence with you, as heretofore I had; and
therefore I am forced to print what I would have but spoke or write, hoping it
may come to your hands, and thence to your heart; yet leaving out something,
which in private might be physical unto you, because I dare not commit them to
the Press, and so make them subject to foolish censures.

My Lord, It was no small grief unto me, when I hard that which befell you last
Saint Michaels day, though some to comfort me, said, that it made much for me,
because, said they, therein God has appeared to maintain my affirmations, and
to consute your high assertions, in your speech lately published. All glay be
to God who did speak to you in this time of need, though by a thunder. I would
not declare it, if I knew a better interpreter that would deal more faithfully
with you concerning it, then I shall do; for I believe, though I be but a mean
instrument, yet I am appointed of God to tell you, that it was Gods love to
rebuke you, and it was his mercy to save you, and good may come to you of it.
If you desire to understand what is Gods meaning by it, I answer, his mind is,
That you turn from your own designs NOW, and do Gods designs; GODS DESIGN is
made known unto you already by my books; that is, briefly, to stablish King
Charles, and the true Religion; I mean Bishops as we had before, and for that
end God saved you. Your own design is made known also, by your going about to
do the contrary, for which cause God rebuked you.

And I pray you consider it, God did not speak to you in an unknown tongue, nor
deny all your assertions (wherein you call him to witness) in a language that
you cannot understand, and there was much of his love to you in that, Isa.
28.11. but he answered you by your own words. For whereas you say, p. 37. of
your speech, That you could sooner be willing to be rolled into your grave and
buried with infamy, then part with that government which did establish you a
supreme; I pray consider whether you were not rolled very near your grave, so
that a little more had done it. Behold it is hereby clear God disowns your
government, and your being set up by him; and they whom once ye counted the
good people say as much, and them who ye counted the bad people say no less:
who then is for ye, but a sort of lukewarm people, that will turn with every
wind? and what trust can you repose in them? Oh lay these things to heart, and
know that God has told you by this also, as I have told you often by writing,
and will you not yet hear? Oh take heed lest the trumpet of God wax louder and
louder, Exodus 19.19. until you be forced to hear.

My Lord, I have no pleasure in telling you these things, but it is needful I
should do it, for I find men, yea Ministers, and your own too, do not deal
faithfully with you; it is true, they tell you of sin in general terms, and
give hints also in public of this very judgment before all men to your
dishoner; yet they do not examine the cause why, and show you for what great
sin this threatening hand of God appeared against you. The Magicians dealt not
so with Pharaoh when they saw God appear for Israel, but told him plainly, This
is the finger of God, Exodus 8.19. And how does Joshua take on, when he saw the
judgment of God upon them; and what enquiry does he make until he found out
the sin which was the cause of it? Josh. 7. Yea, the very heathen were so
troubled when they saw a sudden tempest come upon them, that search is made
with all speed to find out the sin and cause of it, Jon. 1.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

And how was Pharaoh troubled with his dream until he found out an
interpreter? and what great benefit came unto him by knowing the truth of it,
Genesis 41. And what a stir Nebuchadnezzar kept about his dream, though he had
forget it, so that he would have destroyed all his wisemen, because they could
not tell him both his dream and the interpretation thereof, had not Daniel
answered his expectation, and who can blame him for it? the matter is worthy of
all that seeking after, Dan. 2. was not also Belshazzar troubled when be had
profaned and dishonored Gods holy vessels, and saw his sentence of death
written before him on the wall, was not he troubled for an interpreter to open
it? Dan. 5. and though the news to him was bad, yet how gloriously does he
reward Daniel according to the manner of the two former Kings!

And David had his Prophets, that told him of his particular sin, and he gladly
heard them, and was obedient, 2 Samuel 12. 2 Samuel 24. and when a judgment came,
David enquired himself for to know the cause of it, 2 Samuel 21.1. but see the
contrary spirit; Amaziah, though sometimes a good King; yet when the Prophet
told him of his particular sin, he could not endure him, 2 Chronicles. 25.2.7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. And Herod gladly heard John Baptist, and did
many things as he would have him do; but when John comes to deal faithfully
with him, and told him of his own darling sin, which by no means he could
endure to hear of; then John's head must be taken off, rather then Herod would
part with his sin, Mark 6.17, 18, 20.27.

Therefore my Lord, blame me not, though I deal faithfully with you; God speaks
by visions once, yea twice, and man perceives it not; then GOD is gracious,
sends an interpreter (one chosen from among a thousand) to show man his way,
and to keep him from the pit, Job. 33.14, 15.23.24. For a man in a great sin,
is as one in a deep sleep over a pit; and though God speaks aloud to him, he
cannot hear, for the sweet rest that he takes in his prosperity, and sin will
hardly suffer him to awake before he falls into the pit, and then it is too
late. It is a great grace for a man, when he is told of his particular sin, not
to deny it, but to confess it and forsake it, Prove. 28.13. How sweet a thing it
is to see David's Confession, when Nathan had taken him as in a net, by making
him pronounce Judgment against himself, 2 Samuel 12.13. And how grievous a thing
it is to see a man hardened like Pharaoh in his sin, when his own Magicians tell
him, Exodus 8.9. This is the finger of God.

Oh my Lord, God has spoken once or twice to you, let him speak no more to you
after this manner, lest you smart to the purpose for it, I am sure he has a
part in you that he will not loose; he will put you to the greatest afflictions
that ever was in the world, yea beyond Jobs, rather then you shall go on in
your sin. Oh then return at this one voice, as Saint Paul did, who a little
before was as resolute to the contrary as you can be. I know my Lord you are
wise, and exceeding wise, and that by your wisdom you think to stand; glory
not in it, but know this, that God takes the wise in their own craftiness, Job
5.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 1 Corin. 3.19, 20. Therefore do not think, or say within
your self, because I am wise, I am rich, I am strong, Jer. 9.23. I will go on
to keep out such a party; be not deceived any longer, for God is wiser,
stronger, and richer then you, he knows wherefore he has designed you. And
though he suffered you to go on with prosperity thus far, and you think it is
pleasing to God, yet you will find it is not so.

I do verily believe that your Speech came from your heart, and you thought God
went along with you all this time, for God did foresee, that an eminent man
should have a strong erring confidence (as once Paul had) being utterly
deceived in his thoughts of God, at the time when he came to judgment, and
therefore hear what he says, Psalm. 50.4, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. But
unto the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or that
thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? seeing thou hate instruction,
and castest my words behind thee? When thou saw a thief, then thou
consentedst with him, and have been partaker with adulterers. Thou give thy
mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit. Thou sit and speak against
thy brother, and slanderest thine own mothers son. These things have thou done,
and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was altogether such a one as thy
self: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes. Now
consider this, etc.

1. Mark my Lord, Psalm. 50.16, 17. He tells of your presumption in declaring
his Statutes, as if you were called to do it; and of your casting away behind
you his instruction, and his true Ministers who are lawfully called, and
enabled to declare to you the truth perfectly, even the Ministers of the Church
of England.

2. Mark my Lord, verse. 18. He tells you how you consent with those theevish
Kings, who like Nimrod, Genesis 10.9. think it is lawful for them to take what
they can get by the sword; and of your partaking with men in spiritual
adultery, or false worshipping of God.

3. Mark my Lord, verse. 19. He tells you this, Thou give thy mouth to evil,
and thy tongue frames deceit, that is against God, the King, and the Church,
and yet you think it is not so.

4. Mark my Lord, v. 20. He tells you of your sitting in State, and wronging
the King, who is the son of your true and only mother, the Church of England.

5. Mark my Lord, He tells you, that God did let you go on all this time, and
say nothing to all that you did; wherefore you never doubted, but thought
surely, God in a more extraordinary manner was with you and your army, then he
was with any people on earth, as your speech shows, page 37. therefore he tells
you, that you are mistaken in your thoughts of God, and that you are adverse
before him in your works ^^^ch he sets in order before your eyes; that he now
will let you know his mind, and reprove you indeed, and tear you in pieces,
except you order your conversation aright, verse 22, 23. and make your peace as
Zacheus did, Luke 19.8.

My Lord, thus righteous David, or rather God smites you, that you might turn
to him, Psalm. 141.5. Isa. 9.13. Doubt not but that I give you the true meaning
of Psalm. 50. and that you are the person there signified, verse. 21. For I have
the spirit that David had, because he and I was anointed together; and I
believe that you will say that you have seen some of the effects of my
anointing by my prophesying, which already have been fulfilled.

And to prove my anointing, look in 1 Samuel 16. verse. 3. (says God to Samuel)
thou shall anoint unto me, him, whom I name unto thee, verse. 11. ( Samuel says
to Jesse) send and fetch him, for we will not sit down till he come hither,
verse. 12. (the Lord names me, and bids him anoint me, as you see) And the Lord
said, Arise, anoint him, for this is he.

Now observe, according to the command and promise, verse. 3. Thou shall anoint
him whom I name, verse. 12. he does not name David, but arise; and if you
observe, the holy word takes off all objections; and lest some should say, God
bide Samuel who was sat down, arise to anoint David, therefore says Samuel to
take off that conceit, verse. 11. We will not sit down till he come hither, so
that it is clear; that as David was anointed with oil, as you see by the
History: so I was anointed by the spirit, as you see by the mystery, and by
many other places I could prove it; therefore I believe that I have as good
authority to do what I do, as any man has; and I hope my Lord you will not
despise it, though perhaps many (whose case is miserable) that have not tasted
of the heavenly gift, Heb. 6.4. nor known the quickening power and operation of
the work of God upon their souls, Heb. 4.12, 13. 1 Cor. 15.45. will both
despise it and reject it.

Now my Lord I see, and you may see, that you have been mistaken in God, and in
his Church all this while; for it is Gods time to help his people, when all
their power is gone, so that there is none shut up or left, Deuteronomy. 32.34, 35,
36. and nor before. Then shows God his power to save his Church; and therefore
do not think, that though God suffered men thus far to tread down his Church,
and to do to them what they pleased: but that God now will remember and save
them: Herod for a time vexed the Church, and he killed James; and because he
saw that it pleased the wicked Jews (as now it pleases the Presbyters to see
an Ordinance come forth to afflict our Ministers) he laid hold on Peter,
thinking utterly to destroy the Ministers, hoping that then the pillars being
down, the Church would fall of it self. But in this time of straightness, the
Lord sends his angel to deliver Peter and the Church, and to destroy Herod,
Acts 12.1, 2, 3.11.23.24. and then the Church flourished.

Truly my Lord, you shall find that I am faithful to you; you are not the
first that was deceived after this manner: but I find none so like you as
Saint Paul was, who breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
Disciples of the Lord, in the hight of his persecuting zeal, fell to the earth
a Pharisee, but rose a Christian, Act. 9. Oh it was a good fall to him, and so
I hope your fall will be to you. Poor man! the very light that he saw from his
fall, struck him blind, so that he was willing to receive his sight of him
whom Christ had appointed to give it him, though a man without any outward call
to do it. So I trust you will receive your spiritual sight of me, who am not
appointed of the Ministers, but of God alone to do it: the parallel holds in all
things, and therefore be sure that it is of God, and it is his will for your
salvation, that you now should hear me. And this I say unto you, that as Saint
Paul was Jesus Christ's chief Champion for his warfare, so shall you be King
Charles chief Champion for his warfare, and all to the glory of JESUS CHRIST.
For there is but one just war in the world; and that war is for the first born
of Japhet, the elder son of Noah, Genesis 10.2, 3, 4, 5.21. which is in the world.
How to find out this man, by his Genealogies, it is impossible, 1 Timothy 1.4.
And therefore God promises to give testimony of him to the world, as he gave
testimony of his own son Jesus Christ, by giving a day star also at his birth,
Rev. 2.27, 28. and as the Star was taken notice of at Christ's birth: so must
this Star be taken notice of, at this man's birth, as Saint Peter says, 2 Pet.
1.19. take heed to the day star; and so much notice was taken of it, that there
was Latin Verses made of it, and presented to the late King Charles, as
follows.

Rex ubi Paulinas accessit gratus ad aras,
Immicuit medio lucida stella Pole.
Dic divina mihi tractasn aenigmata caeli,
Haec Oriens nobis, quid sibi stella velit?
Magnus in Occiduo principes modo nascitur orb,
Moxque sub eclipsi regna Orientis erunt.
Englished thus by Mr. J. B.

When to Paul's cross the grateful King drew near,
A shining star did in the heaven appear.
Thou that consults with divine mysteries,
Tell me what this bright Comet signifies:
Now is there born a valiant Prince in the West,
That shall eclispe the Kingdoms of the East.
And this man has as true, and more authoity over all the world, be they
Kings, or of whatsoever degree they be, then any man or King has over his own
children; and as he is bound to rule them severely in righteousness, so every
one also is bound upon pain of eternal damnation, Romans 13.2. to assist him
against all such Rebels as shall oppose him; and there is great need of such a
King to be over all the Kings in the world, to punish them that quarrel and are
rebellious to Gods word, for Kings commonly are as other wicked men be that
fear not God: tell them of Jesus Christ, and that he will punish them at the
day of Judgment; alas they matter not that, that never hinders them, no more
then it does hinder a thief from stealing. And as there is many thieves, yea
most men are so minded they would steal, if it were not for fear of the
gallows, which fear does restrain them; so these theevish minded Kings of the
earth, If there were one to punish them here, they would fear him, and not do
wickedly; and he would be as terrible to the wicked kings of the earth, Psalm.
76.12. as the gallows is for a theeving minded man, who would steal, but dare
not for fear the gallows catch him; for as in Jesus Christ God showed the
excellency of his mercy to mankind; so in this man God shows forth the
excellency of his justice to mankind, without which justice good peaceable men
nor Kings cannot be perfectly happy.

Therefore, you that will draw the sword, draw it for King Charles; all that
draw it other ways, draw it for Nimrod: and Nimrods cause and tenet was this
saying, Because I am stronger then my neighbor, brother, or father, therefore
it is lawful for me to kill him, and take all that he has: and if you say unto
Nimrod, You must do unto all men as you would have all men do unto you, he will
answer, so I will, For I would have any man, if he can, to kill me, and take
all from me; therefore I do no more to them then I would have them do to me, if
they dare. And by this rule and law Princes go to this day, and so the world is
disquieted: therefore God says (meaning Charles and his line for ever) He
shall cut off the spirit of Princes, he shall be terrible to the Kings of the
earth, Psalm. 76.12. that is, to such unjust princes and Kings, that live by the
sword, and not by righteousness.

All warriers should take Abraham for their pattern, because he is the first
holy warrier we read off. And mark what the prophet says of Abraham and of
Christ to you soldiers, Isa. 51.1, 2. Hearken to me ye that follow after
righteousness, ye that seek the Lord, look unto the rook whence ye are hewn,
and to the hole of the pit whence ye are dug, look unto Abraham your father,
and unto Sarah (the Church) that bare you: for I have called him alone, and
blessed him, and increased him. And again says our Savior, John 8.39. If ye
were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham. Now look what Abraham
did in his matter of war: Abraham went out to help Lot a just man, who was
taken captive, and robbed of all that he had (a just cause) Abrabraham had but
his own household, being three hundred men, and a few neighbors with him, to go
against five Kings, that had put four Kings to flight, and conquered all the
countries round about them. Abraham with his men over-takes these gallant
Kings, cuts them down with all their host, and brings home Lot, with all the
goods and persons that they had taken from Sodom; and though the King of Sodom,
who was sure a wicked man, Genesis 13.13. desired of him but the persons only,
yet Abraham did give him all his goods also to a shoo-latchet, Genesis 14.

Hear is a great conqueror, yet he does not go about to dis-inherite the
children of those wicked Kings he had slain, he gives all the goods that they
had taken, to the true owners again; he is no way ambitious to follow the war
to make himself great; for surely he might soon have conquered the world, after
the rate that he went for that little time. No, he would live privately in the
service of God, only he would show them that are soldiers an example, how
they should behave themselves in their station, but few follow his example,
specially in our days, yet they would be counted blessed, and Saints as well as
he; but God will let them stay for the blessing of Abraham, until they show
forth the works of Abraham.

And immediately after Abraham had showed his faith to the glory of God, by
doing these righteous actions before all the world: mark what follows, Genesis
15.1. Then the word of the Lord came unto him in a vision, saying, Fear not
Abraham, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward, and this reward
Abraham valued above all the world. Oh it is wonderful to see how well God is
pleased with Abraham: upon this God comes to be more acquainted with Abraham,
and tells him more of his counsel, gives him more of his love then he had
before. And I pray observe, a body would have thought, that Abraham going out
in so just a cause, and upon his own charge, That it had been lawful for him to
get what he could from such wicked Kings; and to serve them as they would have
served him, to take their possessions and dis-inherite their children. No,
Abraham did not count it lawful to rob the children of a theif and a murderer,
who had bought it at so dear a rate, that he had given his soul and body to
eternal torments for an inheritance to his children: God forbid that any child
of God should out-bid them, let them take it, says Abraham: I will have none
of their accursed things. Here you see the works of Abraham; though he fought
for it: he restored to every man his own again, he does not go about to
dis-inherit any of what was theirs; he never examined how they came by their
riches, but he looks to his own conscience, lest that should be defiled; and
see how God blessed him above all the men on earth.

Oh my Lord, and all you noble soldiers, here is a fair example for you: do as
Abraham did. If Abraham had been warring among us in your stead, King Charles
had been on his throne before now, and every man in his own inheritance by his
birthright; he would have had no Caterpillars to devour the land, such as your
Committees, Sequestrators and the like. Oh then do the works of Abraham (that
ye may have the blessing of Abraham) by restoring King Charles and his party,
whom so many Kings, even the late Parliament, pursued, and took all from him
and his party: and God delivered the Parliament into your hands; now put the
King and his party into their possessions again (though they be sinners by your
account, yet) they are not worse then the Sodomites, and their King, to whom
Abraham gave all again.

You know you cannot have the blessing of Abraham. If you follow that cursed
seed of Nimrod the mighty hunter before the Lord, Genesis 9.22.25. Genesis 10.6.8, 9,
10. Abraham will answer such, though they have been the greatest Commanders in
the world of Nimrods side, worse then he answered Dives, Luke 16. from verse 20
to the end of the Chapter, yet that was bad enough, specially to one that was
his son, one that did no evil to no body: he did not send Lazarus away to
Bridwell for asking alms: he might have gone where he would for him, but he
would give him nothing, and because of that he must go to hell: a hard case.
Some say the Cavaliers go the way to hell; there is no such matter, they see
not right that say it, for since the case is thus with Dives, they are more
liker to be the Presbyterians which go that way, for the Cavaliers are they
that relieve the Lazarus's of our times, and the Presbyterians do not only
deny these relief, but also afflict them sore in Bridwells, and that is more
then Dives did to Lazarus; therefore my Lord, judge you which of them twain go
the way to hell. I have observed, that where the Scripture commonly is most in
men by notion, there its least in practice of charity, and where it is least in
notion (for there is none but have some Scripture) there it is most in fruit of
Charity; so that it is rare to find a knowing man (as we call it) that is
Charitable. And it is so indeed, for Saint Paul says, 1 Corin. 8.1. Knowledge
puffs up, but Charity edifieth, and Mat. 15.8. This people draws nigh to me
with their mouths, and honor me with their lips, but their hearts are far from
me. My Lord you shall find the Kings party (though they slip into small sins)
to be the best men in the kingdom, and that their resolution (in matters of the
greatest concernment) is true and constant to God and man (as for your others,
they are but bubbles) and that the substance of Christian Religion does not
stand in notions, but in contrition, charity, and devotion: which things most
abound among Cavaliers; therefore mistake not the people of God.

I have showed you what you have to do, and how and under whose banner ye ought
to, war, and for what cause: now let me tell you, that God has sent his Angel
to deliver us, and to be assistant unto you, if you go the right way, as I have
showed you sufficiently already: but if you will not, the same angel will be
your adversary, Numb. 22.22. And who then that God will accept, can or dare
pray for you? I would not have you mistake me; for though I be for Charles
Steward in regard of righteousness, if that line should fail, so that we were
to seek again, I had rather have you to reign (and the Cavaliers are all so
minded) then any man on earth besides.

Yet since, like Balaams Ass, I carried you on safely to this day, Now God does
open my mouth to tell the danger I see in your way, for you have had a mind
(being stirred up by the Balacks of our times) to curse Israel, that is, to to
afflict the Protestants and our Religion, but take heed what you do unto them,
for the voice of a King is among them, Numb. 23.21. and the Angel of the Lord
with his drawn sword stands in your way, though yet you have taken no notice of
him; but I beseech you again consider seriously what befell you on Saint Michael
the Archangels day last past, and know what an Angel Michael is said to be in
Scripture.

1. He is said to be the chief Prince of warlike angels, Dan. 10.13. Rev. 12.7.
and you know one angel is able to destroy in a moment of time, the greatest and
stoutest army that ever was, witness Sennacheribs army, whereof there was of
them destroyed by an angel in one night, a hundred fourscore and five thousand,
2 Kings 19.35.

2. Michael is said to hold with the man clothed in linen, which gives you to
understand that he is for the Surplice, and for the true worship of God, and
not for confused vain janglings and bablings, Dan. 10.5.13.21.

3. He is also the Prince of the people of God, and their angel to protect
them, against which people you have appeared much, to destroy them hitherto,
Dan. 10.21.

But take heed what ye do against the Protestant Church hereafter; for since
Michael is come (whom they so much acknowledge (as you may see by the Collect
for that day) that they desire God to succor them, and help them by his angels)
And that Michael has appeared according to their prayer, and the promise,
which is, that in the time of need, God should send him to stand up for his
people, Dan. 12.1. 1 Thessalonians. 4.16. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. I say again take heed,
for though you be a terror to poor men, you are nothing in the hand of Michael
the mighty Angel, who we believe will deliver us, and has for that end showed
his hand against you the last Michaels day, to note to you by that day, and
what befell you on it, that he is against you.

But now you will ask me, why do we take notice of his day? I answer, Do not you
take notice on Gregory or Magnus day, being Sept. 3. to be a good day for you?
yet that day this year proved to be the Lords day; therefore I say since that
you have such estimation of Sept. 3. that though you do not keep it as an holy
day, to worship God on it, yet you make it the chief day for your enterprise,
why should not we then having all our hopes in heaven, take notice on Sept. 29.
it being the Archangel Michaels day, set apart to worship God on, seeing he is
the angel which God has promised to send from heaven to deliver us? and truly
being that your Higness has seen, and we find such a prodigious omen to fall
upon that day, we ought the more to acknowledge it, and to believe that the
angels of God are come down to deliver us; and it is high time, all other hopes
are gone now, for our enemies are potent, they have got all from us, Therefore
from whence should we look for help but from heaven?

And lest you should say that we are popishly affected in worshipping of
angels, I say we worship him only whom the holy angels worship, even God who
created all things, and his son Jesus Christ, by whom he created all things,
and the holy Ghost which sanctifies the whole creation; yet God forbid but
that we should have the holy Angels in great estimation for his sake that sends
them, and for their works sake, and for their own sake, because they are them
which glorify God in the highest degree; for if we are to have men in very
high esteem, because they exhort us, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12, 13. by how much more ought
we to esteem the Angels of God, sent to do for us that which men cannot do for
us; and truly we may err in the worshipping of men, for they are vainglorious,
and apt to exact from us that reverence not due to them; but the Holy Angels
are of another nature, so that we cannot err in that worship we do unto them,
for they will tutor us so, that if we give unto them more then is meet, they
will reprove us; therefore I say it is better, since we do not know the degrees
of Angels, that we fall down flat before a Holy Angel, then stand against him,
for all the Angels we read of, did not refuse such a worship, and who can tell
which is the Angel of Gods presence?

And though that angel, Rev. 22.8, 9. did acknowledge Saint John, insomuch that
he called him his fellow servants, and therefore would have no worship from him,
he being as honorable as himself, because he was the beloved Apostle and
Evangelist of Jesus Christ; yet it is a question, that if the same Angel at
that time had been sent to the Emperor of Rome, And that he had fallen down
before the Angel, whether the Angel would not have taken it as a due worship
from the Emperor, and yet destroy him with all his persecuting host (as he did
Senacheribs) except by repentance and amendment they had prevented it.

And truly those people are in a sad condition, when the Angel of the Lord is
sent to persecute them, Psalm. 35.5, 6. And they like Balaam going on still,
with their wicked intention, and cannot see the Angel with his drawn sword,
Numb. 22.22, 23. nor will not be admonished. I have told the people of England
(and specially the chief of them) what they should do, and what would follow,
if they did it not. And now the Angel is come, my work is done, for he that is
able to bring it to pass, has taken it off my hands.

One ass did reprove the madness of Balaam, 2 Pet. 2.15, 16. so that he saw the
Angel of the Lord, and was saved from the present danger, Numb. 22.33. but the
six horses which saw the Angel, reproved the madness of this generation, and
they will not see the Angel and repent. Oh miserable men! do not you see the
Scripture fulfilled (in this act of God?) how justly at this time may the
Church of England (which you so persecute) sing the song of Moses and of the
Lamb? Exodus 15. Rev. 15.2, 3, 4. And what comfort is it for them to see the
Angel of the Lord engage for them, and encounter with their enemy! I am sure it
makes many glad heart.

But what a joyful song should we sing, to see you return again to the Church
and the King! Oh it would be a joyful day to England; and since the Angels are
become your adversaries, we can expect no less, then to see either your sudden
return, or your sudden destruction. And who can help it, while ye go against
God and his Church, and deprive your true and lawful King of all his right? Who
dare petition to God for such a people, that are resolved not to repent of such
high inquity, that all the world rings of it? the sin of Sodom was nothing to
it, yet God came down purposely to destroy them poor ignorant souls, and did
it, and do you that have the Law and Gospel to instruct you (commit such evils,
and) think to escape temporal and eternal punishment?

What argument shall a man, that stands in the gap, bring before God when he
prays for you? If he say with Abraham, Genesis 18.24. That peradventure there are
some righteous persons among you, your own declarations will tell him it is
false.

If with Moses, Exodus 32.11, 12, 13. he mentions an oath, or promise made to
your fathers, alas what promise or oath can be alleged (if there were any
such) on your behalf, that have broken so many oaths, and will not repent?

If he say with Christ, Luke 23.34. Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do; truly it is manifest you cannot be so ignorant.

Therefore there is no going to God for you, but the only way is to speak to
you, if so be you will hear and repent.

Remember what our Savior says, Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. It is not your confident notions in your speech, nor the notions of
them in the Memento to the Army, or in the Colonels petition, that will
justify you and them before God; nor is it your building upon your successes,
as if God had owned you and your cause thereby; alas you come far short in
successes to Alexander, Julius Caesar, Mahumet, and many heathenish Commanders
which had nothing of God in them, but rather the devil altogether was the cause
of it: therefore let not that deceive you.

God will judge you according to your works, and men, angels, and all the world
shall be your witness, you shall not be your own witness, and what you say for
your selves is nothing of value, it being in your own cause.

Now it is for your justification to do such works as all the world shall
confess to be according to Gods word: that they may bear witness to you, and
say of a truth, these are the people of God, that is, for you to restore the
King, then they will witness for you, but now they are witness against you,
insomuch that they question the justice of God for your sake, saying, If Gods
word be true, then these people, though they make such a high profession, and
yet do as they do, and no punishment comes upon them, they are not the people
of God. for thus they argue it with God:

Is it possible that these are thy peculiar people that dis-inherited their
King (with all his seed, without the least cause) of all his right which his
predecessors enjoyed above two thousand years; And he by the whole consent of
the Nations put in possession of it, under which King they lived so happy for
many years, that all the world could not parallel, and for government in Church
and State, there was not the like?

Are these thy people, that when their King confiding in their fidelity to him,
to be as true as his was to them, he knowing how deserving he was of their
loyalty, gave them more liberty then all the Kings that ever was before him
did, to do what they would for the good of the Kingdom, for them contrary to
their oaths, to destroy him and thy Church, and take all the patrimony to
themselves, belonging to thee and thy Church and Ministers this thousand years,
and that took all from the loyal and conscientious people? If these be thy
people, then sure the Scripture is not thy mind, and we are yet to seek.

Oh Lord look upon thine honor: thy name is blasphemed because of these people,
who call themselves by thy name, and say what they did most wickedly, was thy
works; laying it upon thee to the dishonor of thy name. Try them, see if any of
them will prove so true to thee in their Religion, as Charles Steward, and
William Laud did, alas they have no Religion, nor know they which to choose, but
are confounded and divided, striving who shall get most of their unrighteous
Mammon gotten by oppression.

I believe I need not tell you (for you know it) that thus the world resents
you before God, showing him that it is impossible for it to stand with his
Holiness, Justice, and Righteousness, to let you go unpunished: and consider
that God has an high esteem of his own name and repute among all the world,
and consider that a Judge does not (when an evidence is given against a
malefactor) examine whether the witnesses be good men or bad: but if the
witness agree, so that it is found that what they witness is true, the
malefactor is condemned for his fault, though in other things he is more
blameless then the witness.

So when the cry against Sodom came up to heaven, it was not Lot nor Abraham's
cry, for we see Abraham prayed for them, Genesis 18.27, 28. but it was the cry of
the generality, that condemned Sodom as wicked men, Genesis 13.13. And yet God
makes as though he knew not the certainty of it, Genesis 18.20, 21. Therefore God
sends two angels to find out the truth, and then to destroy it, Genesis 19.1.12,
13. and how many angels were abused by you, we know not now since angels come
in such mean habits.

Now after all this cry (about Sodom) it was not for Gods honor to let it
stand: for what would men have said, if he had not destroyed it; but conclude
that God was the Author of all their wicked works? And how zealous is holy
Moses of the name of God, that the world should not speak evil of God for any
cause, Numb. 14.11, 12, 13, 14.15, 16. And how severe did God punish David,
because he being reported to be a man after Gods own heart, did give an
occasion for men to speak evil of God? 2 Samuel 12.11, 12, 13, 14. for though
David upon his repentance is quitted from death, yet the flower of his sons
must die for it, his wives are given before the eyes of all, to his own son,
and he defiles them; and he pursues his father David to the death. Oh what a
sad condition was David in for that sin? as you may see 2 Samuel 15. 2 Samuel 16. 2 Samuel 17. 2 Samuel 18.

Therefore I beseech you (as you tender your own salvation) have a care to the
name of God, that you have taken upon you, before all the world, and let it not
be evil spoken of for your sake: methinks I hear the voice of Joseph, Genesis
39.9. when his Mistress tempted him to lie with her, says he, My Master has
put all that he has under mine hands, but thee, how then can I do this great
wickedness vnd sin against God? He was not to his master, as the late
Parliament was to King Charles; he would rather go to prison and die, then be
so perfidious: but see the end of it; God exalts him, and makes him Lord over
all Egypt, therefore have a care to the name of God. And let your light so
shine before all the world, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven; and this you can do no way, except by
repentance you return to God, and restore King Charles, then all the world will
say, that of a truth you are the Saints of God; and they will glorify him on
your behalf, for therein your deeds will appear to be righteous, and all good
men wheresoever you go will join with you, and all the wicked will be terrified
at the presence of God with you, so that you shall conquer all before you, and
bring them under the Scepter of Jesus Christ.

Now providence has ordered it, that you who are the most valiant, are in such
a condition, that it is not safe for you, nor honorable for King Charles and
you to live together; Therefore God has designed you for his battles abroad,
and not to sit still at home, now you have done here, and quarrel one with
another, but this you shall do, send to King Charles, that he may come to his
throne, and deliver all unto him, except an Army for you to go forward, and
means for so long a time, out of England to maintain it, and let King Charles
have the Trainband throughout the kingdom, settled under Colonels and
Captains to be ready at his call; for such men have great interest belonging
to them, as well as the King has, and are able to maintain themselves in
service if need require; therefore let all rich and landed sufficient men bear
arms for their King and their own safety: you know the people of Israel were in
such a posture, and all from Dan to Beersheba rose as one man, when an enemy
appeared: and there was no taxing.

What shall we do with any other standing army here, except it be for our
Governors to enslave us thereby? therefore take your commissions from King
Charles, or use those Commissions that you have, as if they were from him, or
from his father, who indeed is the fountain of them; and you shall find you
will do better abroad then at home; and you will have great comfort in God, and
prosperity abroad, when you are at peace with your King, and act by virtue of
his power, it being Gods Ordinance for you to observe: and let your design in
the first place be, to set the Jews in their own land, and be the means to
convert them to Jesus Christ; surely then you shall see more of God, then yet
you have seen.

And whereas it was affirmed among us at the beginning of these times by the
Presbyterians, from Psalm. 105.15. 1 Chro. 16.22. that all the people of God
were anointed, and that they were the anointed (the King was no body to them)
and that they should bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Iron fetters, Psalm.
149. and execute upon the earth the judgment that was written; and then
forsooth we termed our selves Saints, and rose against our K. to begin with
him; when indeed nature would have taught us, if we had not been more fools
then Saints, to let him been the last; and them that would not rise against the
King, their Ministers cursed them with the curse of Meroz, Judge. 5.23.

Oh how did the Kings then laugh at our folly in giving out, That we would
conquer all the Kings before us; for they knew that such a consu^ed multitude
without a head, could never hurt them, for the Psalmist says, Psalm. 76.12. He
is terrible to the Kings of the earth; therefore the Saints can do nothing
until they be united, and have a Commission from King Charles, and upon that
account they shall have enough to join with them, and assist them. Then let the
mocking Kings be wise and kiss King Charles, lest they smart for their folly,
Psalm. 2.10, 11, 12. For God has sent the hornet among them already, Exo.
23.28. Josh. 24.12. The Lord by me has blown the trumpet before you; for I am
sure my books are gone over all Europe to that purpose, and had free passage by
Gods providence; for had the King and you been agreed before now, my books
could not have so free a passage as they had among foraign Nations; and I am
sure it takes a great impression on them: and when the King and you agree, my
books will be called in, and then it will take more impression, and turn the
most part in all places for you, and the Jews from all parts will come to you,
for they wait for such an appearance, and have my books to assure them further
of it.

And will it not be a happy thing to see them come in to Jesus Christ?

Oh for Christ's sake, and for the Jews sake, who are them from whence we had
the Oracles of God, let neither fear, nor any other thing hinder you from
making agreement with King Charles; do not hinder Gods design to save the Jews:
and as Mordecai once said upon the like occasion, so say I now to you, and
conclude, Esth. 4.13, 14. Think not with thy self, that thou shall escape in
the kings house more then all the Jews; for if thou altogether hold thy
peace at this time, then shall there be enlargement and deliverance arise to
the Jews from another place, but thou and thy fathers house shall be destroyed;
and who knows whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?

FINIS.
A desperate disease must have a desperate cure.
Or, a Postscript to the Book.
THere is a certain portion of physic found out of late, called the Antimonial
cup, or Evans his cup, in regard one Evans (as they say) was the first sounder
of it. And this cup is such a desperate physic, that immediately it either
kills or cures those that take it. If it works with them, though by the
judgment of the Physician they be past hopes, whatsoever disease they have, it
will restore them to their perfect health; but if it will not work with them,
then it quickly ends them. This I thought good to set down, for I know God has
sent that cup as an emblem of this cup, which I now present to the politic
body of these sick nations: first, because of the effects of it, and then
because his name that found it was Evans: and truly the message of God, is of
the same effect, for where it works, so that it is believed and obeyed, it is
the savor of life unto life, and to the other that believe not, it is the savor
of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. so that the cup being Evans, signifies
the messenger, and the effects of it being to heal or kill, signifies the
message of God to you.

The prophet Jeremiah once had a cup of fury from the Lord, and all the Nations
to which God sends him, were unavoidably to drink of it, Jer. 25.15, 16, 17.27,
28, 29. but I trust this cup will work with you my Lord, so that it will be a
cup of salvation to you; and how meet are these words for you to speak when you
take it, Psalm. 116.12, 13, 14. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his
benefits toward me? I will take the cup of salvation and call upon the name of
the Lord: I will pay my vows (that is, your vows made to the King and Church)
unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people; And if it prove otherways
with you my Lord, I shall be sorry for you, because I fear your house will not
stand.

Men by their policy may come in time to lose themselves: you know Jeroboam had
a promise from God, that if he did walk in the ways of David (that is, in his
Religion) then God would build him a sure house, 1 Kings 11.38. but Jeroboam
thought as you think now, that if the government by Bishops (as heretofore)
shall be established here again; then it will be a means to draw the people to
their right King again. So Jeroboam thinking to prevent that, devises a
Religion out of his own heart, sets up golden Calves for the people to worship,
1 Kin. 12.26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33. casts out all the sons of Aaron
from being Ministers, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14, 15. 2 Chronicles. 13.8.19. but the Lord
strikes him dead for it, 2 Chronicles. 13.20. and destroyed all that he had, 1 King.
15.19. Thus Jeroboam was deceived, and so are you in that point; for if
Jeroboam had gone to worship at Jerusalem, and walked in the ways of David,
questionless his house had stood, and he might have lived with Rehoboam quiety.
Therefore the best way for you, is to establish the Church as it was, for then
will the generality of your enemies turn to you, so that the King and you may
come to an agreement, though you should have the greatest share in the
government of the Nations.

My Lord I am ambitious with a holy ambition, I would feign be more then
conqueror, Romans 8.37. and bring you into subjection for your own good: it is
better for you to yield unto me, then to contend with the Angel of the Lord
that is ready to second me: Pharaoh was rised up of God, to be the object of
his judgment, that the power and glory of his justice might be made known upon
the earth, therefore he hardened Pharaohs heart, Romans 9.17, 18. but I hope God
has raised you up, to be the object of his love, that the power and glory of
his mercy might be made known upon the earth; and therefore he will soften your
heart to receive these things: so be it.

Arise Evans.

FINIS.

