A BRIEF COMPENDIUM of the vain Hopes of the Jews Messiah. The Ignorant Fables
of their Rabbis, AND The Confuting of the Jewish Religion.

Written by ELEAZAR BARGISHAI a born Jew, for the upholding of Christianity.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1652.

TO THE Religious and right Faithful Christian Reader.
Gentle and Right Christian Reader:
AFter that I was brought up in the Jewish belief till I was Twenty four years
of age, and instructed therein, walking after the footpathes of my forefathers,
not having any motive or illumination to belong unto such Honor as to be a
Member of Christ's body. Yet know, that through the mercy and merit of Christ my
only Savior and Redeemer, after these times I received miraculously, as it
were in a moment, another knowledge of the holy Trinity, which God wrought in
me a born unworthy superstitious Jew, through the assistance of his holy
Spirit, and gave me a brighter light of understanding, and brought me (...)
that is, out of the darkness of Egypt, opening mine eyes, curing me of my
Leprosy and blind-born heart, bringing me to the true Christian Faith of the
true and only Son of God (which the Prophets call Messiah:) whom I (with my
illuminated eyes already since short time having received that light from the
holy Scripture by the hand of Faith) do acknowledge, to be our Redeemer, the
promised Seed of the woman, who has bruised the Serpents head, through whom
all Nations shall be saved whosoever rightly believe on him.

And many shall marvel to hear in what manner the Jews hoping for their
Messiah according to their Rabbis carnal expounding of the old Testament
after their superstitious and unbeleeving hearts; insomuch that it may seem
more easy and possible to turn an hard iron or stone in an instant into water,
as soon as a Jews heart unto Christian Religion, for and in respect of such
their Rabbis fabuling.

Wherein (gentle Reader) you shall understand more largely and plainly the
Occasion of this my Conversion, who am a born Jew, and who drunk their
superstition from out my mothers breast, and from my Childhood until my Manly
years, have been instructed in their Synagogues, and strengthened in their
Talmuth books, which are by them in use; and have been much exercised
especially in Jewish Questions out of those said Talmuths against foreign
Rabbis, and what such like they in their dreams expound and learn.

Therefore I departed from such fraternity, and embraced the true Spouse of
Christ, the right Bridegroom, with public confession of her only saving Faith
by the grace of Jesus Christ, through the holy Baptism regenerate, being
cleansed and purified from the debt of Inheritance and the sins of unbelief, in
the precious blood of the immaculate Lamb promised from the beginning.

Likewise to make a full and public expression of my enjoying the right
Christian Faith, I arrived here in England, not out of any doubt that I have
therein (being thoroughly confirmed in that Faith by the true knowledge and
manifestation of the old and new Testament) much rejoicing to have received the
Christian Faith, which heretofore few or no Jews have done, whereof many
Christians have much debate and questions therefore; but my desire is, that so
long as Almighty God grants me life, to serve him as a right true Christian
ought to do.

Likewise Christian Reader you shall understand how the Jews dishonor the holy
and pure birth of Christ, in a cursed Book called (...) that is to say, The
Story of the hanged, which they privately print that the Christian Princes and
Potentates should take no notice thereof. But the everlasting Son of God, and
Prince of all Princes, seeing the injury and vices done unto him, punished them
according to their deserts; for they bringing such cursed books in Poland to
the light and to be made public, many of that cursed and viperous Nation were
killed, exiled and destroyed, after the saying of Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.15. And it
shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God,
to observe to do all his Commandments and his Statutes which I command thee
this day, that all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee. The
Lord shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and astonishment of heart.
And thou shall grope at noon days, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and thou
shall not prosper in thy ways: and thou shall be only oppressed, and spoiled
evermore, and no man shall save thee. As more plainly in the same Chapter is
prophesied.

Moreover I will plainly declare and make notorious unto all Christians, as
well to the learned as the unlearned, that they may both see, hear and
understand, how these poor Jews do expound the holy Scripture, Prophets and
Testaments, in their Talmuds, Fables, Dreams, Dialogues, and such like foolery,
even as wicked carnal men, or a lewd drunken woman, who seeks not after that
which is pure, or the truth, but do visibly more and more bring the curse of
God upon them, as Esaias witnesses, in his sixth Chapter, and through Gods
Ordinance prophesied to them saying, Ye hear indeed but understand not, and ye
see indeed but perceive not; make the hearts of these people fat, and make
their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear
with their ears, and understand with their heart, and convert and be healed.

I am well assured that my Conversion, and declaring of their unjust dealings
and fooleries, shall please them as well as a staff, or the grass does the
dog; but they shall know, that I do it for no other end, but that truth may
victorize against all such blasphemous people and Nations; not that I will in
any wise compare them unto their ancient Parents and right seed of Abraham, for
assuredly they were elect and the Children of God.

I hope that through this my writing, Christ shall cure them of their
blindness, open their ears, and soften their hard-hearted hearts with this my
writing: And I do not only speak unto them, but also pray them, that they will
do so much as inquire and seek into the holy Scripture which they have
altogether rejected, and they will find it will appear, if they seek they shall
find, and if they knock it shall be opened unto them; and verily they shall
see and find, that my Instructions and Exhortations are most true; but with
this condition, they must set aside their dreamings, invented humane Talmuths,
together with the method of their Rabbis expounding; then may they be brought
out of the captive and dark Egypt, into the right way and bright shining light
of Christ our right and undoubted Messiah, and belong unto the truth, and be
transfigured: even as I have already been enlightened through the assistance of
the holy Spirit, thanks and praise be to God therefore: Then shall they all
perceive and understand, and our joy shall be complete; for the time is now at
hand, but not as they hope for. And although many learned Christians have
written unto them of the true Messiah, yet I am in hope that such Jews and
their children as have formerly known me, will more look upon this my writing,
and be converted unto Christ, forasmuch as they know I was not one of the least
of their Rabbis amongst them, and therefore have not through ignorance or
blindness embraced the true Religion and Christian Faith, until I had right
and well searched and enquired into the holy Scripture, and so found my portion
and the due belonging thereto.

And to ye believing brethren and Christians shall I communicate, certify and
declare of the Jews natural enmity against all Christians, in Cursing all
Kings, Princes, Potentates, and all Christians whatsoever, as also their
Kingdoms and Countries, and especially departed and converted Jews which are
regenerate unto the Christian faith through the holy Baptism; and what manner
they use in that cursed Ceremony shall be expressed in this Treatise, though I
hold it unnecessary to write much thereof, because I suppose that more learned
Christians have the knowledge thereof already.

Yet I hope that all true believing Christians will accept of this small and
short Book, expressing and revealing the wickedness of the Jews, and hope you
will excuse my weakness and unfit understanding and knowledge in the English
tongue, whereby I am not able to express by word of mouth to any one what I
shall here set forth, being things of great concernment; as of the stupid
hearts and natures of the Jews, and of the falling of blood from Heaven four
times every year in the Jews houses, and at what time of the year it falls
shall be here declared; humbly desiring all those who shall read this my little
and first Christian work, to take it in good part as from a beginning scholar
and young Christian.

The Jews hoping for their Messiah, and the manner of his coming, according to
the foolish Opinion of their Rabbis.
THe Jews have a Book called (...) and in the 106. page is expressed, that they
shall have two Messiasses, the first shall be called Messiah Ben Joseph, and
the other Messiah Ben David; the first shall be (...) that is interpreted a
Warrior or brave Captain: But they themselves know not in what manner he their
Messiah shall come, or rule, or reign, many of the Jews writing thereof, but
none agreeing one with another, so that their blindness still remains; and
from time to time they become more blind, falling from one Scripture to
another, and after much running and enquiring of their Rabbis concerning the
same, they can obtain no knowledge or understanding thereof in their hardened
and astonished hearts; according to the saying of the Prophet Zechariah Chap.
12. And they shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for
him as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him as
one that is in bitterness for his firstborn; which speech is spoken of Christ,
and no other, as hereafter I shall clearly show and set forth.

But they interpret this saying of the Prophet in another manner in their
foolish Talmuth, in the Book (...) Chap. 10. where they say that Messiah Ben
David the second, in a battle against Gog and Magog shall be slain: And as it
is further written in their Talmuth, when their Messiasses come together, they
shall make war with the Christians, and the Christians shall have a Captain
called Gogmagog, with whom their Messiah shall join in battle; and they write
much of their Messiah through their own evil nature and the spirit of the
Devil, which they call in Hebrew (...) they write and speak, that God shall say
unto their apparent Messiah the son of David, Ask of me and I shall give
thee, but make no mention what God shall or will give unto him: They reject the
holy books of Psalms, where God speaks through the mouth of the Kingly Prophet
David in his second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee,
ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance. But say
they, when Messiah Ben David is so slain, Messiah Ben Joseph shall come before
the face of God saying (...) that is, Omnipotent and Ruler of the World, I
desire nothing of thee but Everlasting life; and the Lord God shall answer to
him, I will give thee such Everlasting life.

Here may every good upright and Pious Christian behold and perceive, how this
blind and heart-stopped people reject the holy Scriptures, Prophets and
Ministers, through their Rabbis ignorant and unfit knowledge; for they have no
thought in the least of such a Messiah as should redeem them from their sins
and spiritual captivity, but of a valiant Man, who shall so valiantly fight
with the Christians, shall slay them and overcome them, take their houses,
goods and Lands from them, and give them unto the Jews for their Inheritance,
having no other thoughts in them, but how they may rob the Christians of their
goods.

Further they write in the before mentioned book (...) fol. 96. That they shall
be delivered in the Month of May, through their Messiah; but Rabi Asua said
and supposed that it shall come to pass in the Month of April; for his
Argument is, That in this Month they have been always delivered.

And when he shall appear writes Rabbi Solomon in his book Erat, in the 4th
Chapter, that it shall be upon an Ass, and properly upon such an Ass as
Abraham the Patriarch rid on when he was to offer his son Isaak, as it is to
be seen Genesis 22. upon whose Ass they say Moses and Cipora his wife rid on
likewise when they arrived into Egypt, and they think it can no otherwise be,
but that their Messiah must come upon such an Ass.

Now my loving Jews, I suppose surely that it shall be an old strong and great
Dog, whom ye miserable filthy men must well bathe and anoint, that his old
bones may be nimble and strong, otherwise at the battle and fight against the
skillful, good and valiant Christians, he must not conquer or be worth a pibble
stone.

But they think, That as it shall come to pass that their Messiah shall appear
upon such an old Ass, it shall be solemnly represented after this manner:
First, Elias the Prophet shall arrive and reveal unto them such a joyful
message and tyding, that such an omnipotent and mighty one, upon such an old
Ass is ready to appear, and in a moment, with a Trumpet like an Herald, or
Marshall, or otherwise with a great Horn shall he utter his voice, which all
Jews in all the corners of the world shall hear, and be gathered together in
one place.

Now I understand that their Elias shall become an Hunter, which shall gather
through the voice of his Horn, all the Dogs (that is to say) the Jews of the
whole world together, and they are steadfast in their opinion, that so soon as
they shall be gathered together in that place, their Messiah shall appear upon
that old Ass, upon whom also all the Jews shall sit, and so altogether be
transported through the sea into the promised Land about Jerusalem.

This the Christians and all other Nations shall see, and desiring likewise to
ride over into that Land with them, shall not have such favor of God that they
may sit upon the body of the Ass; yet this shall be granted, that they may sit
upon the tail of him, which shall be lifted up, and so soon as the Ass shall
be in the midst of the sea, he shall let his tail sink, that all the
Christians may fall down, and (...) that is, in a moment, be drowned, but the
Jews shall safely ride along through the Sea at their pleasure into the holy
Land.

Now loving Jews, this must be a monstrous great Ass whereupon ye must all
together sit; but I think all the unfaithful Jews must be put into a sack in a
lesser form than the motes of the Sun, to be carried into that Land of
promise, otherwise it is impossible that such a beast as the Messiah had should
carry them all through the Sea; and when they are in the middle of the Sea,
down falls the sack and all the Jews are drowned, and the true Christians
through the blood of the true Messiah Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and his
sufferings on the holy Cross, shall be saved.

But my dear friends, where, in what place is this Ass now at this present? I
think he is with the Bull and the Cow, the Whales, the great Frogs and Birds
mentioned in your Songs which ye call Acdomes, and which ye sing with great
devotion upon (...) that is, Whitsunday in your Synagogues, which is thus in
Caldean (...) which interpreted is thus; when I begin to speak and begin to say
I will take consent; and coming into the midst of the Song, you cry aloud in
your Synagogues in these words (...) which is to say, the Whale moves himself
with his sins.

Here loving Christians you may see what is set in their fabling Talmuths. A
Rabbie, by Name Rabbie Solomon, writes a strange story from this Song, and
that in this manner; That when our Lord God created the World, he created two
great Whales, who were so extremely great that the whole world could not
contain them for to multiply; therefore God killed the female of these two
Whales, which he salted for the faithful Jews: O ye blind and hard-hearted,
will ye make God a fish-killer, or a Master of such business!

Moreover he writes, That God created a great Bull and a great Cow, who were
likewise so great, that in multiplying the world was not able to support them;
which the Lord foreseeing, killed the female thereof and salted it as he did
the Whale, and all for the good Jews.

In the same Book the Author writes and teaches his Nation, That when the time
approaches and is at hand that their Messiah shall appear, then God shall show
them this sport and pleasure, that is, that the great Whale and the Bull shall
engage in a great fight, the one defending himself with his horrible fins, and
the other with his horns, but the one should not hurt the other, till God comes
with his sword and kills them after the Jewish and Levitish manner: so they
make God a great killer and fight-Master: O the cursed teaching and abominable
fables! And to continue further in his wicked story he says, That after God
shall have slain this horrible Whale and Bull, (...) that is, the Priests of
the Jews are ready and at hand to cut them in pieces, whereof the Priests shall
have a delicate and costly banquet, at which banquet they shall drink precious
Wine, which from the beginning of all beginnings was hid secretly in cellars,
that no Christians or other Nations shall know of; for they are become (...)
that is to say, unclean, and so the Jews ought not to drink with them: but I
believe they make their reckoning in the wind, and wait thereupon without any
profit: for they shall all drink of one cup, wherein there shall go so much in
number as to that Hebrew word (...) which is 287. my meaning is, that this is
the Cup whereof the Prophet Jeremy in his Prophecy makes mention, filled with
the wrath of God, so that they shall have enough to drink for ever.

But verily my lost Brethren, Sure ye must have a very great fire to boil,
broyl and roast this great Bull and this great Whale: but so much concerning the
Jews banquet.

Now I will speak a little of the greatness of the Leviathan or Whale, who
shall be so horrible great that the whole world shall stand upon him; but I
would fain know how he should endure upon his body such a great burden or
weight; but I suppose the great Frogs, and Bird mentioned in the Talmuth in the
book (...) Chap. 8. shall help him to support and sustein part of the great
weight, otherwise the Whale happly alone might perish under so great a burden.

It is wonder that such unbeleeving people should publicly write and teach
such gross lies. Omer Rabi Bar Chanina, says also in the Talmouth; I have
seen, and behold on the one side a Frog in greatness like a Village or Town of
60 Houses, another Frog much greater then the former, which comes and
beguileth and devoureth the first; and afterward a bird or great fowl whom
they call Guina, likewise came and beguiled the second Frog, and after flew
upon a Tree and there rested; whereupon the Author said, see and behold how
great a Tree must that have been where such a great fowl can sit upon: now said
Rabbi Papa, had I not been there and seen the Bird at that time, I should not
have believed it.

Rabbi Saffera tells another Fable saying, As I once sailed in a Ship, behold I
saw a Fish who lifted his head out of the water, and I espied upon him two
Horns, whereupon was written, I am the least Creature that is created by God in
the Sea, and am indeed three miles long, and must enter into the mouth of the
Leviathan that is the Whale and be devoured of him. Now hark ye my lost
brethren, ye speak much of your Leviathan, that but one shall be in the Sea:
Surely, this Whale, your hoped for Leviathan, Anno Domini 1642. was brought
into Riga, upon the Frontiers of Lifland under the jurisdiction of the Queen of
Swede, at which time I was with my brother there, who is a Merchant, and there
was taken at Riga a great Whale, and at a Merchants there, by name John
Kortrimans, did eat of the Whale, whereof there were many hundred tuns salted,
and I suppose truly it will prove that it was your Leviathan. Now my loving
Jews, for as much as I now have been baptized, so I know that ye would have
given me no part of your Leviathan; but however I have been before ye, for ye
wait all too long upon it, and I had very good reason to be before ye, for in
your Talmuth stands written, that no other shall have part thereof save only
the Priests, very well if it be so I am like of Nativity from ((...)) that is
from the Genealogy of Aaron the Priest, the brother of Moses, and I have not
once, but too often celebrated the wicked Ceremony with your Priests in ((...))
that is, the service and the sons in the Synagogue, who all profess themselves
to be of Levi.

But I will return again to my Story and Song called Achdonis, wherein is
mentioned thus, that the said banquet being dressed and made ready, it shall be
presented upon a Table of Carbuncle in Paradise, all this being done, the Jews
shall wash their feet in the water of Edom.

Very well my joyful Jews, in truth it shall be bright and light enough at the
Carbuncle Table at your Banquet, but rather from the light of that fire within
that Paradise, where the Devils dwell, and where ye shall miss of such
pleasure, and water to wash your feet; and they believe that after washing of
their feet they shall begin a fair excellent dance, and God Almighty shall be
the first beginner and master before them.

Yea my dancing Jews with thunder and lightning shall he dance before ye;
Likewise Rabbi Eleaser in (...) fol. 31. in the end of the Talmuth which he
calls (...) says, that when their apparent Messiah shall arrive, how the
Almighty shall make a dance to all righteous Jews (for only the Jews, and none
other they call righteous) and that so soon as the Jews appear together in
Paradise, and how that one after another shall point their fingers toward God
with great joy. In the same Talmuch and book Meg^lla fol. 33. says Chennina,
when the Messiah shall appear, then shall God the Almighty show great honors
to the Jews, but I think it will be in fire, thunder and lightning, and that
will be all the honor God will show upon the cursed Jews.

Menorat Hamor folio 70. writes (...), that is, thus to understand, and to the
King our Messiah shall God the Almighty make ten dances; but my dancing Jews,
there will be good profit for the Musician when such folk dance.

Also he says in the same Book fol. 84, 85. That after the Resurrection men
shall eat, drink, marry, and bring forth children; The like stands written in
the Talmuth in the Book Boma Metelehem, fol. 31. which was preached by Rabbi
Simon the son of Gameliel, ((...)) in the last times when Messiah shall
appear, every wife shall bring forth a child every day, which is likewise
unnatural, and has no foundation either in Divine or Humane Writings.

If any man ask the Jews, where their Messiah is all this while: Their Answer
is, He lies chained in Paradise all the whole week long with a great iron Chain
that he cannot come away, and upon their Sabbath he is bound with a Hair of a
Woman's head, which he will not break, for that he will not dishonor the
Sabbath. Now my devout Jews, I believe by this circumstance, that the Devil
shall be your Messiah who lies chained in hell, which ye call Gehennam, and
cannot come from thence until the time promised, and too soon I fear for your
sorrow.

Others of them do imagine, that when their Messiah comes, he shall take them
by force from the Christians, and all other Nations, and bring them out of
their Captivity; for example, they allege that Moses not instantly so soon as
he was born released his brethren out of the Captivity of Egypt, but he
tarried and waited upon the orders of God, and so brought (...), that is, that
hard folk out with a strong hand, and so they believe their Messiah will do the
like.

Now my loving Christian brethren, I cannot mention the hundred part of the
fabling opinions and hopes they have of their Messiah, because I have not their
Talmuth Book here, and other fables of their Rabbis expounding, but relate
only what I can bring to memory, having been formerly a Rabbi amongst them, for
they never hoped for the right Messiah, as our Savior Jesus Christ, but much
more wait upon their Antichrist, of which the Prophet Daniel speaks much; and
as the Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. foresheweth, and speaks thereof in the whole
Chapter. And our Savior himself says, That I am come in the name of my
Father, and ye will not know me, but another shall come in his own Name, and
him shall ye receive for a Messiah. But John the Divine gives this godly
sentence thereupon, saying, That when this false Messiah shall come, Christ
through his Spirit shall mark him for destruction, together with all them that
believe on him, which are the Jews, and cast them into a bottomless pit of
torment, which burns with pitch and brimstone for ever, which is the Gehenna,
the earthly pit of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, as you shall find it written in
the fifth Book of Moses in the sixteenth Chapter of Numbers verse. 31. From
which pit the Lord of his infinite mercy deliver us, and all good Christians
through the precious blood of our Savior and true Messiah, Jesus Christ, Amen.

FINIS.
THis is the first part of this my little Treatise of the Jews superstitious
and carnal hoping for their Messiah, as they are taught from their babbling
Talmuth and foolish blind Rabbis and Teachers.


