ELEGIES ON THE DEATH OF THAT WORTHY AND accomplished Gentleman Colonel JOHN
HAMPDEN, Esquire.

Entered into the Hall book according to order.

LONDON, Printed by LUKE NORTON, for I. T. October 16. 1643.

To his ingenious Friend, C. I. S.
HAMPDEN, thou can not live in Jet so long
As in this Threnothriambentique Song,
The Surgeons spice cannot perfume thy Hearse
So well as does thy Soldiers fragrant verse:
That Is thy immortal balm, by that thy name
Will last, and he eternized by thy fame.
I. H.

To the Author, my fellow Soldier.
HAmpden still lives (dear friend) in spite of death,
Thy grateful Muse has given him second breath:
And though thy willing stock cannot erect
A brazen Statue (answ ring the respect
He has deserved) to his worthy fame;
Yet has thy verse eternized his name.
R. M.

To his worthy friend Captain I. S. on his Elegy.
It Is unresolved, though questioned of old
Whether Achilles, or his Homer hold
The more of Fame: and it is as hard of proof
Whether this pious Builder, or his stuff
More earne a modern thanks: both I confess
A part, yet no comparing makes them less.
Hampden is raised; nor can the Muse fall down
That mounts along with his immortal Crown.
I. G.

To the dear and precious Memory of that accomplished Gentleman, Colonel
Hampden.
THough my malicious fate debarred my will
From waiting on your vnlour, when the shrill
And hasty Trumpet bade your Honor go,
With disadvantage, against the subtle foe;
When treachery and odds, crowned with success,
Did triumph over our unhappiness:
Yet give me leave (Renowned dust) to send
My grateful Muse in mourning to attend,
And strew some Cypress on, your Martial Hearse;
There her mild grief, in elegiake verse,
Shall ^ell the stupid Age 't has lost, in thee,
More worth than e're can be repaired in three:
That when the wilful blinded of the Land
They Are much-concerning-losse shall understand
They may reclaim their folly, and with me
Justly-deplore thy sad Catastrophe.
No doubt Detraction, and those twinn'd Adherents,
E^vie and Faction, her best-worst-Vicegerents,
Predominate over ill-affected-spirits
Whereby to cloud men's most ^pparent merits,
And we have found their working, but I dare
The many-headed-Monster to repair
And view thy worths true Charracter, that when
She swells at thy deserving, she may then
B^rst with her ventlesse-venome, so maintain
Thy virtue against all scandal sovereign.
Was he not pious, valiant, wise, and just,
Loyal and temperate? every thing that must
Make up a perfect harmony? ye know
His constant actions have declared him so.
That he was pious, his firm zeal of heaven
Has to the world clear testimony given,
For if Religion had not been the ground
Of this great quarrel, his sheathed sword had found
No way to opposition; but since that
Armed Popery has proudly levelled at
The Churches ruin, then bold Hambden, none
More bravely active, or more forward known
In its resolved defense: he only can
Prove the stout Soldier that is a righteous man;
So was he truly valiant. I have seen
Him in the Front of's Regiment-in-greene,
When Death about him, did in ambush lie,
And whizzing shot, like shewres of arrows fly,
Waving his conquering steel, as if that he
From Mars had got the sole Monopoly
Of never-fayling Courage; and so cheer
His fighting men, that they still chased fear
(Through his example) to the enemy,
And bring them off with joyful victory.
His wisdom and his justness did appear^
Inseparable, in that fatal year
Of our begun distempers, when he might
(Fondly as others) have past over the right
Of the free subject to an unknown law;
But his well-read experience kept in awe
The bribed Maintainers of that imposed rate
And freed his Country from its grievous weight.
He might, since civil discord did break out
To open war, have poorly faced about
According to base presidents, but that
His firmer faith did much abominate
Such temporizing instability.
No (Noble soul!) his purer thoughts were free
From all corruption: had he valew'd friends,
A fair estate, or selfe-propounded ends,
Ayrie preferment, or ought else, above
A quiet conscience, and his Nations love,
^ had not been strange't have fallen from the trust
Reposed in him: but he was wise and just;
And rather chose, by Death, to testify
His faithfulness, then live with infamy.
Wonder of honor! yet his temperance
And loyalty joined to the rest, advance
His worthy commendation; for when force
Rashly did run five Members to divorce
From the States Body Politic, did he
Stain, with loose passion, his staid gravity,
Oppose, or rail at his impeache^s? no,
He, in humility, submitted to
Desired justice, for his innocence
Was proof against their groundless violence.
And after that affront to privilege,
When close contrivers, yet continue siedge
Against their loyalties, though he foresaw
Their aim was the subversion of the Law
And its supporters, yet did he entreat
His Majesty home to his Regal Seat
From that destructive Council, that he might
Appear more glorious in all Princes sight.
Such Patriots will prove his real friends,
When Formallists shall perish with their ends.
What says Detraction now? Oh, are you dumb?
Yet go and write, thus, on this Hero's Tomb,
Hampden rests here approved in every thing
Upright to Heaven, his Country, and his King.
An Epitaph Upon that virtuous Gentlewoman his Daughter.
FAtes grim Sergeant, Death, spares none
His cold hands once ceaz'd upon:
All must to the Common-Goale,
The Grave, he will nor bribe, nor bail.
Life's but borrowed, must be paid,
Else his strictness sure had stayed:
For if Virtue, Beauty, Wit,
Wealth, (or what is more worth than it)
Might to partially
Have seduced him? here lies she
Had prevailed, such perfection
Harbored under her protection.
But (alas!) who can prevent
Heavens resolute intent?
No (sweet ashes) sleep secured,
Although silently immured
For a time, with common clay:
Waking, you shall see a day
Of rejoicing, when the close
Impris'ning Earth shall let loose
His pale Tennants, at the sight
Of the glorious King of Might,
Who will bring you lib^tty
Lasting as Eternity.
In Obitum ploratissimum Clarissimi, Iohannis Hampdeni de casticon.
ACcipe posteritas; and quanto funere magni
Manibus Hampdeni fama parentet, hab^.
Mars, Hermes, Pallas, libertas, jura, Camanae,
Et pietas una contumulantur humo:
Numina tanta? nefas; licet interiisse videri
Heu dolet in tanto, numina tanta, viro.
Sed velut occiduis, quid Sol immergitur undis,
Protinus astrorum turba renata micat:
Sic sacer Hampd^nus, (virto livore) per omne^
Virtutum titulos multiplicatus adest.
J. G.

De per illustri Hero, Domino Ioanne Hampdeno nuper denato.
JVstitiae ne prius mirer, belli ne laborum
Te jubar Oxoniae, te Patriaeque Decus?
Vtraque te stantem coluit, defletque ^acentem:
(Si virtus tanti tanta jacere potest)
Tanta jacere nequit, longo vivacior ^vo:
Non habet in Talem jus Libitina Virum.
Quantus ob Hunc Vnum noster dolor esse putetur?
Quantus ob Arthurum nobilitate parem?
Hoc unum appletos Lacrymis solatur amicos,
Auctus uterque sua prole superstes adest,
Illa desiderium potent tenire; dolorem
Tollere posse nego; velle dolere volo.
Scripsit (...) Jo. H. Oxoni^
Jo. Hampdeno (...).
FINIS.

