A PAPER DELIVERED Into the LORDS House BY THE Earl of ESSEX LORD GENERAL, At
the offering up of his COMMISSION:

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Hewer.

1645.

A Paper delivered into the Lords House by the Earl ESSEX, Lord General, at
the offering up of his Commission.
HAving received this great Charge in obedience to the commands of both Houses,
and taken their Sword into my hand, I can with confidence say, that I have for
this now (almost) three years, faithfully served you, and I hope without loss
of my Honor to self, or prejudice to the Public, supported therein by the
goodness of God, and the fidelity and courage of a great many gallant men,
both Officers and Soldiers. But I will neither trouble you nor my self, by
repeating either the difficulties, or danger, we have ouercomed, or the service
that I have done you.

I see by the now coming up of these Ordinances, that it is the desire of the
House of Commons, that my Commission may be vacated, and it has been no
particular respect to my self, (whatever is whispered to the contary) that
has made me thus long omit to declare my readiness thereto, it being not
unknown to diverse men of Honor, that I had resolved it, after the action of
Gloucester, but that some importunities (pressed on me with arguments of
public advantage, and that by those of unquestionable affection) overruled
me therein; I now do it, and return my Commission into those hands that gave
it me, wishing it may prove as good an expedient to the present distempers as
some will have it believed, which I shall pray for with as hearty a zeal as
any can desire my doing this, which I now do.

I think it not immodest that I entreat both Houses, that those Officers of
mine, which are now laid by, might have their debenters audited, some
considerable part of their arreares paid them, for their support, and the
remainder secured them by the Publique-faith; and that those of them that
remain questioned, may be brought to some speedy trial, whereby they may
receive either the punishment or justification that is due to them; under which
notion I remember only three, of whom I must testify, that they franckly and
courageously have adventured their lives, and lost their blood for the
Public, and that with continued fidelity, for ought ever I could observe.

My Lords, I know that jealousies cannot be avoided, in the unhappy condition
of our present affairs, yet wisdom and charity should put such restraints
thereunto, as not to allow it, to become destructive. I hope that this advice
from me is not unseasonable, wishing my self and my friends may (amongst
others) participate the benefit thereof, this proceeding from my affection to
the Parliament, the prosperity whereof I shall ever wish from my heart, what
return soever it brings me, I being no single example in that kind, of that
fortune I now undergo.

FINIS.

