AN ELEGY AND EPITAPH On that glorious Saint, and blessed Martyr, King Charles
I.

The best of Kings since Christ, but murdered by the worst of men since the
Creation.

Written a day or two after his Martyrdom, and occasioned by an Arbitrary and
Tyrannous Proclamation that made it Treason for any man to speak or write
against the barbarous Murder.

Now published to show the World the unparalled Patience and Piety of the
dead Murdered King; and the matchless impudence and impiety of his past and
present living Murderers.

For the suspicion of which, and many other things, the Author lay almost two
years in the Gate House, defying all the insolent and illagal Usurpation, and
power at Westminster and White Hall.

Saying always then, and ever since, and ever will, God bless King CHARLES the
Second.

London, Printed for J. Williams at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

An Elegy on that glorious Saint, and blessed Martyr, KING CHARLES the First,
the best of Kings since Christ, but murdered by the worst of men since the
Creation.
NOt speak! not write! I Will sooner pray to Hell,
Preach against Heaven; and the Almighty tell,
That Cromwell, Ireton, Peter's, those damned three
He-Furies: Earth's inhumane Trinity,
Hell's Cerberus shall be my Savior, set
My faith on this new Triple Mahomet:
Change Greek and Hebrew for the Arabic work;
And from a Christian Cavalier, turn Turk.
Not speak! not write! Comets shall sooner be
Took to stop bloody-fluxt impiety:
And a full draught from Hell of liquid heat,
A cooling julip to the flaming meat.
Not speak! not write! the many headed Snake,
Hydra, as many Christian Kings shall make:
And all the Christian Monarchs make at best
(Single or joined) a many-headed Beast.
Can any pen or tongue be dumb, when guilt
Cries out so loud, such innocent blood is spilt?
No, it were silent blasphemy, and nigh
To a concealed Christian Apostasy;
And we might justly fear against us all
The fatal handwriting upon the Wall.
Not speak! nor write! hell's lower house as soon
May vote salvation to us, and the boon
Be signed above, and I as easily fear,
Destruction, as a Proclamation here.
Hence halters to those hell hounds that proclaim
Bad, good; truth, treason, in the Devil's name;
Shall Bradshaw, Steel, and Cook, control and rant,
Like Minos, Aeacus, and Rhadamant?
Shall a whole Legion of packt fiends contrive
To murder God-like Charles, and I connive?
No, Were I dumb like Atys, (Cresus son)
I must cry out, when such a deed is done:
And speak, and write in strains as big, and high
(If possible) as all their villainy:
Out-voice the Thunder when it is lowdly sent
The wicked for a fright and punishment:
Silence hell's howles, and (faithless) search to find
Murderers there of such a bloody kind.
Catiline, Sylla, Marius, those old three;
Three Children in the fiery furnace be,
Compared to these: the Roman Senat's hate
To Caesar, but an honorable fate.
Ravilliac's hand imbrewd in milk, the ill
By Faux intended a mere pecca-dill.
The age and acts of that mad Parliament,
Henry the third's; a holy time of Lent,
And pious works the Devil himself may pass
For a past, present, and a future Ass.
Wise Solomon was out, if he did sum
Prophetically up what was to come,
In his old saw; for I dare boldly say,
There Is something new under the Sun to day:
And the more new, because it did not soon
Fright to a midnight darkness, midday noon:
Threaten the World with Doomsday, and each globe,
Hang round for it with a sad fun'rall robe:
But caused Heavens searcher pry with brighter light,
As having never seen so black a sight.
A sight, at which all ages past, to come,
Out of Religion, must for shame be dumb:
Only this present, bold, Atheistick, tell,
What makes one ignorant, one Infidel:
Yet they who dare but speak it now, may fear
Convulsions, we contusions but to hear.
I tremble when Gods vengeance shall begin,
What shoals of souls must expiate this sin?
The British name and Nation must not die
Alone, but all the Princes far and nigh,
That suffered it: King Charles his bloody head,
The hairy Comet that portends them dead.
France, Spain, Pole, Denmark, all ye royal Clowns,
Self-Traytors, Sons of Coridons, not Crowns,
Look to it well, destruction's at your door;
This bloody Star was never seen before.
The World must be beheaded, common Fate
Headsman to introduce a common State:
And (Nero-like) all Monarchs here below,
By the base people suffer at one blow.
And may it come to pass, and worse, may earth
And Heaven mix strongly in a monstrous birth
Of strange unheard confusion: the fixed stars
Dropped to the center, set the Poles at jars.
The Signs Celestial trace the Earth, the Seas
Turn Skies, and Angels man's Antipodes.
Since Charles is gone; that modern Princely frame
Of Ancient Virtue, and what e're bears name
Of pious, peaceable, religious, wise,
Just, learned, patient's taken from our eyes:
Heaven's Darling dead; alive earth's chief delight,
To man let nothing seem in either right:
Only his spirit, (which now can purely see)
Behold in order all things as they be:
More bright by his eclipse, and set, adorned
With a Celestial Crown, for one was thorn'd.
Now the art a great and glorious King indeed,
Above the Paternoster or the Creed
Of thy packt perjured Parliament, who swore,
And jugled in themselves; thee out of door.
Here is no need a Parliament to call;
No uproars, tumults about this Whitehall:
The common people, (Saints and Angels here)
Cry not for justice, but are void of fear,
And jealousies; no Bomkins pens are pointed
With sharp petitions against God's Anointed.
Here are no Members five, that plot, and plea
Against the known Laws, nor will ever be;
No City-guard, for subtle, guilty fear,
The Citizens are wise, and honest here.
Here Is no Rebellion under a pretense
Of evil Council, and a just defense:
No Presbyters, or Independents be,
To preach it up, here is only Hierarchy,
And Monarchy, where God, as King controuls,
And Christ as the Archbishop of the souls.
Here is no driving hence, or forced flight,
No battle at Edgehill, or Naseby fight:
No running to the Scots, and then be sold
By his false, covetous Natives, back for gold
To the bloodthirsty English: an old crew
Of Christian Savages, beyond the new
Heathenish Americans, and deeper died
In royal goar than all the world beside:
Only the Scot excepted, to whose shame
King-killer is a convertible name;
False, stubborn, form, and matter: Judas can
Say, he was not so much Christ's Countryman;
Nor bound to such obedience by the tie
Of subject, or the Law of Sovereignty:
Besides that Christ could not so well be styled,
The Father of his Country, he his child:
Nay, boldly more in his defense he got
Not the tyth-penny of the greedy Scot.
But Judas there is out, and adds a lie
Unto his avarice, and treachery;
For he was only one, and in earth's round
There could not be another Judas found?
To join and share the sum with him; but here
Did twenty thousand Judasses appear,
At once to sell and share their Master: he
Out-strips them yet in his last obsequie,
And hangs himself for sorrow; these are bent
To hang themselves before they will repent;
Such is their bloody hardness, cursed Cain
Stand still, and let these Vagabonds obtain
Thy straggling punishment, it is theirs the rather,
Being less to kill a Brother than a Father.
Here is no Holmby to restrain, or fright
Thy power, or peace; no Sea-bound Isle of Wight
To limit thee, no Carisbrook, no Hurst,
No Whaley, Hammond, Ewer, and which is worst;
No high, forged Court of falsehood, that dares try,
Affront, adjudge their Sovereign Lord to dye:
Against all honor, wisdom, law, or right,
The Magna Charta of the meanest wight:
Unheard, or unaccus'd by any tongue,
But what from their own setting malice sprung:
And after all these deeds of darkness done,
To execute him in the open Sun:
An action without boldness I may dare
Place next the Jews, to Christ; though not compare,
And yet the Jews were better in one thing,
These called Charles Tyrant; and they Christ a King.
And I may say, his suffering set aside,
None e're less King-like, or more Christ-like died.
To see a Monarch of three Kingdoms stand
At his own Gate, and in his chiefest land:
Mounted in spite upon a common throne
Of shame, and treason, by himself alone:
Forsaken of his Nobles, Subjects, all,
But Rebels, by whose power he is to fall
A Martyr for Religion; and to die
Redeemer of the peoples liberty
From popular inslavement, his bare head
bowed to the Heads-mans hand to strike him dead.
Yet all this while neither in word, or deed,
Oppose the traitrous axe, but mildly bleed,
Instructing first with a Majestic grace,
His graceless guard that gazed him in the face,
Undutifully covered, praying too,
And pard'ning those, that God can hardly do;
His absent, present murderers, who boast
A sin next that against the Holy Ghost:
Malicious against the light of truth, who can
Believe it? and all this as merely man.
The earth that at Christ's passion shook before,
Stood now stone-still, as being amazed the more.
The graves that opened at that horrid sight,
Were hushed at this, as in a greater fright.
The veyl rent then, with us was long before,
Temple, Priests, Tables, all in pieces tore.
Hell that but howled, now wept, and laughed, the devil
Came sad, and glad at once, to see this evil,
And good together mixed; whereby his Crown
Was so at once exalted, and cast down.
Each circumstance and accident to paint,
Would make a Saint an Atheist, Atheist Saint:
And I to draw this white and black beside,
Must have an Angel's wing, a Divel's hide.
And therefore being set (bright Charles) and we
Left here, not thine, but our own Elegy;
Dark, clowded Cavaliers, who hourly look
To find our names writ in thy sanguine book:
By thy example let us learn to dye,
(As formerly to live) in piety,
Practice thy gifts, that we as well may be
The subjects of thy graces; as of thee:
Mild, merciful in death, and Martyrs fall
All we for thee; as thou have done for all:
That Charles, and Cavalier, within this Land,
For Saint, and Martyr, may hereafter stand.
And may thy Son, the glory of his Age,
And hopeful stop, and scourge of Rebels rage:
King Charles the second, first to all beside,
But thee, whom English Jews have crucisied:
Great in good subjects and a virtuous name,
Be only Charles the less in martyred fame.
An Epitaph
On that unparalled Prince King CHARLES the First, the Sacred and Royal,
Church and State-Martyr of England; to his own glory, and the eternal shame of
his three Kingdoms, and all Christian Princes beside, patiently yet publicly
beheaded at his chief Court-gate, White Hall January the 30. 1648.

STand off Rebellion, let no traitrous eye
Presume to glance on Martyred Majesty.
Duty, and love approach: yet draw not near,
Without a drooping heart, a dropping tear:
No Age did ever any place entrust
With such sad, sacred, royal, dangerous dust:
So threatening, and portentous, it may make
The present tremble, future Ages quake.
Here severed lies, joind Britain's Charles the First,
Best King since Christ, but butchered by the worst
Of men since the Creation: a packt crew
Of Devils, that make the crucifying Jew
A Circumcising Angel, and advance
Known malice above bloody ignorance:
Such feinds 'twere sin in Christians to be waved,
To think they were created, can be saved:
Whose Sunburned actions, and black midnight works,
White hells, Saint Atheists, deifie the Turks:
Not God's sent executioners, and rod,
But executioners themselves of God,
As high as they could reach; for here lies dead
God, in his earthly Image murdered.
A looking glass, for Christian Kings to see
Their downfall in beheaded Monarchy;
And Christianity in it is full raie
Of Majesty, benighted at noonday:
As if the great and good of all the world,
In Charles his set were to a Chaos hurld.
But God, to vindicate the clowded flame
Of his slain Second, has so starr'd his name;
Black Treason needs this blazing truth must tell
Had he till Doomsday stood, h'ad sooner fell.
FINIS.

