A LETTER From his EXCELLENCJE The Earl of ESSEX To the Gentlemen, Freeholders,
and other well-affected people in the County of ESSEX.

ALSO, An Order of the House of Commons in Parliament for a Contribution for
sick Soldiers under the Command of his Exeellencie.

Together with two other Orders of the Committee of the House of Commons and
City of London, for reducing Newcastle, and the parts adjacent.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament Assembled, That these be forthwith
Printed and Published.

Hen: Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.



London, Printed for Edw. Husband June 17. 1643.

A Letter sent from his Excellency the Earl of Essex, to the Gentlemen,
Freeholders and well-affected people in the County of Essex.
HEaring of your readiness to assist in this great cause with your persons and
purses, for the defense of Religion and Liberty, and what ever is dear unto
us, and of your willingness to rise generally, and to join with other
Counties, to deliver your selves from that slavery and misery that our enemies
would bring upon us. I do with much joy receive your resolutions, and count it
a special mercy of God, that makes his people sensible of their dangers, and
willing to hazard their lives for him, and do judge it the most hopeful means
of concluding these unhappy distractions of the Kingdom. Therefore I desire you
to assure your selves of all assistance from me that the Army can afford, and
my earnest desire is to help you in it. And I desire such may appear in this
cause, as have most interest in it; such of whose constancy and courage we may
be assured, men of Religious lives and affections fittest to bear Arms for
truth of Religion, Men of estates to defend those estates that the enemy seeks
to devour: The employment is not too mean for the best men, and then we shall
hope for success when such put their hands to the work; for assure your
selves, the loosnesse and inconstancy of the Soldiers, amongst others is one
cause of the continuance of the War. I desire you to provide your selves as
well as you can with arms and necessaries, and to bring six weeks pay in your
purses, considering that the march is long, and but a month of that may be
spent in service; when that time is expired, we hope you may return home with
peace; If we shall entreat your further help, we shall provide for you as well
as God will enable us. Choose Commanders your selves, Colonells and Captains,
when we shall hear their names we shall send them Commissions, and when you
shall come near us, we shall send some able and experienced Commanders from our
Army to assist you. Doubt not of your Country in your absence, we shall take a
course for the securing and quieting of the Malignants; your safety is in being
in Arms, it will be your happiness to fight with your enemies at distance, and
so keep them from spoiling that as yet peaceable and flourishing County. If God
stir the hearts of people to appear generally, and to prosper our
endeavors, we hope the success will be happy and comfortable.

Stoken Church, 9. June, 1643. Your assured Friend, Essex.

Die Lunae, 12. Junii, 1643.
WHereas it has pleased Almighty God, to send a visitation of sickness amongst
the soldiers in the Army raised for the King and Parliament, whereby the Lord
General has bin enforced to send back many of thosefick Soldiers, to be
Billited in some remote houses and Towns, some miles distant from London,
until it shall please God to restore them health and ability to return again
to his Army; which Soldiers by reason of this their sickness must needs be in
great want of many things necessary for them in such cases, although there has
been what could be conveniently spared sent them by the Parliament; It is
therefore Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, That there shall be a
Collection made (on Thursday next, being the day appointed for public
thanksgiving) in all the Parish Churches in and about the City of London,
contained in the weekly Bills of Mortality, for and toward relief of the said
distressed sick Soldiers, by the Churchwardens and other Officers of the said
Parishes, and the Moneys by them so collected, to be paid unto Will: Greenhill,
John Pocock, John Randall, and Rich: Hutchinson, Citizens of London, or any two
of them, at Tallow-Chandlers Hal near Dowgate in London; on Saturday next to be
distributed for the relief of the said sick Soldiers, in such manner as the
Committee appointed bythe House of Commons for maimed soldiers shall appoint;
And it is likewise hereby Ordered, That all Ministers of the said several
parishes, shall earnestly persuade the people to contribute to this so pious
and honorable a work; it being for those that have and will be ready again
(when God shall enable them) to hazard their lives for the defense of all our
lives, Liberties, and Religion.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

13. June, 1643.
IT is this day Ordered, That the Major of Boston Mr Edward Tilson, Arthur
Empson, Thomas Welby, Mr Ellis, Mr Tooley, Mr. Green, and Mr. Coney be
assistants to this Committee for the Town of Boston and parts adjacent in the
County of Lincoln, to do and execute all the Instructions mentioned in the
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament made this fifth day of June 1643. for
the speedy raising of Forces for the Town of Newcastl^, and regulating the
trade of coal there.

And it is further Ordered, That Mr. Edward Tilson shall be Treasurer for the
monys contributed and raised in the said Town and County, and is to keep
Books of Accounts of all mones received by virtue of the said ordinance; and is
to Receive such allowance for charges as by this Committee shall be held
reasonable and fit. And all moneys by him the said Treasurer Received, he is
from time to time to give an Account chereof to this Committee, ane pay the
same as shall be directed by this Committee, to such others as in the said
ordinance is mentioned.

Edward Gilbert Clerk to this Committee.

13. June 1643. At the Committee of the House of Commons and City of London,
for reducing Newcastle, and the parts adjacent.
IT is this day Ordered; That the Lord Major of London be desired to cause the
Ordinance of both Houses of Parliament for Regulating the Coal Trade at
Newcastle to be published by evry Minister in every Parish Churh in London and
the Suburbs thereof, upon Thursday next; and the Committees in every Ward are
appointed forthwith to take Subscriptions, and Collect the Money according to
the said Ordinance.

Edward Gilbert Clerk to this Committee.

FJNJS.

