An Elegy and Epitapth, upon the Right Honorable the Lord FRANCIS VILLARS:
Written by an affectionate Servant to his Family, Kinsman to his person, and
Prisoner for the same Cause this Noble Lord so bravely dyed in.
depiction of skeleton and skull and crossbones

WHat are the crying sins of this our State,
Which such great losses cannot expiate?
No sacrifice for sin (we know) is good,
No propitiation can be without blood.
But if we mix not tears with blood, we may
Spend all our stock of Loyal blood; not pay
The debts we owe, but still increase the score:
Let Us add tears to our blood, and sin no more.
Our thanklesse Kingdom's Antichristian grown,
We cannot broak the Miter, nor the Crown.
Christ was anointed King, and Priest to show
What duties we to God's Anointed owe.
The people have set up two Idols now,
And made a Proclamation, all must bow
Unto their Idols which they did create,
(Not God) the first a Hydra, called a State:
Another Idol, called a Presbyt'rie,
As great a Monster in Divinity.
In heaven there is a Monarchy (we know)
Which is the Type of all these here below:
So is the Church Christ's Monarchy, and we
Know all the world was Adams Monarchy.
Let us then to offended Christ fall down.
And beg of him the Miter and the Crown
May prosper still, for if these do not stand
We loose the strength and glory of our Land,
How dearly has this Quarrel England cost?
How many Loyal Subjects have we lost?
This brave Lord who enrich't great Rutland's blood,
And made that better, was before so good.
Nay, did the name of Buckingham sublime,
Was cut off by our sins, scarce near his prime.
Why should such Noble blood by such a hand
Be shed, and guiltless blood polute the Land?
But pardon me, there were more hands then one,
A Squadron joined; though he was left alone,
This Noble Lord so like Great Caesar stood.
The Earth was scarleted with Loyal blood.
So have I seen a peale of Axes fell
A starely Oak, ringing it is fatal knell,
With direful blows, giving it many a wound.
Such mercy at their hands this brave Lord found.
They pleased themselves as much with every b^ow*
And wished that all great Lords might fall just so.
Look to it my Lords in time! I am afraid
The axe unto your root's already laid.
They have deserved it, have abjured their King,
Like those proud Rivers which deny their Spring.
Besides the head abjured, do we not see
They have cut off the Sacred Hierarchy?
Pray heaven (my Lords!) this Antichristian sin
Bring not the Sacrilegious Levellers in.
I love the King, such Levellers I hate
Would not have Lords stand next the Chair of State.
Ad viatorem.
STay passer by, and pay thy tear
To him who lies entombed here;
It Is Villars, Buckinghams brave Son,
Who has this Gole of Honor won.
No Champion at the Olympic Game,
E're gained a greater Stock of Fame.
No Loyal Subject to his King
E're did to grave more Honor bring.
If thou be'st Loyal, thus much know
Thou tears to this sad shrine do owe.
This Noble Lord died in thy Cause,
For God, his Church, his King, his Laws.
If thou a Covenanter be,
Then far more tears are due from thee.
For those who Covenanters are
Engaged us in this bloody War.
And sure no Contract can be good,
Which must be sealed with Loyal blood*
Then (like those Meteors travelers call
The Indian Spouts) let your tears fall
No more by drops, but raise a Flood
Of tears, to wash away the blood.
Aug: 4 Printed at LONDON, 1648.


