An Exact and true Relation of the late Plots which were contrived and hatched
in Ireland.

1. A Copy of a Letter sent from the Lord chief Justices and Privy Council
in Ireland, to our parliament here in England. 2. Their last Proclamation which
they published concerning those Traitors. 3. The whole Discourse of the Plot
revealed by Owen Ockanellee who is now in England. 4. The dangerous and
extraordinary deliverance of the party who narrowly escaped with his life. 5.
The reward the Parliament has confirmed upon him. 6. The true Relation of the
whole Treason related by the Lord Keeper, to the Honorable House of Commons
the first of November. 1641.
group of men standing in front of courtyard

London Printed for Francis Coules. 1641.

The true Copy of a Letter written from a Gentleman in Ireland, to his friend
in England
SIR,
I Could not omit to write unto you, to give you to understand of a miraculous
deliverance, which the Lord in mercy has vouchsafed unto the poor Protestants
in this Kingdom, which you may perceive by the Proclamation enclosed; for I
have not time to relate the whole story, or bloody Tragedy, which was intended
against us: The execution should have bin on the Saturday, which was discovered
on Friday night, by a man of Sir John Clatworthy, an Irish Knight, but one of
your House of Commons, and this day being the Sabbath, has bin the
troublesomest day that ever I saw in all my days, mixed with joy and sorrow;
joy for our our gracious deliverance, and much perplexed by fears of our
approaching enemies, expecting every hour when the City should be surprised,
that for my part and many others, have had but little rest day and night for
these two days, but how many more it is only known to God; the Enemy has in
the North parts of this Kingdom, taken two Lords Castles, and two Towns, one
of them of great strength and much munition in it, and as it is verily
believed, they do still increase in great multitudes: here is taken a Lord,
and diverse others of note, and others the number of forty, which are safe in
Prison, and hope of many more: the Lord is called the Lord Maguere, and the
Papists make it a Religious War which they they had no cause to do, for they
have had a long time as much liberty as we have had, if not more; but their
father the Devil has set them upon this damnable act I hope to their utter
ruin in this Kingdom, if the Lord in mercy open our Kings eyes, and your
Parliaments hearts to take pity upon us, for no hope of Reformation is to be
had here, for they are ten for one of us through this Kingdom as is verily
believed* I have bin so employed Day and Night these two days, that I can
hardly write thus much unto you, but desire your prayers and all good people
for us, and when more is discovered, if the Lord preserve me with life, you
shall bear farther from me, in the mean time pray for us all.

Your loving friend W. B.

A Proclamation, by the Lords Justices and Counsel.
W. Parsons. Io. Borlase.
THese are to make known, and publish to all His Majesty's good Subjects in
this Kingdom of Ireland, that there is a discovery made by us the Lords
Justices and Council, of a most disloyal and detestable Conspiracy ^ntended
by some affected Irish Papists against the lives of Us, the Lords Justices and
Counsel, and many other of his Majesty's faithful Subjects, universally
throughout this Kingdom* for the seizing not only of his Majesty's Castle of
Dublin, his Majesty's principal Fort here, but also of the other
Fortifications in the Kingdom: And seeing by the great goodness and abundant
mercy of Almighty God to his Majesty, and this State and Kingdom, those wicked
Conspiracies are brought to light, and some of the Conspirators committed to
the Castle of Dublin, by Us, by his Majesty's Authority, so as those wicked and
damnable Plots are now dissapointed in the chief parts thereof, We therefore
have thought fit hereby not only to make it publicly known, for the comfort
of his Majesty's good and loyal Subjects in all parts of the Kingdom, but
also hereby to ^equire them that they do with all confidence and
cheerfulness betake themselves to their own defense, and stand upon their
own guard, so to render the more safety to themselves, and all the Kingdom
besides, and that they advertise Us with all possible speed of all Occurrents
which may concern the Peace and safety of the Kingdom: and now to show fully
that Faith and Loyalty which they have always shown for the public services
of the Crown and Kingdom, which We will value to his Majesty accordingly, and
a special memory thereof will be retained for their advantage in due time. And
We require that* great care be taken that no Levies of mon be made for foreign
service, nor any men suffered to march upon any such pretense,

Given as his Majesty's Castle at Dublin. 23. October. 1641. R. Dillon. To.
Digby. Ad. Loftus. J. Temple. Tho. Rotherham. Fr. Willoughby. Ja. Ware. Rob.
Meredith.

God save the King.
The whole relation of the hellish treason in Ireland, as it was related by my
Lord Keeper in the house of Commons November the first, 1641.
THe Lord Keeper declared unto the House of Commons, that the Lord Deputy of
Ireland had received a letter from the two Lord Chief Justices and Privy
Counsel in Ireland, of the discovery of an Horrible plot by the Jesuits,
popish priests and other Papists in the Kingdom of Ireland, for the murdering
of the two Chief Justices and all the Privy Counsel and Protestants of
Ireland, as also to seize on all the Kings Forts, Castles, and Magasens
whatsoever, and moreover, that they would murder all persons that should oppose
them in any of their intentions and desires, which were these.

First, to have their Crown not to be dependant upon England, nor to be a
conquered Nation.

Secondly, to have their Irish Laws established, and such as should be made
hereafter.

Thirdly, to have free liberty of the exercise of their Religion.

The Earl of Leicester declared the same also, adding that he had the original
of a proclamation which was made there, and had caused the same to be copyed
out. The Letter bears date the 23. of October, 1641. declaring that Hugh Ocoret
went to Dublin unto the lodging of Hugh Maymubawne his very good friend, and
he and his friend going to the lodging of the Lord Marquis, understood great
store of Noble men and strangers had been there, but they were all gone
abroad, and they could not find them; whrfore they returned back again to his
friends lodging, where his friend revealed unto him the whole Plot; but swore
unto him he should not stir til it was put into execution, and therefore his
friend commanded his servants to look narrowly to him: but after a while he
fained some excuse of necessity for his going down, which his friend gave way
too, but sent his servants with him: when he was come down, the servants not
being so careful to watch him as they might have been, he leaped over a wall
in the yard, and made an escape, and went to Sir John Burlacy, and discovered
to him the whole plot which was this, as I will truly relate it.

That at 9 of the clock the next morning, the Irish Rebels (amongst whom the
Lord Marquis was on of the chiefest) intended at one hour and moment of time,
to massacre and murder all the English and protestant in the Kingdom of
Ireland, likewise to murder the two Lord chief Justices, and all the privy
counsel at Dublin, and at the same time to seize upon all the Kings Castles,
Ports, and Magazens throughout the whole Kingdom of Ireland, as also the
Castle of Dublin, and that if they should find any of the City that would not
submit to them, then they would shoot down from the Castle, the tops of the
chimnys to affright them, and if that did not prevail, they would then batter
down their houses about their cars. Hereupon the Lord chief Justice and the
privy Counsel of Ireland, sat al night in consultation, and took the best
course they could imagine of for the safeguard and security of themselves;
together with the Castle and City of Dublin. The next morning they apprehended
great store of these Traitors and rebels, together with the L. Marquise, who
was gone from his lodging before day and hid in a cock loft, and at his lodging
they found great store of skains, hammers, and hatchets without halves. The
same day they had notice of several places and Forts seized upon in Conno and
Monno and other places, together with several villages plundered by the
rebels; but they wrote word that they did not believe that distemper was so
general as was reported to be, and then they made no question but they should
with care and pains bring all to a good issue; to to that end they had sent for
500. of the Horse to come and guard them at Dublin, and had likewise raised
500. English for the succouring of themselves and the City, and that out of
those 500. the had chosen an 100. to be put into the Castle under the command
of Sir Francis Willoughby, who they hoped would give a good account to his
Majesty of the place fees two months: And in the mean time for fear least
there should be some further and worser plots then they knew of, they did
desire that the Parliament in England would send them down their Lord
Lieftenant with men, money and Ammunition. They further gave us to understand,
that they had taken order for their army of old Soldiers, to be in a
readiness and to march in opposition to any of the rebels that should draw to
a head.

The Copy of a Letter from the Lord chief Justices, and privy Counselors in
Ireland. to the Lords now assembled in Parliament here in England.
ONe Friday the 22. of October, Owen Ockanellee, servant to John Clotworthy, at
nine of the Clock in the night, came and discovered a Plot for the seizing of
the Castle of Dublin, and making themselves Masters of the whole Kingdom; We
sat all night in debate, and the next morning we searched the whole City of
Dublin and found many of the Conspirators there, and amongst the rest one Hugh
Mackmoen, and several others of the Family of Oneale.

The Lords of the Council caused all the parts of the City to be strongly
guarded; And in the morning we went to search for the Lord of Mackquere at his
Lodging from whence (when we came there) we found he was departed in the
morning before day (as was reported) but searching narrowly into his Lodgings
and rooms, we found several Skaynes, headless Hatchets, and Hammers in
abundance, and in the end found him secretly hid in a Cock-loft; and after he
was taken, being examined he denied all, but that he had heard of it before.
Great store of people were observed to be in the City that Night more then
usual, and the Suburbs was so thronged with people and strangers, that they
put the City in a fright, wherefore we were forced to draw up a Proclamation
for all men and strangers whatsoever to depart the City, or else to show good
cause for their stay there; And that all men whatsoever that had any hand in
the Plot should have a general Pardon, if now they would come in and confess
their faults, and make any further discovery then was yet known.

The Discovery.
OWen Ockanellee, who is servant to Sir John Clatworthy, came to Dublin to the
Lodging of Hugh Ogmackmahawne his very loving friend, and Ockanellee with his
friend going to the Lodging of the Earl of Mackquere, understood there had bin
great store os Noble men and strangers, but they were all gone abroad whereupon
they returned back again to the Lodging of the said Ogmackmahawne where
Ockanellee had not bin any long space, but Ogmackmahawne declares to him a Plot
which was intended, swearing that Ockanellee should not go out of his house
till it had bin executed (which was) that the Jesuits, popish Priests, and
other Papists, together with two Sects of Irish, and amongst the rest the said
Hugh Ogmackmahawne and Bryan Oneale with others should have come and seized
upon the Castle at Dublin, and the Earl of Macquere should be Governor
thereof, which when they had attained unto, they should have shot at the
Chimnies, and by that means have tried if they could have brought the City in
subjection; but if shooting at Chimneys could not prevail, then they should
have shot down their Houses about their ears, and at one hour, and one
moment of time to have murdered all the English and Protestants in the
Kingdom Ireland; and to have murdered the two Lord chief Justices, and all
the Privy Council of Dublin, and at the same time to have seized on all his
Majesty's Castles, Forts, and Magazins throughout the whole Kingdom, and all
persons that should be refractory to have destroyed with the sword, which
Ockanellee hearing, feigned an excuse to go into the yard to nutrusse a point,
to which his friend Ogmacmahawne consented unto, but withal commanded his
servants to go along with him, and be careful of him, that he did not slip
from them, but Ockanellee finding his opportunity leaped over the pales in the
yard, and made an escape and went to Sir John Burlacy, and Sir William Parsons,
and discovered the whole matter.

The Contents of another letter.
NOw Courteous Reader, amongst many other remarkable deliverances of diverse and
sundry persons from time to time, by the power of the Almighty, let this take
your serious thoughts for one, not of the meanest, but among the greatest, this
party Owen Ockanelle, who was servant to Sir John Clatworthy being suspected
by some of the Conspirators who were sworn to secrecy therein, to have
discovered this plot, by his diverse times persuading them to desist from their
divellish and diabolical intentions, telling them what a heinous matter it was
to cause rebellion in their native Country, and the dangerous evils that
might happen to their own persons, and their present estates, and their
posterity after them. These Conspirators finding this party cold in the
business, one amongst the rest breaks out in a passion, and swore to the rest
of the company, that the aforesaid party had revealed their plot, and without
any more advice pulls forth a Pistol (for all of them had swords and pistols)
which was charged with a brace of Bullets, and set to this Owens breast,
intending to shoot him through at that instant; which was prevented by the
divine power, in that the flint did not strike fire, some of the Company being
much affrighted at this sudden assault, began to be angry, and to ask this
party Randal Mac-Donell that would have shot him, how he could prove that
Owen had spoken of it to any party or parties, or in any forn or kind betrayed
their cause? to which Mac-Donel could give no certain answer, but only this,
that he did surmise, and his heart did think so, nay then said the rest you
are too blame to offer this as you have done: this no sooner appeased, but
another in the same passion, and of the before said company, seconds the formers
motion, whose name was Nicholas Cusock, who u^ged Owen Ockanelle, that he was
the man, and only he that the cause was betrayed; which the aforesaid Owen
denying with many protestations, and with man-like courage, which was by Gods
providence in giving him spirit at that time, nevertheless the said Cusock
made at him with another Pistol charged with a brace of bullets also; but
whether the powder in the pan was damp, or the flint not good, thanks be given
to God he missed his intent, this was the second deliverance: now being still in
the aforesaid house, and not suffered to stir, but watched and guarded, for
fear of his escape; words grew, insomuch that a party amongst them run a tilt
at him with his naked sword, which was put aside by means of one in the
company who was behind him, and staid his arm. To be short, 10. or 12. hours
being thus spent, about ten or eleven of clock at night this Owen had occasion
to ease himself and his body, and would have been gone, which they denied him;
at last by much persuasion, they gave consent that he should go down the
stairs into the yard, and four others of the company to guard him, and bring
him back again; but Owen having this opportunity, it being dark, and the yard
spacious at a convenient place leaps upon the pale, being twice his height,
and over he gets, then over a brick wall as high, and so into the high way, and
runs to the City, which was half a mile distant from the house, and there
reveals the whole plot to Sir John Burlacy and other Justices of the peace who
forthwith raised the City, and came to the place, and found some of these
Conspirators, which they aprehended, others of them run away and hid
themselves: some of them being examined, partly through fear, others to get
favor* confessed they were to have an army of 17000. from several parts of
Ireland, which should be all papists and Jesuits that should surprise all the
Castles and Forts, but especially the Castle of Dublin, cut the throats of the
chiefest Noblemen, Gentry, and others of that Kingdom that were there
present. And this being thus discovered by Owen Ockanelle, he was dispatched
with letters into England to make known to the Lords now present in Parliament
what he had discovered: who for his good service and fidelity therein, the
Honorable House has thought fit to give the said Owen 500. pounds, and 200. a
year for ever: and to be preferred to one of the chief places under the
Deputy in Jreland.

FINIS.

