A PROCLAMATION BY HIS EXCELLENCY ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, etc. Captain General
of the Army employed for the defense of the Protestant Religion, King,
Parliament, and Kingdom. Together with A Letter from a Gentleman of quality
residing in the Army, concerning the advancement of the Army toward Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for T. G. 1644.

ROBERT Earl of Essex, etc. Captain General of the Army employed for the
defense of the Protestant Religion, King, Parliament, and Kingdom.
WHereas these Countries have been very much afflicted and oppressed by the
enemy, and we are now come to relieve them of their hard bondage. It is
therefore my express will and pleasure, and I do hereby straightly charge and
command all Officers and Soldiers of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, belonging to
the Army under my command, that they and every of them do forthwith after
Proclamation hereof made, forbear (notwithstanding any pretense whatsoever) to
plunder or spoil any of the goods of the inhabitants of these Countries, or
offer any violence or other prejudice unto them, upon pain of death without
mercy.

Given under my hand and seal this 26 of May, 1644. ESSEX.

A Letter from a Gentleman of quality residing in the Army, to his friend in
LONDON.
SIR,
THe Armies are this day on their march. Yesterday the Lord Roberts Marshall
General of the field marched with a party of Horse and Foot (by his
Excellencies order) and possessed themselves of Abington, which the enemy the day
before quitted, and retreated to Oxford; truly (blessed be God) the enemy
flies before us and durst not oppose. The Country where we now are, are in a
very poor condition, and truly the enemy dealt so inhumanely with them, that
they have almost stripped them of all they had in this Town; as I am informed,
some of them ripped up Sows bellies great with Pigges, and did other incredible
acts of worse nature, besides ravishing three mayds; and when they had done
this, they said they would do what other mischief they could, because they had
but a short time to reign. Herein is his Excellencies Proclamation to save all
that is left by the enemy, which is very little. I rest,

Your assured friend.
Blewbery, May 26. 1644. in the morning. Sir William Waller was this day at
Sutton, which is between Oxford and Abington.



FINIS.

