AN EXACT and TRVE RELATION Of the taking of ARVNDEL CASTLE The sixth of this
present January, between nine and ten of the clock in the forenoone, by the
valor of that ever honored Knight Sir WILLIAM WALLER.

Wherein were taken Prisoners, Sir Edward Lloyd Colonel, Sir Edward Bishop
Colonel, Josia^ Banifield Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel Rawlins, Major Mullins,
Major Massey, Major Miles, and of Majors, Captains, Lieutenants, and
Reformadoes, about fifty more:


As also 1000. Prisoners, 1000. Arms, 4000. l. in money, with other great
booties.

Sent in a Letter from the Army.

This is Licensed and enterd in the Hall book according to Order.

London, Printed for George Lindsey, 1644.

An exact and true Relation of the taking of Arundel Castle on Saturday the
sixth of this present January, 1644.
Right worthy Sir,
COnsidering the engagements whereby I stand so deeply obliged unto your Worth,
being myself your man at Arms for the Republic, and for the service of the
Parliament, in which Cause I am resolved to live and dye. I thought I could not
present you with truer News, or which would more please the expectation of what
passed late at Arundell Castle, and the full manner of the taking of it, which
is News that I doubt not but in a cheerful readiness you will receive,
wherein you shall understand the great mercy which under God we have received
in strengthening us and preserving us, and that in a very great and large
proportion. Sir the joyful and gainful achievement of this place, which
lately was the Den of the Cavaliers, and is how the place of refuge for us,
shall be the present subject of this Letter.

WE endured a long and tedious siege, the weather was cold, the nights long,
and the season of the year troubled us, who lay in the Field extremely with
high winds and extraordinary showers of rain, yet our hearts (God be thanked)
were active, warm, and resolute, neither did the absence of the Trained Bands
of London who departed homewards, any way d sanimate us, but rather increased
our courage and our faith in God. Indeed our opposition was strong, and we lost
at the first assault some special Commanders, and some other Soldiers, and
the great danger we were in day and night might have abated our resolutions
(had not God) in our greatest necessities wonderfully preserved us, and showed
us more wonderful declarations of his mercy then my dull pen is able to
express: for in the middle of the danger and difficulty of the assault, our
noble vigilant and Heroic Commander Sir William Waller, did so cheer up our
resolutions, and put such new fire into our blood, as it raised in us all the
spirit of fortitude to fall upon our enemies, every one of us striving to
exceed each other in valor, or absolutely resolve to endure the loss of our
lives to the last man.

Upon the fourth of this month (as often heretofore) we made a strong assault
of battery against the Castle, which unexpected charge caused (as we conceived)
the Enemy to startle, having never found so strong a charge before, besides
they were driven into great want of provision, which rendered them the more
unable to defend themselves; this we readily perceived, which caused more
vigor and resolution in us to continue the assault, and to take a care that
none of them should escape at the back side of the Castle by leather boats over
the water as some of them did heretofore. When the Enemy found our resolution,
and that they must either endure the utmost that Famine or the Sword could
threaten, or submit unto the mercy of the Parliament, they were driven into
great perplexities, and understanding that there were great Ordnances sent for
from Portsmouth to batter the Castle, they thought it was their safest way to
surrender it, and to desire terms of composition that they might march forth
with all their Arms, Horse and Baggage toward the Lord Hopton without any
violence to be offered them, but the answer of the ever Renowned Sir William
Waller was, That they should presently surrender up all Prisoners, Arms,
Horses, Standards, Colors and all provisions of War whatsoever with all that
is in the Castle, That they also should surrender all Soldiers of ours taken
prisoners, and if any of ours had suffered in any part by the Enemy that their
Soldiers shall expect the like usage from us. The noble Sir William Waller
protested also to some friends there present, that the loss of his friends and
some Soldiers in that service were more precious to him then the gaining of so
many desperate Malignants which had long stood out to maintain a Castle
wherein they found so little probability to relieve themselves. The besieged
when they found no hope of relief, and that their Lord Hopton was retreated
toward Winchester, came forth and surrendered themselves on the sixth of this
present January betwixt nine and ten in the forenoon; the soldiers and
Governor himself being in a miserable distress and perplexity all the night
before: There were taken in it Sir Edward Lloyd Colonel, Sir Edward Bishop
Colonel, Josias Bamfield Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel Rawlins, Major Mullins,
Major Massey, Major Mils; and of Majors, Captains, Lieutenants and Reformadoes
about fifty more. There were taken also a thousand Prisoners, a thousand Arms,
four thousand pound in money, with other good booty. It is certain we lost
some Commanders and good Soldiers in the many assaults that were made against
the Castle, which did all extraordinary good service, but we have now in the
taking of it satisfaction for that loss. Sir William Waller resolved that if
Sir Ralph Hopton will not find out him, he will find out Hopton. We have a
long time expected the assistance of four Regiments from London, but (as I was
writing this) I heard they were upon their march. I believe we shall with all
speed (having put a sufficient garrison into this place) march further
Southwards. I doubt not but you will pray for our success wheresoever we shall
advance: and the rest of our friends desire you with me, that you will join with
us to render al hearty thanks to Almighty God who gives us victory, and will
yet do great and wonderful things. I pray remember my love to my wife to whom
I have also written, and withal, etc.

Postscript.
Sir the haste of this present Post, although my intimate friend, has caused
me to omit many particulars, which at the next you shall receive at large from
him who is yours,

Jacob Travers.


