THE EARL OF ESSEX HIS LETTER TO Master Speaker.

July 9. 1643.

With some brief Animadversions on the said Letter.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall, 1643.

Master SPEAKER,
I Would now have given you the true Relation of the skirmish on Sunday last
between some of my Horse and the Enemies near Buckingham; but Sir Philip
Stapleton and Colonel Goodwin being then upon the place, I refer that
Relation to them: since when being informed that the King had sent more Forces
to Buckingham to maintain that Place and bring those parts into contribution,
and give us battle there: hereupon I advanced with the Army toward that
Town, where the Enemy stayed until the Army came within two miles of them,
and then made haste away toward Banburie, notwithstanding they had persuaded
the People that they would not quit the Place till they had beaten me out of
the County. I then understanding that they were fled held it not fit to go to
the Town with mine Army, but sent Colonel Middleton with some Horse to clear
that Town and Coast, which they did, and then advised where to quarter with
most conveniencie for our Army, and most ready for the Enemy, the Queens
Forces being like to join with them very suddenly; and that our Army may
better secure the Parliament and City of London and Counties adjacent, and be
more safely supplied with moneys from London, and lie most conveniently to
join with the Forces with the Lord Gray in Northamptonshire, J was advised to
march to great Brickhill, as the most fit Place for all purposes. The Enemy
being so strong in Horse, and this Army being neither recrewted with Horses,
Arms, nor Saddles, it is impossible to keep the Countries from being
plundered, nor to fight with them but where and when they list, we being forced
when we move to march with the whole Army, which can be but slow marches, so
that the Countries must suffer much wrong, and the cries of poor People are
infinite. If it were thought fit to send to his Majesty to have Peace; with
the settling of Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the Subject, and to bring
unto just Trial those chief Delinquents that have brought all this mischief
to both Kingdoms; and as my Lord of Bristol spoke in Parliament, how we may be
secured to have those things performed hereafter; or else (if his Majesty
shall please to absent himself) there may be a day set down to give a period
to all these unhappy distractions by a Battle, which when and where they
shall choose, who may be thought any way indifferent, J shall be ready to
perform that duty J owe you. And that it may not bring with it a Treaty, the
Propositions to be agreed upon between his Majesty and the Parliament may be
sent to such an indifferent place that both Armies may be drawn near one to the
other, that if Peace be not concluded, it may be ended by the sword; no
Officers of the Army to be of the Committee, nor any intercourse to be between
them. So I am

Your assured Friend ESSEX.
Great Brickhil, July 9. 1643.

THis Letter will need no Interpreter, only the Reader may please to observe
what is now the chief task of the Rebels Army [To secure the Parliament and
City of London.] for as that wretched City has been both Midwife and Nurse
of this Rebellion, which some desperate Malcontents had cunningly begotten;
so now their General must so order his business, that neither the one nor the
other be brought to an account: for if the Members be disturbed, the
Contrivance would cease, and not to protect their Citizens would stop
Contribution, and so their Army (and this bloody Civil War) would melt and
dissolve into our former happy peace.

Next, consider in what case their Army now apprehends it self, who
foreseeing Her Majesty would advance out of the North, Declared it was not in
their power to prevent Her, but that (maugre all they could do to the contrary)
The Queens Forces would suddenly be joined to the Kings: which accordingly was
done, Her Majesty meeting her Lord and Sovereign in Keinton Field, and
thereby manifested that She valued their Forces no more than their lies and
slanders.

Again, you may observe what excellent good Masters the Authors of this
Rebellion have still approved themselves, that their General the Earl of
Essex (whose repute in the world had cast some credit on these men's designs)
should now be rewarded with so slight and cheap an estimation, as if he had
been a common stander by. For though in the beginning they smoothed and courted
him to undertake their Cause; and (after to continue him) passed a fine Vote,
That Robert Earl of Essex had deserved so highly, that He and his House should
be recorded to all Posterity for their service done to the Commonwealth:
whereby they heaved Him up to such a value among the people, that a mere Letter
of his to Isaak Pennington from Northampton was able to command an hundred
thousand pounds in four days; yet now is he sunk to so low a rate in their
affections, that He is fain to complain, and (as here He does) beg not only
for Men, Money, and Horses, but for Saddles, and such other particulars as were
not wont to find room in his Excellencies Letters: nay, and Isaak Pennington's
own Chaplain (one that for stealing a Gown and his good ability in Learning
was fain to leave the Universitie) does now preach against Him, and whether it
will stay at a mere neglect, themselves best know. Nor is it their Generall's
case alone, Sir John Hotham, Colonel Essex, with others (too many now to
mention) have as amply been rewarded; the Colonel imprisoned because he was
too fair a Rebel, and not so vile an Enemy as that bloody Coward Nathaniel
Fines; and Hotham (with his Son and Family) imprisoned, wounded, pillaged of
all his vast Treasure, though he was the first great Stickler in their Cause,
and if he opened not the first mouth, yet he held up the first hand against His
Majesty; for without Hotham they might have Voted and gnashed their teeth
against the King, but gone no farther, he being then possessour of His
Majesty's Magazine. But Hotham was rich, which (as their case stands) is
against the Privileges of Parliament, they being resolved (as Suetonius says
of Vespasian) to make their Agents Sponges to suck in all they can, In vita Fl.
Vespasiant.
and after squeeze them for their own use.

The next thing observable is an ingenuous confession (of him that knows best)
who is now Master of the Field; The Enemy (says the Earl) is so strong in
Horse, and this Army being neither recrewted with Horses, Arms, etc. it is
impossible to keep the Country, etc. nor to fight with them but when and where
they list, We being forced when we move, to march with the whole Army, to keep
our selves from being broken. Nor can the Earl confide in those few Forces he
has, for he complains in his late Letter to the County of Essex, of the
loosnesse and inconstancy of his Soldiers; by loosnesse he means running
away from him, and by inconstancy running away from before Us, when we offer
to charge them. But the words themselves are full and home.

And I cannot pass that the Earl is troubled at those horrible outrages done
to the Countries; and I confess I am glad to see Him returned to so much sense
of his Honor, that He finds himself aggrieved at these desperate villainies.
For (as He here says) The cries of the poor people are infinite; but who have
been the Authors, or are the Actours in these common robberies, shall be
recorded to Posterity, to the lasting infamy of these bloody Hypocrites, who
cut our throats in courtesy, and are not satisfied with our Money, unless
they have our lives. And it is no wonder if my Lord be weary of such as these.

Now if you take notice that the Earl desires them, to send to His Majesty to
have Peace, with the settling of Religion, the Laws and Liberties of the
Subject, and to bring unto just trial those chief Delinquents that have
brought all this mischief upon both Kingdoms. I must needs tell you they are
no new words; for His Majesty made this motion too often now to mention; nay,
(upon an exact survay) this very thing has been called upon by His Majesty
above sixscore several times in His Declarations and Messages; that (if
possible) He might have stopped this issue of blood, which since has run so
freely in all parts of this Kingdom. But whether the Earls motion for Peace,
be as real and clear as His Majesty's was heretofore, will not easily be
evinced; only it is manifest, the Earls thoughts did not so far abhor the
very name of Peace as others of his Faction, for on the reading of this Letter
among the remnant in the Lower House, such a noise was made, and such a dust
raised, both in the House, and among their Faction in the City, as if the
Earl had now persuaded them to remember themselves, and submit to His
Majesty, which (you will say) would quickly have been Voted for another new
and horrible Plot. And for bringing Delinquents to a Legal trial, let them
consider those they have tried already, and those they Voted should never be
Tried; the Earl of Strafford, Master Tomkins, Master Chaloner, Master Yeomans,
Master Bouchier, these (to say but so) received their Trials: and the Lord
Kimbolton, Master Hollis, Sr Arthur Hasterig, (M. Hampden) M. Pym, and M.
Strode, were Declared too innocent to be stained with a purgation. Remember for
what end the former died, and the later lived, I say no more.

And it is worth your notice how he quoats the Earl of Bristol for words
spoken by His Lordship in Parliament; the words are in that excellent and
seasonable Speech made by his Lordship for Accommodation, May 20. 1642. which
(because they are excellent words) I shall repeat them; The greatest
difficulty (says my Lord) of Accommodation may seem to be, how that which is
agreed upon, may be secured for the future; this is commonly the last point in
Treaties betwixt Princes, and of greatest niceness; but much more betwext a
King and his Subjects, where that confidence and belief which should be
betwixt them, is once lost; and to speak clearly, I fear, that this may be our
case, for it is much easier to compose differences arising from Reason (yea
even from wrongs) then it is to satisfy Jealousies, which arising out of
diffidence and distrust, grow and are varied upon every occasion. Which Speech
the Earl of Essex is pleased now to take up, ingenuously confessing, it was
prudent sober counsel, for indeed it foretold them what since we all have
felt, as any that peruse it may evidently perceive.

Once more you may observe, that the Earl in this His Motion for a Treaty,
would exclude all Officers of his Army from being of the Committee; for my
Lord sees too many decayed Members have Voted themselves to be Colonels and
great Officers, who being their own Carvers have found sweet and frequent
Pay-dayes, and would therefore be unwilling to recurre into a beggarly Peace.

But (to trouble you with no more) the Earl has received so small
encouragement from His ungrateful Patrons, that He wishes a dispatch whether
by War or Peace, and therefore tells them here, that if they have no mind to
compose these unhappy distractions fairly, that there might be a day set down
to give a period to all by a Battle; which if it be agreed upon, he says, He
shall perform that duty which he owes unto them: but what that duty he owes
unto them is (for he speaks indefinitely and comes not to particulars) lies
concealed in his own breast. And sure I should believe it were not much,
considering he has ventured his life and fortune in their service, and yet
has arrived at no greater estimate in their eyes, than to be next to Mistress
Ven, far inferior to my Lady Waller, who expects every hour (by
participation with her Husband) to be Lady General.

FINIS.

