A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF The Blasphemous Doctrine of Familisme, First conceived
and brought forth into the world by one HENRY NICOLAS of the Low Countries of
Germany about an hundred years ago; And now very boldly taught by one Mr.
Randall, and sundry others in and about the City of London. Whom multitudes of
people follow, and which Doctrine many embrace. The sum or brief whereof is
on the other side of the leaf set down.

MATTHEW. 24.4.5. Take heed that no man deceive you: for many shall come in my
name saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many.

Imprimatur.

John Downam.



LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons in Aldersgate Street. 1645.

The sum or maine points of the Doctrine of H. N.
1. THat Christ is already come in his glory from the right hand of God to
judge the quick and the dead.

2. That the great and last Trumpet now sounds, and they that sleep in Christ
are raised from the dead; the sting of death, which is sin, taken away, and
death swallowed up in victory.

3. That holiness, or the anointing of the holy Ghost, and the Sabbath, is
Christ; and the sin which they call the contrary anointing, and child of the
Devil, is the Antichrist.

4. That all the promises of God, and whatsoever is written and foretold in the
Scriptures, concerning the everlasting Kingdom of Christ, and his Saints,
becomes now in this present day of H. N. and his Family, fulfilled.

5. That the Seat or Throne of judgment whereon Christ sits, is the
communialty of the Family of Love, whereof H. N. is the oldest Father. And that
he and they are Godded with God; and God manned with them.

6. That the way and manner of judging is by the new Evangelie of H.N. The
parabolicall sayings and mystical sentences which he has written and
published, and the Elders or perfect holy ones of the Family, hold forth to the
world.

You shall have the own sayings of H. N. word for word with his own quotations
of Scriptures (to read and consider) in the following Discovery; whereupon you
may the better discern and judge of things.

A brief discovery of the blasphemous Doctrine of Familisme.
THat which occasioned me to write and publish this Discovery, was some
Doctrines delivered in a house within the Spittle-yard without Bishops-gate,
near London, by one Mr. Randoll, whom I was requested (by some friends) to
hear. And observing the multitude of people that followed him, and how they
were affected with his doctrine, which I did plainly perceive was the very
grounds of Familisme contained in the writings of H. N. I hereupon thought good
a little to inform the people thereof; whereat some were much offended, and one
mocked and said, See what an old man here is, and what a child here is And I
asked one of them, if he did believe that the bodies of men which were dead and
buried in the earth, should be raised to life again: and he answered me
saying, I cannot tell. And I mentioning Christ's resurrection from the dead, one
answered, Christ was not then a true man but only God: and another affirmed,
that he had known Christ after the flesh. And I asked him when and where; but
he would give me no answer. Whereupon I said, See how this people are taught.
And a woman answered and said unto me, I think if you did speak with the
Minister, you should not find him of their mind. And I told her she was
deceived, he thought the same things. So I left them for that time.

And after this, I having a desire to hear him yet more, and that the people
should be better informed, I came again, and brought with me five or six
papers, wherein I had written these words following:

This Gentleman, Mr. Randall, does delude the people with the deceitful
doctrine of Familisme, which I will undertake to prove by the things he has
delivered; and that he therein does pervert the straight way of the Lord, and
destroy the hope of the Saints, as much as in him lies.

And when his Sermon was ended, and that upon consideration of a point of
doctrine he delivered, that a man baptized with the holy Ghost, knew all
things, even as God knew all things, which himself greatly admired as a deep
mystery, and likened it to the great Ocean, where there is no casting Anchor,
nor sounding the bottom, I said unto the people, This man has many great
words, and a great deal of deceit. And some of them being much displeased, and
moved with anger at my saying, I went down out of the house into the yard, and
gave one of the forementioned papers unto a man that was of Mr. Randals
acquaintance, and requested him to give it him: and a friend of mine whom the
man knew, told him, that we desired to speak with Mr. Randal. And about three
or four days after, my friend spoke with the man, whose name, (as I now
understand) was Mr Cullumbeame, and asked him concerning the motion of speaking
with him, and he told him that Mr. Randall was very willing: and so they
appointed the day and hour, and place of meeting to that purpose, which was on
Tuesday the week following, being the 25. of February, at two of the clock in
the afternoon, and at the house of the said Mr. Cullumbeame, a Grocer in Thames
street, London. So at the day and hour appointed, I (with five or six of my
acquaintance) came to the house, and staid about the space of two hours,
waiting for Mr. Randall, but he came not. Then I having a paper, wherein I had
written a few Arguments for proof of the forementioned charge, I gave it to
Mr. Cullumbeame, and wished him to give it Mr. Randall, and request him to give
us his answer to the same in writing: and so we departed.

The Arguments were these following:

1. Whosoever shall teach and persuade the people, that the perfection and
resurrection spoken of by Paul, 1 Corinthians. 15.51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57.
Philip. 3.11, 12, 13, 14. Ephesians. 4.12.13. Heb. 6.1. (which in verse 18. the
Apostle calls, The hope set before us, and describes through the rest of the
Epistle following, by the names of the true Tabernacle, which the Lord pitched,
and not man, Heb. 8.2. Good things to come, etc. chap. 9.11. An eternal
inheritance, verse. 15. An enduring substance, chap. 10.34. Great recompense of
reward, verse. 35. A City having foundations, whose builder and maker is God,
chap. 11.10. An heavenly country, and a City prepared of God, verse. verse. 16.
A better resurrection, v. 35. A kingdom which cannot be moved, chap. 12.28. A
City to come, chap. 13.14.) are to be attained in the fullness and perfection
of them, according to these testimonies. Now in this present time, before the
common death of the body, does herein teach and persuade to the deceitful
Doctrine of Familisme, taught by Henry Nicholas, the principal Author thereof,
and so deludeth the people therewith.

But Mr. Randall does so teach and persuade, as sundry persons that heard him
can witness. Therefore he does so delude with that deceit.

2. Whosoever shall teach and persuade, that such as are baptized with the
baptism of the holy Ghost, have from thenceforth nothing to do with the Law,
nor with the baptism of repentance which John preached, but away with the Law,
and away with John Baptist from such a one, does herein pervert the straight
way of the Lord, not only in denying the baptized with the baptism of the
holy Ghost, the use of the Law of God to delight therein, and serve the same in
his mind, as Paul says, Romans 7. but also in rejecting the estate of a
repentant broken contrite heart, whereof the Prophet Esaias speaks, saying,
Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way, take up the stumbling block out of the
way of my people: For thus says the high and lofty, One, that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the hearts of the contrite ones, Esaias 57.14.15. The repentant
contrite heart being it which the holy Ghost purges and cleanses, comfort
and reviveth daily; and the baptism of repentance, and the baptism of the
holy Ghost being the parts of the new birth from above, wherein he that is born
anew walks, and goes on daily, weeping and yet rejoicing, dying and yet
living, sowing in tears his precious seed in an assured hope one day to reap
in joy, and come to a City and Kingdom promised.

But Mr. Randall does so teach and persuade (as is aforesaid:) Therefore he
therein perverteth the straight way of the Lord, as does H. N. the
Arch-Familist.

3. Whosoever shall teach and persuade, that the things spoken of by Paul, 1
Cor. 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57. are to be attained and fulfilled now, in this
present time in those that are baptized with the ho-Ghost, do thereby make
Christ to be already come the second time to such, without sin unto salvation,
according to Heb. 9.28. Death to be swallowed up in victory, as 1 Cor. 15.54.
according to Hosea 13.14. The sting of death, which is sin, to be quite taken
away. And all the great and eternal promises to be already fulfilled in them;
and so destroy the hope of the Saints as touching the personal coming of
Christ in his glory to judge the quick and the dead, and of the resurrection of
the bodies of the Saints, and of the kingdom, glory, and life everlasting of
body and loule hereafter to come, which the Scriptures so much speak of, and
all the Saints assuredly look for.

But Mr. Randall, as well as H. N. the oldest Familist, does so teach and
persuade: Therefore he as well as H. N. does hereby destroy (as much as in him
lies) the hope of the Saints: And so the whole charge is fully proved.

4. Whosoever shall teach and affirm, that every creature in the first estate
of creation, was God, because they were made by the word of God, does therein
teach and affirm a very erroneous and blasphemous thing. But Mr. Randall does
so teach and affirm: Therefore, etc.

And although (as I confess) he said, mistake me not, I do not say the
creature is the Creator, neither do I say, Man is God; that were blasphemy:
for man is vanity, yea a lie, yet did not Mr. Randall hereby contradict his
first doctrine: for if I should ask him and say, Did God by his word make
vanity, or a lie? No doubt he would answer and say, No. What is that man then
which he calls a lie, and vanity? Doubtless he means man in his fall, and so
the creature, though he denies it to be the Creator, yet he denies it not to
be God, no more then he denies the Word or Son of God to be God, because he
is not, nor can be the Father. This Mr. Randall counts not blasphemy, but I
affirm it is.

Neither because the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost is one God, are the
Saints which are baptized with the holy Ghost, therefore God also.

Neither because they have the holy Ghost dwelling in them, do they therefore
know all things as God knows all things, as Mr. Randall taught and affirmed,
according as H. N. has done.

5. Whosoever shall presume to turn the holy Writings and saying of Moses and
the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, and the proper names, persons and
things mentioned and contained therein, into allegories, and give them out to
be the mystery and spiritual meaning of the same, The holy Ghost in the
writings or sayings of Moses and the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles)
having not so done, nor left any rule or direction for it, does therein presume
above that which is written; and so adds to, and takes from the sayings,
writings, and prophesies of the holy Scriptures, and deceives the people,
themselves also being deceived. But Mr. Randall as well as H. N. has so done,
as by the Sermons of the one, and the printed books of the other compared
together, may appear. Therefore.

And so Sir, not to mention every thing delivered by you, against which just
exception may be taken, we desire you to consider of these things, and to give
us your answer in writing. And believe us, we have not the least thought of
raising persecution against you, as you perhaps or some other may think, nor of
wronging you any kind of way: only our desire and end is, that the truth may
be known unto us all, and that we should not delude, nor be deluded. And so I
rest your Christian friend,

John Etherington.
These were given to Mr. Randoll by the said Mr. Cullumbeam, but he returns
no answer, nor will, as some that are of his hearers, and inward with him, say,
as from himself.



And now to the end all men may see that Mr. Randall is not wronged in the
forementioned charge, I will here set down the own words of H.N. with his
quotations, as they stand printed in his book entitled, The joyful Message of
the Kingdom.
As first in his Preface, where he has these words:

COnsider on the time, O all ye people which love the truth of Jesu Christ.

Presently in this day of the love and of the appearing of the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ in the resurrection of the dead, wherein the Law, Esaias 65. 1
Cor. 15.
the Prophets, and all what is written of Christ, becomes fulfilled.

And in Chap. 1. he has these words:

H.N. Through the grace and mercy of God, and through the holy Spirit of the
love of Jesus Christ, raised up by the highest God from the death, John 6. Act.
17. Ephesians. 2. Romans 8. Ephesians. 4. Ioh. 14. Apoc. 21. John 1. 1 John 1. Ier. 33. 1
Cor. 13. Apoc. 14. Esaias.
according to the providence of God, and his promises, anointed with the holy
Ghost in the old age of the holy understanding of Jesus Christ, Godded with God
in the Spirit of his love, made heir with Christ in the heavenly goods of the
riches of God, illuminated in the Spirit with the heavenly truth, the true
light of the perfect being, elected to a Minister of the gracious word, which
is now in the last time raised up by God according to his promises, in the most
holy services of God under the obedience of his love, for to publish now in the
last time, out of the same grace and hearty mercifulness of God, and through
the same holy Spirit of the love of Jesus Christ, good tidings, or a joyful
message of the Kingdom of God unto all people, etc.

And in Sentence 9. of the same chapter he has these words:

Esaias 3. Matthew. 24.25. Jude 1. Esaias 16. Acts 17. Zach. 8.
FOr behold in this present day the glorious coming of the Lord Jesus Christ,
with the many thousands of his Saints, be comes manifested, which has set
himself now upon the Seat of his majesty, for to judge in this same day which
the Lord has ordained or appointed, the whole world with equity and with
faithfulness, and truth, according to his righteousness.

For that cause, O all ye which dwell upon the earth, fear now the Lord the
most highest, and give him alone all honor, laud, and praise: for the day of
his judgment is now come: Apoc. 14.
that it might now in the same day of the true judgment of God and Christ,
Luke 22.
become all fulfilled in Christ, whatsoever is written of him. Sentence 10.

And in chap. 34. (he having before from chap. 31. to this 34. spoken of the
Catholic Church of Rome, of the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, Deacons,
Sextons, Services, Ceremonies, etc. and in great commendations of them for
their time, until contentions arose about them) says here:

But the while now that the figurative Services and Ceremonies of the
Christians flourished in their vigor, and that the discordable minds, out of
the knowledge of the Scripture, did daily increase to a more intangling, with
much contending and disputation of Christ, and of his Services and Ceremonies.
And that many good willing hearts which had great hunger and thirst after the
righteousness, Matthew. 5.
searched the Scriptures for to understand the truth and will of God, Exodus 3.
Psalm. 9.
and to live therein, with great diligence and zeal, and sighed, and prayed
unto God. So bath God at last remembered the desolate hearts, the sighings and
prayers of the poor, and for his chosen sake, (to the end that his truth and
what his will is, might before all lovers of the truth, Matthew. 24. Abac. 3.
Acts 13. Ioh. 6. Acts 17. Romans 8. 1 Cor. 6. 2 Cor. 4. Ephesians. 2. Ezekiel. 37. John
17. 2 Pet. 1. John 14. 2 Cor. 6. Apoc 21. Psalm. 45. and 89. Esaias 16. Esaias 2.
Joel 2. Acts 2. Genesis 2^. Matthew. 24. Apoc. 14. Psalm 4. and 68. Romans 14. 2 Cor.
5. 2 Reg. 7. Psalm. 98. Esai. 16. and 32. and 42. Ier. 23. and 35. Acts 17.
be made manifest or declared, and the Scripture fulfilled) shortened the days
according to his promises, and through the hearty mercifulness of his love,
wrought a great and wonderful work upon earth out of his holy heaven, and
raised up me H. N. the least among the holy ones of God, which lay altogether
dead and without breath and life among the dead, from the death, and made me
alive through Christ, as also anointed me with his godly being, manned himself
with me, and Godded me with him, to a living Tabernacle or House for his
dwelling, and a seat of his Christ the seed of David, to the end that his
wonderful works might now in the last time be known, the light of his glory
with full clearness and instruction revealed, and the coming of his Kingdom
to an Evangelie of the same Kingdom, and to the blessing of all generations of
the earth, published in all the world, according to the Scriptures.

Behold and consider my beloved, how wonderfully God works in his holy ones,
and how that in this day or light of the love, the judgment seat of Christ is
revealed and declared unto us out of heaven, to a righteous judgment upon
earth, from the right hand of God. And how that on the same judgment seat of
Christ, that the Scriptures might be fulfilled, there sits one now in truth
in the habitation of David, which judges uprightly, thinks upon equity, and
requires righteousness.

Through him God will now in this day which he himself has appointed, or
ordained thereunto, judge the compass of the earth with righteousness.

In which this same day, or last time, namely in the perfection of the works of
God, and in his righteous judgment the God of heaven has now declared
himself and his Christ together with all his Saints, unto us his elect, and
also made a dwelling with as, and brought even so unto us out of his holy
Being, the most holy of his true Taberncle, with the fullness of his garnishing
and spiritual heavenly riches, to an everlasting fast standing Jerusalem, and
house for Gods dwelling, according to the Scriptures. The which is the very
true undisturbable Kingdom, full of all godly power, joy, and of all heavenly
beautifulness; wherein the laud of the Lord with fullness of the eternal life
and lovely sweetness is sung from everlasting to everlasting. And wherein all
minds of pure hearts do dwell, live and walk with freedom and Christian
triumph in all love.

This great day light of the most high God has presently in his righteous
judgment shined about us, etc. Sent. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.

And in chap. 35, Sentence 8. these words:

Esaias 26. Dan. 12. 4 Esdr. 7. 1 Thessalonians 4. Matthew. 24 and 25. Luke 17. Acts 1.
Matthew. 24. Apoc. 14.
BEhold, in this present day is this Scripture fulfilled, and accrrding to the
testimony of the Scripture, the raising up and the resurrection of the Lord,
dead c mmeth also to pass presently in this same day through the appearing of
the coming of Christ in his majesty; which resurrection of the dead, seeing
that the same is come unto us from Gods grace, we do likewise in this present
day to an Evangelie or joyful message of the kingdom of God, and Christ,
publish in all the world under the obedience of the love.

9. In which resurrection of the dead God shows unto us that the time is now
fulfilled, Esaias 26. 1 Cor. 15. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
that his dead, or the dead which are fallen asleep in the Lord, rise up in
this day of his judgment, and appear unto us in godly glory, which shall also
from henceforth live in us everlastingly with Christ, and reign upon the
earth, wherein the Scripture becomes fulfilled in this present day like as
there stands written thereof, Deuteronomy. 32.
The Lord shall judge his people etc.

And in chapter 38. Sentence 2.

Wherefore awake now all, lift up your heads, hear and see the wonderful
acts of God, Matthew. 24. Luke 21. Cor. 15. These. 4.
and have regard unto the sound of the last Trumpet, and consider, the
forefrunt of the true Tabernacle of God, wherein the beginning of the true God
service, and of the upright Christian life, becomes erected, etc.

So far are H. N. his own words, with his quotations in the Margin.

And that he makes the anointing or sanctification of the holy Ghost, which he
calls the perfection, holiness and the Sabbath, to be the Christ; and the
contrary anointing the nature of sin, and child of the Devil, as he calls
it, to be the Antichrist which the Scripture speaks of, it is manifest by his
own words, Chap. 18. and sundry other places of the book of his Evangely,
wherein also many other matters of the like nature, all grounded on the
forementioned principles, are spoken by him, too many for me here to relate.

Compare now the Sermons of Mr. Randall and those Doctrines of H. N. together,
and you shall see how Mr. Randall (like a right disciple of H. N.) follows
him therein.

And here you may see by the writings of H. N. before rehearsed, in what an
allegorical and mystical sense he expounds all those Scriptures, which he
coats in the margent, making the coming of Christ in his glory, and his sitting
in the Throne of his glory spoken of, Matthew. 24.30. and 25.31. the day of
judgment, and sounding of the last trumpet, spoken of also by Paul, 1 Cor. 15.
1 These. 4. the resurrection from the dead, and every thing else in the same
places mentioned, the perfection, the incorruption, the salvation, and all
whatsoever the Scriptures have spoken concerning the everlasting kingdom and
glory of Christ and his Saints, now, in this present day of H.N. and his family
of love, and in them, and by them, to become all fulfilled.

And now, This being their very doctrine (as their own words do plainly and
often in their doubling kind of speaking) declare, it necessarily follows,
that they who are fully possessed with the belief thereof, neither have nor can
have the least hope or expectation of any other coming of Christ hereafter, of
a perfection, of a resurrection of the body, of an eternal life, salvation,
glory, rest, peace, paradise, city, kingdom to come.

And the case being so, that their hope and happiness is only here in this
their new and last day, as they speak then it is best for them to rejoice and
be glad while their day lasts, and deck themselves here with Rose buds before
they be withered, to take their fill of pleasure: as in youth to eat and drink,
for to morrow they shall die, and all will be past.

And then what are all their pretended spiritual joys, but mere fancies? A
man that imbraceth all the pleasures that this world can afford, and his
carnal appetite shall desire, is in as happy a case as they; for if the body
being dead, shall rise and live no more, nor the spirit after that have any
sense of his being or felicity, more then it had before the body was, or can
now remember or think of that it ever had (which is also a point or consequence
of their doctrine) then Augustus Caesar, that Pagan Emperor, who lived and
reigned so long in wealth and glory in pomp and pleasure, was a happier man
far then any of them. And so all the great and glorious boastings of H.N. the
high style and manifold rare tiles, he ascribes to himself, will prove to be
no better then blasphemies against God and against Christ, and against the Holy
Ghost; and all his sweet intising words of his Evangely, and his pleasing
Allegories, though carrying never so fair a show of godliness, to be nothing
else but mere enchantments, to delude the minds, and feed the fancies of
people.

And what are all his threatenings and sentences of judegment and condemnation
he pronounces against those that reject his doctrine, but a devilish device
to fear the people, himself being filled with the spirit of pride and high
presumption.

Besides, if there be no other resurrection nor salvation then what is now
presently, as H. N. says, then what condemnation is there other, then what is
also now presently; and so when the body dies, condemnation ends.

Therefore, let all true faithful Christians, whose hope is not here in this
life only, but hereafter chiefly, conclude against this H. N. otherwise Henry
Nicolas, that he was, and is a liar, an Antichrist, a blasphemer, and so let
him go.

And let Mr. Randall and all his hearers and followers take heed, and
before-warn'd in time, (and not begin to frame arguments in their minds, and
say, It is not M. Randall and we only that teach and entertain this doctrine of
H. N. there have been and are, great Doctors of Divinity, so called, yea, and
some great Peers, and Persons of quality, and estate in this land, as
elsewhere, that have taught and entertained the same with great affection, and
high applause, I say, let them not reason thus: for although this be true, as I
my self do partly know, having had speech with some of them forty years ago,
and sundry times since, and with one great person several times, who plainly
professed the doctrine of H. N. and stood to maintain by argument, that every
creature is God, and that there was not a resurrection of the body after the
common death thereof to be expected, whereupon I hearing him, and speaking with
him, said, My Lord, out of all doubt, the whole doctrine of H.N. is a very
blasphemous deceit, and requested him to beware of it, and did what I could to
inform him in the truth which I knew, and said H. N. does admit and will have
it, that men may, and shall have wives and children in his resurrection in a
successive manner continually, but Christ says, that they which shall be
counted worthy of that world to come, and of the resurrection from the dead,
neither marry nor are given in marriage, to which he suddenly replied, saying,
no, they shall not marry, nor be given in marriage, they shall take them wives;
and I presently answered, but Christ says, they shall be as the Angels in
heaven, whereunto he replied not.

Now, what of all this? and that there have been Doctors, aed others that have
taught the doctrine of H. N. as one D. Everet, one Shaw, and at this present
one D. Gill, publicly in the midst of this city of London, and one that went
from hence to Redding, D. Pordage, who was in expectation of (if he he has not
obtained) the chief public place there; all whom I have both heard and spoken
with, and know that they have usually taught the same doctrine; although this
be so, I say, and that some of my own special acquaintance, near forty years
ago fell unto the same, yet is not all this a sufficient argument to persuade
me or any Christian else to entertain or believe the doctrine. Nay, there is
as great reason in that kind for the Turks, and for Christians also to believe
their Mahomet and his doctrine, as there is for me or any Christian else to
believe this Dutchman Henry Nicolas and his doctrine.

Although I confess, as touching my self, I being in my youth zealously
affected, was very inquisitive into those several sorts of Religions which I
heard of, then professed, and was as apt naturally, as another to be seduced,
some way or other from the truth, and had been, but that the Lord of his
goodness (he having of his free grace showed mercy unto me in giving me
repentance and forgiveness of my sins) by the same grace kept me. And as
touching this of H. N. especially (praised be the Lord) I never had any the
least inclination in my mind toward it, but have always since the time that I
first saw into it, opposed the same as a very blasphemous deceit, though I have
bin by some very falsely charged with it.

And now, because some may object and say, the Scriptures speak plainly in
some places of a perfection, and resurrection, and of an entrance into the rest
of God and everlasting kingdom of Jesus Christ, here in this present time, as
Mat. 19.21. Phil. 3.15. Joh. 5.25. Heb. 4 3. Rev. 20.5.6. Col. 2.12. and 3.1. 2
Pet. 1.11.

To this I answer and confess it is true, that in the Spirit the faithful
have through faith an entrance into the eternal rest of God and kingdom of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and so are risen from the dead, and live, and shall not come
into condemnation, soul nor body, and this is called perfection, the first
resurrection and renovation spiritual, the first fruits of the Spirit, etc.
but this is not the perfection nor the resurrection spoken of, Joh. 5.28. Joh.
6.39.40, 44. so Luke 20.35. 1 Cor. 15.32. 1 These. 4.16 Phil. 3.11. Heb. 6.1.
Neither is this entrance into the rest of God and kingdom of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the full possession promised the Saints, and which they look for: But
they press hard toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus, looking unto that which is before them, and not casting off any
of the principles or beginings of Christ, as to say as Mr. Randall did, away
with this, or away with that, nay, but only not to look upon them as if that
were all, but to leave and forget them in that respect, as things behind, and
yet nevertheless, as Paul also says, whereunto we have already attained, let
us walk by one rule, etc. Phil. 3.16. The prize of the high calling, being the
full perfection and possession of all things promised, even the Crown of
righteousness, concerning which Paul says, I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness
which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me in that day, and not to me
only, but unto them also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.7.

And although the very perfection of the Law of God be now required of the
Snints, and that they are to set the same before them as a perfect mark, as
well in respect of the Spiritual intent thereof, as the literal to love and
delight therein with their whole soul, and to keep it in the very perfection,
not in part, or for an hour or day, but fully and continually, yet do they not
attain thereunto here, nor can, though D. G. one of the Doctors of Familisme
before mentioned has very much labored to prove, they may and can) but they
sigh and mourn, and weep, because of their sins, and daily failings, and would
fain keep it perfectly, (this is the law of their mind through the spirit) but
they have another law in their members, which leads them captive to the law
of sin and of death, and yet nevertheless (they crying out against themselves,
bewailing the same, do assuredly believe that they shall be delivered from
their body of sin and death, as Paul says, Romans 7. the sting of death which is
sin, shall be taken away, and death swallowed up in victory, when the Lord
comes, as he also says 1 Cor. 15. And as touching the coming of the Lord at
the last day, it is not to be understood in a mystical manner, in the Spirit
only, as H. N. would have it, as if Christ had left or quite put off his
humane person; neither because Christ has been, is, and will be with his
Church and chosen people to the end of the world, in respect of his Spirit
according to his promise, to instruct, to guide, and comfort them, is the
presence of his Spirit, to be taken for this coming, nor the instruction,
guidance, comfort of the Spirit (which the Apostle himself at that present time
enjoyed) the resurrection he speaks of, 1 Cor. 15. as H.N. and the teachers of
Familisme would have it; Nay, but the Lords coming shall be in a most open,
manifest and glorious manner; so as that every eye shall see him, and all shall
know him to be the very same man, Jesus the Chiist that was crucified and
pierced at Jerusalem, he shall in person really and truly come, as the clear
Words of the Scripture speak, Matthew. 24.30 Rev. 1.7. and sundry other places:
and this resurrection shall be also in a most plain and evident manner; all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, and that
truly and really, as the Word says, Joh. 5.28, 29. Then Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the holy Fathers before them, and the holy children after them,
which sleep in the dust of the earth, shall come forth out of their caves,
tombs, graves, and places where they have slept, each bone of every one shall
come to his bone and sins shall knit them together, skin shall cover them,
breath shall enter into them, and they shall live and stand upon their feet
according as Ezekiel prophesied 37. and as Paul testifies 1 Cor. 15. 1 These.
4. and also Christ himself, Rev. 20.12.13, 14.

And when the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of Man (for so he styles himself)
shall indeed so come in his glory, and all his holy Angels with him, as he has
said, Matthew. 25. Then shall he sit in the Throne of his glory, even in that
Throne whereof he spoke unto David, concerning him, saying, I will raise up thy
seed after thee, which shall be of thy sons, and I will establish his
Kingdom, and he shall build me an house, and I will estabbish his throne for
ever, I will be his father, and he shall be my son. And I will not take my
mercy away from him as I took it away from him that was before thee. But I will
settle him in my house, and in my kingdom for ever, and his throne shall be
established for evermore, 1 Chronicles. 17.11, 12, 13, 14.

And again, Once have I have I sworn by my Holiness, that I will not lie unto
David, his seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the Sun before me,
it shall endure for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven,
Psa. 89. According to which the holy Angel Gabriel spoke unto his mother Mary,
saying, He shall be great, and shall be called the son of the highest, and the
Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David, and he shall
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no
end, Luke 1.32, 33.

And as God the Father will settle his Son Jesus Christ in his House and in his
kingdom for ever, and in the throne of his father David, even upon his holy
hill of Sion, as he also said, Psalm. 2. and establish the same throne for
evermore. So will he give unto him the he^^hen for his inheritance, and the
utmost ends of the earth for his possession: he shall break them with a rod
of iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel. He shall also have
dominion from Sea to Sea, and from the river to the ends of the earth. They
that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, and the enemy shall lick
the dust: yea, all Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve
him, Psa. 772.

What can be more plainly spoken then these things are? These are no mystical
fantasies, nor allegories of humane invention, as those of H. N. are, but they
are the most true Oracles of God.

Now at this present time Christ sits in the throne of God the Father at his
right hand in the heavens, reigning in the supreme kingdom with him, and there
he is to sit and reign yet a little while, till God has put down all enemies
under his feet. And then at the last day when he comes, he is to resign and
deliver up the same unto God even the Father, as it is written, 1 Cor. 15. Psa.
89. And then is he to take possession of his own kingdom and throne, which God
the Father had promised and appointed unto him long ago, even the throne and
kingdom of his Father David (it being Gods kingdom also) to reign over the
house of Jacob for ever, as it was foretold, 1 Chronicles. 17. Luke 1.31, 32. Not in
this corrupt world, where and while his enemies rule and reign, but in that
which is to come, when God shall have created new heavens, and a new earth, and
wherein righteousness shall dwell for ever, according to his promise, Esaias
65.17. 2 Pet. 3.13. Rev. 21. For all enemies, even the last, which is
mortality, and death of the body, and the sting thereof which is sin, shall
then be destroyed, swallowed up in victory, and taken away, All iniquity shall
now stop it mouth, as the Scriptures testify, 1 Cor. 15. Psa. 117.42. And then
also shall the Bride, the Lambs wife, even the holy City, the new Jerusalem,
appear complete with all her children) in her perfect beauty, brightness and
glory, according as the Scriptures declare, Esaias 60. and 62. Rev. 21. and 22.

God will create Irusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy; he will rejoice in
Jerusalem, and joy in her children his people, the voice of weeping shall be no
more heard in her, nor the voice of crying, Esaias 65.19. There shall be no more
thence an infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days, Esaias
65.20. There shall be no more marrying, nor giving in marriage, nor taking of
wives, nor getting of children, neither shall they die any more, as H.N. would
have it to be in his resurrection. Nay, all these things will be passed away,
as it is written, Luke 20.35.36. Rev. 21.4. God will now dwell in the midst of
his people, as in his own Tabernacle: and his Sanctuary also shall be in the
midst of them for evermore, as he has spoken, Ezekiel. 37. Rev. 21. And they
shall be a treasure in the hand of the Lord, a peculiar people, an holy
nation, and a kingdom of Priests before him for ever, as it is also written,
Exo. 19.5.6. And as it is given to the King, Psa. 2. So has he promised, and
will give unto them power likewise, and they shall rule the nations with a rod
of iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Rev. 2.26.27. And as
he overcame, and is sitten down with his Father in his throne, so will he give
them all that overcome, to sit with him in his throne, Rev. 3.21. This for the
present, and if farther occasion shall require, and opportunity serve, there may
be yet a more full discovery.

FINIS.

