An Elegy, and Epitaph for Mistress Abigail Sherard, Daughter to the Right
Honorable Philip Baron of Lentrimm, written by one who honored her Noble
Family and Person.
It Is ten days since she died, and though I slept,
Her solemn obsequies even then I kept:
Although I wore no blacks, colors for sorrow,
Which graceless sons and widows too often borrow,
Who think their fathers lived too long and mourn
For that, or perhaps fear they should return,
I cannot (as the wilder Irish use)
Or screeke or houle, and so their dead abuse;
I can scarce weep, but I can sigh my part,
And keep a solemn Funeral in my heart:
Sighs do but case the spleen, and tears the brain,
As clouds are eased by thunder and by rain.
I beg no case, nor do I crave relief,
My soul is happyest when I hug the grief:
My soul looks upward then to her above,
And to its proper center seems to move,
Admit her fair, chaste, noble, young,
And fit for marriage, should I therefore wrong
My faith and hope? nay, for these love her less,
Or seem to doubt or fear her happiness?
When I such sweet angelick creatures see,
I think how happy such fair souls must be,
When they refined and purified shall rise,
How glorious then will she be in our eyes?
As when the corn into the earth we throw,
Such do our bodies by corruption grow;
But when they rise, our bodies shall appear
More glorious then the corn in its full ear:
Admit us changed, yet we must be tried,
By flames of fire as gold is purified,
For my faith teaches me all in this world
Shall into Gods calcining pot be hurled,
And turned into a Calx, from which shall rise
Another world, too glorious for our eyes,
As now they are, for were they not refined,
Its glory (like the Sun) would strike us blind.
Till that time, say, which is it thou can see
Which truly can deserve a smile from thee?
Save only this, that death thou need'st not fear
If thou could either live or dye like her.
Nay, thou so far from fear of death should be
Thy eyes (like Stephens) would thy Redeemer see
Sitting upon his Throne of glory, and
The sacred Legions round about him stand;
Nay, thou shall hear them Halelujahs sing,
Praise, Honor, Glory, to the eternal King.
Her Epitaph.
O Stay Viator pass not by!
But see who here entombed does lie;
A fair, a noble virtuous Maid,
Beloved of all, all debts she paid.
Courted by many all denied
Save death who chose her for his Bride;
Who unto her for Jointure gave
A Kingdom which she is sure to have.
When ere he dies, I dare say he
Who conquers him shall marry thee,
The Heir of all this earth, nay heaven,
He unto whom all power is given:
He unto whom we know was thy first love
In pain he keeps thy soul above
Until the glorioas day which he
Designs his wedding day shall be.
It Is true till then in Death's cold arms
Thou sleep'st, nor can be wak't by charms;
Until the shrill trump of thy Lord
Shall waken thee, as once his word
Made Lazarus, and Tabitha to rise.
Then thou shall see him with those eyes
But so refined, that thou shall see
With faith, or hope could promise thee,
And really shall enjoy more
Then they could promise thee before.
FINIS.

