An exact and perfect RELATION Of the proceedings of Sr Hugh Cholmly in
Yorkshire, and of the taking of Captain Canfield by the Parliaments Forces,
who commanded a Lancashire Troop of Papists

Also a true Relation of a great Battle fought at Tadcaster the last week,
where Captain Hotham slew and took three, or four hundred Cavaliers. Likewise
true information from Leeds, Mackefield, and Skipton. Also the proceedings of
Sir John Seaton in Manch ster.

Likewise a true Relation of a great Battle fought near Darby, between Mr.
Hastings of Leicestershire, and Sir John Gell.

Whereunto is annexed a Copy of Instructions sent by His Majesty's great
Counsel, to the Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and all other Officers of
every respective County of ENGLAND;

For the due execution of Justice, the looking to the corruption of Sheriffs,
the enquiry after Enclosures, the convicting of Papists, etc.

And many more particulars worthy the knowledge of the KINGDOM.

London Printed for J. Harris, Jan. 28. 1643. 1642

Manchester, Jan. 20. 1642.
Worthy Sir,
THE last week Sir Hugh Cholmley with his Forces set upon 3. or 4. Troops of
Horse 7. miles beyond York, going to convoy the Arms from Newcastle, and
killed and took many, and pursued them almost into York; one of these Troops
was a Lancashire Troop, all Papists, the Captain, whose name was Canfield,
taken, and the whole Troop routed; Captain Pentham set upon the Forces of the
Earl of Newcastle that lay at Tadcaster, and it is reported slew and took 3.
or four hundred, and opened the passage there. Sir Thomas: Fairfax at
Bradsmith Summoned the Country In upon monday last, who came with such Courage,
and Valor, almost incredible, and with provision in their snapsacks for six
days, Thanks only was given them for their readiness, and they were
dismissed at that time, with Information that they should be called a gain
within 3. or 4. days: The Lord Fairfax sent word he would be with Sir Thomas
Farifax: and if he be not come already, is expected daily with arms and some
Ordnance: It is conceived they will set upon Leeds: and Macfield and skipton,
the enemies are so afraid they know not where to abide; we hear the Lord Saill
is taken prisoner by the Earl of Newcastles forces, we expect to ^^^re daily
of the taking of Leeds and Macfield by the Lord Fairfax, and Sir Thomas Fairfax.

Sir John Seaton is come to Manchester with some other Commanders, and it is
supposed they will be in action presently.

From Darby.
Colonel Hastings and some other of quallity came against Darby, but Sir John
Gell issuing forth, they retired to a bridge that was strongly fortified, there
they had a hot skirmish for two hours, the enemies being in the works, nothing
but their heads appearing, and the Parliaments forces being without defense in
the open field, yet not one man slain, and but one man hurt; whereas the
enemies were diverse of them slain, and were forced from the bridge; the
Parliaments forces would have pursued them, had not the enemy broke down part
of the bridge.

A Copy of certain Instructions which Was sent to the Deputy Lieutenants,
Sheriffs, Majors, Bailiffes, Justices of the Peace, Headboroughs, and petty
Constables, etc. for the punishing of diverse misdemeanors, and the diligent
searching of all Recusants houses, for Ammunition, or other warilke Instruments
in this time of imminent danger; with diverse other particulars, as follows.
1. FIrst, whereas you are appointed to hear end, and determine between
party and party, that you do equal right between poor and rich, the
particulars are left unto your selves as they happen in your Precincts, but
since you are commanded to hear, end, and determine the Causes of the people,
that you so hear and Order, that they may have no cause to complain, either
for denial, or delay of Justice. Secondly, whereas you are appointed to hear
the trialls of offenders, we will say little, for that the part of Justice
moves in a frame; and if all Officers under you did their parts, so shall ye
walk in so straight a path, that you would find it very hard to tread awry.
Therefore you had need to heed them narrowly, least they pervert Justice,
look to the corruptions of Sheriffs, and their Deputies, the partiality of
Jurors, the bearing and siding with men of countenance, and power in the
Country; when you meet with any such proceedings, you ought to be severe and
exemplarie against them, otherwise Justice and Truth shall be over-borne,
however in your own persons you bear your selves with never so much
uptightnesse. 3. Thirdly, that you afford as much time as may be for the
final determination of these businesses that are most general, and most
concern the general and public good of this Kingdom, you are to account
them as the neighbor matters of the Law, and therefore you are to take them
into your prime and chief cure and cogitation. 1. Now amongst these things I
shall commend unto you (in that first place) the presenting and convicting of
Recusants, for as it concerns Religion, so it has relation to His Majesty's
profits, which are two great motives, to which you may add a third, because
the King has many years since assigned those forfeitures to the politic
defense. 2. The second thing you are required, that you make a strict inquiry
of Enclosures, a crying sin, which barreth God of his honor, and the King of
His subjects, you have already given in charge to enquire, but to little
effect, because they are commonly done by the greatest persons, that keeps
the Jurors under and in awe, and that is the cause there is no more presented
and brought in question, howsoever you, charge and inquiry touching this point,
have not taken effect worthy our care, and your pains; nevertheless we will
you not to cease, but enquire on still, for it is our resolution against all
opposition, to make all men see that we have a cure of this over-spreading
evil. 3. The third thing that we mention unto you, is the rectifying and
reforming the abuse of Ale houses, and Tippling houses, that none be enabled, to
set up, or eitherto continue without license, There are a kind of people that
do take upon them Licenses, Recognizances, or Laws, or what you will, and who
have been a great deal the worse, because they see great a multitude
tolerated that have no License. And therefore we charge and command that none
be permitted, unless they be licensed, and those but few, and in fit places.

We see that by falsehood of measure and unjust prizes have drawn more from the
guest then out of the Ale and Beer of the Sizes of Holland, we mean, that the
Custom of Sizes of Ale and Beer in Holland, do not mount to so much as the
cozenage of Ale in England, we leave this to your care, that they swarm not by
default of Justice.

4. The fourth thing we commend unto you, is the punishment of Vacabonds and
Wanderers, which the Law has appointed hands enough to do this work, the
Constable, Headborow, tithing-men, and the rest of the Inferior Officers, and
the Watchmen, who may do all with a particular Warrant from the Justices of the
Peace, and the Justices of the Peace are bound to call to account and punish
them for their neglect, if this were done as it ought to be, we are assured
that those loose people that wander up and down would quickly be gone, and the
Laws better observed for many years after. 5. The fifth thing, That the House
of Correction had need be looked unto, and that the House of Correction be
placed near unto the Goal, and not idle persons, but the prisoners of the
Goal might be made to eat the labor of their own hands, as it has been
formerly, which we desire may be effected as soon may be. 6. The sixth thing
you are to look unto, is the binding forth of Apprentices, those whom the
Parents are not able to maintain them, sometimes the Master refuses them, and
those that bind them are negligent, but all these must be overruled, and made
to smart for their opposition. 7. We have but one thing more to give you in
charge; and it is a thing of great weight and importance. It concerns the
Honor of His Majesty, and His Kingdom, and the safety of both, Christendom
is full of War, and there is nothing but rumors of war, if the wars
abroad do make us stand upon our guard, how much care ought we to have to
prevent a civil War at home, which is now present, occasioned through the
Prelaticall and-Popish Clergy amongst us; therefore in these doubtful times,
it is necessary that the land forces of the Kingdom should be set in order and
readiness, and a Fleet at Sea to prevent foreign invasions, The dominion of
the Sea, as it is an ancient and undoubted right of the Crown of England, so it
is the security of the Land, for it is impregnable, so long as the Sea is well
guarded, Therefore out of all question, it is a thing of absolute necessity,
that the guard of the Sea be exactly looked unto, And those Subjects, whose
minds are most fixed upon the Honor of the King and Country, will with no
patience endure to think of it. That this Dominion of the Sea which is so
great an honor, should be either lost or diminished; besides the safeties
sake, the Dominion of the Sea is to be kept, and the Sea guarded, Therefore We
have found it expedient to set to Sea, that Fleet that is now upon the sea,
and that it is but reasonable; that we should all putour helping hands to
secure both Sea and Land, by a powerful resistance, that foreign Nations may
see that England is both ableand ready to keep it self, and all its mights.

This is the substance of all that We desire might be looked into; There are
many things else that concern the public, but your judgments are well known
in them, so we will trouble you no further, but leave them to your grave
considerations.

FINIS

