AN ELEGIACALL COMMEMORATION OF THE Pious Life, and most lamented Death, and
Funerals, of Mr. JOSIAH SHVTE, Rector of the Parish, of St. MARY WOOLNOTH in
Lombard Street. Who left us on the 13 of June. 1643.

London, Printed in the Year of our Lord, 1643.

To the Reader.
Reader,
I Here adventure to offer thee some Funeral Sheets, privately consecrated to
the happy memory of that late Reverend Divine, Mr. JOSIAH SHUTE; by one who had
long studied him. They come to thy hands now thus openly, to vindicate the
Subject and the Pen which lamented Him: To both which, Malice, or Ignorance, or
Negligence, or all of them, have done a spreading Injury, by scattering some
corrupted Copies; which are so studiously false, that no Line or Sentence
carries its first and native sense with it. It is but Reason therefore, that
the faulty Press, which has made every Page a continued Errata, should
redeem the multiplied wrongs it has done, and recant those falsities which
mingle themselves almost in every word and Comma, by sending abroad these more
legitimate Leaves; which may be commended to thee, rather for the Ingenuity and
Truth, then the Elegancy or Art which furnish them. And though the Hand that
drew those Lines, draws it self in, either thinking that it has not dressed
them fine enough to look abroad, or unwilling to sin among the common Scriblers
of the Times; yet certainly it is pardonable in me thus to do Him right; and
to present thee with this, though without his leave.

Farewell.
AN Elegiacall Commemoration, etc.
FArewell to my Tears! I Will weep no more. Let those that can find no other
expression for their griefs, then what their shewring eyes afford them,
bewail our departed Prophet in the silent language of a Tear; and weep out
Elegies for their souls great loss: Whilst I find out some other means to
empty my full Bosom: not that I would willingly part with the remembrance of
our Josiah, nor power out all those sad thoughts his Death has left there;
(for even my Melancholy is welcome to me, whilst he is the Subject of it.) But
that I would transcribe some reverentiall conceits, which my contemplative
Grief has written on my Heart, that may perhaps be better read on my Paper:
For, within me, they now have a confused Method; and take up so much of me,
that they scarce leave room for other thoughts, which these Times, fruitful
in sorrows, do continually dictate to me.

I may freely admire Thee now; for, thy modest Ears are deaf to our applause;
and thy well-led-life was above our Flattery: So that I shall have no cause to
check my self, whilst with praise and wonder I run over the variety of thy
merit. Nor shall our inquiry begin at the last Act of thy Life; we will
cursorily, at least, examine every Scene of it; and will look back upon thee
even from thy Cradle to thy Grave.

And we shall find Thee consecrated even from thy Infancy, to the service of
thy Great Master. Thou were the Son of a Prophet, of a religious and
faithful Minister, who was blessed with five more; every one of which, with a
careful and pious Hand, he led through all their Studies, till He brought them
from the School to the Pulpit: and when, as in an eminent Candlestick, He had
there placed them, as so many burning and shining Lights, (as if there wanted
nothing to make Him perfectly happy but Heaven it self,) He left this world
(engaged to Him for those five happy Legacies) in a full old age. We will not
here any further search after the religious courses of thy learned Brothers:
yet, whilst we bemoane Thee, we cannot but remember the considerable loss of
thy Neighbor Mr. Shute of the Poultry, Dr. Bolsworth at the Funeral recounted
above 3000 Sermons which he had preached.
Brother (who was Sainted some few years before Thee;) whose various Learning,
whose devout Industry, whose divine Gifts, made his Life also admired, and his
Death lamented by all that heard of him; being Brother as well to thy Desert,
as Blood.

When we take a view of Thee, and examine all thy Merit; we need no other
description of an exact Protestant, and a true Father of the Church. And let
those that shall hereafter have occasion to write such a Character, remember
Reverend Shute, and make Him their Pattern.

We will first consider Him as a Man; How well He did instruct Himself, and
preach to his own soul. And we shall here find that his ordinary
conversation, was a continued Lecture. He was of Been vixit ordinabiliter
sibi: sociabiliter Proximo, humiliter Deo. Bernard.
a disposition sociable; yet affording Nature only such refreshments as might
enable Her, to assist Him in his holy employment; for they were but as so many
preparatives to study. To all He was generally affable, to none severe; never
discovering any Austerity, but against a confident Sinner. He was known
almost to all; acquainted with but a few. He kept a civil correspondence with
many learned men; but those that He commonly bestowed his leizure hours with;
He chose rather for their free and innocent friendlinesse, then for any
eminency of their parts; rather studying Books then Men, yet conversing so
much with the last, that He might not be quite a stranger to the His Rectory
being worth about 80 li. Per Annum.
times He lived in. His greatest wealth was the riches of content. His greatest
expense next to his Books was his Charity, and He could never find himself
touched with any thing like Covetousness; but when his small Treasury could
not afford Him relief for some that were the objects of his Pity. He was long
happy in a grave and virtuous wife, but never was indeed a Father; though He
often showed himself so to those that were Fatherless. He knew not how to be
proud, and could as ill endure a creeping Flattery. In brief, He was a man of
so even a spirit, so happily tempered, that He was Master of his Passions, and
had no unruly Humor predominant in Him. I could lay down out of the
observation of his life so many divine, so many moral rules and precepts; that
his very example were direction enough, how we should steer our Actions and
Affections. But these are the sleightest pieces of his worth: Let us look upon
Him in his proper sphere, and enquire how fit a man He was for his sacred
Function: How he was qualified to be an Ambassador from the Court of Heaven:
and here He will be well worth our wonder: for it will appear, that all those
Eminencies, which do disperce and divide themselves amongst several other men
did all meet in Him: what was it that any one Man might boast of; of his
profession which He himself was not Master of?

When He showed Himself in his Pulpit, his gravity and preaching countenance,
did chastize every careless or wanton Hearer: So that to wear his Picture near
our Eye or Heart, or to suppose Him looking upon Us were enough, methinks, to
fright away a sinful Thought: Devotion hovered about Him; when He was
addressing Himself to pray; and his whole gesture kindled a warm Zeal even
in a frozen Bosom. Whilst his petitioning words fell from Him; they begat
penitent sighs in those which joined with Him; to witness that their Hearts
breathed out the same requests: All his Ejaculations were the sober dictates of
the spirit, they were not fiery and sudden raptures, hudled up, conceived and
born in a hasty minute; his Zeal, though fervent, was modestly ordered,
considering to whom he spoke: nor did He (on the otherside) tie himself to a
few set words, as if the Almighty were to be appeased with spells: but his
well-fitted Petitions varied as often, as any occasions offered themselves: and
when He had as it were prepared the attentive Soul by prayer, and begged a
blessing upon His hours discourse; he so chearefully, so solemnly, addressed
himself to the work of a holy Orator, that He presently had possession of
our Eyes, Ears, and Hearts. He seldom (unless some proper occasiou called
for it) varied His Text; or leapt from place to place to start a new Subject;
He commonly pursued one piece of Scripture with such learned perspicuity, such
a pious pleasancy; and did so heighten our religious appetites, that we were
sorry for the parting Sands, and longed for the next hour to finish that,
which to day perhaps he did only cut out, or divide, for another days
exercize. In His delivery, He was neither affected nor loose; having such a
command of his tongue and voice, that he could handsomely fit them for every
subject. At a Funeral He pleaded so mortifyingly in the behalf of Death; that
He made some desirous not to live, others to live better, nor did any return
from Him without a beneficial conviction of their own Mortality. So
pathetically would He solemnize the passion of our Savior; that his hearers
might well laugh at the superstition of a Crucifix, which only reaches the
gazers eye, or but slightly touches the abused soul: when as He imprinted in
every heart Christ crucified, by representing every circumstance of His Passion
so to the life, as if He were bleeding a fresh; and were again stabbed and
wounded by us that were His sinful Auditory. By these means He became Master
of our consciences, which stood in awe of His words; and were powerfully
subdued to his saving Doctrines. Nor did He administer sharp things only; He
had Balm for the broken and contrite heart; soft and gentle persuasions to win
a trembling soul: He never denounced judgment, but his eyes were big with
Tears: He was none of those Thundereres, who represent GOD in all his terrible
Attributes, and shadow over his Mercy and Compassion. He rather allured then
terrified a straying conscience, and rather endeavored to bring it home to the
Fold, then drive it further from safety.

And though He did dress Divinity with all the winning advantages, and pious
allurements of spiritual Rhetoric: though the words He clothed it in, were
imbroadered with all the flowers of Learning, with golden Sentences, and
precious Meditations (which did cath the attention of every Auditor.) Yet, this
Kings Daughter (for so is the word, well preached) was all glorious within: the
matter, which was the inside, was rich and substantial. The weakest Capacity
went along with Him understandingly, all the way; so well did He comply with
the meanest hearer. The more delicate apprehension of the Nobility and Gentry
(which were still part of that Religious Throng) was so advisedly suited; that
He did, as it were, court them from their sins, and by a holy Insinuation, did
even steal into their Bosoms; and so powerfully convince them of their
vanities, that they always carried home with them new resolutions. And the
most Sober, the most Learned Persons (for some such were almost always a part
of this Auditory) discovered in every Sermon such a digestion of general
Learning, so many full expressions of a Scholar, of a sound Preacher, of a Holy
man, that they could even have kissed the Pulpit, in approbation of those
blessed Truths sent down from it.

There might you see the graver Divines, willing to improve their Knowledge and
their Piety, by that Summary of Divinity which might be found in every days
Lecture. And there might be seen the Young Men of the Cassock (lately set up
in their Trade for Souls) inabling themselves for their sacred Employment; so
attentively fixing their whole selves on Him, as if they had a design to
assimilate themselves to every excellency of His. One eyeing Him, as if he were
learning to put on his Reverend Gesture, which gave Life to all that fell from
him: the other, how to borrow his unaffected Art, and facility of utterance:
another, how to weave his reading and his meditation with such cunning and
advantage: another, curiously observing his Method, with a purpose to contrive
his after labors by so rare a Model. Thus, He was a President for all men;
yet was there such a mixture of Grave Humility in all these Perfections, as if
He only had been ignorant of them.

And wonder not that this Tower of David made so fair a show, and had so many
swelling eminencies, for He had a Foundation large, and sure. Grace laid the
first stone; and Perseverance built upon it: a connection of Piety and
Good-works was the Mortar or Ciment: Faith was the Buttresse that kept it
upright and steadfast: the Holy Spirit was the Master-workman, by whose active
influence every thing was disposed. Nature lent all her aides to make the work
perfect; for, (as so many Laborers, whose proper employments were herein
necessary,) she lent an open Capacity, a retentive Memory, a searching wit, a
trying Judgment: And here were all those servants of Art which make the
super-structure; as indefatigable Industry, inquisitive Study, curious
Observation, satisfying Experience, and the useful extractions of Books and
Antiquities.

Let it then be the boast of others, that they are able to perform the most
sacred and mysterious office of the Ministry, without being much beholding to
Learning, that necessary Hand-maide to divine Knowledge; whilst we pity, and
laugh at the cunning Ignorance of these zealous Drones. It will be a worthy
addition to his lasting Fame, that He was not contented to make himself
intimate with the whole Scripture, and have every Text ready to refute an
Adversary, or convince a Sinner: but He did run over the whole Body of
Learning, sipping from every part of it, as from so many flowers, some
serviceable notions, which being by his holy Art digested (as by the subtle
Chymestrie of the Be) helped to make up that Honey, those sweet and cordial
Lectures, with which He frequently entertained us.

He read the Bible in that Original language, in which those happy
Secretaries to the Holy Ghost penned it; that he might be the more familiar
with the true intentions of every word and expression of it; making himself
acquainted with the learned Languages, because he would look back into the
first Essence and purity of things, before the perplexing variety of humane
conceit had spent it self upon it: that he might examine upon what Grounds and
Reasons, the ancient Expositors and Fathers have founded those numerous
Volumes, which at this day do furnish our holy Libraries. Doing this, not out
of a proud curiosity, or to defend Error; but out of a reverend fear of
assenting to the newer opinions of any, how eminent soever; if he found them
dissonant to those ancient verities, which he studiously traced, by going so
far backward into the unfoiled Learning and wisdom which was behind him.

And then, -- But I Will sum up no more of his parts, but, will abruptly leave
his many abilities in the midway: Seeing every Sermon of his told us how
generally, how admirable he was qualified; for, they were not the elaborate
Issues of many days, (so much time not being allowed him) but they were the
disgested quintessence of his former labors; to which his leisure only gave
him leave to add little else but Meditation, and Method. There is yet
something behind which will give more luster to his precious Memory. It is
possible, that we may find his parallel, if we only look upon the
qualifications of Learning and strong Parts. But, where shall we find so much
sober integrity; one so like to those first Disciples, whose immediate Tutor,
Christ himself was? One, that so deservedly may be styled an Apostle of our
Church? Herein lay his prime Excellency.

Let us first look upon Him, as appointed by his great Master to the cure of
those souls, amongst whom He expired; we shall find Him continually diligent
in his charge (where He fixed himself for one and thirty years) behaving
Himself much like that Shepherd, that gave his life for his sheep: for it is
well known, He spent himself so without intermission in his study and his
Pulpit: that his unstirred humors (which wanted part of that immoderate
exercise which his spirits had) settled into Diseases; which pressed upon Him so
violently in his later years; that he often preached in pain, in faint sweats,
nay, sometimes in Blood; of which he had many sad witnesses. Nor could He be
won from his station, wherein his Conscience told Him, his God had set Him, by
any richer Invitations, or Livings of a greater Ostered Him by some of his
Lay-friends.
value; which he often refused, as unwilling, when He had brought his
neighbors souls halfe-way to Heaven, to leave them to a new Convoy; who might
perhaps rather direct them a crooked course, or bring them back again, then
help them forward, (for He would often lament the paucity of conscientious
Guides.) He was observed to be so far from that (almost epidemicall) crime of
Temporizing, that he was looked upon as a professed (though not a rigid)
Antagonist to the times he lived in, as if he scorned to be a Favorite to
that predominant Power, under which the evils he lamented, seemed to him to
receive their countenance and growth; his well-setled soul was still kept
within its religious Center, and could never be conjured out by all those
powerful Charms which Ambition scatters, to enveagle the judgments and
inclinations of her opposites. Yet he sometimes commanded himself to a
mannerly and civil obedience, as a subject, and a son of the Church; in some
indifferent things rather yielding to the public, and a good conscience, than
to the wilfulness of his own private opinions. But when at any time he saw
plainly any indirect Designs on foot, which some great Agents in Church and
State, kept going, either to put new fetters upon the subjects, or new
disguises on Religion; he could never be courted to lend his Tongue to make
Apologies for their Innovations; nor could be silenced from declaiming against
the dangerous attempts of these first troublers of Israel. And there needs no
greater approbation of his uprightness, nor a fuller conviction of the corrupt
Genius of those days, then that he and some more of his Form, (whose standing
in the gap, when superstition was rushing in, drew upon them that then
venerable nick name of Puritans) were so long left unpreferred; whilst the
Dignities of the Church (which should have been the reward of Men, singular for
their Piety and Ability) were chiefly taken up by such who rather studied,
preached, and practiced the Politiques then Divinity. And when afterward, the
winds were quite turned, when storms and foul weather seemed to threaten
every one that came not into the new road, he did not forsake that Anchor of a
holy Resolution, but rather endured sharp blasts of envy and malice; disdaing
a wavering compliance to the fatal alterations of our giddie times; which drew
from him many a Tear, and private groan: Nor could he refrain from a more open
expression of his grief, though there was danger and suspicion in his very
Sighs: For he would modestly and warily complain of, and bewail the
miscariages or mistakes of those above him: but with a warm and warrantable
Zeal be angry with such among the heady people, who would not see the
confusion they were violently hurrying into. No bold-fac'd sin could escape
him without a seasonable reprehension. No distructive Doctrines, no false
glosses, no schismatic Tares could be sowed by the Malice or Ignorance of
any, but he would carefully set himself to the weeding of them out betimes;
lest the seeds of them should prove fruitful; and scatter themselves in his
well-kept Garden, (for such is a Parish well instructed.) He was so earnest a
Lover of Union and right Devotion that the dividing Separatist, and
superstitious Papist received a wound from him at every Lecture. To conclude,
he was such an eager opposite to all those things that interrupted our Peace,
and sullied the fair Face of Truth; that we must needs complain, that Truth
and Peace have lost one of their chief Champions.

Nor did he encounter the diverse enemies of the times with a loud violence, but
moderately and calmely overthrew Them; (having learned the experiment of
breaking a Flint with more easiness upon a cushion) scorning that vainglory,
and those false ends, which make some partially and uncivilly rail against the
present managers of our Affairs; tempting on purpose the Anger and the power
of those, whose Interest commands them to stop their their mouths: that they
may undeservedly gain the title of a Prerogative Martyr, and hazard their petty
preferments, in expectation of some better guerdon: so catching at a Dignity,
by their hot ambition, which they were never likely to reach by their
lukewarm Devotion. But his Diviner Soul knew no indirect ends; the
Cathedral honor, never had any magnetic Influence upon his conscience: his
Eye and his Heart were always toward Heaven, as if he thence expected his
Bishopric; and desired no other preferment, then what was there laid up for
him: Being so high minded, that he slighted the Miter to make himsefe sure of a
Crown.

It is time that I should make haste to his Mortality, lest, when I have
enquired after, and called together all his worth, my Reader want faith to go
along with me further. Let us therefore descend quickly to his declining, and
we shall find an evening becoming such a day, glorious even in his Sunset.
Nor could we look for any other Catastrophe at the last Scene, when all the
rest of his life was so well Acted. He lived 55 years to learn how to dye
well; for indeed his whole Age was no otherwise employed. At last, Nature being
overwrought, groaned under many Infirmities; which with cheerfulness he a
great while passed over; till Death, which would not be deferred further; and
Heaven, which would no longer be without this Guest, agreed together to summon
him, by a swouning Fit; which (as soon as he had retired out of his Pulpit
into his Chamber) suspended his spirits and had thrown him on the ground; had
not a luckie friend (whose fortune it was to close his eyes at last) then by
chance rescued him from the Fall. After this, his Disease pursued him so close,
that it took him from his profession; and this he accounted Death even before
Death to be forced from his Pulpit, where he would willingly have expired, his
soul being then nearer, and on its way to heaven.

But, Blessed Man, thou made thy Bed thy Pulpit; and finding thy Soul upon
her Wing, thou did (almost after thy usual Method) betake thy self to thy
Text, which was, that commanding Monosyllable Death. Yet before thou did
enter upon it, thou did prepare thy few and happy Auditors, by a most devout
and patheticall Prayer; wherein all the world was beholding to thy extensive
Charity. And, may thy bleeding Country, thy disquieted Prince, thy divided
Brethren, thy melancholy Friends, and even thy peevish enemies feel those
Blessings, which in thy last words thou did beg for them. When thou had (as
if thou did intend them as so many Legacies) summed up all things which are
necessary for us; Thou did bequeath thy self into those hands that made
thee, and suddenly after did fall asleep.

He that shall with a contemplative soul observe all this, and yet want a
Sermon to teach him how to dye well, when Reverend SHUTE now very near a Saint,
preaches from his Deathbed to him, will hardly be brought to a true sense of
saving Mortification, should his blessed Angel descend, and bring down
instructions more immediately from GODS Mouth, how he might dye to live
immortallie.

Nor did this Man of God, go to his Grave with mean Funerals; he had more
true Mourners then followed the Hearse of a departed Prince. Such put on an
affected grief with their dissembling blacks; and at these stately Obsequies
there is no circumstance which is like Sorrow, but a counterfeit Solemnity:
when as there wanted no Pageants of Mortality nor borrowed sadness to attend
him to the house of Death. In his Melancholy Train, (which was made up of
thousands besides his drooping Kindred) it was hard to find out a dry eye, or
a face wherein grief did not apparently show it self. The Nobility and Gentry
could not command their Tears; or were willing to bestow that last gatefull
shower, in acknowledgement of those many blessings they owed him for. The
dejected Clergy hung down their heads, as if they had lost the credit of
their Profession. His sad Parishioners, who for so many years had received the
bread of life by his faithful Ministry, looked pale and disconsolate, as
though they had feared a succeeding Famine. And the rest of the weeping crowd
(who had heretofore gathered up, whilst he shook the Tree of Life to all that
came) by their Laments and Peales of sighs did witness, that they had souls
sensible of the injuries which death had done them by taking away him; who
always stood Sentinel for all his Auditors, and gave them a timely Alarm
against the surprizals of their Arch-Enemy, the Devil. Mr. Vdall that preached
his Funeral Sermon.
Well then might his Learned Friend have spared his Funeral Lectnre; for there
were no eyes present which needed pumping, no hearts, which were not already
melted, at this Burial of their Favorite. But his words were Cordial to us,
when he excellently showed; how, He had fought a good fight, finished The Text
at his Funeral.
his course, and kept the faith, and was gone to receive that Crown of
Righteousness which the Lord the righteous Judge had laid up for him.

Let us therefore wipe our eyes, seeing we are so well assured of his
happiness, lest we seem to envy him his blessed repose, and the reward of
his righteousness, which, we have reason to hope is as certain, as that the
Almighty is merciful; and that he has prepared heaven for a Kingdom, and
immortality for a Crown, for all those that have fought a good fight, etc.
Yet, it is said, there want not those that dare more then doubt of his souls
bliss. Oh, desparate uncharitableness, even against their own selves! If our
God be so severe, that thy well-drest soul (which never went without its true
Wedding Garment) cannot be admitted: what shall become of those, who have
nothing but rags of vanity, and patches of pretended zeal to cloth their
sinful nakedness? O my God, if there be no room in Heaven, for this good,
this vigilant Shepherd, where shall his poor weak flock be folded, when we are
driven out of this life? Is not the Gate of Blessedness narrow enough, but
must wretched man streighten it, yet farther? If so much, so pure Piety cannot
enter; how shall profaneness and accumulated sin struggle through? That
forward Intruder that will make himself of Gods Jurie, and dares
presumptuously condemn the Just and Innocent, passes a sure sentence against
his own soul.

But, Heaven and Earth (whose Darling he always was) have lifted him above the
reach of their violent malice. And whilst God and Men (having now divided him
betwixt them) shall take care, the one of his Soul, the other of his Fame; and
shall eternize him in the Register of the Saints; the memory of these dregs of
men, (who are professed enemies even to Mortality, to Learning, Virtue, Piety,
almost to all those true and essential parts of Charity and Religion) shall be
odious to Posterity; (to which they have helped to give a wound by their
furious and unlimited zeal and practices, which will be beyond the cure either
of Time or Policy.) Yet even for these Malignant Spirits, his Soul left a
blessing, whilst he begd of the Almighty (whither he was about to go) to
enlighten and amend their bloodshed eyes, and to pardon their wilful and
malicious Blindness. Thus, instead of repaying the Gall of his Detractors with
Bitterness, he took them into his Prayers, and so sacrificed for their sin; a
benefit bestowed upon them against their will and merit.

Come hither then all ye that have any aim at heaven, and set your selves to
study the life and death of this holy man: what we cannot perform by his
precepts, and passed Instructions; let us reach at by his example and
imitation. Thus he may live with us in despite of Death: and preach saving
Doctrines; though himself be for ever silenced. Thus every pious bosom may
make it self his Tomb; which, being adorned with any resemblance of his
better part, will more fully evidence his worth, then a speaking marble, whose
partial Inscrptions do most times flatter their dead guests; and are
therefore justly suspected, as no more then a Funeral Complement. Yet, it were
both pity and ingratitude, should that silver Trumpet (which has so often
awakened us from our sinful Lethargies) be be now hudled up in common dust,
without some little memorial, where it is laid up. Go on then; and do you
(whose souls were above thirty yeates obliged to him,) deliver him over to
Posterity in your intended Monument. That when aged Time has worn out all
those, who have been witnesses of his matchless parts and Piety; the stones
may tell his happy story, by offering this Epitaph to every Reader,

Here lies, etc.
