EVAN'S Gamesome Frollick; OR, PETER'S sorrowful Lamentation for the loss of
his JENNY.
It Is Peter's Wife that leads a Life
Which makes his Heart to ache;
While Evan he, and Jenny she,
Will still their pleasure take.
To the Tune of, The Country Farmer.
This may be Printed,

R. P.





COme listen a while, and I here will unfold
A story as pleasant as ever was told;
If two Brother Scarlings, nay, Brothers by birth,
Therefore I must tell you the more is the mirth:
The one of these Brothers was Peter by name,
The other was Evan who much was to blame,
For leaving his Wife, whom he often to adore,
Resolving he never would come near her no more.
Not many weeks after, It so came to pass
That Evan did light of a bonny brisk Loss,
With whom he was willing as Husband to dwell,
And she for a season did humor him well:
Where ever they wandered he called her his Wife,
And said that he loved her as dear as his Life;
Yet he at the length, was for leaving her over,
Poor Lass, she was never so served before.
As he with his croneys was merry one day,
In drinking Canary and Claret they say,
He sold his brisk Lass, for a Bottle of Wine,
And he that did buy her did likewise enjoyne,
Her after the drinking this Wine, for to run
A Race with another, this bargain was done:
But whilst she was Raceing her Guts they did roar
And run down her Stockings behind and before.
So that she was made the whole game of the Crowd,
And all that beheld her they laughed out aloud,
To see how the liquor did work with her then,
Amongst a great number of Women and Men:
At this sad misfortune and woeful disgrace,
She by her endeavors, soon quitted the place;
And running away, for it grieved her sore,
Thus Evan he never beheld her no more.
The Second Part
to the same Tune.
And now at the length, the whole truth to relate,
Poor Evan was troubled for want of a Mate:
To Peter his Brother's sweet Wife he did go,
Where in friendly sort he much kindness did show;
Thus, after much pleasant fine toying had past,
Poor Peter her Husband she Cuckold at last;
But what though she did it, yet this was no more
Then her Mother did so for her Father before.
Poor Peter he led a most horrible life
While Evan his Brother enjoyed his Wife;
For if he found fault with whatever he see,
They kicked him and thumpt him most pitifully:
Thus he was Cornuted and Horned beside,
This sorrowful Life he was forced to abide;
But what though it troubled and grieved him sore,
Her Mother did so for her Father before.
Nay Peter was forced to take all the care,
They sent him abroad from each Market to fair,
Thus travel he must with his-Pedlers Pack,
No Sorrow, no Labor, poor Peter must lack;
And when he returned full weary at night,
Though they had enjoyed both ease and delight,
They hardly would let him come in at the door;
Her Mother did so for her Father before.
If they let him in, yet he lodged below,
While they to his Chamber most lovingly go;
And if he steals up to watch their affairs,
They presently tumble him headlong down stairs,
Thus Peter to them he is forced to bend,
It is but a Folly for him to contend;
For if that he should he has seven times more,
Her Mother did so for her Father before.
For she is resolved to bear all the sway,
It Is Cat after kind, as we commonly say;
Thus she and her Gallant has what they would have,
Whilst Peter continues their Hackney-slave,
To labor and bring home a daily supply,
With Patience he does it and dare not deny;
And yet he must never enjoy her no more,
Her Mother did so for her Father before.
Printed for J. Back at the Black Boyon London Bridge, near the Drawbridge.


