A full and particular RELATION OF The manner of the late besieging and taking
of Chepstow Castle in Wales.

By the Forces of his Excellency the LORD FAIRFAX, under the command of Colonel
Ewer:

Expressed in a letter from Colonel EWER to the Honorable WILLIAM LENTAL,
Speaker to the House of COMMONS.

The Governor of the said Castle within, that betrayed it to the Kings Forces,
was slain in this service, as also all the rest of the Commanders and Soldiers
killed and taken.

LONDON, Printed by Matthew Simmons, for Henry Overton in Popes-head-Alley.
1648.

A Full and particular RELATION Of the manner of the late besieging and taking
of Chepstow Castle in WALES.
SIR,
LIeuetenant-Generall Cromwell being to march toward Pembrook Castle, left me
with my Regiment to take in the Castle of Chepstow, which was possessed by Sir
Nichlas Kemmesh, and with him Officers and Soldiers to the number of 120. We
drew close about it, and kept strong guards upon them to prevent them from
steeling out, and so to make an escape.

We sent for two Guns from Gloucester, and two off a Shipboard, and planted
them against the Castle. We raised the Battlements of their Towers with our
great Guns, and made their Guns unusefull for them. We also played with our
Morterpieces into the Castle; One shot fell into the Governors Chamber, which
caused him to remove his Lodging to the other end of the Castle. We then
prepared our Batteries, and this morning finished them, and played all the
forenoone with our great Guns very hot. About twelve of the clock we made a
hole through the wall so low, that a man might walk into it.

The Soldiers in the Castle perceiving that we were like to make a breach,
cried out to our Soldiers that they would yield the Castle, and many of them
did attempt to come away, I caused my Soldiers, to fire at them to keep them
in. Esquire Lewis comes upon the wall, and speaks to some Gentlemen of the Country
that he knew, and tells them that he was willing to yield to mercy. They came
and acquainted me with his desire, to which I answered, that it was not my work
to treat with particular men: but it was Sir Nicholas Kemmesh with his Officers
and all his Soldiers that I aimed at: but the Governor refused to deliver up
the Castle upon those terms that Esquire Lewis desired, but desired to speak
with me at the Draw bridge, which I altogether refused to have any such speech
with him, because he refused Lieutenant-Generall Cromwels Summons: but being
over-perswaded by some Gentlemen of the Country that were there; presently I
dismounted from my horse and went unto the Drawbridge, where he through a port
hole spoke with me; That which he desired was, that he with all his Officers
and Soldiers might march out of the Castle without any thing taken from them,
to which answered, that I would give him no other terms, but that he and all
that were with him should submit unto mercy, which he swore he would not do. I
presently drew off my Sould^ers from the Castle and caused them to stand to
their Arms: But he refusing to come out upon those terms, the Soldiers
deserted him, and came running out at the breach we had made. My Soldiers
seeing them come out, ran in at the same place, possessed themselves of the
Castle, and killed Sir Nicholas Kemmish, and likewise him that betrayed the
Castle, and wounded diverse, and took prisoners as follows, Esquire Lewis,
Major Lewis, Major Thomas. Captain Morgan, Captain Buckeswell, Captain John
Harris, Captain Christopher Harris, Captain Mancell, Captain Pinner,
Captain Doule, Captain Rossiter. Lieutenant Kemmesh, Lieutenant Leach,
Lieutenant Codd. Ensign Lewis, Ensign Watkins, Ensign Morgan, with other
Officers and Soldiers to the number of 120.

These Prisoners we have put into the Church, and shall keep them till I
receive further order from. Lieutenant-Generall Cromwell. This is all at
present, but that I am

Chepstow, May 25. 1648. Your humble Servant, Isaac Ewer.

FJNJS.

