(...): OR, A TREATISE OF THE HOLY GHOST.

IN WHICH, The Godhead of the third Person of the Trinity is strongly
asserted by Scripture-Arguments.

And defended against the Sophistical subtleties of JOHN BIDLE.

BY Mr. Nicolas Estwick, B. D. sometime Fellow of Christ-Colledg in Cambridg,
and now Pastor of Warkton in the County of Northampton.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard, for Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at
the Sign of the Bible in Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange. 1648.

THE PREFACE.
THe sublime Argument, touching the unity of the Godhead, and the Trinity of
the Persons, is of that high concernment, that it obliges Christians to lay
themselves out to the uttermost in the search of the means in the which it has
pleased the Lord to reveal himself, that we might have right apprehensions of
him; partly, because it is very dangerous, and attended with sad consequences
to have erroneous conceptions in this to-bee-adored subject: and partly,
because no subordinate truths can be more profitably learned, whether we
respect the information of our judgments, the reformation of our lives, or our
sound consolation in every condition.

In this licentious age, wherein Heresies, with more boldness (the more is the
pity) are not only privately vented, but printed, and exposed to public
view, then in former ages, whereby many unwary and ungrounded Readers are
infected with leprosy in their heads, and their judgments are corrupted, as
other wicked phancies, for want of humility, knowledge in Scripture, Arts and
Tongues, and due respect to the word of God, and the testimony of ancient and
modern Divines, have been broached, so has the fundamental Article touching
the Deity of the holy Ghost been questioned, yea plainly contradicted.

Many months passed before I had a sight of Mr. Bidle's abhorred lines, nor did
I so much as desire to read them; but when I heard by the relation of a very
learned man, and of much observation touching these times, that those twelve
Reasons did a great deal of hurt, I then used the means to get a sight of the
Book, and I saw it was Sophistically penned, and plausibly contrived to do much
mischief; and when I could not hear that any of the learned, which have far
better abilities, more leisure, and encouraging accommodations then I have,
would spend their precious time in convincing this Adversary of God, I
resolved, by the grace of the Spirit of God, to vindicate what lie's in me his
honor, in showing partly the weakness, partly the blasphemy of his twelve
Reasons, to show him, if it may be, the danger of his Heresy, and to clear
the alleged Scriptures from his Sophistry, and to hold forth that little
light which the blessed Spirit has freely imparted to me, to the bettering of
the understanding of the simple Readers.

There have been many erroneous opinions, no fewer then six in my knowledge,
(and it is not unlike but there are many more) touching the blessed Spirit, the
holy Ghost; it is not fit, nor safe for me to set down a Catalogue of them,
lest unawares (which is far from my intention) some vain and unsound Christians
in these unsettled days should take an occasion to err from the beaten way of
truth; and others, which have tender consciences, should be offended with the
stinch of these rotten Heresies, when they are presented to them: yet necessary
it is, that I should set down my Adversaries tenet, that the Reader may know
it, and that I may more punctually address myself to answer him; and this he
hold's, That the holy Ghost is a creature, a finite person, the prime and chief
of all the good Angels, as the Devil by an unhappy excellency is called the
chief of all the evil Spirits: An ancient Heresy this is in the Church of
Christ condemned both by the single testimony of many famous Doctors, and by a
general Synod at Constantinople, which has been always honored, and was held
by the Summons of Theodosius the first, more then twelve hundred and threescore
years ago.

O blessed God! be not angry with me, I beseech thee, who am but sinful dust
and ashes, for adventuring to speak of thy glorious Majesty. Pardon, I humbly
pray, for my Saviors sake, all my sinful apprehensions of thine unconceivable
Greatness, accept graciously my sincere intentions to promote thy glory, and
guide me (O my God!) that I may always, as a weak and sinful creature ought
to do, both think, and speak, and write of thy glorious Majesty with holy fear
and lowly reverence, and instruct me, O thou blessed Spirit of Truth, that I
may readily untie the Sophistical knots of carnal and humane reason, which in
pretense are grounded on the truth of thy Word, and yet there is no truth in
them, nor any divine word for them: And enable me to maintain thy Greatness
against a wretched man, which dare's stand up, and both boldly and publicly
argue against thine ever to be adored Deity.

The Deity of the holy Ghost proved by Scripture and Argument.
True Arguments grounded on the Word of God whereby the Deity of the holy
Ghost is fully proved, and such passages of Scriptures which are excepted
against by the Adversary are examined and clearly refuted.

Argum. 1
Maj. He that has the names of God absolutely attributed to him is God. Min.
The Holy Ghost has the names of God absolutely attributed to him. Concl. Ergo
the holy Ghost is God.
The Major is clear; for albeit the name of God be given to Angels, Psalm. 8.
6. Heb. 2. 7. and to Magistrates, they are Gods to whom the Word of God came,
Psalm. 82. 7. that is, to whom by divine vocation the office of Magistracy is
committed; yet either this is not spoken in the singular number, I said ye are
Gods, whereas the true God without contradiction is but one; or, when it is
spoken singularly, it is not without limitation, Moses, I have made thee a God
to Pharaoh, Exodus 7. 1. Every man may readily conceive that a made God is is
not a true God; or with such an affixed limitation that a simple man can hardly
mistake: I have said ye are Gods, yet they are but mortal Gods; for as is
threatened there, They must die like mortal men; but the true God is immortal.
So that in all the Scriptures we shall not find the names of God asscribed to
any creatures without addition, limitation, or correction of speech, nor is
this denied by the Adversary.

The Minor is proved, first, more obscurely, Genesis 1. 1. God created: A word not
of the singular, or dual, but plural number, and that is also with a word of
the singular number. God created, because God is but one in nature, but in
regard of the manner of being there are three Persons. And in verse 26. of the
same Chapter, God says, Let Us make man after Our image, that is, in the image
of the holy Trinity: these, and many like to these are alleged out of the old
Testament, and justified to be pertinent to prove this cause against the
exceptions of such as have opposed them; and the rather is the phrase to be
marked, because, as is observed, it is not said, one, Elohim unus, as one,
Jehovah unus, in all the Scripture. W. in 1. praec. Decal. but because they
meet with contradiction of learned friends, I pass them over. Secondly, and
more particularly, King David in his last words says, The Spirit of the Lord
spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue, 2 Samuel 23. 2. and then verse 3. by
way of explication he add's, the God of Israel said, the rock of Israel spoke
to me. And yet more fully, Esa. 6. 3. that Person that is called the Lord of
hosts, and after that, (...) the Lord, which is the proper name of God, ver. 9.
is by Saint Paul, an infallible Interpreter, expounded of the holy Ghost, Well
spoke the holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet unto our Fathers, Act. 28. 25.
hearing ye shall hear, and not understand -- and this is further proved,
because what God promised Levit. 26. 12. I will dwell in them, and walk in
them, that is verified of all faithful Christians, when the holy Ghost dwell's
in them; hence are they called the Temples of God, and that is expounded by the
holy Ghosts dwelling in them, 1 Corin. 3. 16. and 1. 6. 20. 19. what can be
more plain? The virtue of God is never separated from his Essence. God is there
where he work's, and Gods working in a creature, and dwelling in them differ
much. God work's in all things, and is with them according to his essence,
presence and power, but he work's in his own and dwell's in them, as in his
Temple, according to his singular and gracious presence. Acts 5. 3. Peter by
the revelation of the blessed Spirit, discover's the fraud, the distrustful
covetousness and gross hypocrisy of Ananias, in that this wretched man being
overcom with divelish persuasion withheld part of the money which he had
promised to God to be dispensed by the Apostles to pious and charitable uses:
and to demonstrate the height and heinousness of this offense, he avoucheth
that he sinned and told a lie against the holy Ghost, and by way of
explication, it is added in the next verse, thou have not lied to men, but to
God.

to lie to the holy Ghost, is to lie to men endued with the Spirit, so
Piscator; yet will it not presently follow that the holy Ghost is God, for one
may lie to God, and yet neither men nor the Spirit in them be God; but only
the Messengers of God; what is don to Messengers redound's to him that send's
them, 1 Thessal. 4. 8, 13. John 20. Luc. 10. 16.

Ananias did lie to men endued with the Spirit, though not only, or
principally against them: for so S. Peter acknowledges, you have not lied to
men, but to God; and yet the holy Ghost is not to be excluded, as you have
don, from the being an object against whom this lie is told. And well had it
been for you, if you had had the eyes of Piscator, when you alledg what does
without wavering soundly conclude the Deity of the holy Ghost out of this
text. I add, grant that to lie against the holy Ghost is to lie against God
speaking by his Spirit in his servants, will this follow that the holy Ghost is
not God dwelling in his servants? nay, rather the contrary may be concluded,
for the words import thus much, Think not, O Ananias, because I said thou
sinnedst against the holy Ghost, that I intended only that thou usedst
dissimulation against me, and my brethren the rest of the Apostles, in whom
are the extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, or as if the Spirit that is in
us was a mere created Spirit, thou art deceived if thou think so, thou
should then directly have sinned but against a creature; but in this thy
fact which is against the holy Ghost, thou have not lied to man but to God. Who
see's not, if he will seriously perpend the text, what it is to lie against
the holy Ghost; that it is to lie against God the holy Ghost; and be it
granted, that the despite don to the servants of God redound's to God, which no
man will deny; yet touching the holy Ghost these texts are not fitly alleged:
for show me any place of Scripture where the holy Ghost is called the
Messenger of God. Search as long as you will, you shall never find such an
expression in Gods Book. Besides, this concession abat's not the strength of
our Argument for wrong don to the servants of God, as they are his servants;
it is against them as acted by the Spirit which dwell's in them, and is no
accidental gift, nor created person, but the holy God, and so it tend's to the
dishonor of the holy Ghost, and this may further appear by these circumstances
in the text. How came Peter to know this lie of Ananias? It Is not a man, not a
creature that can search the heart, was it not then God that revealed this sin
and the intentions of Ananias and of his wife to Peter, even the blessed Spirit
that enlightened, sanctified and enriched him with extraordinary gifts? And does
not the punishment inflicted on the man and his wife thew the severity and
power of the holy Ghost in that he can so instantly destroy his enemies? And
for further proof and confirmation of the Deity of the holy Ghost out of this
Scripture, ver. 9. for the sin was one, and agreed on betwixt the husband and
the wife, and both of them are charged for their hypocritical and bold tempting
the Spirit of God. This fact of Ananias and Saphirah proclaimed evidently, that
whereas they had heard that the Spirit know's all sins, is just to punish for
sins which he does know, is true and faithful to perform his threatenings, and
powerful and able to punish as he had threatened, yet they wretchedly against
the clear light and check of their consciences in thus sinning against him,
would yet put God to it, and make a trial and experiment whether God knew the
infidelity of their hearts, and could discover it, whether his patience,
mercy and love to mankind would not spare them, and avert that vindicative
justice, albeit he had threatened often to punish them that do commit this
sceleratissimum genus tentationis, as Peter Martyr phraseth it, and whether he
had power to punish them for their dissembling hypocrisy. Lay all these things
together, and they will amount to a full demonstration of the point in hand.

If any man (say you) look more narrowly into the words, he shall find that
the translation is not true, for the verb (...) ver. 3. is construed with an
Accusative case, and with a Dative, ver. 4. and so it is to be translated, to
belly and counterfeit the holy Ghost, which is to bear us in hand that thou
laidest down the money at the motion of the holy Ghost, herein thou have not
lied to men but to God.

of the text, had found out a fault in our common translations, whereof the
Authors out of their ignorance or inadvertencie took no notice; if so he
think's he is utterly mistaken: for all translators, ancient and of later
days, had the text before their eyes, and saw the difference which is here
noted by this Author, and yet did purposely translate the words, thou have lied
to the holy Ghost, as holding forth the genuine meaning of the Spirit of God,
some excepted, which yet, for the point of controversy in hand proved out of
this very Scripture, are professed Adversaries to you. Beza, after he had
rendered the words to deceive, or mock; i. e. endeavor to deceive the holy
Ghost, (I might add what others say) he retract's and go's in the steps of
common translators. Why? I might say from others. It Is not unusual amongst the
Grecians to understand a preposition which is not expressed. He says, because
the 4th. ver. where the Dative case is used, is an explication of the 3d. ver.
Besides, the Hebrews do sometimes confound these; whence these expressions,
benedico te, evangelizo te, which the Grecians derived from the Hebrews, and
the Latin Authors from the Grecians. Besides, in one manuscript I found the
preposition (...), and so have the Syrian and Arabian Interpreters read it.
Lastly, because this interpretation which is followed by Erasmus, to say, they
counterfeited the holy Ghost, seems to me not to be full. They were indeed
notorious hypocrites, but Peter by the sequel accuses them of a far higher
crime, that when, as by the motion of the Spirit, they had sold a parcel of
ground, and consecrated it to the Church, they afterward kept back a part
thereof, as if in that case they had not to deal with God, but with men, which
could not discover this their sacriledg, and so they are in this regard said to
tempt the Spirit of God.

Further, were it granted that your translation were sound, and that the words
ought to be so interpreted, as you have don, this neither hinder's us, nor
further's you; none ever dreamed by the common translation to correct the
meaning of the text, that they might have an Argument thence to confute the
Adversaries of the holy Ghost; he needs not our lie to defend his cause. But
the strength of the Argument is not from the words singly taken, ver. 3. but
from them, and the explication of them in the fourth and ninth verses, you
counterfeit the holy Ghost to be the Author of this fact, and this is
expounded to be a lying to God, viz. to God the holy Ghost whom you have
counterfeited, he speaking in us, and discovering this hypocrisy of your
heart which you little dreamed off. And your exposition of the words, as they
stand in your Book, is of that nature, that albeit I have perpended it as
exactly as I can, yet do I conceive nothing in it, but I may readily subscribe
to it; I am sure it nothing crosses the Argument. Thus much for the first
Argument.

Argum. 2
Maj. He to whom religious worship is truly exhibited is God. Min. The holy
Ghost is he to whom religious worship is exhibited. Concl. Ergo.


The Major is not denied by the Adversary, and is evident of it self: and
strange it is to me that any learned men, which do acknowledge the Deity of
the holy Ghost, should avouch, as they do, that there is neither precept to
worship him, nor any clear example in the Word that he was worshipped. It Is a
certain rule, the sacred Persons of the Trinity which are undivided in nature,
must be likewise undivided in worship: for any one to say the holy Ghost is
God, and with the same breath to profess their doubting whether he is to be
worshipped, is to speak contradictions; and it is all one as to acknowledge a
King, and to deny him honor, and this is to make him a titular King, and in
truth no King at all.

The Minor is proved thus: the holy Angels of God do worship him, they
worshipped the Lord of hosts. Esa. 6. 3. Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts.
Heb. 1. 6. Whether the Prophet Esaias understood this mystery or not, it is not
material to the point in hand, nor whether their thrice chanting out holy,
implied the sacred Trinity. Yet why might not that be intended? But the
Angels being intellectual substances worshipped they knew what, and being
confirmed in holiness, they only worshipped a fit object of worship, and had
they, or sinful men worshipped the highest creature with religious adoration,
would not he, as the Angel in the revelation, have rejected it, and said, See
you do it not? I am your fellowservant? but the Angels worshipped the holy
Ghost. I prove, the blessed Apostle and irrefragable Interpreter inform's us,
that the Lord of hosts who put words into the mouth of Esaias was the holy Ghost,
Act. 28. 25. Well said the holy Ghost by Esaiah the Prophet: and as the Son of
God is directly prayed unto, Lord Jesus, said Stephen that blessed martyr,
receive my Spirit, Acts 7. Lord Jesus com quickly, Apocal. 22. So is likewise
the holy Spirit, Awake thou North-winde, and com thou South, blow upon my
garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out. O blessed Spirit breathe into my
heart, that by the love of God and my neighbor it may send forth a sweet savor,
Cant. 4. 16. The blessed Spirit of God is compared to the wind, that as the
wind blow's where it list's, so does the Spirit of God blow where he will,
regenerat's whom he pleases, John 3. 8. And to this intent it is that S. John
prays, grace and peace, not only from God the Father and from Jesus Christ,
but also from the seven Spirits, Apocal. 1. 4. The Spirit is but one in nature,
but it is said to be seven, that is, manifold, in regard of the distribution
of many gifts which are from the Spirit, and more plainly 2 Corinthians. 13. 13.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with you all. And this Argument is asserted by Justin
Martyr, as I have showed in answer to your thirteenth Argument, and by Clemens
Alexandrinus at the end l. 3. Paedag. used in the ancient Liturgies, and
practiced by the reformed Churches. Sancta Trinitas miserere, O holy Trinity
have mercy. To these I may add this consideration, that we are the Temples of
the holy Ghost. It Is God only that has a Temple, and so it is necessary,
says S. Austin l. 1. de Trinitat. c. 6. that we should yield religious
service to him, that which is proper to God. I shut up this Argument with the
words of our Savior, Matthew. 28. 19. Go and baptize all Nations in the Name of
the Father, the Son, and holy Ghost: to be baptized into the Name of the
Father, Son and, holy Ghost, is to be obliged to the Faith, Worship, and
Obedience of God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

into the holy Ghost, that is, into the guidance of the holy Ghost: which may,
I deny not, be a part of the meaning of the text. You add, Thus all the
Israelites were baptized into Moses, 1 Corinthians. 10. 2.

These two texts are unequally matched and paralleled:

First, it is not said 1 Corinthians. 10. 2. that the Israelites were baptized into
the Name of the Father, Son of God, and Moses, which would have been a seeming
advantage to you, but yet not forcible enough to have shielded you from the
dint of the Argument.

Secondly, the Baptism into which the Israelites were baptized, was not such a
Sacrament as ours of Baptism is; it was not a spiritual Sacrament of the
Covenant of Grace appertaining to eternal life, as our Baptism is: their
passing through the Sea, and under the Cloud was don without sprinkling them
with, or dipping them in water, and did seal up, and evidently confirm that
Moses was by the Lord deputed to be a Guide and a Leader of his people, whose
Ministry was not fully spiritual, but it is termed carnal. God made choice of
him to be a happy instrument to deliver them out of bondage. Now such as the
deliverance is, such is the Baptism; but consider we their passing through the
red Sea, and by the guidance of the Cloud, as types and figures of the benefits
which we receive from Christ our true and spiritual Mediator; for servitude in
Egypt was a type of spiritual servitude under the power of Satan, and sin: and
deliverance out of Egypt was a type of our deliverance from the snares of the
devil, and the commanding power of our own sins: In this regard it is denied
that they were baptized into Moses; hence is it said that some were baptized
into the Baptism of John, Act. 19. 2. but they are not said to be baptized
into John; the reason is, because the Ministry of John was merely spiritual,
and not carnal. And S. Paul does take it as a very absurd thing to be abhorred
of Christians to be baptized into the name of any man. 1 Corinthians. 1. 13, 15.
were ye baptized into the name of Paul? and yet would he be acknowledged to
be their Guide, and Doctor, and a Father, who by his Ministry begot them
through the Gospel, 1 Corinthians. 4. 15.

Thirdly, this will further appear, if we do consider the use and the end of
Baptism; it is a sign and a seal of the new Covenant, the Covenant of Grace,
which is signified and ratified thereby; now consider this on the one part, the
great God of heaven and earth, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost undertake's to be the God of his people, which is their happiness: on
the other part, the confederates, the parties baptized and sealed as Gods own
by Baptism (which Austin call's Regius Character, a Kingly Character,) do
solemnly profess and oblige themselves to the faith and service not of any
Angel, for where is there such a condition expressed in the Covenant to tie us
to creatures? but as I said, to the Faith, Service, and Obedience of God the
Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost.

That which you say is true in it self, though not in your meaning, that God
the Father, and the Son, by the Spirit, do guide, govern, sanctify, and endow
the Church; and whereas before conversion, and the giving up their names to
Christ, they lived according to the Prince of this world, they ought
thenceforth, being admitted into the Church, resign up themselves to the
guidance of the holy Ghost. But your saying that the holy Ghost is our Advocate
in your sense, and a chief instrument under God, is as a dead sly in precious
ointment; this is spoken, but cannot be proved by you; and it has been
before, and shall hereafter be disproved; yea, and your own concession
touching the benefits received from the holy Ghost stand's not with this
assertion.

Advocate. If I go not away the Advocate will not com unto you, John 16. 7, 8.
And you boldly avouch that it ought so to be translated every where, as ours
have also don. 1 John 2. 1. We have an Advocate with the Father.

Advocate. Is it to plead our cause with God, as Lawyers do their clients cause
before the Judge? Or do you mean, an Advocate, one that make's prayers for us?
the rule hold's, A deceitful man speak's in generalities. I am not ignorant
that some learned men, which are strong defenders of the Deity of the holy
Ghost, do translate the word (...) in some texts (as you do) Advocate; and if
you had rendered it so in their sense, I would have passed it over in silence.
The holy Ghost may be called an Advocate, but not so an Advocate to God the
Father as Christ is, which is by the merit of his passion and intercession. In
this meaning (...) is often used in the Scripture; but the holy Ghost may be
called an Advocate, because, in doubtful cases and in straits, he help's us
with his counsel, and teaches us all things, John 14. 26. and when his
servants shall be convened before persecuting Magistrates, and they then know
not how to speak to them, nor how to pray to God, the holy Ghost will enable
them both to speak to men, and pray to God, as Christians ought to do. And
because the instilling of this heavenly doctrine into the hearts of Gods
servants is usually accompanied with spiritual joy and comfort, hence is it, as
Came. guesseth, that this word is translated by the Learned oftentimes, the
Comforter.

You say, the holy Ghost is not ranked with the Father and Son of God, as
being equal to them, as is evident by other punctual places of Scripture, 1
Cor. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. and 1 Corinthians. 8. 5, 6. the holy Ghost
is emphatically excluded from being either God or Lord, by being
contradistinguished from them both.



First, because he is God of himself, and from no other Person; he is often
styled (...), without a principle of being, so are not the Son, and the holy
Ghost. Secondly, because he is the principle and the fountain communicating
the Deity to the Son and the holy Ghost, and yet, when it is said, We have
one God, and it is immediately subjoyned, the Father, this is not spoken by way
of exclusion, but inclusion of the Son and the holy Ghost; for the Son is in
the Father, and so is the holy Ghost too. All creatures, and particularly
Idol-Gods, are excluded from being God; for God is opposed to Idols in the
later place, and I suppose you will not take the Son of God and the holy Ghost
to be Idols. Besides, the text might have lead you to this construction, for
it is said, We have one Lord Jesus Christ, will you rashly exclude God the
Father from being our Lord? will you deny that he has dominion over us? And
if the Father be included in this term, Christ is our one Lord, why should not
the Son be included in the former, one God? And as for the other places, the
works recited there do prove the holy Ghost to be God; the the 3d. Argument
follows:

Argum 3
Maj He that has the incommunicable properties of God, is God. Min The holy
Ghost has the incommunicable properties of God. Concl Ergo.
The Major is confessedly true, and need's no proof; the Minor is confirmed by
a few instances, and if it can be proved that but one of them belong's to him,
it is virtually proved true of them all, for all are but one in truth and
nature, and one is all.

First, the holy Ghost is omniscient, not only in that he lead's his servants
into all truth; Joh. 16. 13. Esa. 40. 13. he is true, the Spirit of Truth, and
the Fountain of Truth; but chiefly is this confirmed, because he searches all
things, yea, the deep things of God, 1 Corin. 2. 10. which no creature can do.

Secondly, because he is essentially and powerfully present every where. The
holy Prophet took this as an undeniable truth, Psalm. 139. 7. Whither shall I
flee from thy Spirit? This Interrogation (as appears also by the enumeration
of places most distant one from another, heaven and hell) implies a peremptory
assertion, that he could go no where, no not in his thoughts, but the Spirit
of God was present there; and yet is he not included or circumscribed in any
places, as bodily creatures, or limited, as the nature of Angels is, Basil de
Spir. San. c. 22.

By this reason the devil is omnipresent, for he steal's the Word sown in a
thousand places at once, he dwell's in all wicked men. Let them answer to
these, and then I will tell them how the Spirit, though he is not omnipresent,
may be in all the faithful at once.

First, I must tell this Disputant, that though he says much and enough to
prove our assertion, yet it is not so full as it ought to be; for the Argument
holds forth this truth, That God's Spirit is not only in the hearts of his
children, but there (and it is their happiness that he is essentially there)
where they shall never be. He is every where.

Secondly, I observe that though many lines are penned in answer to the
question, yet positively does he assert nothing at all. He leave's us to
guess at his meaning, to prevent absurdities: with which he might have been
pressed, if he had told us how the holy Ghost a creature is in all the
faithful, and how the chief Devil is in all the wicked; now possibly he has a
starting hole, and may say, he has no such meaning. It became a plain dealing
man, desirous to have the truth revealed to him, as he pretend's to be, to
have opened his mind clearly, and not to have left the Beader in suspense
touching this particular.

You tell us, and this is all you say, that what we can answer against the
Omnipresence of the Devil, you will apply the same Answer to our Objection. And
will you so indeed?

Show me then out of the Word of God in any place, that the holy Ghost has
his being by creation, and not by eternal procession. I can plainly prove, and
this you will not deny, that the Devil and his Angels were created of God, and
were good in the instant of their creation.

Show me out of the Word of God, that it is any where thus spoken, the holy
Ghost, and his Angels; as it is said expressly, the Devil, and his Angels. We
read indeed that Michael and his Angels did fight with the Dragon and his
Angels, Revel. 12. Whosoever is meant by Michael, (and there are several
interpretations thereof) yet none did so much as dream of the holy Ghost, whom
you make the Prince of Angels.



dwell in them, and that it is not one only holy Ghost that does all these,
and as you your self contend. The Person of the holy Ghost is given together
with his gifts, Argum. 7. but I can show you that it is not one individual
Devil, but they are innumerable principalities and powers against which God's
servants must fight, as against enemies, with whom they must make no peace, and
which do damnably seduce, guide, and hold in woeful captivity all sinners. A
legion of Devils was cast out of one man; every one of these wicked Spirits is
a Devil, a Satan; he is like a similar body, as a bone, every one is a Devil.

that one lying Spirit seduced four hundred Prophets, 1 King. 22. 23. and add
that there is the same reason of four hundred, and four millions; To this, I
say, speak out man, does one wicked individual Spirit seduce all the wicked by
himself? If you dare not say so, why is this example alleged? yea, and by your
own silence your cause is lost. I dare tell you that the holy Spirit
sanctifies with his gracious presence all the Saints that are in the world.
Nor is the reason alike betwixt those four hundred, and all the wicked men in
the world, for they were assembled together in one place, and all of them of
one Spirit; but suppose these four hundred had been severed, and placed in so
many remote Kingdoms, will you have the forehead to say that one Spirit could
seduce them all at once? The former, I grant, may be done by a created Spirit,
but not possible the later.

Argum. 4
Maj. He that is simply superior to Christ, as man, is God. Min. The holy
Ghost is so. Concl. Ergo, he is God.
The Major is clear by the confession of the Adversary, for he ranketh Christ
in the second order, next under God, and the holy Ghost below Christ in the
third rank, and rightly, if his supposition had been true; for the humane
nature, simply considered, being assumed into the person of the Son of God, is
nearest the cause and fountain of all greatness, and is thereby exalted far
above the state and condition of the highest Angels; but he is said to be
made lower then they are, only for a short time, in regard of his sufferings,
Hebr. 2. from which those blessed Spirits were exempted.

The Minor is proved by those very Arguments, whereby you endeavor to prove the
holy Ghost to be inferior to God. First, because Christ in this notion is sent
of the holy Ghost, The Lord God sent me, and his holy Spirit, Esa. 48. 16. I
know some of ours do expound this of the Prophet Esaias, the Spirit sent him, and
so do the Hebrews suddenly change the Person (says Oecolampadius) without any
necessity, because they do abhor the mystery of the Trinity, but we (says
he) with Catholics do avouch that these are the words of Christ, as the
whole context evinceth. But let that text be meant so or otherwise. It Is clear
by Fsa. 61. 1. applied to Christ, Luke 4. 18. The Spirit of the Lord has sent
me to bind up the broken hearted, to preach the Gospel.

Secondly, he that receives of another is inferior to him of whom he
receives, and dependent on him, these are your own expressions; but the humane
nature of Christ receive's from the Spirit it is being, for he was conceived
by the holy Ghost, Matthew. 1. and was anointed by him with abundant gifts
without measure, Luke 4. 18.

Romans 8. 11. as he does his people spiritually from the death of sin.

Lastly, because it is a greater sin which is committed against the holy Ghost,
then that is which is committed against the Son, Mat. 12. 31, 32. this is
pardonable, the other shall never be forgiven.

The sin against the holy Ghost is unpardonable, not because the holy Ghost is
God, but because he that sins against the holy Ghost does in the same act
sin against God with an high hand against his conscience, renouncing the truth,
as the Renegadoes did, Hebr. 10. 25, 26. which things are the greatest affronts
that can be offered to God, who uses the Spirit in none, but in things of
greatest importance.

simply unpardonable, because it is simply against God; for so are all sins,
and yet are they not the unpardonable sin, and they are in a proper and true
sense against the holy Ghost, even the sins of his own people, and he is said
to be grieved for them, Ephesians. 4. 30. and the sins of the wicked, for which
he will be revenged on them, Esa. 63. 10. But yet this I do peremptorily
avouch, unless the holy Ghost were God, and equal to the Father, and the Son of
God, it could not be the greatest sin that was committed against him, as the
immediate and ultimate object thereof. I will on your own principles argue
against you for the fuller confirmation of this point.

I take this for a granted Maxim, that the unpardonable sin, is a sin, and of
necessity must be a sin against the holy Ghost. This Assertion cannot with
reason be denied. Upon this supposition of yours, that the holy Ghost is a
creature, I argue thus, That the unpardonable sin may be committed, and yet
the holy Ghost not at all sinned against: First, because the first and
universal cause can immediately of himself, without the intervening of any
creature, so far enlighten a reprobate, that this sin maliciously committed
against this light, shall be for nature the very same, every way as heinous,
and as unpardonable, and yet not all against the holy Ghost. It is true,
instruments are God's hands, and as they can do nothing without God, so God
ordinarily will not work without them; but is Gods hand shortened? Can you give
any reason why he cannot do the same work without the creatures, which is
instrumentally produced by them? Secondly, suppose the Lord will not work thus
immediately by himself, cannot he employ an Angel, inferior to the holy Ghost,
about this work of illumination? Cannot he so far elevate this blessed
creature above it self touching the former state, and actuate his abilities,
that he shall, as a means under God, so far enlighten man, as is don at other
times by the holy Ghost? And the blessed Spirit in the mean time according to
your profane opinion, reside in one place, and not intermeddle at all either to
command, or have any influence on this Angel in this employment? or if there
should be a deficiencie still in this creature, (which is very unreasonable to
imagine) cannot the great God supply the defect thereof? In this case we have
the unpardonable sin committed, and yet not at all committed against the holy
Ghost. Thirdly, I confute you from this Scripture, Matthew. 12. on which our
Argument is grounded. The holy Ghost (say you) is God's Messenger, and he is
sent as God's servant to enlighten men; at the same time this great God send's
his Son also as his Messenger, for so he is often called, but the holy Ghost
is never called his Son: this Son of God, as you grant, is next unto God
himself, higher and greater then the holy Ghost; and besides, which is another
advantage to strengthen the Argument, the holy Ghost is invisible, the Son of
God present's himself visible to them, and his Person is directly and purposely
scorned and abused by them: and it is not easy to be proved that they had the
like mischievous intentions, and malicious purposes against the Person of the
holy Ghost. Judge now impartially whether is the greater sin, and which in
likelihood is the sin most unpardonable? Whether the Lord will* be more
offended for a sin against the servant, against a Person inferior to the Son,
then for a sin against the greater, and against his wel-beloved Son? And if a
man be not bereft of common sense, he must need's conclude against this
Disputant; and therefore, since the sin against the holy Ghost is unpardonable,
but the sin against the Son of God is not unpardonable, as the text shows, it
must of necessity be yielded, that the holy Ghost is God, and superior to
Christ, as he is man, as he is Mediator. Fourthly, if the holy Ghost were not
God, the sin committed against him could not be the greatest sin. Can a sin
immediately committed against a creature, be greater then that which is
directly against the Creator? Does not the greatness of the Person against whom
the sin is committed, aggravate the offense, and make the sin to be so much the
more heinous, as the Person wronged by it is the greater? Is not a sin against
God, which is a breach of the first Table greater, (I mean of an equal
comparison) then a sin against the 2d Table, as this sin whereof we treat must
be, if it be a sin against the creature? I deny not, but they that sin
against a creature, do sin against God, whose authority and law forbidding it
are slighted; but shall therefore an immediate sin against the workmanship of
God, be, as you contend, the more heinous, then that which is against the
great God himself? I might tell you that you do only say, that this sin
through the holy Ghost does strike at God himself as a superior object thereof.
You can never prove that this sin is not terminated in the holy Ghost, but for
Argument sake grant it. At the Assizes, as I remember, malefactors are indicted
for sinning against our Sovereign Lord and his Laws, but is it as great a sin
as that which is immediately against his Majesty? Suppose supreme Authority
send's Ambassadors to a forain Prince, and they are disgraced and killed, ('it is
your own comparison, Argum 4) this redound's, I deny not, very much to the
wrong of the supreme Authority, and it is don, and interpreted to be don to
them, not for their own, but for his sake. Suppose, again, a King should send
more honorable Ambassadors then the former, as Balak did to Balaam, and join in
commission with them his chief favorites, was not the same sin committed
against these later servants greater then the former? But suppose a King
himself should go in his own Person about the same business, and they should
e-equally contemn him, was not the affront now and sin committed of a deeper
die? Give me leave (Christian Reader) to endeavor to explicate, in as few words
as may be, how the sin is said to be against the holy Ghost.

It is an undeniable truth, that all the actions of the divine Persons, (those
only excepted which are ad intra, of intrinsecal relation) are the joint and
undivided works of the three Persons, because there is not a multiplied, but
one divine essence, and the unity of their working depend's on the unity of
the power, which is all one with the essence, Gregor. Nazianz. Orat. de
Theolog. Yet the blessed God is described in Scripture by a gracious
condescending to our dull capacities, which are unable to conceive the
distinction of the Persons in the unity of the Godhead, but by a distinction
of their operations to usward: and hence it is, that the great works of
Redemption, Creation, and Sanctification are severally attributed to the
several Persons, not in a way of opposition, but distinction, which the
Schoolmen call Appropriation. Thus power is asscribed to the Father, because
he is the principle of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; and therefore, because
the mighty power of God is manifested by Creation, the Father is frequently
styled the Creator. Wisdom is asscribed to the Son of God, because he is
termed conceptus Sapientiae: hence is it, that Redemption, wherein the manifold
wisdom of God is seen, is appropriated to the Son, he is called Redeemer.
Goodness is asscribed to the holy Ghost, because he proceed's from the Father,
and the Son per modum amoris: hence the good things of God which are
communicated to us are appropriated to him, he is called our Sanctifier. And
for the same reason are sins thus distinguished; there is a sin of Frailtiness,
and that is said to be against the Father, who is Power; there is a sin of
Ignorance, and that is said to be against the Son, who is the Wisdom of God;
and there is a sin of Wilfulness and Malice, and that is said to be against
the holy Ghost, who is Goodness, Bonav. p. 1. Quaest. 39. Art. 8. This is a
reason why this sin is unpardonable, it is a sin by appropriation both against
his Person and his Gifts; it is not a sin of weakness, nor a sin of ignorance,
no nor every gross sin against knowledge, no nor every apostasy from the truth
against the known truth; for some may fall away either out of fear of the loss
of their goods or lives, or for preferment; nor a few of this kind have
bewailed their follies, have obtained pardon, and proved glorious Martyrs; but
this is a sin wittingly, and willingly, and out of cankred malice committed
against God the Father, Son, and (a I said) by appropriation, against God the
holy Ghost, and his great work in their hearts, and whereby they offer
contumely and despite to the Spirit of Grace, and so will he never give them
the grace to repent.

that God uses the Spirit but only in things of greatest importance. By this
your saying, you give your Reader a hint to suspect that you think every sin
committed against God's Spirit is that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost.
Speak out, is not this your meaning? if not so, to what purpose should you say,
God never uses the Spirit, but in matters of greatest importance? If so, I
demand then who can be saved? For every good man grieveth the blessed Spirit,
and sins against him. I add, this your Conclusion is such a Paradox which
has searce dropped from the pen of any Christian man. You think, belike, that
the Spirit is like to Archangels, which are said to preside over Kingdoms, and
great Personages only; but the care of singular mean persons is, under God,
committed to the Angels. You think, it seems, the Spirit work's not but to
bring forth a male-childe, of whom the woman has been long in travel to be
delivered, for whom the Church has sighed much, and made many prayers to God
to give her a Christian orthodoxal King or Emperor; or to divert the rage of
the persecutors of the Saints, and to procure rest to the Church, to raise up
men of heroical spirits and parts to reform the Church, or such like. Belike
then, they that have but one talent, or two talents, or mean men, which have
but a low degree of sanctifying graces, are not beholding to the Spirit for
them, God never sent his blessed Spirit to them; how false and unsavory this
expression is, who sees not? And the folly thereof shall be fully disproved
in the next Reason. When you wrote this you were half asleep; or, if
deliberatly, I will be bold to say, That your Sophistry has the upper hand
of your Divinity.

5 Argum.
Maj. He that produces those works which God alone produces, is God. Min.
The holy Ghost does so. Concl. Ergo
The Major is plain; the Minor is proved by particular instances.

1
He that create's the world, is God. The holy Ghost create's the world. Ergo
the holy Ghost is God.
The Major is proved both by Reason and Scripture: First, by Reason, because,
to create, is to make something of nothing, or of that which, to such a purpose,
is as good as nothing; and this require's an infinite power, which cannot, no
not by the absolute power of God, be communicated to a creature; and by
Scripture every where, Genesis 1. 1. Jer. 10. 11. The true God, the living God,
the everlasting God has made the Earth, the Heavens, the Seas, and the
Fountains of water, Apoc. 14. 7.

The Minor is proved by Scripture; the first verse in the Bible Elohim created
Heaven and Earth; and after in the same Chap. ver. 26. Let Us make man after
Our Image: hence it is said in the Original, Where is God (...) my Makers; and
Psalm. 149. 2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, (...), in his Makers:
which denote's the Trinity of the Persons. More distinctly, Psalm. 33. 6. By
the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the host of them by the
Spirit of his mouth; that is, God the Father by his Word, i. e. his Wisdom,
which is Christ; and by his Virtue, which is the holy Ghost, has made all
things, and these three are but one God. More clearly, Psalm. 104. 30. Thou
sendest forth thy Spirit, and they are created. The Prophet shows how the
orderly course of the creatures is wisely disposed off, and the Antithesis
betwixt the Spirits, i. e. souls of the creatures which die, and the Spirit of
God which create's and renewe's them. So Elihu in Job, The Spirit of God has
made me, and the breath of the Lord has given me life, Job 35. 10. And it is
said touching our Savior, That which is conceived of Marie, is of the holy
Ghost, creating the body, by his omnipotent power, of the substance of the
Virgin Marie, in a way unheard off from the beginning of the world, and his soul
immediately of nothing.

2
He that support's and uphold's all the creatures in their being, is God. The
holy Ghost does so. Ergo
The Major is confirmed; because preservation of the creatures is a work
equivalent to creation, and it is rightly called a continued creation: hence is
the Lord described to be a God (...) for the present stretching out the
heavens, Esa. 40. 22. All means under the Sun are but dead instruments without
God. To be of himself is proper to the Lord, and incommunicable to any
creature: hence is it (as Glass. observe's Orat. de Hebr. lin. Necess:) that
the Lord is called Adonai, of (...), because he is the basis, and the prop to
uphold all the creatures in the world; they all depend on him as artificial
works do on natural substances. What can a Carpenter do without wood? What can
a Mason do without stones? Yea, as the light in the air depend's on the body
of the Sun, we live, and move, and have our ^eein^ in God. Acts 17. 28.

The Minor is confirmed; not only because the holy Ghost is Ado^ai, as is
showed in the first Reason, but because this is particularly affirmed of one
work, and in paritie of reason it hold's true in all the rest. Genesis 1. 2. The
Spirit of God is said to move upon the face of the waters. By the Spirit of God
cannot be meant the wind, which is the moving of the air, for there was no
distinction of things below in the first day, they were a confused mass without
form, and without any virtue or efficacy. Nor could the air of wind, if there
had been any such creature at that time, have had the cherishing effect which
is there asscribed to the Spirit: we are then to understand no created Spirit,
but the Creator and Cherisher of all. The Lord would teach us that this
confused lump of the Elements, created in the beginning, could not consist of it
self, but as it was necessary it should have a Creator for its being, so
likewise that it should have a Protector, a Conservator, and a Quickner for the
continuance of the same, and the Spirit that upheld this mass, was the Spirit
of God. The word used by the Spirit is very emphatical; it is a Metaphor taken
from Birds, which do sit upon their eggs, wave over them to bring forth their
young ones, or ^o cherish them being hatched, Deuteronomy. 32. 11. (...) in Deuter.
the Lord protected his Children as the Bird does her young ones, and brought
them out of Egypt, as he did a beautiful world out of the Chaos: so that in
this place of Genesis is set forth the effectual comfortable motion of the
Spirit on the indigested Chaos, whereby he sustained, and, as it were,
cherished that vast creature. I might show that this is not a singular
exposition devised of late days, but asserted by many ancient Fathers, yea,
and by some ancient Rabbis, as P. Galatm. l. 2. and H. Ainsworth on this text
do witness, but I omit them.

He that truly and properly work's miracles, is God. The holy Ghost does so.
Ergo
The Major is proved even by one of the words which is used for a miracle,
(...), derived of (...), which, like a beautiful creature, has an allureing
nature to drawmen to believe in God, and to obey him, Ainsworth on Exodus 7. 9.
Or, as Schindler, of (...), because it dem^nstrat's the truth, and is as a
divine seal thereof, not imprinted in wax which will soon wear out, but
engraven (as it were) in brass, and so is an indeleble Character. Hereby did
our Savior prove that he was God, Matthew. 9. 5. as if he had said, it is the
same divine power to forgive sins, and work miracles. The Lord alone does
wondrous works, Psalm. 78. 18. Sometimes he work's them for the prayers of his
servants, as he did at, and for the prayers of Elias, 1 King. 18. Sometimes by
divine instinct and inspiration, and then is the miracle said to be a miracle
ex potestate. Josuah said, Sun, stand thou still in the firmament. And Peter to
Aeneas, Arise, -- and this is a work so peculiar to God, that the great
School-man Aquin. cap. 2. quaest. 14. 8. art. 1. concludes, that that it
cannot be communicated to a creature, no not to the humane nature of Christ,
as properly and originally wrought by it. The Deity shined with miracles, and
the Humanity was exposed to injuries.

The Minor is proved by the words of our Savior, Luke 11. 20. Christ cast's out
devils by the finger of God. He has reference, as is probable, to Exodus 8.
19. The Magicians of Pharaoh acknowledged that the miracle of ^ice was wrought
by the finger of God; the holding up of the singer argue's power and
authority, and is a kind of threatening to desist from evil: and this text is
expounded in S. Matthew. 12. 28. Christ cast's out devils by the Spirit of God;
and yet more plainly, if any thing can be more plain, there is no servant of
God which God has graced with this honor to be an instrument of working
miracles. But it is the blessed Spirit that give's this gift unto them, 1 Cor.
12. 10.

4
He that inspired the holy Prophets and Apostles, and infallibly guided the
Penners of the holy Scripture, is God. The holy Ghost has don both these. Ergo
he is God.
The Major is clear by Scripture, Luke 1. 70. God spoke by the mouth (not of
some but) of all the Prophets since the world began; and the whole Scripture,
and every clause of Scripture is (...), given by divine inspiration: hence is
it that the Scripture (...) is called the Word of God; and to be esteemed of
us, as if it had been written with Gods own hand, as the Decalogue was: it is
chirographum Dei, as Austin elegantly, a writing under God's own hand.

The Minor is proved by evident Scripture. Prophesies of old time (says S.
Peter) came not by the will of man, but the Prophets spoke as they were moved
(both for the matter and the words) by the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. The Spirit
which began by inspiration, sat still, moving on those soul-refreshing waters,
sweetly and wisely assisting his Penmen according to their several styles,
till there was a perfect production, till the Canon of the Scripture was
completed. And this is further proved in that what God is said to speak in the
old Testament to David, to Esaias, etc. that in the new, which is a commentary of
much in the old, is asscribed to the holy Ghost, Heb. 3. 7. Act. 28. 25. and in
many other places. Well said the holy Ghost by Esaias to your Fathers. Ergo, I
conclude, the holy Ghost is God.

He that rule's and govern's the Church by his absolute power, is God. The
holy Ghost does so. Ergo.
The Major is plain, and cannot with any color of reason be denied; for the
Church is the Church of God, Acts 20. 28. his own enclosure from the commons of
the world, and one inferior to God cannot by his absolute power govern it; it
is God's own property, and peculiar not to be claimed by any creature, to
command by his own authority over the whole Church.

The Minor is evidently proved by Scripture: the holy Ghost instruct's Peter,
remove's his scruples, and laie's a charge upon him; Arise, get thee down, and
go to Cornelius with the Messengers, doubting nothing, for I have sent them,
Act. 10. 20. Is this a language beseeming a creature? Will a creature speak
thus with authority, a holy creature? Acts 13. 2. Separate to, or for me,
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. Has any creature,
a good creature, the boldness thus imperiously to command in God's house?
Certainly, this is the voice of God, and not of an Angel. Consonant hereto is
that profession of the holy Assembly at Jerusalem, Acts 15. 28. It seemed good
to the holy Ghost, and to Us; that is, to us inspired by the holy Ghost. Had
this happy society of Saints consulting for the rest and peace of the Church,
and, by the blessing of the Lord, making a happy conclusion, most suitable to
the state and condition of those times, forgotten to acknowledge God the Author,
and resolve finally this great work into a creature's inspiration? Lastly, to
name no more, Acts 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the flock, over
which the holy Ghost has made you overseers. Words very emphatical, belonging
to the great God, but too high to be attributed to any creature.

Argum. 6
He that does what he will, and disposes his gifts, as he himself pleases,
is God. The holy Ghost does so. Ergo.
The Major is plain; our God is in the heavens, and he has don whatsoever he
pleases, Psalm. 115. 3. It Is blasphemy to conceive that God should be like
some Kings of Egypt, which seems to be intimated by that speech of Pharaoh to
Joseph, and is asserted of these Caliphs in later times, that they committed
the whole Government of their Kingdom to their Viceroys, according to whose
word and commandment all the people were ruled, Genesis 41. 40. And they in the
mean time enjoy themselves, and meddle not with the administration of the
Kingdom. Let Christians abhor such cogitations, and firmly believe that there
is nothing at all don by the creature, but the Lord is the first efficient
cause thereof, and produces it immediately, immediatione suppositi: for he is
every where; and immediatione virtutis suae infinitae, Greg. de Val. tom. 1. d.
8. q. 1. p. 2. And our Bradwardine laie's down these three Conclusions, and
prove's them: First, no creature at all can work without God. Secondly, no
creature can make any thing at all, unless God by himself, and immediately does
make the same thing. Thirdly, yea more immediately then does any working
creature. de causa Dei, lib. 1. cap. 3. I may further confirm this Proposition
by your own Arguments. God give's all things to all, Argum. 5. And it is God
that has the power and disposition of all things, Argum. 7.

The Minor is confirmed, Hebr. 2. 4. where the Apostle teaches, that several
gifts, (...), distributions and parting of his gifts severally to men are
according to his pleasure. And, 1 Cor. 12. 11. he divide's not to some only,
but to every man as he pleases, all gifts: not only the greatest and most
admirable gifts, but those also of the middle sort; yea, and the meanest are
the gifts of the Spirit, he works all in all. Heathens sottishly asscribed
several gifts to several gods; some to Jupiter, some to Apollo, Mercury, some to
Juno, Diana: but we have been better taught then so, to asscribe all to God
the holy Ghost, who give's all to all. Whereby this Author is confuted, who
affirms in answer to Mat. 12. 31. the acts of the Spirit, his ministry is
not used but in things of the greatest importance.

Seventhly, I add another Argument as a choice specialtie under the general,
concluded in the former Argument.
He that is the Author of saving Graces, is God. The holy Ghost is the Author
of saving Graces: Ergo.
The Major is proved, because conversion, and regeneration (not to spend time
in running through particulars) sanctification is Gods alone work. None can wash
away the filthiness of the mind, but he that made the mind, Optat. Mil. l.
5. The Heathen shall know that the Lord does sanctify Israel, Ezekiel. 37. 28.
And is not this state compared to the raising up of the dead to life, and to a
new creation? Is not grace of a supernatural order, and by it the Saints do
regularly move to a supernatural end? Every one of these of necessity require's
the powerful work of a supreme Agent. A creature has no more power to make a
Saint of a sinner, then he has to make of a vile lump of earth a glorious
star in heaven.

The Minor is proved; he is called the holy Ghost, because holiness is from
him, per modum principii inhaerentis and assistentis, 1 Pet. 12. called the
Spirit of holiness, Romans 1. 4. and we are said to be regenerated by the holy
Ghost, Joh. 3. 5. renewed by the holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 5. to be washed and
sanctified by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. As there is but one soul in
a man which quicken's all the members of the natural body, so is there but
only one holy Ghost, which animate's all the mystical members of Jesus Christ;
and as Christ our head was conceived by the holy Ghost, so the mystical body
is conceived by the Spirit of God. Every Christian, as he is a Christian, has
his conception and new birth by the holy Ghost. I might show this at large in
the particular graces which are sanctifying; a catalogue of many of them we
read Gal. 5. 22. and it is as true of the rest, which are not there recited,
they are all of them the fruit of the Spirit.

The Arguments which I have already recited, will, I hope, and conceive, give
ample satisfaction to the Christian Reader: there remains another, grounded
on the Word of God, to prove the Deity of the holy Ghost; which I will set
down, not only because many eminent Protestants, and men of note of the Church
of Rome, do rely on it, but because the Adversary has, upon some plausible
pretenses, excepted against it, I am persuaded that there is scarce a good
cause maintained, but it is proved by some weak and false mediums. It is
acknowledged by Mel. Canus, and it is not contradicted by any, loc. l. 6. c.
ult. that not only sacred Synods, but the Popes themselves may thus err; some
of whose proofs may be so far from being necessary, that they are not fit
nor probable to conclude infallible cathedral definitions of Faith. If then
this Argument, which is in the rere and hind-most, should be cut off, (as the
faint and feeble Israelites were by the Amalekites, Deuteronomy. 25. 18.) yet even
then were the people of God victorious over their enemies; so do not I doubt,
albeit this Argument should be unproper, (I do not say it is, but if it could
be demonstrated to be so) but some of the former, if not all, are
unanswerable, and like invincible fortresses which cannot be surprised. Thus I
frame the Argument:

Argum. 8
He that is a heavenly witness, and one in nature with God the Father, is God.
The holy Ghost is so: Ergo.
The Major is evident of it self, and not contradicted by the Adversary: the
reason why I only name God the Father, and not God the Son is, because Mr
Bidle will not yield that the Word is God.

Minor is proved by those words of S. John, 1 Epist. chap. 5. ver. 7. There are
three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost;
and these three are one: an express place, one would think, for the distinction
of three Persons, and the Unity of nature in the blessed Trinity. I do take
for granted, that the Person to whom this witness is given, is, that Jesus is
the Son of God, the Messiah. The heavenly witnesses which give testimony
hereof are three: the Father, at his Baptism, speaking from heaven, This is my
beloved Son. The Son called the Word, for three reasons.
The Son of God, who is called the Word, either because he is the Person on
whom the promises of God do run, God the Father promised him, so Beza; or God
the Father, as our first act and conceit, (which is our internal and mental
Word) is, and issues out of our understanding. For these or some other reasons
it is that the Son of God is called the Word; and he bear's record to himself
that he is the Messiah, partly, by his works, Joh. 4. 26. partly, by his
Doctrine, Joh. 5. 18. -- Joh. 6. 29. -- 6. 37, 46. partly, by bis miracles,
Joh. 10. 25. The holy Ghost bare record of him at his Baptism, when he, in a
visible shape, asscended from heaven, and alighted on him. I argue from this
text:

Acts 15. 28. Romans 8. -- speaking by his Prophets -- but those very texts do
strengthen our faith touching the Deity of the holy Ghost. For the further
confirmation, let it be considered, that all the creatures were made by J.
Christ, and nothing was made without him. It is never spoken in the Scripture,
that the holy Ghost was made by him. Colos. 1. 16. all things in heaven and in
earth, visible and invisible, were created by him; and it is there added for
illustration, that thrones, dominations, principalities and powers were created
by him. The holy Ghost, had he been a creature, and the chief of all the
creatures, would not have been omitted, but by name expressed, the holy Ghost,
principalities, powers, etc. The Reader (if he please) may see more proofs of
this point in the Answer to the 8th Argument.

three do bear witness in heaven; the meaning is not, as if the place where
this record was given is in heaven, or to the heavenly Inhabitants, but this is
a record to men on earth; nor is it a testimony which is given by the Angels:
hence I draw a second Argument, If by the holy Ghost was not meant a divine
testimony, or the testimony of God himself, then there are not only three
which bear witness in heaven, as the text hold's forth, and must be verified
of three, but there are many more that witness Jesus is the Messiah. Before his
birth, to Joseph, Mat. 1. 20. After his birth, to the Shepherds, Luke 1. 10.
And a multitude of the heavenly host praising God for this Messiah. Glory be
to God on high, ver. 13. At his resurrection, to those that guarded the
Sepulcher, Matthew. 28. 3, 4. and to holy women, ver. 5. At his Asscension, to
the Disciples, Acts 1. 10, 11. and many the like.

These three (says the text) are one: these words afford another Argument. To
say nothing, that if they had not intended unity in nature, but consent in
witness bearing, there was no necessity of them; and the former words would
have carried that sense, There are three that bear witness, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, that Jesus is the Son of God. these are one; and not
as in the next verse, that they do agree in one: does not this lead us, by
perpending the different language, to a different interpretation of the words?
And to a more intimate, an essential unity in the former, which, as the phrase
and common reason impart, cannot agree to the later.

Beza, that the Complutensian Bible prefixeth (...) to both verses; and Matthew.
19. 5, 6. and ought to be rendered alike in both verses.

first I answer: Why should not we rather think there might be an addition in
one Bible, then an omission of any word which com's from God in all the rest?
that which is superfluous and not agreeable to the mind of God fully in the
one must be razed out by the concurrent testimony of other Copies.

second I answer: That you pour out Oracles, and say, the later is after the
Hebrew idiome, the former according to the ordinary phrase, and tell us very
magisterially, both ought to be rendered alike, and yet you do not acquaint us
how they ought to be rendered; and for your parallel place in Matthew. 19. 5, 6.
to that I answer four things: First, albeit our English phrase is one in both,
yet the exact Translations in Latin are not the same in both places; they
religiously do, in their Translations, follow the Original, in unam carnem, or
two shall be in una carne. secondly, is it so unanimously agreed on, that the
sense is one and the same in both places; for the fifth verse may note out
their state and condition before Marriage, and the sixth verse, after
Matrimony, then are they one flesh, and so this later will be a consequent of
the former. Thirdly, there is not the like reason betwixt these two texts; for
I need not say, Ask the Scriptures, ask the Learned, but ask a very child, and
he will tell you that man and wife are two distinct and separated persons,
which may be at a great distance, in regard of place, and likewise in regard
of affection: and none are so simple to think, when man and wife are one flesh,
that they are one numerical and individual flesh. But now ask the Scriptures,
and ask the Learned men, and they will tell you, that these three are one in
nature, and one in essence. there is not a paritie, because in Matthew there
are the same subject persons meant in both verses; but it is not so in John 7.
8. and therefore, albeit in sense the verses there did intend one thing, and no
danger of translating both alike, yet here, in regard of this difference, the
case is altered: thus then, as you see, besides the letter of the text, there
are many Arguments deduced from it, which is not ordinary in other Scriptures,
to prove controverted points, which do evidence this blessed truth, The holy
Spirit is God.

It would have been hard, if not impossible, if men had not been pre-corrupted,
that it should ever com into any one's head to imagine, that this phrase, three
are one, did signify, have one essence: for John 17. but never an union in
essence.

first I answer: That if I took any pleasure in invectives, which, I conceive,
never did any good, you have ministered an opportune occasion for the dipping of
my pen in gall; but here, and throughout my Book, I have satisfied your desire.
I do forbear railings and reproachful terms, and I only say, Christian Reader,
behold the Spirit of the man.

second; whereas you say, that our exposition is against common sense, I say,
you write as if you were in a dream. Cannot two be one in essence? That near
and intimate oneness that is betwixt the husband and the wife; that neerness in
consent does necessarily presuppose the unity of nature, the same specifical,
though not the same individual nature; and that oneness betwixt Christ and
Christians, The head and the members does likewise necessarily presuppose the
unity of nature betwixt them both. Heb. 2. 14. we have flesh and blood, and
so has Christ likewise took part of the same, and he took on him the seed of
Abraham: and well is it said in the Confession of Faith in the Synod of
Chalcedon, Christ is coessential to his Father, according to his Divinity, and
he is coessential to us according to his Humanity. Is not water in the
fountain, in the river, and that which is conveyed by pipes to houses one in
essence? Is not the light in the heavens, in the air, and in our houses, one
and the same being.

third, I grant, that unity in consent is meant in part; but this unity of
consent is in regard of the unity of the divine operation; and the unity of
divine operation argue's the unity of the divine Essence. I grant, many things
are said to be one secundum quid; for as many consentanie Arguments as there
be of the first kind; and as many as there be of the second kind which do
arise of the first, orta Argumenta, so many fountains there be of unity,
identitie, and oneness. There are some that are one, as touching their
understanding, will, work's; naturally one, as all men are partakers of humane
nature; morally one, as loving friends; corporally one, as husband and wife;
and spiritually one, as Christ and Christians are. No question of any of these:
but will it follow from hence that there is no other kind of unity, an unity
simply, more near then any of the former? You tell us, to be one, is never
taken to denote a union in essence. Not to repeat what I have formerly written,
I say, this is boldly spoken, and contradicted by our blessed Savior, John 10.
29. I and the Father (says he) are one: how one? In the former verses he
require's they should believe in him, promises that he will give unto his
children eternal life; and such is his divine power, that none can take them
out of his hands; and uses the self same words in the next verse, none shall
take them out of my Father's hands: and then says, I and my Father are one;
viz. in power, and consequently, in essence; for the power of God, and the
essence of God are all one thing. This my Adversary, which denie's this
Assertion, swerv's not only from the plain meaning of the text, but shows
that he has less understanding then our very enemies of Christ had; for they
collected, and that rightly from thence, that Christ professed himself thereby
to be God.

I omit (says he) to speak of the suspectedness of the place. It Is not extant
in the ancient Greek Copies, nor in the Syriack Translation, nor in most
ancient books of the Latin Edition, and rejected by sundry Interpreters, both
ancient and modern.

John, as is witnessed by Ambrose. God is a Spirit, which they unconscionably
cancelled, and razed out of their own books; and I wish, did not blot it out of
the books of the Church: this sacriledg was plainly detected. You might, says
the Father, lib. 3. de Spir. sancto, cap. 11. abolish sentences of holy
Scripture, but you could not destroy the faith: Plus vos illa litura prodebat,
plus vos illa litura damnabat (I add) quam litera nocebat; and the rather,
because I find this text, 1 John 5. 7. cited by S. Cyprian, li. de Vnitate
Eccles. which lived an hundred years before Macedonius the founder of this
Heresy, when the Church was not pestred with that noisome weed, no nor with
Arianism, whereby the Deity of the Son of God chiefly, and so the divine
Trinity was directly opposed, and violent spirits might be imboldned to
adventure on that impiety, because the scepter was in the hands of Constantius
first, and not long after of Valens, Arian Emperors.

To these reasons taken out of the Scriptures, I might produce a cloud of
humane witnesses, and begin with the Fathers, which lived before the (...), and
alledg the elaborate Treatises of those which then and after lived in the
Church, and show how this error has been registered in the black bill of
Heresies by Epiphan. to. 1. l. 3. haer. 74. and August. haer. 52. Then might I
descend lower to the times before and since the schism betwixt the Eastern and
Western Churches, which albeit many points of faith were deeply corrupted, yet
did they inviolably maintain even to this day, the unity of the divine Nature,
and the Trinity of the persons: Then might I relate the consent of the
reformed Churches, which have a sweet harmony in their several Confessions
touching this point; but I know this Author, dreaming that he has not only
reason, but the testimony of the Scripture on his side, will reject them all,
and say with Luther, though in a different case, The Word of God is to be
preferred above all: that make's for me; if a thousand Augustins, a thousand
Cyprians, a thousand Henricians (that is, English Churches ruled by Henry the
Eighth) should stand against him, he would reject them all. And, as I
remember, I have read one of the same brain with my Adversary, said, Luther
has pulled down the walls of Popery, but the foundation thereof (meaning the
doctrine of the Trinity) remain's untouched: therefore will I spare that labor
in transcribing their testimonies. Yet let me mind you of this, that as the
foggie smoke, which arose out of the bottomless pit, chiefly by Macedonius
Bishop of Constantinople, about the year of our Lord 361. was happily dispelled
by the light of the holy Fathers. They so sharpened their weapons, and so
successfully used them, that they gave a deadly wound to those Monsters, as
Epiphanius cal's them; so I do not doubt, but by the good providence of God,
the Schisms and Socinian Heresies, which do annoy the Church for the present,
and every new started controversy will occasion that good, which has been
long since observed, viz. the more full discussion, and clearer discovery of
opposed truth, and cause the sincere and approved Professors of Gods cause to
pray unto God more zealously for divine illumination, to search the Scriptures
more diligently, to continue themselves together more firmly, and communicate
their labors mutually more plentifully then they were accustomed to do, and put
them on the labor of love for their brethren, with tenderness and compassion to
strengthen them that stand lest they fall; and, like waking husbandmen,
vigilantly to guard those fields of corn, where the instruments of the envious
spirits are most likely to sow their tares. Gods faithful servants are burning
lights, the Adversaries which do top them, do burn, or at least besmear their
fingers. But these lights do shine thereby more brightly; and I do hope, that
as S. Austin said of the absurd Manichees, when they boasted (as all Sectaries
will do) Veritas, Veritas, the Truth, the Truth, that sound Christians with
better enlightened and clearer judgments then formerly, will be as able to say
as it follows in my Author, there is no truth at all in them. And, O that the
seduced would make an hearty acknowledgment, we took that for truth, for
divine truth, but now, blessed be God, we are convinced, and our eyes are
enlightened to see it was but an error. I conclude as S. Austin did his
fifteenth, the last, book of the Trinity.

Domine, Deus unus, Deus Trinitas, quaecunque dixi in hoc libro de tuo,
agnoscant and tui; si quae de meo, and tu agnosce, and tui. Amen.

ARGUMENT 1.
1 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that is distinguished from God, is not God. The holy Spirit is
distinguished from God. Ergo.
The Major is evident; for if he should both be God, and be distinguished
from God, he would be distinguished from himself, which implies a
contradiction. The Minor is confirmed by the whole current of the Scripture,
which calls him the Spirit of God, and says, that he is sent by God, and
searches the depths of God, etc.

Essence and Person of God, saying, that the holy Spirit is distinguished from
God, taken Personally, not Essentially. For this wretched distinction (to omit
the mention of the Primitive Fathers) is not only unheard of in the Scripture,
and so to be rejected, it being presumption to affirm any thing of the
unsearchable nature of God, which he has not first affirmed of himself in the
Scripture; but is also disclaimed by Reason. For first, it is impossible for
any man, if he would but endeavor to conceive the thing, and not delude both
himself and others with empty terms and words without understanding, to
distinguish the Person from the Essence of God, and not to frame two beeings or
things in his mind, and consequently two Gods. Secondly, If the Person be
distinct from the Essence of God, then it is either something or nothing: if
nothing, how can it be distinguished, since nothing has no accidents? If
something, then either some finite or infinite thing; if finite, then there will
be something finite in God: and consequently, since by the confession of the
Adversaries themselves, every thing in God is God himself, God will be finite,
which the Adversaries themselves will likewise confess to be absurd. If
infinite, then there will be two infinites in God, to wit, the Person and
Essence of God; and consequently two Gods, which is more absurd then the
former. Thirdly, to talk of God taken only Essentially is ridiculous, not
only because there is no example thereof in Scripture, but because God is the
name of a Person, and signifies him that rules over others; and when it is
put for the most high God, it denotes him who with sovereign and absolute,
authority rules over all; but none but a person can rule over others, all
actions being proper to persons: wherefore to take God otherwise then
Personally, is to take him otherwise then he is, and indeed to mistake him.

ANSWER.
Answ.
Major. He that is distinguished from God (say you) is not God.

To this Proposition I answer, by clearing the meaning of it thus: He, that
is, that person which is distinguished, that is, really separated from, and
substantially divided from God, is not God. In this sense this Major is
undoubtedly true.

Let no man look upon the Proposition thus limited, as a forced evasion to
elude the Argument; for it hold's forth fully the mind of the Adversary: His
opinion is, the holy Ghost and God do differ as much as a finite creature
differ's from the infinite Creator.

Minor. Your Minor run's thus, The holy Spirit is distinguished from God; for
he is the Spirit of God. To this I answer both by denial and concession.

First by denial, if the term, distinguished, be taken in the assumption, as it
is intended and explicated in the Proposition; for the Spirit of God is not so
distinguished from God, as a creature is distinguished from the Creator.

Secondly, I assent to the Minor, if it be taken in an Orthodoxal sense; for
albeit the blessed Spirit is not so distinguished, as to be separated from
God, yet is he distinguished from God taken personally, as of necessity it
must be taken in this place, as appears by the proofs of the Minor: for the
third person of the Trinity is neither the first nor the second person.

Further, let us take a distinct view of the Syllogism, and I avouch it is
either a false Syllogism, or it prove's nothing.

First, it is a false Syllogism, and consist's of four terms, if the term [God]
be taken in a different sense, as essentially in the Proposition, and
Conclusion, and personally in the Assumption, it is a fault parallel to this
reasoning.

She that is distinguished from man, is not man. A woman is distinguished from
man. Ergo, a woman is not a man.
The word [Man] is a comprehensive word, and in the learned languages, and in
common use, in Scripture, and amongst Philosophers, is all one with animal
rationale, a reasonable creature. Take man thus in the Major, and take man in
another sense in the Minor, as a term to distinguish the sex, and so the
Syllogism consist's of four terms.

Secondly, I answer, if the term [God] be taken, as it ought to be, in all the
axioms in one sense, then the Syllogism conclude's nothing for the Adversary;
for this must be the meaning of it:

He that is distinguished from God, viz. from God the Father, or God the Son,
is not God; viz. not God the Father, or God the Son. The holy Ghost is
distinguished from God, viz. from God the Father, and God the Son. Ergo, He is
not God the Father, or God the Son.
This Syllogism thus explicated, is readily assented to by the unanimous
consent of the Churches.

There is a fallacious homonymie of the word [God,] which he make's frequent
use of to abuse his Reader; which (like corrupt blood) run's through the veins
of all his Arguments. If he knows not the meaning of it, his ignorance is to
be pitied; if he know's it, and yet presume's to seduce the unwarie, his
impiety is to be detested. He well foresaw the usual distinction of God
taken sometimes essentially, and sometimes personally in the word of God, would
cut the sinews and strength of his reasons; and therefore this, as a great
block, must be removed out of the way. This he cal's an ignorant refuge, and
a wretched distinction. Behold, brethren, the modesty of the man, whereby he
discover's the bitterness and arrogancy of his spirit; a weak and wilful man,
who never took degree in Divinity, nor ever was a Professor of that highest
and best learning, magisterially condemns millions of professed eminent
Divines in this and former ages, for flying to an ignorant refuge, and for
denying the truth by the help of a wretched distinction.

But what, I pray, is this ignorant distinction? It is for making a distinction
betwixt the Essence and Person of God.

I entreat the Reader to take notice of the palpable darkness which he
discover's, even in the same place where he accuses his betters of ignorance,
of making a distinction betwixt the Essence and the Person of God: But, my
friend, was it your task to prove this? Do but review the parts of your
Syllogism, and you shall find that they drive on this design, that a person is
distinguished from a Person, that the Spirit of God, which is a Person, and
sent of God, must needs be a person distinct from God that sent him. If you
will say, you speak in the Person of your Adversaries, I deny, that any
learned man ever expressed himself in that manner; if you can name any, let him
bear his own blame. The distinction of God taken essentially and personally,
differ's much from that which is betwixt the essence and person of God, as in
due place I will prove. Yet because my intention aime's at the benefits of the
Readers, I will follow you in these your erring steps, to treat of the
difference betwixt the Essence of God, and the Person of God. There is a real
distinction, and there is a distinction in regard of our rational conception.
The former is denied, the later is asserted touching the nature of God, and the
Person of the holy Ghost; for albeit in created things, nature is one thing,
and a person is another thing: (for a man is not the humane nature: Thomas is
not the nature of Thomas;) yet in God, by reason of the absolute simplicity of
his nature, the divine nature and the Person are the same thing, Thom. 1. Sum.
q. 3. art. 3. yet is there a distinction of reason, as they speak; for there is
one respect of the nature, and another of the person: for the nature, as it is
the divine nature, is communicated to the person, and subsist's in it; but the
person is the very suppositum, in which the nature subsist's, and which in this
particular consideration is incommunicable, as the definition of a person
evinceth, in which regard it is, that neither does the distinction of the
Persons multiply the natures in God, nor does the unity of the nature confound
the Persons.

I return now to the distinction: God is taken either essentially, or
personally, which I shall justify against his clamors and pretensions; for, if
you demand, Has he no reasons to write tartly against it? No sound ones, I am
sure; but such as they are, I will now examine.

omit the mention of Primitive Fathers. it is unheard of (say you) in the
Scriptures, and so it is presumption to affirm any thing of God, which he has
not first affirmed of himself.

First, my just answer is, You are an Opponent now, and your bare saying is of
no validity. Doubtless, if your words may be taken for oracles, you will
carry the cause. What is your Nay to a world of Christians that do affirm it?
It Is as a feather laid in the balance, and weighed against a talent of gold.
Prove what you say, or look for no credit to be given to your words.

Secondly, this distinction is heard of in the Scriptures, by necessary
inferences and sound consequences it is grounded on the word of God, as I shall
in the sequel demonstrate. And I have made good in the positive part by those
many arguments which I have alleged to prove the Deity of the holy Ghost, and
what is justly so inferred out of the word of God, is proved by the word of God.

First, because it is impossible for any man, if he will not delude himself
with empty terms, to distinguish the essence from the person, and not frame
two beeings in his mind, and consequently two Gods.

First, I observe a palpable and gross error in Divinity, couched in this
reason, that a man must believe nothing touching God, but what he is able to
conceive with his mind. God's unconceivable truths by way of comprehension in
the creature, shall be no truths to Master Bidle, when they transcend the
sphere of his capacity: whereas it is the honor of our faith to believe Gods
word, when it discover's truths, not only above our apprehensions, but
contrary to our corrupted reason. Our reason, as now it is, may be a good
servant, but it is an ill master in points of faith. Well, I see the Deity of
the holy Ghost is impugned by this way, not because it is not clearly revealed
in Scriptures, but because he think's it a matter impossible, and so upon the
point he denie's the omnipotency and infinite nature of God.

Secondly, if Mr Bidle cannot conceive hereof, who, besides his natural
ignorance, is further blinded by the Devil, the god of this world, for being a
professed enemy to the blessed Spirit of light, I do not marvel: but that he
should take upon him to measure all the refined and sublimated apprehensions of
the eminent servants of God, by his own dull and erroneous conceptions, is
miserable folly. This has been plentifully don by them, insomuch that, at the
least, the footsteps of the Trinity are seen in many of the creatures, is the
common opinion of Divines, Lombard. lib. 1. did. 3. And those Schoolmen that
write on him, their Master, and hereto accord our learned Doctors, who ever at
large have handled that common place, and most amply, that much to be admired
and honored Mornaeus lib. de veritate Christ. Relig. cap. 5, 6. I will not
instance now in any particular examples; they are not, I grant, convincing
demonstrations, but liable to the exceptions of a captious Adversary; yet the
groundwork being firmly laid in the word of truth, and truly apprehended by
faith, they are subordinate helps to yield some glimpse and sparks of light to
the point in hand; and though I do forbear real instances in this place, yet I
will alledg an imaginary fiction, which has strength to prove a real truth,
and it is such a fiction, which is recited and approved by some of the Learned
of both professions. Suppose a father beget's a son, and communicate's to him
the same soul and body which he has still himself, and both of these should
communicate the same soul and body to a third, here would be three distinct
persons, yet the same essence in them all. But, you will say, this is
impossible; for there must needs be three souls and three bodies in three
persons. But now you deny that which I suppose; I say, if a father could so
communicate the same essence to his son, and retain it still to himself, then
would there be but one nature in them all: really, I grant, this is never don;
because in finite substances the essence must needs be finite. But if we
speak of God, because he is immaterial, infinite, and not capable of essential
division, this is truly don: it is a received Maxim in Logic, Ficta similitudo
probat fidemque facit, fained similitudes prove.

If the person be distinct from the Deity, it is either something that make's
the difference, or nothing; if something, it must be either finite or infinite,
both of them are false.

First, I propose the many essential properties of God, and I ask, Are they
something, or are they nothing? are they finite or infinite? for I observe that
you speak reservedly in this place, and tell us what we hold, not what your
self maintain's; and in your eleventh Reason I might justly suspect, that in
your opinion the understanding of God reside's in the divine essence, as in the
subject of it; but however that is, if you resolve this objection, it is not
unlike but you have answered your self. But I will follow you more closely, the
God whom you, with the deluded Jews and Turks, do acknowledge to be a Person,
has the divine Essence, and he has the divine Essence of and from himself;
and this make's a distinction betwixt the thing, and the manner of the thing:
now, the manner of having this nature from himself, and no other, is either
something or nothing; if something, it is either finite or infinite. I suppose,
you will be put to your shifts, if you will be true to your own principles,
to dissolve this doubt; you must plough with our heifer, I mean, make use of
the knowledge of our learned Writers to unfold this riddle, or else it will
remain unanswered.

Secondly, if you should, as an unskilful Pilot, stear the ship to split it on
rocks, to the loss of your own life, and of the passengers; if you should lay a
snare to catch the feet, not only of the Adversaries, but your own too; this
will afford no comfort to the Reader. I add therefore a punctual Answer:

If that wherein they are distinguished (says he) be aliquid, it is either
finite or infinite. By this dilemma he think's to reduce us to absurdities:
for the clearing up of this foggy mist cast before our eyes, or infinite, is
all one for substance with this distinction, though expressed in other terms.
Every thing is either the Creator or the creature; certain it is, the power of
God is in it self infinite, and yet it does not, nor can it produce an infinite
creature, for that were to place a creature in the throne of God, yea, to make
him a created God, which implies a plain contradiction. Now God's Omnipotency
is not conversant about things impossible, and repugnant to the divine nature.
This brief declaration premised, I will now present two Answers to this
Objection and either of them has eminent Authors to avouch it. Christian
Readers, consider well, and rest in that which you apprehend to be best.

If it be something, you say, it is either finite or infinite. My first Answer
hereto is by a direct negation of the disjunction, which does not consist of
the full enumeration of the parts: this distribution belong's to absolute
positive things; every absolute and positive thing is finite or infinite, but
that which does distinguish the Essence from the Person is no such thing: the
Person considered in respect of the Essence is one thing, but it is
distinguished in regard of the manner of having this divine Essence; thus the
diverse degrees of white, in color of whiteness, of light in the air, of heat in
the water, are not whiteness, light, and heat it self, but they are affections
of Ens; they are modi albedinis, lucis, and caloris: these different degrees
are aliquid, yet they are not the qualities themselves; so is there aliquid in
Deo, something in God (so I am forced to speak) which is not a diverse thing from
God, nor the very Essence of God, but modus Essentiae, which is called (...);
so that the Person of the holy Ghost differ's from the divine Essence, as the
manner of the thing does from the thing it self, and the Persons differ amongst
themselves, as modi a modis.

genere Entis, in respect of the Essence which they do include, and so they are
not multiplied, but one Ens. Hence is it, that the Father is not aliud a Filio,
-- nor is Deus triplex. Secondly, they may be considered in regard of the
proper respects wherein they are opposed, and so they are infinite in respect
of relation only, and in this regard it is not inconvenient to say, that an
infinite thing may be multiplied: there are not three things, but three
distinct Persons, Deus est trinus, and Pater est alius a Filio. -- Hence is it
also, that Schoolmen do approve, that adjectiva nomina in the concrete,
because they do not signify a thing per modum substantiae, as the Substantives
do, but only the number of Persons, may be attributed in the plural number to
them: Thus, there are tres aeterne Personae, tres increatae, tres omnipotentes,
creantes, etc. If the first answer be too jejune, and will not serve the turn,
I hope the second will give satisfaction to the Reader.

To talk of God (say you) taken only essentially, is ridiculous.

First, because there is no example thereof in Scripture. Secondly, because the
name of God signifies him that rules over others; but none but a Person can
rule over others, all actions being proper to Persons.

[God] is taken essentially, when it is not contracted either by the express
name of the Father, the Son, or the holy Ghost, or when it is not limited by
some circumstances in the text, which do infallibly lead us thereunto. And thus
most frequently in the Scriptures it is taken; but then it is taken personally,
or secundum quid, in regard of a certain propriety, which point's out a
certain Person, which is sometimes God the Father, sometimes God the Son, and
sometimes God the holy Ghost; or else we are guided to such a limitation, by
perpending the text or places of Scriptures parallel to it. For instance, John
1. 1. the Word was God, and that Word was with God. In the first place it must
be taken essentially, in the second personally with God, viz. his Father; thus
Christ is said to be the Son of God, the image of God, viz. the Father.

second I might take exception to your rule in many particulars, which is not
true in any created acting things, which are not persons, no nor in the soul of
man, which has many immanent actions, both in and when separated from the
body, which are not actions of a person. homeitas. It is a horse that carrie's
a man, not equina natura, or equeitas: this is only suppositum. But then I
must tell you, to abate your mirth, that you give (through your ignorance) a
false interpretation of the meaning of Orthodoxal Divines touching that
distinction, as though they thought that Gods nature generally, absolutely, and
essentially considered as abstracted from God the Father, God the Son, and God
the holy Ghost did rule the world: this is but a figment of your own brain. But
when they say, God works this or that, God is taken essentially: they mean
nothing else but God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost; and the
government of the world, the particular instanced in, being a work ad extra,
relating to the creatures, belong's to all the Persons jointly; this is a
received Maxim of all Divines. Thus much of this Argument.

ARGUMENT 2.
2 Argum. of M. Bidle.
If he that gave the holy Spirit to the Israelites to instruct them, be
Jehovah alone, then the holy Spirit is not Jehovah or God: But he that gave
the holy Spirit to the Israelites to instruct them, is Jehovah alone. Ergo. The
sequel of the Major is plain: for, if he that gave the holy Spirit be
Jehovah alone, and yet the holy Spirit that was given be Jehovah too, the same
will be Jehovah alone, and not Jehovah alone, which implies a contradiction.
The Minor is evidenced by Nehem. 9. 6, 20.
ANSWER.
Nehem. 9. 6. who is said to be Jehovah alone; yet will it not by the rules of
Divinity be a necessary sequel, that the holy Ghost is not Jehovah or God,
nor is there so much as a shadow of contradiction, as shall be evidenced; and
they do know this well that are versed in these points. When you say Jehovah,
or the first person is Jehovah alone, there is in the words a fallacy of
composition and division, as the Logicians speak. And that I might fortify
your Argument, and make it advantageous to you, if the exclusive particle had
been added to the antecedent, thus, only the Father is Jehovah; yet were not
your cause confirmed thereby: for, it is a rule in the Logician Kecker. lib. 2.
cap. 4. exclusiva particula subjecti non excludit concomitantia: and he
instanceth in this very example, Only the Father is true God, whereby (says
he) the Son of God and the holy Ghost are not excluded from being God, but
creatures only. And profound Zanchius add's another example, Only Christ is
the Savior of the world, taken inclusively, all creatures are excluded, but
neither the Father nor the holy Ghost are to be excluded from the great work
of our redemption. Nor do we want examples in the Scriptures to this purpose;
None know the Son but the Father: nor does any know the Son but the Father,
Matthew.. 11. 27. that is, only the Father know's the Son, and only the Son
know's the Father. And again, No man know's the things of God, but only the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. that is, only the Spirit know's the things of God; as in the
former place the holy Ghost is not to be excluded, so in the later, both
Father and Son of God are to be included: Thus our blessed Savior is described
to have eyes like a flame of fire, and to have many crowns on his head, and a
name which none knew but he himself, Revel. 19. 12. let the mystery be what
it will be which is intended by this name, yet certainly the Father and Spirit
are not to be denied the knowledge of it: and many the like 1 Timothy 6. 16. The
King of kings only has immortality: none but the Father know's the day and
hour of judgment.
expressions we may read in Scripture, by which exclusive particle only such
things are to be excluded, which are not one and the same in Tertul. says of
the Son of God, he is individ^^^ and inseparatus a Patre, in Patre ^^putand^^,
et si non nominatus. advers. Pra^eum. So of the holy Ghost.
essence with the subject to which the exclusive particle is annexed. As if one
should say, I believe in God the Father, who alone made the world; we must not
conceive, that he exclude's God the Son, and God the holy Ghost from that
great work of creation: but only the creatures, which had no hand at all
therein. This which I have spoken seems to carry some probability with it,
and that one may not without cause suspend his judgment from concurrence with
those Divines, which do commonly judge this proposition thus enunciated to be
false, only the Father is Jehovah.

Alone, both in the cited text, and in your argument, is referred to the later
part of the axiom: Thus, the first person of the Trinity is Jehovah alone;
this, I grant, is a very true Proposition, if it be rightly understood, and
yet make's nothing at all for your advantage; because the particle [alone] does
not exclude any thing in respect of the subject, but only of the predicate:
and therefore is clearly true both of the Father, Son, and of the holy Ghost.
Thus, the Father is alone Jehovah, the Son is alone Jehovah, and God the holy
Ghost is alone Jehovah: and the reason is plain, and unanswerable; because,
albeit the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord, and the holy Ghost is Lord; yet are
there not three Lords, but one Lord, says the Athanasian Creed. I am the Lord,
and there is none else, there is no God besides me: and it shall be known
from East to West, that there is none besides me, and there is none else, Isa.
45. 5, 6.

ARGUMENT 3.
3 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that speaks not of himself, is not God. The holy Spirit speaks not of
himself: Ergo.
The Minor is clear from John 16. 13. The Major is proved thus: God speaks of
himself; therefore if there be any one that speaks not of himself, he is
not God. The antecedent is of it self apparent; for God is the primarie Author
of whatsoever he does, but should he not speak of himself, he must speak
from another, and so not be the primarie, but secondarie author of his speech,
which is absurd, if at least that may be called absurd, which is impossible.
The consequence is undeniable. For further confirmation of this Argument, it is
to be observed, that to speak or to do any thing not if himself, according to
the ordinary phrase of Scripture, is to speak or do by the showing, teaching,
commanding, authorizing, or enabling of another, and consequently incompatible
with the supreme and self-sufficient Majesty of God. Vid. John 5. 19, 20, 30.
chapter 7. v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 28. chapter 8. v. 28. 42. chapter 11. v. 50, 51. chapter 12. v.
49. 50. chapter 14. v. 10, 24. chapter 15. 4. chapter 18. 34. Luke 12. 56, 57. chapter 21. 30.
2 Cor. 3. 5.

ANSWER.
He that speaks not of himself (say you) is not God I deny this your Major
Proposition; for though in a sense the Spirit of God speaks not of himself,
yet is he truly and properly God: nor will I content my self with a bare
denial of it, which is enough for an Answerer, but I will give you the reason
hereof; nor need I go far for a proof, this Verse in John alleged by you,
might have taught you this truth; for, the person here is called by an
excellency the Spirit of truth: and which lead's the Apostles and the Faithful
into all truth, the heavenly truth of eternal salvation. This leading into
truth, is all one for substance with that translation of others, shall teach
you all truth. And that which is in the Hebrew, Psalm. 86. 11. lead me thy way
-- (...). The Septuag. render it with the same word which the Evangelist uses,
(...) -- Now this is properly a work of the great God, and that which was long
before foretold, They shall be all taught of God, John 5. 45. Can any thing
be more plainly spoken? It is not denied but one man is said to be a teacher
of others, Matthew. 28. Go and teach all Nations: And this is don two ways
principally, if not only, vel proponendo auxilia -- Aq. 1. 117. q. either by
proposing to scholars general helps, whereby the scholar is led, as it were by
the hand, to the knowledge of unknown truths; as by general rules, sensible
examples, lively similitudes, and such like, to help the understanding: or
else, by strengthening the understanding of the learner, by showing him how he
should deduce conclusions from principles; but when a creature has don all
that he can to the utmost of his power, he cannot infuse light into his
scholars, and elevate their minds to apprehend divine truth. Let the Sun shine
never so bright, yet a blind man cannot see it: and we are taught to call no
man Master on earth, Mat. 23. So God alone is the fountain of illumination, he
sits in his chair in heaven, who teaches our hearts on earth.

snatch the Word of the hearts of hearers in ten thousand places at once, for
this is fallacia non parium. The holy Ghost which dwell's in all the godly, and
leads them into all truth, is one individual Spirit; but it neither is, nor
possibly can be, one individual Devil, which acts his wickedness in all the
wicked ones at once; for there are millions of them dispersed every where in
this lower Region of the world, full of malice, and policy to do mischief, and
every one of them is a Satan: We read of the Devil and his Angels, but you do
not read of the holy Ghost and his Angels, though (I grant) they are his
Angels, as created and commanded by him, but not so as the Devil's Angels are
his, as a superior creature having rule over fellow creatures.

I will once again propound your Major.

He that speaks not of himself is not God. This Proposition is not
universally true: I grant, in this sense it is true; he that speaks not of
himself, but what he learn's by revelation, and in time, and what he did not
know from all eternity, he is not God; but such a kind of hearing from
another has no place in the holy Ghost, and therefore the Proposition, if it
be taken generally, is denied; and the reason of my denying it is this,
because it is a property of the Father, as to be of and from himself, the
Fountain, and the Principle, as Divines do usually speak, though not properly
the cause of the Son of God and of the holy Ghost; for then they should be
effects, which sound's harshly: the Father is (I say) of himself, and
communicate's the Essence and the essential properties to the Son, and both
Father and Son to the holy Ghost, who is eternal, infinite, omnipotent, and
omnipresent. Our learned Junius has observed a threefold consideration of a
Person; one, common in essence, as the Person is God; the second consideration,
as it is singular and absolute in Person, as (says he) it subsist's in the
unity of the Essence; the third is relative in the distinction and order of
one Person to another, contra Bellar. Controv. 2. l. 1. Praefat. let the
Learned judge of these, the last is to my purpose. Now, as the Persons do differ
in the manner and order of subsisting, so likewise, though the outward action
be the same, and common to all the Persons, yet in the manner of working we
must conceive a difference. Give me leave to clear this received truth by
solving the strongest Objections which are framed against it.

inchoative, it belonged to all the Persons; terminative, it was personal and
proper to the Son of God.

This is my welbeloved Son, so it is said, not because all the Persons did not
frame that voice, but because the words were uttered in his Person; the Father
alone is said to speak those words, because they related to the Son of God, the
thing signified did alone appertain to the Person of the Father: nor is this
rule crossed by the apparition of a Dove.

Mark then, albeit the work be the same, and it is from all the Persons, yet is
there a difference in the manner of working: the Father, and the Son, as they
are the Fountain of the Person of the holy Ghost, so likewise are they the
Fountain of the operations of the holy Ghost. When we read this expression
then, the holy Ghost speak's not of himself, we must not conceive that phrase
to import any diminution of the Majesty of the holy Ghost, nor does it implie
that he is not God, that he is inferior to the first Person of the Trinity:
hereby our Savior would teach the Disciples, for they are his own words in
John, that they should not think the holy Ghost to be greater then the Son of
God, albeit his works in the hearts of his Apostles should be greater then
those, which he, whiles he visibly conversed with them, had wrought in them.
Nor should they think that the holy Ghost should bring any new Doctrine, but
the truths taught by him, are the truths of God the Father; there is a plenary
consent of the Doctrine of the holy Ghost, and of God the Father; that which
the holy Ghost speak's from the Father, he had not in time, but by eternal
procession from the Father and the Son of God. There is no diversity at all in
the work, in it self considered, but the order of externally working answer's
to the order of the divine Persons: thus is the holy Ghost said not to work
from himself, but from the Father and Son. By this which has been spoken, his
reasons are already answered; yet a word of them.

Advers.
God speak's of himself. The holy Ghost speak's not of himself: Ergo he is not
God.
and thus the holy Ghost, as he is God, speak's of and from himself: but if
you take it thus, by a reduplication of the Subject, by a specificative
limitation, the holy Ghost, as the holy Ghost, is not of himself, in regard of
his Person, but from the Father and the Son; and in this regard speak's not
from himself, yet is a holy, true God, blessed for ever.

If God (say you) speaks not from himself, he should not be the primary
Author of his speech, but the secondary; and this is absurd, impossible.



It is needless for me to spend time in examining the many particular places
alleged by him; for some of them do directly speak of the creatures, and those
are impertinent; for what call you this? The holy Ghost that speak's not from
himself is not God; why? Because the same phrase is used of a creature: or else
they speak of Christ, as God, and then they are already answered. I add, that
some of those expressions are so far from proving Christ not to be God, that
they do strongly evince the Deity of the Son of God. I conclude in S. Austin's
words, Whatsoever the Father is, as he is God, as he is a substance, as he
is eternity, the same is the Son of God, and the holy Ghost. If you will say,
What riddles are these? I answer, How little is it that we conceive of God? We
can have better apprehensions of God, then we can make expressions of him, and
he is transcendently above both our apprehensions and expressions of him.

ARGUMENT 4.
4 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that hears from another what he shall speak, is not God. The holy
Spirit does so: Ergo.
The Minor is plain from the forecited place John 16. 13. The Major is proved
thus: He that is taught, is not God; He that hears from another what he
shall speak, is taught: Ergo. The Major is clear by Esaias 40. 13, 14. compared
with Romans 11. 34. 1 Cor. 2. 16. The Minor is evidenced by John 8. where our
Savior having said in the 26. verse, Whatsoever I have heard from him (the
Father) these things I speak. In the 28. verse he expresses the same sense
thus: According as the Father has taught me, these things I speak. Neither
let any man go about to elude so pregnant an Argument, by saying that this is
spoken of the holy Spirit improperly; for let him turn himself every way, and
scrue the words as he please, yet shall he never be able to make it out to a
wise and considering man, how it can possibly be said, that any one hears
from another what he will speak, who is the prime Author of his speech, and
into whom it is not at a certain time insinuated by another. For this
expression plainly intimates, that whatsoever the holy Spirit speaks to the
Disciples, is first discovered and committed to him by Christ, whose Ambassador
he is, it being proper to an Ambassador to be the Interpreter not of his own,
but of another will. But it is contradictious to imagine, that the most high
God can have any thing discovered and committed to him by another.

ANSWER.
[hearing,] which is the basis and ground of your Argument; and then will
particularly apply it.

Superior hears the Inferior: thus, God is frequently said to hear the
prayers of his servants made in faith.

Inferior hear's the Superior, and that is don many ways; not only by his
bodily ears, but by understanding what formerly was not known: or, when the
judgment is more perfectly informed in a point, before not fully known; or
believing what, till that voice came, was not believed, or harkening to the
counsel, or obeying the will and pleasure of God.

an equal hear's an equal, as common experience shows.

If we speak of the first acceptance, God's hearing us, and answering of us
according to the tenor of our prayers, then I appeal to your judgment, and you
must needs give sentence against your self, that in this sense your Major is
false.

If you speak of hearing in the second sense, I grant your Major is true;
because, so to hear argues ignorance in whole or in part, forgetfulness,
dullness, slackness, or plain neglect, if not contempt of duty, which we do
all confess, are inconsistent with the infinite knowledge and transcendent
excellency of the great God.

If you take it in the third sense, an equal hearing an equal, then I deny
your Major; for God the holy Ghost, which hears from God the Son, is equal to
him.

Minor (say you) is proved John 16. 13.

John 8. 26. and 15. 16. hear any thing corporally; and thus is hearing
properly taken, and for such a hearing, I suppose, you will not contend.
hearing, viz. by revelation, by which hearing he should learn that which
formerly he knew not. It Is indeed spoken, that he was, that he is, and that
he shall be; if it had been only said, he was, one might have conceived
that now he is not: If it had been said, he is only, it might have been
thought, that he had not been always. If it had been only said, he shall
be, it might be thought he is not now. Time past, present, and to come are
asscribed to God; yet not as to men, to denote a beginning, continuance, and
end of time: for, actions are said to have been, which now are not, and that
they shall be, which now have no existence at all: but when they are spoken of
God, there is no limitation of time at all. God so has been, that he is, and
shall be: he shall be, yet so, that he is and has been, and this is to be
applied likewise to the hearing of the holy Ghost. He has always heard, and
he does hear. And in the future time it is said in this place, he shall hear.
This hearing, says S. Austin, Tractat. 99. in Joan. is everlasting. He has
known, he does know, and he will know. His hearing is his knowing, and his
knowing is his being: he has heard from him, he does hear from him, and he
will hear from him, from whom he proceed's, so Austin. And he cal's the
opening of this text, John 16. arduam, nimis arduam quaestionem. This be
spoken to prevent that scruple, in that it is said, He shall hear. Some of ours
clear the words thus, Whatsoever the holy Ghost shall hear, that shall he
speak, which import's thus much, those things which the Father will have
revealed to us, those things, and no other will he reveal to us; the truths
which the Spirit shall reveal to us, are truths received from God the Father;
the Spirit feign's nothing, he alter's nothing, he pervert's nothing. The
paraphrase of the text in the former Argument will dispell the foggie mists of
this reason.

The Major (says he) is proved thus: He that is taught, is not God; He that
hears from another what he shall speak, is taught. The Major is proved Esa.
40. 13, 14.

Esaias; for it directly overthrows your assertion, and expressly teaches us,
that none have taught the Spirit of God. But I answer

Secondly, he that is taught properly, that is, learn's what he formerly knew
not, is not God, I readily assent; for God's knowledge is infinite, and cannot
be increased.

But how can you prove, that the holy Ghost is taught? by comparing (say you)
John 8. 26, 28 together. Christ is taught by hearing. This is but a very weak
bul-rush, it has no strength at all in it. This must needs be your
consequence, in some places of Scripture, and not only so, but even in common
reason, he that hears is taught: therefore must it needs be so taken John
16. 13. Is not this a wild inference? That Scripture John 8. 26, 28. speaks
not of the holy Ghost, but expressly of Christ: and then it must be spoken of
him either as God, or Mediator, man. If in the former way, then the text
furthereth not, but marreth your Argument; if in the later, then it is unfitly
alleged: for, albeit a created substance, by hearing another, may properly be
taught, yet far be it from us to conceive, that the Creator, the supreme God,
can learn what he knew not.

But (says he) let a man turn himself every way, yet shall he never be able
to make it out to a wise man, that any can hear from another what he will
speak, who is the prime Author of his speech.

Bidle is a wise man in his own eyes, and all Christian men in the world
besides himself, and a handful of seduced ones, are no better then fools; but
if he had well perpended that text quoted by himself out of Esa. 40. 13, 14,
15. he would not have concluded the great God, the three sacred Persons, which
are one Almighty God, within the shallow compass of his brains. I perceive he
is always wrapped in the briars, and cannot possibly extricate himself,
because he apprehends not the meaning of that common distinction of God the
holy Ghost, as God: for, in this respect he has infinite knowledge of himself,
and of God the holy Ghost, as he is the holy Ghost; for so does he receive
knowledge and wisdom from God the Father, and God the Son; yet, I pray, let this
be remembered, so as he was never ignorant: and life, yet so as he never
wanted life: and power, yet so as he was never weak; because these persons,
communicating essence to the holy Ghost, did communicate life, power and
knowledge: So that the holy Ghost has knowledge, not by learning, but by
proceeding; and all the creatures which hear, and are taught, they are taught
by the holy Ghost. And whereas he illustrate's, as he think's, his Assertion,
by a comparison taken from Ambassadors, which speak according to the will of
the Prince that send's them: To this I say there are (...), vast differences
betwixt the holy Ghost and an Ambassador. An Ambassador, as such, at least in
this imploiment, is a servant, and a subject to his Prince, inferior to him,
commanded by him, personally separated from him, capable of new instructions to
be imparted in his name to forain Princes in his absence; but none of these do
belong, or can possibly be applied to the holy Ghost, as he is sent from the
Father and Son.

ARGUMENT 5.
5 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that receives of another, is not God. The holy Spirit does so. Ergo.
The Minor is witnessed by the aforesaid place John 16. 14. The Major is proved
thus: God is he that gives all things to all; wherefore if there be any one
that receives of another, he cannot be God. The antecedent is plain by Acts
17. 25. Romans 11. 35, 36. The consequence is undeniable: for, if God should give
all things to all, and yet receive of another, He would both give all things,
and not give all things, which implies a contradiction. The Major of the
Prosyllogism is otherwise urged thus: He that is dependent, is not God; He
that receives of another, is dependent: Ergo. The Major is unquestionable:
for to say that one is dependent, and yet God, is in effect to say, he is God,
and not God, which implies a contradiction. The Minor also is evident; for to
receive of another, is the very notion of dependencie.

ANSWER.
Major, if it be general, as it ought to be, thus; Whosoever receives of
another is not God, is false. For, to say no more yet, the Lord receives the
prayers of his praying servants, he receives the fruits of his vineyard, Mar.
12. 2. he receive's not the persons of men, but sincere Christians, Gal. 2. 6.
he receives the acknowledgment of his honor, glory, and power, Rev. 4. 11.
And will you from hence infer that he is not God?

If the Major be particular in sense thus; Something that receive's from
another is not God. I grant the Proposition is true in matter, but
asyllogistical, and so is unwarrantable in the second explicate, or first
figure, and justly to be denied, as not sorting to your purpose.

to hear from another, to speak what he heare's, and to receive of another,
are multiplied words, not Arguments; they are like three dreams varied in
forms, yet for substance they are but one. Yet I will say something in
particular.

First, by eternal procession to apply it to the holy Ghost; and by eternal
generation, as does the Son of God, he receive's the Essence, and, as they are
called, the essential properties from his Father, who does beget him, as from
an intrinsecal principle, to him who is generated. Thus is it in natural
generation, children receive from their parents their being and natural
qualities: i'ts evident, he that receive's his soul by infusion, receives at
the same instant the essential faculties of the soul: and so we may say the
holy Ghost, as the holy Ghost, whatsoever he is, or whatsoever he has, he
has received from the Father and the Son of God, not as from an external but
intrinsecal principle; and it may be said of the holy Ghost, as it is of the
Son of God, that he has life in himself given by the Father, Joh. 5. 26. How
did the Father and Son give life? by active spiration. How did the holy Ghost
receive it? by eternal procession. And, what is it to have life in himself, but
to have it essentially, and to be life it self? The holy Ghost, as he is God
simply considered, as he is the same Essence with the Father who is God, is (I
grant) of himself, and has from his Essence whatsoever he has; but, as this
is communicated by eternal procession, so he has it from the first and second
Person of the Trinity. We may see a resemblance of this Mystery in the
creatures: thus Peter, as he is a man, it is from his humane nature, and so
whatsoever in this consideration he has is natural to him; but Peter, as he
is a Son, receive's all from his Parents by natural generation: and thus,
albeit the holy Ghost receive's from another, viz. from God the Father, and God
the Son, yet is he properly and truly God.

Secondly, a thing may be said, and it is usual, to receive in time, and from
an external principle, as men do their being, habits of knowledge, etc. to be
in potentia to receive, and therefore is imperfect, and in some wants: Such a
receiving as this is (I grant) belonge's not to God.

Minor; the holy Ghost thus receive's, John 16. 14. Minor, you must produce some
other Scripture; for this holy text will not serve your turn: it does not say,
as you pretend, the Spirit receives of me, which was to be proved; and yet,
if it had so expressly said, it would not have supported your impious cause, as
I now have showed; the text only says, he receives of mine, viz. what is
testified of me by the Prophets; and that is don, when, by the powerful
preaching of the Gospel, he give's a clear testimony that Christ is the Son
of God, and Savior of the world, and chiefly he receive's of mine, to speak
after the manner of men, when he bring's it home to the hearts of the elect by
effectually calling and converting them, by raising up their minds to know the
divine truths, and their hearts by faith to embrace them, by rectifying their
disordered affections, by enabling them to confess, publish, and magnify the
Lord Jesus with their tongues, and to conform their lives to those heavenly
directions which Christ has left us on record. Thus does the holy Ghost
glorify Christ, in that whatsoever the holy Ghost work's in our hearts,
whether it be touching doctrine, remission of sins, or sanctification, he
receive's all from Christ, and so dispenses them to us. The Spirit washes us
from our sins, but by the blood of Christ: he he mortifie's sins in us, but
it is by virtue of the death of Christ: he raises us up to newness of life,
but by virtue of the resurrection of Christ, etc. In this consist's the glory
of Christ. And were you not blinded by Satan, you would be so far from
perverting this Scripture to the dishonor of the holy Ghost, that you would
rather infer from thence both the Trinity of the Persons, and the Deity of
the holy Ghost. All that the Father has (says Christ) are truly mine, and
what are mine, the holy Ghost receive's, not as a scholar, from the directions
of his Master, as though thereby he learned any new thing formerly unknown:
But, as the Son of God does not speak from himself, but what he hear's from
the Father, no more does the holy Ghost, but what he receive's from the Son;
all three Persons working the same work in our redemption.

He that receive's is not God, (say you) but God give's all things to all; to
give all things, and not to give all things, is a contradiction.



He that give's all things to the creatures, is God. The holy Ghost give's all
things to the creatures, as I have proved in my Arguments. Ergo He is God.
Else (say you) he should give all things, and not all things, which is a
contradiction. I see you take a great deal of pleasure very frequently almost
in every Argument to reduce us to absurdities by contradictions (by such manner
of arguing, to discover your folly this once for all) you may happily delude the
simple and unwarie Readers. But I do wonder, if you do not write thus against
the light of your own conscience; for every one, who is any whit versed in
Logic, know's this to be a received rule of contradiction, that it must be
meant of the same thing, at the same time, and in the same respect; but now, to
receive in one regard, viz. from all eternity, in reference to the Persons of
the Trinity, and to give all, viz. in time to the creatures, is no
contradiction: for both parts are true; but it is impossible it should be so,
where there is a real contradiction. Now, because the ignorant Reader is only
in danger to be caught by this fallacy, I will propound a like example to his,
which may serve as an antidote against it.

He that is taught, is not a Schoolmaster:

M. Bidle is a Schoolmaster:

Ergo He is not taught. This is true, or else M. Bidle must be a
Schoolmaster, and a Schoolmaster, which implies a contradiction. Will not
every one be ready to say, he may be both a Schoolmaster, and not a
Schoolmaster in several references; a Schoolmaster, in regard of his
scholars, and not a Schoolmaster, but a husband to his wife, a father to his
children, and a master to his servant. I should have been ashamed to put down
such trifies in writing, had not the bold fallacies of the Adversary forced
me thereunto.

He that is dependent, is not God; He that receive's from another is
dependent: for, this is the very notion of dependencie.

Minor, if it be taken without exception; for dependencie, if we speak not of
that which is logical and notional, which is mutual, but of that which is real
and theological, as we must: for this note's inferioritie, subordination, and
reliance upon another in fieri, as a house and a ship to be built, does on the
Carpenter; and in facto esse, when it is built, on the materials artificially
compacted together: but to speak fully and properly, all things do immediately
and totally depend on God, they do depend on the holy Ghost, who is God. But
this can have no place in your Argument, where there is unity of nature, and
equality of Persons: Thus rather and more truly you might have argued; He, on
whom all things depend, is God. The holy Ghost is a person, on whom all things
depend, by him of nothing they were created, and but for him, as God, they
would be annihilated, and reduced to nothing. And whereas you say, it is the
very notion of dependencie, this we must take it, if we will believe it on
your own words; for other proofs we are not to expect from you. In this, I
say, you are mistaken; the notion of receiving carrie's us to the consideration
of giving: to give and receive are relatives, which does not formally implie
dependencie, but relation. Albeit, I confess, to receive in time, as the
creatures do, which have their being from God, denote's prodependencie on the
Creator. But what does this make against the Deity of the holy Ghost? Nothing
at all.

ARGUMENT 6.
6 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that is sent by another, is not God. The holy Spirit is sent by another.
Ergo.
The Minor is plain from the fore-quoted place John 16. 7. The Major is evinced
thus: He that ministers is not God; he that is sent ministers: Ergo. The
Major is undubitable, it being dissonant to the supreme Majesty of God to
minister and serve another; for that were to be God, and not God; to exercise
sovereign dominion over all, and not to exercise it. The Minor is confirmed by
Heb. 1. ult. where the divine Author shows, that the Angels are all
ministering spirits, in that they are sent forth; as he before intimated Christ
to be Lord, because he sits at the right hand of God. Thus David, Psalm. 2.
declares the Soveraigntie of God, in saying, that he sits in heaven. The
Minor is further proved thus: He that receives a command for the performance
of something, does minister; He that is sent forth, receives a command for the
performance of something: Ergo. The Major is evident to common sense, since it
suiteth with none but ministers and inferiors to receive commands. The Minor is
manifest by John 12. 49. The Father that has sent me, he gave me a command
what I shall speak. Neither let any man here reply, that this very thing is
spoken also of Christ, unless, having first proved that Christ is supreme God,
he will grant that whatsoever is spoken of him, is spoken of him as God: or
can make good that to be sent at least may agree to him as God. The contrary
whereof I suppose I have clearly proved in this Argument, showing that it is
unsuitable to the divine Majesty.

ANSWER.
sending, on which word the strength of the Argument depend's, that so the
point may be more fully cleared, and the Adversaries reason more distinctly
answered.

A Person is said to be sent either properly or improperly.

To be sent properly, according to our vulgar acception of the word, requires
these particulars.

First, that the Person sent be really divided from, and actually separated
from him that send's him, this is evidently seen by daily experience.

Secondly, it is required of him that is sent, that he move's from an ubi, or
from place to place, which is a necessary condition, to expedite the
emploiment about which he is sent.

Thirdly, it denote's, that the Person sent is inferior to the sender, either
in nature or condition, or both: as, when the Lord send's Men or Angels about
his service; in this sense Princes send their subjects, Parents their children,
Masters their servants. -- And thus bodies representative, whether civil or
ecclesiastical, may send some of their members about public affairs of Church
or State, because the whole is greater then the parts thereof. And when an
equal or superior act's for an equal or inferior in points of wrong and
justice, charity and mercy, this is not don (unless upon a compact and mutual
consent) by sending them, but by a voluntary condescension, or by the
prevalent persuasion of equals or inferiors.

But now, when we speak of divine sending, in reference to the Persons of the
blessed Trinity, we must abandon all base and low conceptions, and raise up
our spirits by the light of other Scriptures, to an apprehension of the
excellency of the nature thereof.

The mission of a divine Person may be considered, Divine Mission considered


First, negatively what it is not; and then positively what it is.

First, it denote's not a division or separation of the divine Persons; for
this would necessarily imply the multiplication of the 1. Negatively.
Deity, and destroy the unity of the divine nature, which is impossible.

Secondly, it denote's not a moving from place to place, a change of place; for
the third Person, in regard of the essence, is everywhere, and there is no
place any where whither he can com, where he was not always present.

Thirdly, nor does it denote any inferioritie or inequality of the divine
Person, but in respect of the divine Person sending, they are one in nature,
and coequal, and coeternal, touching their Persons.

But positively, this mission argue's a distinction of the divine Persons. 2.
Positively.
The Father, in Scripture phrase, is no where said to be sent, but he send's
the Son and the holy Ghost; because he is first in order. The first Person of
the Trinity, he is of himself, and from himself, and the fountain of
communicating the Godhead to his Son, and both the Father and the Son to the
holy Ghost. And, as it denote's a distinction of Persons, so is it properly an
external personal operation; for although mission, quantum ad principale
significatum, is external; yet, ratione connotati, it is only in time.
Halensis. And so the whole is called temporal; as, when a necessary thing is
joined with a contingent, the whole is judged contingent; so says our
Countriman plainly thus: This mission is nothing else, but a new manner of the
manifestation of the presence of the holy Ghost by some effect. And this is don
either visibly, by some visible Symbol and external representation of his
presence; as, by descending from heaven on Christ in the likeness of a Dove, or
in fiery cloven tongues on the Apostles: And this was extraordinary; or
ordinarily God the Father or Son is said to send him into the hearts of his
children, by working saving graces in them, when he manifest's his presence by
spiritual operations. It Is not in the power of man thus to send him; for all
that he can do is only external, disposing by administration of Sacraments,
obtaining by Prayer, instructing and moving outwardly by preaching. -- The holy
Ghost is sent in the use of these Ordinances, yet not by them, but by reason of
internal grace, which God alone creates in the soul.

These conclusions being laid down, it will be an easy task to untie the
supposed knots of this Argument.

He that is sent by another, is not God, the holy Ghost is sent. The Major is
proved, because he that is sent ministers, Hebr. 1. ult.

Major Proposition in sense be general, as it ought to be, thus, whosoever is
sent, is less then he is that sent him, is false: he indeed that is sent by
the command properly of another, is inferior to the person that send's him; but
the mission of the holy Ghost, is (as I said) but a manifestation of his
presence by some effect, which was actually in the very same place invisibly,
and with the same persons to whom he is sent; it argue's the distinction of
the persons, not the multiplication of the natures, or the diminution of the
divine power, state, authority, or honor.

Major, because he ministers that is sent. Major to be true, if it be
properly taken, if ministering be taken for serving; for the holy Ghost is not
(...), the servant of the first or second Person. This to assert, is (I
confess) an odious error, and though the phrase is strange and harsh, and not
to be allowed, no not to say, that God is a Minister, a ministrando gratiam,
not intending thereby to imply that he is under God, but above the faithful;
yet two of our eminent Divines do so speak. And Ruffin in expos. Symboli says,
Deus justis ministrat ad perpetuitatem gloriae, and peccatoribus ad
prolixitatem poenae and confusionis. (...) exulet. I grant your Major.

The Minor I deny; for whosoever is sent, ministered not. Be it granted, that
whosoever ministers, may be said to be sent, yet it hold's not reciprocally,
whosoever is sent ministers; that proof out of Hebr. 1. is no proof at all. It
is your ordinary fault to apply what is directly spoken of the creatures to
the great God. The Angels indeed, which are ministering spirits, are sent abroad
for the benefit of the heirs of salvation; but you cannot solidly from thence
infer, that the holy Ghost, which is sent, is in the rank of ministering
spirits. It is true of the creature, but you can never from thence conclude it
to be true of the Creator.

If there be any pertinencie in that which you alledg touching our Saviors
sitting at the right of God, it make's against you; for notwithstanding his
sitting there, he is said to be sent: and whereas you say, Gods sitting in
heaven note's his soveraigntie, implying that the holy Ghosts being sent from
heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 11. should note inferioritie, this would be much for your
purpose, if you could prove, which you shall never be able to do, that the
holy Ghost, when he is sent to his servants to dwell in them, to sanctify,
and to govern them, did leave heaven; God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost sit
in heaven, and rule by a general providence all the creatures in the world, and
shall he be said not to rule in heaven, when by his Spirit, which is there
also, he by his special and admirable providence rule's in the hearts of his
own children? Assuredly there can be no good reason so to determine.

receive's a commandment (you say) does minister: He that is sent, receive's
a commandment, John 12. 49.

First, I say an equal may receive a commandment from an equal by consent of
both parties, as a Prince of another Prince, a brother of a brother, one
citizen of another; so Christ, as the eternal Son of God, received a
commandment of his Father, as one equal does of another, and that was nothing
else but Gods counsel and decree to send his Son to undertake, as he did, and
execute the office of a Mediator.

Secondly, if by command is meant what a superior require's of his inferior,
then I deny your Minor: true it is, that it is spoken of Jesus Christ, that he
received a command of his Father; because, in regard of the humane nature, and
as our Mediator, he was inferior to him; the Father (says he) is greater
then I am. But it is no where asserted in the Scriptures, that the holy Ghost
was commanded by the Father; show us a text for this purpose, which, if it
could be don, I can readily have recourse to the former Answer: I may
therefore retort your own words. Let no man think what is spoken of Christ, as
he is man, and Mediator, is to be applied to the holy Ghost, unless he can
first prove he is not God.

ARGUMENT 7.
7 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that is the gift of God, is not God. The holy Spirit is the gift of God:
Ergo.
The Minor is plain by Act. 11. 17. Forasmuch then as God gave them the like
gift (meaning the Spirit) as he did unto us, who have believed on the Lord
Jesus Christ, was I one that could withstand God? The Major, though of it self
sufficiently clear, is further evidenced thus; He that is not the giver of all
things, is not God; he that is the gift of God, is not the giver of all
things: Ergo. The Major is apparent from Acts 17. 25. God gives to all, life,
breath, and all things. The Minor is proved thus; He that is himself given, is
not the giver of all things; he that is the gift of God, is himself given:
Ergo. The Major is undeniable; for otherwise the same would be the giver of
all things, and yet not the giver of all things, inasmuch as he himself, a
principal thing, is given, which implies a contradiction. The Minor needs no
proof. Moreover, a gift is in the power, and at the disposal of the giver; but
it is gross and absurd to imagine that God can be in the power, or at the
disposal of another. Neither let any man here think to evade by saying, That
not the holy Spirit himself, but only his gifts are imparted to men; since
both the more learned Adversaries themselves confess, that the Person of the
holy Spirit is given together with his gifts; and the Scripture puts the
matter out of doubt, if you consult Nehem. 9. 20. and Romans 5. 5. In both which
places, the holy Spirit is said to be given contra-distinctly from his gifts
and operations: in the first, contra-distinctly from the instruction flowing
from him; in the other, contra-distinctly from the love of God diffused in our
hearts by him. Whence we may draw this Corollarie, that if the Person of the
holy Spirit be out of favor given to certain men, as the aforesaid places
testify, then he was not personally present with them before, and
consequently by the concession of the Adversaries, themselves, cannot be God,
since they will not deny that God is always personally present with all alike.
But I fore-stall the following Argument.

ANSWER.
To give, and to send, to be given, and to be sent, are I confess, different
much; but (mark what I say) God's giving the Spirit, and God's sendiug the
Spirit, are really one and the same. God never send's the Spirit, but he
give's the Spirit; and he never give's the Spirit, but he freely send's him
to his servants. That respective difference betwixt them make's this Argument
of giving the Spirit to be much weaker then the other of sending him, as will
appear by the examination of it.

He that is the gift of God (say you) is not God; because God is the giver of
all things. The holy Spirit is the gift of God, Act. 11. 17.

viz. of God the Father, or God the Son, is God; for, it is not unusual in the
Scripture, I must often put you in mind hereof, for the name [God] to be taken
for the first Person of the Trinity, the second Person is called the Son of
God, the third Person is called the Spirit of God: and the first Person is
often so called, not because he is a higher God then God the Son, or God the
holy Ghost, for they are equal; but first, because he is the first in order:
and secondly, because he is the Person, by whom the Godhead is communicated
to the Son, etc. Hence it is, because the Father has original from no other,
and is the principle of the Deity, he is simply called God; not the God of
another God: for, if the Father had begot the divine essence, he might be
called not only God, but the Father of God; but, because he does not beget
that essence, which is communicated to the Son of God, but the Son: therefore
he is not called the Father of God, but the Father of his Son. And in
proportion the like is to be spoken concerning God the holy Ghost, and the
same order is to be observed of the works wrought in time. God the Father by
the Son, and thorough the holy Ghost bestows ordinary, extraordinary gifts,
as it pleases him; and these three Persons are coeternal, and coessential.

If your Proposition be virtually particular, it prove's nothing. Some gift of
God is not God. It Is true in this sense, no created gift of God, is God
himself; but the holy Ghost is no such gift: he is a gift indeed, but an
uncreated gift, not lesser, but equal to the Father or Son that give's him. And
though I yield the holy Ghost is a gift, yet your proof, Act. 11. 17. is not
convincing; for to say nothing that some render, the same grace, by gift may
very well be understood the miraculous gifts of the holy Spirit, which then
(...).
were bestowed upon the Gentiles. And we read, 1 Cor. 12. 6, 7, 8. that the
gift, and the Spirit [the Giver,] are plainly distinguished. But let that pass.

giver of all things, that is given himself;

Terminus ad quem, yea, and we ourselvs likewise, as we are bound, may give
ourselvs to God to be disposed of, and ruled by him according to his pleasure.

Further, I say, by limitation of your words, he that is not the Creator,
Preserver and Giver of all things, viz. which are created, he is not God. This
is true; but is this any thing for your purpose? Nothing at all. Nay, it make's
strongly against you; for the holy Ghost is the Creator, Preserver and Giver of
all things: he give's life, and breath, and all things to the creatures. He
is such a Gift, that he give's all other gifts; and so by this reason you
might have soundly concluded, that the holy Ghost is God: for that text, Act.
17. 25. speak's of God's blessings bestowed on the creatures. And you ought not
blasphemously to have made use of it, to rob the blessed Spirit of the glory
of his Deity. Apply now what I have related of the several respects of the
Giver and the Gift, and you will easily discern, that your advantage which you
would gather from a seeming contradiction to be a gift, and not a gift; to be
given, and not to be given, is as good as nothing.

A gift (say you) is in the power and disposal of another; it is absurd to think
that God should be so.

munus, praemium, and donum. The two former, munus and praemium, are absolutely
in the power of the Giver, and do imply, that they are a separate thing from
him. That the Giver has a propriety in them, and that they are inferior to
the Giver. See Dan. in Lomb. l. 1. d. 18. Censura. But it is otherwise of a
Gift: a thing is said to be given, which is either had or possessed from
another, when either simply, or in a certain respect, it was not so had or
possessed before. And so it does not necessarily import any authority which
the Giver has over the gift; but it signifie's only a free communication of
that which is given: for he give's, that make's this gift to be had of
another, whether he be the author or original of it, or not. Hence is it, as
I said, that God the Father, when he come's to us graciously, and
communicate's himself to us by his gifts, is said to give himself. And God the
Son is said to be given, and to give himself for us, and to us: yea, and the
holy Spirit also does give himself to us, because it is an act of his free will
and absolute power, to communicate his gifts to whom he pleases; so says the
Scripture, The Spirit blow's where it will, John 3. And the Spirit divide's to
every one his gifts as he pleases, 1 Cor. 12. And this is further evidenced,
because a righteous man has God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy
Ghost; (for he is a Temple of the whole Trinity) and therefore he has
received this best gift of all, as given to him by the most sacred Trinity.

given, and that in time only; for it is a name of God which actually belong's
to him not from eternity, but in time, as do many other. Creator, Preserver,
Lord -- the power indeed was from eternity in God, and these do belong to him
ab aeterno in habitu, Hal. because he is habilis dominari, creare,
praeservare, donabilis ab aeterno. But the actual denomination to be Creator,
Preserver, Lord, Gift, was not from eternity, when there was no creature, no
servant, none to whom God was given. Does not this concession (may some say)
prove a change in God? in sola ratione consistunt. This is illustrated by these
similitudes: We say this is the right side, and that is the left side of a
pillar, the right side or left side of the Equator; and by the death of a son,
there is no change in the pillar, the Equinoctial line, or the father: but in
the man, that turn's himself this way or that way to the pillar, that cut's the
line, and in the child that die's; and yet we truly say, this is the right
side of the pillar, of the Equator: the man cease to be a father, when his
child is dead. The like is to be said of the holy Spirit: when he is given
to us, there is no change in him, but the change is in us. The decree that the
Spirit should be given to the elect was before all time, yet the real
execution of this decree, as of all others, was don in time.

that not only the gifts of the holy Ghost, but himself is given, Nehem. 9.
20. Romans 5. 5. If he was given out of his favor, he was not personally there
before, and consequently not God.



First, ad hominem, if he come's personally to every Saint where he was not
before; and is in this Saint in England, in that Saint in Germany, etc. Either
the holy Ghost is divided from himself, which cannot be, or else, being in
all Saints, he must needs be infinite, for you no where in all your reasons
hint that there are many holy Ghosts; and it is a strange creature to
admiration which can be in this place, and not in that which is contiguous to
it, and in that which is far removed from it. This I do mention, that I might
give an occasion to you plainly to discover yourself in such particulars as
these are.

Secondly, the weakness of this exception appears, because if it were
convincing, it would prove God the Father not to be God; for he give's
himself to his children. Why then should God the holy Ghost on this ground be
no God?

Thirdly, I grant in a good sense, that the holy Ghost, and not only the gifts
of the holy Ghost are given, Luke 11. 13. And albeit many Divines do vary in
their expressions, yet all agree in the main point against you, that the holy
Ghost was with all them to whom he is given before he was a gift to them, as
touching his natural and powerful presence; and thus he is also with the very
devils, reprobates, the elect uncalled, and all other creatures which are
incapable of this gift of holiness and of happiness. Yet the holy Ghost, when
he is given, he is with the Saints in a new way, in such a manner as he was
not present before: in this regard it is, that the Saints are called the
Temples of the holy Ghost, and a Temple is Gods peculiar, he dwell's in the
Saints, and is graciously present with them, they have him present by faith,
and other graces, when he is known and beloved of man. And this is not only
understood of the gifts of God, but of God himself, whom we know by faith, and
love by charity. Nor is it any marvel, that God should be present without any
change on his part; for the bodily Sun, as we know, without any mutation in
the Sun at all, is present to him that will open his eyes to look upon it. This
is then your palpable fallacy, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter.
The holy Ghost was not graciously present with the elect before their calling,
Ergo, he is not God, or was not essentially present with them before. I abhor
the consequence.

ARGUMENT 8.
8 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that changes place, is not God. The holy Spirit changes place. Ergo.
The Major is plain; for, if God should change place, he would cease to be
where he was before, and begin to be where he was not before, which everteth
his Omnipresence: and consequently, by the confession of the adversaries
themselves, his Deity The Minor is ocularly apparent, if (following the *
advice of the adversaries) you will but go to Jordan, for there Abi, Ariane, ad
Jordanem, and Trinitatem videbis.
you shall have the holy Spirit in a bodily shape descending from heaven, which
is the terminus a quo, alighting upon Christ, which is the terminus ad quem,
Luke 3. 21, 22. Neither let any man alledg, that as much is spoken of God,
Exodus 3. and chap. 20. and Genesis 18. For if you compare Acts 7. 30, 35, 38, 53.
Gal. 3. 19. Heb. 2. 2, 3. and chap. 13. 2. with the foresaid places, you shall
find, that it was not God himself that came down, but only an Angel,
sustaining the Person and Name of God; which has no place in the history,
touching the descent of the holy Spirit.

ANSWER.
Major, nor against the explication and confirmation of it; that God is
everywhere, is religiously and unanimously acknowledged, because the essence
of God is most simple and infinite absolutely, and so is the virtue of working
infinite also: and, if it was not everywhere, it would be limited. It Is a
memorable expression used by Hermes Trismegistus, a Heathen, he compare's God
to a perfect Sphere, whose center is everywhere, and circumference no where.
As the soul is in the body, wholly in the whole body, and wholly in every
part of the body, albeit it is said to be chiefly in the heart or brain,
because in and by those parts it perform's the most excellent operations; so is
our great God wholly in heaven, wholly on the earth, wholly everywhere in a
divine and spiritual manner, not included in any place, nor excluded out of it,
although he is frequently said to be in heaven, because there most
conspicuously he manifest's his glory and his goodness to the holy Angels and
blessed Saints.

I deny your Minor; for although the holy Ghost is said to descend from
heaven, yet was he in heaven then, and everywhere else. And there are diverse
circumstances in the text to convince what you from thence would deny, that
he is God who descended, and that the holy Ghost was not personally contained
within the compass of a Dove, real or in representation, because he did not
assume into the unity of his Person this Dove; and if he had don so, yet
would not he have been definitively or circumscriptively therein: nor can he
be said to descend on Christ in regard of sanctification, because Christ even
from the instant of his incarnation was full of grace. Nor was there any
addition of holiness to Christ by the descent of a Dove upon him, but he
represented himself in the shape of a Dove as in his sign; and it is not
obscurely made out by the text, that he is God: for what was the scope of the
Evangelist? why does he relate this story? was it not to manifest that Jesus
Christ, both by the voice of his Father, and this descent of a Dove, was
publicly authorized to exercise his prophetical, sacerdotal and regal offices,
to redeem the elect, and to reconcile them to God? The circumstance of the time
may lead us to such a consideration; he is first inaugurated to this office,
and then he begin's to put it in execution: and so we see that the Father by
his voice, and the holy Ghost by his visible descent upon him, did call him to
this great work. None can send any Prophet but God alone, much less is it in
the power of any creature to send Jesus Christ to redeem the world, Deuteronomy. 18.
15. See Luke 4. 18. Esa. 61. 1. Moreover it is never spoken of any Angel or
pure creature, that the heaven was rent, and opened, as it is said hereof, Mar.
1. 10. this was a symbol of the singular presence of God, whereby we may learn
that this Spirit was God's Spirit, yea God himself. Add that it is something
that this Spirit whereof you do speak, descended on Jesus, and remained on him,
John 1. 33. but where do we read that created spirits descended on, and abode
on him? It is their office, we know, to minister as servants unto him, and to
worship him, Hebr. 1. 6. Lastly, the same Spirit that descended on Jesus, did
also lead him into the wilderness to be tempted of the Devil, Matthew. 4. 1. Is
it in the power of any creature to lead Jesus Christ up and down, especially
into solitary deserts, and to this end to be tempted by the Devil? Well, if
this circumstance fail, yet by other circumstances in the text it is clear
enough, that S. Austin with good reason did say, Go thou Arian to Jordane, and
there thou shall see the Trinity.

I add, if there be any sense of the Deity in you, consider I pray, of your
(shall I call it) extreme blindness, or rather abominable impiety, which you
discover by this your Argument. Why so? the Prophet David says, that he could
not go any where from the presence of God's Spirit, Psalm. 139. But if you say
true, suppose we, that you could have taken the wings of the morning, and
remove, as the light of the Sun does (as it were) transfuse it self from East
to West in the turning of a hand, the Spirit of the Lord would be no where
with you in these inferior parts of the world; and if you could have ascended
into heaven, and have had a glorified soul, and have been able to view all
those heavenly mansions, when the holy Ghost descended down from heaven, you
could not (if you say true) have found him there. Besides, by this your
reasoning, there could not then have been one Saint on earth, in whom the holy
Spirit did dwell, who was enlightened, purified, comforted, strengthened and
guided by the holy Ghost; for, if notwithstanding the descending of the holy
Ghost in this likeness, this admirable action was no hinderance why the holy
Ghost should not be in every Saint, what reason can be alleged, why, albeit
he thus descended from heaven, he should not be still essentially in heaven?
Surely the divinity which you would teach us is odious divinity, and if you
literally press the very words against the ubiquitie of the holy Ghost, might
not an Atheist as strongly argue, and with as good reason as you do, that God
is not on earth, he is confined within the circles of the heaven, Why? because
the Father spoke from heaven, This is my welbeloved Son. But what shift can you
make to elude the words of the Psalmist, and be true and constant to your own
Argument? God bowed the heavens, and came down, Psalm. 18. 9. Here is in your
own language terminus a quo, he came from heaven; and terminus ad quem, he
came to the preservation of his children, and the destruction of his enemies.
And, if I sinfully would dally with Scripture, I might press you sore with the
next verse, He rode upon a Cherub, and did fly, yea he did fly upon the
wings of the wind. And does the supreme Majesty remove from place to place?
Yea, and the Lord himself said, Bring the Officers to the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and I will com down, and talk with them there, Numb. 11. 16, 17.
What should I speak of that gracious promise of Christ, If any man keep my
words, I and the Father will com unto him, and abide with him, John 14. 23.
What mean's the Lord's leaving of his children for a time, and that threatening,
I will go to my place, Hos. 5. 15. These and many like expressions to these in
Gods word might be as strong to conclude as yours, that the supreme Majesty
changes place, which is transcendently absurd.

Nor do we want in Scripture visible demonstrations of the like presence of
God to this of the Dove. Was not the pillar of fire to conduct the Israelites
in the wilderness, which moved ocularly from place to place visible sign of the
Lords presence? what else was the meaning of the Lord's threatening in his wrath
that he would give over the people to Moses, and to the conduct of an Angel
contradistinct from God himself, that he would withdraw the sign of his
presence from them, Exodus 32. 34. as after he did, Exodus 33. And what now does
the great God go from place to place? And was it not the Lord that passed by,
and was not in the great wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in
the soft voice that spoke to Elias the Prophet, 1 Kin. 19. 15. Much more in
this kind might be alleged, but this is enough to show the weakness and
impiety of this Adversary, who denies the Deity of the holy Ghost by no
better argument then what would prove the supreme Majesty, by himself so
acknowledged, to be no true God at all.

appeare's, by comparing texts in the Old Testament which speak of God, to be
meant of Angels, Exodus 3. with Acts 7. 30.

first, that hereby you have weakened your own Argument: Do not you see, that if
you are right in this answer, that by analogy we also might retort your
Argument against yourself in this manner, that albeit the holy Ghost is said to
descend in the shape of a Dove, yet it was but a created Angel, which
represented his Person, and appeared in the name of the holy Ghost.

Secondly, if it were yielded to you, that an Angel, as God's messenger,
sometimes spoke in the name of God, must it needs therefore be so in all places
of the Scriptures? And if not in all, your Argument is gone.

Thirdly, nor will this follow it was an Angel that spoke to Moses out of the
Bush, Ergo it was not Jehovah the Lord. This consequence is as weak as water:
it was an Angel indeed, but an uncreated Angel, the Angel of the Covenant, so
called Mal 3. 1. that Angel which wrastled with Jacob, and was invocated by
Jacob, Hos. 12. 3, 4. And are creatures in your divinity the object of
religious invocation? That Angel which redeemed Jacob out of all evil, and
blessed him, Genesis 48. 16. who can do so but God alone? And why else should
Moses mention the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush? Deuteronomy. 33. 16. And
what was the meaning of that in S. Paul? the stiff-necked Israelites tempted
Christ in the wilderness, 1 Corinthians. 10. And the expressions there used do
sitly agree to the Angel of the Covenant, but not to a created Angel. I am the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And he sent Moses to deliver the Israelites
out of Egypt. I have seen, I have seen the affliction of my people. And he
call's himself by the proper name of God (...), I will he that I will be.
It Is a name full of mysteries, and note's the eternal and immutable essence of
God, and that in time, as great Clerks have from thence collected. This eternal
and immutable God would become man: and if there be any strength in the
testimony of the ancient Fathers, Justin. Apol. 2. ad Antonin. Irenae. adv.
Haeres. l. 4. c. 11. Tertul. adver. Praxeam, they will give their suffrages for
us. To name no more.

Genesis 18. were three Angels which appeared to Abraham, and he entertained
Angels, Hebr. 13. 2.

Abraham at first sight took them to be, but one of them was the Angel of the
Covenant, Jehovah, for so he is called Genesis 18. 13. God reveale's to Abraham
what he will do to Sodom, Ver. 18. and Abraham acknowledged him to be the
Lord, and Judge of all the earth, which is not the office, as you will grant, of
a created Angel, but of the Son of God, and that it was in his power to save
and destroy Sodom. Here then the Lord appeare's in the shape of a man, and this
shape is moved from place to place, which clearly overthrows your Argument.

Exodus 20. compared with Act. 7. 53. Galat. 3. 19. Hebr. 2. 2. an Angel spoke,
and yet God is said to speak; Ergo, the Angel spoke in the Person of God.

First, I answer by concession, admit that your exposition touching the
speaking of the Law by Angels, be sound by those texts in the New Testament,
yet there will be enough remaining in the text to enervate your Argument; for,
did not God com down then? was there not a manifestation of Gods glory and
severitie? Did not Moses speak with the Lord face to face, insomuch that his
face did glister, and was glorious? Did not God himself write the Law in the
two Tables, and give them to Moses? Did not he see the back parts of God, a
glimps of his glory? Since these things cannot be denied, the Argument will
remain strong against you, albeit the holy Angels were Gods instruments of
pronouncing the Law. And why should it be a thing incredible for any man to
believe, that God may visibly manifest his presence either in wrath or mercy?
for can an Angel appear in a visible form, and frame a voice, and shall this
with any color of reason be denied to God Almighty?

Nor is it clearly proved by those cited Scriptures, that Angels spoke the
words of the Law in the Person of God.

first, was it ever heard that any Ambassador, when he has audience of a
forain Prince, deliver's his embassage otherwise then in the third person; he
says not, I say so, but my Prince says thus and thus. thus says the Lord.
Dan. 9. And they likewise by some circumstance or other make it appear, that
they speak in the Name of the Lord. And Paul says to this purpose pertinently
and expressly, that when the Law was delivered, it was the voice not of a
created Angel, but of Christ, that did shake the earth, and men on earth, Hebr.
12. 26.

Particularly in the two first places it is not said, that the Law was spoken
by Angels, but ordained by Angels: and so it might be, because holy Angels
were attendants on the great God, and instruments to shake the earth, to raise
thunder and lightning, etc. because they were witnesses and approvers of the
deliverie thereof, in which sense it is said, that the Saints shall judge the
world, not by pronouncing, but by approving the sentence of Christ, 1 Cor. 6.
And for that place in the Hebrews, might it not relate to the words of the Law
uttered at some other time? Or it may be, Gods voice in the deliverie of the
Law was uttered and pronounced by the ministry of Angels, and they by an
extraordinary way thundered out the words which God spoke to them to speak to
the people; as a Scrivener may write and speak the words which are dictated to
him by another in the person of that author, the principal author; as in
marriage the persons to be married speak the very words from the Ministers
mouth: but I had rather hear the judgment of another, then peremptorily in this
perplexed case set down mine own opinion.

ARGUMENT 9.
9 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that prays unto Christ to com to judgment, is not God. The holy Spirit
does so. Ergo.
The Major is granted. The Minor is evident from Rev. 22. 17. compared with
ver. 12. Neither let any man think to elude this proof, by saying, that the
Spirit is here said to pray, only because he makes the Bride to pray. For
when the Scripture would signify the assistance of the holy Spirit in causing
men to speak, it is wont to affirm, either that the holy Spirit speaks in
them, as Matthew. 10. 20. or that they speak by the holy Spirit, as Romans 8. 15.
We have received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry Abba Father. But
there it is expressly said, that the Spirit and the Bride say, Com; not the
Spirit in the Bride, nor the Bride by the Spirit.

I add what is pertinent to this head out of his 12th. Reason.

Romans 8. 27. The Spirit makes intercession for us with groans unutterable, and
he make's intercession for the Saints, according to the will of God, which
prove's the holy Ghost to be inferior to God, inasmuch as he is said to make
intercession unto God with groans: which is not so to be understood, as if the
holy Spirit was here said to help our infirmities only by suggesting petitions
and groans unto us, and making us to pray (as is commonly, but falsely affirmed)
for the very words of the context sufficiently refute such a gloss, since they
say, that the Spirit himself, (not we by the Spirit, as we have it in ver.
15. of the same Chapter) makes intercession for us: but to help others
infirmities, by making intercession for them, is not to instill petitions into
them, but to pour out petitions apart in their behalf, as is apparent both from
the thing it self, (since none can intercede for himself, all intercession
requiring the intervening of a third Person) and by the collation of ver. 34.
of the same Chapter, and by the 30. verse of the 15. Chapter, and by 2 Corinthians.
1. 11. Hebr. 7. 25. 1 Timothy 2. 1. Col. 4. 12. Ephesians. 6. 18. Neither let any man
think to baffle off this Argument, which is written with a beam of the Sun, by
saying that this is improperly spoken of the holy Spirit; for, besides that he
has no other ground to say so, but his own pre-conceived opinion touching the
Deity of the holy Spirit, he ought to know, that the Scripture, though it
speak many things after the manner of men, yet does it no where speak any thing
that argues his inferioritie to, and dependence on another. But this passage
of the Apostle plainly intimates the holy Spirit to be inferior to God, and
dependent on him; otherwise what need had he to intercede with God, and that
with groans unutterable, on the behalf of the Saints?

ANSWER.
Major Proposition is undeniably true; for religious invocation, is an humble
obsequiousness, and an enjoined duty to be performed to the great God; and
does necessarily suppose in him that praie's, first, inferioritie of the nature
of the party that praie's to the object of invocation. Secondly, indigencie or
want of that good thing which is prayed for, either in whole, or in degree, a
defectibilitie or possibility not to have the good thing prayed for as it
relate's to the person for whom the prayer is made. Thirdly, a disabilitie,
either to enjoy or hold what is prayed for, without the help of God: for, what
can be more foolish (says S. Austin) agreeably to common reason, then to pray
to another for help, to do, or to have that which is in his own power to do and
to have. Epist. 107. Now the holy Ghost is God almighty, and according to the
Scriptures, give's to every one his gifts as he pleases.

To the objected place out of Revel. 22. 17. there are many things which may
be said to infringe the strength thereof.

Com. Ergo, the blessed Spirit of which we treat, This fallows not: it is
quasi a genere ad speciem affirmative; for how does it appear in the text, that
this is meant of the holy Ghost? Why may it not be meant of an Angel, that
Angel which was mentioned Ver 16? For first, you will not deny but an Angel is
a Spirit; express Scripture and sound reason do show, that Angels are spiritual
substances. Secondly, nor can you deny, that the holy Angels do desire the
happiness of the Saints, and their fellow servants. It may be you will say,
then the text would have run in the plural number, the Spirits say, and not the
Spirit. To this I answer, that S. John relate's only what was don by that
Angel, which was sent by Jesus Christ to signify this revelation to S. John,
Cha. 1. ver. 1. and Chapt. 22. ver. 16. particularly mentioned. I would not
have mentioned this answer, which I apprehended as possible, unless I had read
it in Mr. Buroughs on Hos. 2. lect. 17. p. 606. as his own opinion. Readers,
accept or reject this as you shall see cause.

Secondly, there is another exposition of these words which you do conceal, and
it is of a singularly-pious and learned man in the opening of mystical
divinity, Mr. Brightman on the place, The Spirit (says he) signifie's single
Christians, in whom the Spirit dwel's, and the Spouse signifie's the whole
Church, and multitude of believers. Now, it is the desire of them all singly
and conjunctly, that the Lord Jesus would com. If this exposition hold's good,
the Argument, as touching this place, is of none effect; but whether this be
the meaning of the text, or not, I leave it to the serious consideration of the
judicious Reader.

Thirdly, to adhere to that exposition which is most common, and which you
would disprove; (for we shall find, that common answers are usually the
truest.) The Spirit and the Spouse say, Com. I answer, there is in the words a
Figure, which they call (...), Hendiadys; and the meaning is, The Spirit
speaks by the Spouse, or the Spouse by the instinct of the Spirit, says,
Com, that is, the Spirit is the efficient cause, why the Spouse prays, Com.
Nor is this a singular example for such a Commentary, for the like phrase we
have in S. Paul, Gal. 4. 6. it is the Spirit that crie's Abba, Father. It is
said indeed, that the Spirit is in their hearts, but withal, if you would play
with these words, as you do on those in the Revelation, you might as fairly
conclude your intent from them; for it is not said, that they, by the Spirit,
but the Spirit in them crie's Abba, Father. Nor does this text which you alledg
affirm that the Spirit abiding without the Spouse does say, Com; for then you
might have some color for your gloss: Besides, this exposition ought not to
seem strange, because the very self-same expression is set down in the
Scripture touching the holy Ghost, Act. 15. 28. It seemed good to the holy
Ghost and to us, assembled in a Synod; the meaning is thus, It seemed good to
us by the instinct and suggestion of the holy Ghost thus to determine. A place
parallel to this in the Revelation, and sound reason will evince, that it must
needs be so, because prayer is the gift of the holy Ghost, Jude 20. It is he
that give's his children the Spirit of supplication, and if you will separate
the Spirit and the Spouse in this holy action, you must needs confess, that
the Spouse of Christ, without the assistance of the blessed Spirit of Christ,
does pray; if so, and when she does so, such a prayer is a prayer of no
account with God.

Romans 8. 27. The Spirit make's intercession to God. Method reduces this
Argument to this place.



Chrysostom. in loc.
S. Chrysostom, by the Spirit, understand's not the person of the Spirit of
God, but the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit. And they which had those gifts
were called Spiritual men, or Ministers of the Spirit; and when in great
anxietie and distress Christians knew not which way to turn themselves, nor how,
or what to pray, then, as the Spirit of God came upon Jahaziel in the midst of
the Congregation, and he delivered the mind of the Lord to their exceeding
great comfort, 2 Chronicles. 20. 14. So likewise, in such a stress, some one of the
Christians endued with the Spirit of prayer, stood up, and with much
importunity, and with many sighs poured out effectual prayers to the God of
heaven, which were profitable to the Church; this is a pious sentence in it
self considered, but not fitly agreeing to this text, as our Junius against
Bellar. acknowledges, and Paraeus in his Commentary on this place does prove.

The Spirit prays, that is, the Spirit enableth us, and makes us to pray.
And if it be objected, that prayer is a gift, not only of the Spirit, but of
God the Father also, and God the Son being an outward work, and so is common to
all the Persons; yet is not the Father said to pray, not because he is not the
Author of prayer, for so undoubtedly he is, but because he so give's the
things prayed for, that he being the fountain of the Deity, receive's of no
other, Est. l. 1. d. 20.

The reasons of this exposition are these: Because by the Spirit we cry Abba,
Father, ver. 15. And because it is said, the Spirit helps us against our
infirmities, viz. of praying as we ought, etc. and the very words of the text
will make this good, as S. Austin exhort's, intellige, etc. understand the
words of the Scripture, and thou shall be kept from blasphemy. The person
that prays, sigheth and groaneth; the holy Ghost, blessed for ever, groaneth
not: as he groaneth, so he prays; He is said to groan, because he make's
us to groan, and so he prays for us, because he make's us to pray for our
selves. Thus God is said to know, when he make's others know. Now (says he to
Abraham) I know that thou fear me, Genesis 22. 12.

None (say you) can intercede for himself, but this action require's a third
person. Many Scrip heaped up.

interpellat, orat, (or as others translate the word) postulat, clamat, when
he make's us intercede, pray, and cry to God; and those three words, as some
say, are but one thing, called by different names, (...), prayers, when we lay
open to God our wants: the same prayers are (...), because by our prayers we
testify the desires of our hearts to God: and (...), intercessions, because
we do not pray diffidently and fearfully, but in an humble familiarity we
speak to God, and do go boldly to the throne of grace. Com. in locum. The
prayers which 1 Timothy 2.
are intended, Romans 8. 26. are of that nature, that whether they be directed
to God for ourselvs or for others, as we are bound to pray both for our selves
and others, are intercessions, interpellations, or appellations, but yet they
are not formally (as Schoolmen speak) the prayers of the holy Ghost, but they
are his, as an efficient cause thereof, they are the prayers which the holy
Ghost enableth his servants to make both for themselves and others.

Touching the many Scriptures, which you have unconscionably heaped up
together, to prove that intercession is always for another, I briefly answer,
by freely yielding that in those places which you have recited, The prayers are
made, or entreated to be made for other men; but will it therefore follow,
that in all other texts which mention prayer, the Scripture is to be so
expounded? Nothing less. And if by virtue of those words in the texts
forenamed, a Christian had no ground to pray for himself, he must not then
follow that maxim and approved rule, Charity begin's at home, he must only
pray for others, never for himself; for in some texts you have (...), Romans 15.
30. Colos. 4. 12. and in some other, (...), as 2 Corinthians. 1. 11. Ephesians. 6. 18.
which is such a dotage, as never entered into the brains of an advised Christian.

Albeit (say you) the Scripture speake's many things after the manner of men,
yet never what argues inferioritie and dependencie on another.

medium, although it cannot be denied, but the Lord, not out of any power of
ours, but out of a gracious condescension to us out of his free goodness, does
sometimes in the Scripture speak, as if we, base and feeble creatures, were
able to encounter with God, yea and to overcom him, as Jacob wrastled with God,
and he could not prevail over him, Genesis 32. Jacob, as a Prince, had power not
only with men, but with God; and let me alone (says the Lord to Moses) that
I may consume transgressing Israel, Exodus 32. The prayers of Moses did as it
were bind the hands of the Almighty, that he could not smite his people: and
that is yet a higher expression Esa. 45. 11. (...) the Lord is, as it were at
the command of the prayers of his servants, and many the like gracious
expressions might be named, so that neither head nor foot, neither Argument
nor Inference has any soundness in it.

ARGUMENT 10.
10 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He in whom men have not believed, and yet have been Disciples and Believers,
is not God. Men have not believed in the holy Spirit, and yet have been so.
Ergo
The Major is plain; for how can any be Disciples and Believers, according to
the phrase of Scripture, and yet not believe in him that is God? The Minor is
proved thus: Men have not so much as heard whether there were an holy Spirit,
and yet have been Disciples and Believers. Ergo. They have not believed in the
holy Spirit, and yet have been Disciples and Believers. The Antecedent is
apparent from Acts 19. 2. The Consequence is grounded on that of the Apostle,
Romans 10. 14. How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? Now if
any man, to decline the dint of this Argument, shall say, that by holy Spirit
in these words, (...), is meant, not the Person, but the Gifts of the holy
Spirit: He, besides that he perverteth the plain and genuine meaning of the
words, and speaks without example, does also evacuate the emphasis of the
Particles (...), which imply, that these Disciples were so far from having
received the Gifts of the holy Spirit, whereof we may grant, that the question
made mention, that they had not so much as heard whether there were an holy
Spirit or not: Again, that the holy Spirit is not God, does further appear by
this very instance, since the Apostle, when there was so ample an occasion
offered to declare it, (if it been so) does quite decline it: For it is
incredible that he, who was so intent and vigilant in propagating the Truth,
as that casually seeing an Altar at Athens inscribed to the unknown God, he
presently took a hint from thence to preach unto the Heathens the true God; yet
here being told by Disciples that they had not so much as heard whether there
were an holy Spirit, or not, should not make use of the opportunity to discover
unto them, and in them to us, the Deity of the holy Spirit, but suffer them to
remain in ignorance touching a point of such consequence, that without the
knowledge thereof (if we believe many now adays) men cannot be saved.
Certainly, the Apostle had greater care both of the truth of God, and the
salvation of men, then to do so.

ANSWER.


The first Conclusion, we are to consider of God absolutely, as he is plainly
revealed in the Word, and accordingly acknowledged by all those which are in
outward covenant with him, that he is true God, the ever-living God, the only
wise and powerful God, etc. Thus in the Chaldean language in Jer. 10. 10, 11.
both for a caution and instruction to the Jews, when they should be captives
there, it is said, The gods that made not the heavens and the earth, they shall
perish. Or else we may conceive of God relatively, as distinctly to be
apprehended to be God the Father, God the Son, God the holy Ghost. The former
was always necessarily believed to salvation, but not the later; so
peremptorily to avouch, is to cover the graves of millions with a stone of
despair. For if the Sun shine's not on the mountains, surely the valleys are
not lightsom. Bellarmine judging the Argument drawn from the word [Elohim] not
sufficient to prove the Trinity of the Persons, amongst other things add's
this, In l. 2. de Chr. cap. 6. no. 7.
that the Septuagints never turned it Dii. To this our learned Junius answer's,
the reason hereof is, either because they themselves knew not the mystery of
the Trinity, or thought it not safe to propound it to them. And yet I grant
that God never heard any but for his Sons sake, nor could ever any man make an
acceptable prayer to God, but by the help and direction of the holy Ghost. The
former was clearly revealed in the Old Testament, The Lord thy God is one Lord,
Deuteronomy. 6. 4. and in many other places not needful to be recited; but the
mystery of the Trinity was not clearly revealed, but mystically expressed,
and in great wisdom we are sure. And if we will believe Theodoret and many
others, l. 2. ad Graecos. it was so ordered partly, because the people of God
then were incapable to understand that depth, and partly, to prevent Idolatry,
to which sin the Israelites were very prone; for living amongst the Egyptians,
then with Cananites, and other idolatrous people that did surround them, and
were worshippers of many gods, if they had clearly and explicitly heard
mention of God the Father, of God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, here is the
danger, that they would have been Tritheites, and have believed that there were
three gods; yet was this mystery shadowed many ways in the Old Testament,
lest it, being seen in the essential image of God, and evidently preached in
the Gospel, should seem to Christians a new doctrine, or repugnant to the Old
Testament.

The second Conclusion, to be called a Disciple of Jesus Christ, and a
Believer on him, I speak of actual faith, does of necessity require that he
should believe the promised Messiah was com into the world, I do not say, that
it was always necessary to believe, that he was God, the second Person of
the blessed Trinity; for I take it for granted, that in the infancy of the
Church, not only ordinary Christians, but his choice Disciples apprehended
not that divine truth: Nor do I say that it was absolutely necessary to
salvation to believe, that Christ was incarnated, and that he was crucified
for the sins of the world, for Cornelius, Act. 10. And it might be the case of
many others then, and before those days, was in a good condition for believing
in the promised Messiah, albeit then he pitched not his faith on the Messiah,
as already com in the flesh; and that was, we may well presume, for want of
sufficient instruction, for virtually believing on the Messiah, whom he
explicitly professed not; yet I say, that he which is denominated a Believer
in Christ, and a Disciple of the Lord Jesus, does not only believe with his
heart, but he does also profess with his tongue, that the Savior of the world
was manifested in our flesh.

The third Conclusion is, Believers and Disciples are of two sorts: Some there
are that are thoroughly instructed in the Articles of faith; and others there
are, which either for want of capacity, time to learn, or means of learning,
(and these make their ignorance to be invincible,) or else for want of
industry, or through their negligence to learn, are ignorant of many main
heads of our Christian religion, which they might have known, and whereof they
are sinfully ignorant: This is a received truth in the world, all those who
profess the Name of Christ, which are distinguished from Jews, Mahumetans, and
Pagans, are usually, and may in a general way be called Disciples and
Believers. These Conclusions being thus premised, the answer to the Argument
will be a very easy task.

He in whom men have not believed, is not God.

viz. for an explicit belief of the third Person, is not generally true, as it
ought to be. Many there are in the world, which were not so far enlightened,
and yet were Believers and Disciples of Christ, as is showed in the third
Conclusion. But now, if the Proposition be meant thus, as it is explained, he
that does not believe in him that is God taken absolutely and essentially, can
be no Disciple or Believer. I readily grant this to be a truth, he that does
not believe in one God, he is no Disciple; nor do I think that any worthy the
name of a Christian ever questioned the truth thereof.

Many (say you) were Disciples, which were so far from believing in God the
holy Ghost to be God, that they never heard whether there were an holy Ghost
or not, Act. 19. 2.

John the Baptist, or one of his Disciples, they were not tam tincti, quam
sordidati, says S. Ambrose: They then returned home to Ephesus, and wanted
means at home of further instruction, as we may charitably judge, and probably
gather, because that Paul and Timothy were forbidden to preach the word of God
in Asia, Acts 16. 6. where Ephesus stood, but afterward, as we may read, Acts
19. and 20. Chapters, the glorious light did shine forth to idolatrous Ephesus,
by the long continued disputations, and many Sermons of Saint Paul: so that in
what sense soever the holy Ghost be taken in the question and answer, these
Ephesians were very much unlike to those Christians, which according to that
scomma propheticum, Esa. 65. 20. were children of an hundred years old. And, as
Espencaeus out of his own knowledge says of an ancient and noble Gentleman
brought up in the Church, and so his ignorance was unexcusable, that he did
freely confess, that he never had heard whether there was an holy Ghost or
not, in 1 Timothy 3. cha digr. 17. But I will reason with you.

Either this ignorance of the Ephesians was vincible, or invincible; either it
was sinful, or sinless. That there was an holy Spirit of God expressly revealed
in the Old Testament, and by the name of the Spirit of God, yea and manifested
by extraordinary inspirations and raptures, not only by the holy Prophets,
but also to others which had not a standing calling to that high office. Saul
and the Messengers of Saul prophesied amongst the Prophets, 1 Samuel 19. And that
he is yet more fully revealed in the New Testament, you cannot deny, although
you do boldly and wickedly deny his Deity.

Well then, if these Ephesians never heard of the holy Ghost, either it was
because they never had sufficient means to instruct them in that profound
mystery; and do you think that this is very probable? for they had, or might
have had the writings of the Prophets; and if they were baptized by John, does
not he expressly speak of the holy Ghost? Christ (says he) should baptize
with the holy Ghost, Matthew. 3. 11. Or might they not have repaired to some
Christians in some place or other for a further instruction in the faith? Or if
they never heard of the holy Ghost, it is else, because albeit they had some
means of knowledge this way, yet did they not regard them, or sufficiently
profit by them. Take it which way you will, and in neither of the ways is
there any strength in the Argument to prove your odious assertion; but it
argue's clearly, that you are given up by the just judgment of God to strong
delusions to believe lies. How could it else have entered into your heart to
think, that the ignorance of a few untaught Christians should be a sound proof
to overthrow a truth, which was unanimously embraced by sounder Christians?
Shall God's truths be no truths, because some sinful and ignorant persons do
not know them? Nay rather, you should thus have reasoned, since this was a
divine truth preached by John the Baptist, and afterward more fully taught by
Christ and his Apostles; therefore without wavering, much more without
contradicting them, I will submit to their better judgment.

The Argument, by this which is already spoken, is fully answered; yet I will
follow the Adversaries steps, and gather up his mistakings, for the better
satisfaction of the Reader.

If any shall say by the holy Spirit is meant not the Person, but the gifts of
the Spirit, besides that he speak's without example, he evacuate's the
emphasis, we are so far from receiving the holy Ghost, that we have not heard
whether there be an holy Ghost or not.

First, let the Reader observe how the Adversary is possessed with the spirit
of giddiness, in contradicting himself. It Is without example (says he) to say
the Spirit is taken for the gifts of the Spirit, and yet within three lines
after he says, we may grant that this question, Have you received the holy
Ghost? may be meant of the gifts of the holy Ghost. And with the same breath
he says, (strangely forgetting himself) that it is without example to take
the holy Ghost for the gifts of the holy Ghost. I add further, that it is
clearly prophesied, that extraordinary gifts, as of prophesying and tongues,
are called the holy Ghost, Joel 2. 28. Acts 2. 17. and in this Chapter, Acts
19. 6. the holy Ghost came upon them: How this is to be understood, the words
following do expound, They spoke with tongues, and prophesied, Ver. 6. So Acts
2. 4. thus John 7. 39. the holy Ghost was not yet, you cannot deny but he was
in Person before that time, and that he was as touching sanctifying graces
before. How then is it said, the holy Ghost was not yet? Of necessity it must
be meant as touching miraculous operations, which were not yet bestowed on the
Disciples. What can be more plainly spoken?

of the holy Ghost, that we have not so much as heard whether there be any
such miraculous gifts of the holy Ghost or not: And if the question moved to
them was not touching the Person, and sanctifying graces of the holy Ghost, but
only touching miraculous gifts, as it is most probable; (for they being
Disciples might be presumed not to be ignorant, that there was an holy
Spirit, and that he was a Sanctifier of his servants) then either their answer
is impertinent to the question, or else they must needs return their answer in
effect thus, We have not heard whether there be such miraculous gifts of the
holy Ghost, or not.

S. Paul would have taken the hint, which he did not, to have instructed them
in the Deity of the holy Ghost.

First, to this I say, that this your pleading make's as strongly against your
self, as against the truth; for do not you also put a difference betwixt that
prime created Spirit, as you do blaspheme, and his gifts? What then do you say
against us, which make's not as much against your self also?

Secondly, how prove you that the holy Apostle did not instruct these Ephesians
touching the holy Ghost? Is not this your pleading? It is not written,
therefore it was not don; this is, say I, inconsequent: All that he preached
is not written, and do not you see, that by this reasoning you wound your own
cause? For can you show that S. Paul taught these Ephesians such a doctrine
touching the holy Ghost, which you do maintain, that he was a creature?

Thirdly, it is not to be doubted, but that he opened to them the doctrine of
the holy Ghost, that he was God, and that he taught them, that holy graces
are fruits of the holy Spirit, which none but God can give.

Yet now (say you) we are made to believe that a man is damned, that beleeve's
not the Deity of the holy Ghost. And so saying you think to aggravate our
error.

presently die, though they never heard of the holy Ghost, I would charitably
judge of them, and conceive that God intended mercy to them by these gracious
discoveries of himself to them at this time; but if God will graciously wink at
such ignorance, and have mercy on them, this will yield no comfort at all to
you, who have been bred up in the Church of Christ, and in our Schools, and
have read the word of God; for you have wilfully shut your eyes against the
truth, which is as clear touching the holy Ghost, as if it had been written
with the Sun beams; and you have stretched your wits to the uttermost to
pervert the plain meaning of the Scripture, as appears by your endeavoring to
answer Matthew. 28. and Acts 5. I may say to you, as S. Cyprian de Sacram. Dom.
calicis, says of some, which used not wine, but only water in the Eucharist,
if any of our predecessors, either out of simplicity or ignorance, did not
practice what the Lord taught us by his example, there may, by the favor of
God, be pardon granted to his simplicity; but if we, which are instructed in
his will, should transgress, we might not presume of the same favor. And the
very like passage we find in Bid, used by Wilfride in a Synod or Conference
at Stransholch disputing with Cotmay about a very trifle, the time of the
observation of Easter. 3. lib. hist. Eccles. Anglic. cap. 25. And Luther make's
an allegory on Deuteronomy. 19. they which err ignorantly, are like to those which
imprudently and casually killed a man, such have the privilege of a City of
refuge; but they which hear, and will not learn, are like wilful murderers,
they shall be dragged from the horns of the Altar, and lose their lives.

ARGUMENT 11.
11 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that has an understanding distinct from that of God, is not God; The holy
Spirit has an understanding distinct from God; Ergo
The Major is clear; for he that has an understanding distinct from that of
another, must needs likewise have a distinct Essence, wherein that
understanding may reside. The Minor is proved thus, He that hears from God,
and that at the second hand, what he shall speak, has an understanding
distinct from that of God; The holy Spirit so hears from God; Ergo. The Minor
is evident from Joh. 16. 13, 14, 15. The Major is confirmed thus: He that is
taught of God, has an understanding distinct from that of God; He that
hears from God, is taught of God; Ergo. The Minor is manifest from John 8.
where our Savior Christ having said in the 26th verse, Whatsoever I have heard
from him (the Father) these things I speak. In verse 28. he expresses the
same sense thus. According as the Father has taught me, these things I speak.
The Major is of it self clear; for he that is taught, has an unknowing
understanding, since none can be taught what he knows already; and he that
teaches has a knowing understanding, otherwise he could not teach another
something; but it implies a contradiction that the same understanding should at
the same time be both knowing and unknowing of the same thing. Besides, that
the holy Spirit has an understanding distinct from that of God, is easily
deducible from the words of the Apostle, 1 Corin. 2. 10. where he affirmerb,
that the Spirit searches the depths of God, (as Romans 8. 27. he intimates,
that God searches the heart of the Spirit:) but to search the depths of any
one necessarily supposes one understanding in him that searches, and another
understanding in him whose depths are searched, as is evident not only by
collation of other places of the Scripture, as 1 Pet. 1. 11. Rev. 2. 23. but
even by common sense, dictating to every man so much, that none can without
absurdity be said to search the depths of his own understanding. Whence the
Apostle going about to illustrate what he had spoken of the Spirit of God, by
a similitude drawn from the Spirit of a man, does not say, that the Spirit of a
man does search, but know the things of a man, though his former words did seem
to lead him thereunto.

ANSWER.




Secondly thus, he that has an understanding not really distinct, but vet
distinguished modally, and that is in regard of the manner of having the
understanding.

thirdly thus: He that has an understanding not really distinct from that
understanding of God the Father, but in regard of our understanding, which is
blemished since Adam's fall with much blindness, weakness; and take it at the
best, it is but finite, whereas God's understanding is infinite, and so are
those manifold essential properties in God, as they are called, which are
many, not only in regard of the outward works, to which they do directly
relate, but also in regard of their different respects, and our apprehension of
them, and yet they are in truth all one even the divine essence, God himself.

The Proposition taken in this second and third sense, is not true, and so it is
to be denied.

Major, that a distinct understanding must needs have a distinct essence
wherein it reside's, and so as it seems you hold forth this as a truth, that
God's understanding is in God, as an accident in a subject. I would be loath to
father on you such a tenet, which you will not own; but this is either your
opinion, or else you are to be charged for not writing so accuratly and warily
to prevent mistakes, as is required in this Argument, especially a writer of
controversies.

Touching your Assertion, that the understanding reside's in an essence, if we
speak of a created understanding, you shall meet with contradiction to this
opinion from the pens of most subtle Philosophers, J. C. Scaliger, and acute
Divines, Zanchius -- which will tell you, that it become's the soul, in regard
of the dignity thereof, to perform its acts by its own essence without the
help of any accident, and that the several faculties of the soul (as they are
called) are but as so many notions and formalities of the same thing. The soul,
the understanding, and the will are the same thing; it is called the soul in
regard of the essence; the same essence is called the understanding, as it
apprehend's an object; the same thing is called the will, as it extend's it
self to enjoy the good thing which is apprehended convenient for it. But I will
not contend about this point, which if it were granted, will not weaken the
Argument. Be it granted, that a finite understanding is an accident, and
really distinguished from, and necessarily depending on its subject; yet will
it not be verified of the infinite understanding of God, whose Essence is most
simple without all kinds of composition, from whence result's a thing
compounded as a third thing, of it self one, truly and really distinguished
from the parts thereof. God has neither integral nor essential parts; he is
not as a species constituted of the genus and the difference; for God is the
first and highest being: not the constitution of subject and accidents, not of
act and potentia, for that would argue imperfection: For God is a most pure
act: not of Esse and Essence, for the Esse of God is his Essence, and that
Essence of God is his Esse; God's greatness is God's Essence; God's goodness is
God's Essence; God's justice is God's Essence; and it is true of the rest. God
is great without quantity; God is good and just without quality; God is
merciful without passion; God is every where present without place; the first
and the last; without time; nor is he compounded of Nature and Person, because
the Essence of God is most simple, most infinite, most immense, and the same
thing is both the Nature and the Person: nor is this overthrown, because there
are three Persons; for they are not three by composition of parts, for the
Persons are not many things, they are but one thing, though distinguished by
relative properties; for the divine relation in God is not properly an
accident, but a substantial attribute, and make's no real composition in God,
but a distinction of our reason, which crosses not the absolute simplicity of
God no more then the same distinction of reason opposes the absolute unity of
God, because this denomination is extrinsecal, arising from our manner of
conceiving of it, Suarez. Thus is he Deus trinus, by co-existencie of Persons;
but the Catholic Faith teaches us, that in creatures, the nature may be
really divided from the person: thus the Son of God did assume the nature, but
not the person of man.

The holy Spirit (say you) has an understanding distinct from that of God,
because he hears from God, and is taught of God.

Minor, if you mean distinct really, as you ought to do, if you intend thereby
to prove your Assertion. And your first reason, because he hears from God,
and is taught of God, is but an idle repetition of the fourth Argument. For
answer hereto, that I may not be charged with needless tautologies, I refer
you thither for your satisfaction.

This (say you) is deducible from the words of the Apostle, none can search his
own understanding, 1 Corinthians. 2. 10.



Romans 8. 27. which shows, that he searches the heart of the Spirit; yea
further, it is his peculiar honor to search the hearts and reins of men, which
import's thus much and no more, that there is nothing so secret in man, but the
Lord both can and does see the same most perfectly.

diverse, which does not agree to the unity of the Godhead; Advertite Fratres.
for, as we cannot say the power of the Persons is equal, nor the goodness of
the Persons is equal, but the same power, the same goodness; no more can we
say the understanding of the Father is equal to the understanding of the holy
Ghost: But thus may we say, the Persons of the Father, of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost are equal in power, and equal in goodness; so are they likewise
equal in understanding: and albeit the divine understanding is but one and the
same being, yet is it considered of us in a common way, as referred to the
essence, but singularly in regard of the Persons. And hence is it also, that
such phrases are spoken of the Son of God, and they are also truly verified of
the holy Ghost, that he is a Principle of a Principle, very God of very God,
light of light, a fountain of a fountain, when taken not essentially, but
personally; so that the Son is a Principle, true God, a light, and a fountain,
and so is the holy Ghost; yet the Father is considered first in order, and the
Son from the Father, and the holy Ghost from them both.

Corinth. 2. 10. is so far from evincing that the holy Ghost is a creature,
that it strongly prove's his Deity. First, because that he must needs be
God, that know's whatsoever the Father know's; for how should a smite creature
by search attain to the unsearchable depths of God's knowledge? As of many other
things; so were the Angels without sin ignorant of God's counsels, Revel. 5.
13. and of the time when the day of Judgment shall be. Secondly, the Apostle
compare's the Spirit of God to man's spirit, and the Spirit of God is in God the
Father, and God the Son. There is (...), circumincessio, as the Latins speak,
whereby is signified the unity of the Godhead in the distinct Persons, that
the Persons are so distinguished betwixt themselves, that they are altogether,
and most intimately one and the same thing; and further, hereby is noted a
peculiar manner of the original of one Person from another distinguished from
that procession of creatures, as the Son from the Father, which is sejunct from
the Father; and therefore it is called processio ad extra: but here it is
otherwise, the Son from the Father, and the holy Ghost from them both, by a
procession ad intra, because he does intime continue, and is not another thing
from the Person from whom he proceed's: Singula sunt in singulis, and omnia in
singulis, and singula in omnibus, and omnia in omnibus, and unum omnia. Hence
may we conclude, that as the spirit of a man and a man, are not two men; so
the Spirit of God, and God, viz the Father, are not two separated substances,
but one God.

ARGUMENT 12.
12 Argum. of M. Bidle.
He that has a will distinct in number from that of God, is not God. The holy
Spirit has a will distinct in number from that of God. Ergo
The Major is irrefragable. The Minor is asserted thus: He that wills
conformably to the will of God, has a will distinct in number from that of
God: The holy Spirit so wills; Ergo. The Major is plain; for conformity must
be between two at least, else it will not be conformity, but identitie. The
Minor is confirmed by Romans 8. 26, 27. Likewise the Spirit also helps our
infirmities; for we know not what to pray for as we ought, but the Spirit
himself makes intercession for us with groans unutterable: but he that
searches the heart, knows what is the mind (or will) of the Spirit; for he
makes intercession for the Saints according to (or conformably to) the will of
God. Your other Argument, annexed to this, whereby you would prove the holy
Ghost to be inferior to God, has been examined in its due place, Argum. 9.

ANSWER.
Major, He that has a will distinct from that of God, is not God. I grant the
Proposition to be true, if it be taken in your sense for a distinct and
separate will; for two such wills do necessarily require two distinct
substances, to which they do relate.

Minor. The holy Ghost has not a will distinct from that of God. First, I say,
this text does not clearly hold forth to us any thing touching the will of
God's Spirit. The original is, (...), and in our new translation is turned,
not the will, but the mind of the Spirit. Some render it the intention of the
Spirit, and others the spiritual sense; and you know very well, that the
primarie signification of the word is thus to be translated. God know's the
intention of the Spirit, or act of the mind.

Secondly, let us grant what you cannot prove, that it is to be translated
what is the will, or what is the desire of the Spirit. To this I answer, that
the Spirit wills and desires, as he prays; it is a Metonymie, he is said
to will and desire, because he inableth us to will and desire according to the
will of God; God know's the intention of the Spirit, even as the Mother knows
the crying and sobbing of her Infant; and so our secret sighs, which are
infused into us, are known of God: our sighs indeed cannot be expressed by us,
but the Spirit, which work's them in us, direct's them unto God. Apparent it is
you were hard put to it to make up a full dozen of Arguments out of an ambiguous
text, to prove a distinct will of the Spirit from the will of God the Father,
by a place where there is no convincing proof that there is any mention of the
will of the Spirit at all.

will, or what the Spirit of God desire's by those groans, yet will it not
follow, that there be two distinct wills of God the Father and the Spirit.
What I have written touching the understanding of God and of the Spirit, is by
paritie of reason to be applied to this Argument: there is, as I asserted, but
one will of God the Father, and God the holy Ghost, but yet this one will is
otherwise in the Father, otherwise in the holy Ghost; in the Father, of and
from himself, but in the holy Ghost by eternal communication of the Deity to
him.

John 5. Nor did the Son of God think he robbed God of his honor, when he
made himself equal to his Father, Phil 2. And what is spoken of the Son, is
true likewise of the holy Ghost; and it is the general resolution of the
Church, that the holy Ghost is consubstantial, coequal, co-omnipotent, and
coeternal with God the Father, and God the Son. Now, because equality is
properly understood of quantity, and agreeableness in quality; it will not
be amiss to explicate briefly in what sense similitude and equality are
asscribed to the sacred Persons. It is to be observed, that in regard of
substance, things are said to be the same or diverse: If the substance be one,
things are said to be one in substance; but if not the same substance, they
are said to be diverse in substance. In regard of quality, things are said to
be like, which do agree in quality; and unlike, when they have not one
quality. In regard of quantity, they are said to be equal or unequal. Now,
because in God, to speak properly, there is neither quality nor quantity,
(for how should a finite quality or quantity reside in an infinite substance?
or how is it possible that these should be many infinites?) therefore it
fallows undeniably, that these three, viz. identitie, similitude, and
quantity, are all one in God, and one God, because there is the same essence
and substance of the three Persons, and yet there is similitude and identitie
betwixt the Persons founded not on the relation betwixt them, but on the
essence; and therefore, because there is no dissimilitude betwixt the essence,
there is no dissimilitude absolutely in the Persons: yet it is so founded on
the essence, that it does insinuate to us the plurality of the Persons. The
Persons are said to be like, as touching qualities, because they do agree in
the same perfection of qualities: as in wisdom, power, goodness, and such like;
these are really distinguished in the creatures, but relating to God, they
neither amongst themselves, nor from the divine essence do differ really.

The Persons in Trinity are said to be equal, because they do so agree in the
same perfection, that one Person does not in the least degree exceed another;
for there are no degrees in that which is infinite: that is said to be better
in quantity, that is better, and has a higher degree of excellency then
another; as in Logic, the degree of quality is quantity, so that greatness
in God is nothing else, but the excellency of God in every perfection. If the
first Person was more potent, and wiser then the holy Ghost, there would be
likeness betwixt them, but not equality; there must of necessity be a
distinction betwixt things like and equal: for nothing is equal or like to it
self. The Father is not the holy Ghost, and therefore when the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost are said to be one in essence, goodness, wisdom, there is not in
such an attribution, a distinction of Persons; but when we say, the Persons
are like or equal, as touching every imaginable perfection: as in goodness,
wisdom, power, etc. such an attribution necessarily require's a distinction of
the Persons amongst themselves.

I have now (as I conceive) fully answered your twelve Arguments. I have set
down all, and concealed nothing which in your Arguments carries with it any
show of strength; there remains yet one Argument in your Epistle, by which
you would countenance your Heresy, in these words:

ARGUMENT 13.
13 Argum. of M. Bidle. I believe (say you) the holy Ghost to be the chief all
ministering Spirits, and I do place him, both according to Scriptures, and the
Primitive Christians, and by name Justin Martyr in his Apology, in the third
rank after God and Christ, giving him a pre-eminence above all the rest of the
heavenly host.

ANSWER.
I do willingly grant, that since there is a Trinity of Persons, there must of
necessity be acknowledged an order amongst them. But how? Not in regard of
time, as though the holy Ghost should be in time after the Father, and the Son
of God, for they are coeternal: nor 2ly in order of nature, as if the holy
Ghost should be in nature after God the Father, and God the Son; for in this
sense, that is said to be after another, which depend's upon the nature of
another, which has no place in this subject, because the three Persons have
but one undivided nature. Neither, in the third place, is the holy Ghost, to
speak properly, after the Father in dignity; for there is but one Deity, and
there is equal glory, equal majesty of the three Persons: The order then is
in regard of original and principle, as it is called, the Father as Father is
the principle of the Son, and the Father and the Son are the principle of the
holy Ghost. In this regard it is, that we commonly say, the Father is the
first Person of the Trinity, as being of none: The Son is the second Person of
the Trinity from his Father. The holy Ghost is the third Person, being from
eternity both from the Father and the Son.

This concession is not answerable to your opinion; for if you would speak out
of the Son, as you do of the holy Ghost, you hold, as appears by many of your
Arguments, both God's Son, and the holy Ghost to be creatures after God in
time, in nature, and in dignity.

Whereas you say, this in your sense is according to Scriptures, the texts
which you have alleged I have discussed, and made it clear both by my positive
Arguments in proof of the point, and by my answers to your Scriptures, that
your tenet is directly against Scriptures.

But (say you) this is agreeable to the Fathers: this (say I) is very falsely
and impudently spoken. I am now upon the defensive part, and will not set down
a catalogue of their testimonies in their several ages as I might do, and those
that are not learned may clearly see how falsely you do boast of the Fathers by
the Apostolical (as it is called) the Nicene, Constantinopolitane, and
Athanasian Creeds.

But yet (say you) Justin Martyr places the holy Ghost in the third rank.

Justin Martyr himself, who positively assert's in his first Apology, that the
Son of God placed by him the second in order, was alone properly the Son of
God, that he was with his Father before the world was made. Now, as the Son of
God, the second in order, was truly God; so may we argue by proportion, that
the holy Ghost, who is the third in order, is likewise God. And this you might
have learned by the words, which do immediately follow in Justin; for, when he
had said, We have the Prophetical Spirit in the third place, he immediately
subjoin's these words, We teach that he is rightly to be worshipped, which
honor agree's well to God, not to a creature. And in the same Apology
afterward, he would prove the Trinity of the Persons out of Plato. And this
of the third Person, that it is written by Moses of him, that he moved (in the
beginning of the creation) upon the waters. And in the same Apology he
relate's the custom of the Church in his days, both touching Baptism, that the
person is washed with water (not in the names, but) in the Name of the Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. And likewise touching the Eucharist (as he call's it)
when the Minister had taken bread and wine, he giv's the praise and glory of
all things to the Father, Son, and holy Ghost. And after the receiving the
Sacrament, and giving relief to the poor, the assembly is dismissed, and (says
he) in all things which we use, we praise God the Father of all by his Son
Jesus Christ through the holy Ghost. And in his exposition of the Faith,
touching the holy Trinity, there is one (says he) truly the God of all, and
he is known and understood in the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and says, they
are of one essence, and one divinity, and much more to this effect. But this
is enough.

Go now and boast of the Fathers in general, and of Justin Martyr in
particular, and blush for shame, if there be any modesty left in you, for
your intolerable wrong offered to the holy Fathers, and for fathering on them
that abominable Heresy which they did detest.

A Postscript to the Readers.
THis Paper may fall into the hands both of the unknowing and skillful Readers,
and is liable to various censures.

Gregor Nazianz in an Oration of the praises of great Athanasius, shows the
rents betwixt the Eastern and Western Churches, occasioned by the use of these
terms, Hypostasis and Persona; the Eastern Churches used the word Hypostasis,
and utterly disliked the name Person. On the other side, the Western Churches
adhered to the name Person, and could not endure the name Hypostasis. The
Eastern Churches judged the Western Churches to be Sabellians, i e. that they
held but one Person called by three names. And the Western Churches judged the
Eastern to be Tritheites and Arians, maintaining three substances. Athanasius
apprehended the mistake, and that both sides were sound in the faith, though
they differed in terms, and so reconciled them. I do entreat these Readers, if
they meet with difficulties, that they would not presently cast the Book out of
their hands, but to take pains to know the meaning, pray, read, perpend the
text, the context, and parallel places of Scriptures, meditate, and where your
endeavors fail you, have recourse to the learned, which will, if it be
needful for you to know, resolve your doubts, and somewhat clear your
judgments, and to encourage you, I dare promise, that you shall not repent of
your labors, but better understand some texts of Scriptures and humane Authors
which handle this subject, then formerly you have don.

cannot read; and that I would not touch the coals, which would have burned my
fingers.

Secondly, perhaps I shall be blamed for tedious discourses, and for
excursions sometimes, which are of near kin to digressions. I do confess, that
this was purposely don to clear up doubts, and to make the discourse more
profitable for the Reader; for had I intended merely to answer the Arguments in
a Scholastical way, a short distinction applied in a few lines might have
served the turn for his longest Argument; but then (as I conceive) I had missed
of my end, the information of the judgment of weaker Christians.

Thirdly, I shall be blamed for rudeness of language, I deny it not; my mind
was so intent on the matter, the body, that I had little regard of the words
to clothe it handsomely withal.

The holy Ghost, not as the holy Ghost, yet, as God, is of himself. I do
confess, the strength of my Adversaries reasons did not necessitate me to use
such an expression; and had I timely considered of it, both to prevent the
seeming advantage to an enemy, and the needless censure of friends, I would
have forborne it. And albeit this term (...), first used by Calvin, as applied
to the Son of God and the holy Ghost, because he confuted Valentinus Gentilis,
which said, the Son and Spirit had not one and the self-same essence with the
Father, but were essential: In this respect, I say, he used the term, which
some of his Adversaries, and some learned Protestants, to speak the least,
disliked. Yet they know full well, that phrase is the usual language of our
approved Authors, and justified by eminent Divines; and it is usual for one and
the self-same subject to admit of diverse respects, and thereupon of diverse
attributions. The essence of the Son of God, and of the holy Ghost, as it is
the essence, has no principle, but is of it self; and so the holy Ghost,
according to essence, is (...); according to personalitie, or as the holy
Ghost, is from the Father and the Son: And this is no error, as Bellarmine
himself, no friend to Calvin, acknowledges, l. 2. de Christo, c. 19. albeit
he dislike's his manner of speaking, yet not his judgment. And Gregory de
Valentia, a learned Jesuit, finde's fault with Genebrard for calling Calvin an
Autothean; for if he be attentively read (says he) his meaning will be
found, that the Son of God, as he is God, and so he is essentially, is of
himself; but as a Person, he is of his Father; and this is true. The Fathers,
when they say he is God of God, they take the name of God personally; but yet
the Son, as he is essentially God, i. e. that most simple thing which is God,
he is not of another, because in this respect he is an absolute thing, tom.
1. did. 2. q. 1. sect. 27.

I do entreat the learned, if they do discover any real faults herein, (which
is not unlikely; for another may sooner see mine errors then I can see them my
self; and so perhaps may I see another man's, which the Author take's no special
notice of) that they would in a Christian manner, with sound reasons reform my
judgment: For truly I am not in love of any error, if known, but do carry a
mind always ready to renounce my judgment, and to give place to the truth in
any point, when it shall be manifested to me.

Lastly, I do earnestly beseech both kinds of Readers to bestow those
spiritual alms upon me, which are both my due to demand, and their duty to
afford me, that they would pray to God for me, that I may faithfully employ
that small talent which the Lord has imparted to me, for his glory, mine own
and others benefit. All the glory, the riches, the highest preferments, and
all imaginable perfections in this world are but unsatisfying shadows, and mere
pictures of happiness; but happy, thrice happy, yea a thousand times happy is
that man, whose God is the Lord.

I now address my speech to you, Mr. Bidle: I confess, I can promise nothing to
myself touching your conversion; I fear you have hardened your heart, and made
it like an Adamant, incapable of any impression of this heavenly truth. You
glory, that you have disputed with many learned men, and could not receive
satisfaction from them, no not so much as to one of your Arguments; I do not
doubt but you have heard from them the same answers which I have made, and more
forcibly urged upon you then I have don; yet I do speak as loud as you do, that
I have examined them all, and am in mine own judgment satisfied in mine answer
touching every one of them, and do confidently say, there is no strength in any
one of them to prove your detestable Heresy, but they are a number of
Sophistical fallacies, which I have plainly detected.

It grieve's me, that any one should rake out of the grave old rotten
Heresies, to infect the world with their stink, especially that my Countriman
should, to the joy of Adversaries, and the great disadvantage of our Religion,
vent them in print. Me think's I see you, Mr. Bidle, struggling to extinguish
that little light which is in you, in that you set your wits awork to pervert
plain Scriptures in the end of your Book by your forced answers to them, which
I have laid open in justifying of our Arguments, and (not so much as barely to
mention our strongest reasons) what may we judge to be your meaning herein,
but a conviction that you can give to them no probable answer at all? Does not
the Christian world, in the succession of many ages, wherein your Heresy has
been cried down to the pit of hell, strike terror into you? Does not the
consent of the Reformed Churches, which you have deserted, lie as heavy as a
mountain upon you? Does not your conscience check you, for cleaving to a few
rotten branches cut off from the Church, and for striving in the stoutness of
your spirit against the stream both of clear Scriptures, and the unanimous
judgment of the Church of Christ? Can you think, that wisdom should be with
you, and folly with them all? Consider, I pray, that you have set yourself
against a strong Adversary, he cannot be resisted, he will prevail over
you. Yield up then your weapons in time unto him, give glory to his great
Name, and put forth all your strength for time to com, to bring honor to his
greatness, as you have been a divelish instrument to defy supreme Majesty: it
is a happy victory to be conquered of Truth.

FINIS.

