An exact description of Prince Ruperts Malignant She-Monkey, a great
Delinquent:

Having approved her self a better servant, then his white Dog called BOY.

Laid open in three particulars: 1. What she is in her owne-shape. 2. What she
does figuratively signify. 3. Her malignant tricks and qualities.


depiction of Prince Rupert's monkey

Printed for E. Johnson. 164^.

A description of Prince RUPERTS She-Monkey.
IT is a mad theme to describe Prince Ruperts Monkey, his she-monkey: and when
you see her drawn out in lively colors, you will hardly forbear laughing.
Three thing are observable in this monkey: 1. What she is in her own shape. 2.
What she does figuratively signify. 3. Her malignant tricks and qualities.


It is thought that she was formerly some proud'd^me, that pulling up her
clothes, and setting her looking-glass a good distance from her, would needs
view her white belly in that imitating mirror: Whereupon the gods being angry
at her obscene wantonness, did convert her into the shape of a lascivious
she-monkey. Her rivelled face has some few thin hairs upon it, and if she had
but a muffler under her chin, she would look like an old Bawd, yet her eyes are
full of lust, and as red as two rubies which she nimbly turns about upon every
occasion, and thinks her self as handsome as the fairest Court Lady, when we
was in her green or yellow gown* There was a young fellow, a countryman, that
took her for a young Gentlewoman, and sent a letter to her by his father. The
Ladies at the Court were that day in all their bravery, because the good news
of Peace began then to be generally reported and believed. They had no sooner
made their courtesies one unto another, and wished the morning might grow into
a happy day, but prince Ruperts Monkey, which then kept close unto the
chimney-corner, (for the morning was very cold) began to chatter with her teeth
her complements amongst them, angry as it seems that she no better was
observed. The Ladies began to laugh outright, and speaking fair unto the
Monkey, she being re-comforted, began to deal amongst them those accustomed
postures which expressed most content. This the old man perceiving, proud of
hope that some good fortune might now attend his son, scr^ping out two (...)
then country congres, presented this letter to the monky, which she
perceiving, first looked on one side of it, and then upon the other, and taking
some delight either in the whiteness of the paper, or in the manner of the
enfolding of the letter, first took it into one hand and gazed upon it, and
then into another, and according to the natural expressions of that creature,
she seemed by the noise she made to be very joyous of it, and did much hugg
the present. At length weary of what she seemed so much to affect and full of
mischief, as of haughtiness, she took the letter and tore it all in pieces,
which the Country man beholding thought within himself, that in disdain of his
sons letter she had made a Taylers bill of it, and torn it to flitters
instead of discharging it: at last when he understood that it was Prince
Ruperts Munkey, he went home and told his son that his Mistres was neither
better nor worse, but a malignant Munkey, for I will swear quoth he that I never
saw such a strange fashioned creature in my life; For she has a kind of a
Roundhead as smooth as an apple, and if there be any Roundhead this Munkey is
one, her brow is low and wrinkled hanging over her little eyes, her nose that's
flatt is very short, her cheeks are lean and lanke, and her thin lips do
hardly cover her teeth, the complextion of her whole face is swarthy coverd
with hair green as moss, and lastly she hides her head in a black bagg,
moreover she wears a green or yellow gown trimmed about with lace, and a
girdle about her middle by the which she is fastened to the name of a wheel,
for the Prince is full of fears and Ielousies that if she were loose she would
steal away into some wood and live there upon nutts and apples, What is under
her coats is unknown, but certainly if her coats were lifted up you might
see her Munkey as they call it. I remember in my youthful days when I danced
with the country Lasses on the town green, I had the happiness to view some
of there commodityes, and they looked just like Prince Ruperts Munkeys mouth, or
as an ancient author says, like mumping things; and so her honesty I believe
it is as much as nothing, for like the old woman she keeps her tail always
wagging, and being her own (as the whore said) she thinks she may use it as she
list, so that I believe she is a very wicked and profane Munkey, Prince
Ruperts Dog who had bewitched the Country man's son to believe that Prince
Rup^rts Munkey was a little young Gentlewoman took off his spel again, and
opend the eyes of both their understandings; and when he heard the Countryman
make this description of his Masters Munkey, he stood by in a corner and laughs
as heartily as ever Dog could do; for a Monkey, though in a fine coat, is but a
Monkey, and so much concerning what she is in her own shape.

What she does figuratively signify.
A Monkey for her petulant and wanton tricks may resemcle a wanton creature, I
will not say a whore (for that name will make the Devil blush) but a necessary
instrument of recreation, unto which pretty pieces of delight it is no doubt
but Prince Robert does stand well affected, and though a soldier, he does love
the soft embraces of a fair laid, since Mars himself did scorn to dally with
Venus, Eneas had a Dido, and it is like that Prince Rupert is not only a
soldier but a courtier, it being natural to the most witty and valiant to
love a woman. But let that pass, certain it is that the Prince does love this
Monkey exceedingly; and the Monkey does by all her gestures and actions tempt
the prince to lassiuious desires, and if a puritan should behold her he would
verily affirm that she were the little whore of Babylon, for indeed she
speaks nothing but the language of the beast. When the prince is in sight, she
will cast a sleering look toward him, then throw her little eyes another way,
then look upon the prince again, then which as if she would tempt him to give
her a private meeting, which are all lascivious tricks, and some time she
affords a temptation to the prince by clapping her hand on her buttock and
scratching it as if she were troubled with the lustful itch, whereby perhaps
she makes the prince think of another buttock, so that lustful pictures or a
wr^ in wanton postures cannot more strongly move the imagination, then the
bawdy Monkey does by her mowing mopping tricks. Some times she will imitate the
sitting of women by the fire side on a low stool, with her knees up to her
mouth, and her hands fastened about her knees, a pre^ty wanton posture, and such
as may beget a lascivious fancy in the dullest conceit, then she will tumble
over her head and let all her coats f^ll about he ears, so that ye may see
all for nothing; Then again she will look melancolly as if she were a sad
widow mourning in a black bag for the decease of her husband, though indeed
sorrow cannot draw a tear from her working eyes, and then she will appear
like a holy sister, casting her eyes, with a silent gleg upwards, but presently
her devotions are ended, if she behold but a red sided Apple, for she loves
them better then Religion or liberty of the Subject. Then you shall behold her
tumbling on her back with her legs spread wide abroad, and it is thought that
some women have learnt their tumbling tricks from Prince Ruperts Monkey, she
differs from your feminine good fellows, and that is, she cannot sing any
amorous songs; yet she will take tobacco and break the pipes, drink wine and
break the glasses, and roar as well as any singing Siren, and on a pipe, (if
she get it in her mouth) she will perfectly express the tune of Me have been
in England.
Where I have seen such sport,
The calling of the Parliament
Has quite put down the Court.


And it is thought that if she were but admitted into a conuenticle, she would
make all the Brownists dance after her pipe to the tune of sweet sister Ruth
come Kiss me now; Thus this monkey is a Kind of movable body that can cringe
and complement like a Venetian curtisan, though her face be not so handsome;
yet all her gestures and postures are wanton and full of provocation, she being
nothing else (as many others are) but a skin full of lust; her eyes are full of
lascivious glances, and generally all her actions do administer some temptation
or other; so that she cannot choose but work upon Prince Ruperts affections; and
if he he any thing effeminate as it is not to be doubted but he is forward
enough in expressions of love as well as valor; for as the Spanish painter
wrote in a Church window sunt with a C. which was an abomination, so her name
is an emblem of wantounes, sunt written in that manner being often called a
Monkey, which is a kind of profanation, and thus you see what prince Ruperts
Monkey does nominally and figuratively signifye, she being in all her postures
the picture of a loose wanton, who is often figuratively called a Monkey.

Her malignant tricks and qualities.
First, she has never a good condition: for find a whore without bad
qualities, and a monkey without mad tricks, and you may hang them both together.

She is most certainly a great malignant, and cares not how the Cause goes
forward, so she may sit on her tail end crack-nuts.

She is unconstant, and will leap from place to place, as the Brownist does
from point to point in his Sermons, and it may be supposed that she learnt her
giddy actions from her half cousins, which are Baboons. Violent she is in all
her actions, and would tear the Miter from the Bishops, and pull the Crown from
the sacred brow of Majesty, if she were permitted to come near them, for she
does love to rend, tear, and demolish all things, as the Brownists do. Her
diet is a le mode de France, that is, after the French fashion, for she loves
kick-shaws, and dairty novelties, and has a constant appetite to delectable
things, as if her mouth were made only for a Lenton mill to grind figs,
almonds, and raisens, and it is doubtful whether Ladies instructed her, or she
taught them to waste time in devouring sugar-plums and sweetmeats, for she
will eat more then a parish Midwife. And because she is a Court Delinquent,
and ready to play shrewd turns there, if she be not prevented; she is
therefore tied to the nave of a wheel, which she rowls before (...) as Prince
Rupert tumbles about the wheel of Fortune, and ro^^l^ his Fate before him,
pillaging and plundring wheresoever he comes.

And now we talk of plundering, this Monkey is by nature a notable plunderer,
for if she were put into a Study of Classical Authors or into one of the shops
in Pauls-Churchyard, do you think she would read any of the Books? No, but in
the Study she would tear and rend all the papers and letters that she could
find, and all the books, then she would spill the ink upon the table, and pour
out all the sand-dust. If Prince Rupert should but let her raise an Army of
Monkeys, or transport them hither by shipping from beyond Sea, it is thought
that this Monkey with an Army of Malignant Monkeys would come and plunder all
the Coster-mongers houses in London, and all the Fruiterers stalls; and
moreover, she and her Forces would plunder all the Ladies closets, and make
vile work amongst their sweetmeats; but yet she would be more merciful then
Prince Rupert, for she would take away no gold or silver, but nuts, cakes,
apples, ginger-bread, and the like, should be all her pillage, which she would
seize upon. Besides all these tricks, she is a cunning jugler, for she can cast
a mist before soldiers eyes, so that when they think they have gotten their pay
in their own hands, if they do but open their hands, they shall find nothing in
them but a rusty musket or a pike. Morever, if she should come into a Church,
if she did but breathe or blow upon a Service Book, and afterward bid a
Brownist open it, he would swear that all the leaves were full of nothing but
Crosses, Images, Beads, Surplices, Hoods, Coaps, and all kind of Popish
Ceremonies. It is thought that she made the Adamites walk naked, so that the
holy sisters thought it a divine innocence to show their Monkeys to their
zealous brethren. The Family of love had the same zeal to monkifie themselves,
and through the provocation of the spirit (which they called holy zeal) they
became as lustful as monkeys, and none must be admitted into their
conventicles, but the monkified brethren and sisters of the family. Thus P.
Ruperts Monkey is a kind of old, little, wrinkled, old faced, petulant, wanton,
and malignant gentlewoman, the little whore of Babylon in a green coat, that
sometimes rides upon the beast that is Prince Ruperts dog, that tempts the
Prince by her lascivious gestures, to think oftener on a woman then he would do,
though I believe he dare stand for the feminine cause, and has plundered some
Ladies cabynits as well as Country towns. She is indeed a skin-ful of folly, a
malignant ancient gentlewoman, a Cavalier-monkey, a jugler, that has turned
the University-caps to Court-feathers. It is fit therefore she should be
delivered up, and baited to death this Lent, before the well-affected brethren;
who without doubt will grant this to be a considerable motion concerning Prince
Ruperts malignant Monkey: Prince Ruperts Monkey is a toy,
That does exceed his dog called Boy,
Which through dogged folly,
Both barks and bites
But this delights,
The Prince when is melancholy.
He puts sweetemeats and sugar plumbs
Into his Monkeys tothlesse gums,
Which open like an oyster,
For he does esteem,
A wench I mean,
More then a Nun in a Cloister.
And all his Cavaleeroes bold,
That live at Oxford uncontrould,
When as they are half drunkish,
Their heat to quench,
Will have a wench,
That Lusty is and Monkish.


FJNJS.

