Exact and certain NEWS From the Siege at YORK.

And of many remarkable passages of our Armies in those parts, extracted out of
diverse Letters which were sent by this last Post from Hull, to a Gentleman of
Grayes-Inne.

As also the taking of Mulgrave Castle, and in it Sir Walter Vavasour, Sir
Peter Middletons eldest Son, and other Gentlemen of quality.

Together with the Relation of the Scots second Army, advanced to Blithenooke
in Northumberland, and their taking of Morpeth Castle.

With many other remarkable Observations*

July 3. London, Printed for Matthew Walbanke. 1644.

AN EXTRACT OF Four several Letters written from HULL, and sent by this Post
to a Gentleman of Grayes-Inne, by a prudentiall friend of his, newly returned
thither from the Leaguer before YORK.
1MY Lord of Manchesters Forces are daily in action, straitning the besieged in
their quarters; and battering about Bowdan-Barre and the Manor, and the
besieged frequently issuing forth, and skirmishing. June 24, there were about
20 taken, and as many slain on the Kings party, and two or three hurt and
slain on my Lord of Manchesters, but this is reported something diversely.

2. The Scots Forces for the most part stir not, by reason the Enemy sallied
not out so often against their quarters.

3. My Lord Fairfax and his quarter is also often in action, about and against
Monck-Barre.

4. Prince Ruperts Army, especially in horse, is reported to be great, and a
great part of brave horse and good foo^, under the command of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and Major General Lesley, are gone forth toward Rippon and those
parts, to meet and fight with them.

5. I believe (so far as I can conjecture) the Yorkists are neither quickly nor
easily to be conquered, but are resolved to try all extremity in expectation of
the coming and aid of Prince Rupert; God turn all to the good of the Church
and Commonwealth.

6. All the great and vast dales in the North Riding of Yorkshire, together
with their two strong Castles of Midlan and Bolton, stand still as formerly, to
wit, in a neutrall posture, and to this day would never bear Arms, or pay
Contributions, notwithstanding all their several summons, threats,
propositions sent unto them.

7. Colonel Charles Fairfax, a prudent and valiant Gentleman, has again
reduced most of the Bishopric of Durham to the obedience of the King and
Parliament, and are now with about 1200. horse about Durham and Sunderland.

8. Last night news came hither, (believed true and certain) that a new Army
of Scots is come into Northumberland to Blythenooke, of about ten or twelve
thousand, and that they have already taken Morpeth-Castle, and that Colonel
Clavering and the Scottish Lords with him, have rested themselves in Newcastle.

9. These seas here are full of danger and robbery.

Out of another Letter.
10. We hold our siege yet, but are so prepared, that if Prince Rupert do
come, we are ready to meet him, we hear much of his advance this way, but no
certainty which way he will fall into the Country.

11. Mulgrave Castle is taken, Sir Walter Vavasor, Sir Peter Middletons eldest
son, and diverse others.

Out of another Letter.
12. There is about Whitby some Ordnance landed for us, of which Colonel
Bointon having notice, did prepare Forces to conveigh them to Mulgrave Castle,
(now in our hands) and had sent Letters to some Troops in Holdernesse to assist
him: which Letters Sir Hugh Cholmley intercepting: and understanding thereby the
design, makes his strength, and goes and skirmisheth with our Forces, which a
Master of a Ship on our side perceiving, sent a shore a Drake and 20
Musketeers which by a mistake came to Sir Hugh Cholmley, and so were
surprised, but we heard this day that Whitby is taken by Colonel Bointon, and
that Drake, with 40 men and Arms taken, and one Newton is left Governor in it.

13. We now hear also from Sir Thomas Fairfax, who is about Rippon with his
Army, that he cannot hear or learn that Prince Rupert is approaching any
thing nearer York, yet they are very cautious, and prepare for him, least that
Vbiquitarian steal on them unawares.

14. Our hopes are rather to starve then storm York, but our desire is to
have it by composition and yeeldance.

15. Cawood Castle had like to have been surprised, by a party of Horse from
Pomfret, but was prevented by the vigilancie of the Guards, though some
Prisoners escaped.

1. July 1644. Jmprimatur,

JO. RUSHWORTH.



FINIS.

