A Exact and True RELATION OF THE BATTLE Fought on Saturday last at ACTON,
between the Kings Army, and the Earl of Essex his Forces.

With the number that were slain on both sides.

ALSO, A true Relation of the taking of the Earl of Middlesex, Sir Kellam
Digby, and the Lord of Dorsets Son, on Saturday the 12. of Nov. at
Mile-end-Green, in a Coach, coming to view the Works.

Sent from the Army from one Master Bourn an Officer under Colonel Hollis.

LONDON: Printed for Tho: Cook. November. 14. 1642.

A true Relation OF The Battle at Acton on Saturday last.
ON Friday last there was a Rumor of Peace blazed abroad in the City, which
was only upon policy to come on unawares, which we are all subject to
believe, which causes our own Ruin; for we believed that Rumor which made us
be unprovided of Men and Arms; so they had the advantage of us at the beginning.

On Saturday they came on our men, who were unprovided both of Powder and
Bullets; but the Lord that is the chief fighter, I hope on our side will still
defend us: For, Colonel Hollis with his Regiment did hold them play till the
other Forces came in, which did behave themselves very courageously.

Also, Captain Manwaring did with his Troop of Horse behave himself bravely,
for he stood close to it, not being daunted at any thing; for the Lord was
their incourager, and brought them on, and brought them off.

It was almost four of the clock in the afternoon before the Earl of Essex came
to them with his Forces; but when he came, the Lord fought with them, for they
were wonderful courageous in the Battle, for they flew on like Tigers, both
with Musket, Pike and Sword, till they could see no longer; therefore they
were forced to leave off for that night; There were about Seven hundred
Cavaliers slain, with the loss of about One hundred and fifty on our side.

On Sunday morning about six of the clock a break of day, they began to fight
fiercely on both sides, but our men came on courageously; the Noble and
valorous Earl of Essex did play his part very bravely, encouraging his
Soldiers to be valorous, knowing whose cause it is, for God, King and Country.

Colonel Hollis has stood very bravely to it, both on Saturday and Sunday,
with an undaunted spirit.

Colonel Hampden has likewise been very forward in this Battle, the Lord be
praised that he continues so constant, and true hearted for the defense of the
Gospel, they going out with full resolution to live rnd die in the defense of
it, for which we are all bound to pray to the Lord to continue amongst us. but
the Lord is angry for our too much neglecting of him and his word, this Land
abounds wonderfully in sin, and we must expect a punishment: so the Lord
begins to punish very sharply, let us all join in prayer to other heavier
aflictions, and not to make us like unto Germany, we all know that was the
flourishingst Lingdom in all Christendom; but the Lord sent first the Sword
that devoured many a thousand, then came the pestilence, that swept away many,
then came famine, so these three together has made it a depollished Country;
it is credibly reported that a man may travel a hundred miles and not see a
Town, nor mnat man woman nor child: the first is begun here, but let us all
humbly and jointly together few unto the Lord that he will keep the others from
us which we may daily expect continuing in our sin and wickedness; let us
now do as we are bound in duty to do, seek to amend nur lives and
conversations, and become new creatures, and desire every one of us to be he or
she that may stand in the gape to appease the just Wrath of the Lord who is the
knower of all things before they come to pass, and desire him to unite us all
in one, that we may be all of one Church, and of one Resolution, and that we
may not stand in opposition one against another, the father to fight against
the child, and the child against the father, and brother against brother, which
causes so many dead corpse to lie on the ground as now does, to the great
terror and affrightment of all the beholders, it is a grief to all to see or
hear of it, the father and mother grieve for their sons, the sons and
daughters grieve for their fathers, the wife grieves for the husband, brother
grieves for brother, so all are weeping and lamenting, none can rejoice for all
sinart, from the highest to the lowest all are aflicted, but the Lord I hope
will in convenient time, bring a period to it.

It is credibly reported by those that were eyewitnesses, that there lies heaps
of dead men in multitudes.

This was brought from thence on Sunday at three of the clock in the
afternoon, and then there were slain the Lieutenant Colonel under Colonel
Hollis, and one Captain Push, these are all of noat, three or four more were
wounded; but what Soldiers of each side were slain is not yet justly known for
Sundays sight.

On Sarurday last at Miles-end-Green, about three of the clock were taken the
Earl of Middlesex, the Lord of Dorsets son, and Sir Kellam Digby, who had been
in Kent to raise forces against the Parliament, and in other parts to raise
more, but the Lord has stopped his journey and hindered his intentions, for in
stead of going with an Army of men against the Parliament, he was with the rest
guarded with Armed men to the Parliament, there to suffer according to their
treachery, a just reward to such Delinquents, they were committed to custody
till they could be examined.

On Saturday night last at 11 of the clock, two Captains went post into Essex
to raise men which was quickly done, for there were 500 came into town on
Sunday morning about nine of the clock. with undaunted resolution to march away
with the Noble Earl of Warwick, which is Lord General of these forces for the
defense of the King and Parliament, and for the defense of the true Protestant
Religion, vowing to live and die with the two Noble and Courageous Generals,
which are the two Loadstones of the Kingdom.

On Saturday the 12. of November, Prince Robert using the advantage of the
Mist, which was that morning extremely thick, brought up his Forces to
Brainford, where he was most valiantly opposed by my Lord Roberts Regiment on
the Bridge, who beat them off, and with great resolution maintained the Bridge
till they had spent all their powder and shot, at which time it pleased God
that Colonel Hampden and Colonel Hollis Regiments came in, who very manfully
set upon them, and slew many of them, with the loss of a very few on our side.

On Sunday the 13. of November no feat of War was done, only there came up two
small Ships to Branford, who hearing the Cavaliers were there, shot at them,
who were answered again by the Cavaliers.

This day also the City sent 89 Carts and Wigons laden with all manner of
provision, unto the Army.

There were taken prisoners also, two of His Majesty's Guard, whereof one was
shot in the leg.

FINIS.

