ROBERT Earl of ESSEX, CAPTAIN GENERAL OF THE Army employed for the Defense
of the Protestant Religion, the Safety of his Majesty's Person, and of the
Parliament, the preservation of the Laws, Liberties, and Peace of the
Kingdom, and protection of His Majesty's Subjects from violence and oppression.
To all those whom it may concern;
WHereas I am informed that diverse Officers and Soldiers belonging to the
Army under my Command, by license or otherwise are now remaining in and about
the Cities of London and Westminster, and parts adjacent; It is my express
will and pleasure, and I do hereby declare, that if any the said Officers or
Soldiers whatsoever, shall not forthwith upon publication hereof made, repair
to their several Quarters in the Army before to morrow next in the Evening,
being the 19. of this instant Month of May, there to attend the duties of their
places, and to receive further order from Me, that every such Officer and
Soldier, not having after this Proclamation made a particular license from Me,
shall be forthwith casheered, and also proceeded against by the Council of
War, according to the Rules of Martial Discipline. And if any person
whatsoever residing within the said Cities and liberties, or else where, shall
conceal or withold any such Officers or Soldiers from their attendance; I
do hereby declare that such persons shall be further proceeded against by the
Council of War, as persons ill affected to the State, according to their
several offenses. And I do hereby require all Justices of the peace, Bailiffs,
Constables, and all other his Majesty's officers and loving Subjects
whatsoever, to be aiding and assisting in the discovery and prosecution of such
as shall contemn or neglect this command, so much importing the good and
welfare of the Army, raised for the service of the King, Parliament and
Kingdom.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms this 18. day of May, Anno Domini 1643.
ESSEX.

It is His Excellencies pleasure that this Proclamation be forthwith Printed.

To. Chambers Secr.


