THE CHARGE Delivered at the LORDS BAR BY Sir JOHN EVELIN, from the HOUSE of
COMMONS OF High Treason against three Earls, four Lords, and others of the
House of Commons committed to the TOWER.

WITH The Particulars of their Examinations, And the Orders of the House of
Peers for bringing the seven Lords to Trial.

The Protestation of the Earl of Pembrooke.

And an Order for Sir Robert Harlow, M. Stephens and Mr. Guen, to be summoned
to appear before the House of COMMONS.

7ber London printed for V, V. and are to be sold at the Exchange, Anno Dom.
MDCXLVII.

THE CHARGE Delivered At the LORDS BAR BY Sir JOHN EVELIN, from the HOUSE of
COMMONS.
Die Martis 7 Septem. 1647.
MR. Glynn Recorder of London was called into the House of Commons, where he
was charged for countenancing the Cities last Declaration, and giving thanks to
some of the late Riotous people for their Petition, and for being often at the
new Committee of the Militia, and at that Committee of the Safety, in which the
particulars were read. To which when he had made Answer, he went out of the
House, and then the House considered what to do in it, who after much debate,
ordered that Mr. Glyn Recorder of London shall be discharged from being a
Member of their House, the House being divided. And ordered that Mr. Glyn the
said Recorder shall be sent to the Tower during the pleasure of the House.

Die Martis 7 Septem. 1647.
Sir John Maynard was called into the House and the report being read against
him, he was charged with subscribing of warrants for raising of Horses, which
warrants for raising of Horses were showed to him; And being asked whether that
was his hand: he answered that his hand was counterfitted, and that he signed
none of those warrants. Besides those warrants he was charged for having acted
with great zeal, and activity in endeavoring to raise a new war, which was
fully proved by three witnesses. After this he being commanded to withdraw, The
House debated his crime, and after some consideration had of it, ordered to
discharge him out of the House, and to send him to the Tower: And that an
Impeachment of high Treason be brought in against him.

Die Mercurii, 8. 1647.
Ordered by the Commons in Parliament, That Sir John Evelin of Wilts, do go
up to the Lords, and Impeach the Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Suffolk, Earl of
Middlesex: Lord Hunsdone, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Lord Bartlet, and Lord
Maynard of high Treason, in the, in name of all the Commons of England, for
levying War against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom, And to desire their
Lordships to sequester them from their House, and to commit them; and they
would make good the Charge of high Treason against them; Sir John Evelin
carried up the said message and Impeached them at the Lords Bar.

Die Mercurii 8 Septem. 1647.
Ordered that the report concerning the Earl of Pembrookes case shall be made
the fifteenth day of this instant September: His Lordship has entered his
Protestation against the sitting of the Members in the absence of the Speakers,
and that what was then done, was forced; which his Lordship caused to be entered
into the Journall book of the House of Peers.

Die Mercurii 8 Septem. 1647.
Ordered that Sir Robert Harlow, Mr. Edward Stephens, and Mr. Guen, shall be
summoned to appear at this House the thirtieth day of this Month, to answer
such things as shall be objected against them.

Die Jovis Sep. 9. 1647.
The Lords Debated the Charge of the House of Commons against the Earl of
Lincoln, the Earl of Suffolk and the Earl of Middlesex; The Lord Hunsdon,
Lord Willoughbey of Parham, Lord Bartlet, and Lord Maynard, and Ordered that
the Gentleman Usher of their House, seize, and bring before their Lordships,
the said Earl of Lincoln, Earl of Suffolk; and Earl of Middlesex: The Lord
Hunsdon, Lord Willoughbey of Parham, Lord Bartlet, and Lord Maynard, to Answer
the Impeachment of High Treason brought up against them by the House of Commons.

Die Jovis Septem. 9. 1647.
Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, that Collonell Capley, who
joined with the Committee for raising of Forces, and approved of the
proceedings of the Members in the Speakers absence, be expelled the House, and
sent prisoner to the Tower.

Ordered by the Commons Assembled in Parliament, that Captain Musgrave be sent
prisoner to Newgate.

FINIS.

