To his EXCELLENCY the LORD GENERAL CROMWELL, and his Honorable Council of
the Army at WHITE HALL.
The humble Petition of ARISE EVANS, living in Blackfriers, on the behalf of
Gods glory, the Kingdoms behalf, your honors behalf, and the behalf of the
whole world besides.
Humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner, having the knowledge of Gods secret Counsel manifested
to him, being called thereto, has declared it freely to all people these 19.
years', as you may see in his book called [A Voice from Heaven,] Written in the
year 1651. and directed to the Commonwealth of England: as also the further
preparation of God in him for the same purpose from his Nativitie to this time;
And the effects thereof you have fully set forth in his book called [An Echo
to the voice from Heaven, etc.] Written in the year 1652. In both which books
is sufficiently showed Gods determination concerning this CommonWealth.

That, from the date of the said books you may observe, how God has in part
fulfilled the words of your Petitioner, and thereby conclude, God will fulfill
the remainder thereof, so that, as sure as the Parliament is dissolved, as sure
shall the King come to his Throne, as it is sufficiently proved in the
aforesaid book. And indeed if your Honors will look into the same, and
seriously read and consider them, you shall find that your Petitioner would
not turn water into blood, but would rather turn blood into water, and water
into wine, to cherish the heart of the sorrowful, that the waters and tears of
repentance might wash away the guilt of blood, and become wine of consolation
to this Nation, in their union and conjunction with the KING.

That without their conjunction to their Native and right KING, there is no
hope of peace, certainty, or safety to this Nation, nor to your selves (most
Noble Worthies) whose actions are glorious, though as yet much imperfect: The
great Mountain Parliament is become a plain before you: Next in order the KING
is to be exalted by you, who is signified by the head-stone, Zachar. 4. 7.

Crown all your actions by setting him up, and be glorious for ever: I am sure,
if you speedily proclaim him KING, you will glorify God thereby, and save an
Ocean of English blood from being spilt, and have such conditions of perfect
peace from GOD and the KING, that you and your seed may be his glorious Nobles
for ever: Therefore, because time is short, use your Jewel for your best
advantage, least you loose it, as the Parliament did, for want of using it
aright, according to the mind of God, and your Petitioners instructions.

May 16. 1653. Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays, that your Honors would
with your most serious thoughts consider these few lines, and set the KING
(Charles Stewart by Name) upon his Throne. Do this and live for ever, 1 John,
2 Chr. 17. John 11. 26. And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

