EXCEEDING IOYFVLL NEVVES FROM DARBY: Declaring how Endimion Porter was taken
at the Grange near Westhallum within 5. Miles of Darby, on the 15. day of
September. 1643.

Also the taking of Sr. John Watson, near Hartford, with the true proceedings
at Bristow, Bath Warwick, Boston, Yorke-shire, Northumherland, Darby-shire,
Cheshire, and Northamptonshire.

With a true information of his Majesty's removal from NOTTINGHAM to DARBY.

Likewise how the Cavaliers made an attempt against Boston, but was opposed by
the Country, 14. slain and three taken prisners.

Also a true Declaration how the Welshmen was driven out of Cheshire, by the
Forces under the command of the Earl of Essex.

LONDON, Printed for HENRY FOWLER. Septem. 20. 1642.

SPECIAL PASSAGES, AND Certain Informations from several places collected for
the use of all those that desire to be truly informed.
From the 13th. of September, to the 20th.
Northampton, Septem. 13.
CAptain Dragner having gathered near 300. Horsemen in the neighboring
Villages, by verrue of a warrant given him by His Excellence, marched round the
County, searching and disarming all Papists, and all others that were known to
be promoters of his war, and enemies to the proceedings of Parliament, from
whom he took great store of Arms and Ammunition plate, and money, packt up in
several places, to be carried to Nottingham, but now it is laid up in
Northampton, till he shall have order from the Parliament how to dispose of it

Hartford, Septem. 14.
THe Earl of Bedfords Troop under the command of Captain ANSELL, marched out of
Hartford toward Puckeridge to search a Papists-house, which was suspected to
have great store of Arms, but by the way they met with Sir John Watson
accompanied with near 200. Cavaliers, which were his tenants, and inhabitants
near Hartford, men of loose carriage and decayed fortunes, which had joined
with the said Sir John Watson, to aid him and the rest of the Commissiousrs, in
the settling of the Commission of Array at Hatford; but being discovered by the
Earl of Bedfords Trpop, Captain Ansell sent a message back to Hartford to raise
the trained bands, giving them notice what he suspected, withal he retreated
unseene back to Hartford, to the end that he might join with the trained
bands, for the suppressing of the said intended disturbance: by that time the
trained bands were in Arms, and ready to entertain them. Sir John Watson and
his men appeared in sight coming off the hill from Ware, the sight of the
trained bands startled him, insomuch that he made a stand, and drew his men up
to a full body, ralling of his men in warlike equipage.

In this order he marched up to the Town, till he came within Pistol shot of
the Town, his men being led by one which he had made Lieutenant of his Company,
he himself bringing up the Rear, and a sumpter horse following him, lead by
one of his servants.

All this while Cap. Ansell with his troop stood still in a close way which
comes from Hodsden, to Hartford, and joins with the way from Ware, within a bow
shot of Hartford: Sir John Watson being past him, he with his Troop rode up to
him as fast as he could gallop, seizing Sir John Watson and his sumpter horse,
before ever his Company could make any resistance, some pistols were
discharged, but little hurt done, for as soon as the Cavaliers saw Sir John
Watson taken, they clapped squrs to their horses and rode away as fast as they
could. Sir John Watson was carried into Hartford, and a guard kept about his
Chamber, at the bell, till they shall receive directions how to bestow him, his
sumptuer horse was laden with plate and money to the value of 4000. pounds,
which was likewise detained. Since the surprizall of Sir John Watson the
country has been very quiet, he being the main disturber of all those parts.

Cheshiere.
THe Deputy Lieutenants in Cheshiere having gathered forces together, and
marched up against the Welshmen who were bilited in that County, but as foone
as they heard that the Parliaments forces were coming, they took their heels
and ran for it, the County stands generally for the King and Parliament.

It was reported that the King intended to come to Westchester, to settle the
commission of Array, others said, that they thought if he came thither, it was
because he meant to get shipping and go for Ireland, but these are but false
rumors, for he intends not to stir from Nottingham.

Warwick.
SIr Edward Peto this day sent out a party from the Castle, to Master Dormers a
great Papist, inhabiting at Grove-parke; where he took ten Cavaliers with a
Jesuit, and great store of powder and Armor, which was hid in a vault which
they had made in a Dove-house.

Darbishire, Septem. 15.
AT the Grange near West Hallam, within 6. miles of Darbie, the house of Mr.
Poudrel a great Papist, was made the magazine for the Papists of that County,
it being both near Nottingham, and guarded by the Cavaliers, Endimion Porter
making it his chief randevouz, but the Major of Darby and the Lieutenant of
the shire having intelligence secretly raised a troop of Dragooners, and two
other troops of Shire horse, and by night marched to the Grange, where before
ever they were discovered; they beset the house, broke open the doors and
entered, where they found Endimion Porter and his son, Mr. Willobie, brother
to Sir Francis Willobie. Having made a privy search they found a Vault which
they had made to go from the Grange to a great house they had at West-Hallum,
being near a bow-shot distance, where they use it seems to bestow their
Priests when any search is made, for there they found one Atkins a known
Jesuit, who was in the habit of a servingman; these they carried to Darbie,
and are to be sent up to London, to be disposed of by the Parliament: some Arms
there was found, but it was most of it carried to Nottingham before their
arrival.

Bristow.
ONe Mason a singing-man of the College, was carried before the Major for
speaking diverse scandalous words against the Parliament, which being proved
against him, he was turned out of his place and kept in prison till the
sessions, that the Law may determine what punishment he shall have, There are
many malignant spirits here, but they are kept under by the well affected
party, so that they dare not be seen to stir, for upon the least knowledge of
either word or act the Major imprisons them, our Newgate is as full of
Cavaliers as yours.

Bath.
WE are here in a very good posture of defense, only we had some Cavaliers come
hither under pretense of coming as usually Gentlemen do at the spring and
fall, to bath; themselves in our springs, but during their abode they privately
endeavored to raise forces, promising them great rewards that would be
assistant; but being discovered they secretly left the Town, otherwise we had
taken order with them and hindered their proceedings.

Wells.
OUr Bishop is turned Cavalier, for he is secretly gone from Wells, and gone
to the King, the Town has ceised upon his Palace, and fortified it with
Ordnance which they borrowed at Bristol, so that now they are well provided to
entertain the Cavaliers.

Yorke-shiere, Septem. 16.
THe Earl of Cumberland summoned the inhabitants of that County to meet him at
Northalerton, and according to his appointment, they met him to the number of
5000. or thereabouts, but when the E. of Cumberland had declared the extent of
his commission, they went away faster then they came, for within 3, hours the
E. had not above 50. followers, for which cause he was much discontented, and
immediately sent Letters to his majesty of his proceedings, withal desiring
him to employ him in some other service, for in that he was like to do him
little good.

Northumberland.
AT Morpoth in Northumberland there was a great combustion made by some
il-affected persons of the Town, insomuch that the trained-bands were enforced
to rise and suppress them, who after they had took them, clapped them in the
Castle feeding them with bread and water, And in a short time, they will hardly
be so lusty.

Boston.
THe Cavaliers by his Majesty's appointment made an attempt against Boston, but
Sir John Hotham having intelligence sent them word beforehand, so that they
were well provided to entertain them, though they came by night, many shots was
made from the Town, which kept the Cavaliers from coming too near the Town,
so that finding they were not like to gain their ends, they retreated, but
before they could get clear, the Country rose upon them, and slew 14. hurt
others, took 3. prisoners, which are coming up to London, to bear the rest
of their fellow Cavaliers company.

On Thursday the King removed from Nottingham to Darby, and it is thought he
means to remove into Wales very suddenly.

FINIS.

