Exceeding Joyful NEWS FROM SCOTLAND Brought over By the Lord Mackland, and
read in the House of Commons upon Thursday last, being the 18. day of this
instant month of August, 1642.

WITH The PALIAMENTS Resolution concerning the Yorkshire propositions declaring
their intentions for the sending down of Forces both of Horse and Foot, for
the safety of the said County.

LIKEWISE The Resolution of the Earl of Rutland, the Earl of Exceter, and the
Lord Paget, with diverse others that are come from His Majesty, are resolved to
come to the House again, if they may be received

Ordered that this be printed and published,

Hen. Elsing, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



August 20. Printed for J. Horten.

Upon Thursday last the House of Commons entered in^o debate of some
Propopositions sent to the House out of Yorkshire, for the defense and safety
thereof against the outrages of the Cavaleers, and having some while disputed
thereon, they resolved some Troops of Horse and Foot should be forthwith sent
into that County

The Lord Mackland came out of Scotland and acquainted the House of certain
businesses agitared in their Assembly concerning the peace and union of the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland.

The Earl of Exeter, the Earl of Rutland, the Lord Paget, and diverse others
are come from His Majesty, and are resolved to come to the House again, if
they may be received in.

EXCEEDING Joyful News from Cumberland.
THere has been of late days many attempts made against the Forts and Castles
that are the keys of the Kingdom, as we count them, and may justly torme
them so, by reason that they are the strong bolds that we have for our
defense, which attempts has bin made by the Cavaleers the scum of the
Country, who has been beaten often off by the Religious party that stands
for Gods true Gospel, yet for all this they could not be at rest and quiet, but
must needs presume to assault Windsore Castle the key and strength of the
adjacent Counties, but they and all their plots could not take effect, for they
were soon discryed, insomuch that if they had not betook themselve to flight,
they had most of them been taken, yet still must these blood-sucking Rebels be
in action, although they come by the worst out, as may plainly appear by
these ensuing particulars:

The Cavaleeres and the rest of those persons that are ill affected to the
Parliament seeing that they could not bring to pass their wicked designs
concerning Portsmouth on the 16. of this instant month of August they assembled
together near to the I Will of Wight, thinking to enter on the same in the night
time, but they were disappointed, for misinformation had been given to the
Inhabitants of the said land, and so by that means they could not bring their
designs perfaction, and understanding also the number of Cavaleers, and the
place where they lay, they appointed Captain Johnson a man of most puistant
courage, to fally forth of the Town with 300. men very we armed, who coming to
the said place, where the Cavaleeres were billited, Captain Johnson gave fire
against them, the Cavaleeres seeing that, most furiously charged against the
said Captain and his followers and hurt some two of his men, but at the last
they bad the worst out, for about 9. of the clock in the forenoon they began to
show themselves in battle array, and after some parley they fell to it like
furious Lions, and when they had felt the angry bullets on both sides, they
rested for the space of two or three hours, and then fell on again with as
much fury as they did at first, which skirmish continued a long time, the
victory being very doubtful on both sides etch striving for the day, which
after, which after some continuance, it pleased God to give the Parliaments
party the day, and the Cavaleers fled, so many as possible could get away, but
Captance Johnson has slain and wound^^ (...) great number of them, having not
above 7. men of his side wounded.

The greatest part of the adjacent Countries near the I Will of Wight stand for
the Parliament, and has taken an Oath and protestation among themselves to
maintain Gods true Religion, His Majesty's Honor, the privileges of
Parliament, and the Laws and Liberties of the Subject, which Protestation was
cheerfully taken amongst diverse poor Country fellows.

It was also credibly reported to the Honorable Assembly, that the State of the
I Will of Wight was very weak, by reason that they wanted Ammunition, and diverse
other things belonging to the said Cattle, and that the walls or the Town was
much out of repair, Whereupon the House being willing to grant their desires,
forthwith resolved that the Earl of Pembroke should go down and have the
charge of the said Castle committed to his trust, which was accordingly
performed, and their Order unto the said Earl for his speedy setting forth.

From Cumberland it is credibly reported that the Cavaleers began to commit
many outrages against the inhabitants thereof, and has taken many Horses and
Cattle from them, and taking mary o-other things of great worth from them, and
still more and more to usurp and ^e, till it pleased God to ^^^ue the
inhabitants thereof with courage to withstand them, and having resolved amongst
themselves to be eased of this great but then which was laid upon them they
generally consented in one voice together to raise all the powers they could
for the suppressing of these wicked persons, and having so done they marched
against them with a great number of men, and took diverse of them prisoners and
are now fully resolved to kill and slay all those that shall oppose them.

The Earl of Cumberland, General of His Majesty's Army does persist in his
actions still, and does endeavor to put the Commission of Array in execution,
but the Lords and Commons have declared, that the County shall raise all the
force they possible can to withstand these persons, that does raise and
endeavor to bring in a Civil war in this Kingdom.

Ordered to be forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Par. D.C.


