AN EXACT RELATION OF The whole Proceedings of Gallant Col. Mitton in North-
Wales, as is assured under the hands of several Commanders of Note.

The besieging of Carnarvin, Denbigh, Flint, and Holt Castles: And Propositions
of Conditions for the surrendering of Anglesey Island; with an account of those
Garrisons not yet besieged.

ALSO, A Narration of the perticualar of a Letter from Plymouth, of the state
of Pendennis, and the surrender of Sal^umb, called Charles-fort, to Colo.
Welden, by Sir EDWARD FORTESCVE.

LONDON Printed for Laurence Chapman.

SIR;
WE received yours bearing date the twenty sixth of this instant, we return
you and Master Lloyd hearty thanks for your care and pains for us, the Letter
you speak of sent per Major Elliot, we fear is miscarried, for we hear not
of it, we are glad of your hopes of money, wherein if you and we are
disappointed, it will endanger not only our own Brigade, but also the whole
work of North Wales, that now through Gods blessing upon the active and
vigilant endeavors of our General, and the Forces under his command is
reduced into a very hopeful condition. We have closely besieged Holt Castle,
Denbigh, Carnarvan and Flynt, all places of exceeding great strength, our
Forces are so many, that all the Countries under our command, can hardly afford
us provision; we are put to use our utmost skill to get maintenance this way,
then you may judge how hard it is with us for want of pay, without which our
Soldiers will not continue patiently to go on in their hard and difficult
duty that hitherto they have undergone, harder then which we dare boldly say,
has not been in any place since these Wars, and besides many of our Soldiers
with us are auxiliaries from Lancashire, who are most unreasonable men if they
are disappointed of their pay, of which they have had many promises from our
hopes of the ^oool* ordained for that service, we see by Your Letter so much
sense of our condition in you, that we need not pres you to more then
confidently we may expect you will endeavor to act for us, we pray you to
hasten away the ammunition, and let us weekly hear from you by Chester Post,
and we having taken care of conveyance of our Letters from and to that place,
so that we shall keep constant correspondence with you.

For news, We acquaint you above with the several siedges we are engaged
upon, each of them has enforced much care and resolution, being all places of
very great strength, well manned and victualled, they have made many sallies,
but ever all of them repulsed with loss, especially Carnarvan, which siedge
was laid wast, and is managed by our General himself, the Commander in
chief, each siedges have made works suitable to the condition of the places,
our hopes must be of starving, not storming any of them, De^bigh we laid
siedge too soon as we took Ruthin, which now is 6. weeks since, its
Governor is a very wilful man, he has very nigh five hundred able fighting
men in it, it has in its situation all the advantages for strength that any
Castle can have, there are many Gentry in it, and some riches in it, but it
would do well, that as they are notoriously refrectorie, so they may be made
notoriously exemplary, by the Justice of the Parliament upon them and their
estates according to their demerits, the Countries have improved their
interests and many other ways have bin used, but all ineffectuall, their
hearts are as hard as the very foundation of the Castle it self, being an
unpierceable rock: there are Mounts raised round about it, and approaches for
battering of a Tower called the Goblings Tower: hoping thereby to deprive them
of the benefit of a Well in that Tower which can we attain, we may then soon
expect the Castle through want of water, they having but one well more which is
usually as it is reported dry in June or July every summer. Carnarvan, that
siedge the General himselfel ay although with exceeding difficulty, the enemy
(if not full as many, yet very nigh and as good men as England has any) had as
many men as the General, yet notwithstanding he at his first aproach to the
town, beat in the enemy from their Ambushes that they had lain, as also out of
the Suburbs, and from a Rock of very great concernment without any considerable
loss at all, the Enemy made since that sidge which has bin now very nigh one
month, two despeperate sallies, at the first they lost slain and taken
prisoners seven or eight, and we but one shoots at the second, 17. whereof one
taken, a Lieutenant, and one or two Lieutenants and four more, our Lieutenant
General was in danger at the sallie, had not the Country appeared cordially
and that generally the sige cold never continued thus long, Mr. Glyn M.
Recorder his brother, Bart. Williams and some others are much assisting, they
have formerly gotten in relief by Sea, but we have gotten so many Boats and
Ships, that we hope they now despair of any more relief that way, they are in
great want of water, this day the General gives them a second summons, God
grant it may take effect.

Yesterday went Commissioners Col. Roger Pope, Col. John Jones, and Edwards
Esquier to Anglesey with Propositions from our General for the surrender of
that Island to him for the Parliament, he formerly had summoned it, and after
two or three weeks consideration, they desired to treat either by
Commissioners or propositions, the General therefore sent both, we hear since
that they have turned out all strangers, and refuse to afford any relief to
Carnarvan, we expect an Answer within few days: Flint Castle two days after
the siedge was laid, 46. of the Enemies horse broke away, but all come in or
are gone to their homes 16 came into us to Hawardin, about ten went into
Cheshire, and the rest being Welshmen are gone to their homes, there is no hold
in all Northwales free from a siedge, but Conway, Haclacke, and Ruthland
Castls, of which also you will hear something very shortly.

Holt has bin be sieged ever since the taking of Chester, it is a very strong
place, starving is the only hopeful way that we can use against that place.
Sir, you may perceive we neither have bin nor are idle, we hope the Lord will
continue to bless our endeavors, for which we beg your prayers, we rest Sir,

Your assured friends and servants. Rich, Price, Tho. Mason, George Twis^eton.


By express^ from West is thus certified.

Charles Fort (sometime called Salcombe) is surrendered to us, to the obedience
and use of the Parliament, which is the only considerable place that the Enemy
now held in all the West parts, except that strong Garrison of Pendennis Castle,
they in that garrison are very refractory, and obstinate, They have hopes of
some farther design in hand, and resolve to try the u^termost, they are blockt
up close by land and by Sea, they cannot annoy the country, nor get in any
thing considerable to do themselves good, they will shortly grow to want of
provisions, and be driven to straits, The Inhabitants of the County of
Cornwall, are now turned faces about, they have now tasted so deep of the
bitter of War, that they relisht peace as sweetest morsel, and most
desirable.

The Articles given by Col. Welden to Sir Edward Fortescue the Governor
thereof were very fair, in brief thus, The Governor and the rest of the
gentlemen to merch a way with their Arms and all their own goods without
molestation, to their own dwellings for three Months (doing nothing
prejuditiall to the Parliament) and if they cannot compound within that time,
to have passes to go beyond Sea, It was agreed that they should all march out
of the Fort with Drums beating, Colors flying, Musket, Pikes, match, powder,
bullet, etc. and after three volleyes to return, and afterward to deliver up
the Fort, Ordnance, Arms, and all Ammunition and provisions to Colonel
Welden, or to whom he shall appoint, without any diminution, or spoil, all
which was performed with diverse other particulars, which I will not trouble you
with, this is the summonary of all, and may suffice for your intelligence and
assurance that I am

Yours etc.

FINIS.

