THE EXAMINATION OF Colonel Lunsford, Colonel Vavasor, Captain Noes,
Lieutenant Colonel Ballard, Sergeant Major Wallis, Cornet Strangewaies,
Lieutenant VVh^te, Sergeant Jones, and Mr. Bland, Delinquents.

Who were taken in the Fight at Kineton in Warwickshire, and were committed to
Warwick Castle, and on the the 17. of November were examined upon some
particular Articles.

Whereunto is annexed a SPEECH OF Colonel Lunsfords, which he spoke at his
Examination.

Printed for Tho. Cook. November. 19. 1642.

C R
royal insignia
The Examination of Colonel Lunsford, Colonel Vavasor, etc.
1. REport was made, that upon the Examination of Colonel Lunsford, he was
found to have a treacherous intent and a private conspiracy with the
Delinquents, to betray it into the hands of of the Malignants, resident in the
City and Suburbs, and whose exmination consists of these 3. heads, viz.

I. Concerning the Delinquents in the Tower.

II. The Lord Digby and French is concerned in this Conspiracy.

III. His urgent provoking Sir John Byron to assist his Majesty against the
Parliament.

Colonel Uavasors exammination was reported, who says, that he had no hand in
the conspiracy; only Colonel Lunsford invited him to List himself in the
number of his Majesty's Commanders, in this present design, and employment of
his Majesty's service.

Captain Noes exammination was reported, who deposes and says, Captain Leg
his escape was first practiced by the Earl of Northampton, who sent several
sums of money toward his lollity among the Saylors that he might the better
thereby work his own ends, as afterward it so happened.

Leivetennant Colonel Ballards exammination was reported by Mr. Staply, that
Captain Chidley had brought down to the Army many instuctions from the Earl of
Lindsey Lord General, and that Colonel Goring should be Leivetenant General
of the Army, and that Prince Rupert and the Earl of Newcastle with their
several troops of horse should meet the Lord General in Nottinghamshere and
there to take into their charg the Dragoones formerly appointed to be raised by
his Majesty's command, all which instructions came from Mr. Holborne, and were
dispersed by Captain Cihdly.

Sergeant Mayor Wallis upon his exammination s^ith, that the French would
assist his Majesty, and that the Bishops and other the Clergy would at their
own charge maintain 2000 horse, with a collection through all their Diocesses
for three tenthes at the least, or more if occasion shall require.

Colonel Strangewayes, upon his exammination says that he is tied up by an
oath of secrecy, and therefore durst not answer to any of the interrogatoryes,
which oath he says was given him by Master Pierce his Chamber Chamber in the
presence of Commissary Wilmot, which refuses to make any further answer hereto.

Lieutenant White, Sergeant Jones, their Examinations, who said, That they had
taken this Oath, and that they were urged to take it by Colonel Ashburnham and
Captain Pollard.

Mr. Bland upon his Examination upon the 7. Article, says, That the seven
Priests landed at Foy in Cornwall, he was commanded with other troops
belonging to Sir Bevill Greenvile, to couvey them to the Marquis of Hartford at
Sherborne, which went after into Wales with the Marquis, and what since is
become of them, he cannot further depose.

A Speech of Colonel Lunsfords, upon His Examination.
I Stand here before you a Prisoner accused of High Treason, and Liberty is
offered me, it is true, but like Merchants you value it at such a rare, that my
Fidelity, and all that is due to a Noble Mind, must be the price to purchase
it: If I refuse what you propound, Rack, Torture, Loss of Goods, Lands, and
perhaps Life it self threatened: Hard choice, yet I must choose; It is in my
power to be a Freeman, but how? If I will be a slave, I have already given my
Faith unto my Prince, upon whose Head this Crown, by all Law of Nature and
Nations does justly appertain. Shall I falsify that Faith? (Heaven forbid) In
that word Prince there is a Deity enclosed, who wounds them, wounds the Divine
Nature: Why then shall I draw my Sword under so holy a Veil, was Religion ever
built in blood? Did the Primitive Church ever propagate the Gospel with other
then their own blood, which they at all times patiently shed, not only for
God, but their Princes. I have read, that as the Devil was the first Rebel,
so Judas was the only Traitor amongst the Apostles; And shall we rank our
selves amongst those hated examples of Disloyalty and treachery, (God forbid)
besides Traitors are hateful to all Princes, see therefore what will be the
end of such ill grounded War, I see the misery with horror that attends it,
wasting of goods, ruining of towns, and Cities, and the unjust liberty which
we usurp lost in an instant, and wife, children, and blood, which man holds
dear: if we pity not ourselves let us pity those we hold dear; Kings have
power to subdue the stubbornest, therefore this blessed arm that stretches
out to receive us, when all is a wilderness we shall beg that which we now
refuse, for my part I am in your power, and know not how this Speech will be
taken, howsoever you dispose of me, I will never stain mine Ancestors, nor
leave the title of Traitor upon my posterity, but will end with the saying of
that worthy gentleman M. H. you may when you please take my head from my
shoulders but not my heart from my Sovereign.

FINIS.

