AN EXACT Relation, Of a battle fought by the Lord Moore, against the Rebels
in Ireland; with the number of them that were slain on both sides.

London, Printed. 1641.

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms
AN EXACT RELATION Of a Battle fought by the Lord Moore, against the Rebels in
Ireland; with the number that were slain on both sides.
THE Lord Moore hearing of the Rebellion of the Papists; sent for all his
Tennants, and asked them, if they would assist him in suppressing of the
Rebels; their answer was, they would be ready at all times, to venture their
lives, for their King, him, and their Country: His Lordships answer was, he
was very thankful to them for their faithfulness to his Majesty, and also for
their faithfulness to him, and to their Country; and if they would assist
him, he would by the 30. of October provide Arms for them; and he would go
find out some of the Rebels, who did much spoil all the Country their abouts;
their answer was, with all their hearts they would assist him, to the uttermost
of their lives, and fortunes promising all to attend him on the 29. of October.

In the mean time, the Conspirators hearing of my Lord Moors design upon them,
they made themselves two thousand strong; intending to take my Lord Moore in
his house, and to ca^ry him away prisoner; and to seize upon all his Munition,
and to take his hundred horse, that he had then in readiness: he having notice
of their coming, sent post f^r all his friends, and Tennants; for that he was
before their coming furnished with a thousand men, but had not g^tten in Arms
for half of them: The Rebels drew near his house, to the number of two
thousand, with Drums, and Colors displaid before them. My Lord Moore seeing
them so n^er, thought it not wisdom to let the Rebels besiege him in his
house; therefore he marched out to meet with them, and having met with them in a
narrow passage, which went to hi^ house, a Rock being on one side, and a River
on the other side; he placed his horse in the Front; where began a very smart
fight between them; but the Rebels still pressed to gain the p^ssage to his
house; which they with much ado gained: so that by that m^ans, the Lord Moors
Horse could stand him in no stead; neither was he able to charge them any more
with his Foot; so that he was forced to march to a City three miles of.

The number of the Rebels slain in this fight, was three hundred; the number of
the otherside slain, was forty; th^n the Rebels entered the Lord Moors house,
and took all that they found in it, and killed up all his Cattle; and pillaged
his Tennants houses, and destroyed all their Cattle round about.

The chief Commander of the Rebels is, Sir Patrick Oneal, the high Sheriff of a
County in Ireland, who, with the other Rebels, published many declarations in
writing to this effect; That they were not a conquered Na^ion, nor would not
live under the Laws, that have now of late been enacted; and they would have a
free use of th^i^ Religion without interruption; which they had now cause to
fear, would be much straightened, if not u^terly taken away: therefore it is high
time to stir, since it is of so great a c^nsequence; therefore all that wish
well to the Catholic Faith, let them now betake themselves to their Atms, and
come now and assist us who are now in the field, to defend the Religion with
our swords, which has been established in this Kingdom, by our worthy
Ancestors: and hereby we shall put honor upon our Religion, and make our names
famous thorough the Christian world; and if any of the Catholic Religion
shall refuse to assist us in this our just def^nce, let them know, they will be
kept under like slaves, and draw upon them a curse from all the Catholics in
the world, and the curse of us Priests, and Friars, and Soldiers.

Given at the Council, held the 31. of October, in the County of Monno.
Patrick Oneal. Hugh Mackmadouse. Father Patrick. Friar Dennis.


FINIS.

