EXCEEDING TRVE NEVVES FROM Boston, Sherbourne-Castle. Oxford, Exeter Beverley,
Bristow and Ireland.


Wherein is declared how ten Cavaliers were taken near Serges in
Lincolneshiere, with 3. Ships and great store of treasure, and brought to
London on tuesday the sixth of September, 1642.

Also an Information given to the Major of Bristow, by certain Irish Merchants,
that the King of Spain has set up his Standard at WASHFORD in IRELAND.

Whereunto is annexed the proceedings of the Earl of Bristow who has besieged
Sherbourne-Castle with thirty thousand men.

With the truest inteligence of the proceedings in every respective Place above
mentioned.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Fowler: September 7. 1642.

Joyful News FROM SHERBOVRNE CASTLE;
THe Earl of Bedford has besieged Sherbourn Castle where the Marquess of
Hartford has, encamped himself, having but 800. Horse, and a small number of
Foot, and the Earl of Bedford has 30000. men both Horse and Foot; by which
means it is impossible that they, should escape, only the Castle is strong,
being built by Sir Walter Rawleigh and guarded with a Grove of Wood, by which
means his men have great opportunity to make outworks to keep them from
having access or coming over readily to offend or surprise the Castle.

But they, after their escape from Wells, being so fiercely pursued by the
Forces of the Parliament they wanted time to furnish themselves with needful
provision, (namely Victuals) as Corn, Bread, Beef, or the like, by reason of
which they are in great want of sustenance, only from Wittom and Evercrutch
Park, the Manners of Sr. Ralph Hopton, before the Arrival of the Earl of
Bedford, they received such provision as they could at that instant provide, as
Venison and such other things as they could spare.

From Bristow.
BRistow has sent the Earl of Bedford both men and Ordnance to batter down
the Outworks, so that they might have free recourse to the Castle, the
Citizens being very ready to lend their aid and assistance, and to disburse
Moneys for all sorts of provision, that may further that Service, (namely)
Powder, March, and Bullet, and all things that can be thought necessary for
such a design.

From Exeter.
EXeter has sent men to his aid, with store of Munition, so that it is
impossible that any of those disturbers should escape, or gain power to breed
a further trouble in that Country.

From Beverley.
THe Siedge being raised, Sr. John Hotha^ has Fortesied Beverley, being a
strong Town, and one of the greatest Markets in all that County.

From Boston.
INformation is given from Boston, that on Thursday last a Thousand men were
raised on that side of the Country, for to appreh^nd ten Cavaliers which were
landed at Serges near Boston, with 3. Ships wherein was great store of
treasure, several Trunks being landed and they drawing up their Ordnance to
guard it. it is conceived that they were pursued by the Earl of Warwick, and
forced to ^^ri^^ in there to secure themselves.

From Oxford.
OXford Scholars have carried great store of Stones to the top of the Tower of
Maudlins Colldege which joins to the Bridge with intent to throw them down
upon the heads of those that shall oppose them.

The Scholars are all turned Cavaliers, having to their Commanders the Tapster
of the Roe-Buck, and the Chamberlain of the Red Lion, with the assistance of a
Barber.

These commit several outrages on the inhabitants of the Town, being
countenanced by the Principles of the Colleges as it is generally conceived, if
this be the fruit of learning, good Lord deliver us.

From Jreland.
AT Bristow there landed certain Irish Merchants, who coming before the Major
declared very sad ridings, the sum of which was, that at Washford the King of
Spain has set up his Standard.

Likewise declaring the great misery that Kingdom is like to undergo if
present aid be not sent over.

On Tuesday the 6. of September certain Cavaliers were brought to Town, which
were taken near Boston.

To this I have thought good to add a fit discourse that does somewhat allure
to this.
WHen that England and Scotland was in Contention, the T^^kish EMPEROR had an
intention invade them; and take the advantage of their civil discord; to which
end he summoned all Bashames and Beglerbegs, giving them notice of his
intention, withal demanding their advice, which most of them did, applauding
the design, but one among the rest stood up, and desired a hearing, which
being granted, he told the Emperor that in a dream his fancy showed him a
vision which was as follows.

He thought he faw two brothers fighting sorely for a prize, and during their
combat there came a thief and endeaeoured to feise the prize which they
fought for, which the two brothers seeing, left fighting with one another and
beat him sorely, taking him and binding him hand and foot, and carried him
into eternal captivity.

Great Emperor (says he) though England and Scotland jarre in private
contention, and hurt one another sorely, yet if any foreign enemy should
venture upon them they will like the two brothers full upon him and doubtless
great will be his overthrow.

The Emperor heard this and desisted in his design, esteeming his counseled
the best, giving him great thanks, saying thou have well counselld.

This may be applied to Spain, and I do pray heartily that it would please
God to putt into his Majesty's heart to join with the Parliament, that so
these forces might be employed against Spain which seeks the ruin of the
Church and Protestant Religion, that as in England so in Ireland, Gods word may
flourish and the whore of Babylon be utterly destroyed.

FINIS.

