THE EXAMINATION OF IOSVAH HILL, taken at NORTHAMPTON, in the Presence of the
EARL of ESSEX, General of the Army, the 14th of September.
THe King sent a Letter to Master Major of Nottingham, requiring one thousand
pound: And particular Warrants to diverse private men for two hundred pounds a
man, And other several Sums. If this was not paid, the Cavaliers threatened
to plunder.

After, His Majesty was pleased to send the Lord Newarke to Master Major to
double the thousand pound.

Captain Leg said, that he thought Nettingham men were A Generation of
Devils: And said, if he knew a Roundhead, he would knock him over the pate.

The House of one Mistress Piggot was plundered by Warrant from His Majesty.

The Trained Bands of the County of Nottingham being summoned in by Warrant
from the Lord Newarke, were all disarmed by Cavaliers: Threatening any one that
refused, to pistol him.

Sergeant Bowne, and Alderman Toplady, have used all possible endeavors to
have taken away the life of one Master Hooper, Steward to the Countess of
Clare, in charging of him with high Treason, for not delivering up the Arms of
his Lady.

There were in and about Nottingham near 500 Irish, very many Commanders, Irish
and Papists, and increased daily.

September 14th IOSVAH HILL.

September 9th 1642.
THese are to certify all those whom it may concern, That I Augustine Harper
of Market Harborow, being taken by the Cavaliers, who took away my Mare,
Saddle and Bridle, and all the money in my purse, and being brought before the
Lord of Carnarvan to be examined. Notwithstanding, they had no just occasion
against me, did abuse me with ill Language, calling me Round-headed Rogue, and
that I was an enemy to the King, to which I answered, That I was as good a
Subject to his Majesty or his Lordship, he called for a Book, and said, he
would try that, and did tender me an Oath, whether I would fight for the King
against the Parliament, which I refusing to take, was committed to the custody
of the Cavaliers.

Augustine Harper.
Witness to the same,

Andrew Gill.



Ordered to be printed, together with the Examination of Augustine Harper taken
at Northampton, 9 th SEPTEMBER.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Husbands, and John Frank. 1642.


