Exceeding Joyful NEWS FROM Plymouth and Devonshire.

Sent in a Letter from the Deputy Lieutenants to the House of Commons. December.
8. Wherein is declared the full proceedings of the Cavaleirs against the
Parliament Forces in the said County, from the 4. of December. to the 9. 1642.

Also a full Relation of the besieging of Plymouth, by the Lord Grandison, the
L. Digby, and Commissarie Wilmot, with 9000. men, and how they were beaten off
by the parliament forces that were within the Town, killing about 850. the Lord
DIGBIE being shot through the shoulder, with a musket bullet.

December. 10. Printed for H. Blundoll. 1642.

THE RELATION OF The great Overthrow given to the Lord M^hune, the Lord
Grandison, the Lord Rivers, the Lord Digby, and Commissary Wilmot.
December the 8, 1642.
By the Renowned and Heroic Champions, the Volunteers of Plymouth, being in
number 2000 against the aforenamed Persecu^ors with 9000.
UPon the 7. of this month, the Lord Grandison advanced from the Kings Army
with 3000. horse and foot, with an intent to march against the town of
Marlborow in Wilt-shire, but having received a Letter from the L. Mohune,
concerning the present estate of Plymouth, he changed his Resolution, and
marched toward the said Town, to join his Forces with the Lord Mohune, the
Lord Digby, Commissary Wilmot, etc.

But by reason of his long and tedious ^ll Wednesday night, he lay short of the
other Forces about 8. miles, on Thursday morning.

But toward 12. of the clock the same day he got to the Lord Mohune, where he
joined his Forces with him, and the rest of his Confederates, and about three
of the clock in the Afternoon they began to move forward toward Plymouth, and
about five of the clock they came within one mile of the said Town.

But the Forces that were there billeted having information of their coming,
prepared a Supper for them, and mounted their Ordnance, setting their men in
battle array, and in a very good posture for their own defense, and so soon as
the Cavale^rs made their approach nearer the Town, the Plymouth Forces began to
welcome them, sending them a great Charger full of black plums, which plums
were as bad as poison to those that tasted of them; for they made such a
slanghter amongst the Kings Army, that many hundreds of them lay dead before
the Town Walls.

The Lord Digby and Commissary Wilmot seeing this, with much futy and violence
they adventured up with their Forces, and gave a desperate charge against the
Parliament-Forces, but did very little execution, and although they were fix to
one, yet our men gave them the foyl, obtaining a happy Victory, and putting
near upon 9. hundred and fifty to the sword, with the loss of one hundred and
twenty men, besides the Lord Digby is dangerously wounded, being shot through
the shoulder with a bullet.

The Lord Mohune and the rest of the Cavaleers are retreated 20. miles from
Plymouth, and it is very probable he will have but little stomach to come
thither again, by reason they tasted of such hard fare; yet if they do come to
make another attempt, the plymouth forces are resolved to prelent unto them the
like plums which they tasted of before.

The like proceedings has bin in Cheshire, between the Lord Rivers and his
Adherents, against the well-affected party of that County, as it was declared
in a Letter to Sir William Brewerton, a member of the House of Commons,
intimating that the L. Rivers having raised an Army of Papists and disaffected
protestants is very active in that County to put in execution the Commission of
Array, and plunders and pillages all those that refuse to yield obedience to
his illegal Commands.

And therefore the County desires, that the Parliament will speedily take order
for sending some Commanders unto them, for a great part of that County stands
very well affected to the Parliament, and are resolved to spend their lives and
fortunes in this cause.

Whereupon the Parliament have ordained that some speedy aid shall be sent unto
them, and that they shall associate themselves together, to defend themselves
from tyranny and oppression, and to maintain the peace of that County against
all that did oppose them.

And it is credibly informed, that upon Tuesday last there was a general
meeting of the well-affected Protestants, who stood in opposition against the
Lord Rivers and his Cavaleers, and at the last gave them a Charge, killing
about 40. of his men.

Whereupon the L. Rivers mustred his Forces together, placing them in battle
array, and drawing them up to a head, and at the last wheeling about, and
obtaining the wind, they charged against the Parliament Forces, but after one
hours fight they were forced to retreat, by reason that two of our Troops of
horse broke in upon the L. Rivers left wing, breaking their Ranks and files,
and bringing them to a most confused Order, killing 2. or 300, and putting the
rest to flight.

Upon Friday last, there was Letters came to the House of Commons, directed to
Mr. Speaker, out of Devonshire, informing the house of the true estate of
things in that County, and that the Cavaleers do exceedingly plunder and spoil
that County, and that they are marching from Tavestack toward Plymouth, and do
threaten that Town but the Committee for the Militia being there, they have
gotten some new forces into the Town, and are in a good posture of defense.

Also the Deputy Lieutenants at Excester have raised three Regiments of the
Trained Bands of the adjacent Counties, and are resolved to aid and assist
Plymouth, The Parliament has also made the E. of Stamford General of
South Wales, and his Son the young Lord Gray, General of Liecester shire,
Darby-shire, and Lincolnshire.

The Lords and Commons assembled in Parl. do declare, that all soldiers that
do commit any offense contrary to their Orders shall be brought to condign
punishment, and that they may be severely proceeded against according to Law.

FJNIS

