Exceeding Joyful NEVVES FROM THE TREATY CONTAINING The Acts of Agreement,
between the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the Parliaments Commissioners, on
Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Saturday last. Brought by the Post on Sunday
November. 5. 1648. With His gracious Speech at the Council Table, for His
present coming to London, and proclaiming of Peace throughout His Realms and
Dominions. And the Earl of Northumberlands Declaration thereupon.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family DIEV ET MON DROIT
C. R.

HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE



Imprinted at London, for P. LOVNDEL, 1648.

JOYFUL NEWS FROM THE TREATY Communicating the proceedings of the Kings
Majesty and the Commissioners, on Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday last.
Right Honorable,
ON Wednesday morning last the Kings Majesty and the Commissioners met in the
Treaty Chamber, and taking their places at the Council Table according to the
usual manner, the Earl of Northumberland rose up, and made a short Speech,
Humbly defiring his Majesty to remove his averseness from the settling of
Religion, and to hearken unto the advice of His great and loyal Council, so
much tending to the honor of His Majesty and Posterity, and the settling of a
true and lasting peace throughout all His Realms and Dominions.


Which done, his Lordship presented a Copy of the Parliaments last Votes
brought by Sir Peter Killegrey, on Tuesday night last, in answer to his
Majesty's Enlargement of Concessions touching Episcopacy. His Majesty (after
reading the same) rose up out of the Chair of State, and made a very learned
and excellent Speech to the Commissioners, the effect whereof was as follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
WHereas I find (by your present paper) that the two Houses of Parliament are
not satisfied with my last Concessions, I shall therefore endeavor (as a
further testimony of Our candid Desires for peace) to give you a more ample and
satisfactory Answer touching the said particulars; especially that concerning
Religion, and therefore (considering the period of our days) desire no longer
detraction of time, but that we may forthwith insist thereon, to the end, that
all differences may be composed, and peace and unity established throughout Our
Realms and Dominions, which God of his infinite mercy grant.


His Majesty having thus graciously declared Himself, the Commissioners began
to proceed according to their Instructions, and desired a more fuller and
satisfactory Answer, touching the utter extirpation of Episcopacy, which took
up some time of debate in pro and con, and the day being far spent, they
referred the further results thereof to the happy succession of the morrow
following.

And (accordingly) yesterday morning they met again, where the streams of joy
issued from the current of the hearts both of Priuce and People, who came to a
final close upon all the Proposals, His Majesty promising upon his Royal Word
to pass those Bills into Acts which He had already assented to. And being
further pressed by the Commissioners so sign to the Bill for the establishing
of Episcopacy, his Majesty desired respite of time till Saturday morning, which
was accordingly granted.

And this morning (about the accustomed hour) his Majesty gave the
Commissioners a visit, and sitting down in the Chair of State, presented a
Paper to them, which is said to be very satisfactory, containing His Royal
Assent to the Proposition of the Church, and likewise to all the rest of the
Bills and Proposals. This joyful tidings were soon echoed throughout the
Island; insomuch that the Bells rang tryumphantly in all the respective
Parishes. But by reason of the sudden dispatch of the Post, I am forced to
conclude, and remain

Your Honors devoted servant, J. RISHTON.
Newport 4 October. 1648.
The voice of the Kingdom touching King Charles.
Whereas base degenerate Spirits would sell or their Birthrights for a mess
of pottage, or a deceitful smile of a shadowing Prince induce them to a belief
that He would fight for their freedoms, when they know that the people
throughout all Nations are now staves to their Princes, and cannot be ignorant
likewise how for many Ages together this Design has been violently prosecuted
against the free Commoners of this Nation. And could it ever be expected that
Christians should be so inhumane, and self destructive to sheath their swords
in their own bowels, and fight with their Enemies against themselves, to make
themselves, staves to their enemies and their posterities for ever, but that
they were not sensible of their own freedomse, both by the Law of God, Man, and
Nature, but deluded by false prophets, who taught the works of the Law, and not
of Grace, making the people believe that all power were ordained of God, and to
resist these powers.

And lest there should be any of this seed yet left in the Nation, spreading
abroad this doctrine to deceive the people with these fallacies, I shall give
them an explanation of the true sense thereof, and represent these ensuing
Articles or Charge, against a perfidious Prince, or an unfaithful Parliament,
viz.

1 God has ordained all things in heaven and earth for the good and well being
of man; and what power soever is contrary to, or acting against the same, is no
power of God, but again his express will and pleasure, and therefore most
lawful to be disobeyed; whereupon the Parl. levied war against the King, and
disobeyed his pretended power.

2 Every Officer appointed for the good of the republike and well-government of
the people, as the King, parliament, Justices of peace, etc. is elected by the
people; the King by three several voices, by way of consent and approbation of
the people, before his Coronation.

3 The Kingly Office as it is a great trust, so the people will not admit him
to the execution thereof, without He swears to be faithful in performing the
trust reposed in Him, executing their Laws and Statutes, for their peaceable
government, and not otherwise.

4 In case any of the Trustees shall forfeit their trust reposed in them by the
people, in breaking their Oaths, violating the peoples laws, faeedoms, and
privileges, leavying war against them, to destroy them; the people are bound
by the Law of God, Man and Nature to disobey them, and bring them to speedy
trial for breach of that trust which they reposed in them.

5 It is lawful for the people after such breach of trust to use all Coercive
power for bringing to condign punishment such Trustees, and to fight with kill
and slay all such as shall oppose them therein.

And it it is further declared, That if God has ordained all things for the
good of the people; what earthly principalities or powers which the people have
chosen for their good, can enjoin them to obedience in destructive and
unlawful? Is not Salus populi suprema Lex, The peoples safety the supreme Law?
And what Laws and powers there are contrary hereunto, are not they all void,
being against the supreme and highest of all Laws, to which all other must
give place and precedence, and all Kings and Parliaments veil to, and stand in
fear of.

SIR,
SInce my last, Here has happened several Overture; between his Majesty and the
Parliaments Commissioners; they have had much debate upon the Propositions,
especially that concerning the Church, which the King stuck much at; but the
dark Cloud being expelled, and the splendour of the Gospel shining most
gloriously in the eyes of his Majesty, He was graciously pleased to declare his
Royal Assent to all the Propositions, and to grant His Royal Word to pass
all things desired by his two Houses, that may be agreeable and consonant to
the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom. And as to the business of the Church
(which is all they stick at) the King has promised to give his concurrence
therein, rather then his People shall suffer for his dis-assenting. Just upon
the close hereof, news came that all things were agreed on, but the Treaty not
to break off till ten at night.

Brought by the Post on Sunday November. 5. 1648. And dated from Newport on
Saturday last, at 3. of the clock in the Afternoon.

FINIS.

