THE Execution of the late KING, JUSTIFIED; And the Parliament and Army therein
VINDICATED: Published for Satisfaction to the Kingdom,

By a Wel-wisher to the safety and freedom thereof.

Deuteronomy. 16.18. Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all the Cities which
the Lord thy God gives thee, etc.

Deuteronomy. 1.17. Ye shall have no respect of person in judgment, ye shall not
fear the face of man, for the judgment is Gods.

Amos 5.24. And let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a
mighty River.

Jer. 22.17. But thy eyes and thy heart are but only for thy covetousness,
and to shed innocent blood, and for oppression and destruction even to do this.

Levit. 23.17. He that kills any man, shall be put to death.

Numb. 35.31, 33. Moreover ye shall take no recompense for the life of the
murderer, which is worthy to dye: but he shall be put to death. So ye shall
not pollute the Land wherein ye shall dwell: for blood defiles the Land, and
the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood
of him that shed it.

Jer. 22.18. Therefore, thus says the Lord, against Jehoiakim, the Son of
Josiah King of Judah, they shall not lament him, saying: Ah, my Brother, or ah
Sister, neither shall they mourn for him, saying, Ah, Lord, or ah, his glory.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, in Aldersgate Street, 1649.

To the Reader.
Judicious Reader,
I Thought good (in times of so great and voluntary distraction and
dissatisfaction about our civil rights) to testify my integrity to the good of
this my native Country, according to my ability by some following Propositions
and resolutions of doubts thereupon in reference to the late transactions of
Parliament and Army in justice upon the late King, and the rather (though many
more rational and so should have been more satisfactory discourses hereupon
has been published) because some men notwithstanding remain obstinate and
perverse under a clear light; therefore as by many witnesses a truth is the
more confirmed, so by the multiplicity, diversity, and distinction of arguments
and reasons (as for ought I know these are from other men's) a just cause may be
more clearly manifested, and the spirits of these men (being satisfied) reduced
to an acknowledgement of the past equal proceedings of (though the minor part)
the Parliament and Army, and the present perseverance of both, in them,
therefore when thou read it, do it not obstinately, but be willing to be
convicted by the truth, which is the maine end for which I offer up these my
first Fruits to thee and the Kingdom, which to attain is the only desire of
him, who is thine unknown friend in the peoples service, etc.

THE Execution of the late KING, JUSTIFIED; And the Parliament and Army therein
VINDICATED.
AS wise Men before they build, lay a good foundation; so for a right
procession in this discourse, we must consider the constitution of Government
from which [not being rightly weighed] springs all our differences and
contradictions in this Kingdom; I shall therefore state the constitution of
Government two ways, viz. Legal, and Illegal constitutions or ordination of
Government, to explain the terms; Lawful ordination of Government is that
which [as near as possible] is according to Gods prescription: Unlawful, is
that which is contrary to, or diverse from Gods prescription in that way of
Government which the people shall choose, which has been [according to the
then immoderate importunity of the people] since Saul, almost hitherto, Kingly
Government, and that in three lawful respects, viz. By unction, the peoples
approbation or election, and lawful succession; so that whosoever is qualified
with these three particulars must be [according to the constitution of that
Government] a lawful King, but it being clear that the first of these
particulars [ viz. immediate unction or unction by commandement] is withdrawn
[so that in that sense no King now can be called the Lords Anoynted] from us;
it remains, that he that is King by the peoples election or approbation, and
lawful succession, is [according to the institution of that Government] a
warranted King: But on the contrary, he that is not so elected [lawfull
succession (to one freely chosen and not that usurpt authority and forced
submission) being only beneficial to a man for preferment in choice, if he
(as well qualified) come in competition with others] his authority is usurped
and illegal. For let him plead succession [though lawful] never so much, yet
if the people forbear to choose him, because defective in his qualifications;
he is, in a degree as incapable as a Fool for the Office; so then lawful
succession depending upon the peoples election; hence will arise this
undeniable Proposition, that that man that assumes the Kingly office only by
virtue of [though lawfull] succession is a Usurper, and does presume upon the
peoples rights; now this was the only plea that our late King had or could
have to his Office: seeing he could pretend no right to it from unction,
because as (before said) it is withdrawn, neither from the people [it is
clear in that they have made so much opposition against him] that he
continued in it, neither was it from the peoples free election, that he
reigned so long, in that he never acknowledged such a power to be in them,
'twas only then through an ignorant submission by them (or if they were
convicted of their right yet through their impotency) that our late King first
assumed and since so long continued in the Office, now therefore, the title
that he (on his part) claimed to it, and thereupon entered, was by a pretended
right through [though illegal, because originally from conquest] succession:
So that the premises considered, there needs no other proof to demonstrate
that his title was usurpt; yet for further conviction [and not to lay any more
burden upon him, or prejudice him in the thoughts of people, he having enough
already where ever he be] and satisfaction to men's spirits concerning his
Execution, and that we may with more ease and contentedness of mind (in
respect of the flesh) forget him from whom we had received, and could expect
so little good [though his impenitency should better us] let us consider and
review in our selves, his actions since his reign, even to his very death
(which should sadden us to think of) and they have clearly demonstrated that
he took it upon no other terms, then to rule according to his will; which
[though it lay in his heart from his first possession] was not evaporated till
these his latter and last years, wherein [the people claiming their rights] he
has most manifestly and audaciously [though contrary to all reason] declared
himself inaccountable to men, [though from them as a people (and so his
Master) he had received, if it were Legal, his power and authority] for his
actions; then which nothing can more nullify and frustrate the Law of God,
which upon a breath thereof, does include all whatsoever, without exception of
persons, under the penalty of it; as to instance several, universal
injunctions of God in Scripture, Sine aliqua exceptione and quae ad universos
pertinent, without any exception, but belong to all alike as men: as in
particular, that in Levit. 20.2. The Lord there speaking unto Moses, said, Thou
shall say also to the Children of Israel, whosoever he be of the Children of
Israel, or of the strangers that dwell in Israel, that gives his Children to
Molech, he shall dye the death, etc. Moses and all the head Officers of the
people being included in [if in this transgression] the punishment thereof, in
as much as they were among the Children of Israel; and in the 10. verse of the
same Chapter, God says, The man that commits adultery with another man's
Wife, etc. shall dye the death: Now we know, that the Office of any, though
never so high, does not, or at least should not elevate him above his being, he
is a man still, though in Office a King, and though in respect thereof, God
says, I said ye are Gods, that is in respect of your Office, be it high or
low, which is, to manage your power in the execution of justice and judgment,
in which you bear my image, ye are gods in being like God, though I have said
so, yet ye shall dye like men, which in the general sense of it, may have
respect to a temporal death common to all men, whose nature you Magistrates
bear, yet may very well bear this interpretation likewise, Ye shall dye like
men; That is, all sorts of men [if alike qualified] if murderers, ye shall dye
like men; that is, those men that are murderers; if adulterers, ye shall
suffer like adulterers, the rigor (in reference to many sins) not the
punishment of the Law being taken away by Christ: Now then, the former
interpretation agreeing with the precited Text, shows clearly that the Law of
God exempts none (neither high or low, rich or poor Magistrates or Subjects)
from the punishment [in case of transgression] thereof; now for any man to
plead freedom [because in the highest authority] which notwithstanding is
derived, is to contradict the Word of God, which says, Numb. 35.30. Whosoever
kills any person, the Judge shall slay the murderer through witnesses, etc.
And yet such (would be outlawes) will plead exemption; (I speak not (only in
reference to this opinion in the late King) but to such that are of his spirit,
that connived at, and still approve of such an opinion in him, at least at the
impunity of it, whether they be Magistrates or others, ye look more at the
privilege and the honor then the care of the Office, and therefore he was,
and you are, far from Solomon's spirit, that discerned it to be the hardest
matter to govern the people in righteousness, and therefore made it his
prayer to God, to beg wisdom, and that not for his own ends, but to rule
the people in equity; he made their good the center of his endeavors, you, the
late Kings prerogative, his riches, greatness, and long life, the centers of
yours; Solomon rejected all these, in competition with the peoples good, and
how acceptable it was to God, will appear in 1 Kings 3.11. An example we have
of the same spirit in Christ himself toward the good of his Sheep, John
10.11. Where he says, I am that good Shepherd, that good Shepherd lays
down his life for his Sheep: But how distant was the spirit of the late King
from such a temper, that for a little self accommodation and forcible
preservation of a few usurpt Privileges, to himself, sought to destroy (if
he were as Shepherd) his Sheep. The same example we have of Nehemiah 5.14.
that would not burden the people to pleasure himself: By this therefore it is
evident that Kings have some earthly power above them, which they serve, and
whose good must be the end of their power; to which then, as their superior,
they must be accountable, without which their power is usurpt, and by which
they are deposed, prevented, or punished, according to the demerit of their
fault; Now then to confirm this, there is the example of Solomon, who was so
far from pleading any title of his own to the Office, that in the former
part of his prayer; he says, Lord thou have made thy servant King (speaking of
himself) in stead of David my Father; now that it is a righteous act upon just
grounds to prevent a successor, it is manifest by this Gods own example,
because that Adonijah by right of succession, was heir to the Crown, yet
notwithstanding was prevented by God, who foresaw, that the peoples good would
not be so much aimed at by him as by Solomon: So that here will sitly
intervene this observation, that the Authority of all Magistrates depends upon
their good behavior, and that it is lawful in case of misdemeanour either to
prevent or disposesse them of their power. The proof whereof, I shall further
amplify, in discussing particularly the kingly Office in the quality of it
what it is, which I shall briefly resolve in two particulers.

First, It is a trust.

Secondly, An Office or Duty.

A trust in that it is committed (not from God by injunction by which only
trust is imposed but by his permission) to a man, from men; so then it cannot
be from succession, which if lawful, has only (in case of good behavior) a
preference to the trust; that is, a man lawfully succeeding (if as well
qualified as others) is to be preferred (in choice to the trust) before them;
therefore, as it is a trust, so secondly it is a duty, in that he is enjoined
to perform that trust, as by God that would have every man (like himself)
faithful, so by men from whom he receives his charge, and therefore they must
needs be his intrusters, in that likewise the end of his trust is for their
own good and welfare, to whom then he must without question be accountable,
and therefore a King to a people, is as an accountant to a Company, a
Cash-keeper to his Master: Now if a King, or any other Magistrate shall act
quite contrary to the end of their trust, viz. the peoples good, which was the
conditions of their authority, and in stead thereof, make it as a mantle that
thereunder they may more securely preadvance their own private interest,
though directly prejudicial to the end of their Office; let the meanest
capacity judge, whether such a Magistrate or Magistrates have not forfeited
their trust, upon which the intrusters may justly cease, as to render to the
person or persons so offending according to his or their deserts therein, so to
institute that trust, that way the sea best to discharge it, seeing the end
thereof is their own welfare; it is reason it self therefore, that the
Servant should be accountable to his Master (for how ridiculous would it be
for any Servant (a King being so to a people) because long entrusted without
examination, to refuse accounting, when by his Master called thereunto) wherein
if defective he may justly exclude him his service, for otherwise such a
servant would be an intolerable burden (and so frustrate the design and end
of service which is for good and ease) to his Master, and therefore the reason
why God (when he commanded the people to choose themselves a King from among
their brethren, Deuteronomy. 17. from the 15. to the last verse) prescribed him Laws
and rules to walk by, and many things was forbidden him that he might not be
exalted above his brethren: And therefore Samuel 2.5.1. the Elders of Israel
made this among others as an argument to them to make David their King, in that
they were his bones and his flesh: Now I need not make any application of this
to the late King, since it is publicly known how much he was (and in his
seven years contention sought to have been) exalted above (not his brethren,
because not chosen from among them) the people; but it being before clearly
demonstrated that he is guilty of breach of trust herein, I need not appeal to
rational men of the justness of the Parliaments and Armies late proceeding
against him, or make any further proof of that his and his accomplices wilful
error for an absolute power in him; yet for full and clear conviction, I
shall demonstrate another proof of the unlawfulness and perniciousnesse of
such an inaccountable power in any Magistrates, and then clear objections and
conclude.

The Proposition was this, That the authority of Magistrates depends upon their
good behavior; I shall turn it into the negative, and from thence prove it:
so then if the authority of Magistrates, superior as well as inferior,
depends not upon their good behavior, then their power is absolute, and they
may do what they will without contradiction or questioning, which is
incroachment upon, and directly oppugnant to the rights and liberties of the
people, and therefore such a power is unlawful. For first, it is against the
Covenant that Magistrates take when they are first invested with power; which
signifies that there is some bond or tie upon their will, that they cannot do
what they please, else to what purpose should they take a Covenant: whence by
the way I note, that that man which assumes an absolute power where it is not
given him, at the same time he both breaks his Covenant and usurps that power.

Secondly, If Magistrates have an absolute power, as some would have had wholly
in the King, why then the Kingdom lies at a very great uncertainty; it is upon
one perhaps, that if the King or superior Magistrates be good, the Kingdom
will be saved: but there are ten perhapses, ten it may bees, for one that is
contrary; that the King or Superior Magigistrates are bad [especially they
knowing themselves to have such a power] upon which the destruction of the
Kingdom lies; now there is no reason [I speak for prevention of danger for
future, whatsoever government shall be setled] that we should expose our
selves to chance among such rocks, especially when we know where they are, and
how to avoid them, whereunto this is a strong motive, to consider, that though
extremity be the fittest season for God to step in and deliver; yet all other
means must fail, otherwise it is to tempt God; for though God does often
deliver with the means, yet he saves not where lawful means is not first
used; why so, if there were no means of avoiding this absolute power in
Magistrates, we were free from our own destruction: but if we will obstinately
venture upon these rocks, as the Israelites upon a K. it may be just with God
to split us upon them; for the greatest sin of the Israelites was their desire
to return into [after God had released them] Egyptian bondage, which at last
proved their greatest plague.

Thirdly and lastly, If Magistrates have an absolute power over the people,
then that general and undeniable maxim, salus populi suprema lex is but a
vapor, it vanishes away: and so that which out of duty they are to prefer as
the end of their trust, becomes subject to their unconstant wills and
disposions; For, the peoples safety [it being really consonant to the word of
God, in that it confirms propriety, every man to sit under his own Vine, as a
blessing] that should by all (if not ordinary) extraordinary means be
endeavored, is hereby made postrema lex, or rather no law at all, in that it
is then dependant upon the wavering disposition of Magistrates; which if good,
(as it is ten for one to the contrary, in that they have more abundance of
temptations from such an inherent power in them) yet where will appear the
supremacy of the peoples safety, when it lies in the Magistrates power* Nay,
can we repute that people any other then slaves whose rights and liberties lie
wrapped up in the will of usurping Magistrates, whether in a King or others.
Indeed the rights and liberties of the people are much talked of: but when they
come in question of preferment, alas, they gulp down all the liberties, and
therein the livelihoods of the people, into the honor, safety, and happiness
of such trust-usurping men, whose principles are to maintain such a power,
which surely is not derivative, and therefore usurpt; then which, nothing can
tend more to enslave a people, to whom, while so, to ascribe any rights or
liberties, is to mock and deride them. For how can the people, rights and
liberties be dissolved into a Kings, or any other Magistrates will and power,
and yet be theirs; therefore, when we speak of the peoples liberties, we do
(or at least should) mean something peculiarly theirs; that for any man to
usurp must needs induce the slavery, which is as much contrary to liberty, as
light to darkness.

Now then it being clear, that it is usurpatio^ in Magistrates to assume an
absolute power; it follows by consequence, that those that do so, are
accomptable; for the very motion, life and soul, the marrow, and the
nourishment of such a power in Magistrates, is the peoples incapacity of
opposing and punishing that irruption upon their liberties by them: and to take
away this power from the people, is to deprive them of their liberties; for how
can those be the poples (in that they are made incapable to maintain them)
liberties, when they are subject to the power of out-lawes; or wherefore have
they a right or a title to them, if they cannot enjoy them; and how can they
enjoy them, when they are at others command; therefore seeing the people have a
peculiar right and title unto liberties which cannot be enjoyed, unless by
their own power maintained, it is clear, that the same law by which they may
justly endeavor the enjoyment of (which cannot be but in opposition to those
that would usurp) their rights, they may impartially punish such usurpers
answerable to their crimes; for the attempt of such a power deserves
devestment, and much more the practicing of it punishment. I shall proceed now
to the objections.

And the first is this; say some, have we not taken an oath of obedience to the
late K. how then could it stand with our oath to disobey him; to which I shall
add (because both of a nature) that of another party, viz. Have not we
covenanted to maintain and defend and preserve the honor, safety, and
happiness of the late Kings person; how then has it consisted with our Covenant
in taking away his life? To both which I shall answer but a little, because I
refer the Reader to be more fully and amply satisfied herein, by a Book which
I shall suddenly publish, entitled, Illumination to Sion. College, by a
moderate reply to their Letter delivered to the General, January 18. last.

But to the first of the precedent objections, I answer, that our oath of
obedienee to superior Magistrates is, not was not absolute, or without
conditions; for then (as I said before) to what purpose should we take an oath
of him or them: and if our oath was absolute, we swore our selves slaves, and
therefore not a good oath, because taken in ignorance: but how irrational it
is to think that we swore obedience universally, I need not demonstrate;
therefore it being clear, that our oath was conditionally to yield obedience
unto superior Magistrates in the execution of judgment and righteousness,
which is the very end and cause of their authority and our obedience: and which
if they omit, we are as disingaged from subjection to them as to a private
person; because that in this their duty the become as (and more incapable of
power because offenders, then] private persons: And therefore like to this was
the Covenant that David made with Israel when he was made King, 2 Samuel 5.3.
Where it is said, that all the Elders of Israel came to the King to Hebron, and
King David made a Covenant with them before the Lord (a Covenant that he must
keep if he would continue in his office) and (then) [after he had Covenanted
with them to make things sure for the people] they anointed David King over
Israel: Now the very substance [which he accordingly performed] of his Covenant
to them is manifest in the 1 Chronicles. 18.14. So David reigned over all Israel and
executed judgment and justice to all his people; there is a great deal of
emphasis in that particle so, So David reigned over all Israel in the execution
of Judgment and Justice, [as that the very being of his authority depended
upon the keeping of that his Covenant] to all his people, his people, how? Why
[not that they were at his pleasure, but he at theirs, as in 2 Samuel 18.3, 4.
Where the people [not seeing it best for themselves] told David he should not
go forth in the Battle; to whom he answered in the 4. Verse. What seems
you best, that will I do; and David remained in the City, not for his own
safety but for the peoples, (in that they saw it) good] but they were his
people while he performed his Covenant, after he had executed Judgment and
Justice unto them: I have been longer in this answer then I thought, for
satisfaction sake.

I shall very briefly answer that Objection of the other party in reference to
the Covenant, that they say we made to preserve the late Kings person, etc. To
this therefore I reply, that this clause in the Covenant is qualified with the
subsequent end thereof, which [they willingly slip over] is, in the
preservation of our Religion and Liberties, the safety whereof is the end of
our Covenant, and which we have sworn to endeavor in opposition to all the
enemies thereof; now if the Parliament should, or as the late King did
[notwithstanding our Covenant to preserve them, which was no otherwise then
they should comply with us in endeavoring that end] turn enemies to what we
have Covenanted solely to endeavor, we are engaged by our Covenant to oppose
them as enemies and impediments of attaining our end; but for more ample
satisfaction herein, I refer the Reader to that prenomitated Book, and proceed
to answer two or three objections more and then conclude.

Jehu, 2 Kings 9.6, 7, 8. to do what he did to his Master Jehoram the King,
would directly contradict his own Word if he should injoyne us obedience to
all, and command disobedience in him; Again, God injoynes not obedience to
unlawful Magistrates, such as come not duly to their Office, and therefore
the Apostle, Peter 1.2, 13. injoynes obedience to Magistrates, as being the
ordinance of man; For says he, Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the King as unto the superior:
Superior, what? not as the Monarch, none to contradict him, but as the
superior Ordinance of man, or unto Governors as unto them that are sent of
him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do
well; here is likewise a limitation to our subjection, it is not to obey in all
cases, but when they execute justice in the punishment of evil doers, and the
praise of them that do well; for this is their place, and if they do not
discharge this duty, they cease to be Magistrates; and this I conceive to be
the meaning of that place, because it agrees with other Texts, 2. Samuel 5.3.
Thus David was ordained, Deuteronomy. 1^.18. and Deuteronomy. 17.15. And Officers shall thou
make thee in all the Cities, which the Lord thy God gives thee, etc. And they
shall judge the people with righteous judgment: Now then it is clear that the
Lord injoynes obedience to none but lawful Magistrates and that in the just
execution of their Office. I proceeed now to the,

Last Objection, and that is this, If Magistrates they commit their trust to
Magistrates, and herein they promise particularly to obey them while they
righteously discharge their Office; but now when to advance self, they begin
to respect persons in judgment, they become accountable to the people, or
those whom they shall choose to represent themselves in this judgment; and
therefore we often read that the avenger of blood appointed on purpose
thereunto, was to slay the murderer whoever he was, and when ever he met him,
Deuteronomy. 35.21. Levit. 24.17. In other cases likewise we find that the
Congregation it self was to give judgment; as when a man had accidentally
(not voluntarily) committed murder, he was to remain in the City of refuge
till he did stand before the Congregation in Judgment; that is, before such as
they should appoint thereunto, Joshua 20.6. And therefore when GOD so often
commands the people to execute Judgment and Justice without respect of
persons, it lies upon their score [though God will likewise reckon with those
whom they entrust to do it for them] if they omit it, Levit. 20.2. Whosoever
he be of the Children of Israel or of the strangers that dwells in Israel
that gives his Children unto Molech, he shall dye the death: Now here comes in
the objection: What if a Ruler give his Children to Molech? Who shall kill him?
Why the close of the Verse answers it, The people of the Land shall stone him
to death. But in the 4. Verse. What if the people of the Land hide their eyes,
and wink at that man, etc. and kill him not? why in the 5. Verse, Then (says
God) will I set my face against that man and against his family, and will cut
him off, etc. But how sad a thing is it when God shall find none in a Land to
make up the hedge, to work righteousness, and thereby prevent God from taking
the Sword himself to execute judgment; the Lord will power forth his
indignation upon them, and consume them with the fire of his wrath, their own
ways will he render upon their heads, Ezekiel. 22.30, 31.

Now then the result of all will be this;

That Kings if lawful [under which title I comprehend all Magistrates] are
freely elected by the people, and accountable to them for their trust:

But the late KING was not freely elected by, neither would be accountable to
the people:

Therefore he was not a lawful King, and his dispossession was just.

Again,

Gods Law injoynes the execution of Justice and Judgment:

The Parliament in their late Transactions, have executed Justice and Judgment:

Therefore they have obeyed Gods Law.

For how absurd is that opinion in some, that have complied with the Parliament
in punishing of Delinquents, and yet they would leave the cause of them all
unpunished.

For how unjust would that be in any Authority to punish the Servant for ill
doing, and yet leave the Master [at whose command he was and whom he obeyed
therein] unpunished; I could multiply examples of the like kind, but to
rational men the premises will be sufficient; but as for that particular way
of Government by a King, it is not enjoined in Scripture as a necessary way of
Government, in that the Prophet Samuel 1.11. to the 18. so much dehorted the
Prophet from it, and so highly discovered the evil of it, and that it was a
sin in the people so immoderately to desire it; therefore it is left to a
people to establish what way of civil Government they see safest for
themselves, and in which, Judgment may run down as Waters, and righteousness
as a mighty River.

FINIS.

