AN EXACT RELATION OF FOUR NOTABLE VICTORIES Obtained by the Parliaments
Forces:

^eing informed to the Honorable House of Parliament on Satterday last, being
the 24. day of this instant February, 1644.

Viz. I. The taking of 3000. pound in money, besides Plate and Jewels, with a
Convoy of sixty Horse; going from Prince Rupert to Weymouth. II. Colonel
Mittons taking of one Colonel, many Captains and other Officers, and 60.
common Soldiers prisoners; with the routing two Regiments of Irish R^bels newly
landed, and taking their Bag and Baggage. III. A defeat given to the Newark
Forces, occasioned by a discovery of a dangerous Plot, for betraying the Town
of Nottingham; with the manner of drowning many of them, and taking others
prisoners. IV. The taking of twelve Ships by the Earl of Warwicks Ships, which
were employed against the Parliament, under the command of Brown Bushel; with
a relation of what store of Ordnance, Ammunition and Treasure was therein.


Published according to Order.

Febr. 26.

LONDON. Printed by Bernard Alsop. 1644. 1643

A RELATION OF FOUR VICTORIES OBTAINED By the PARLIAMENTS FORCES.
The First Victory. Of the taking of a convoy of sixty horse, and three
thousand pound in money, besides Jewels and Plate.
THat this relation may not appear to the Reader like a Nutshell without a
kirnell, I shall briefly satisfy you in each particular: and for the method
sake begin with Prince Ruperts marching toward Wales, and whether his aim in
his passage through Worcestershire to Ludlow in Shropshire, were not more to
raise money then men I leave to your construction; but this is certain, there
was going from him to Weymouth, (with a purpose that it should be conveyed from
thence over sea) three thousand pounds in money, with Plate, Jewels, and other
rich treasure, which was sent the last week with a Convoy of about sixty horse,
chosen men (most of them being Gentlemen.) But Captain Sydenham the Governor
of the town of Pool for the King and Parliament, having notice of their coming
through Dorsetshire toward Waymouth, went out with a party of horse, and
meeting with the said Convoy charged them, and after a short fight took them
prisoners and carried them to Poole, with the Money Plate and Jewels, for the
service of the State. And whether this Money and Plate were gotten by plunder,
or some other of Prince Ruperts Revenue (less visible) I leave to any
indifferent man to judge; and although there may be some pretense that it was
going to some of his friends beyond sea, yet is there far greater
probability, that Prince Rupert foreseeing what condition he is like to be in
very shortly, begins to wax provident, and make a stock against his flight into
Holland; or else, to buy Arms to be employed against the Parliament.

The other matters of greater importance which I have yet to relate in this
small piece of paper, will not permit of any longer discourse on this
business, therefore I will pass from that, and come to the next thing of
great consideration.

The Second Victory. Of Colonel Mittons taking of one Colonel, many Captains
and other Officers, and sixty common Soldiers prisoners, with the routing of
two Regiments of Irish Rebels.
IT has been received for a certain truth, that of late thousands of the
Irish Rebels have come over to Bristoll, Chester and other places, and it is as
true, that two Regiments more landed since near Chester, and intended to join
themselves with the rest of that blood-sucking and Rebellious crew, which were
in actual war against the Parliament; thinking themselves sure to drive back
Sir William Breretons forces, which since the victory obtained at Namptwich,
were drawn near Chester. And the Rebels being now upon their march into the
country, Colonel Mitton (a valourous and deserving Gentleman) having notice
thereof, admitted of no delay in preparing not only to defend himself, but to
offend the enemy, and preservation of the country; but presently drew forth
with about six hundred men, and having certain intelligence how the Rebels
advanced, it was not long before he met with them: and drawing his forces into
a body not far from Sir Richard VVilbrams house, they fell so bravely upon the
Rebels, that within one hours space, he had killed and taken above threescore
of them, and utterly routed the rest, putting them to flight.

In which Skirmish there was taken one Colonel, three or four Captains, be
sides many other inferior Officers, and all their bag and baggage, wherein
we have great cause to acknowledge Gods infinite mercy and goodness to this
land, that notwithstanding the great multitude of the Rebels which have lately
come over into England, to join with the Papists here to destroy the
Protestants, and for the utter extirpation of the Protestant Religion; yet it
has pleased God so wonderfully to manifest his love to his cause, that neither
they nor any of the Kings forces have had any success since their coming
over, but notwithstanding all their acting and plotting, they have been
disappointed; and their consultations have like the Counsel of Achitophell,
turned to their destruction, and their wicked devices brought to light; as
lately we have an example in the deliverance of the town of Nottingham,
against which, the Newarke forces had laid a plot for betraying of the said
town into the hands of the enemy, and was very near to be put in execution;
and as we are credibly informed was after this manner, viz.

The third Victory. Of a defeat given to the Newarke Forces, with the drowning
many of them, and taking others Prisoners.
THere being a party in the Town which had conspired with the Cavaliers for
the betraying thereof (most of them being Malignants which were disarmed) they
had devised a way to convay Arms to them, under the color of bringing corn
and provision to the Town, and all things being agreed upon, both touching the
manner of the execution of the Plot, and the time when their bloody designs
should be acted; diverse loads of corn (to the outward appearance) were by
persons in the habit of Conntry men brought thither, and being examined what
was in the sacks, they said that there was nothing but wheat and other grain,
but (upon some cause of suspicion) they were not suffered to pass without
further search, and were commanded to shoot the sacks, and amongst the corn in
the sacks, there were swords, Pistols, and other Ammunition. But I should have
told you in the first place, of certain persons that were taken upon suspicion
before in the Town, and after examination and nothing confessed, there was
other means (less pleasing) used to make them utter the truth, and afterward
one of them confessed that they were Spies, but would confess no more;
whereupon they were tied neck and heels together, which made them within few
hours confess the truth of the Plot, for otherwise in all probability, the
sacks had not bin so strictly searched. And so being returned again to the
place where I left off, I shall go on in declaring, that after the Swords,
Pistols and Ammunition were found as aforesaid, the parties which brought the
same, were taken and carried into the Town and kept in safe custody, and no
persons suffered to go out of the Town for fear of giving intelligence that
their Plot was discovered, which was suddenly to be put in execution; and at
the hour appointed, at a place where the Enemy were to come over the River of
Trent, they were so bravely assaulted by the Nottingham Forces, that many of
them were killed, and about thirty of them drowned in the River, diverse
Prisoners taken, and the rest put to flight.

The fourth Victory. Of the taking of twelve Ships from Captain Brown Bushel.
HAving certified you of the happy success of our Land Forces, it will not be
much unseasonable to give you an account of our Navies proceedings, under the
command of the Right honorable the Earl of Warwick, whose vigilant care for the
preservation and safety of this Kingdom, deserves much commendation.

Certain of the Earl of VVarwicks ships coasting up and down to scour the Seas,
and free a passage for our Merehant men, met with twelve Ships, under the
command of that Arch-enemy to the State, Captain Brown Bushel, who has robbed
at Sea, under pretense of a Commission from Oxford; where after some few hours
fighting, they yielded themselves; which Ships will now be employed for the
defense and safeguard of the Kingdom, they being very serviceable Ships and
furnished with Ordnance and ammunition, and in one of the Ships is thought to
be some store of treasure; especially in a great Cypress Chest, for the
opening whereof the Parliament has given special Order.

FINIS.

