An Examination Examined: Being a full and moderate Answer to Mayor Innes
Relation concerning the Siege and taking of the Town of Leicester by the Kings
Forces, the last of May 1645.
THere lately came forth an Examination of a Narration of the siege of the
Town of Leicester, attested by James Innes, which we conceive to be Major
Innes, he must needs take up by way of trust what this Pamphet contains, which
concerns not that Siege, for he was not in the Town above one week; we wish
he had named his Informers: but we hope Soldiers that are men of honor, and
prize it so dearly, will not slander others from less then honorable
assurance. First, he takes upon him to declare, That complaints were heretofore
made by honorable persons against the Committee of Leicester, and that they
were not groundless Accusations, nor splenative Aspersions We think he means
by complaints, those words spoken by the Earl of Stamford at the House of
Commons door, for there was not yet any complaint made to the House of Commons,
and we are sure that no one Accusation raised against us has any true grounds
to make it good; and under his favor, if he, or others, divulge things from
Honorable persons against us that are not to be proved, they are splenative
aspertions; were we guilty but in the least measure, we had long sithence
suffered, and we still justify our whole proceedings, though not to be free
from error, yet from injustce, partiality, or any just imputation; and we hold
it forth to the world that diverse of us have served the Parliament from before
this war began to this present, with integrity without change or gain.

The Author goes on in these words; Those Gentlemen of quality that at the
beginning of this sad war had with the hazard of their lives and fortunes put
the Town of Leicester into a posture of Defense, could not choose afterward
out of zeal to the public, but continue their care for the suppressing of it:
though the full managing of that Affair were since taken out of their hands,
and committed to others of meaner rank, and such men who had not at first
joined in the hazard with them, nor appeared till danger seemed to be blown
over. To this we answer, That the Town of Leicester was not begun to be
fortified till about three quarters of a year after the war began, neither
was there much hazard to any man's person in that work, no considerable enemy
being then near to interrupt them. We cannot but commend those Gentlemen for
their zeal to the public, and their forwardness in fortifying Leicester, and
with their care had still continued for maintenance of those Fortifications,
and not for the suppressing them, as is confessed in the Pamphlet; with sadness
be it spoken, the Parliament has found many such Changers, and we should be
glad to know their names, that their thanks might suit with their merits, and
the Parliament take notice of them accordingly. And for the distinction made
betwixt the present Committee, and those who acted then, we cannot distinguish
so well as to afford them their sayings, since none that did execute then were
left out in this Ordinance but Master Danvers, Master Cotton, and Master
Richard Bent, whose quality is not of such note, neither in regard of persons,
estates, or families, to be magnified above those Gentlemen who now act as
Committees: And for those who were left out, the Parliament saw cause for what
they did; and though some of meaner rank were put in, they are such as never
petitioned for that employment, and to their best abilities have endeavored to
advance the public, and have both appeared and acted when diverse of greater
rank in the Country either durst not, or would not appear, being made
Committees by the same Orders and Ordinances. And there are some of this
Committee, when the King came in person to demand the Magazine at Leicester,
before he advanced his Standard at Nottingham, were active in defense thereof,
and saw the order of the Knights of the Shire for the distribution thereof by
the grand Jury to the Country executed accordingly.

And whereas they say, They will insist only upon such things, as without too
much injury to truth cannot be let pass, we shall give a full answer to this
Pamphet without any injury to truth, and clear our selves of any aspertion
cast upon us.

It is well they have nothing to say against what the Committee did upon Master
Purefoy his intelligence from Bristoll, some thought to have made it a very
great charge.

And first, they seem to confute what the Committee writ in a Narration
touching the mending of the Works, with this Answer, That diverse Houses of
advantage to the enemy were undemolished within one hundred and twenty paces of
the Works, and most of them within Pistol shot. Where is the Logic? In this
answer the Works were not amended, for the houses were standing. But to reply
to the standing of the houses, we found them so, and a Major General and those
Gentlemen of quality spoken of, had as much power to pluck them down as the
now Committee, yet we resolved in case of absolute necessity to fire them,
which was done accordingly. And whereas Major Innes does apply the burning the
houses at St. Sundays bridge to his men, we say, That there was only two of
his men, and all the rest were Colonel Greys, and some Townsmen.

And as to the next charge, That the Committee was unprovided of Mattocks,
Spades, and Shovels to make up the breaches. Our answer is, We marvel what
became of all those Pioners instruments that were provided for the making of
the Works at the first, and wherefore they were not delivered to the Committee
for the service of the State; yet there was no want of such implements,
witness the brestwork against the battery that was raised and finished within
the Newarke wall in a very short time, where many hundreds workt together to
the amazement of the enemy.

And whereas it was objected, That the Committee would not suffer that place in
the Newarke to be fortified where the breach was made, because it was upon M.
Wadlands ground, who is Clerk to the Committee. We answer, That had we been
permitted to fortify the Newarke, this tax had been just, but wherefore was it
not done by those Gentlemen of quality before spoken of.

The next objection is, That the Lord Gray could never prevail with the
Committee for the pulling down those houses, and shortning the Line: we
answer, the Lord Gray was Major General, and one of the Committee, and might
have done it by his own power; nor was it ever propounded unto us, debated
amongst us, or opposed by us.

And where it is objected, that in our Narration we write, that the Kings
coming to Ashby was so sudden, that we had no time to call off our men from
Cole-Overton, and bring off our Cannon: To which the Author tells us, that Sir
John Gell, by Letters advertised us three days before the Kings coming, that
in all probability his design was for Leicester: to that we answer, that what
Sir John Gell writ, was but probable, and uncertain; and Cole-Overton was a
Garrison within Cannon-shot of Ashby, and had exceedingly weakened them both in
reputation and strength, and was the preserver of all the Northern Trade to
London, and of as great consequence as any small Garrison in England, which
made us unwilling to quit that place; but upon undoubted intelligence of the
Kings resolutions for Leicester, had we quit that Garrison, and the King gone
Northward, of which we had probable intelligence, those careful Gentlemen of
quality then had had one just complaint, at which we should have blushed.

The next, is an answer to the reply made by Sir Robert Pie and Major Innes,
after the Town was summoned, both of them then questioning, whether the
strength of the Town was sufficient to defend it against the Kings Army?
which Major Innes answers, saying, that upon view at the Posts they found but
four hundred and fifty soldiers: Our reply is, That if he means Listed
Soldiers under the Committee, besides Townes-men, it approaches near unto
truth: There was of those, about five hundred; Colonel Gray, in his march to
the Works, had in his company two hundred and thirty, being accounted by Sir
Robert Pie; Captain Farmer had one hundred and twenty, Captain Hurst had one
hundred twenty and nine, Lieutenant Colonel Battersby about fifty; there was
also about nine hundred Townes-men, and 150 of the Countrymen, and this
computation rises near to sixteen hundred.

In the next place it is said, That Sir Robert Pie desired the Committee, that
Teames might be in a readiness, for removing the Cannon from place to place;
but that not a Horse or Teame was to be seen in readiness for that service:
whereunto we answer, That all the Teames in the Town were in readiness, and
many of them employed to bring Wooll-Packs, Baggs of Hops, and other
necessaries, to stop the breaches, and to supply us with what was wanting; and
this does appear to be so, because there was but two Cannon desired to be
removed, the one from the Horse-Faire Leyes to the breach in the Newarke, and
the other from the high Cross to the North Mills, which were done accordingly.

The next Charge is, That the Committee did not keep promise with Sir Robert
Pie, to keep three hundred men upon the maine guard: we say, that we made no
such promise, neither was it suitable to the Town strength, having so large a
work to man; yet the enemy found a maine guard, which cost many of them their
lives; and we had many prisoners also, that while we were in sight, violently
pressed for liberty, so that we were enforst to draw off some Musketeers from
the maine guard, to keep them in order.

We consent with Major Innes that it is a vast Line, but under his favor, we
differ upon the defense of it, for fifteen hundred men cannot half man it
against a great Army; which we foreseeing, endeavored the fortifying of the
Newarke, the Works being near four miles in circuit: And we desire every man
to take notice, that when it was in the Enemies hands, and that Sir Thomas
Fairfax came against it, the Enemy had as many more Forces as ever we had in
it, all our Arms and Ammunition, the Trained Bands being called in to their
assistance, and the Country compelled to fortify; and notwithstanding all
this, thought it not safe for them to stand upon their defense, but yielded
without any assault at all.

It is also averred, That Sir Robert Pie and Major Innes declared they would
contribute their best endeavors for the maintenance of the Town, which they
said they fully performed. To this we answer; We cannot justify them in this
particular; but say, That if Major Innes did any such service at the breach in
the Newarke, by his favor, we know not how he came there, for his Post was
assigned him at St Margarets Churchyard, and the West Bridge; and to that
ground he was brought by Colonel Gray, and Master Hasilrigge, two of the
Committee, which ground he professed to maintain, or loose his life; But the
Enemy entered at the North Mills, within that Line, and betwixt Belgrave Gate
and Humberston Gate, close by that Line, and the Horse at Belgrave Gate. And
thus plainly, yet truly, we are enforced to deal with him, to vindicate our
own Soldiers from unjust charges: We know no Officer of ours that forsook
his Post, nor we suppose that any man of honor will go about to prove it; And
not to disparage his Service, we had at the breach in the Newarke, Commanders
and Soldiers, both Horse and Foot, as valiant and tried men, as are any where
to be found, as both friends and Enemies can witness, and had they not entered
elsewhere, they must not have entered there: Though Major Innes had been away,
our men did their parts, and there took two of the Enemies Colors, and plucked
diverse of their Pikes out of their hands, and beat the Enemy back four
several times. (This is truth:)

And we do again aver it to be true which was said in the Narration, that
we did disperse our selves to several parts in the Town, to supply what was
wanting in Ammunition or otherwise, in distributing Money and Provisions to the
Soldiers, and to encourage them, some one amongst us distributing ten pounds
of his own Money amongst them, besides what others did; and if any had want of
meat or moneys, it might be their own fault, absenting themselves from the
Works: And that the Committee very seldom appeared at the Works, it is also
false, and is but the effect of that scandellous malice the Pamphlettor,
without any just cause expresses, both toward us and our Soldiery through the
whole Pamphlet, which he injuriously and senselesly prosecutes against Captain
Hacker, taxing him with making an escape through the breach, at which the Enemy
entered after five repulses, and that he should be taken near Humberston; if
this had been true as it was not, it had been an honor to him to break out in
the face of an Enemy, and not at a back door, or to hide himself under a
Table; the truth indeed is, that when the Enemy had broken in on the contrary
Line, and came upon the backs of them in the Newarke; then Captain Hacker,
with diverse others, got over the River at the Pike head, and were all taken on
that side the River toward Bramstone, which is opposite to Humberstone.

And whereas the Author goes on to make Captain Hackers name the burden to a
scandalous story, saying, this is the same Captain Hacker that failed to join
with Colonel Rossiter: It is true, his Forces were not joined with Colonel
Rossiter, but himself was in person with him, when news came of the near
approach of the Enemy, and was desired by Colonel Rossiter to go and fetch
his Troops, which accordingly he did, not so much as a lighting from his Horse,
but drew out his Forces and marched toward Colonel Rossiter, and was within
half a mile of him, where news came to him, that Colonel Rossiter was routed,
nevertheless he marched toward the Enemy, until Captain Collins of Burley
(not Captain Collinson) met him, and told him, that Colonel Rossiters Horse
were all routed, and that he had seen an end of all his brave Horse and men,
and had not a man left to stand in the face of an Enemy; and told him further,
that the Enemy had twenty bodies of Horse, and that their Forlorn Hope was as
big as Colonel Rossiters Body; whereupon Captain Hacker, (the Garrison of
Kirby not being finished, nor defensible, without Drawbridge. or so much as a
Line drawn on ^^e side the House,) he set fire on part of the out houses,
brought away all his Ammunition and Arms, and left not so much Provision as
would have kept his men two days, and came to Leicester, whence (if Captain
Collins his report had been true of the Enemies number) he might have done more
service then in a naked House; but offers to prove, that the time the Enemy
was in those parts, he had Scouts and Guards out continually, though by the
Pamphlettor it is alleged to the contrary: And now let this be taken into
their printed Records of more sincerity and truth, that this was that Cap.
Hacker, for whose release the three Committees of Leicester, Nottingham, and
Derby, petitioned the Parliament for, when he was Prisoner at Belvoyre Castle:
This was that Cap. Hacker that was principal actor in taking Bagworth House
from the Enemy; and first entered the Town of Nottingham, and took it, when
the Enemy had possessed it: that in his return from Nottingham, with a few of
his own Troop, entered Ashby Park, within command of their Muskets and
Canons, brought many Cattle out of it; and the same that gave the defeat at
Bagworth Heath to the Enemy, where they wounded and flew many, and took three
score prisoners; and the same that gave the defeat at Milton, where they
killed and wounded many, both Captains and Soldiers, took forty five
Prisoners; and the same that entered the Town of Ashby, brought away forty of
the Enemies Horse, and diverse Prisoners; and the same that with eight of his
Troop entered the grounds under Belvoyre, and took thirty six of the Enemies
Horse; and the same that had the command of Leicester, Nottingham and Derby
Horse, at the great defeat given the Enemy near Belvoyre, where they lost
about nine hundred Horse; and the same Captain Hacker, that of all the prizes
that ever he took, reserved nothing for himself, but gave all frankly to the
State and his Soldiers; and the same, that having layne long Prisoner at
Belvoyre, was offered his Pardon, and the Command of a Regiment of Horse to
change his side, and refused it with scorn; and the same, that now at the
Kings taking of Leicester, was so much prized by the Enemy, as they offered him
a choice Regiment of Horse to serve the King, but he refused, choosing rather to
suffer imprisonment and beggary, then to take up Arms against the Parliament;
And finally this is that Hacker, that ever has carried himself as a man tender
of his Country, a friend to all honest and good men, and fights not for the
spoil of the Kingdom: And these and many ^ore are his honest actions, and we
know no cause of this invect^^^ spleen against him, but that he is a valliant
Soldier, and one of the Committee.

The next Charge is upon Col. Gray, That it will be proved, that he suffered
Sir Bern. Ashley, with his whole Brigade of Foot, to scale with three ladders,
and entered the Works without discharging one Musket, and running from his Post,
was wounded in the back, one of his Enemies saying, He would give him the mark
of a coward. This charge is most unjust, we have it under the hands of
sufficient witnesses, he behaved himself valiantly, and Major Trollop that took
him in Leicester, acknowledges him to be a valiant and a stout man, he had no
Post to keep, but maintained the Line with much diligence and courage, till the
Enemy with Horse and Foot brake in upon him, incompast Belgrave Gate, and
there fighting on Horseback, was wounded on the face, and had two cuts on the
forepart of his head, one of them cut the scull, and also a wound in the back
with a Pike, which was rather a mark of honor, then of disgrace, and there
being beaten off his Horse, was led away; And were there no other Answer made
to this Pamphlet, but to desire the honest Reader to observe these two last
passages, he would find it stuffed with nothing but malice and falsehoods in
the extreme, and things alleged impossible to prove.

And concerning Captain Hurst, who is reported in the Narration to be slain,
it was by misinformation, but wounded he was.

And whereas it is declared in this abusive Pamphlet, that it is most certain,
that the Committee were so possessed with fear, that they told his Majesty they
would have delivered the Town at first, upon the Summons, had not Sir Robert
Pie and Major Innes diswaded them from it: Hereunto we answer, That the
Committee never spoke with the King; that both Sir Robert Pie and Major Innes
know, that if any of the Committee told the King so, they told him a notorious
untruth, for they themselves, with many others, both Captains, Officers and
other Gentlemen, were witnesses, that no one of the Committee spoke one
syllable of the rendering of the Town, but all assented to what was said by him
that read the Summons; the sum whereof was, That he desired to die in no better
a Cause, and every man stood to his imprisonment, neither did we express so
much fear, as either to crave or accept any pardon, which if any particular
man have done, we desire to know him, and shall endeavor to put him out from
amongst us.

After which answer, Sir Robert Pie and Major Jnnes questioned, whether the
strength in the Town was sufficient for the defense of it? and how far they
wo^ld have proceeded by arguments to have persuaded us to the rendering of it
(had they found us inclinable to have hearkened to them) we know not: but the
concurrance betwixt us and our Officers was such, in our joint resolutions for
the defending of the Town, that they could have but small hopes to prevail
thereby; although upon examination of some things lately come to our ears, we
are not altogether without grounds of such a suspicion.

And whereas it is alleged, that Sir Henry Skipwith, and Sir John Pate, two
notorious Delinquents, and powerful with his Majesty, declared at Leicester,
in the presence of many honest men there, That the greatest motive that drew
the King to Leicester, was the certain intelligence that he had of the
weakness of the Committee, and their want of experience in military affairs.

We say, that it is was strange, that Sir Henry Skipwith, and Sir John Pate,
should make such declaration to many honest men in Leicester, there being so
few out of prison there, at that time: and we marvel the more, that such as
come in to the Kings Garrisons voluntarily, should by any well-wisher to the
Parliament be accounted honest; and being of the Kings party, they cannot be
competent evidence to accuse us: and the planting of Cole-Overton Garrison, and
managing of it, is so well known to the Country, that they will testify that
the enemy was beaten as often as our forces could meet with them: and if their
wisdoms and experience were so eminent, we cannot but wonder, that they
should not out us in all that time, being such a thorn in their sides, and so
near, as that the bullets from our Cannon knocked at their doors in Ashby
Town; and we may with modesty enough affirm, that if the King had not come,
or some considerable army to their assistance, they would not have dared to
have met us in the field this year. And touching the fortifying of the
Newarke, they say in these words, we will leave it to the judgment of all the
world, how great a discouragement that had been to Town and Country, and of
what small advancement to the publque, since it was impossible that the Newarke
could receive the persons, much less the Goods and Estates of the
well-affected: For answer whereunto, we say, that Colonel Bard told some of us,
that if that had been done, the King had never come to Leicester, and we
suppose him as competent and impartial a Judge as Major In^^^; and what
inconvenience had there been in that?

Next, we say, that the Kings experienced old Soldiers thought it of so great
consequence, as that they set upon it, and had done a good part of it before
Sir Thomas Fairfax took the Town; and they being enemies to both, can be
partial to neither.

And last of all, Sir Thomas Fairfax his judgment in martial affairs, we
suppose equal to those opposers, and he has commanded the finishing of it as
we had begun it, this we hope to effect in a short time: and whereas they
object, want of room for the well-affected, and their goods, and so they had
been subject to as much misery and plunder as before; to which we answer
also, that it is the condition of many, that having once engaged in an
argument, they will seek all corners, and sift every thing to the bran, to
make it good; but the Newarke is of receipt enough to receive into it all the
persons and estates of the well-affected, and yet leave sufficient quartering
for two thousand soldiers for the defense of the place, there being in it a
great circuit of wast ground; the Castle-Hal, where the general Assizes are
kept; a very fair, large, and spacious Church; together with a vast Cellar by
the Castle; and an Hospital, wherein are one hundred and nine poor men,
together with their Keepers, every one having a several Room to themselves,
besides their Houses for store, Wash-houses, etc. together with many fair
Buildings, Houses, Barnes, Stables, Orchards, Gardens, etc. within the Newarke
and the Castle-yard.

And for Colonel Boothes Letter, which bares date from Leicester, (yet
peradventure might be contrived elsewhere) we past it over before; but since it
comes to us reprinted, we shall presume to examine some particulars, omitting
the fyled phrase, and fall upon the substance: First, he says, that by all
men's account, that there were not above two hundred soldiers in the Town;
that is confuted by the confession of the Author, who confesses four hundred
and fifty, and a more particular account of five hundred, besides Townes-men,
and the Horse Troops: Secondly, that the soldiers were as peremptory against
Discipline as the Governors more ignorant of it; to which if we should have
answered, that this young Gentleman spoke more then he knew, it might have
stood well enough; but we say, and are confident in it, that there are amongst
us that have seen more in matters of War, and been in more Garrison Towns
before he was borne, then ever he saw or came in since: And whereas he speaks
with so much confidence, that he would hazard life and fortune, that he would
take the Town at any time, day or night, with five hundred men; we say, it is
no difficult thing, for so young a Gentleman to lose both life and fortune: but
we hope the enemies loss will teach this young Gentleman to beware of rash
undertakings, especially in Print; it being confessed by Colonel Lesley, that
they lost few less then one thousand men, and of them two Colonels, four
Majors, three other eminent persons, whose names they were not willing to
reveal, all buried in Martins, and ten buried in Margarets Church, many more
in other Churches, these being all Commanders of note; besides many of the
same rank being wounded, dyed since, and were buried at Leicester: And whereas
he further adds, That the grand Masters (as he in scorn terms us) most
sensible of danger, have all of them gotten houses in the Newarke; this also is
as true, as that Captain Hurst was killed: for of sixteen of the Committee,
there was eleven had houses or Lodgings in the Town, and not one of them
removed, and some of us dwelt in Houses in the Newarke, before the War began.
And whereas he says, that he perceived the Townes-men much discontented with
the fortifying of the Newarke, conceiving themselves destined by the Committee
to the enemies mercy; To this we answer, that certainly this young Gentleman
alighted at a malignant Inn, and unless the malignants of the Town attended
him there, and desired him to prefer this Complaint, we neither know nor
imagine how this came about, for he spoke not with the Committee, nor a Common
Hall; and the Townes-men, who were of the Committee, subscribed the Order for
the fortifying the Newarke, though their houses stood in the Town. And whereas
the Author (We) is so well assured of Colonel Booths good intentions in that
dissuading Letter, we conceive young men seldom know their own intentions,
neither do we his; this we are certain, that this Letter has ruined us, both
Town and Country: and we cannot but stand amazed, to see a stranger write
with that confidence, of things he understood not, and of us he knew not; and
we have again reprinted the Letter, hoping that by time and review this young
Gentleman may come to give the Town and Country some satisfaction. And
concerning the taxing of the Country, this answer may serve. That the weekly
sum was imposed by the Committee an hundred pound less then we were enabled
by the Ordinance of Parliament, and that gave power to raise but six hundred
pounds weekly: the Tax both upon the Towns and persons, was made by the most
able and honest contrymen we could pick out in the Country, and was not
taxed by the Committee; and we dare affirm, that never any just complaint of
inequality of Taxes was made to us, but it received redress. And whereas it
is said by the Author (We) that it is verily believed, that had the Moneys
collected weekly bin converted to no other use then for the service and
maintenance of their Garrisons, Leicester had been better provided for a
siege, then (as appears) now was: Friendly Reader, let it fall into your
consideration, what we may expect from this Bunch, if men included in this
word (We) for it cannot be we, Major Jnnes only, but we defamers of other
men's actions, have made this Quaere upon you, the Committee of Leicester; and
we again, the Committee there, do thus answer: That in the Narration set
forth, which this Pamphlet examines, and passes a censure upon; it is desired,
that something might be first proved, and then Printed: but notwithstanding,
we, the behind-doore publishers of this scandalous Pamphlet, in case we
cannot find just matter proved, will yet upon our own brains believe and
publish also, that you are defrauders of the State, and deceivers, abusers of
that trust put into you; and let these conceits speed how they will, yet go
they shall. But to this we reply no further; but upon more certain evidence
we suppose, if guesses fail us not, there are none of those that thus stand
behind the door, or look through the Lettuce, and cry (We) but they are or
should be Accomptants to the State for large sums of Money: (...)conclusion of
this point, we wish, that those Gentlemen of ^^^^^^tie, who made the first
entrance into the Affairs of the Mi^^^ia in this County, may as punctually
reckon with the State as we; and when they have cleared themselves, they may
the better charge us.

And whereas the Pamphlet says we affirm, that we receive not any pay, and
this Examiner says, that they are credibly informed, that very few, or none of
us, but are chargeable with Money raised in the Country for the public
service, and how we have disposed of it, they must leave it to the examination
of those who are employed for that purpose: we answer, we also shall leave
that to the examination of the Sub-Committee for Accounts, they having it in
charge, and being men we, neither desire nor expect favor from. And whereas
they say, that many of the Committee were Captains, and have received great
sums of Money, yet seldom or never went out with their Troops, for the
defense of the Country: we answer, that this Charge is most unjust; the
greatest part of our Horse were ingarrison'd abroad near the enemy, and were
so active, that they kept the enemies Garrisons in such awe, that they durst
not stir out but like Thieves, in the night. As for cashiering old soldiers,
we say, we never cashiered any; neither know we any old soldier formerly
employed at Leicester, above the degree of a Lieutenant in the Low Countries,
except Colonel Wardeloe, who was gone long before the last Ordinance for the
Militia.

And for Captain Temple, we know not that ever Captain Temple refused to go
forth, declined an enemy, or lost opportunity: and for his going to London, he
was High Sheriff of the County, and by reason of that Office, had business
there; and that at his going not ten days after, we heard not any thing of the
enemies approach; and for the rest of his charge, we hold it frivolous, and not
worth the answering: And however he might persuade, upon report of the Kings
advance toward Ashby, to secure the Ordnance in Rockingham-Castle, Leicester
being unfortified, it was no very indiscreet advice, yet he never concurred in
advice upon the approach of an enemy to strip Colors off the staff, and to
put them into a Coach, and so to carry them away. And whereas they say, that of
those that now sit in the Committee, not above two or three of them did
appear, and join in the service with those Gentlemen that hazarded their
lives and fortunes for the public in the beginning, and are now out of the
Ordinance for the Militia, and that they did not appear till Leicester was
near fortified, both Town and Country, in a good posture of defense: we say,
there was more of the now Committee appeared, then there was of those Gentlemen
of quality, mentioned to be the fortifyers of Leicester, But give us leave to
ask one question; Wherefore did not those Gentlemen of quality appear at
Oundle, to personate the affairs of the County there, when the well-affected
Gentlemen of the eight Counties did meet, to consider what every County
should contribute toward the raising an Army for the mutual defense one of
another? Had they been active then, to have made an association, and gathered
a suitable strength to those eight Counties, which were the best in the Kingdom
of England for able horse and men, and means to maintain them: Leicestershire
had seen no Garrison upon its own soil, nor had Newarke upon Trent taken so
deep a root; no, these Counties had not known what Pillaging and Plundring
had been, no more then the Associated Counties have done; nor was it hard to
demonstrate, that the North of England had never undergone those heavy
pressures by the Earl of New Castles Army: but the Major General had no more
strength then poor Leicestershire maintained: had those Gentlemen of quality
done this, it had not been to put Leicester only into a posture of defense,
but the whole Association, and been a work much more proper, and extremely
beneficial to the whole Kingdom.

And whereas in our Narration we declare, that if Sir Edward Hartop Baronet,
Sir Thomas Hartop, Sir Roger Smith Knights, John Saint-John, and Thomas
Brudnell Esquires, were but commanded down to sit as Committees, they would
give more satisfaction to the Country, and do the Parliament better service
then those that are of less estates possible can do: whereunto they answer,
the Committee well know, that all or most of those Gentlemen before mentioned,
by reason of their age and infirmities (without prejudice to their healths)
cannot attend to do service; as otherwise they willingly would. Whereunto we
reply, we know well, but know no inabilities of body in them, such as may
hinder them altogether from the service, diverse of us being as aged and infirm
as some of them.

And whereas there are diverse persons in the Pamphlet named to be added to the
Commttiee, which certainly were unknown to Major Jnnes, (as if twenty and
eight, besides Townes-men formerly approved of by the Parliament, were not
enough, being the choysest Gentry in the Country, that were not in arms
against the Parliament) amongst which are named all those who appeared upon the
first Ordinance, and deserted not the service, and yet they spoke of a Petition
preferred by the Country for addition: we say, that a Petition was presented
in the name of the best affected of the County, but not set on foot by them;
and to make the greater show, very many men's names were twice subscribed,
many others Malignants, both Gentry and Clergy, diverse Delinquents, others
of mean quality, not capable of the sense of the Petition, others setting
their hands to blank papers, and this business was formerly examined by a
Committee of the House of Commons, appointed for that purpose.

The persons the Pamphleter (We) names to be added to the Committee, if
occasion serve, and if we shall be thereunto called, we shall give in our
reasons and exceptions against them, but we shall forbear to Print them: But
because we desire the full satisfaction of all persons, both Town and
Country, that the Gentry of best quality of Leicestershire have not been
neglected, but put in to act as Committees for the Parliament; we have printed
all the names contained both in the first and last Ordinance.

The first Committee for the Militia, 16 Jan. 1642.
Thomas Lord Gray. 0 Sir Edw. Hartop Sen. Baronet. Sir Arthur Hesilrige,
Baronet. Sir Martin Lister, Knight. 0 Sir Thomas Hartop, Knight. 0 Sir Edward
Hartop, Knight. 0 John Saint-Iohn, Esquire. 0 William Roberts, Esquire. Peter
Temple, Esquire. 0 William Jervise, Esquire. Thomas Hesilrige, Esquire. Richard
Bent, Esquire. William Danvers, Esquire. John Goodman, Esquire. 0 Simon
Ridgley, Esquire. William Bembridge, Esquire. 0 Thomas Brudnell, Esquire.
Thomas Babington, Esquire. 0 Thomas Merry, Esquire. 0 Thomas Beaumont,
Esquire. Arthur Stavely, Esquire. Thomas Cotton, Esquire. William Hewit,
Esquire. Richard Ludlam, and William Stanley.
The Committee as now it is.
Thomas Lord Gray of Grooby. Theophilus Gray, Esquire. Sir Arthur Hesilrige,
Baronet. Sir Martin Lister, Knight. Sir Edward Hartop Jun. Knight. Sir George
Villers, Baronet. Sir Edward Hartop, Baronet. Sir Thomas Hartop, Knight. Sir
Roger Smith, Knight. John Saint-John, Esquire. Thomas Babington Sen. Esquire,
William Bembridge, Esquire. Thomas Brudnell, Esquire. John Whatton, Esquire.
Archdale Palmer, Esquire. Peter Temple, Esquire. Arthur Stavely, Esquire. Henry
Smith, Esquire. Thomas Hesilrige, Esquire. Francis Hacker, Esquire. John
Stafford, Esquire. John Brown, Esquire. William Hewit, Esquire. John Goodman,
Esquire. Francis Smalley, Gentleman. John Swynfen, Gentleman. Valentine
Goodman, Gentleman. John Pratt, Gentleman. Richard Ludlam, Aldermen of
Leicester. William Stanley, Aldermen of Leicester. Edmund Cradock, Aldermen of
Leicester.
Those who are marked with Ciphers in the first Ordinance, appeared not; those
who are crossed, went away and forsook the service: and gentle Reader, judge if
this last be a Committee of Gentlemen of the meanest quality and estates in
Leicestershire: does not this Pamphleter deserve punishment for his slander?
shall we be all blamed, if Gentlemen of the best quality will not act for the
Parliament?

And now to wynd up all, the Author draws to his conclusion, saying, upon
these considerations, how much those Gentlemen of the Committee, who have had
the power of the Militia in their hands these ten months last past, deserve to
be rewarded for their service; let the world judge, and we also appeal to the
honest impartial Reader in this behalf, if there be in all this frivolous
Pamphlet, one error charged upon us, and not fully answered, as acting at the
Committee, much less a crime: he charges us with committing heinous offenses
against the State, he has not so much as suggested, much less proved one; we
have served the Parliament faithfully and honestly, and do justify our whole
proceedings, and do make our challenge even to malice it self, who is a good
accuser, to come forth and prove but one offense, though much below heinous: we
are not such fools to expect reward, nor to have our services confined within
ten months; what we have done from the beginning of this Parliament, was in
obedience to God, and in duty to our native Country and this Kingdom: what
we expected, that we have; that because we could not serve other men's, turns
they would hate and reproach us; our innocent sufferings are our
encouragements, and for rewards we have enough, the Parliament prospers: If
ever this be replied unto, it will not be by men of honor, for the Author
concludes, they are ashamed of ignoble actions, amongst which we number
slanders and spleenative aspertions and we resolve to trouble our selves no
further till some one thing be proved against us; and thus gentle Reader, we
take a civil leave, and bid thee farewell.

Peter Temple, Vic. Thomas Hesilrige. John Brown. Henry Smith. William Hewet.
Francis Smalley. William Standley.


FINIS.
Printed at London for J. W. J. dwelling in the Old-Bayley:


