Exceeding Joyful News FROM IRELAND, Or a true discovery of the present
Estate of that Kingdom at this present.

Wherein is declared what Towns of Note, the English have taken from the
Rebels in several Seiges since the last Forces went over.

Namely, Limrick. Waterford. Wickloo. Ackloo. Clogham. Galway. Droghede.
Kilkennie. Waxford. Colerane. Manahom. Garmaston.


Also a true Relation, by what means the Castle of Limrick was taken by
Captain Bartlet, a Scotchman, to the great wonder of all the English Army, the
Forces in the Castle being seven thousand, and he but five hundred foot, and
one Troop of Horse.

Ordered to be printed,

Ion. Bron. Cler. Parl.



London, Printed for T. Rider, Aug. 27. 1642.

Joyful Nevves from IRELAND.
SIR,
THE season suiting my desire having found so fit an occasion to send to you, I
thought good things being for the present so well with us, (by Gods blessing,
and the valor of our small forces) to give you a true information in what
Estate the Kingdom is in at this present.

Many Towns of indifferent strength we have taken from the Rebels. Namely
these,

Drogheda taken by Captain Christopher Loftus with the loss of twenty five
men, the Rebels loosing near three hundred.

Likewise taken by the Lord More, who beat the Rebels, and took store of
Munition which the Rebels were forced to leave behind them, by reason that the
Town was too hot for them.

VVickloo, and Waxford taken by young Charles Coote, son to that valiant (and
deplored) Commander sir Charles Coote; Colorane taken by the Deputy President
of Munster.

A^k^oo taken by the Lord Grandeson, who in that service was shot through the
left thigh, entering a breach.

Clogham was taken by Captain Gibbs, Manah^m was taken by sir Richard
Greenevill, Galway and Garmaston having been besieged long by the Rebels, was
releived by the Earl of Ormond, Leivtenant General of his Majesty's Forces.
As for Lymrick, that was a place which did do much hurt to our proceedings,
being so strongly fortified by the Rebels, that though our English forces had
made many attempts against it, yet they were repulst, and forced to recreate as
vanquished.

Nevertheless so it pleased God to bless us, that he put it into the heart of
Captain Bartlet, a Scotch Commander, to frame a project, and to put that
project in execution.

For on satterday the 9th. of August, the said Captain Bartlet came to my Lord
Lieutenant General, and desired him that he would be pleased to let him
employ five hundred men, and a troop of horse, in a design against the Castle
of Limrick, withal promising confidently, that he would take the Castle, or
upon the failing thereof he would loose his head, the Lord Lieutenant being
loath that a Commander of such worth should engage himself in a design of
such probable danger, and improbable to prosper, used much persuasions,
desireing him to avert his intention, since an attempt upon that Castle so
strongly fortified must of necessity prove the ruin of him and his Company,
withal intimating that if he should receive a defeat by the Rebels, and be
lost in that design, it would give an occasion of encouragement to the
Rebels, and be a means to dishearten the English, who were in great want of
such noble and well disposed Commanders as himself.

Notwithstanding all this the said Captain Bartlet would not be persuaded but
that he should take the Castle, which the Lord Leivtenant seeing, gave way to
his desire, withal giving command that five hundred of the properest and
forewardest men should be assigned for him, and sir Richard Greenevills Troop
of Horse, which he having received, marched presently away from the Army to a
little village, which they had that day plundered, where he caused them to
search for all the Trouses and habits of the Irish, with which he habited one
half of his men, making them appear just like Irish Kemes, having so done, he
out of that part of his men which remained elected thirty musketeers which he
placed, (being befriended by the darkness of the night) on the backside of the
Castle in a deep ditch, giving them command not to stir till they see the
Irish forces out of the Castle. Likewise his troop of horse he placed in a
little grove, which was of one side of the Castle, some three Bows shots off,
having thus placed his men, and giving them directions what they should do,
he sent out those that were habited like Irish men, to walk round the Castle,
and to wait till that he should come up to charge the Castle.

The day appearing Captain Bartlet led on his men and beat a feirce alarm,
which the Irish in the Castle seeing, began straight to arm themselves, but on
the sudden they see the supposed Irish come to their rescue, for the disguised
English seemed to charge Captain Bartlet very fiercely, only with powder to
be shot, after a little time spent in this seemeing combat, the English
falling down thick and threefold, lying as if they were dead, and the rest
flying, which the Rebels seeing, straight issued out of the Castle, pursuing
the English that fled, not once noting or meddling with those that lay on the
ground as dead.

Which the 30. Masquetiers seeing rose, and with all speed seized on the
Castle, killing those that were the guard, who were unprovided of defense being
overjoyed with their supposed victory.

The Troop of horse clapped in between them and the Castle and the supposed
dead men rose and charged them cutting them off without mercy, so that they at
that time killed above 3. thousand of the Rebels, and took many prisoners, not
loosing above three men, only some few hurt, this is a real truth, and the
true manner of his taking the Castle of Limrick, for which service he is so
admired, that the soldiers are greedy to go with him upon the most desperate
designs.

Thus it pleases God to fight for us, and we doubt not (were the present
distractions of England once composed) and more aid sent over, we should
quickly reduce this Kingdom to its former obedience, and banish all those
blood-thirsty Papists out of the Land.

This is the sum of all that has happened lately, or is worthy my pains or
your knowledge.

Only I desire you in requital to retain me the chief Heads of your
proceedings in England, for now English news is as much longed for here, as
Irish news was lately in England.

I received a letter from Chichester, which informed me that my Lord Deputies
son was taken prisoner at Portsmouth, and sent up to the Parliament, pray
send me word whether it be true or otherwise.

FINIS.

