AN ELEGY On the Death of Sir CHARLES LUCAS and Sir GEORGE LISLE.
INspire me some prodigious Fury: all
The Muses are not enough Tragical.
Hither you Leaguer Fiends from your black Tents;
Hell has but Three, Fairfax whole Regiments.
A Pompy's death Caesar would chose to enjoy,
His Butchers were an Eunuch and a Boy.
Cannibals thus War not to reduce, but chew,
As Mastiffs fight to worry, not subdue.
Lightning (heavens sword) blasts not, if not withstood,
Colchester's Bull deals tamely in cold Blood.
What plenteous harvests storming brought the Town!
Each shaver Tarquin lopt his poppy down.
All your shot, fire, steel, scarce murdered one,
Your Mercy only was destruction.
Poison took in our certain ruin is,
Serpents never sting, but when the embrace, and kiss.
Scabbards stabbed most; no harm in the Cannons noat,
The only murdring piece was Fairfax throat.
Quarter from Rebels, will dispatch or end;
The Devil's most pernicious, when our friend.
When you should Cure, you bleed us to our grave,
The Book does never condemn, but when 't should save.
If the King escape by Rolfe, it is to be hurled
With Pass, and Pistol, to another world.
Must ye be flesht? so soon faces about,
The Town's not starved, the famine is without:
They Are guiltless sure must bid so soon adieu;
Or like the Devil, must you damn 'em too?
Horseflesh is sober meat: Fairfax digests
Tigers and Wolves, and is himself turned Beast:
He keeps a Sessions, when he takes a Town,
Councels of War are Juries, Buff Coats Gownds.
His Standards Gibbets are; he needs must fright,
His Physnomy's a funeral black and white.
The head quarters always are at Tiburne; all
His power makes him but Hangman General.
Countermarch quickly all this Blood: home, home
Lest we mistake the Devil for Black Tom.
This League murders more, then Marten could
Spawne (in a Holland's Leaguer) Bastard brood.
Must the Saints Feastivals be writ in Red?
Or are ye Gods with blood and victim's fed?
Thus, and scarce thus, Turks Conquer, and embrew;
Turks are no Saints, yet Conquer more then you.
If Executioners before Reformers go,
Be Derrick henceforth Generalissimo.
Fairfax and Essex spell their Christian brands,
You Will find the same T. R. in all burnt hands.
Strange Parlies, which no Articles dispense,
But such as dispatched Laud and Strafford hence.
If to Capitulate be such a thing,
And Treaties must end thus, God bless the King.
Whilst Nol, and Tom dividedly do awe,
The Land's bestrid with the Devils cloven paw.
In Lilly's dreams the King is still undone,
If so, these are his Lancasheire Mocksuns.
For they will both be Kings; Fairfax in the dress
Of the Rlack Prince, and Cromwell of Q. Besse.
Rossiter, Lambert, Ireton too must reign,
England will suffer Heptarchy again.
Come hallowed quill, dropped from an Angels wing,
Ink from that Font: (we now of Christians sing)
An Ostridge plume with aquafortis dressed,
He that writes Lucas praise must steel digest:
His Epitaph, in the cripled Savoy stands,
Armelesse trunkes there shows you his fatal hands:
All Hospitals his Monument conspire,
Every maimed piece presents you him entire.
Thus his eternal fame shall last as long
As Rebels halt; or Royalists have tongue:
Search Marston-moore, and in Yorkes Records seek,
You Will find him writ in Stigmatized Toms cheek.
Such were his fierce Sallies, as some did doubt
Whether he rod, or had been discharged out:
Then at each sweep he made whole ranks to fall,
As if the had duck't before a Cannon ball.
Some he o'retakes and joints at knees; you would swear
Their legs had fled, and left the bodies there.
Now they must to it the Superstitious way,
Down (says his Morglay) Villains kneel and pray.
He was the Towns best Wall; and O! to glutt
Revenge, this Royal Fort is made a Butt.
On Cut-throates, on, perfect your gamesome rites,
Forward and backward shoot, set up two whites;
Proceed, let not your lucky mischiefs slack;
Royalists mourn, but your souls were the black.
Lisle defies Quarter: now his friends bloud's spilt,
Your Charity's sin, your mercy will be guilt.
Great spirit, death's a Mistrisse in his eye
Or Nuptials; it is the same to kiss and dye.
His Grave's as welcome as his Quilt or Down,
Would but his Ghost walk, 'twould nigh clear the Town.
Holland's to him a Coat of Maile; what crowds
Did his thin Newbery shirt send to their shrowds?
They had not Brains to judge, nor hearts to fight,
But ran and thought the Devil was turned white.
He vengance hurled like a pale dismal star,
Or the milkie Genius of an innocent War.
No need of swords to have the Rebels sped;
He Had soul enough to Lispe whole squadrons dead.
Farewell brave Twins of valor; may no spurn
Of Rebels foot light heavy on your Urne:
We all shall wait upon your fate; this year
Starved Colchester will soon be every where.
Plenty and Lucas fled at once, this Isle
Together wants a Summer and a Lisle.
Your Graves are meritorious, Wharton lies
Still in his Sawpit, and will never rise.
Your Loyal hunger, and your lean Alarmes,
Was better then to feed Pyms loathsome swarms.
Your glorious souls are free, whilst others have
A Conqueror who to his Gout's a slave.
Old Fairfax Corn's ill cut, there goes to wrack
Weather-wise Booker and an Almanac.
Their wounds are still in the legs, you know the spell
Of The Greek, they were dipped too in Styx and Hell.
Rossiter's half dead; it is well he is so much man;
But geldings serve for the work Essex began.
Their Church is militant; and does appear
Triumphant too; for why? their heaven is here.
The Army's the holy League; all for Saints go
Because their Murders make all others so.
May they be Angels too; and when they fall
Like Jacobs Angels upon ladders all.
FINIS.

