AN EXACT RELATION Of the Discovery of a great PLOT For the surprizall of
YORK FOR His MAJESTY; as it was presented to Major General LAMBERT, by the
Judge Advocate.

WHEREIN Is set down the manner of the said PLOT, and the names of those taken
that were the chief Actors in the said business, with all the Arms and
Ammunition provided for that Design.

WITH A Letter from PONTEFRACT concerning a Party that were to meet them from
Sir Marmaduke Langdale June 18. 1648. June 21

Published for the prevention of misinformation

LONDON. Printed for G. W. 1648.

A RELATION MADE BY THE Judge Advocate, TO Major General Lamberts Army,
concerning the Rising and Alarm which happened in this City near Micklegate
Bar the 11. of June 1648.
SJR,
ABout 12. of the Clock on Sunday night the 11 of June, we had a strong Alarm
in this City, given near Micklegate Bar, by some parties fireing upon the
Centry and Guard there which consisted of the Volunteers, and Trained Band, the
Guard did not quickly receive the Alarm till the parties that fired came up to
the gate and knocked, and bad them open the gate for the King, at which they
took the Alarm, some pieces went of, but by whom is not known, within the
Walls upon the Guard, and then they beat an Alarm; whereupon Captain Pitson
and Captain Farley, commanded up their companies, and marched them to the main
Guard, and sent strong parties over Ouze Bridge to Micklegate Bar, and by
that time Lieutenant Levens marched up to the main Guard with a party of about
20 horse and from thence Captain Pitson desired him to march to Micklegate
Bar, which he did, but they discovered no enemy in any Body, only they found
the Guards in some disorder, and many cried out in the streets, for the King,
for the King; whereupon Captain Pitson from the main Guard sent out several
other parties of Soldiers and Volunteers of the City into diverse parts of the
City, to search for such as were the most dangerous Malignants, in regard they
feared their rising, and accordingly they did cease on about 10. some whereof
are Citizens, and some have been in Arms for the King, amongst which a
Lieutenant Colonel and some captains having their Swords, and fireing Arms
lying ready charged by them, and some of them wearing Sir Thomas Glemhams
colors, particularly captain Pitson commanded his Lieutenant John coape to
march with a party to Mr. Mascals house to search for letters and arms and
acquainted him that he had notice of a Letter that should come from Pomfret,
and there was found in the said house hid in a wall a Letter dated at
Pontephr^^t the ninth of June twelve at night subscribed M.B. a Copy whereof
here is enclosed.

On Wednesday last Captain Pitson having the Guard that day, about 150. of the
most Malignants of the City went out at Boudam Bar, to meet a Wedding that
was to come out from Newcastle that night into York; they had liberty to go
forth, but Captain Pitson commanded that none should come without an Order from
my Lord Major, which upon their return, about 9. or 10. of the clock at night,
the Guards being strict, they permitted none to come in, but those that could
have liberty from my Lord Major, fearing there might be some design in that
business, amongst those that went out was Mr. Mascalls Son, and the
Lieutenant Colonel of the Kings side, and they being suspected, some was sent
out with them two miles off, whither they said they went, and there they met at
an Alehouse, about 40. Gentlemen and others which had secured the King; with
their swords, and some with Pistols, a drinking, and pretending they stayed for
the Wedding: This letter was partly discovered on Sunday night by a Maid, it
seems Mr. Mascall had showed it, and the Maid hearing her Mr. and Mrs.
speaking of a letter that was sent from some Cavaliers about the surprising of
York, did speak of it to some well-affected about 2. or 3. hours before the
Alarm: The next morning there was sent out some horse to discover the enemy,
and it did appear by many in the Country, and some they took up for Guides,
that the enemy was about 3. Troops of Horse, and had Musketeers behind them.

This Relation was made by the Judge Advocate to Major Genesis Lamberts Army, who
was at the main Guard, and saw all Passages.
Mr. Mascall.
YOur affection to our cause makes us apply our selves to you as a fit
instrument to be entrusted in our present endeavor for the Seizing and
securing of York, which would be of great consequence to us at this time by
amaising the enemy and drawing them back from engageing with Sir Marmaduke
Langdale his Forces, and by your diligence might easily be done; we intend to
attempt the taking of York on Sunday next at twelve a Clock at night and to
that purpose shall have a strong party of horse ready at that time to enter the
City, and possess the guards and strength thereof, of which we have assurance
already, and shall confidently for our assistance rely upon our friends there,
appearing in a body betwixt Micle-Gate bar and Northstreet-Posterne to join
with our party, who shall enter therein delivering them selves from those that
have no power over them, which we shall rely upon at the time and place
aforesaid, to be obtained by your giving them notice of it, this party comes
from Sir. Marmaduke Langdale upon pretense of releifing us here; but we have
diverted them from that design in regard we are in good condition, and can
make our party good to take that City, which will be a good neighbor to us,
your ready compliance with us in this act, which we doubt not of will be very
acceptable and seasonable, therefore pray fail us not who are your very humble
Servants

Pontefract this 18. of June 1648. M. B.

FINIS.

