Exceeding Joyful NEWS FROM The Earl of Bedford, Lord General of the Horse,
that is now set forth for the Defense of the Protestant RELIGION.

Declaring the happy and fortunate Success of the Protestant Army at
Siege-Moore in Sommerset-shire, upon the 19. day of this instant month of
August, who having received a Challenge from the Lord Paulet, Sir Ralph Hopton,
and Sir John Stowell, daring them to meet them at the said Moor at the time and
place appointed.

Which said Gentlemen upon the 19. day assembled at Siege-Moor with a great
number of men, where Sir Francis Popham, Mr. Pine, and Mr. Str^nd met them with
6000. Horse and Foot and after some parley concerning the King and parliament,
they fell to blows, but after some 6, hours fight. Sir Francis obtained the
Victory.

The said Lord Paulet and his Accomplices stood for the Commission of Array,
and Sir Francis and the rest of the Gentlemen for the Ordinance of Parliament.

London Printed, for Thomas Berriman; dwelling in Great St. Bartholomews.
Angust 23. 1642.

Exceeding Joyful NEVVS FROM FROM Sommerset-shire.
ON the 16. day of August, there was a meeting of diverse Gentlemen at Sir John
Stowell his house at Ham, where after much discourse amongst them selves, they
contrived away how they might put the Commission of Array in execution, and
suppress all those that should oppose them therein, Sir Ralph Hopton replied,
that it were an casie thing to be done.

First, considering my Lord Paul^ts powerfulness in the East part of the
shire, and what mean Forces there abouts can arise to hinder his Proceedings
therein, the rather for his part in regard of Master Digbies assistance of Horse
and Foot. II. For his own part he said he has gotten the good will of the
County therabouts his quarter, notwithstanding Mr. Alexander Popham, or Sir
John Horner, do they what they can. III. For Iihn Stowel it was said his
opposers were many, namely, Sir Francis Popham, Mr. Pine M. Coals, M. Nevvton,
and diverse others; yet they thought his part of the County were as easy to be
brought under subjection, as any of them, all the rather, because he has great
Lordships and Manors about the West part of the shire, and that his Tenants,
most of them holds their Lands by Rack-rent; so that if they would not obey
his command, he might out with them. IV. And lastly, for Sir Francis Dorington,
Sir Ferdinando Gorge, and Mr. Smith, they said that they thought the
Inhabitants of the City of Bristoll, and Bath would help and assist them,
notwithstanding Mr. Hollis or Mr. Stroud; after which agreement they concluded
and prefixed a day, place, and hour, of meeting, which was the following, being
ihe 18. of August.
And that every one of these Gentlemen ^efore-mentioned, should make what
expedition they could in Raising each feverall man's quarters, and to force
their Neighbors and Tenants ^o be well armed with powder and shot, and the
Pikes to be in the Arrear of the Musketeers, and the Horse to be in Arrear of
all the Pikes, which was about the number of five thousand soldiers, all o
meet at a place called Siege-more, upon the Eleventh of August, about o^e of
the clock, at the East part of said Moore, near adjoining to Donnington and
Sommerton.

Sir Francis Popham and his Son Mr. Pine, Mr Stroud, and the rest having had
notice sent them by these Cavaleers, that at such a day, place, and hour, they
would put the Commission of Array in execution, in defiance of them all, that
if any offered to oppose them in the execution thereof, let them be assured
ehey shall suffer for their attempt, though they hazard their Lives and
Fortunes therein.

The said Sir Francis with the rest of the Gent^y in the County, fearing no
threatenings, caused the drums to beat up, charging the Trained Bands to be in
readiness, and every Captain of the train Bands to lead his Company to the
said Moore at the day appointed, and about 6000 met at the place and hour, the
Cavaleers themselves durst not venture near their soldiers, for fear of
Treachery by their own Companies.

For there was not a word of Command obeyed by the Cavaleers, upon which they
all rid their ways, and took their commanding servants and Sir John Stowell
dangerously shot in the breech, yet he got away before any could over take him,
and the Country being thus met together on both sides, the one part to put the
Commission of Array in execution the other the Militia, consented all
ingenerall to put the Militia in execution where they exercised for three hours
space, only three Captains in the Lord Paulets Regiment, and two Captains under
M. Smith his Regiment, refused to put their soldiers in rank or file, or to
exercise them.

Whereupon they were apprehended and carried to prison, till Order from the
Parliament.

The Country since the last four Troop of Horse, sent by the Earl of Bedford,
who is Lord Lieutenant of the shire, has kept the Country in peace and
quietness, for they are quartered within a mile of each Gentleman's habitation
or mansion house.

The City of Wells has been much rifled and racked, and the Cavaleers have
poled and pinched the poor of the City, and has made such an obstacle of the
town, that it is not 10000. l. will make satisfaction.

The Town Goal are full of the meaner sort of people, and the chief Agents was
wilfully let gone; after which there was Order taken for by the Committee and
Justices, having therefore maturely and judiciously considered, that the chief
spring of all our miseries descends from those corrupt Fountains, have thought
it meet and expedient that there should a troop of horse daily at the Lord
Paulet his house, for the more security of the peace of the shire, and so about
every of the said Gentlemen's houses a Troop of horse for their apprehending,
that thereby the Countymay be cleansed rom such corrupt members that contaminate
the sanctity of the Lowes in an obstinate exulcecration: but it is to be feared
they are gone out of the shire else they would have bin taken ere this, in
regard of their daily searches made about their houses, and in most parts of
the shire.

On Friday after the mustering of the trained Bands, there was a privy sear^h
at one Mistress Ward her house a widow woman, and a great Recusant for M. Smith
near Bridgewater, and at Mr. Harvies house an Alderman sometime of
Baidgewater, for Sir John Stowell, but no person found therein, but there was
Ammunition and Armor found in widow Ward her house, for above 100. soldiers.

A little boy seeing the Rifling of the House, said that his Father had a great
company of such Ouns too; hereupon the Searchers went with the Child, and
fearched all that Village of Ware, and took from the widow Ward and near upon
400. Arms, and many sorts of Engines, the Tenants were all committed to safe
custody: and this is all for the present I can certify you with all, till the
next Post.

The Captains of the City of London were appointed to attend the Committee for
Defense of the Kingdom, to consider of fit and convenient places for the making
of Outworks for the Defense and safety of the City of London, and the Suburbs
thereof.

Ordered to be forthwith printed.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

