EXCEEDING True and happy News from the CASTLE OF WINDSOR.

Declaring how several Troops of Dragooners have taken possession of the said
Castle, to keep it for the use of the King ann Parliament.

Likewise manifesting how several Companies of Horse and Foot are raised by
Authority of the high Court of Parliament in Essex. Buckingham-shire. Surrey.
Midlesex. Barke-shire. Hampshire.
And other adjoining Counties.

With a remarkable passage concerning the Earl of Warwick, who came to
town, on Tuesday 18.th of this present October.

Also a Declaration concerning the Major of Worcester, who was brought to town
on Wednesday the 19. th of October. with a Wagon laden with Plate and Money.

London, Printed for T. Franklin. October. 20. 16^^.

Exceeding true and joyful News FROM Windsor Castle.
Declaring how several Troops of Dr^gooners have taken possession of the said
Castle, for the King and Parliament.
THe Kings Majesty having altered his intention of staying at Shrewsbury (as is
conceived by the Persuasion of that Cavalero rout, which have destined all to
ruin and destruction) has lately bent his course toward London, being
persuaded that here he shall have more ^id and assistance, (as is pretended)
then he has yet obtained, this pretense of theirs has drawn his Majesty into
this course, although it is apparently manifest that they march up to London
with an intent to plunder it, and bring all to ruin and destruction, that
stand well affected to the King and Parliament.

For the perfecting of which practice, they intended to draw to Windsor, and
to take Possession of the Castle, that being a place of greatest strength in
this part of the Kingdom, by reason of the height and strength, the Country
lying under it, so that the Castle can command it round about.

Could they have obtained this Castle, they would there have fortified
themselves, till such time as they could have gathered strength, which having
obtained, they then intended (as is generally thought) to have marched against
London that being their only aim, but God which sees the secrets of all
hearts has brought their practizes to light and made them apparent to the eye
of the world, their intentions were discovered to the high Court of Parliament,
who by Gods assistance and direction have taken the most speedy and effectual
course to prevent so great a mischeife.

For by the appointment of the Parliament, several well affected Gentlemen and
valiant Religious Commanders are gone into Essex, Midlesex, Buckingham-shire,
Barke-shire, Surrey, Hamp-shire, and other adjoining Counties, to raise
several Troops of Dragooners and Volunteers, some of which are arrived
already at Windsor, and have taken possession of the Castle, for the use of
his Majesty and Parliament, others are in their march toward Windsor, where
being arrived, they intend to fortefie themselves, and to make out-workes, so
that the Cavaliers have lost their labor.

The Countries are very ready to go in this service, and stand generally for
the Parliament, because they see that the Cavaliers plunder all the places they
came at, taking and seizing Horse and all things which are portable, and if any
one resist, they presently burn their Houses, to the utter ruin and
destruction of all those that have dependence thereon.

The Cavaliers in their march toward London visited Coventry a second time, but
the City withstood them valiantly, and by the assistance of the Country routed
their whole Army, so that they were forced to retreat disorderly, and every one
make shift for himself.

The Country makes head against them as they march, being forced to guard their
Towns, which if they should neglect, the Cavaliers would plunder.

They pay for nothing, but live all upon pillaging and theeving, therefore it
is our best course not to trust to their mercy, for whosoever tryes them, shall
find them like so many Judasses, and the poor Protestants shall be handled by
them like so many Publicans among thieves, if ever they should get the uper
hand, or gain power to perfect their bloody designs.

But God be thanked all their plots have been brought to light, for he has
confounded them in the performance of all their secret Designs.

A true Declaration of the particular causes of the Earl of Warwicks coming
to London.
THe Earl of Warwick having received a command from the High Court of
Parliament, intimating unto him, that it was their desire that he should
resign his charge (during his absence) to his Vics-Admirall, and immediately
repair to London, which message being received by the said Earl, he with all
speed settled his affairs, and on Tuesday the 18. of this present October he
arrived in London, whose welcome presence made ore-ioyed the hearts of his
beholders the occasion of his coming to town as is generally conceived is to
raise men in Kent and Essex, his Lordship being so highly beloved in those
parts, that he can raise more men for the defense of the King and Parliament,
then any other Nobleman in the whole Kingdom.

On Wednesday the 19ht. day of this month, the Major of Worcester was brought
to London, with a Wagon laden with Plate, which was taken from the malignants
of that County.

FINIS.

