THE EXAMINATION OF Mr. VVil. Prynne, By Order of the House of Commons; WITH
HIS ANSWER.

Likewise several Votes in prosecution of the Trial of The Kings Majesty In the
Painted-Chamber, Westminster.

Also the Trial of Sir Robert Stuart, by the Lord General and the General
Council of the ARMY.

Together with a LETTER from Holland, certifying the Landing of Alderman
Langham, and Alderman Bunch, to the House of Commons.

Imprimatur,

G. M.



Jan: 1^th. London, Printed for H. Beck, 1648.

SEVERAL Votes, Orders, and Ordinances, for trial of His Majesty.
THe Committee of Indemnity, ordered to draw up an expedient, how all the
people of England may have the benefit of the several Ordinances for
Indemnity, without being put to that trouble and extraordinary charge of
coming to London.

They voted, that two Members of the House to peruse the Lords Journal Book,
and to certify what they had voted upon the Ordinance and Vote, yesterday
rejected by them, they presently return answer, That the House of Lords
yesterday consisting of the Earl of Denbigh, Earl of Northumberland, Earl of
Pembroke, Earl of Mulgrave, Earl of Rutland, Earl of Kent, Earl of Manchester,
Lord North, Lord Hunsden, Lord Maynard, Lord Dacres, and Lord Barkly, had nullo
contradicente agreed upon several Votes for laying aside and rejecting the
Ordinance yesterday sent to them, for appointing a Court-Marshal for trial of
the King, and the Order for declaring the King Traitor, for levying War against
the Parliament and Kingdom, the supreme Authority of this Nation (though they
would never own that style till now) therefore voted, That the Members of that
House, and others, appointed by order of this House, or Ordinance of
Parliament, to Act in any Ordinance of Parliament where the Lords are joined;
and are hereby empowered and enjoined to sit, act, and execute in the said
several Committees of themselves, though the Lords join not.

They order Farrington Ward to proceed to Election, and that the Lord Mayor, or
any other, should forbear to impose the Oath of Common Counsel, or the Oath of
Trinity house, or any other illegal Oath, upon those that are lately elected
for Common Counsel men of London.

They refer the names of the Officers of Ships to the Navy, to consider who are
fit to be employed in the next Summers Fleet. Col. Lidcot, and Cap. Moulton,
especially recommended to the Navy for employment.

Ordered, That the General should be desired to command his Marshal-General to
take of all prisoners of War, and for Delinquency, That they be secured from
escaping; and it was referred to the Committee of the Army to enable the
Marshal-General to go on with the said service.

The Marshal-General was likewise voted, To put the Ordinances of Parliament in
execution, for suppressing scandalous and unlicensed Pamphlets, and the
Committee of the Army was to enable him to go on with that service.

The prison of Peter house, and the escape of prisoners thence referred.

Letters come from Mr. Strickland, Agent for the Parliament in Holland, that
two rich Aldermen of the City of London are landed there, viz. Alderman
Langham, and Alderman Bunch.

The two Members appointed to know Mr. Prynnes answer, Whether the scandalous
Pamphlet, to which his name was set, was his; and whether he would own it,
reported his answer, That when a sufficient Authority (...) to him, he would
return a speedy answer. This answer is to be considered of on Thursday next.

The house Ordered, that the Clerk of that house should be enjoined not to give
out any Copy of the said Ordinance for trial of Charles Stuart, either to any
Member of the House or any other whatsoever.

The Ordinance of Parliament for trying of the King was this day brought in,
fairly engrossed in Parchment according to former Order, and was read and
assented unto, The manner of His trial as before, the time and place, Whether at
London or Windsor, nothing further; but that is left to the Commissioners who
are to try Him, and they are to meet Monday next in the Painted Chamber,
Westminster, and to proceed in order, as to the trial, which they are to go on
withal, without intermission.

A Letter came from the Commissioners of Scotland; Resident here, Laying open
and pressing much for unity of Councels and Actions according to the Covenant,
betwixt the two Kingdoms, Desiring that the House would not proceed to try or
execute the King, till the Advice of that Nation be had thereunto.

Approved by the house of the apprehending Sir Robert Stuart and others that
fled into, and that were engaged against this Parliament and Army in this
Kingdom, and likewise Scotland in the last Summers Rebellion.

Voted also, That it should be referred to the Lord General and Council of War,
to try Sir Robert Stuart by a Council of War, upon the matters charged against
him; and that the prosecutors do give in their charge against him to the
Council of War; and that the said Council be desired to secure the person of
the said Sir Robert Stuart, till the said trial be ended.

The General Council of the Army intended to perfect the Agreement this day, if
the siting of the Commissioners for trial of the King in the Painted Chamber
had not prevented them: The House rose betimes likewise in relation to that
business.

The Commissioners being met about three of the clock, (his Excellency being
one) after a (short Ceremony performed) they fell to Debate, and came to this
Resolution, viz. That to morrow morning a Herald should proclaim, and invite
the people to bring in what matter of Fact they had against Charles Stuart, King
of England.

That on Wednesday next the Commissioners appointed for trial of the King,
intend to sit in Westminster Hall concerning that business, and to direct all
persons to bring in their Charges on that day.

Having thus named the time and place, His Majesty is expected to be speedily
sent for to Westminster in order to His trial.

FINIS.

