Exceeding joyful NEVVES From the EARL OF VVARVVICK.

Wherein is declared the wonderful works Of God, by preventing a damnable and
hel-bred conspiracy plotted against him: Sir John Pennington being near unto
him with a great number of Caveliers.

Read in both Houses of Parliament, and by them ordered to be Printed.

Also a Declaration of the House of Peers sent down to the House of Commons,
with Mr. Pyms answer thereunto.

With the Kings Resolution concerning the Earl of Northumberland, Pembroke,
Essex, Holland, and the Lord Fielding.

Likewise the humble Petition of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled,
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty. For a Pacification between His Majesty and
both Houses.

Ordered that this be Printed.

Joh. Brown Cler: Par.



London, Printed for A. Coe, July 16, 1642.

Exceeding joyful News from the Earl of WARVVICKE.
IT is not unknown to the subjects of England, the great Plots and wicked
Designs which the Papists, or rather the party which we now call Malignants,
have often and sundry times endeavored to bring this Land to perpetual ruin
and destruction, neither can it be unknown to the whole world, how powerful
and active the wicked Counselors about his Royal Majesty have been both
before and since the Parliament now assembled, in seeking to destroy and
extinguish the true Protestant Profession, the laws of the Land, and the
Liberty of the Subject: and have also wrought many traitorous and damnable
designs against the Parliament: But by the great care of the omnipotent God of
heaven, they have been discovered, taking no effect, praised be his name for
it. And seeing they could not prevail in these their damnable and Hell-bred
attempts, they prevailed so far with his Royal Majesty, that they drew his
Highness from his Parliament to diverse adjacent places thereabouts, and after
to the Northern parts, where (in his name) they publish diverse scandalous and
ignominious speeches against the Parliament, to the great danger, not only of
the disturbance, but even of the subversion of the original Constitution and
Fra^^ of this Kingdom.

But they not prevailing in all these attempts, which they have plotted against
the Parliament; they thought it a business very convenient for them to bring
their projects more to perfection, to desire his Majesty to send command to the
Earl of Warwick for to resign his place to Sir John Pennington: At which
time there was a disrovery of a great mischief that had like to have happened
upon the discharging him of his place, Sir John Pennington being then in the
Downs with a great company, expecting to have the ships delivered up unto him,
but it was prevented.

His Majesty through the instigation of wicked Counsel, has put the Earl of
Pembroke, Earl of Essex, Earl of Holland, and the Lord Fielding out of their
places of Honor, for no other cause but discharging their consciences in
Parliament, being Members of the said House; and likewise the Earl of
Northumberland, and his Majesty has displaced of high Admiral a man so
eminent in all qualifications of honor and safety, so necessary for these
times: All which were done by the means of evil Counsel, being a dangerous
preparative to future Confusions.

Both Houses having taken into consideration the displacing of these persons,
especially the Earl of Northumberland, cannot think the Kingdom to be in
safety, till they have done their utmost in all fit ways, till that office be
restored, whereby the Commanders of the ships, which are the walls of the
Kingdom, may again be settled in charge of that noble Lord.

The Honorable House of Peers taking into serious consideration the great
distempers of this Kingdom, and the great distress and danger the Kingdom of
Ireland was in, unless timely remedy be forthwith prepared and made ready: But
for the prevention whereof they ordered and resolved at a Conference to make
this ensuing Declaration.

That they having taken into consideration the weighty affairs of both
Kingdoms; thought it very requisite and necessary, that the Earl of Leicester
should be forthwith dispatched for Ireland; declaring and laying open the great
necessity and want of him in that distressed Kingdom.

To which Mr. Pym answered, that he was very willing to go, but that many
we^ghty occasions hindered him, and at the same time the Earl of Leicester
seconded him.

Mr. Pym presented to the House of Peers diverse Propositions concerning that
motion, which was to this effect.

That whereas their Lordships were desirous that he should forthwith go for
Ireland; he was very willing, if so be provision were in readiness, he
demanding a great sum of money at his first setting forth.

But it was referred to a Committee for the consideration ^hereof.

To the Kings most excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled.
May it please your Majesty,
ALthough we, your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subjects, the Lords and
Commons in Parliament assembled, have been very unhappy in many former
Petitions and Supplications to your Majesty, wherein we have represented our
most dutiful affections in advising and desiring those things which we held
most necessary for the preservation of Gods true Religion, your Majesty's
safety and honor, and the peace of the Kingdom; And with much sorrow do
perceive, that your Majesty incenc'd by many false calumnies and slanders, does
continue to raise forces against us, and your other peaceable and loyal
Subjects, and to make great preparations for war, both in the Kingdom, and
from beyond the Seas; And by arms and violence to overruled the judgment and
advice of your great Council, and by force to determine questions there
depending concerning the government and liberty of the Kingdom: yet such is
our earnest desire of discharging our duty to your Majesty and the Kingdom, to
preserve the peace thereof, and to prevent the miseries of civil war amongst
your subjects; That no^withstanding we hold our selves bound to use all the
means and power, which by the Laws and Constitutions of this Kingdom we are
trusted with for defense and protection thereof, and of the Subjects from force
and violence. We do in this our humble and loyal Petition, prostrate our
selves at your Majesty's feet, beseeching your Majesty that you will be pleased
to forbear and remove all preparations and actions of war, particularly the
Forces from about Hull, from Newcastle, Tynmouth, Lincoln, and Lincolnshire,
and all other places. And that your Majesty will recall the Commissions of
Array, which are illegal; dismiss Troops, and extraordinary Guards by you
raised. That your Majesty will come n^erer to your Parliament, and hearken to
their faithful advice, and humble Petitions, which shall only tend to the
defense and advancement of Religion, Your own Royal honor and safety, the
preservation of our Laws and Liberties: And we have been, and shall ever be
careful to prevent and punish all tumults and seditious actions, speeches and
writings, which may give your Majesty just cause of distaste or apprehension of
danger. That your Majesty will leave Delinquents to the due course of Justice;
And that nothing done or spoken in Parliament, or by any person in pursuance of
the commands and directions of both Houses of Parliament, be questioned any
where but in Parliament.

And we, for our parts, shall be ready to lay down all those preparations
which we have bin forced to make for our defense. And for the Town of Hull,
and the Ordinance concerning the Militia, as we have in both these particulars
only sought the preservation of the peace of the Kingdom, and the defense of
the Parliament from force and violence: So we shall willingly leave the Town
of Hull in the state it was before Sir John Hotham drew any Forces into it,
delivering your Majesty's Magazine into your Tower of London: And suppressing
whatsoever has been; disposed by us for the service of the Kingdom. We shall
be ready to settle the Militia by a Bill, in such a way, as shall be
honorable and safe for your Majesty, most agreeable to the duty of Parliament,
and effectual for the good of the Kingdom: That the strength thereof be not
employed against it self; and that which ought to be for our security, applied
to our destruction: And that the Parliament, and those who profess and desire
still to preserve the Protestant Religion, both in this Realm and in Iceland,
may not be left naked and indefensible, to the mischeivous designs, and
cruel attempts of those, who are the professed and confederated enemies thereof,
in your Majesty's Dominions, and other Neighbour-Nations. To which if your
Majesty's courses and counsels shall from henceforth concure. We doubt not
but we shall quickly make it appear to the (...), by the most eeminent effects
of love and duty (...) your Majesty's personal safety, your Royal Honor and
Greatness, are much dearer to us then our Lives and Fortunes, which we do
most heartily dedicate, and shall most willingly employ for the support and
maintenance thereof.

FINIS.

