EXCEEDING Joyful News from HIS EXCELLENCE The Earl of ESSEX.

Declaring His Proceedings since his setting forth from London.

Likewise a Famous Victory obtained by His Excellence in Leicestershire against
the Cavaleers, with the manner of the Fight.

Also declaring a great Conspiracy against his Excellence at Northampton,
Sept. 11. there being a bullet shot into his Chamber where he lay.

Sent in a Letter from a well-willer of the Earl of Essex.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cook. Sept. 15.

Joyful News from His Excellence the Earl of ESSEX.
THe Earl of Warwicks proceedings and fortunate success at Sea is very
joyful and delectable to all true Christians, as will appear by these
particulars following, for it has been often times specisied unto diverse
worthy persons of this Realm, from many of their Friends, that have now
offices under his Lordship, of his brave and heroicke actions against the
Malignant party, that now lie lurking in many corners of the Sea, and of his
brave adventures in diverse places thereabouts, as Humber, and the Irish Seas,
and the courage that all the Seamen and Mariners take against all such persons,
vowing to lose their lives in the defense of his Majesty's person, the
Honorable Court of Parliament, and the Laws and liberties of the Subjects of
England, and that they will sight it out to the last man, whosoever they
encounter with, being resolved never to yield unto Englands Foe or Enemy.

The Honorable Court of Parliament (the great Council of this Kingdom) upon
Monday last received advertisement and information of the proceedings of
Captain Kettleby and Captain Stradling upon the Irish Seas, to the hazard of
that Kingdom, and the utter ruin and destruction of all the true Protestants
in that Kingdom; therefore the Honorable Court of Parliament having taken
into serious consideration the proceedings of these Pyrars, and resolved to
send a Message to the Earl of Warwick, and in the same propounded these
following Propositions: Whereby he might destroy those wicked and cruel
persons, who continually lie in wait to destroy and ruin the true Protestants
both in England and Ireland:

That they having had information of the proceedings of the aforesaid
Captains, and that they had taken an English Ship that was going with Beef to
the distressed Protestants, having in the same diverse suites of clothes to
cloth the poor Soldiers that are now in a miserable and naked condition,
therefore they desired the said Earl of Warwick to send some of his Ships to
the Irish Seas, for the apprehending of those wretched and Malignant Persons,
which questionless he will suddenly do, and I pray God that all such and the
like persons as they are, may be caught in their own snares, but because I am
loath to leave and conclude with these sad tidings, I am therefore resolved to
lay open to the Readers view many joyful and remarkable passages, which has
happened since his Excellence the Earl of Essex setting forth from London, upon
Friday night last His Excellence took up his lodging at Saint Albans, and from
thence, upon the next day, being Saturday, he took his Journey toward
Northampton, and as it is credibly reported, he arrived there that night, and
from thence his resolved to march into Leicestershire, intending to scour that
County of all those Cavaleers that do now in a most tyrannical way execute
the poor distressed Inhabitants, taking from them Horses, Kine, Sheep, and
all other kind of Cattle, but it is thought that when he appears in that
County that many of the Cavaleers will betake themselves to flight, as diverse
of their Companions has done in Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire, for when
that they heard that His Excellency the Earl of Essex was marching and
coming near those places, where many was billited, they duest not withstand
him but betook themselves to their heels, and so they do in many other
places, when they hear that the Lord General is near. The County comes in
very fast to aid and assist his Excellence, and such is the courage of him,
that I hope the Lord of Hosts will crown him with Fame and Victory, and make
him able to resist all that shall oppose him, for he is resolved, and thereupon
set down his Resolution to lose his dearest blood in the maintenance of that
cause which he has undertook, being comfortable tidings and happy
intelligence for all those that wishes well to this happy Reformation, that
we have such a worthy General, that does not think his dear blood too much
to be spilt in our cause, and I hope that he will make Englands foes in a short
time fear and tremble at his very Name, as they did his Fathers before him in
foreign Countries, God grant him happy and fortunate success in this his
constant Resolution, and let all good Christians daily send their prayers to
the Almighty for his preservation from all treacherous conspiracies, that so we
may have joy and comfort from him, as our Predecessors have had from his
Father, a man who was infinitely beloved throughout all England.

Septem. 11. the Earl of Essex came to Northampton, which was great joy and
comfort to us all, but in the night there was a Pistol Bullet shot in at his
Chamber window, which mist him narrowly, that caused the Town to be up in
Arms on a sudden, but who it was that did it, we cannot find as yet, my Lord
Wilmor and the High Sheriff of Leicester we have taken prisoners upon Friday
last.

FINIS.

