EXCEEDING Joyful News FROM THE EARL OF WARWICK Wherein is declared his
Resolution, concerning the Kings Majesty's desires, to have the Navy resigned
to him, Likewise the Parliaments determination, concerning the same.

ALSO, A TRVE RELATION Of the proceedings from York and Beverly Showing, The
great power and strength there raised, against the Parliament and Hul, under
the Command of The Lord of Carnarvon, The Lord Rich, Captain Butler, Colonel
Fielding, Colonel Runsford,


Likewise, The bounty of the Clergy, and of the Gentry in Yorksheire, tending
to the increasing and managing of, these unhappy Proceedings

John, Brow. Cler. Parl.

August. 3. Printed for Thomas Baley. 1642.

Exceeding Joyful NEVVES FROM the EARL of Warwick.
MANY have been the distaactions of this Kingdom, which overspreade this
Island by reason of his Majesty's absenting him self from his Parliament, and
none have taken deeper impression and threaten more danger, then those that
having taken hold in the Noertherne parts.

Many have been the Attempts of the Malignant party, to take and surprise
HVLL, and by that means to strengthen their one part, and to work out their
own ends and desires. But still the care and vigilance of the Parliament which
does continually watch for the preservation of this Kingdom, has opposed
those designs in their infancy, and betrayed them in their beginnings before
they could attain unto the end they aimed at. And it is most Remarkable to
observe these following particulars.

The Gentry and Freeholders of the County of Leicester having information, that
the Kings Majesty were resolved to come in person to the said County forthwith
prepared all manner of provision, meet and necessary, for the entertaining of
such a worthy and Pious Prince, And when his Majesty was entertained in the
County of Leicester, he made with all possible speed rewards the Town and
Bourrough of Leicester and coming thither the inhabitants of the said Town
gave his Majesty entrance with some of his Troops and followers, where being
resident certain while he proposed and propounded the follewing propositions
to the governors of the sea Town.

That they would be pleased to let his Majesty see the Magazine that were now
within their Custody.

2 That they would be pleased to restore the Magazine into his sacred and
Royal Custody it bring for no other then to defend his people from
disturbances.

NEWS FROM YORK AND BEVERLEY.
Cosen: My kind love, etc.
ACcording to your desire and my promise, I shall acquaint you with such News
as has happened with us since last I writ to you.

Then in brief this.

On Friday last, Sir John Goodrick Knight and Baronet, which was one of the
Yorkshire Knighs, that subscribed to give the King 250 horse and men, deing 30
in number, very bravely accoutred. Sir Francis Wortley, and the rest, have
engaged themselves to bring in their on Friday next. This day a Troop of Horse,
under the command of Captain Butler, marched from hence toward New Castle (as
it is reported) to g^rd the Town; and this day likewise two Regiments of Foot,
of the Train Bands of York shire, show under the command of Colo Lunsford, the
other under the command of Colo nell Fielding, marched toward Hull. Doctor
Bastwick, and three oath Captains are taking prisoners by Mr. Hastings and his
Consederates, and they are expected to be brought to York.

If they would but sit down and recolect what dangers hang over them and us,
how sharply they have bin entertained in their adventures they would I suppose
take breath and Parle before a second onset; they lately in tended for to
invade the Town of Hul, and having a friend of night to distowne Sr. John
Hotham; which under mask of darkness they did, intending may I say like
Cowards which strike winking or blindfold, but he found fortune as fauarable as
the Parliament finds him faithful for first he seeming as it were carlesse
Congested the Waters together and bridled them in which some fresh Water
Soldiers being privy to, Conducted by their ancient Captain, Captain sancey
began to inherit after the Flood, and having won the apportnuity orespred the
earth; this Sr. John Hotham gave leave to Raudeuowz in his thoughts; who
presently felt these Flies wagging in his Web; whereupon he saluteed these
Brauadoes with a piece of ordinance welcome sent about threescore souls to
Pluto, shook the roast into an Ague Hard Fate.

Sr. John not only welcomd them but paid the shot, such intertainment were they
never like to rein^oy: or the rest to be tasters of unless they come with a
powder, thus those daring Grim spirits have bincured of the desease of long
life: for indeed they have bin engines of torment of torment to the Country,
and that Noblemau is crowned with glory; who remembers rather that he is a
Subject then a Knight, whom the Honorable Houses of Parliament, have as a
gurdeon and med for his deserts, willingly with on heart vented forth
protestations for the security of his person as their own, whose happiness
consists in theirs to maintain which, he is as ready as able to pur in force
any thing by force, from force, the endeavors of incroaching adversaries;
wherefore answerable to their command, to let in the water, he has opened the
floodgates, which measuring the out-fields, make clothes of Crystal for the
neighboring plains: which, that it may not be disrobed of its pure garment,
to the subversion of many. Let such Merchant adventurers take heed to batter
for goods, or thought-good to King, with life or limbs, lest while they strive
for that little Hand in a forced ebb, they be ill willers to the King and
Kingdoms estate, whose ruin is smirkt with the name of safety, and gain he
Parliaments displeasure to their own loss.

There was letters com from the Right Hounarable the Earl of Warwick to the
high Court of PARLIAMENT intimating and desiring that they would be Pleased to
send some Aminuition withal speed for the Repaireng and maintaineng of his
Navy which Both Howses tesobued to do with speed and likewise ordered that
there should be all kind of Aminuition sent to the said Earl acording to his
desires he also informing the said Howses of his Proceedings at Sea and how
that he had stayed and taking diverse Ships which were goeing to His Majesty in
the North and desired their pleasuer therein and how that he had receuid
inteligents that his Majesty would have him restore the money into his Coustoty
and also the Parliament having taken into consideration the Kings Majesty
demands concerning the navy Hull and the MILITIA, declared that it was not for
the safty and security of the Kingdom.

The Lords and Commons do declare, tthat a Garrison of Soldiers is at New
Castle Likewise Earl Rivers being put into the Commission of Array, exercises it
with much rigor imprisoning all the that oppose him.

John Brown Cler. Par

FINIS.

