EXAMPLES FOR LONDON Or a Parallel between the evill-affected Malignants of
this City, and the seditious Jews in Jerusalem.

Also Declaring the miserable estate of this City if this war should
continue, there being so many potent Enemies within the Confines of the said
City, which seek to destroy the same.

printer's or publisher's device

London Printed, for Henry Hatton 1642.

Examples for LONDON
Several sayings of Gods chosen servants in whom the Holy Ghoast it self
speaks, are worthy perpetual remembrance, and if they be not regarded, the
godly are taken away to their rest and joy, and then follows a plague unto ye
people, the miseries and calamities that before was threatened by the mouths of
those his messengers, so after the death of St. ^mbrose, followed the
vastigation of Italy, after the death of St. Augustine, the Vandals entered
Affricke, and then sprung up the Arian-Herisie after the death of Johannes Huz,
the fierce Battles of Bohemia, after the death of Martin Luther what terrible
troubles and cruel callamities hapened who in his life time amongst all other
of his Works left in memorial This notable pophesie, that these 3. things
would be the destruction of Christian religion.

The first is forgetfullnesse of benefits that we reseved at Gods hands by the
Gospel, and unthankfullnesse for the same. The second is Carelessnesse. The
third, that we l^ke better of the worlds wisdom, then of Godly wisdom, within
the compass of our foolish brains we would Comprehend the Reason, Rule,
Order, and end, of every thing, ungodly counsel is aprop and stay unto our
determinations, we depend not upon the Lords providence we ask not counsel
at the mouth of the Lord, if the Lord guide not the world after our own will
we like no longer to be governed by him, we forsake the Lord, we fly straight
to flesh and blood, the prosperity of the world is our delight, and therefore
we say simply as did the prophet Jeremiah we remember what we have done and
lived merrely by it, when we sacraficed to the queen of heven, now we live in
lack and feel much woe, even so say we, if we should live according to the
Gospel we should leave of our crafty cuning in getting, and perchance become
beggars, we should leave our fa^se swearing, and not sell our wares.

We should leave our access in vanity, which is our chief delight.

We should labor ernestly and leave our slloathful rest.

We should give to those that want and have no certainety our serves.

But still weight until the Lord shall give us more

Flesh and blood is our delighr the glory of the world is our joye, and this is
contrary thereunto.

Thus we forsake the Lord, and cast of the yoke of of Christan profession, nay
of Christian Religion, I may say, for we profess somewhat, but express
nothing in our lives and conversations, but Envy, Hatred and Malice, and all
uncharitableness, we profess purity, but our hearts are fraught wirh
Hipocrisy.

It Is horible to be feared, because of the ungodly, who for all they have so
many labonrers from the Lord with his directions to teach the way to Heaven,
who I am sure with earnest groanings, pray that his blessed spirit would teach
them what to spoke, but they, by their neglect and slight regard, the nerears I
do mean, forces them often to prenounce this woe, to have the Kingdom of
Heaven taken from us, to have the gracious Gosspell the emmortali seed and
spiritual food of our souls taken quite a way from us, so long as I think
on it, I fear and tremble to think how soon that terible hunger may come,
for now us set on foot, then we shall go, rune, and seek earnestly, and yet
not find the food of our souls wherewith to be comforted: If we will fully
forget Gods glory will he care for us. wherefore for Londons example, there was
never a godlier City on the earrn, then was Jerusalem, and yet when they
refused to be Obedient unto the Lord, and begane to wax forgerfull of his great
benefits, when they left of to ask counsel of the Lord, and trusted to man's
vain strength, even then they were destroyed.

Even then they were begirt with death and Desolation.

Even then did all their Channells flow with Blood.

Her STREETS were filled with Scarlet.

Her precious palaces was filled with groans and howlings.

Her Temple Doors were blockt up with Priests, decked in their Golden Coapes.

Fired were their Barnes and Garners stuffed with Corn.

Their young Babes tossed upon their Enemies Spears, Balls of wildfire hurld
upon their lofty spires prided with goulden weines, this City seated by the
hand of Heaven, and fixed upon the Navell of the Earth, by her own discention
was thus destroyed, her Nobles forced daily to labor like the porest slaves,
no more account there was then made of them, but thirty there was sold for one
pore penny, the rest were forced to live in woe and want, pinched with pennury,
oppressed with labor in most cruel boncage and perpetu^^^ slavery. Oh London,
take example, first by this glorious City Jerusalem, whose unnumbred Towers
were built so nigh, that they seemed to touch, nay kisle the clouds, and now
all lies flat, and not one stone left standing upon another? Will thou not
pity Her.

But to come nearer unto our selves, how gallant and glorious a City was
Antwerpe of late days, how flourished some part of Germany and Flanders, but
when the voice of the Gospel is not obeyed, when the Kingdom of heaven is not
sought first, and before all things when Gods mercy is despised, and his
Gospel no more im^tated, when the Spirit of the Creator is resisted and
refused, then indeed we must needs loo^e for that which Martin Luther, that
chosen Testament of the Lord, foretold us, That the Gospel should be
^ra^slated from u^, to some other Nation, or rat^er returned back from us
Gentills, unto the Jews, from the new chosen refusers to the old chosen
proffessors.

It has a hid and a most a dark mystery, that many that proffesse themselves
to be Christians, yet deny the Sacrament of Baptism, and some ^at^ all
Isralits-and carnal Jews, have erenestly desired ^^e Benefit of the same
doubtless it is true that Christ said, you shall not finish all the Cities of
Iudab, until the coming again of the Son of man. Somewhat willbe to do among
them. God has a work that he will do, he has a remnant that he will call
home, whereof P^ull speaks saying blindness is partly happened unto Jsraell
until the fullness of the Gentiles be accomplished, and so Jsraell shall be
saved, hereof speaks Hilarious all is not yet doneth Jsraell, after the
fullness of the Gentiles is come (...), there is a remnant yet left in Jsrael
that shall be gathered unto the Lord.

Our looseness of life is to any Christians conscience a terrible fear or
rather ach part of any long continuance of the gospel amongst us that we are
so different in show that it is hard to find many of one color, of one
Consent, or of one ^ike Dsposstion some are white, some are black, some are
dunne, some ate blew, some are Yellowe, some are Red, but abundance brown,
some are spoted, but some unspotted.

On the other side one wolf is like another, seeking to deface Gods glory blot
out his name, and let up whom you will, let God and Moses be forgotten in the
Mount; a^l (...) will pluck of their special Iewis and ornament to ma e a
molton Image, in this case help all you that are true protestants, lament all
you good hristians, for reverent use of his name, spare no labor, speak, sue,
entreat, encourage, your Knights of the S^ire, the Burgessecs of the
parliament, the Clerks of the Convocation show your z^alo^^ what you may to
move, to procure son Godly law whereby the customary evil use, vain a^u^e of
our sacred God, his most mighty name may be reformed.

The force of Papistry, with all their wisdom and power they labor to beat
down our lack of good Life is still the gre^test loss, the strongest ^^op,
the unhappiest hinderance that now remains against the fu^nesse and
plentiousnesse of Gods Kingdom, whose Kingdom if we build not to the end,
whose spirit if we resist and refuse as heretofore (a fruit of infidellity) we
are quite given over, the devil shall every where the terror of Conscience
appear and show himself unto us (which God avert) and London be thou warned,
oh think upon fernsalem, that was so fair, so beauteous, and so pop^ulus, her
several Sects brought her to that confusion, which God defend but that thou
should live and flourish, and maintain the Churches glory, and be so he^d
upon England, that the other Congregations in other Lands may confess the to
be no whit inferior to any in the world, but rather a light and lantern unto
the rest, and tread cowne them that seeks to raze out the.

And last of all, to prompt the toward the imbraceing of an unity (the only
means to obtain a religious peace) think of the late flourishing estate of
the Kingdom of Ireland, there thou may see as in a glass the misery of
War, the cosideration of which, I hope will prove a motive to repentance, and
cause an union in Religion, and then we have no cause to fear but that God in
his good time will give a period to all our fears, and rurne our mourning into
a religious joy.

FINIS

