An Exact RELATION OF The Surrender of Scarborough CASTLE, By Sir Hugh
Cholmley, Governor of the same; to Coll. Sir Matthew Boynton, Colonel
Lassels, and Coll. Needham, Commanders in chief of the Parliaments Forces in
Scarborough.

Together with a Copy of the Articles agreed upon at the said Surrender.

Also, that Rabs Castle, Sir Henry Vanes houses in the Bishopric of Durham,
with all the Arms and Ammunition therein, is yielded up to the Parliaments
forces.

Published by Authority.

July 31 London, Printed for John Field.

SIR,
I Received yours by the last, for which I return thanks: For News here, what
we have so long weekly expected, is now happily effected and brought to pass,
namely, the Surrender of Pontefract and Scarbrough Castles: For the former of
which, the yielding of Pontefract, I doubt not but you have it with you
already, Sir Rowland Everard being sent to the Parliament with Letters from the
Committee at York, of the particulars thereof: That Siege was gallantly carried
on by the ever Renowned and experienced Commander, Major General Poyntz, who
by his prudence prevented all the Enemies designs for the Relief thereof: For
the particulars of the latter, I shall refer you to the enclosed Articles,
being an exact Copy agreed on between Col: Sir Matthew Boynton, Col: Lassels,
and Col: Needham, Commanders in Chief of the Parliaments Forces in Scarbrough,
and Sir Hugh Cholmley Apostate Governor of the Castle: I shall only add these
ensuing passages; Many of Sir Hughs Officers and Soldiers belonging to the
Castle, were in such a weak condition, that some of them were brought forth i^
sheets, others were helped out between two men, the rest were not very fit to
March. The general and common Disease amongst them, was the Scurvey, which
made such a mortallity among the Soldiers (as before) that Sir Hugh hastened to
make Conditions: The women in Scarbrough could hardly be kept from stoning of
Sir Hugh Cholmley. For other News here I am Informed, That Rabs Castle, Sir
Henry Vanes houses in the Bishopric of Durham, with all the Arms and
Ammunition therein, is yielded up to the Parliaments Forces that besieged it. I
must not pretermit a gallant Service performed by the ever Honored Major Gen:
Poyntz his forces, against the Skiptoners, the manner thus; A Troop of Col:
Brights, Commanded by Lieutenant Hatfield having In^elligence, that about
fourscore of the Enemy were advanced from Skipton toward Welbeck, (which the
Newarkers yet keep) fell upon them, Routed them, slew diverse upon the place,
took Sir Charles Howard of Naworth in Cumberland, diverse other Officers, and
about twenty Soldiers. Sir, This is all for the present, hereafter I shall not
fail to inform you of all the passages: In the mean time, I Rest,

Kingston upon Hull, July 26. 1645. Yours, etc.

Articles agreed and concluded upon the 22. day of July 1645. betwixt the
Honorable Sir Matthew Boynton, Knight and Baronet, one of the Military
Committee for the Northern Association: Coll. Francis Lassells, Coll. Simon
Needham Commanders in chief of the Forces for the King and Parliament in
Scarborough: And the Honorable, Sir Hugh Cholmley, Knight and Baronet,
Governor of the Castle there; concerning the Rendition thereof to the persons
before named.
I. THat the Castle be surrendered upon Friday next, being the 25. day of this
i^stant July 1645. by twelve of the Clock at noon: That all the Arms,
Ordnance, Ammunition, Provision and goods of what sort soever, now in, and
about the Castle (except what is hereafter excepted) shall be delivered to the
Commanders in Chief in Scarborough, or to whom they shall appoint, to the use
of the King and Parliament.

II. That all Prisoners now in the Castle be set at liberty within six hours
after the sealing of these Articles.

III. That the Governor Sir Hugh Cholmley, and those Officers, and Gentlemen
Soldiers, if he desire it, shall have a safe Convoy from hence into Holland,
or be safely conveyed to Newark, whether they shall choose, and if any after
their coming to Newark shall then resolve to go into Holland, giving notice
thereof within six days to the Committee for Military Affairs at York, they
shall have Passes from thence, to take shipping at Hull, Scarborough, and
Birdlington-key, and be there Accomodated, paying small Rates, so that they
take the first opportunity of wind and shipping. And such other who desire
them, shall have Passes from the said Committee to go to the Kings Army, or any
of his Garrisons, as they please: they traveling not above twenty in a
company, where the Governor or Colonel shall be in person, otherwise not
above ten in a company, the time to be permitted in their several passes, as
the distance of the places they go to shall require, none of them passing
through any Garrison for the King and Parliament, if there be another way.

IV. That no person whatsoever going from this Castle be Plundered, Arrested,
or staid upon any ground or pretense whatsoever, and in such case upon
complaint made to the aforesaid Committee at York, to be speedily redressed.

V. That the Lady Cholmley shall have liberty to live at her own house in
Whitby, and enjoy such part of her estate, as is allowed by Ordinance of
Parliament; That she may have two men servants, and two horses to carry her
self and such necessary things as shall be granted her.

VI. That all inferior Offices, Common Soldiers, and others, who have desire
to live at home, shall have Passes granted them for that end, and shall not be
forced to take up Arms against their minds: That the sick and wounded shall
be provided for until their recovery, and then have Passes to Travel to what
place they please, having sufficient time allowed for their journey, and two
persons permitted to take care of them.

VII. That the Governor march on his own horse, with Sword, Pistolls, and
defensive Arms, and all Field Officers upon their own Horses, with their
Swords and Pistolls, all Captains whatsoever, Lieutenants, Cornets of Horse in
like manner, three Servants of the Governor, and one for every Field Officer
as aforesaid, and all other Officers and Soldiers whatsoever on foot, without
any other Arms then their swords, and not to be compelled to march above ten
miles a day.

VIII. That all Officers and Soldiers may carry upon their persons what is
really their own, that nothing be carried in cloath-bags or snap-sackes, but
their own wearing apparel, writings, Evidences and Bills.

IX. That every Officer, Gentleman and Clergyman, may have liberty to buy, or
lawfully procure a traveling horse for himself and his servant, that all
sick and lame men may enjoy the same privilege.

X. That all Gentlemen of quality and Clergymen have liberty to march,
Gentlemen with their swords, that none of them carry above the value of 5, l.
in money or Plate about their persons, and nothing in their clothbags, but as is
expressed in the eighth Article.

XI. That there be no fraud or deceit whatsoever used, in spoiling or
imbezzelling any thing before mentioned, or comprised in these Articles; and if
any of them shall be violated, the party offending shall be delivered to the
Commander in chief where the fact shall be done, to give satisfaction for his
offense, and his particular act shall not be understood as a breach of these
Articles, nor be prejudicial to any other:

Hugh Cholmely.
We do attest that the within written Articles were signed and sealed by Sr
Hugh Cholmley in our presence,

Thomas Gower. Thomas Crompton. Richard Legard.




FINIS.

