EXCEEDING Good News from the Earl of ESSEX And that noble Commander,
Sergeant Major SKIPPON;

Wherein is declared how the said Sergeant-major Skippon, with 4000. Horse and
Foot, met with Prince Robert, with 5000. Cavaliers, near the City of
Gloucester, on the twelfe of this instant December.

Where they fought for the space of seven hours, and slew 800. of the
Cavaliers,, with the loss of 60. men, putting the rest to flight, and took
four Pieces of Ordnanc^, with store of other Ammunition.

Also Sergeant-major Skippons resolution concerning Prince ROBERT.

December 16. printed for Joseph Hutton, 1642.

A famous Victory obtained by Sergeant Major SKIPPON:
THe thrice noble and renowned Earl of ESSEX, Lord General of the parliaments
Forces, accompanied with that noble and heroicke spirit Sergeant Major Skippon,
whose very name does now begin to to terifie the Malignant Crew, and does
begin to fall off, not daring to give him Battalle wheresoever he comes,
unless they have five to one, as it will appear by this ensuing Relation.

Sergeant Major Skippon, that valiant and prudent Soldier, and one that is
willing to sacrafice his Life in this so good and just a cause, for the defense
of his Majesty and both Houses of parliament having intelligence by a Gentleman
that is very well affected, which came to his Excellencies Army, informing his
highness that prince Robert was come into Wiltshire with a resolution to pil
lage all those that would not adhere to him, and that he did great spoil in
that County, taking much Arms and Ammunition from them, whereupon his
Excellence after some debate upon the business, appointed that Sergeant Major
Skippon to march toward them, with 4000. Horse and foot, whereof 2000.
Draggooners, the Sergeant Major was very willing to obey his command, and with
a cheerful resolution, drew out four thousand men, and with valliant spirits
they followed him, marching day and night, until they came to the Enemy, and
upon Monday last each man had his desire Prince Robert hearing of his coming
made all the have he could to meet him, before he could get to Hungerford and
there to give him battle, but Prince Robert missed his aim for before he
could get some three miles on this side Marlow Sergeant Major Skippon was past
Hunger ford which is about seven miles one this side Marleborough, and upon
Sunday night they law two miles off each other and upon monday morning marched
unto each other, whereafteer some Parley Sergeant Major Skippon commanded his
Ordnance which was in the front to be discharged, the Prince answering him in
the same.

Sergent Major Skipton invading his Lest wing of Dragoners doing special
service Fighting as it wear in Rings, where not to be broken by the Prince
Troop, though they endeavored it withal their fury and violence for an hour
at least remained the sight in equal scale, and the Cavaliers fell off and on
verry fiercely* but that well experienced Soldier Sergant Major Skipton,
fighting in a half moon battle according to the swedish discipline, his men
giveing fire all at one instant one their left wing they were no longer able to
keep rank, but fell into apparent rout* retreating as fast as they could,
there Right wing was yet unbroken, but Prince Robert did so valiantly behave
himself and so desperate was the charging on of his Cavaliers, that had not a
Colonel who commanded our right Wing, been an excellent Soldier, he had run
the eminent hazard of our defeat, but at last Sergeant Major Skipton with his
left wing, brake into the Princes flanck himself with his battaileax beating
down many a Cavalier, Prince Robert seeing this began to retreat, he and his
Cavaliers to the number of some five thousand horse broke away through the end
of our right Wing and fledtowards Shrewsbury.

All their Foot, to the number of three hundred; were cut off, and about five
hundred of their Horse, but so great was Gods mercy to the forces raised by the
Parliament, for the defense of the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Religion
Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, the just privileges of Parliament, and
the propriety of the Subject, that (notwithstanding that they were so many in
number, exceeding ours, namely five to one, yet so many of them were slain, as
is above mentioned, and Sergeant Major SKIPPON, lost but threescore, besides he
took four pieces of Ordnance, five hundred pikes and muskets, with an
abundance of othei Ammunition of all sorts.

Likewise after the Battle he took great store of their Baggage, they being
in such post have, that they could not take it along with them, so great a
victory with so little loss has not been obtained as yet.

And the said Sergeant Major is resolved to pursue these runaway Cavaliers to
their destruction, and the Countries daily come in to his assistance,

The Gentry and Commonalty of Huntington, Lincoln, Northampton, and
Licestershire, have joined themselves in association, and do declare that they
are resolved to hazard their lives in the defense of his Majesty, and both
Houses of Parliament. and that they will never leave fighting, till these
malignants are quite destroyed.

FINIS.

