EXAMPLES FOR KINGS, OR, Rules for Princes to govern by. Wherein is contained
these ensuing particulars, 1 A Discourse touching Regal and Politic
Government. 2 A Prince must be just in his sentence. 3 What Man is fit to be a
Governor, and to bear Rule. 4 That a Prince ought to be true of his word. 5
That a Prince ought to be religious. 6 That a Prince ought not to shed innocent
blood. 7 That a Prince ought to be circumspect in giving credit to evil
reports. 8 That a Prince ought to beware of Parasites. 9 What kind of men ought
to be of the Kings Council. 10 That it is dangerous for a Prince to take aid
of a stranger. 11 How a Prince may get and keep the love of his Subjects. 12
That a Prince ought to be well advised how he begin a War.


LONDON, Printed for Henry Hutton. 1642.

Examples for Princes.
AS in Natural things, the Head being cut off, the rest cannot be called a
Body; no more can in politic things, a Multitude, or Communalty, without a
Head, be incorporate: Therefore a people desiring to live in society, and
willing to erect either a Politic Body or a Kingdom, must of necessity choose
one to govern that Body, who in a Kingdom of Regendo, is called Rex, and so by
the People is established a Kingdom: which Government is absolutely the best.
And as the head of the Physical body cannot change the reyns and sinews,
thereof, nor deny the members of their proper strength and necesary nutriture:
no more can a king who is head of the polliticke Body, alter or change the Laws
of that Body, or take from the people their goods or Substance against their
wills; for a king is chosen (and bound) to maintain the Laws of His Subjects,
and to defend their Bodies and goods, So Brute arriving in this Island, with His
Trojans, erected here a regal and polliticke government, which has for the
most part continued ever since: for though we have had many changes, as first
the Romans, then the Saxons, then the Danes, and Lastly the Normans, yet in the
time of all these nations, and during their Reigns, the kingdom was for the
most part governed in the same manner as it is now, Plutarch faith, that all at
first that governed were called Tyrants, but afterward the good governors
called Kings. For though a man by force do subdue Cities and Countries, yet he
ought to rule according to reason; and if he know God, according to the Law of
God: but when he is admitted King by the people, and has his power from them,
He may not Subject the people to any other power, yet He has a great and large
Prerogative, which He may use at His pleasure.

And here I think it not a miss to set down some few Laws and Customs of
other Commonwealths, whereby their good government may appear, they not
being Christians, Prolmaeus King of Egypt feasted one day seven Ambassadors,
which at his request showed unto him three of their principal Laws and
customs. And first the Ambassador of Rome said, we have the temples in great
Reverence, we are very obedient to our governors, and we do punish wicked men
severely: The Carthagenian Ambassador said our Noble men never left fighting,
the Atificers never left laboring, nor the Philosophers never left teaching,
The Cicilian said, in our Commonwealth justice is exactly kept; marchandice is
excercised with truth, and all men account themselves equal: The Rodians said,
that at Rodes, old men are honest, young men shamefast, and women use very few
words: The Athenians said, in our commonwealth rich men are not suffered to be
divided into factions, nor poor men to be idle, nor the governors to be
ignorant: The Lacedemoninas said, in Sparta envye reigns not, for all men are
equal, nor covetousness, for all goods are common, nor sloth, for all men
labor: in our commonwealth said the Ambassador of the Siconians, voyages are
not permitted, because they should not bring home new factions: Physicians are
not suffered, lest they should kill the sound: nor Lawyers to take upon them
the defense of causes and suites. And to these may be added Anatharsis letter
to the Athenians, wherein He councelleth them to choose a king that is just in
his sentence, true in His word, constant in his act, secret and liberal, for
these be the principal morrall virtues most necessary in a prince.

A prince ought to be just in His sentence according to the words of Solomon
Wisd. 1. saying, A Prince ought to be just in his sensure. Who fittest to
govern.
love justice you that judge the Earth, for a just king does advance his
country: and the king that judges the poor rightly his throne shall be
established forever.

Now to show what manner of man is fittest to govern. I read in Livie, that men
borne in arms, great in deeds and rude in elloquence ought to be chosen
Councelors, and that men of quick spirits, sharp wits, learnd in the Law, and
eloquence; should be for the city for a prince ought to be a martial man stout
and courageous to defend his subjects, and offend his enemies, not to be
curious to Speak eloquently, but to deliver his mind plainly, and wisely, it
being more necessary for a prince to do well, then Speak well, Paucimas says,
those are to be hated, who in their acts are fools and in their words
Philosophers: for wise words are not commendable, if the deeds be not
answerable, they therefore says Plato. that will have glory in this life, and
attain to glory after death, and be beloved of many and feared of all, let him
be virtuous in good works, and deceive no man, with vain words. All good and
worthy Princes, have Labored to attain to this wisdom and to exact justice
most exactly in so much that some have not spared their own children so sacred
a thing they ever held justice to be: as for example. Brutus, who understanding
that his two sons were of the conspiracy for Tarquinius superbus. Alexander
Magnus was so far from being transported from Justice, as when any man made
complaint to him of another, he stopped always one ear, saying, he must keep
that for the party accused. King Edgar of England had likewise that care to do
justice, as in winter time he would ride up and down the Country, and make
enquiry of the misdemeanors of his Officers and Governors, and punished them
severely that offended the Law. And as the followers of Justice shall not only
be glorious on earth, but live in eternal glory; so the Princes that minister
injustice, and do not judge rightly, shall reap infamy on earth, and undergo
the high displeasure of God; for the royal Prophet says, that God is terrible
to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 75. which does very well appear by the
strange punishments which he oftentimes inflicts upon them, as upon Pharaoh,
Nebuchadnezzar, Ozias, Ioram, Antiochus, Heroa, Memprisius King of Britain,
who was devoured by Wolves, Seldred a Saxon King of England, who was killed by
the Devil as he was banqueting with his Nobillity. And many more for their
injustice have been very strangely punished, and oftimes lost their Kingdoms,
as appears by Ecle. Chap. 11. being transferred from Nation to Nation for
injustice and injuries, therefore it behooveth a Prince to take special care
hereunto.

Next it is requisite that a Prince be true of his word, A Prince to be true of
his word.
both toward God, and man, for Soloman, says, that a lying lip does not
become a Prince, Pro. 17. many examples might be given touching several
Princes who have been severally punished for breach of faith: As for example,
Charles the 70. King of France, when he was Dolphin, made John Duke of Burgundy
believe that he would make peace with him, whereupon they met at a place
appointed, where Charles caused the Duke to be presently killed, but Charles
after this was forced to ask Phillip forgiveness openly by his Ambassadors.
Charles the last Duke of Burgundy having given safe conduct to the E. of St.
Paul Constable of France, took him prisoner, and delivered him to the French
King, who put him to death for his treachery, and set the said E. free. Thus
you may see how honorable it is to keep their word, and what they deserve
that falcifie their faith; for, a faithless Prince is beloved of none, but
hated of all, suspected of his friends, not trusted of his enemies, and
forsaken of all men in his greatest necessity.

Also a Prince ought to be religious, for Solomon says, A Prince ought to be
religious.
God preserves the state of the righteous and is a child to them that walk
uprightly, Pro. Cap. 2. and in Deuteronomy 17. a King is commanded after he be placed
in his Kingdom to read the book of Deuteronomy, that he may learn to fear
God and to Keep his words, for so doing a Prince shall prosper.

It is also expedient that a Prince have special care that he put not his hand
in innocent blood, neither by tyranny, malice, A Prince ought not to shed
innocent blood.
ambition, policy, or false reports or imformations, for to be a Tyrant is
odious to God and man, and to bring himself to an evil end. As for example,
K. John of England murdered his Nephew, and in the end was murdered himself.
Richard Duke of Gloucester murdered his two Nephews, Sons to Ed, 4. to make
himself King, and after was slain in Bosworth by Hen. 7. for blood requires
blood, and let a bloody Prince never look for a better end.

But many Princes have been mightily abused by false reports and rong
informations, A Prince to be circumspect in giving credit to reports.
David therefore prayed God to deliver him from wicked lips and a lying tongue,
Psalm. 119. and in Eccles. 6. it is said, Separate thy self from thy enemies,
and beware even of thy friends, for where a man does trust the most there a man
may be soonest deceived, as was Francis Duke of Britain who put his brother
Giles to death upon the false report of those who went messengers between them
and after put them to death also, therefore a Prince should duly examine every
report whether it be true or not, before he give credit thereunto, and
especially if it concern life, for innocent blood does cry to God for revenge,
as appears in the Apoc. 6. saying, how long Lord holy and just judge thou
not, and revengest not our blood upon them that dwell upon the earth.

I have read that Appalles drew the picture of a king (which he sent to
Prolmaeus set in a chair of state with great hands, A Prince to beware of
Parasites.
great ears, and besides him ignorance, suspicion a taleteller, and flattery:
these will labor to be about a Pr. therefore a Prince must labor to avoid
them. It is therefore a happy thing for Princes to have those about them that
will not flatter but tell the truth. If therefore the Emperor Gordean said,
that Prince was very unfortunate who has not about him those that may plainly
tell him the truth, for a King knows not what passes, but by relation of
those who converse with him. Theopompus being asked how a Prince might preserve
his Kingdom, said by giving his friends liberty to speak the truth, and by
keeping his Subjects from oppression.

A Prince should be very careful in making choice of his counselors, What
kind of persons are to be of a Princes counsel.
for Plato says, that many Princes are undone for want of faithful friends
and servants to council them, therefore Alfred K. of England sought out the
wisest and most learned men to be of his Counsel. The Emperor Constantius
to make proof of his friends, made show to abandon Christian Religion, and to
turn to Idolatry, he was instantly applauded by a great number whom presently
he banished the Country, for a Prince shall never want followers, I wish that
our gracious Sovereign would make this his president, but to my former
discourse. Counselors says Julius Caesar in one of his Orations to the Senate,
should not be lead by malice, friendship, anger nor mercy, and if they concur
in one lawful opinion, though the Prince be opposite yet it is fitting he
should yield to them, for so did the Emperor Marcus Antoninus saying, it must
be as you will, for it is greater reason that I being one should follow your
opinion, then you being many; wise, and learned should yield to mine.

If a Prince take aid of a stranger stronger then himself, Dangerous for a
Prince to take aid of a stranger.
he may thereby endanger his State, as for example Heruls, Goths, and Lumberds
came into Italy for succor became Lords thereof, so did they of Franconia, with
their King Pl by Pharamon the Galls, now France, and the Saxons, did the like
to England.

How to get and keep the love of his SVBJECTS.
A Prince to the end he may be strong at home, and need no foreign Forces,
should always expect his own subjects, (especially men of worth and service)
as well in peace as war, that he may win the love and hearts of his Subjects,
the meanest whereof may do him service, in some Kind at one time or other: For
Seneca says, the only inexpugnable force of a P. is the love of his subjects;
Antonius Pius would say that he had rather preserve one of his Subjects, then
kill 1000. of his enemy; and Pythagonas affirms that Subjects are to the
Prince as the wind to the fire, for the stronger the wind the greater the
fire, so the richer the Subjects be, the stronger the Priece, but where
Matchovells Principles take effect, there the Subjects must be made-poore, by
continual subsedies, exactions and impositions, that the people may always
beekept under as slaves, and fear their Prince, which course extinguisheth the
love of the people toward the P. and ingendereth hatred (the actions of the
Clergy, evil Counselors of the State, monopolies and other, and other
machavilian practices of some great ones in authority, has almost procured the
same effect in England) Phillip Commines greatly blames such Princes, as seek
not to compound and end discords and quarrels, amongst their greatest subjects,
but rather nourish the one part, wherein they do but set their own house on
fire, as did the wife of Henry the 6. taking part with the Duke of Somerset,
against the Earl of Warwick, which caused the war betwixt York and Lancaster.
Augustas the Emperor made a Law concerning exactions, which he called
Augusta, that no payment should be exacted of the people, but for the profit of
the Commonwealth. And when Marcus Antoninus laid a double tax upon the people,
they answered, that if he would have two taxes in one year, he must give them
two summers, two harvests, and two vintages, for the people cannot endure to be
overcharged, if they be, great inconvenience may grow thereby, (our later times
give apparent testimonies of the truth of this particular.) A Prince therefore
should love and cherish his Subjects, but not oppress them; for Tiberius Nero,
when some persuaded him to take great tributes of the Provinces, said, that a
good Shepherd should sheare his sheep, but not devour them; and that State
(says Thales) is best ordered, which has in it neither too wealthy nor too
poor Citizens.

It is not for a Prince to make war upon every sinal occasion, A Prince ought
to bewell advised how he beginn War.
but to be sure the cause be good and just, which then will bring honor to his
person, safety to his soul, and encouragement to all his soldiers: yet
according to the saying of Octavus Caesar, neither Battle nor War is to be
undertaken, unless there may be evidently seen more hope of gain, then fear
of damage; but above all, a religious Peace is to be embraced by a Prince, and
so to be offered to his enemy: for Blessed is the Peacemaker, for he shall
inberit the kingdom of heaven: which that we may all do, let us endeavor to
purchase a peace by our timely repentance, and hearty prayers. When the
Israelites had sinned, and that God had resolved to destroy them, Moses rose
up, and by his prayers became a Mediator betwixt God and them, so that Gods
Justice was converted to Mercy. Is there not in all this spacious Kingdom one
Religious Moses to stand betwixt Gods Justice and our sins, by his prayers to
purchase a pardon, and remove this threatening mischief which hangs over our
heads? O that God would put it into the hearts both of Prince and People, to
join with one heart and one voice, and cry unto the Lord, for who knows what
an effect such an union might produce? who knows whether the Lord will repent
him of his wrath, and turn this destruction from us?

FINIS.

