AN EXAMINATION Of the Seasonable and Necessary WARNING Concerning present
DANGERS and DUTIES, Emitted from the COMMISSIONERS Of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY Of
the KIRK of Scotland, unto all the MEMBERS of that KIRK. June 25 1650.

Which was Printed at Edinburgh by Evan Tyler,

By a Servant of the Commonwealth of England, and a Lover of the ARMY.

LONDON, Printed by William Du-gard Anno 1650.

25 Junii, 1650. Post meridiem. A seasonable and necessary Warning concerning
present dangers and duties, from the Commissioners of the General Assembly,
unto all the Members of this Kirk.
[1] IF the eminency of the danger and the necessity of the duty did not
constrain us, we had rather chose to be silent then to emit any public
warning to the land within so few days of the meeting of the General
Assembly; but we should not only run the hazard of just blame from them, but
also be conscious to guiltiness in our selves, if we did not in a time of so
great straight, give warning to the Lords people both of their danger, and of
their dude.

[1] If you had well considered your danger, before it was imminent, and how
necessary it was for you to have prevented it, by an ingenuous acknowledgment
of your National guilt and just demerit, by your perfidious and unprovoked
Invasion of England, against all the Treaties which were then in force, but
thereby dissolved; and by a just satisfaction for the spoils and devastations
your own Army made where it came, until it was destroyed; and for the charge
this Nation was at by occasion of it. You might perhaps have now been silent,
and we at quiet. How just our War against you is, and how clearly we are
necessitated to it, the Parliament has sufficiently evidenced in their
Declaration. And though we cannot exspect you should acknowledge it (it being
not usual with you to speak truth to your own disadvantage) yet the evidence is
such as must needs convince you, as we are confident it will satisfy all
others. And if the conscientiousness you speak of be a tenderness resulting
from a clear and pure light not tinctured with the dye and mixture of an
Interest working a prejudice, it might have put your reflections upon an other
guilt, and you might have thought your selves worthy of blame, that you had not
given warning to your Parliament and People, of something else to be don besides
your condemning men to the stool of hypocrisy, that might have given the
Commonwealth of England a better satisfaction, and fuller reparation for and
of the effects of your perfidie, then that was like to do; and might have
proved a more effectual means to have prevented that danger which your own
injustice and wickedness have involved you in.

[2] The insolent and strange actings of that prevailing party of Sectaries in
England these years past, Warning.
in reference to Religion and Government, are so well known, and have been so
often and fully laid open in the former Warnings, Remonstrances, and
Declarations of this Kirk, that we need not now take up much time in
representing the same. Albeit the Reformation of the Church of England, and the
advancing of the work of uniformitie there, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline
and Government, was the great duty that the Lord called that Land unto, and
which all the people of God in these three Kingdoms did engage themselves in
Covenant to endeavor to the utmost of their power; yet does that work so much
desired and longed for by all the lovers of Sion in these Nations, and all that
concern's Religion, lie in the dust altogether forgotten and despised by those
men; and in stead of the beauty and order that should be in the house of God,
a vast toleration of many gross errors is allowed, whereby so many and so
monstrous blasphemies and strange opinions in Religion have been broached and
are vented in England, as the like has not been heard of almost in any
generation: And though Monarchy and the power of Parlaments was the ancient
and long continued Government of that Kingdom; yet have those men usurped above
the Parliament, whose servants they were; and by open violence driven away
many, and imprisoned some of the Members thereof, and have not only taken away
the House of Lords, and destroyed the late King, but also subverted Monarchy it
self, and turned the Foundations upside down, and labor to wreath the yoke of
their oppression upon the necks of our brethren in England, not only in regard
of that which concern's their bodies and estates, but also in regard of that
which concern's their souls and consciences, whereof that Engagement that is
now pressed in England is a present and public testimony, being a sore
bondage under which many in that land now groan; whose case and sufferings for
the work of God, we desire not only to remember daily before the Lord in our
prayers and supplications, but in every thing to regard it as if it were our
own: being confident that such as love the truth, and cleav to the Covenant in
these Lands, shall obtein mercy of God to be faithful in the midst of
temptations, and that the Lord will not suffer them to be tempted above that
they are able to bear, but will give unto them the issue with the temptation.

[2] The wonderful and even miraculous goings forth of the most wise and
merciful providence of our good God toward us in England, Tyranny, and
settling us in a just Liberty, notwithstanding all those strong fetters in
which we were imprisoned under it, have been evidently written with the very
beams of the sun, and exposed to the view of the world; that there are scarce
any that have not acknowledged, it is his work. And for our parts, we desire
to observe those glorious actings of his, and with all humility to rejoice in
them. God see's not as man see's, and therefore act's not as man act's, nor
rule's the determinations of his wisdom, nor the efficiencie of his power, by
any of the conceptions or apprehensions of men. That which you call The
insolent and strange actings of the prevailing party of Sectaries etc might
better perhaps be called his work, his strange work: And though perhaps many
in this age, whose particular concernments have been touched by this just hand
of God, the flowings of whose gall, by their rebellious struglings under their
chastizements, has disabled their Icterical eyes to see clearly his hand, may,
as you do, blaspheme that Providence, and asscribe its glorious and harmonious
working to the anomalous extravagancies of whom you pleas; yet when the pangs
of this birth shall be over, and the distempered humors com again to a just
balance, even you, as well as others, shall see that it is his doing. And
after-ages will say concerning these times, What bath God wrought? We cannot
deny, but you have been very frequent in your Warnings, and Remonstrances,
and Declarations, which you have filled with impertinencies, calumnies, and
slanders against the people of this Nation, obtruding, without blushing,
objections formerly answered, to abuse the simple, and draw them into capital
danger. And indeed you should have don well to have spared this time from such
imploiment, and bestowed it upon that in which at present you are more
concerned.

And whereas you say, The reformation of the Kirk of England (we suppose you
mean it in your own sens) the work of uniformitie etc. was the great duty that
God called this Land unto etc. We cannot but lament to see how miserably you
are enchanted, and imprisoned within your circle of forms, so as you can
neither speak nor think of any thing, but this nauseated stuff; how great is
the judgment of God upon your hypocritical formalitie, that he has taken from
you the sens of every thing else. Can you think that Presbyteries, whether in
Kirk-Sessions, Classes, or Provincial or General Assemblies, is the great Work
of Reformation that God call's men to? and to the exercise of your effectless
Discipline, as to all true Reformation? What is the uniformitie of Doctrine and
Discipline you speak of? is it that contained in your Catechism and Directorie?
can you persuade us to believ there is such a perfection in these, as there is
no possible discovery beyond, or may none adventure to make it, unless you be
the Pilots? We like better St Paul's profession of his judgment and practice,
he forgot what was behind, and pressed forward to what was before, and did
not think he had yet atteined. And upon that ground we dare not think you
have. But you quarrel the light which you cannot comprehend; and press for an
Uniformity of which your selves will be the Measure, and set the Rules; lest
if any should presume to know more, and hold it forth to the world, the
appearance and Coruscation of these clearer Beams should demonstrate the light
that is in you to be Comparative darkness.

We rather believ the great Work that God call's every Man unto, is, to be
holy, as he is holy, in all manner of conversation. And for an atteinment of
it, by a full and unreserved self-denial, to go out of himself, and all
self-value, and by a most intimate retirement into himself, and impartial
search of his own heart, to take a view of his own corruptions, and be humbled
at that sight, and seek for pardon in the blood of that one sacrifice of
Expiation, and to be cleansed from filth by the sanctification of his spirit;
To have no further a will of his own; but with an unrelucting Liquescencie to
melt it down into the will of God, mainteining still a filial implicit
resolution to conform to all the revelations of that will: searching the
Scriptures with prayer and humility, for a discovery of that will from those
full and divine Treasuries, and keeping the soul ever open, and without
prejudice for recieving in the divine Illuminations of the infinite Spirit to
whatsoever measure of light, and taking heed of clouding that light by
indulging of Lust; but with a resolved strife against all opposition walk up
to that Light, in all holiness of Conversation, according to the Word of God.
This we think to be the duty of a Man, and this is his happiness; And he
that thus has, to him shall be given, and he shall have abundance, his
talents shall be multiplied, and so shall his joie. There are discoveries in
divine things, which the Eagles eye has not yet made. The divine and infinite
goodness, from whom are perpetual Emanations, has no where limited the
shinings of his glorious Light. It shine's in darkness, though the darkness
comprehend it not. There may be a veil upon the heart even of great Rahbies,
and that in reading the Law. Light and Truth is received by a principle of
Light from the Spirit of Truth. And who dare's say he has clearly, and
without aenigma, seen all the Treasures laid up in the Sacred Scriptures? Does
not one day add to another in the knowledge of particular men? does not this
day teach us even from the Scriptures the things that yesterday we knew not?
He take's little notice of his own Progress, or make's but little, that dare
at any time of his life say, he know's all, or that some other may not
communicate to him a light which he has not received: we could therefore
wish you would once forbear these unsavorie words of Uniformity, in Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Governments, as being things not edifyng in these
times, especially to men whom the gracious flowing out of the Spirit of Light
and Holiness has qualisied as above. If these things be profitable in
Scotland; we envy not your enjoiments though we wish you better. Truly we
have reason to suspect you have not the best way of spiritual edification,
your people are generously so barbarously brutish in all morality, and in so
unthriving a condition in spiritual things: theit leanness wherein make's it
probable you feed them with shells and husks, and deceiv them with formalities
and Covenants, and such outside-stuff, and endeavor not to discover the Divine
Beauties shining forth in the face of Jesus Christ, and the glorious garments
which they wear, that are clothed with a Spirit of holiness, who worship God in
the Spirit, and rejoice in the Lord JESUS, and have no confidence in the flesh,
and who make no provision to fulfill the lusts of it. If this Beauty were
discovered, it would irresistably draw a love: for faculties are ever
stronglyest carried to their more excellent objects: they would then loath your
Onions and Garlic after their relish of Manna in a spiritualized taste. only
the danger is, perhaps they would not so dreadfully adore you, but look at you
as their deceivers, rather then their teachers, while you have put your own
Dixi in the place of the Scriptures, or of the self-evidencing discoveries of
the Spirit of God.

But you heavily complain, that these your formalities (which you say are so
much desired and longed for by all the lovers of Sion) and all that concern's
Religion lie's in the dust altogether forgotten and despised by these men. We
know not well whom you mean by the Lovers of Sion; but it seems by your
description, they should be some that are in love with your outside Worship:
nor what you mean by that Religion which lie's so forgotten and in the dust.
We desire to bless God, that through his goodness and free discoveries of
himself, there are great numbers among us that are lovers of the beauty of
holiness, and by the power of that love carried out to the contemplation of
that glory of him who is glorious in holiness, shining forth in the face of
Jesus Christ, so as they are transformed into the Image of* it, from glory to
glory, by the Spirit of the Lord; and by this means they give up themselves to
a willing subjection to the power of Religion and godliness; and are not indeed
much taken with your forms, which, in competition with power, they think may
be little esteemed; and do believ they are much to be pitied, whose most
spiritual contemplations have no sublimer object. We acknowledge with you,
there should be beauty and order in the House of God; and so there will be,
where none but stones elect and precious are built upon the foundation; and
when those are formed and fitted, by that Spirit who only has the clear view
of that Archetypal Idea, the pattern in the mount, according to which the House
you speak of is to be modeled. And certainly if you had not taken a vast
liberty to affirm boldly of what you know not, and to accuse upon hearsay
those with whose conversation you were never acquainted, you would not thus
lash out into these exorbitant generalities, by which you get little credit to
your selves, or to your cause, unless with those who dare not say, they believ
you not, least they should incur the Churches Censure, the consequence whereof
is more then they are willing to lose. But we cannot let you pass thus with
this calumny; why did you not assign a catalogue of these errors, or at least
some of the grossest? for your generals signify nothing; till then we may,
with much more charity, suspect you are of those that call the good evil, and
the evil good; that put light for darkness, and darkness for light. If you did
believ them errors, why did you not name them? perhaps other men would not have
been full of your minds; but if we conceiv them to be errors, we shall
confess them such, and be very willing to be convinced; for we profess Our
selves to be lovers and followers of truth; only we can take nothing for such
upon your word; that is only your prerogative on the other side of Tweed,
where the people believ you possess the infallible chair. We shall not impute
it to the tenderness of your charity, that you spare us the particulars, while
you load us with your generals, interpretable to whatever your credulous Reader
pleases, which cannot be small matters, when they are called gross errors,
monstrous blasphemies, and strange opinions in Religion, such as has not been
heard of almost in any generation. We think it strange none of them are
named; certainly you might have spared a line for it, from some of your
following impertinencies, if you had not thought this course would have served
your turn better. But that you may not mistake us, we deny not there may be,
and doubtless there arc errors among us; we are not perfectists, we see but
in part; much truth may be beside our observation, and beyond our measure; and
what is affirmed that is not truth, is error; error being nothing else but a
deviation from truth: But where is the toleration for this all this while? what
mean you by the allowance of them? If you mean we do not hang up all that do
not believ as the Kirk of Scotland believ, we confess we do not so practice,
and think we ought not; and are content they stigmatize this for one of our
errors, and let it lead the Van in the Catalogue: We think we ought not to
punish men, because they are no wiser then God has made them, and for that they
do not profess they know and believ things which flesh and blood cannot reveal
unto them? But is this to tolerate them? We profess all fit means should be
used to give them light, by holding forth the truth in love, and in evidence
and demonstration of the Spirit, and wait with patience till God shall reveal
the truth to them: But we conceiv that neither the gallows, nor the whip, nor
a mulct, nor their Church-censure, are instituted Ordinances, or sanctified
means for conveying and evidencing of truth, and convincing and eradicating of
strange opinions. But for the blasphemies, we know not what they mean by them;
If that cursed wickedness of profane swearing be the thing they mean, we
have certainly Laws for the punishment of that, which if they were in force in
Scotland, and daily executed, where Oaths and Execrations are the Schemes and
Elegancies of their Idiome, it would bring a good part of the Revenues of most
among them into the Exchequer of the poor man's box, who would be better
relieved by their blasphemies, then by their charities; you cannot but take
notice that this wicked custom is among you, and that there are very few free;
remember what the searcher of hearts said, Thou hypocrite, first pull out the
beam out of thine own eye, and then thou shall see more clearly to full out the
mote out of thy brothers eye.

But for what fallows, the Commissioners of the Kirk would be asked, if they
be not beside their Commission? It Is very much doubted whether these things
be cognoscible at their Tribunal, or whether they com under the power of the
keys. What has the Kirk of Scotland, or the people of Scotland to do with the
Civil Government of England? And certainly, as to them, this piece of their
book might pass without any further answer, but only to undeceiv some among
our selves, and to discover the tendencie of this their hypocritical Paper,
wherein they would espous the quarrel of all the discontents; and with their
empty blown bladders offer their assistance to buoy up every sinking
interest: They will be the defenders of Monarchy, complain of the removal of
the House of Lords, of the pretended injury don to the secluded Members, take
upon them to determine what are foundations, and bewail their renversment;
Tender they are also and sensible of the yoke of oppression upon the necks of
their Brethren in England, by the Engagement. By all this they hope to draw all
these parties to join with them for recoverie of what they have been justly
divested of, and to have a party corresponding with their motions, the better
to effect their design upon us. But all these points have been so largely
handled, and objections answered in several Tracts, that we shall not here
epitomize, or recapitulate: Only we must ask whether they be fit to object
these things, if they were otherwise of their cognizance. We shall ask them a
few questions anent these particulars, and by their answers (if they will make
any) see how much of this is practiced in Scotland; and whether they do not
condemn in us what they allow and approve of in themselves: We shall first ask
them, how much the late King was a Monarch among them after the beginning of
these troubles? how far his commands had place among them? whether Parliament
and General Assemblies were not called without his Authority, and held without
the presence of his Commissioner? whether this were wont to be so with them?
whether this be not an innovation? and where is their Charter of privilege,
that they only of all other Nations, when they find it good and necessary
for them, may change their form of administration in Government? and exclude
all others, who have intrinsecally a power in nature, to choos and establish
such a Government as they judge most conducing to the end of its ordination, the
good of the people; and to change it in whose or in part, when it shall
degenerate, and not serve the end of its institution: or when another shall be
discovered that will do it better. They have don so in part, and we have don
so (as to Monarchy) in the whole. We are not bound to take from them the
measure of our change; and we are confident we shall not follow their example
in their returning to their vomit. And it seems they were not so satisfied of
their King, that they durst trust him without a Treaty, and a previous
Agreement, limiting his power; but with us he must be absolute; a Duke of
Venice will serve them, but here he must be a grand Signior, a Sophie, or a
Mogull: But we know the meaning, good offices, profuse gifts, and an
accountles privy purs are fine things, not to be had by Scots in England, and
they may set their hearts at rest for having the like any more. We know Kings
too well to be troubled with them any more: We know Princes are not such
either conscientious or tame things, as to be bound by Treaties, or to value
any of their mis-called concessions longer than they serve their own profit,
which they always contra-distinguish from that of the people. We would also
ask these Commissioners of the Kirk, whether they have not an inspection into
all their Kings actions? Whether he be a sheep without their fold? and
without their care? If he go astray must not he be brought home with a
wholesome censure? Whether any of his most public actions will not com under
your consideration, as they are his duty to God, as a Christian Magistrate, of
which you only will be the Judges? And upon that ground control, direct, and
censure him? And certainly from this your paper, we have reason to suppose
these will be your actings: for why should you be more modest at home, then
you are abroad? for with us you take upon you to determine of all things, as if
you had learned from Pius Quintus to mis-applie to your selves that Text of
Jeremiah, I have set thee up over Nations, to pluck up, and to plant: But to
return to such a Monarchy, as you will allow, will not serve your young
Monarchs turn, and that you will find if ever he get quiet footing amongst
you. You complain of taking away the House of Lords, and hope by that to engage
all those to take your parts; we conceiv most of the Lords in England (except
some few that are managed by by your conspiring fellows, the Presbyterian
Ministers) are more generous then to accept of a restitution by your means:
their remembrance of the Impudence, Avarice, and Ambition of the Court-harpies,
and Hors-leeches of your Nation, make them abhor the thought of any more of
your company, who are never welcome but where you are not known.

But you have some reason to be tender for them, as being Martyrs for your own
cause; for though that House was found by many experiences to be dangerous to
the just liberties of the people, and very often to obstruct necessary and
profitable things; yet it is like they might have stood longer, had they not
been found to be in your Cabal for the Invasion of England; and in order to it
had cast out an Ordinance that was sent up by the Commons for putting things in
a posture of defense; they liked it better the people should be unarmed, that
you might destroy them with the more eas and safety. And when your Army had
invaded us (according to the Covenant, no doubt) did they not deny to pass any
Votes either against you, or those among our selves, that as Traitors did, or
should adhere unto you? Was it not time to take away this Enemy of the
Commonwealth out of its power to do hurt, when it was so dangerously disposed
to make use of it to that end? It Is true, there were a very few of their
number that protested against the perfidiousness and malice of the rest; but
they were able to effect nothing, and the best remedy against like evils for
the future, was judged to be its taking away. We must hereupon ask you one
question about this, Whether had you not once Lords of the Articles among you,
who had a previous negative upon all things that were to be consulted in your
Parliament, without whose approbation nothing could be brought into debate?
These you judged a prejudice to your just liberties, and you removed them Did
we trouble our selves to ask why you did it? You thought them dangerous to your
liberty and safety; and the Commons of England judged the Lords house so, and
so removed them. Why not we, as well as you? May we do nothing but in the
very same kind and degree that you act before us? How came we into this
pupillage to your prescriptions?

But why do the Scots talk so much of House of Lords in England, when they know
they have no such thing in Scotland? They indeed meet in the Bodies, as they
call them; that is, the Noblemen by themselves, the Commissioners of Shires by
themselves, and the Commissioners of Burghs by themselves, in these they propone
and debate things as well originally, as by reference; which are determined by
the major part of all collectlive and conjunctly in their House of Parliament,
where the Lords have no distinct conjunct negative, but are involved in, and
concluded by the number of Votes of the whole: Therefore if the Lords have any
advantage, it is by their reason in debate, to convince; not by their suffrage
which is no more then any Commissioner of a Burgh; Yet, these men will be
Proctors for an House of Lords here; It may be imputed to their gratitude, if
you pleas (though it be a thing they seldom use) several of that House were
very much their servants.

The next fault is, they have driven away many, and imprisoned some of the
Members of Parliament. Here indeed is the thing that grieve's you; your party
is cast out, by whom you were wont to act all your fine things amongst us; and
you have no more hopes to effect any thing in Parliament, as formerly: But let
me tell you a Mystery; you have no such reason to plead the cause of some of
them, who were not perfectly your Proselytes; but were at close guard with you;
they intended to make use of your Faction, for oppression of the faithful), and
good Patriots under the name of Independents; which if they could have
effected, they would have cared as much for your Religion, when they had served
their turns on it, as you do your selves, when you have made such uses of it.
We, who know the men, know well their Religion, though to serve themselves of
you, they would be Presbyterians: In the mean time entertaining you in their
thoughts (expressed in plain language among their confederates) with a perfect
hatred and scorn. It Is true, the way, they were excluded by, was
extraordinary, and the cure Emperical, but yet necessary; those votes of
darkness, when they setup all night to ruin themselves and the Nation, were a
sufficient Diagnostick of so prevailing a corruption in the whole mass beyond
the power of nature to reduce a right complexion and temper; and a clear
indication of the necessity of a present and extrordinarie remedy, without
which, both we, and you too, notwithstanding your ambition bred credulity
of the contrary, had long before this time been destroyed by that party,
which is still the common Enemy (what ever they make you believ to the
contrary) and posterity reduced to as bad a slaverie under the late Tyrant,
as that which is exercised by you over the poor blind people who have given up
themselves to the impositions of your Consistorialor Classical mercies.

And now we must ask you, whether something more than this has not been don in
Scotland? Whether was not that Parliament which decreed the Invasion of England
by Hamilton a true Parliament? (if not, give us some rule by which we may
distinguish one from another) Whether that Parliament was not still in being
after your Army was destroyed in England? Whether were not some forces raised
against that Parliament? and they driven from Edinburgh while they were yet a
Parliament or Committee of Estates by the power of that Parliament, and had a
power of conveneing it again upon any Emergencies? Whether when a part of the
English Forces, which had destroyed your Army in England, was marched into
Scotland, did you not by their countenance and assistance dissipate and disband
the remaining* part of your Parlaments Army? And did you not then, while your
other Parliament was in being, call another Parliament? and ordered the
Elections by previous rules given by your Army, for the seclusion or exclusion
from Elections for that ensuing Parliament, all which as you thought fit to
describe and characterize? And was not your present Parliament thus elected? Now
let us see how this action in Scotland agree's with, or differ's from this in
England.

In England here was an Army raised by Authority of Parliament, and
Commissionated to destroy all the forces of the late Tyrant: These understood
of a sort of men adhering to that Tyrant, and laboring, though without Arms,
to re-inthrone him. They prevent it, they dissipate the Conspirators: against
whom, because they found them not in Arms, they proceeded not to blood, they
took away the corrupt part, and left that which was found to serve the
Commonwealth, and this is their Crime; and for this they are complained of,
and as much nois made about it, as David made for his Absalom, against whose
rebellion, the Generals own execution of him (and without a Council of War
too) had put his Master whom he served, in safety. They, who quarrel this Act
of the Army, may do well to read Joabs answer to David, perhaps it may
satisfy them. Indeed it is true, it fell out in this case as in all Emperical
Cures, that some were secluded, and some have thereupon absented themselves, as
being unsatisfied of it, which it were much to be wished were in the service
of the Commonwealth; and that those to whom that work was committed had been
better informed of particulars, which was scarce possible for them to be in
that short time wherein 'twas necessary for the life of our liberties, that
something extraordinary must be done for cure: And we doubt not but they now
see a necessity of what was don, though they approved not the doing; and will
again contribute their services faithsully to the Commonwealth. In England the
same Parliament continu's and act's, though some Members be secluded.

In Scotland Forces are raised by private persons, drive away their Committee
of Estates, in whom was the power of the Parliament, as to most things; disband
the Army of their Parliament; do not only seclude some Members, but seclude
their whole Parliament, and set it by, and call another by the power of that
Army by private hand raised and commanded; and in that call seclude, as was
said, a part ante making whom they pleas incapable of Election, or of sitting
in Parliament; secluding what Lords they pleas also from sitting in their House:
And this Parliament, thus called, is that which has treated with their King by
their Commissioners, and so humbly besought him to vouchsafe to put his yoke
upon their necks.

This is the brief of both the Cases, and now let any but themselves judge. But o
ye Commissioners of the Kirk, why did you not tell the whose truth? Were not
an ingenuous confession better then a Conviction? O that you could blush a
little that we might have some hope of you! Judge your selves for once, and do
thus no more; do not thus dance in a net, and think to impose upon the
ignorant; those, that are knovving will discover your nakedness, and men shall
see your shame: Thou hypocrite first pluck out the beam out of thine own eye,
etc.

We shall break proportion in this Paragraph; but however we must have one
word more to what fallows about the Engagement, about which they are
grievously afflicted; for that it is an oppression, not only upon the bodies
and Estates, but upon the consciences also of their brethren. What is it
trouble's them? they would not have people promise to be true and faithful to
that power, under whose protection, through the mercy of God, they live and
enjoie (or might do, if it were not for these their falls Brethren, and their
seduced adherents) as full and secure a peace, and all the consequences of it,
as can be enjoyed here below. What trouble's them in the present Government?
are not the same Laws still in force that were? Is not Westminster Hall still
open, and the Courts there both of Equity and Law sitting in their times as
formerly? Is not Justice in all Cases, both Civil and Criminal, brought to the
peoples doors, as freely as in the best times part? Are not many grievances of
the former Tyranny heretofore complained of taken off? and that great one
which remain's, viz. the necessary Levies of Money, is it not their own fault?
might not that also be taken off, if the people would see their true Interest,
and keep to it? if they would cordially keep this quarreled Engagement, in
being true and faithful to the Power that protect's them, and not be fooled
by the Scots, and the partisans of their King, into a disobedience, which will
certainly ruin them, not more by just punishment for it, then by the natural
productions of it, if they could be so unhapple as to bring their endeavors
into act. But what is it in this that lie's so heavy upon their consciences?
is not Custodes lihertatis Angliae as Canonical as Carolus, or Jacobus Dei
gratia, and as effective of peace and justice? Is there any thing in it like
your Covenant? there is nothing in the declare's a judgment, there is only a
promise of practice of what is in the power of the party promising; and he
that will not promise to be true and faithful to the power under which he
live's, will not be extremely persecuted if he be denied the benefit of that
Authority, which he will not acknowledge. But let us ask, whether your Covenant
was not a greater imposition, was there nothing in that which came near
conscience? We have not time to enlarge, only let us enquire, as to Estates;
what the sweet and meek proceedings amongst us were upon that thing the
Covenant, worthy to be had in everlasting detestation; wherein the great Name
of God, who is goodness, and sweetness, and love, must usher in an ugly
persecution: How many were turned out of Fellowships in the Universitie of
Cambridg, and out of Livings in the Country, for no other fault but refusing
the Covenant? men of great learning, and unreprovable life, were removed, and
men of signal duncerie and ignorance and some sufficiently debauched put in;
deny not this for your friends sakes, least I give you a Catalogue both of
them, and who preferred them, whom at present I will spare. It was put on by
your Commissioners, when here, and pressed by them on all occasions, as
earnestly as the mark of the Beast, no man might have command here nor in
Ireland, might keep any Office, exercise any Magistracy, unless he had
subscribed that Covenant; of a far other nature, both in regard of its
doubtfulness, and its tendencie, then this Engagement. And certainly with such
violence was this thing carried on, that, had not the good providence of God
discovered to our good Patriots here the foul hypocrisy of the Scots
Commissioners, and their designs, to the execution whereof they went furiously
on, under the veil of this stalking-hors the Covenant, it had been imposed with
as much Authority as the said mark of the Beast, that no man should either buy,
or sell, or live, who had not taken the Covenant; and it is a mercy worth all
it cost, that their Invasion delivered us out of that snare. And yet these
hypocrites complain of offering the Engagement; compare them and see the
difference. And once again remember Thou hypocrite to pull out the beam out of
thine own eye, etc. And for a close of this Paragraph, be persuaded to
remember daily before the Lord in your prayers that he would deliver you from
the fascinations of Interest, that he would give you single hearts and fill
them with candor, and free you from this gross hypocrisy, and from those
temptations that are suggested to you from the pride of your own spirits, and
impotent desires of Domination, that he would discover to you the extreme
ignorance and darkness you lie under, and that he would give you hearts to
love the truth, and embrace it by whatsoever means it be offered to your
apprehension:

And if you will do this, and do it with humility and resignation, The Lord
(who is long suffering and very ready to forgive, full of goodness, and
mercy, and love, and that wait's that he may be gracious) may pardon the
Errors of your blind zeal, and all those things that you have don in ignorance
and unbelief, and deliver you from these temptations of darkness.

The Warning.
[3] This party, after that they have acted such things in England, and also
sore afflicted and oppressed our brethren in Ireland, now conceiving that they
cannot be established, and that they cannot eat the fruit of their own devices
without contradiction, as long as the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland stand's in
their way, threaten us with a War, by drawing their Forces Northward, and
sending them in small parties toward the Border, that it may the less be
discerned what they intend to do: And if the Lord in his righteous and wise
dispensation shall suffer them to invade this Land, as it is to be feared,
that the Gangrene of their errors may take hold upon men of ignorant and
unstable minds, who have not received the love of Truth; so may we, if they
prevail, look for confusion and desolation, and that the Pillars both of
Religion and Government shall be ruined and razed in this, as well as in our
neighbor-land. It does therefore in the first place concern all the Inhabitants
of this Nation to draw near to God, and to mourn for their own iniquities, and
for all the ignorance and prophanitie and backsliding that is in the land, and
to study to make peace with God in Jesus Christ: The continuance and increase
of many of those sins, for which formerly we seemed to have been humbled, does
doutless greiv the spirit of God, and may, if they be not speedily and
sincerely repented of, and forsaken, provoke him to give us over to the lust of
our adversaries; Our King, our Princes, our Nobles, our Pastors, teachers, and
people have sinned; Let us therefore search and try our ways, and turn again
to the Lord: Let us lift up our hearts with our hands to God in the heavens,
that he may spare and save his people, that they be not a prey to the enemy.

The Answer.
[3] What the things are that we have acted in England, we hold out to all the
world; and with humility rejoice that God has owned us in them, and given
success to our endeavors, and made us the Instrument in his hand even as a
threshing Instrument, having teeth, whereby he has cast down Tyranny, and
established to us the just liberty of the Sons of Adam; And has showed us so
far his face and favor in it, as we are confident, that he will not only,
not pull down what he has begun to build, but given therein a specimen of
that liberty, which his goodness will bless the world withal, as a fit state,
wherein that Justice and Righteousness shall excuse it self, which shall be set
up as a triumphal Arch, through which the King of glory, and the King of peace
shall enter into: The administrations of the Kingdoms of the world which we
exspect shall become the Lords and his Christ's in the which he shall reign,
while the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover
the Sea; while you object those things, we glory in them, and shall wear them
as our Crown: As for the affliction and oppression of their Brethren in
Ireland, we know of no such oppression. We have indeed endeavored to reduce
that Island, as having a just claim to it, and to chastize the Irish Rebels
whom we think they will not call Brethren. And we have also made some of the
Scottish Rebels to taste of the fruit of their doings, in rebelling against
this Commonwealth, in whose pay some of them were, at the instigation of their
woefully ignorant and petulant Presbytery at Belfast, whose repentance and
saisfaction have not yet satisfied for their guilt, but a further account
remain's for them to pass: for though neither you, nor they are pleased to own
us for a lawful power, yet they shall find that we bear not the sword in
vain, but that it shall be for the punishment of such evil doers, and for the
protection of all the good people of England and Ireland, both against them and
you. But seeing we see our Rebels in Ireland are your Brethren, it will teach
us what to think of your devotion here, who shall do well to take early
warning, lest neither the hypocritical prosecution of the ends of the Covenant,
nor all their good meaning be able to preserv them from the hand of Justice.
The rules of good Government will not now allow connivence.

That our Army march Northward is very true; but your intelligence is bad, if
you conceiv it to be in small parties; It is in a body, and with intention to
enter into Scotland: the JUSTICE, NECESSITY and ENDS of which action is at
large set forth in the Parlament's-Declaration, and we shall here repeat
nothing: If you like it not, you might have prevented it; you have had fair
overtures, and a long exspectation: Next your Hypocrisy, your causeless Pride
is predominate; it is that which has gathered and bound up the rod of your
Castigation.

But your are more sensible of the Gangreen of our Errors, then of our Sword;
it is indeed most to be feared, because the Sword may be put up after
satisfaction, but these Errors (which we suspect you mean to be some opinions
against the power and government of the Kirk of Scotland) are like to prevail
as being the appearances of the truth of God, before which your Dagon that
proud Idol must fall, and break its neck; therefore trouble not your selves for
that; the times are coming you must fall as well as your Mother: The word is
gone forth long since that Babylon is fallen, and this remain of her power in
Scotland must fall also. The confusion and desolation you speak of would be
your beauty and you happiness, if your guilt and provocations did not hinder
your being instrumental to it. Your Religion (as you call it) and your
Government might both be changed into better, if you were fit for it, and you
com to enjoy the same freedom and happiness, that by the blessing of God is
like to flourish in your neighbors Land. Your next passage give's your selves
good counsel, which we heartily pray to the Father of all mercies, that he
will give you grace to take, only when you com to draw near to God, and to
mourn for your iniquities, forget not to add to your Catalogue, which you have
here made a very brief one, your sins of hypocrisy and pride, of which all
the world beside your selves conceiv you exceedingly guilty. That most simple,
most pure, and all-penetrating Spirit, who is centrally every where, (pardon
this later expression, it sound's heretically no doubt in your ears, we know
you understand it not in our sens, and it is used for them that do) is in
nothing more provoked then by the practices of men walking in darkness, and
conceiving they impose upon his all-discovering light. This has been your
constant way, and you have given no such clear evidence, as all who run may
read, that you have sincerely repented of it; search and try your ways, and
turn in good earnest, and God will so far receiv you, as, though he does not
deliver you from the overflowed scourge, which he in righteousness has
decreed to bring upon you, and of which his wisdom see's you stand in need
enough; yet he will correct you in measure, and amend you by it, and then you
will be gainers.

[4] In the next place, Warning.
As the Parliament of this Kingdom have taken care for putting the Land in a
Posture of defense, so we hope that none shall be so negligent of their
duty, and so insensible of their danger, as not to give cheerful obedience to
the lawful commands of their superiors, in those things that concern the
security of Religion, and peace of the Kingdom, and that are necessary for
the defense of the Cause and of their native Country; but that every man in
his station and calling will willingly and cheerfully acquit himself in the
diligent and faithful performance of all the duties that relate unto those ends.

[4] If you had been as careful heretofore to warn your people to be just, you
might have spared this Paragraph, to the great advantage of the people of your
Land; remember what has been required and denied by you; had you always been
upon your defense only, you should not have needed to be so now, with so much
charge and danger.

If we could have believed you had any such meaning as you here hold out, it
might have saved us a very great charge; a small Army would have been
sufficient to have atteined our ends, if none who are tainted with Malignancy
or dis-affection to the work of God, should be permitted to bear Arms among
you, or that you would not associate with such. But sure this Paragraph, with
some other, is calculated to the elevation of such among us who are honest and
conscientious, whose own simplicity of spirit, and candor, have made credulous
enough to be abused over unto your side; it got no faith with us, who know
well enough the complexion of Scotland. As to malignancie, certainly there are
not the fortieth part of the people of Scotland who are not Malignants, and not
disaffected to that which they call the work of God. And we know they had
6000 Horse and Foot standing, before their new Levy; are none of these
Malignants? why then was the question renewed not long before your emitting
this Warning, that the Army might again be purged, but it has not been don
since: And it is not like but some of your new Levies may have a little touch of
it: Have you none of Orkney or Cathness? You know there when Montross was among
them, the very Presbytery were Cavalierish; we believ the people were not
much better; for often times, it is like Priest like People; and though he made
trial of more (the fate of his Master arresting the course of his victories) yet
we shall take the liberty to believ, that there may be many more of your
heathenish mountaniers, that may be alike instructed; your Paper confesse's
you have many of them; and we conceiv, notwithstanding all this fair
imposture, there may be a great number among those of your Armies not clearly
instructed in, nor much affected to the work of God: But even such kind of
stuff as your Armies tent into England formerly were composed, of whose
qualifications we understand as well as your selves, therefore we shall not
lessen our Forces for all your good words; which if we were sure you meant to
keep, we might believ your musters would not exceed in numbers Gideon's
lapping Army; and one Regiment of Horse and one of Foot might serve our turns.
If the mind of God be so clear unto you in this point, take heed of going
against it; this book of yours will be a witness against you before the world,
as your consciences will be before God; take heed of your apostacy after your
so solemn engagement; hazard not your selves, and be not desperately pervers.
You confess the Malignants have often fallen before the Sectaries, and you
would not give them ( viz. the Sectaries) encouragement by your junction;
deceiv not your selves, hypocrisy provoke's the all-seeing Majesty, as much as
open profaneness; and perhaps the Sectaries may receiv in their spirits a great
encouragement, that they are sent by God against an hypocritical Nation. Deceiv
not your selves with the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; many so
exclaim and boast who are not that Temple. Your selves in this paragraph confess
you have a great scarcity of men rightly qualified, and can hardly expect a
blessing in the fellowship of any other; take heed you do not as well procure
as proclaim a judgment against the Land, which shall consume it without remedy.

We earnestly wish the Estates of Parliament would be ruled by you, and purge
your Army of all scandalous men; sure you would have very thin Troops and
Companies. We would ask you if many have not given scandal by their
drunken-healthing thanks-givings, for your Kings arrival? or whether
drunkenness be not a scandal there? in the Sectarian Army it is counted one;
and, through the mercy of God, is not frequently committed; and when it is, is
duly punished. The close of your paragraph is very orthodox, which we close
with, and embrace as a savorie truth. But before we leav you, seeing you are
so tender of closing with Malignants, let us ask you how came you to woo the
King so earnestly? to agree with him, and bring him among you, and make such
great demonstration of jole at his arrival, with more drunken bone-fiers then
ever were seen there before? Is not he a Malignant? sure he was one, when he
gave Montross his Commission to subdue you his Rebels of Scotland, wrote his
Letters of special favor, and gave him that Order of the Garter; how corn's he
to be purified since? can you persuade your selves the taking of the Covenant
will do it? have you not found by great experience it does hot cure, but
palliate; why else such frequent Recidivations? It is not well understood why
ye should with so much fury and indignation execute Montross, the servant,
and that (becoming your selves) something barbarously for making a war upon you,
and then immediately embrace him for your King, by whose Commission he did it.
There is some mystery in this, if you would tell us what; but perhaps it lie's
deeper then your own knowledge; why may it not be, that your own hypocrisy
growing ripe for judgment, providence has ordered, that by his permitting you
one signal act of it more, you should thereby espous the Interest and fate of
that family, which lies under the wrath of God, and which you will needs take
upon you to defend, though you see none have prospered that do so; that even by
your hypocrisy your hypocrisy might be punished, from the just hand of him
who searches the heart, and take's pleasure in uprightness: Though you are,
yet he is not a respecter of persons; no difference of degrees is any thing
to him, who set's up and debaseth whom he pleases; he sometimes give's a King
in wrath; and perhaps when you well consider all things, you may have some
strange opinion, that he has don so to you; you have wooed and married an
Interest attended with a Curs, which will undo you.

It is no great trouble to us to hear from you the name of Sectarie, having
been long acquainted with the Titles and Attributes which the civilitie of your
language has been pleased to honor us with; and we bear it with the greater
glory, for that it seems there are few of them of your Nation; and so may
serve for a distinguishing Character that where we are not known, we may not
be mistaken for Sots: The Sectarie therefore we take up for a glory, as
imposed by you, and shall labor to bring the Name beyond reproach, not by
masking under a veil of seeming holiness, (which we wonder by what special
gift they have discovered, especially in those whom their consciences have
compelled to confess that they walk circumspectly) but by putting on the Lord
JESUS CHRIST and being made conformable to the Will of GOD through the
sanctification of the SPIRIT, living in that Spirit we desire to walk in it,
approving our hearts to God, and our ways to Men; desiring you would not go
beyond your line, and step into the Throne of God, and judge hearts, where you
cannot blame actions.

And we must again desire you to lay down that your Antichristian practice of
propounding your selves as the Rule of Truth and judge of Error. How com you to
know truth better then other men? to the Law and to the Testimony; for that
Rule is common to us and you; you must take a little more pains to satisfy us,
then you do your Scots; you shall put it among our Errors that we hold, if
you will, that we ought to try all things, that we may keep that which is
good: you are not sure, but some of those things that you count Error, may be
the Truth: and why may not some among us have had the boldness or the happiness
to know that to be true, which is not the opinion of the Church of Scotland.
And least you should claim a privilege for the vanity of boasting, give us
leav to use it for once, as well as you; and to tell you that we have reason
to believ that there are some on this side Tweed, to whom the Father of Lights,
by the Word and Spirit of Truth, has made as full and glorious manifestations
of himself, as he has don to you, who dwell beyond. And though you are
pleased in your wonted usurpation of the Throne of God, (wherein you will sit
and judge our affections to tell us we love to walk in the imaginations of our
own hearts, and in the light of our own fires, and the rest that fallows: we
tell you, you should do better to leav our hearts to God, but withal we must
walk according to the light that God is pleased to give us; as it is in us, it
is our own light; and if we should go from that to follow your light, because
it is yours, we should sin against our light, and against God, and this we
are content you shall note for another of our Errors, That we dare not believ
that either the dictate of any of your Ministers, or ours either, nor the
determination of the whose Kirk of Scotland, or of any else, ought to be the
ground of any man's judgment, be the thing determined never so true, until
he has received the same truth into his own intellect, and that it become one
with it. And we are of opinion there is no error we hold that trouble's you
wors then this. We deny not but there may be many among us in the Nation,
and in the Army too that may be more loos then we desire they should: It
were to be put among the wonders of the Age that there should be an Army so
numerous as ours, consisting all of men fearing God and walking accurately, or
to say less, fully-Civil; yet this we tell you, they that are loos shall not
be encouraged in it by those who command them; but where is your blushing all
this while, that you dare in this manner speak of the looseness of many among
us, when all men know there are few among your selves that are not so? Did not
you suppose that some of your books might com to be read of those that have
felt your Armies? and conversed with your people? and that know them as well as
your selves; we desire not to give you these close returns, but we may not
hold our peace, least we be thought to have nothing to reply, and least you
should deceiv conscientious people amongst us, and make them believ you are the
Lord's Inheritance, his peculiar people, a holy Nation, and an Army of
Saints, and all because the Commissioners of the General Assembly have
Cannonized them. Will you say your almost general drunkenness and healthing
for the welcome of your King is not looseness? or has looseness another
signification in Scotland then it has in England? What think you by that
Action of some of your people, that having taken some of our Mariners ashore
going for water they were detein'd prisoners till they would drink your King's
health on their knees: is this the received Form of praying for your King among
you, do you think our Mariners were much edified with this holy conversation of
your people? we hope your Directorie of worship has no prescription of this
kind of praying. Pen your things hereafter a little more circumspectly, and do
not necessitate us to stir your dunghill which will make you stink in the
nostrils of all good men. You imprison and restrein the spreading of truth, and
compel the poor people to your Forms in which there is nothing of the power of
Godliness; your people are still slaves to profaneness, because the truth is not
held out to them which should make them free. They are nourished in an opinion
that the Kirk of Scotland know's all things, whom they may consult upon
occasion, and never endeavor to store themselves with principles that would
effect their Reformation; they have only heard of God by the hearing of the
Ear, but if their Eye might see him they would repent and abhor themselves in
dust and ashes. There is a learning and knowledge which is kept in memory and
this may well be called other men's learning, this act's but little upon the
possessor: There is a knowledge in the understanding that is given by the
shining in of the beams of light from the Spirit of God (for it is the spirit
of the Lord that give's understanding) and this act's according to its
proportion by virtue of its union with the Intellect, and produce's necessary
effects: if you would dispose your people into the way of those Noetical
receptions, you would find their profaneness by little and little wear away;
but perhaps then also that dreadful reverence toward you their Oracles (which
while they practice, all lookers on laugh at) would decaie too: if the
Samaritans once hear Christ (who vouchsafe's his secret teachings to all who
have ears to hear) they have not much more need of the discourses of the woman:
You tell us also of approving of errors in our selves. We would wish you to
mend the expression, let your unsanctified zeal to multiply heads and
common-places of calumny against us, run you out into such ignorant
expressions; certainly Approving in English use is an act of the practical
intellect; do we approve them as errors? If not, you say nothing; we deny
not but great darkness in many things remaine's upon us, and you very
manifestly discover it does so upon you too. We may, and you do approve many
things that are perhaps errors in themselves, but apparent truths to us and you.
No man approve's of an error quatenus; they are little acquainted with the
proportion of the intellect to truth that will say it receiv's any thing under
other notion. Indeed in practice Interest sometimes swaye's profession and
practice against judgment. But the single and intrinsecal act of the
understanding in giving the judgment is always for truth according to the
degree of its appearance, and the measure of its own apprehension. As you, when
you make a single judgment of your King, do verily believe him to be a
Malignant, notwithstanding his Covenanting (as you have reason having seen
many others so before, as your selves tacitly insinuate in this Paper, of which
we shall remember you in due place) yet in the mean time you offer him to the
people as a Convert, because you hope in time to draw some advantage from him in
order to England. Here you apprehend right, that he is a Malignant; yet you
practice, as if he were not; you are not deceived in your judgment made in
your understanding, you understand him right enough; and though you hold out to
the people that he is converted, which you know to be an error, yet we shall
not say you approve this error, that is, receive it in your judgments for a
truth; for you perfectly judge the thing is false, and an error. You proceed with
your heavy charge generally and Magisterially enough, that we altogether
neglect those things that concern the honor of God, and the Kingdom of his Son
Jesus Christ. What? altogether. We confess we have neglected those things too
much, and have our frailties, which we do not approve; we are but men, and
may have too much looked after our outward safety, as you have done after a
Carnal domination under pretense of a spiritualitie; yet we conceiv there is
more in your charge, then will be in your evidence. And if we com to examine
the matter, we believ there will be a difference in interpretation: What is
meant by the Honor of Gold, and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ? We suspect we
may not have the same opinion of them here on the other side of Twede; where
we have heard the meaning is, to give power to the several Kirk-Tribunals in
Parishes, Classes Provincial, and General Assemblies, to dominere over their
Brethren at their pleasure; that it is the honor of God, that the Gods-men be
honored; indeed thus we have not, and are confident never shall do any thing
for this honor, and for this Kingdom. According as we have been taught of God,
we believ that herein is our heavenly Father glorified, that we bear much
fruit, and become the Disciples of our Lord Jesus; and for that purspose that
we nourish the springings up from that root of life, which of his Free grace
by the Spirit he has planted in our souls, and ever keep them open to receiv
in those divine influences and emanations of life and light that flow forth
from him, for the irrigation of that root of life when once planted, whereby
he prepare's further communications of truth and light, in which every soul
is capable of an increas, and ought not to be stinted by any humanely imposed
forms.

The Kingdom of Jesus Christ which he exercises in this state of things (for
of that which is to com, there is no occasion here to speak) is not of this
world, nor after the pattern or manner of administration of the Kingdoms of the
World, which lie in the evil one, and are acted by the prince of the power of
darkness; but it is altogether spiritual, managed by the irresistible power of
his Spirit in the hearts of men, according to his manifold wisdom, and the
various proportions in several subjects that he has conceived in the eternal
Idea's, according to which that work proceed's by his own efficiencie, even
according to that way of working, in which he invisibly effect's and work's
all things in the visible Physical world; which is a thing known only to a
few of the children of wisdom, unknown to you, and therefore you will blaspheme
it, and put that also into the Catalogue of Errors, as you use to do all things
that either pass your understanding, or cross your carnal Interest. But those,
who are thus made the subjects of Christ's Kingdom are enabled with a principle
to walk worthy of it in all wel-pleasing. They have received an unction, even
the falling down of that Spirit which was shed upon their head abundantly, for
he received not the Spirit by measure, and this anointing teaches them all
things, even all things necessary for every calling, degree, state of life,
or condition whatsoever, either as single men, or as they constitute
Commonwealths, or Governments. And when they meet quatenus Christians, which
are called Churches; in all these conditions, they who are subjected to the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, are instructed how to walk in the beauty of holiness.
The first lesson taught them by this anointing is to deny themselves, and not
seek their own things, but those of Jesus Christ, and to walk in love, because
God is love. This is the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, to which we desire to
subject our selves, and we long for a further manifestation of the power of it
appearing in all fruitful productions in the eyes of men, to the prais of God:
We hope there are many who propound this end, and press on to this mark, and
through mercy we hope we may say many among us have atteined some weak
degrees of it: But indeed we confess we do not strive to advance your forms
in which we can discover no beauty, but every day does more and more
discover to us your gross hypocrisy under them, and their rank savor of the
flesh, and carnalitie: And we doubt not, but the Lord will go on to perfect
both what he has begun to do in us, and work by us; and to make a more full
discovery of the unprofitableness of your Forms, by the daily increas of new
light to those who have been nuzl'd in darkness, and shortly abolish them all
at the brightness of his coming.

And indeed though we dare not deny, but several among you have the seed of
God in you, and a foundation laid through grace, whereby you are in a salveable
state; yet you have built so much hay, and straw, and stubble upon that
foundation, and so choked the work of God by your self-superstructions, and
exaltations, and so grieved that good Spirit of God by which you were to be
built up, by your pride and hateful hypocrisy, that the effects thereof do not
very beautifully appear in you, so as those who shall compare your proceedings
with the word of God (for your ensnaring and Apocryphal Covenant we shall not
admit to fit on the same seat as a co-judg with the sacred Scriptures) and look
to the effects that thereupon have followed, especially as to the souls of men,
must needs, notwithstanding any of your pretenses, abhor and abominate your
hypocritical formalitie. And God will execute his judgments too upon those who
imprison and obstruct the free passage of truth, as well as upon those which
corrupt it. How far some of you have been heretofore Seducers in England, we
well remember; and know also the tendencie of this your seasonable warning that
way* Remember too when men will not love truth, because it crosses their carnal
Interest, they are given up to the worst practice; and certainly the practical
abominations of Antichrist, as you call it, (I would rather say that the state
of the Apocalyptical Beastianism) are among them by them by just judgment of
God for a punishment of their persecution of truth for Interest sake. God
branding them to all the world for none of his, because holiness is not written
in their foreheads, and engraven upon the palms of their hands, and held out
to the world in profession and practice; but they have a spot which is not the
spot of his children; He that says he remains in him ought so walk even as
he has walked.

And indeed we must tell you, you are justly subject to a jealousy, that
there is something of Antichrist among you, there is such an universal
wickedness among you; profane swearing is your dialect, and lying has put you
into a Proverb, uncleanness blusheth not in your Stools of Repentance, perhaps
an ill remedy for that sin to expose them to view, that unclean and wicked
persons may know and learn where to find one another; have not the spuings of
your Bacchanals lately flowed in your streets? And whether they do not yet run
down, we know not. But it is like there will be a Coronation-Torrent, as well
as an arrival-puddle. Your Army had one other singular good quality when they
were in England, by virtue of the Covenant, that nothing could escape their
fingers at the remove of a march, but what was too hot to handle, or too heavy
or troublesome to carry or drive away: For your telling us of the many
Antichrists in England, we shall return you this; We have in England some new
lights concerning Antichrist which you are not acquainted with; there are
several things in which you know vvondrous little, because you shut all new
light out of Scotland; it is too large to be told you in a digression, and we
shall not go so far out of our course to make you at present that discovery;
only let us give you a seasonable warning to look well to your selves, and see
if there be not a great deal of that same thing among you that you take not
notice of; certainly it is not confined to Rome and Roman worship; it is every
where more or less, and grossly and formally, where it is little taken notice of;
We deny not but much of it is in England, but you have taken your marks about
it much amiss, and know not at all wherein.

[7] The success of that party provs not the goodness of their cause, or that
they shall prosper still; Warning.
The Lord who it wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, has been
pleased to put the rod of his anger, and the staff of his indignation in their
hand, for executing of his wrath against Malignant, because of the enmity and
opposition of that generation unto the cause and people of God: But if they
shall invade this land, and exalt themselves against the Lords inheritance, and
the people that are in Covenant with him, For whose sake the Lord did cloth
them with power for a time, for taking vengeance upon his enemies, Then shall
they stumble and fall, and be broken in pieces: Though the host of Senacherib
did prevail against Samaria, yet did they fall in Judah, and he did return
with shame, and was slain with the sword in his own land. That party has as
yet no cause to boast that God bath prospered them in Arms against the Covenant,
or against a praying people steadfast in the Lords cause, following his way, and
waiting upon him for help and success: All their encounters have hitherto been
against Malignants; and now the Lord having performed so much of his work
against that generation, who know's but the Sectaries day may also be coming,
and that when the state of the question shall be changed, God may turn his
hand upon them, and bring upon them the judgments of a broken Covenant, as he
has ever don to all that look that way.

[7] We acknowledge that greatness of success neither evidence's the goodness
of a Cause, Instruments, and of our selves are nothing. The Lord who is indeed
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, has been pleased to execute
his wrath by us against Tyranny, and against that cause which you have now
espoused: And having now called our Armies also to go against an hypocritical
Nation, We shall proceed with confidence that we shall also be enabled to
chastize their breach of Treaties, and most wicked and perfidious Invasion of
this Nation. And do not think your distinguishing your selves from Malignants,
will be your shield against Divine justice, as if there were none but that
generation against whom his wrath were kindled: And indeed should they prevail
only against, and destroy that sort of people among you, it would leav your
poor land very much unpeopled; for we very well know you have forty
Malignants to one that is devoted to your Kirk. You say that party has not
yet prospered in Arms against the Covenant. We need not fight with the
Covenant, it is com to nothing without it; it was brought a little too near the
Ark, and it is fallen like Dagon, and there let it lie: But were there no
Covenanters in Hamiltons Army? Was not that Parliament that sent them a
Covenanting Parliament? Can there be such a thing in Scotland, as a Parliament
not Covenanting? yet Dagon was then fallen, and had neither head nor hands, it
could neither advise, nor help. which has Divine Ordination, and Institution,
when it shall be idolized, provokes to jealousy him, that will not give his
glory to another. The Brazen Serpent was set up by Divine command, and more
wonderful effects wrought by looking upon it at Gods command, then we ever yet
saw your humane invention of the Covenant produce, where it has been imposed;
yet when 'twas made an Idol, he is commended that brake it in pieces, and
called it Nehushtam.

The Temple was astructure of Gods own contrivance and prescription, and built
and furnished with no small charge, and there was in it greater mysteries then
are perhaps of all men understood; yet when the people made an Idol of it, and
put their confidence in it, crying out, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of
the Lord, while they committed all abomination, God gave up to destruction both
it and them. You have too much cried up the Covenant, and the Kirk of Scotland,
and taught the people to trust too much in them, for the continuance or safety
of either of them. And while you talk of a praying people, we are not much
scared at it; consider whether your prayers have not been your provocations;
we mean not those only which were offered up with your drink offerings for
the health of your King, when you kindled so many fires all over your streets,
if not to the Host of Heaven, yet to Liber Pater, and for the Heathenish
celebration of those Lyaean Mysteries: But we mean also even those
hypocritical houlings of your ignorant crowds when they keep time to your
passion, and the ebullitions of your dark zeal, invoking vengeance from Heaven
(with a spirit of love and meekness, no doubt becoming Gospel-administrations)
against the Sectaries, who are men you know not, only your selves have painted
them black, that you might with the more intention of heat and malice hate them.

These your horrible mis-carrings have quite lost you with all wise and good
men; only with such Papers as these you still baffle your own people, and keep
them under slaverie, and subject them to a danger which is by every
compassionate spirit to be much pitied. If you be angry at this plain
dealing, you may thank your selves; if you care not what you say to delude the
people, we must tell ours the truth to undeceiv them. And let not those few in
Scotland who truly fear God (for we have heard there be a few such, though
but a very few) be kindled at this plain dealing, which the pride and
hypocrisy of this Paper has necessitated, not least they should still be
wise, not only in their own conceits (for of that cure we have no hope) but
least they should still appear what they are not to the judgments of others,
and thereby dangerously deceiv them.

[8] We desire that not only others, Warning.
but the Sectaries themselves may consider, that when England was very low, and
well nigh brought under the feet of the Popish, Prelatical, and Malignant
Party, That this Nation was then much solicited for their assistance and
relief, and even by some of these who have since that time been very active and
instrumental for the party which now prevail's in that land: The Kirk and
Kingdom of Scotland were then so compassionate of their bretbrens condition,
that they were willing to join in a League and Covenant with them, which both
Kingdoms, even many of those who are now in the Army, did solemnly swear and
subscribe: In prosecution of the ends thereof, this Kingdom did send into
England a considerable Army, by whose assistance the power of the Malignant
Party was broken and brought low, and the Parliament and Army of England put
into such a condition, that they needed no more fear the strength of their
enemies. This League and Covenant, which was the foundation of England's and
the Armies deliverance and safety, the Army has now forgotten and trodden
under foot, and walk in all their proceedings no less contrary thereto, then
darkness is unto light: Neither does it satisfy them to do so in their own
Land, but they threaten us also with war, for no other reason, but because we
cleav to our duty in these things, to which England stand's no less obliged
unto by Covenant before the Lord then we do. We may confidently assert and
profess before the world, that the Lord's people in this Land are not conscious
to themselves of any wrong don to that prevailing party in England: The
engagement in the year I648. was no less abhorred, and testified against by the
Kirk of Scotland, and by these that are how in place and power in the State,
and by all the godly in the land, then it was by that party themselves; Which
did so far convince the House of Commons, that in their Letter to the General
Assembly of this Kirk in the same year, they profess that they are assured,
that these impious and unwarrantable actions cannot be don with the
approbation and assent of the religious and well-affected people of the Kingdom
of Scotland, and that they do understand, that there are very few amongst
these who were in the engagement against them, that first engaged with them in
the Covenant and Cause, but such as are professed enemies to them, however they
were then content to proceed thereunto, that they might the better deceiv the
people of England; And that therefore they are unwilling to impute such evils
to this Nation in general. It is known how many fervent prayers and
supplications were poured out in this Land before the Lord against that
engagement; and we think we may without boasting say, that those prayers had
as much influence upon the defeat thereof, as all the power of that Army: And
since that time that engagement has been publicly disavowed, disclaimed, and
repealed by the Parliament of this Kingdom. Neither has that party any thing
to challenge us concerning Malignants, both Kirk and State having constantly
followed, and being still about their duties against them, without conniving
at, or complying with them in their courses. It is true, that this Kingdom and
Kirk have protested and testified against the proceedings of Sectaries in
reference to Religion and Government; Which we could not but do, unless we
had forgotten our duty, and the Christian mutual ties that lie upon us, not
only as sister-Churches, but as covenanted Churches; and so make our selves
partakers of their sins, and expose our selves to the hazard of their plagues.
We in this Land being therefore conscious to our selves of nothing but duty;
If they shall invade us for following the same, shall not God look upon it and
avenge it?

[8] If we shall answer this Paragraph at large, and affairs that have been
between the Nations since these last troubles, which shall proceed as fast as
leisure will serve; and give but some touches the while.

The Sectaries do very well consider, and remember too, that England was very
low brought under the foot of the popish and prelatical party, which were the
Armies which that late King used to subdue us, whose quarrel you espoused
notwithstanding the Covenant, and pleaded his cause, and whom you would have
brought in again upon such terms, as had not providence prevented the effect of
your endeavors, you had ruined your selves and us too. And we remember also,
that though you were as much concerned as we in the danger, and privileged
only with one stop of a greater remotion, yet we were enforced very much to
solicit you by the parties you mention, whom God has since made very
instrumental for the good of this Land, before we could prevail with the Kirk
and Kingdom of Scotland, notwithstanding our great need, and their own evident
danger, either to compassionate us, or be careful of themselves, until they had
brought us into the snare of a Covenant; of which the designing Church knew
they should be afterward able to make some other good uses besides the
Reformation of Religion; and however our dangers were imminent, yet they would
not com in to our assistance till we had furnished them with 50000 l. a sum of
no small difficulty for us to raise at that time, when our quarters were so
straight, and our occasions so multiplied; but yet, when they had a mind to
invade us under Hamilton, they could do it without any Levie-monie advanced.
What assistance they gave, and how much they contributed to the bringing us to
that condition, wherein we needed not to fear the strength of our enemies, we
shall more fully set out in that other mentioned Tract. Only now they proved a
broken reed, from whom we had but a weak support; but it ran into our hands,
and pierced us sufficiently, as all places, where they came, can bear sensible
witness, and which the world shall shortly know. Briefly, they took our money,
and helped us little, being specially careful to keep out of the way of
danger; they did like right mercinaries pursue their own interest, which was
very opposite to ours; we desired to end the war, and they to lengthen it,
that they might lengthen their emploiment, hoping they should never be
necessitated again to return to their own poor Country: Yet this advantage we
had, that while they took our pay for a great while, they did not take our
Enemies part; and our money produced with them as good effect as the worship of
that Numen at Calecut does there, you know who, and what.

The League and Covenant, you say, was the foundation of England's and the
Armies deliverance: We, that know better, deny it, and say, 'twas a
foundation, upon which was endeavored to be built our ruin, if God had not
mercifully prevented the bringing forth and hatching of that Cockatrice egg,
which your Cabals and conspiracies had laid among us; we shall not now tell
you with whom. But if any thing humane may be put among the foundations of
our deliverance, it must be the new modelling of the Army, and putting it
under a new Command, who very well understood you, but could never be brought
to understand and entertain any of your Cabals; they shamed your sloth, and
did our work without you, and put us into a condition to be able to require
such an useless charge to be gone; This is the great sin of this Army, to have
thus wipe't your mouth of all the sweet morsels your designs had cut out, and
your hopes had already swallowed. They awaked you out of your dream, and you
found your selves hungry still, and this you will never forgive them. As for the
reasons for which we now make war upon you, the Parliament, who better know
their own motives, have in their Declaration told you both them and their ends.
And for the obligation by Covenant, you have been often told there is no such
thing in being, and shall add no more to it.

But to the next, were it not that you have an evasion in the expression (the
Lord's people) we should ask what is become of all your little remnants of
shame or ingenuitie; and we shall ask you so still, if you take this
expression in your usual acception, viz. for all your covenanted people, were
not your Parliament a covenanting People, or were not they the Lords People?
give us a Criterion, by which we may be able to judge and distinguish them:
Your Parliament decreed our Invasion; and your whole crowd of wretched ignorant
Covenanters, that swallow whatever you propine, invaded us in pursuance of that
Act. We grant, you of the Kirk and your devoti did profess to abhor it, when
you saw the Command fallen into hands you could not manage, and from whom you
should be able to draw no advantage to your party. Do not we know, and all
men know, that had any intelligence of the affairs of Scotland at that time,
and dare you deny it, That that Invasion was put on by all your Pulpits, and
all your Kirk-men unanimously; and the quarrel grew among your selves, not upon,
Whether there shall be an invasion, but, Who shall invade, and have the
conduct? Are not all the pulpits of Edinburg witness of this? and are there not
diverse among us now that were ear-witnesses? was not the work of your pulpits
then to make the Sectaries odious to all your people, who knew no more of them
but what you told them? and you never cared what you said of them, so it might
stir up the people. When you saw that Hamiltons party had carried it, and that
you had conjured up a devil you could not command, and doubted, if he should
succeed in England, it would not go well with you; then you began to have
recours to your Balaanism, and fall to cursing. We believ you did not approve
the Invasion when it was made; but we know very well, and you know it too,
and must confess, if your consciences had power enough to make you speak a
truth, that if Hamilton's Party had not invaded, the Kirks Party had. And do
you think we are so simple to believ that the contradictions of your Envy are
the productions of your good affection? And that particular disavowings can
compensate your National Parlamentarie Enmity. For shame do not thus discover
your ignorance in the Law of Nations, and common reason; by which it is evident,
when one party break's a Treaty, the other is free; can you play fast and
loos at pleasure and keep us bound? was there any such claus in the Treaty
that you should have liberty to break it, if you saw advantage; and we be s
but yours, could obtrude these things. Suppose your present Parliament should
disavow it, what is that to us? What justice, beyond the Kirk's foolish Stool,
has been inflicted on any of the guilty? or, what reparation has there been
made for all the blood and spoil? nay your present Parliament (forsooth in good
time) will not own the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Nor Treat
about reparation, till we adnul our selves. Certainly the Civilitie you quote
of the House of Commons to your General Assembly, if any such were, was ill
bestowed, and as well requited; however, since it was with you but the House of
Commons, it seems it was not the Letter or the Parliament, and therefore
binde's them not. If there had been more in the Letter, then your selves urge,
it might yet be reckoned among many other of those causless complements cast
away upon an ungrateful people, which you never deserved either before or
after. You that stood nearer your selves, and knew clearly the truth of things,
surely laughed in your sleeves at those mistakes. There are great Errors in the
world about Prayer, and it is efficacy; take heed of mistakes about it: you
would seem to intimate as if the world and the affairs thereof were managed by
a power only, without a wisdom to direct it, which could not tell how to do
well to the good, or punish the evil, but as your prayers, as proceeding from a
principle of greater light, and more goodness, should direct or impel. It was
the going out of the mighty power of God, Ordered by his Omniscient
Providence, and flowing from an infinite goodness and love to his people, and a
just indignation against such proud and hypocritical men, which wrought their
destruction; as for the aestuations of your unsanctified anger, which you call
Prayer, we cannot allow them a place in that work.

When the Sectaries interpose with your Religion and Government in Scotland, as
you do with ours, you may then testify against them, and lay what weight you
will upon your Covenant; but we have not yet don it, and your care not to
partake of the Sectaries sins, would be commendable (unless you mean
Sectarianism it self in your sens) so as you would be as careful to reform and
repent of your own. We Invade you, not for doing your duty, but upon grounds
of clearest JUSTICE and absolute NECESSITY, and recommend our Cause to the
blessing of the just God.

[9] Whilst we incite men to their duty in the defense of the Kingdom
against invasion, Warning.
and encourage them in performance of the same, We desire not to be mistaken,
or that any should so far misconstrue our meaning as though we did thereby
intend to stir up unto, or approve of an Invasion of the Kingdom of England, or
an Engagement in War against the same. In relation to peace or war in these
Nations, we cannot but very much commend and approve the resolutions of the
Parliament of this Kingdom, expressed in their Letter of the 6th of March to the
Speaker of the House of Commons, and Instructions sent therewith to their
Commissioners 1649, and now again renewed in another Letter to the same Speaker
of the House of Commons, wherein they acknowledge their obligations, and declare
their resolutions to observe the rule of Remonstrating first the breaches of
peace, of craving just reparations, of using all fair means, of giving a
preceding warning of three months before any engagement in these Kingdoms in
war, and do hold forth this way gf procedour in clearing each others, and
dealing plainly, as agreeable, not only to particular Treaties, and to the
many Ties, Bonds, and Declarations past betwixt the Kingdoms, but also to the
Law of God, and practice of his people in his Word, and to the common law and
practice of Heathen Nations, much more of Christian Coveanted Kingdoms: And
plainly profess their confidence, that the Covenanted GOD of these Kingdoms,
who did take order with these of this Nation, who did unlawfully engage against
England, does still live and reign, and will bring shame and ruin upon
whatsoever party in either of these Nations, that without a necessary cause,
and clear calling, and without observance of the aforesaid rules and order,
shall offend and invade the other Nation: In all which we do agree with them
in our judgments and resolutions, and conceiv that the whole Land is bound to
tread the same steps, and to walk according to the same rules.

[9] This your 9th Paragraph is so fully answered in the Paper this week
published. Entitled, The Answer.
Colonel Grey's Portmanteau opened, that we shall not add a line of it more,
but refer the Reader thither, this being but the recapitulation and Epitome of
that Letter.

[10] Albeit we be diligently to take heed af the danger that threaten's from
Sectaries, Warning.
and faithfully to bestir our selves in our places and stations in the use of
all lawful and necessary means for preventing of the same: Yet are we not to
forget, but also with the same diligence and care to take heed of these dangers
and snares that threaten the work and people of God from Malignants.
Malignancie though a very evil weed, yet is not plucked up, but still
continue's to be one of the raging sins of this Land, it being the snare
wherewith loos hearts, who cannot endure Christ's yoke, are most readily taken.
Hence it is that there be still many of that stamp in all the three Kingdoms,
who drawing encouragements to themselves, from the influence they have upon the
King's Counsels, and hardening themselves in their way, by the proceedings of
Sectaries, do still follow their former designs, and wait for their day, and
would rejoice in the ruin or halting of these who adhere to the Covenant: And
experience prov'es, that many of these, who have seemed to repent of, and
abandon that way, yet do not really shake off that sin that hang's so fast on,
but upon new temptations fall again upon that same wickedness, and prove wors
then before; which may be a caution to us not suddenly to trust them. We make
no doubt, but that Malignants will by all means endeavor that there may be
room left for them to undermine the work and people of God, and engage the
Kingdom in a new War, upon terms of their devising, destructive to Religion and
the Covenant.

In reference to dangers upon the right hand and upon the left, besides any
duty already represented to us; We conceiv it incumbent to us, seriously to
recommend the following particulars to all the Land, especially to these that
are in trust, either in Judicatories or Armies.

1. First to watch and pray that in nothing they be deceived, or com short of
the duty, whereunto the Lord call's them in a time of so many temptations and
great difficulties.

2. Every one would labor not only for the knowledge of the Truth, but to have
the power and love thereof engraven on their hearts, that they may from an in
ward principle of grace and spiritual life avoid Error, and all the snares
which lead thereunto, and be encouraged to contend earnestly for the Faith
which God has been pleased to deliver to his Kirk in this Land.

3 Not only is open Malignancie to be avoided, but men would watch that
enmity against the work and people of GOD, which ordinarily is the birth of
jealousy and discontent and of familiar conversing with such as are
disaffected to, or lukewarm in the cause of GOD, steal not into their hearts,
and gain not upon their affections by degrees; Experience almost of all
backsliding times and persons has proved, that the fellowship of men of a
disaffected or lukewarm temper, blunt's the edg of tenderness and zeal, and
steal's away the heart, first from honest instruments, and then from the cause
it self: There have bin, and are still some in the Land, who in a cunning way of
insinuation foment jealousies, and act divisions, whilst they seem to be
friends to the Cause, and by this means do more harm then others by open
violence; These we would mark and avoid them, that we may neither endanger
our selves, nor give offense unto others, nor prejudice the Cause of GOD.

4 We would take diligent heed, that in nothing we recede from the just and
necessary desires of this Kirk and Kingdom, propounded to his Majesty, for
securing of Religion, and settling the peace of the Kingdom; But that we cleav
closely to our former resolutions in those things: If we remit and grow slack,
and yield in any of them, as it shall increas the hopes and endeavors of
carnal and disaffected men, so shall it provoke GOD against us to leav us to
our selves, till we be plunged in a pit of backsliding.

5 It concern's us to take heed that we do not tread the steps of those, who
carried on the late unlawful engagement against the Kingdom of England in any
thing already condemned by the Kirk and Kingdom, especially to beware of
changing the state of our Cause, or altering the matter of our quarrel, either
by laying aside of GOD's interest and taking up of man's, or by preferring or
equalling man's interest unto GODS; This were to turn upside down the whole
tenor of our Principles and Procedours, and not only to spoil us of all the
comfort we can look for from our Covenant, but also to bring upon our selves
the guilt and reproach of all the sin of those, who carried on that engagement,
so much condemned and born testimony against in this Land.

6 We would beware of losing the advantage of defenders, seeing our strength
most consist's in the equity and clearness of the Cause, and the holy and
righteous way in pursuing of the same: It shall be better for us, rather to
endure straits for a time, then by precipitating and making haste in the dark,
to rush against the wall and spoil our selves of that peace and comfort, which
we may have in waiting till GOD go before us.

7 We desire that all the Land may be still pouring out their prayers and
supplications before GOD, that the King's Majesty may really and wholly
abandon all Malignant principles and counsels, and join cordially in the
Covenant and Cause of GOD.

8 As all the people of GOD throughout the Land would be careful to discern of
dangers and avoid snares from, and compliances with both Sectaries and
Malignants, so would Ministers be diligent and faithful in pressing of these
duties, and that in a solid and convincing way, and labor to make it appear
that they speak not against the one or the other from passion or interest, but
upon the grounds of divine reason, and from the light and authority of Gods
Word; that so they may make themselves manifest to the consciences of their
hearers, and stop the mouth of gainsayers.

Finally, all the inhabitants of the Land should beware of pride and carnal
confidence, and in an humble way should wait upon the LORD, and tread the steps
of holiness and righteousness, and he who has don great things for us, shall
yet save us. A. KER.

[10] You judge rightly, that there be store of Malignants, it may thank you
and your Cabals, The Answer.
that we have so many among us, your joining with them and espousing their
Interest has more strengthened their hands, than any proceedings of the
Sectaries. Has not your receiving the head of Malignants for your King, who
has been bred up in no other company, nor followed other counsels, and whose
heart is with them, though he came to you to serve turns upon you; more
hardened their hearts in their way, and animated them in their proceedings than
any thing that the Sectaries have ever don toward them. We com now to the
particulars of your recommendation.

1. And to this first we have nothing to say; but desire that you, and we
also, may, without hypocrisy, do the thing you advise unto.

2. To the second; if you mean by contending earnestly for the faith, not any
use of outward carnal strife, but an earnest strife of the soul in it self, in
the spirit with God, for his gracious manifestation of the matter of our faith,
we agree for so much; only we must expunge your there last words, containing
a limitation to your Land; for you may no more make your selves a Catholic
rule then Rome may do.

3. We desire you impartially to examine your hearts, and see if there be not
in you a great deal of enmity against the work and people of God; which is
ordinarily the work of an Antichristian pride; whereby you are apt to think,
that you are, and that there are no other the people of God but your selves; And
this causes your jealousy of, and discontent and enmity against any other
that lay claim to that privilege, if they be not also of the same complexion
with you: with whom you will not convers, least you should be unprejudiced,
and so run in danger of a Kirk-censure, by having a better opinion perhaps of a
Sectarie, and thereby have your zeal brought to a Christian temper, and
directed to move rationally, according to its object. We must tell you too,
that there are some of your faction in this Land, Malignants jure divino, who by
their insinuations and secret infusions, do foment faction, and sow division
and disobedience to the Government of this Commonwealth; and while they will
pretend a conscientiousness, do more harm to the Peace of the Land, then the
worst of the old Malignants. These we shall mark, and cause them to avoid, or
otherwise put them into a condition not much capable of doing us mischief.

4. It had been much more your wisdom, and your happiness, if you had taken
diligent heed to have had nothing to do with your King, who is not like to be
much bound up by the desires of your Kirk, though you recede nothing from them;
or will your Religion be very secure by it? As for the peace of your Kingdom,
lookers on think you have, by espousing his quarrel, made it very difficult to
establish and settle. We in England think you have, more ways then one,
provoked God, and you are like enough to be plunged into a deep pit of a
lasting misery.

5. We have only here with sad and tender hearts to lament the woeful
blindness and unsavouriness that your formalitie and hypocrisy, by the just
judgment of God, has brought upon you: That upon so serious an occasion, as
this is, you should have no other rule to direct your actings and forbearings
by, but the condemnations of your Kirk, and your Covenant: We blush and mourn
while we read these passages. We Sectaries are scandalized at it; it is not
your way to make us your Proselytes; For we believ and hold forth, that the
sacred Scriptures are the rule of all things to be believed, and to be don.
Obtrude not your Covenant, nor the Kirk upon us; we shall condemn them both,
if they either be, or do any thing that is contrary to that sacred rule. Are
these expressions becoming these times of light? we thought them times of
darkness, when the Scriptures were forgotten; and the sentences, the decrees,
the decretals and extravagants, were made the rule of a Christian faith and
practice: How come's your Church to have gotten such credit, that it should be
emulous with Rome for infallibility? Accustom your selves therefore to
Canonical language; and talk not of Gods interest, while you measure it not by
God's Word; though by the way we must tell you, that word Interest sounded
with God, is hardly concord in our ears.

6. You lost your advantage and defense, when you became Invaders; you should
have needed no defense against us, if you had not begun to invade, and proceed
in such ways as declare you still enemies. If you had been righteous, it had
been well for your selves and us too; and when you are brought to a condition to
be so unrighteous no more, and that we have such an assurance of it, as you
cannot break, we shall not desire longer to pursue you; and if this tenderness
of not moving till God goe's before you, had possessed your Parliament in 1648,
we are confident you had never invaded England.

7. By this it seems, you are not sure of your King; your selves doubt, whether
he be real or not, and free from malignant principles? What meant you to be
troubled with him upon these uncertain terms? here was something at the bottom
will find you out at last: You were in the beginning of you paper very tender
of joining with Malignants, or having any in your Army; why not so, as well
as have an Army for a Malignant? for it seems your selves dare not undertake
he is not one.

8 We wholly like your Counsel to your Ministers, and wish you would take the
same Course the next Papers you Emit; then perhaps we might receiv some
information or conviction; for we profess our selves ready to receiv it, when
from those grounds and principles; and we would have you define or describe a
Seclarie, and tell us wherein is the poison of their opinions, and practice;
for the name has no harm in it. And we begin to take it up and wear it very
contentedly: it seems to us also that many of those men you so call are of
the best among us, God has honored them to do great service to this Nation,
for that cause we both love and honor them, and think we have greater reason
to do so, because you hate them, for we know you pursue an interest quite
contrary to ours.

9. In this you are short, you should have added hypocrisy to your pride and
carnal confidence. And truly if they would leav off their swearing, uncleanness
and drunkenness among you, which is so very general, it would do well. And if
in a deep and true humility they would retire into themselves, and search their
hearts, and turn from all their evil ways and walk in the ways of
righteousness, and holiness (a thing much spoken of, and arrogated by many
that neither have it, nor understand what it is) and meet the Lord in the way
of his judgments, and endeavor to agree with their adversary while he is in
the way, ye may vet be safe, which would be very desirable, so we may be
satisfied and safe also.

FINIS.

