The Examiner defended, IN A Fair and Sober ANSWER TO The Two and twenty
QUESTIONS which lately examined the Author of Zeal Examined.

In this ANSWER are (not unseasonably) touched, Christ's interest in this and
all Nations. Christ's interest, and the Commonweals, as to the present affairs.
The true nature of all Civil States. The nature of all Civil Magistracy, and
of the Civil Sword. The Title of Christian Magistrate. National Churches and
Covenants. The world of Religions and Consciences thorowout the world. The
permission due to Conscience in (merely) Spirituals, all the world over.
Idolatry, and the kinds of at. The Spiritual and Civil Sword, and the effects
of them, in Spirituals. The Forms of Worship. The causes of destruction to
Nations. The Violence to the Souls of men; and of Interest the cause of it. The
dangerous consequence of such Violences, experimented in so many Nations. The
difference of the Land of Canaan, and the Kings thereof, from all Lands and
Kings besides. Christ Jesus himself, and his followers, ever accounted and
punished, as the greatest Heretics, Blasphemers, etc. The crying guilt of
Soul-Rapes and National hypocrisy in Worship. The light of Nature in
Spirituals. The acts of Asa, Artaxerxes, etc. The Fast of Nineveh. The
Conscientious differences of the most Conscientious in the world, about God's
Worship. The justice and prudence of State-provision against all ^ncivilities
both of Popish and Protestant Ranters.


LONDON, Printed by James Cottrel. 1652.

To the Reader.
Pious Reader,
TWo honorable Gentlemen (as is said) have so far (lately) honored Christ
Jesus and their honorable stations, The occasion of this Discourse.
and them selves, as to try by the Sword of God's Spirit ( the Word of God)
whether the World, and the Civil States and Nations thereof, may permit
Idolaters, Heretics, etc.

The first of these Two Worthies published his Zeal Examined: The second
attempts upon the former with Two and twenty Questions, under this Title; The
Examiner Examined.

It was desired that the Examiner of Zeal might have examined these Questions
also. But finding an indisposition of health upon his person, and multiplicity
of Public affairs engaging his hours and minutes; I have been humbly bold to
look up to heaven, and to beg the finger of God's most holy and gracious
Spirit, for the dissolving and untying of them.

It was a truely-gallant and heavenly speech of the Author of these Questions,
An heavenly speech.
(whosoever he be) in his Epistle or Preface: [I profess my self a lover of
Truth, wheresoever I find it, though in an heap of Errors: for I know well,
that it is the highway to be given up to strong delusions, not to receive the
love of the Truth, yea, an universal love of all truth.] But I had almost said,
( not only, What Saint, what Angel, but) What man will not say, Vincat
Veritas? We know who said, Amicus Plato, etc. magis Amica Veritas. Such counsel
is like our common counsel of Physic to others, but not so pleasing and
practical in our own distempers.

And Oh how many are the Skreens, the Veils, the Hoods, the Vizards the
Curtains, the Hangings, the Clo^ks, the Clouds, and Colors, by which the
luster and shining of that which we call Truth, is hidden and eclipsed from us!

For instance: 1. Truth suspected for a Novelty.
This cannot be Truth, it is a Novelty. What will this babbler say? ( said the
famous Academians of Athens) he feemeth to be a setter forth of new Gods;
though all the old were false, and indeed but new, and therefore false; because
not the Alpha and Omega, Quod antiquissimum optimum.
the First and the Last. Thus cry the Papists against the Protestants, and the
Protestants against each other: New Doctrines, New Men, New Lights, New
Christ's, New Gods, etc.

There is no room in the Inn for Christ Jeus and his Mother, 2. Commonly Truth
is outwardly poor.
ovely among the beasts in the stable, in the Manger: A poor Carpenters son,
whence has be such learning? How should such base and unlikely Medicines as
Clay and Spittle, p^n men (...)? How should the dry and low tree be fruitful?
How poor Fishermen, Tent-makers, Mechanics, know and preach Christ Jesits?
etc.

He takes away our Hogs ( say the Gadarenes) and therefore beseech him to
depart from us. 3. Truth is costly.
By this Trade ( says Demetrius and his Crafts men) we have our living, etc.
our Popedoms, Bishoprics, Benefices. If we believe this Doctrine, the Romans
will come and take away our place and nation, etc.

How can you believe ( says Christ Jesus) who receive honor from one another,
4. Truth is in disgrace.
and not that honor which comes from God alone? How many had been convinced and
persuaded that Christ Jesus was the Son of God, but that they loved the praise
of men, more then the praise of God?

Howsoever sometimes it has pleasad God to take off the Rod and Plough of the
wicked, 5. Truth is persecuted.
from the back of the righteous; yet the general Rule is That All that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, must be hunted. The great Lord General, Christ
Jesus, carried his Cross and Gallows; and professath it impossible for any to
follow him, without a denying of himself and taking up his Cross, or Gallows
also. Thus are we ( says David and Paul) as sheep for the shambles all the day
long. Thus must those blessed Petitioners under the Altar wait, until the rest
of their fellow-brethren and servants were slain also. Hence ( though Christ's
followers have ever found the sweetest enjoyments of God and Christ, and the
holy Spirit, in sufferings, yet) how harsh is this Alarm to flesh and blood
which therefore rather seeks a thousand shifts, to swear, to subscribe, to
conform, (upon the point) to deny Jesus Christ, etc.

Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? 6. Truth is prejudiced.
Can Micaiah ever speak good to me, who never yet spoke good to me? And Have
thou found me, O mine enemy ( said A had to two Prophets.) This Stone the
builders have abready refused, etc. This may be Jebovah 's miraculous work, to
choose the stones cast by, etc. but flesh and blood cannot got over this
mountain.

Do any of the Rulers believe in him? Do the learned Scribes, 7. Truth is
followed with sew wise, great, learned.
the Reverend Clergy, the King, the Queen, the Parliament, the Counced, the
University, the Convocation, the Assembly, the Synod? Oh how thick is this
Choud, that the eyes of the wisest cannot pierce it! for it is God 's design,
that few wise and piencing eyes are chosen, to see Christ Jesus, and his
despised Truths and Mysteries.

How many whom Christ invites, send Christ this answer: 8. Truth finds few at
leisure.
I have not such time to search the Scriptures, as the Bereans had: So many are
my distractions, so neoessary are my occasions, about my Farm; about my Oxen,
about my Merchandise, about my Marriage. Go thy way, Paul, ( and Peter, and
Christ, and God) says Festus, until I have a more convenient time, etc. It is
the voice of my Beloved, says the soul, Cant. 1. yea, Martha knows it is Christ
's voice; but dinner must be dressed; and it is for Christ himself also, etc.

This Jesus (say the Jews) cannot be He: This man is a Glutton, a Drunkard, a
Company-keeper. And just as, John, because austere and harsh, came from hell,
and had a devil, was Jesus a Glutton, etc. because of a mire loving and
sociable, of a more merciful and pitiful disposition and cenversation. I
acknowledge, the followers of Christ Jesus, The lives of Gods children, causing
his name to be blasphemed, like to kindle Fares of persecution.
by unchristian courses, may cause the Name of Christ to be blasphemed ( as
questionsess the lives of many Papists and Protestants cause both Jews, and
Turks, and Pagans, to stumble at him; and therefore, were there no slaughter of
Witnesses in question, I cannot but suspect a storm, a fire ^ straight
impending, which shall bring forth a more refined and purer Edition of
Christianity to the whole world;) yet since the devil in English, is an Accuser
standeres etc. it is but devilish to reproach, and it is but foolish to stumble
at reproaches.

There is another, of a finer spun and thread; 10. Our spiritual senses may
deceive us.
which damps the ingennous searchings after, Truth; and that is ( like unto
deceptio visus) a Delusion from our very Senses, and from our very experiments
of our good canditions. Truth kept out by experience.
Thus ( not only ignorant souls plead for the old Religion, and the Jews for
their cakes to the Queen of heaven; then 'twas better, etc. but) what rejoicing
finds the heart of, David himself, and so wany thousands of Israel with him,
even in a false carrying of the Ark, the sign of God 's most holy presence?
Yea, is it not one of the unkindest Answers that ever was given to so dear a
Savior, ( Cant 5.) My feet are washed, how shall I defile them? etc.

Lastly, 11. Hatred of Truth the highest wall against it.
What trembling calls for that most black and horrid sackcloth of hell it self
( to the weaving of which many of the former contribute) to wit, a malicious
hatred of the very purity and holiness of the Son of God.

There is a twofold hatred of Christ Jesus. Two walls of hatred of Truth.


First, Natural. The wisdom of the flesh, is enmity with God. But this wall is
saltable and breakable, and blessedly gives way in Gods chosen, to
reconciliation, and leagues of eternal loves with Jesus Christ.

The second, is a wall so high and strong, as it stands for ever. This is a
malice and hatred after light. Such (probably) was Saul 's against David the
shadow, and the Pharisees against Christ Jesus himself: They hated him, and
said, He shall not reign over us. Thus, among the many hundreds of false
Prophets, there is one more says Ahab, Micaiah; but I hate him, etc.

The result of all these ( gentle Reader) is too often even in the heart of the
greatest lover of Truth in the world, a seeret prejudice, Resolutions against
truth.
a barricado, a resolution against some Truths of God. Such a resolution was
that of the Captains, consulting Jeremiah about their stay in Caldea, yet
secretly resolved to go down to Egypt Thus, like those forty resolved to kill
Paul, they pretend to enquire something more perfectly.

The truth is, Truth is a prisoner upon suspicion. How many millions are the
conspirators against the life of it? And yet, let us examine the prisoner, call
Assemblies, Classes, Synods, Councels, etc. appoint Disputations, Conferences,
etc. But before the prisoner come to the Governor, the Parliament, the
Council, etc. stab it, kill it. Yet God forbid we should wound the Truth, but
the Heretic, the Seducer, the Disturber, etc.

My humble prayer therefore is presented to the Father of lights, ( who is
light, and love, and truth) that these honorable Examiners, and all those noble
Bereans who heartily shall please to examine them and this, may cry with David,
sensibly and cordially, (Psalm. 119.) I am a stranger in the earth: O hide not
thy commandments from me.

ERRATA.
Page 10. read shadowing rocks and trees. p. 27. l. 4. put out but. p. 41. for
Religions, r. religious. p. 42. for ought they, r. ought they not. p. 54. l 24.
for height and prudence, r. high prudence. p. 56. l. 29. for When. r. Whether.
p 57. l. 12. for Sorms, r. Storm, p. 61. l. 2. r. Canaan. p. 74. in the
margin, r. whether the pishops. p. 76. for the Idolatry, r. Idolatry.

The EXAMINER DEFENDED.
THe Ship of the Commonwealth (like that gallant The Sovereign, or Commonwealth.
Ship now going forth, so called) must share her weals and woes in common.

As the one, so the other has its dangers of Rocks and Sands, Common Woes
Storms and Tempests, Want of Provisions, Sicknesses and Diseases, treacherous
and professed enemies, Fires, Leaks, Mutinies, and
etc.

I humbly beg of God, and wish to both, their Fair Winds and Weathers,
Plentiful provisions, Unanimity and Peace, Preservations, Victories, Boon
Voyages, Weals.
and joyful Anchoring in their desired Ports and Harbors. Such woes and weals
are common to all that sail in either.

Now in a Ship there is the whole, and there is each private Cabin. A private
good engages our desires for the public, and raises cares and fears for the
due prevention of common evils.

Hence is it, Common Duty.
that in a Ship all agree (in their commanding orders, and obeying stations) to
give and take the Word, to stand to the Helm and Compass, to the Sails and
Tackling, to the Guns and Artillery. This is, this must be done in Artificial,
and in each Civil Ship and Commonweal.

Hence, not to study, and not to endeavor the common good, and to exempt our
selves from the sense of common evil, is a treacherous Baseness, a selfish
Monopoly, a kind of Tyranny, and tends to the destruction both of Cabin and
Ship, that is, of private and public safety.

I hope it will not therefore be offensive, Christ's Interest the Commonweals.
that into the great and common treasury I cast my mite, and say, Christ's
interest is the Commonweals. Christ's interest is that Sheat- Anchor, at which
this Ship has rid, and can only ride in safety. All power in heaven and earth
is his. If England make peace with him, ally with him, etc. though every dust
of the field were an army, and every drop of the Ocean sprung up a Navy against
us; yet our tranquillity should not be shortened, our Commonweal, our
Parliament, our Peace should flourish.

But where is that man whose Case is not right? Where is the conscientious
Papist, or Prelatist, or Presbyterian, Every Christ but one (the true) calls
for the Civil sword and maintenance.
or Independent, that assumes not thus; [ Christ's interest is mine?] And (in
some sense) I verily believe they all say true; plainly thus. As no Religion in
the world can justly challenge the drawing of the sword for its defense; so,
least of all desires it that which is, of all, the best (and only true) the
Christian.

I know each Sect is apt to plead, Mine interest being Christ's, the Purse and
Sword of the State is not only mine, but it is Christ's due: But,

I also maintain, that it is not true Civility, Christ's Interest in any Nation,
is soul-freedom.
not true Christianity, that draws the Sword for one or other. Christ's Interest
in this Commonweal (or any) is the freedom of the souls of the People. I
confess that all Nations, all Peoples, Kings, Princes, Judges, etc. ought to
kiss the Son, to be nursing fathers and mothers to Christ Jesus and his
followers. But what a dreadful mistake is this, that no people must live but
Christians? That the many millions of millions in our own and other Nations of
the world, must either at the shaking of a sword fall down before Christ, or
with the edge of it be cut off for Idolaters, Heretics, Blasphemers (or evil
speakers) against Christ and his Religion?

Has not the God of heaven, the Father of lights, written it with the beams of
the noon-day-sun, that (notwithstanding pretenses) the truth is, That the
Parliament of England, and the Religion of England, The Parliament and the
Religion of England, have ever followed the Sword of England.
has ever followed the Sword of England? Was not the Parliament and the
Religion of England all Popish in Henry the seventh's days? But in his son's,
Henry the eighth, the Parliament and Religion divided, and turned half Popish,
half Protestant. In Henry the eighth his three children's days, what turns,
what wonders? Was not the Parliament and the Religion all Protestant, in that
most hopeful Edward's spring? etc. and as altogether Popish, when the
Sword-fell into the hands of that bloody Mary? And when Gods providence and
vengeance wrung the Sword from the paw of that Lioness, and reached it to the
hands of that tender Lamb Elizabeth; how has the Parliament and the Religion
of England (since her time) carried the face, and hung out the flag of all
Protestants? etc.

In these late Earthquakes and Combustions (which the late King begun, by
imposing upon the consciences of the Scotch Presbyters, in favor of his
Prelates) how dreadfully has a naked Arm from heaven snatched away the Sword
from both, and fixed it in a hand more merciful (I hope) to the souls of all
men, Jews and Gentiles!

Who sees not this to be the design and the decree of Heaven, Gods present
design in England.
To bring into the light, and to break to pieces the more-then-iron Yokes and
Chains upon the souls and consciences of men? Who sees not, with holy fear and
wonder, that this his Decree has begun to break the arms and necks of all both
Popish and Protestant persecutore?

What eye so weak, but may observe how little and how seldom it pleased the God
of heaven to go out with our Armies, The Goings of God in the late Wars.
until this interest of the Son of God (soul-freedom.) begun to be seen and
served by our Armies, and that they fought not for one sect or conscience, but
(as to Religion) against tyranny, and persecution of any conscience?

Till then, the Balance turned not, and our Armies could hardly be said to
prosper: And ever since, they never did but prosper; and, I verily believe,
still shall, and the Commonwealth of England, and the Parliament thereof still
flourish, till that fatal hour, when they shall cease to break the yokes, (
soul-yokes especially) and to let the oppressed go free.

One of the greatest Knots this day in England, concerns the rising of this
Parliament, and the sitting of the next. I confess, Alexander's sword will cut
all Gordian knots, but none but the finger of Christ's interest will untie
them. There was none in heaven, nor earth, nor under the earth, that could open
the seals; but the Lamb did. The same blessed Lamb of God, and the interest of
soul-freedom to all men, can, One of the greatest knots this day in England,
untied.
and can only maintain this Commonweal in the freedom and glory of it: for,

Who but soul-oppressors can be unwilling that men's Consciences be free to see
with their own eyes, and themselves be judges of the path they choose, in which
they hope to find eternal life and Blessedness?

Who but Tyrants and Oppressors can be grieved, that the souls of men should
choose whom to hear, what and with whom to pray, whom and how to pay and
maintain, according to their Abilities and Consciences?

Who but such as buy and sell Christ Jesus, and make a trade and living of
Heaven and Hell, can cry out, Great is Diana, for hours and years together?

Will not all the people of the Nation stand obliged, The only woy (according
to God) of obliging the people of this Nation to the present Government and
Governors.
as one man, to live and die with such Saviors and Deliverers, and to elect
and choose such Vindicators of their spiritual Freedoms?

How will all men be enforced (either from the freedom of their consciences, or
from the freedom of their purses (which is their due) I say, be obliged and
enforced to send such Representatives as have stood for, and may maintain the
Common Freedoms and Liberties (especially the soul-freedoms) of the Commonweal
of England?

Against many Objections, I briefly oppose my Answer to these two and twenty
Questions: only to one Objection, thus,

answer with Quections.

Founder, Christ Jesus.

Secondly, in justice, this Re-examiner cannot refuse his own coin.

I confess, my Principle of Soul-freedom commands me to applaud and honor this
searching and proposing from the holy Scripture: yet since the Sun of
righteousness is risen so high (as to soul-freedom) and darts the beams of his
Light upon the very eyes of all that love his Name (especially) I plead for a
more gentle censure, if in any line or letter I speak too loud to such a most
unseasonable sleeper.

The sum of the first Question.

Whether the Civil Magistrate, etc. be not bound, as a nursing father, to
provide saving food for the people, and to provide that poison be kept from
them?

The prophecy of Kings and Queens nursing fathers and mothers.
and ask, first, Whether this Prophecy of Kings and Queens being nursing
fathers and nursing mothers to the Saints, be not (as many wise and godly take
it) a peculiar prophecy and promise to that peculiar and distinct Nation and
People of God, the Jews: And whether these words (verse. 22 of that 49 of
Isaiah) I will lift up mine band to the Gentiles, etc. be not a character
fixing this Prophecy unto that (yet) beloved people?

And so consequently, Whether all those bloody Persecutors (Papists and
Protestants) who have used to draw this shaft out of this Quiver of Scripture,
whereby to pierce the tender heart of Christ Jesus; yea and all that give a
power to the Civil Magistrate in Spirituals from this Scripture, Have not most
ignorantly profaned this Prophecy, and that to usurpation over the Temple of
God, the Consciences of Gods own people; and to bloody violence against their
Bodies, although under a cloak of providing wholesome food for their children,
and prohibiting poison? etc.

Secondly, I ask, Whether there be not two sorts of Nurses, literal and
mystical; Fathers, Mothers, Nurses, distinguished.
and again of mystical two sorts, Civil and Spiritual? as also, Whether there
be not the same distinction of Fathers and Mothers, who are distinct from
Nurses? etc.

And whether these Kings and Queens (in Isa. 40.) yea and suppose all other
lawful Magistrates, must needs be understood to be spiritual Nurses, such as
Paul (who was no King, etc.) professes himself to be, being a Messenger of
Christ Jesus to the Thessalonians; and spiritual fathers and mothers, such as
he professed he was to the Corinthians and Galatians?

Or, Whether here is not prophesied and promised to this People; or rather,
whether is there not here prophesied and promised to these Saints (whether
literal or spiritual Jews) that Kings and Queens shall put off their Lion-like
and Lion ss-like nature toward Gods people, and shall be (as the Poets used to
write good Kings ought to be) shepherds of the people, etc.

If this be not the true meaning, I ask why is it said, Wonderful honor that
Kings and Queens shall yield to the Sain's.
verse 23, That these Kings and Queens, shall bow down to these Jews with
their Face toward the Earth, and like the dust of their feet? which posture and
practice seems not to imply a disrobing themselves of their civil Dignities and
Authorities (for that is it by which they show such kindness to the Saints) but
rather, their high esteem unto these Saints, in heavenly and soul matters; and
that in spiritual respects they are so far from challenging to be Fathers and
Judges of what is wholesome food and poison, that they bow down and kiss the
feet of Christ Jesus in his Saints, far more superior in spirituals then
themselves.

Thirdly, Kings and Queens, and all Magistrates essentially Civil, and as a
Master of a Ship, etc.
I ask whether the Office of Kings and Queens, etc. be not (in the ship of all
Commonweals in the world) merely and essentially Civil, just as the Office of a
Captain, or Master of a Ship at Sea, who ought of all his Passengers to be
honored and respected, paid and rewarded for his service: But as to the
Consciences of the Passengers, whether Jews, Turks, Persians, Pagans, Papists,
Protestants, etc. whom he transports from Port to Port upon a civil account of
payment and recompense; I ask whether he go not beyond the Sphere of his
Activity, if he act by any authoritative restraining them from their own
Worship, or constraining them to his? And whether he have any more to do, but a
showing kindness and countenance, according to the quality and temper of his
own Belief and Conscience?

Fourthly, I ask, Idolatrous and Popish Magistrates as lawful as, etc.
Whether all Magistrates in the world (of what quality and conscience soever)
be not as true and lawful Magistrates, as he that is most truly Godly and
Christian; like as Idolatrous and Pagan Fathers, Husbands, Masters, are as
truly such in their Relations, etc? Whether does not the holy Testament of
Christ Jesus acknowledge this? the Lord Jesus, both by his word and practice,
commanding obedience, honor, maintenance, for their Civil relations and work
sake?

Fifthly, Whether Kings and Queens, The People of each Nation the fountain of
the Government of it.
and other Princes, receive not all their Power and Anthority from the several
and respective Peoples who call them and empower them to their several and
respective Services? Accordingly, Whether it have not been declared by the
Parliament, that the fountain and original of all Authority and Rule, is the
People, consenting and agreeing in their several Combinations, by themselves or
their Deputies, for their better subsistence in Peace? etc. Power of judging in
Spirituals detected to be but usurpation in Kings and Queens, etc.
And consequently, Whether have the Nations and People of the world, in their
mere natural and national capacities, any one jot of Spiritual and Divine
power, with which to betrust their Magistrates and Officers? And if, upon due
weighing in the Balance of the Sanctuary, it be found that they have not, Is
not this chalenging of Spiritual power to judge and determine what is soul-food
and soul-peyson, (I mean, in a coercive way binding all souls, and the very
souls of them that sent them, and who neither did nor could commit such Power
unto them) Is not this, I say, a soul-rape, and tyranny, and a mere policy of
Satan, deceiving (too often) honest and zealous minds, but most commonly
acting the subtle Ieroboams and Nebuchadnezzars of the world, to erect their
State-Calves and Images? etc.

Sixthly, Admit some Kings and Queens thus to have been empowered by God, in
some juncture of time, either for the Jews sake, Few Magistrates in the world
(savingly) know Christ Jesus.
or any of his people, upon some especial and extraordinary account; yet I ask,
What is this to all Kings, and Queens, and Magistrates in the world, that it
should be their charge, duty, and calling, imposed upon them from Heaven? when
the counsel of God is revealed, that as his flock is a little flock, and that
he appointed spiritual Pastors and Shepherds for the feeding of them; so his
holy purpose was to call few wise, few noble, few mighty, to the saving
knowledge of Christ Jesus.

Seventhly, If the counsel of Christ Jesus had been otherwise, and that he had
committed (as is pleaded) the judging of soul-food and poison, to the Kings and
Queens, Christ Jesus rarely sends godly Kings, Queens, etc.
etc. since he wanted not power, (for all power in heaven and earth was his)
nor love and faithfulness, (for he laid down his life, and poured out his
heare-blood for his;) I ask, Why in the first three hundred years (under the
Roman Emperors) nor in the second and third three hundred, (under Emperors
and Popes) nor ever since, he has not been pleased to furnish the world with
such Shepherds, but rather permitted Wolves, and Lions? etc. notwithstanding
that he is pleased sometimes (after long and sharp persecutions, to stir up
some blessed instruments, as Rocks and Trees, Fathers, Mothers, Nurses, to
refresh, and shade, and comfort, and countenance his servants.

Eighthly, When it has pleased him graciously to call and change, by his Word
and Spirit, any of the Wise, and Noble, and Mighty of the world; I ask, Whether
their Regeneration and New Birth has made any addition to their Civil
Magistracy and Authority; and more especially (as Popish and Protestant
Rabbis have taught us) that now the Christian Magistrate he must judge in
spiritual matters more then all the Magistrates in the world beside; who though
(say they) they have equal Authority and Duty, yet they ought to suspend acting
in Spirituals (says M. Cotton) until they be rightly informed, that is, upon
the point, until they be of his Church and Conscience? And if so, A Magistrate
is not more or less a Magistrate, by being a Christian or Antichristian.
that by this professing Christianity, they receive this addition of
Magisterial power in Spirituals; I ask if it do not clearly follow, that
(according to that most dangerous and seditious doctrine of some Papists and
Protestants) such Magistrates who change their judgments and way of Worship,
must lose their Headship in Spirituals, and consequently be found unfit at last
to govern in Civils also?

And will not this doctrine extend to all other Civil Officers, both at Land
and Sea; yea, even to all Fathers, Husbands, Masters; and so at last confound
all Relations, and tear up by the roots all Civility, and all Order, and the
world out of the world?

Ninthly, As to the matter of fact, do not all Histories and all experience
demonstrate, that most of all those Kings, and Queens, and Princes, and
Magistrates (Popish and Protestant) that have pretended to this power of
judging of saving food and poison, All Magisttrates pretending power in
spirimals, have ever forced down poison in ssead of food.
have grossly mistaken the poison of Satan's invertions, Superstitions,
Will-worships, etc. for that wholesome and heavenly food pretended; and with
bloody hands have forced this poison down the throat of thousands and millions,
or else forced and fired them out of the world with barbarous persecutions, if
any have been enlightened by Christ Jesus to discern this poison, and to refuse
it?

Has not Christ Jesus, in these last times, declared it, that neither
Constantine, nor the good Emperors before the Popes rose, nor Protestant Kings,
Queens, and Magistrates departing from the Pope unto this day, but have been
still mistaken most grossly (either in Doctrine or Discipline) and that in great
quantities (sometimes) of dangerous poison, for saving and wholesome food?

What man, From Constantine to the last Presbyterian Magistrate.
but may furnish himself with instances, even down to the very Presbyterian
Magistracy? And whoever shall next pretend to judge between this poison and
food, and put forth a restraining or a Constraining Sword accordingly, How is
it possible but they must alsO dash upon those Rocks, whereon the very Tide of
such a practice does necessarily enforce so many gallant Sbips miscarriage?
Therefore (lastly) since that typical land of Canaan is abolished, the
Partition Wall broken down, and in every nation (not Whole nations) he that
fears God and works rirghteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10. since
Magistracy is a merely- Civil Ordinance, and the forms and sword thereof
derived from the People; and all Magistrates in the world (so derived) are
lawful, and none can receive any addition to the power of Magistracy, by his (
spirituality or) Christianity; I ask, Whether this doctrine of Kings and Queens
judging of soul-food and poison for all their subjects, The doctrine of Kings
and queent being nursing fathers, the Firebrand of the world.
etc. has not been (e!pecially in Popish and Protestant Nations) the
Firebrand that has kindled so many devouring flames of War? etc. Yea, was not
this the very Doctrine that cost the late King Charles his Crown, and life? who
being flattered and bewitched into this dream of a Nursing father, The Ax that
cut off the last King's head.
and a judge of wholesome food and poison for his people; he forced poison for
food upon the Scotch nation, and upon that occasion was persuaded to maintain
his stewards and cooks, the Bishops, by commencing and prosecuting those fatal
Wars, which (by a naked hand from heaven) justly plucked up root and branch,
both Ceremonles, Bishops, and King together.

The sum of the second Question.

Whether the magistrate be not bound to advance the doctrine of Grace,

Of which nature is the third Question, viz.

Whether a Magistrate be not bound to advance that Godliness which gives all
good and happiness to a nation?

I answer, and ask, (as before) Whether, merely civil, and the power thereof
derived from the People, the fountain of it; it will not appear, that the
Magistrate can no more judge authoritatively what is the doctrine of Grace, and
what is the doctrine of Godliness, no more (I say) then the people of each
Nation, in its national and natural capacity, can be the primitive and original
Judges thereof, and may therefore rightly delegate such a Spiritual power unto
their Officers or Magistrates?

Secondly, I ask, Whether the proposer of these Questions intends not, by the
Magistrates advancing the doctrine of Grace, and the doctrine of Godliness,
these two things:

1. A National profession of the doctrine of Grace, and the doctrine of
Godliness. 2. The advancing of such doctrines by the power of the civil Sword?
And if so, (as the scope of all the Questions seem to imply) then,
Thirdly, Whether there be any such thing to be found in the last Will and
Testament of Christ Jesus, as a National Church; that is, whether (as the Land
of Canaan was a Land holy unto God, so) any Nation, as a Nation, may lawfully
pretend to be the Spouse, and Wife, and Body of Christ Jesus, according to his
own holy Order and Appointment? Or rather,

Fourthly, The world (and Eng and in a national respect) lies in wickedness.
Whether, since the world lies in wickedness, dead in sins and trespasses,
etc. since every Nation in the world is a part of it; since such as fear God in
a nation, are distinguished from the Nation, ( Act. 10) I ask, Whether this
Nation, as a part of the World, lies not in the same estate of wickedness
also, more or less, and the body of the people estranged from the life of grace
and godliness, notwithstanding that this body be sometimes clothed with the
name of Christianity, under (sometimes) a Popish, and sometimes a Protestant
fashion, as it pleases God to permit the Sword to pretend to and advance its
way of doctrine of grace and godliness? And whether, beside the common nature
of mankind, Four greatchanges of the Religion of this nation in abous 12 years
space, in Hen. 8. Edw. 6. Qu Mary, and Qu. Elizabeth.
the wonderful changes of Religion in other Nations, and in none more then in
this, and that in the same individual persons, in a few years, do not make this
undeniably evident and demonstrate?

For illustration, I ask, shether the Kings and Queens, Parliaments and princes
of all nations, and of this, have not been the Gods of the Nations, Kings and
Queens etc. the Gods of people; and Reliegions their pictures in which
themselves are worshipped.
whom they have wershipped in and by the several Images and Representations of
their minds and wills, which they have set up as ways of Worship and Religion
to the Nations? Thus Jeroboam pretends the Name of the God of Israel; but, upon
the point, Jeroboam was their God, and robbed the true God of his honor, by
the golen calves which Jeroboam had set up. Thus Nebuchadnezzar pretends honor
to his golden Image; but himself was really the Deity which all Nations
worshipped, through the golden Image which he had set up.

Fifthly, I ask, Whether God people (that is, such as fear God in every nation,
Act. 10.) be not the true, and proper, and only Antitype of that typical Nation
the Jews, in that typical land of Canaan, according to 1 Pet. 2. You are a
chosen Generation (as Abraham and his offspring in the Type were) a Kingly
Priesthood, and holy Nation? etc. A National Church is Judaism.
And therefore I ask, Whether, to modellize a Body or Church of Christ, with
Natural and National bounds and circuits (after the pattern of the typical Land
of Canaan) be not to dwell in the old Levitical shadows, in the A.B.C. and
Horn-book of Judaism, and in the denial of Christ Jesus to be yet come?

To this end, I ask, Whether some Presbyterians (in foreign parts) come not
nearer to the truth of the first Christian worship, who admit not one of ten or
twenty to be of their Churches: And the Independents yet nearer, who admit
only such in their Societies, in whom they hopefully see the Spirit of
Regeneration and Holiness?

sixthly, I ask, Whether there has not been in all Ages of the world, and are
at this day, many great and mighty Nations of the World (some of some hundreds,
yea of some thousands of years continuance and flourishing) in which the
Doctrine of Grace, Flourishing States of the World in which Christ Jesus is not
heard of, etc.
and the Doctrine of Godliness has not been (I am sure not nationally)
advanced? And notwithstanding that Godliness has promises belonging to this
life, as well as to the life approaching, and the God of heaven is pleased to
imprint a Character and Crown of his favor and love upon some Persons and
Actions, when his name is greatly engaged (as in Queen Elizabeth her days
against the Spaniard, and in our late Wars both against EnglisH, Scotch, and
Irish, yet) whether it be not generally and ordinarily true, that all that will
live godly in Christ Jesus, must be persecuted or hunted; and the more Godly,
the more persecuted? and according to the mystery of the fifth Seal, the Souls
under the Altar must rest but until the rest of their fellow servants are
slain, etc.

Is it not (upon the matter) a Turkish argument, The peate and prosperity of
Gods people in this world, is spiritual, etc.
We have conquered so many Nations, Kingdoms, etc. Therefore Mahomes is above
Christ? And also, is it nota Popish plea, All Nations have bowed down to our
Church, who sits as a Queen; therefore it is the only true, etc. God has
given the Western Mines of Gold and Silver to the Catholics, not to the
Protestants; and to the Spaniards before the English, (who had the first offer;
therefore, etc. Since then that National and typical holiness, with all the
annexed outward peace and prosperity, promised upon condition, is vanished, and
the Lord Jesus, by his Birth in a stable and his Death on a Gallows, has
taught all his followers to despise this Worlds Goods and this Worlds Evils;
how should his Saints study the difference between the Tenor of the Old and
New Covenant, the Jewish and the Christian Canaan, and at last find out that
peace and prosperity they speak of, in those spiritual pleasures, Beauties,
Honors, Riches, Joys, which are even in this present life un speakable and
full of Glory?

Eighthly, Since the Throne is upholden by Mercy, Mercy to the persecuted, the
upholder of States.
Prove. 20. and both the holy scriptures and Histories tell us how many Thrones
of Kings and States, that seemed to have been placed among the stars, are
tumbled down, etc. I ask if it be not at last the wisdom of this State, to
tremble at the shipwracks and downfull of our Predecessors, and to learn not
only the song of judgment and Zeal (as we judge) for the doctrine of grace
and godliness, but the song of mercy also to such whose Consciences (whether
out of a slavish or child like awe of God, are (it my be) Antipodes to ours? To
say nothing of all former examples, are not two most wonderful before our eyes
and fee^?

First, shat was it that within the memory of man has so wonderfully (almost
miraculously) raised and advanced from the low valleys, that poor fisher-town
of Amsterdam (now one of the gallantest of the Lady Cities of the world? I say,
What was it but Mercy, Mercy which that poor Fishertown showed to distressed
and persecuted consciences, who fled from Enchuysin and other persecuting parts
thither?

Secondly, The rise of this State and Commonweal.
What was it (as before) that plucked up the roots and foundations of so many
Thrones of late among our selves, and lift up and exalted our present State and
Statesmen, but mercy to the long-oppressed souls of men, amongst whom Christ
Jesus (who will not suffer a cup of water, given to his, to pass unpaid for)
has been favored and relieved? Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquitiess by showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a lengthing to thy
tranquillity: For,

Are not false Worships, as to God, and Tyranny as to men, the two Generals,
under whose bloody colors the most Sins and Plagues, in all the Nations of the
World, Hollands greatest sin as to Engand.
have ever marched? I question not, but Ambition and Pride, Covetuousness, and
Greedtness Ingratitude and Unthanfulness Excess and Drunkenness, now lodge in
the new-raised Towers of the aforesaid Fisher-Towne. But it is that Sin of
Sodom, the not strengthening the hand of the poor, the Poor oppressed in
England, oppressed both in their spiritual and temporal liberties, and their
late notorious strengthening the hand of Oppressors, the King and his Cavaliers
that sin (I say) if any, will stain the pride of all their rising Glory.

But are there not the cries of the oppressed ascending to the heavens against
us also? (to say nothing of the many other particulars of Soul- Violence and
Oppression, which some have reckoned up yet still in England) I ask, if ever
such cries went up to Heaven in the late Kings Reign, or his Fathers, The
oppression of Tithes now greater in England then formerly, (I hope) before
their downfall.
or all the long tyranny of Elizabeth's Bishops, from such, whose either
consciences or necessities, cannot permit them to practice that notorious
Judaism of Tithes?

The Nonconformers (it is true) were sued, and cast, and paid; but they were
never so torn with the three-tooth'd Hook of Elies SOns, the Treble da mages
and oppressions.

I as therefore, shat Grace, what Godliness that is, that teaches us, after
all our our former sins, and judgments, and deliverances, and vows, to stop
our Ears from the oppressed, their Cries, their Tears, their Consciences, and
to imagine that our Commonweal, our parliament, our Counsel, our Commonweal,
our parliament, our Counsel, our Army, our Navy must prosper, in our most
known oppressings of Him, whose is all power in Heaven and Earth, the Son of
God Christ Jesus?

The sum of the fourth Question.

Whether the Magistrate, Glory, true worship and service, and the good of his
people, with all his might?

I ask, Whether (as before) the Magistrate being the Civil officer of the
People, has any Might, Authority, or Power, but what the People commit unto
him? And Whether any People will or can betrust such a Power to the civil
magistrate, to compel their Souls and consciences unto his?

Secondly, Spiritual weapons and carnal, compared.
Whether the Spirit of God speak not expressly that the Weapons of Christians
are not Sword and Might, but the Spirit? and whether his Spiritual Weapons (2
Cor. 10.) be not sufficiently and abundantly able and mighty, to bring down
every strong hold, and every high thing, and every imagination and thought to
the obedience of Jesus Christ? And Whether ever any carnal might ever did or
can effect ought in Christianity, but the storming of the Nations into an
Antichristian Hypocrisy and Compliance?

Thirdly, The woeful effect of carnal weapons in Spirituals.
Whether this Principle of the Magistrates putting forth his carnal might in
spirituals, has not constantly occasioned the Magistrate (according to the
mistakes of his own conscience) to promote Superstition and Idolatry; And also
has rendered the strongest sword to be the measure and standard of all Religion
in the World; and the Magistrates thereof, the Nimrods and mighty Hunters
before the Lord?

Fourthly, I ask, Where Christ Jesus (the only Lawgiver to Christians has
appointed in his holy Testament, Christ Jesus not forgetful to furnish his
kingdom with spiritual weapons.
the civil swrod the judge and defender of his Religion and Worship? And why he
has not furnished his civil Magistrates of Justice in the World with such
hearts and spirits, but contrarily has called few of them to the profession of
his Name? And whether he has not ever furnished, and does, and will, his
spiritual Ministers and Messengers with spiritual might and power, sufficiently
and abundantly efficacious for the propagating of his holy Name and Truth, and
for the confounding of Antichrist and all Antichristians by the breath of his
Mouth, that two edged Sword of his Spirit?

Fifthly, Whether Christianity did ever so flourish, The sirst and last times
of Constantine considered.
as when the people of God in the first 300 yers after Christ, had no might but
that of Christ's spiritual weapons? Ans when it pleased God to raise up
Constantine, to give some rest to his people from persecution; whether
Christianity did most flourish in the first time of Constantine, when he with
his Colleageue Licinius published the edict of Freedom of Religion to
hissubjects; or in his aftertimes, when he compelled all the World to
Christianity, but (as is confessed by many) occasioned the World to put on the
bare and empty name of Chrislian? etc.

Lastly, I ask, Whether this Principle of the Magistrates employing the carnal
sword or Might in spirituals, The Carnal sword an Spirituats, the occasion of
so much bloodshed in former, and in our late Wars.
have not in all Histories and Experience been the Firebrand which has kindled
such devouring flames of War about Religion, in all both Popish and Protestant
Countries? And Whether it did not kindle our late Wars, and occasion all the
dreadful Calamities, between the Bishops and the Presbyters, which proved
fatal to the both? And whether all these Experiences are not the voice of God
out of the whirlwind, to waken all the Magistrates of the World, to keep within
the Civil sphere of Civil Jurisdiction and Deminion?

The sum of the fifth Question.

Whether the people be not bound to pray for Magistrates, Godliness and Honesty
and whether the Magistrate is not bound to do that for which the People pray?
etc.

1. I ask, godliness and honesty, be rightly translated; but rather, upon a
mistake in the Translation, weakly made the ground for the Magistrates being
the heeper of godliness in the first, and honesty in the second Table? 2. I
ask, The puring and pre-eminence the first Christian times.
To whom this direction of praying for Magistrates was given? Whether they were
not the first and purest Saints, and those times the most glorious, wherein the
Saints enjoyed two such helps as no Christians ever since did?
First, the presence of the holy Apostles or messengers of Christ Jesus amongst
them.

Secondly, the wonderful effusion of the holy Sourit of God, in those rare and
miraculous gifts and operations, (1 Cor. 12.) Now to imagine that those first
Saints should pray for the Civil sword to defend (I speak not of their persons,
but) their godliness, and suppress ungodliness, etc. does it not imply this
twofold strange and most unchristian Paradox?

First, Two strange Paraderes.
that those Saints must imagine those Civil Magistrates to have a clearer sight
in discerning, and an higher Authority in judging of Godliness and Christianity
then themselves and the Apostles of Christ Jesus, who are called expressly the
(Ministerial) Foundations of the Churches, Fphes. 2.

Secondly, That they being thus called of God, and endued with the Spirit of
God so savingly, so miraculously, yet should not be able to live in Godliness
and the pure profession of Christ Jesus, without the help of a carnal sword to
preserve them pure, establish and reform them, etc.

Thirdly, I ask therefore, Whether the scope of the holy Exhortation be not
this; The scope of 1 Timothy 2. pray for Magistrates.
That those first Believers, and all Believers in the Ages following, should be
much in prayer with God, and not only for themselves, but for all men, and
especially for Magistrates the Chief of men?

1. That such as were Gods Elect amongst them might be called.

2. For the peace of the Nation and Cities wherein they lived; and so,
consequently, that God would graciously guide the hearts of the Helms-men the
Magistrates, that the ships of the several states (wherein the Saints as
Passengers were imbarqued) might Sail in peace and safety, that in the peace
thereof they might have peace, (according to the command of God to his people
in Babel, Ier. 29.) That so the Saints enjoying civil peace, and also (if it
may be the holy pleasure of God) enjoying rest from persecution ( Act. 9.)
might multiply, walking in the fear of God and Christian Edification, whatever
the Religions fo the States or the magistrates there should be, though
Babylonian, Roman, etc.

fourthy, I ask, Whether the blessed Spirit of Life and Regeneration which is
in all Gods people, be not abundantly sufficient to preserve them in Godliness
and true Christianity, to preserve them from falling, and to reform and restore
them from all their Backslidings and declensions? I add, to preserve them, 1
John 3. Rom 6. ^ John 5.
that sin have no dominion over them; that they sin not, and watch against the
touching of Satan; to preserve them in the use of the Word and prayer, and all
such paths and means, which in Faith they are persuaded of to be the commands
of Christ jesus? The most holy and most powerful and eternal indwelling of Gods
most holy Spirit in all Gods Children.
All this, and more, the holy Spirit of God works in Gods Children, although
there should not be a Magistrate in the World, yea although all the World and
the whole World oppose them; yea although there were no Heaven nor Hell, no
Resurrection, no Judgment, nor World to come, wherein they should be rewarded
or punished, glorified or tormented; yea although they should want all
Spiritual helps and Teachers (which respectively are necessary) for they have
received an Anointing, which teaches them, and abident with them, and will
abide with them for ever.

Fifthly, I ask, Whether in the present state and juncture of affairs in
England, The divisions of the Clergy now, like that of the Friars in Chaucers
tiem.
wherein (as Chaucer observes of the four great differing Orders of Friars in
his time) every Sect, every Order and conscience pleads the integrity and
purity of their way, and the People of God themselves are so divided and
differently persuaded, as of late (in the Scotch wars) to blood and dreadful
slaughters (I say) I ask, Whether we may pray, without profaning of the holy
Name of God, and the guilt of the breach of the civil Peace of the Nation, that
God would send such Magistrates, who should authoritatively judge, whose
Conscience, whose Worship, whose Godliness is true, What prayers ought to be
put up for Magistrates?
and accordingly maintain that Godliness, defend that Faith, advance the
Worship and service of God, etc. As also prohibit by his carnal Sword, all
other Consciences, Worships and Godliness, as Schismatical, heretical,
Seditious, Blasphemous? etc.

How much rather ought we to pray, that it may pleasethe most holy and only
wise Go, to vouchsafe such a Spirit of Godliness and Wisdomie to the Rulers of
this Commonweal, that the civil Rights may be preserved and Civilities may
flourish in Righteousness and Mercy, even in the midst of so much spiritual
Division and Opposition, which are and must be greater and greater, in all
Nations of the World, when once the Chains and Yoaks of implicit Faith, Soul
Yoaks
believe as the Church believes, Decrees and Precepts of Men, Tradition of
Elders, Customs, Antiquity, etc. re torn off, and broke from the souls and
necks of the People, and Inhabitants hereof?

The sum of the sixth Question.

Whether Abraban, and Jacob, Magistrates in their Families, and commanded and
reformed their Families in matters of Religion, or were meetly fello-Servants,
with their Servants, as the Examiner says?

First, I ask, Whether the Questionist has dealt fairly with the Examiner,
odiously) to say, that Abraham's and Jacobs Households might command them, as
well as Abraham and Jacob might command their Houshoulds? And Whether or no did
the Examiner once mention Abraham and Jacob? It is true, he maintains, (and
with express words and clear light of holy Scripture well may) that in
Religious matters the Magistrate and Subject are Fellow Servants: but gave he
any color or appearance of Countenance to Servants to be inobsequious to their
Masters, Children to their Parents, Wives to their Husbands, people to
Magistrates, in all their civil spheres and respects?

I ask further, The dispensations of the Fathers and magistrates of Cods
Israel, figurative and typical.
Is the consequence fairly gathered, that because Abraham, I saack, and Jacob,
and those Fathers of Families and Elder Brothers, those Saviors, Judges,
Governors, and Kings of the Israel and people of God, in those sigurative
times and typical administrations, commanded and punished, even with a material
and carnal sword in spiritual matters; therefore every Master of a Family,
Husband, Father, Elder brother, Judge, governor, King, Magistrate, has the
same Authority in spiritual matters now? And that therefore, according to Numb.
30. an Husbands or Father may now disannul and overrule the merely Religious
Vows and Devotions of their Wives and Daughters? Or rather, since the Lord
Jesus the substance of those shadows is come, Whether ti be not one express
end of his coming, Great diviscons in matters of Conscience, necessary, etc.
to set a man at variance which his Father, and Mat. 10.) in a family of five
persons, to set two against three, and three against two; that is, in the
matter of Religion and Canscience? And I ask, Whether the wife (notwithstanding
in civil converse she submit with all wife-like submission and affection, yet)
as to Religion ought she not to judge of her Husbands Belief or Unbelief in
God? and may she not join with him or separate from him, laboring to be a
Savior to him? How know thou, O Wife, but that thou may save thy
Husband? etc. And so consequently, the servant to his Master, the Child to his
Parent, the subject and soldier to the highest Magistrate and Commander? For,
Gal. 3. there is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neibond nor free, there is
neither male nor female; for yea are all one in Christ Jesus.

Secondly, I ask, Whether it be not the design of God (for the manifestation
of his own most glorious Brightness) to carry on the Mystery and Glory of
Christianity in the meanest and lowest of Earthen Vessels, according to that of
James 2. Has not God chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, Gods
design of choosing men of low deeree, not many wise, noble nor mighty.
and Heirs of the Kingdom? Hence, in a most stupendous condescension, God
manifests himself in Flesh, and that Flesh must be taken from a poor
Carpenters wife, and she delivered of her blessed fruit in a stable amongst
Beasts: And however he command thousand thousands of those most blessed
Invisible Spirots the Angels, yet, for his visible attendants and Ambassadors
to the World, were they not (ordinarily) of a low Rank and condition, even
those two Pillars whose names have so sounded in all parts (especially at Rome,
and London) Peter the Fishcrman, and Paul the Tent-maker? Further, I ask,
Whether that Rule be not constant in the Christian Profession, Not many Wise,
not many Noble, not many Mighty? And therefore, Whether it be not against the
purpose and design of God, and aaginst his declared will and course, that his
Servants should expect many Christian great or noble persons, many Christian
wife or learned men, many Christian mighty men either for wealth or valor,
many Christian magistrates, etc.

Hence though we find the Saints in Caesar's household ( Phil. 4.) yet I ask,
How many Caesar's ( Masters of those houshoulds) do we find believing in lesus,
for three hundred years together? and therefore, shether the poorest Saint in
the Household or Court of these Caesar's, were not higher (in Spiritual and
Christian respects) then those Emper ours of the World themselves?

Thirdly, A true Christian who.
What is it that makes a Christian, but the Spirit of Christ in a person,
manifested in the profession of his Name before the World? Mat. 16. Rom 10. And
if so, I ask, Whether that more of the Grace and knowledge of Christ, render
not persons more and more eminent and glorious in Christianity? And
consequently, Whether the poorest Subject or Servant, participating of more of
the Grace and spirit of Christ, be not invested with more of the Authority and
Power of Christ Jesus, What Christions the highnest.
in his affairs and Kingdom, then the highest Magrstrates or Superiors, that
are not so endowed? According to that Honor of all his Saints, who
(especially) bind Kings in chains, etc. And that charge from Heaven, James 2.1.
My Brethren, have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus with respect of persons; a
Scripture, that being read out in the following words, seems, at first blush,
to entrench upon civility and good manners, except it be granted, this in
Christianity the greatest respect is not given to greatness of Place, Birth,
Wealth, Autherity, Braverie, etc. but to the greatness of Humility and Grace of
Christ, according to that of the Lord Jesus (Match. 18.) Whosoever shall humble
himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.

We read of two mighty Princes professing the name of Christ, meeting together
in England, Charles the Fifthe Emperor of Germany, Two mighty Princes
pretending to glorious Hights in Christianity.
and Henry the Eighth of England: Their names then soared so high for
Christianity, that they were both in Letters of Gold, set upon the very Gates
of Guildhal in London, Carolus Defensor Ecclesiae, Henricus Fidei: yet when
Luther, or the poorest follower of the truth of Christ jesus witnessed by
Luther, were condemned and persecuted by that Charles the Fifth, the great
defender of the Church; I ask, Who had the greatest Authority in Christ's
affairs, the great Emperous Charles, or the poorest true Christian? Yet the
poorest witness of any truth of Christ Jesus above them.
And when that glorious (pretended Defendour of the Faith) Henry the Eighth,
with all his Nobles and Bishops, sat in person with so much Glory and Majesty,
Terror and Authority, in that famous Disputation, and Condemnation of that
faithful witness of Christ Jesus John Lambert; I ask, where was in truth the
true Authority and power of Christ Jesus, Whether in the stately assembly of
Kings, Nobles and Bishops, or in the two-edged Sword of the Word and Spirit of
God, in the mouth of that one single, and yet most faithful witness of Christ
Jesus?

Nay further, I ask, The Authority of reproving in the name of Christ.
If that rule of Christ Jesus ( Luke 17.) be not yet in force (If thy Brother
sin against thee, reprove him; if he repent, for give him) Consequently,
Whether a Magistrate (eminent in the grace and knowledge of Christ, yet) if a
Brother in Christ be not to be reproved for sIn, by his lowest Groom or
handmaid, and that by way of Authority in hte Name of Christ Jesus? Yea and I
add, Whether have not such inferior persOns Authority from Christ upon
Repentance, to grant a true pardon to such a magistrates penitent Soul, then
all the Popes and Priests in the World can affoard him? And in case of final
obstinacy, contradicting and blaspheming; I ask, Whether such a poor Believer
in Christ Jesus has not a power and privilege to separate from such a
Magistrate (in spiritual respects) and refuse to touch Spiritually sUch a
(Spiritually) unclean person?

The sum of the seventh Question.

Whether Artaxerxes and the K. of Nineveh, etc.

I ask, Kings and the Instances be not ill coupled, for the one, Artaxerxes (
Ezra. 7.) gave free liberty of conscience to the Jews; Artaxerxes his decree
examined.
whereas the King of Nineveh forced all his people to a positive Act of
Fasting? But more particularly, as to Artaxerxes.

1. Was not an Idolatrous King, A Terror of God sometimes causes dilaters to
favor Gods people.
a stranger from the God of Israel, one that held the people of God in slavery,
one that had no true love to the God of Israel nor his people, but only out of
a fear of the wrath of the God of Israel, she wed favor to his people, granted
them free liberty of their conscience, to go up to Jerusalem to worship? 2. He
bountifully encouraged and assisted them. 3. He furnished them with a Decree,
suiting to their National Estate, and mixed condition of Church and Comonweal.
But (Secondly) I ask, Did this Artaxerxes compel any of these Jews to his
own Religion (which he believed to be the only true) the Religion of the
Persians? Or did he compel the Persians to the worship of the God of Israel? Or
did he compel the Jews themselves, or any one man of them, to go up to the
worship of their own God at jerusalem? but verse 13. Let all which are minded
of their own free will go up, etc. Therefore,

Thirdly, I ask, Artaxerxes his edict freely made for soul freedom.
What Conclusion can be gathered from thence, but that it sometime pleases God
to affect the hearts of Idolatrous Kings with kindness to his people, and
forces them to permit his people the liberty of their consciences, yea and
that with Countenance, Encouragements, and Authority? for which mercy (although
the Nations where they live, and the Princes thereof, partake not of such
mercies themselves, yet, ought Gods people to praise God, as Ezra does.

Fourthly, I ask, Whether this Instance of Artaxerxes, do not absolutely
condemn the forcing of all the people and consciences in a Nation to one way of
worship, whether Popish or Protestant, or to any particular sect or way of
either of them? And Whether it do not absolutely make for Soul-Freedom in
spiritual matters, in that these very Jews were not forced to their own
Jerusalem, but as every one was freely willing? etc.

Secondly As to the proclamation of the King of Nineveh?

First, I ask, Whether all examples recorded in holy Scriptures, bind our
consciences in our worships and communion with God?

In particular, The King of Nineveh his Proclaiming a Fast, examined.
must there be a King and Nobles in London to Proclaim a Fast, as we know there
was in Nineveh? must the Beasts also be kept from Food and Water, as there?
must Man and Beast be covered with Sackcloth, as there? If one part of the
Example bind us, why not the other? Or if we say that such practices were
ceremonial and typical, how will that be proved amongst the Ninevites, st
angers to the true God and his Servant Moses? although probably they might
light their Candle from the Example of that national Church of Israel, which
kept their National Fasts, ordinary and extraordinary, etc. And if example be
Rule for Gods Servants, I ask, Whether all Ship-masters or Magistrates, in
their respective storms and tempests, may exhort their Passengers, and
Seamen, and People, to arise and call upon their several Gods and Deities, as
the Ship-master deals with Jonah in the first Chapter?

Secondly, No Warrant in Christ's Testament for a national (muchlessm forced)
worship
I ask, Whether in the New Testament of Christ Jesus, by which the National
Church, and the worship of that Church, was abolished, there be any Example or
Rule for any such National worship, of one sort or another, for what cause
sover?

And although it may be said, Christ Jesus approves the Action; yet I ask,
Whether he speaks one Tittle to the Decree of the King and his Nobles, but
only to the Repentance of the People, at the preaching of Jonah? And upon the
point, Whether the scope of the Lord Jesus, was not to upbraid the hardness of
our hearts, in not repenting at the threatenings of Gods judgments, as the
Ninevites did?

Thirdly, I ask, Whether this example of the King of Nineveh, Many various
Consciences; and more will be, in the Nations.
can be a proper and fit example for the imitation of all the Nations in the
World, whose Consciences (like the various Meridians and Climates of Nations
and places) may wonderfully differ in one and the same Commonweal and Kingdom;
the Magistrates (possibly) may be of one Conscience, and all or the greatest
part of another: And (like as in a Ship) where several Consciences of Seamen
and Passengers happen, how can there be an enforcing of all Consciences unto
one worship, without great Violence and Distraction, and sometimes hazard of
the whole, in breach of Peace by mutinies? etc.

Fourthly, I ask, Whether the holy Name of God has not been mightily
profaned, and the holy Eyes of his Jealousy mightily provoked in this Nation,
by the Fasts and Thanksgivings, which the People of this Nation have been
forced to observe, even against their hearts, and souls, and consciences? How
did the Parliament at first, enforce the People of this Nation to Fast and
Pray, for the defense of Religion, King, Parliament, Laws, Liberties? And how
did the King at the same time, command that party of the Nation under his
command to Fast and Pray, for his contrary Forces fighting upon the very same
Grounds and Causes?

How did the Parliament command the People to give Thanks to God for those
Victories, for which the King commanded the People to give thanks for, as his,
got over and against the Parliament?

How have thousands been forced to pray for the Parliament, The wonderful
profaning of the name of God, by the enforced Worshipe of Prayer and
Thanksgiving in this Nation.
whose hearts and courses have rather joined with the King, against the
Parliament; and thousands, commanded by the King to pray and fast for him,
whose hearts and causes have more adhered to the Parliaments cause and
Interest? Yea as to the Presbyterians, whose cause of violence this was (and
therefore, O that their Souls may see it as from God, just upon them) how have
they been forced to such public Actions of prayer and thanksgivings (and
especially, in reference to the Scotch Nation and cause) the which their Souls
and Consciences have much abhorred? O the infinite and unsearchable Treasure of
the patience of God, to such Worships, such Violences! etc: and therefore,

Lastly, The duty of the Magistrates apprehending Gods Judgments.
I ask, Whether the Governor of Ships, artificial at Sea, or mystical,
Commonweales on shore, in their several storms and tempests, can do any more
rightly and Christianly, by the Testament of Christ Jesus, then,

First, Humble themselves in such ways of Worship and with such Societies and
Communions, wherein they have fellowship with God and one with another, and to
stand in the Gap by Humiliation, by Righteousness and Mercy? Daniel 4.27. etc.

Secondly, Use all possible persuasions and exhortations, to the several
Passengers under their civil care and charge, to turn to God, to pray unto him.
Thus Peter exhorts Simon Magus (fearing Gods judgments) to turn unto God by
repentance, and then to call upon him; And thus Paul, knowing the Terour of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 4. persuades men to be reconciled to God, etc. implying this to be
the way for the prevention both of Temporal and Eternal Judgments.

Thirdly, The Duty of good Magistrates in public Calamities.
Entreat the Prayers and Supplications of such, whom they believe to be the
People of God, whose Prayers he professes to be his Delight, and has promised
to hear them, while the Prayer of the wicked is an Abomination, and therefore
more provokes him.

Thus some good Emperors have used to desire the Intercessions of Gods People,
in times of danger and distress. Yea and Paul himself, so high in favor with
God, and so full of the Grace and Spirit of God, yea and so full of the Spirit
of prayer (as next to the Lord Jesus, we read of no man more in the the New
Testament) yet no man do we read of, that so frequently and earnestly begs the
prayers of Gods people.

The eighth Question.

Whether any of the Prophets or Apostles, Savior himself, did ever except
against the Magistrates Authority, for questioning them in matters of Religion?

First, I ask, Prophets and Christ Jesus and his Apostles, are here so fitly
joined in this Witness, The dispensation of the Prophets before Christ.
since the Prophets before Christ's coming, were under the dispensation of
shadows and figures, in that National and typical Church of Israel, and only
prophesied of that great High Priest, and King, and Prophet to come, Christ
Jesus? The Law and the Prophets were until John (says Christ Jesus) and their
actions (as relating to a National Church) cannot be brought as witnesses with
John or Jesus?

Secondly, I ask, Did not all the Prophets foretell of this most absolute and
independent King and Lawgiver to his People, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, by whom only God has spoken in these last times? Christ Jesus the
only King of Israel, and that spiritually.
Heb. 1. Did not the Angel declare to Mary, that he should be the King of
Israel, and should sit on the Throne of his Father David, (which yet he never
did literally?) Luke 1. Was he not saluted by his followers, Thou art the King
of Israel, John 1. And was it not for this very cause, viz [that he was the
King of the Jews,] that he was Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed, and the
crime pretended, fixed on his Gibbet, in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin; Jesus of
Nazareth King of the Jews? All which he was, not in any temporal or worldly
respect (for he disclaimed and refused the offer of a temporal Crown) but in an
absolute spiritual consideration, respecting the souls and consciences, the
Religions and Worships of the children of men.

Thirdly, I ask, Whether the Lord Jesus except not expressly against the
Magistrates in matters of Religion, in that so famous Distinction between
Cesars right and Gods; give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God
the things that are Gods? More particularly and concisely, I ask, Caesar's due
is Gods due, and yet Gods due distinct from Caesar's.
Whether Cesars Sword was not Gods Sword? Romans 13. And Whether by giving unto
Caesar his Submission, Honor, Tribute, etc. was not a giving God his due (in a
true sense) by giving this his due to Caesar? And if so, then what singular and
distinct Character is this, which gives unto God his due, distinct from Caesar?
And Whether there can be any other Characteristical difference imagined, but
only that of matter of conscience, spiritual and Religious, which Caesar
himself (as the old Martyrs witness of Jesus, were wont to say) had no power
over?

Fourthly, As to the Apostles, I ask, The Apostles were the highest and next to
Christ Jesus, in matters of the christian name and Worship.
If the book of the Acts, and the Epistles, etc. breathe not forth the most
absolute Independency of their Ministry and Apostleship, from the highest
civil powers in the World?

It Is true, Paul makes an humble Appeal (against the Persecuters of his life) to
the highest Magistrate Caesar: But as to the matters of Religion and
Christianity, was not the Church built upon the Foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets? ( Ephesians. 2) Were not their Commands, in spiritual things, the command
of Christ Jesus (1 Cor. 14.) even to the highest Kings, and Keysars? Was not
that an Apostles voice (in case of Religion) Ye are bought with a price, (1
Cor. 7) let no man (consequently not the highest, etc.) judge you in respect of
meats and drinks, or an holy day? And what can be more express, then such
peremptory, not only refusalls to obey ungodly and unchristian commands ( Act.
4.5.) but even to own the very Courts and Judicatures of the highest in the
matters of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Christ Jesus?

Lastly, Since the Magistrates Authority in questioning matter of Religion, may
be taken two ways:

First, Twofold questioning in Religious matters.
For demanding a private reason of a Christians Faith or Practice; so here it
cannot be intended: for there is no question, but that every Servant of Christ
Jesus ought to be ready, to give a reason to every one, etc. 1 Pet. 4.

Secondly, For Authoritative questioning either by inferior Magistrates
Executive, or Superior, Legistative: and if Christ Jesus had been subjected,
and bound to answer any Authority questioning him, or his Apostles, as to
matter of his Kingdom or Christian Worship, Christ Jesus the he most absolute
Monarck.
if himself and his Apostles and followers, had or should own any Tribunal in
Spirituals but his own, they should have plucked up the roots of his most
glorious and most absolute Government and Headship. And if so, what kind of
Heresy and Blasphemy against Christ Jesus this is, let the Heaven and the
Earth be Judges.

The sum of the ninth Question.

Whether the Examiner have cause to say, Magistrates giving wholesome Food, and
forbidding of Poison, be a ground for a Magistrate to command Poison? etc.

Unto which may be added, the sum of the tenth Question.

Whether Asa's Authority from God to advance the true Religion, were a ground
for Manasseh to set up Idolatry, and a principle of Persecution, to kill those
that would not worship his Idols?

As also the sum of the Eleventh.

Whether Gods Law, punishing Blasphemy unto death, Jezabel to kill Naboth?

And of the Twelfth.

Whether Paul commanding Parents to bring up their Children in the Nature and
Admonition of the Lord, Idolatry?

I ask, Whether the proposer of the Questions Examiner so void of Zeal and
Reason, as to imagine that Corruption and Abuses, All Gods works and
Institutions, and God eimself obused by man.
are sufficient ground to overthrow a truly- Christian, yea or the least
natural or Civil Constitution and Appointment? Or rather that he grants all
Natural Bodies, both Caelestial and Terrestrial, yea all Divine and Civil
Constitutions from God or Men, are Gods works, and excellent in their kind,
although by man abused to Idolatry, Superstition, Oppression, Gluttony,
Drunkenness, Whoredom, Pride, Ambition, Revenge? etc.

Secondly, I ask, Whether all the Questions are not built upon these
Principles, which are not one-in Dispute, and not granted, but now at this time
of the day, they do most shamefully beg of Moses, of Christ, of these late
Times, and merciful discoveries of the true principles, both of Spiritual and
Civil Government; I say, beg for that which can never more be granted, without
horrible Oppression and Tyranny, over the souls and bodies of all the sons of
men? viz.

To particularize: Foundations out of course.
First, That Civil Magistracy is not merely a Civil Thing, in the very nature
and essential Qualities and beings thereof; but rather some Divinum quid, and
that Kings and Queens and Magistrates are Gods (not only by way of Allusion
and Consimilitude, and in a respect, but really they are Sacred (or holy)
persons, their Majesty's Sacred, their Crowns Sacred, their Thrones Sacred,
and their very Kingdoms and Empires Sacred. The Blasphemies of the Kings
Emperous, etc.
Hence that most horrid Blasphemous Character, on the Forehead of the Whore and
of the Beast, Sacrum Romanum Imperium, that Sacred or holy Roman Empere.

Secondly, That the People and Inhabitants of the Nations of the Earth, are
borne Slaves, and Villains, and are not the Original and Fountain both of
their Offices, Officers, and of the Authority committed to them.

Thirdly, That no Magistrates in the whole world, are lawful Magistrates, but
Christian and consequently none but the Protestant; and among them, none but of
such a Sect or Conscience.

Fourthly, That the Land of Canaan (that Land of Ceremonies, Types, and
Miracles was a Land of pattern and example, for all Lands, all Nations, all
Magistrates, and that not in matters of Morality, Civility, and Humanity only
(which is not controverted) but even in the matters of Religion, and Spiritual
Covenant, of Conscience in Gods Worship, etc. If these Questions are built upon
these grounds, I ask, if these Roots be found rotten and withered, what can be
looked for on the Branches?

Thirdly, I ask, How can it be avoided, but that one of these two Consequences
must be granted? Either,

First, If Magistrates, as Magistrates, The dangerous hanging or suspending
Magistrates.
be keepers of both Tables, then must they keep them and interpret them, and
determine Controversies about Religion by those Eyes, and by that Eyesight,
which they have in Religions and heavenly things (be it Pagan, or Turkish, or
Popish, or Protestant.)

Or else, secondly, they must fly to Master Cottons refuge of suspending (or
hanging up) all the Magistrates in the World from acting in Spirituals, The
rooting up of all Societies out of the World.
if they see not the true and only way of Worship; and that for all the days
of their life, except God give them Repentance, and reveal the true and only
way unto them.

And I add, and ask, Whether this Doctrine incline not strongly, to these two
more (justly exploded) dangerous Consequences?

First, That as no Magistrate must act in Spirituals, but such as are of the
pretended true (which every Sect is prone to plead to be his) and Magistrates
(many thousands and ten thousands, must be hanged up as above said) yea and
hanged outright, for want of those Essential and Fundamental Qualifications,
which may enable him to discharge the principal end of his Office; so, neither
may the People, which are the Original and Fountain of Government, lawfully
combine and live in civil Cohabitation, or Societies, but must live Barbarians
or worse, since that all the People and Nations of the World, in this depraved
state of mankind, are wholly void of heavenly understanding, and can no more
convey to their Magistrates any spiritual Authority or Power, then a Dead man
can appoint his Officers, etc.

Secondly, Protestant Jesuits.
If such Orthodox, sound and right ( Magistrates chosen by the People, come to
be of another conscience, persuasion and Worship (true or or false) ought they
to be deposed? etc. and may not that Oxford Author, who put forth that Book,
called the Puritan turned Jesuit, and all that hold that principle of
Magistrates being Custodes utrinsque Tabulae, be forced to say, that (in this
respect) the Bishops were Jesuits, the Presbyterians are Jesuits, the
Inderendants are Jesuits, and hold that dangerous Doctrine of deposing
haeretical Magistrates? etc.

Lastly, Strange violence to childrens and Parents consciences.
As to the Question from the New Testament ( Ephesians. 5.4. Fathers, provoke not
your children in wrath, but bring them up in the Instruction and admonition of
the Lord) may not he do this, except he force them to his own conscience and
Worship?

And I ask further, if it follows not, that if the child by some providence of
God (as sometimes it falls out) become Superior and Magistrate to the Parent,
The child now being Father, must force his Fathers Conscience, according to
that typical Example of Asa (punishing his Mother Maachah for her Conscience?)
Yea I ask, how could it be avoided, that by this Rule King Edward did well, in
forbidding his Sister Mary the use of her Conscience, when he (though younger)
was her Head; and Mary (though a woman, yet now Head of the Church) could not
do other, but forbid her Sister Elizabeth, the use of her Protestant Prayers
and Conscience also? And therefore I ask, Whether it follows not by this Rule,
that all Conscience and Religion in the whole world, be not (except we grant
the monstrous suspension of almost all the Magistrates and Fathers in the
world) be not, I say, to be measured by the accidental turns of Superiority,
and the Civil Sword?

The sum of the thirtenth Question, viz.

Whether since Idolatry was punished by the light of Nature (as Job
acknowledged, Job 31.28.) the Magistrate ought not much more to punish it in
the Gospel Light? etc.

Job, Job. 31.28. Examined.
Whether there be not many various Translations and Interpretations of this
Scripture? Does not the Septuagint, (the Seventy) interpret those words [that
were an Iniquity (as we turn it) to be punished by the Iudges] I say, the
Seventh turn it thus: (...) For this would have been accounted, judged or
esteemed, the greatest, or a very great iniquity.

Others, Quae est Iniquitas maxima, which is the greatest, or a very great
Iniquity.

Others, Etiam hoc futsset Iniquitas judicata; For this had been a plain
condemned or judged Iniquity.

2. For Interpretation, some interpret those words (If I behold the sun when it
shined, or the moon walking in brightness) to imply Jobs denying of his
worshipping the Sun and Moon, etc. Some Metaphorically, for being puffed up with
prosperity and success, which tempts all men, Gods people most apt in
prosperity to deny him.
and even Gods People themselves, (as Agur confesses) to say unto God when
they are full, who is the Lord? and to deny Him who is the Alpha and Omega, the
Author and Fountain etc. of all their mercies. And therefore I ask, If it be
not probable, that Job might sooner be tempted to that so pleasing a sin of
applauding himself in the shining of the sun (Heavenly (and right hand)
mercies) and the brightness of the Moon (left hand, and inferior mercies) then
to be enticed to that gross and so palpable an Idolatry, of worshipping the Sun
and moon? etc.

Secondly, Grant that the beholding of the Sun and Moon by Job, and the secret
inticement of his Heart, and the kissing of his mouth, etc. relates to
Idolatry, in the very real and literal Worshipping of those Creatures; grant
that was Iniquity to be punished by the Judges: As also that Job lived before
Moses, and acknowledged the Justice of such punishments (all which particulars
can be but probably disputed, pro and con; and therefore is not such a Building
and Fabric, to be laid upon so uncertain a Groundsel and Foundation.) But
admit all, yea and further [that the Gospel gives more light for the Discovery
of the sinfulness and guilt ^f Idolatry] Yet, The dispensations of God, both
before and after Moses.
since both Moses and Job also lived under such dispensations of National
Covenants and Worships, and before them of the Family-Covenants and Worships,
such as Abraham's, Isaacks, Iaccbs, and the Patriarchs, wherein the Fathers of
Families, and the elder brothers (in a figurative Birthright of the first born)
carried on the figure Christ Jesus to come, The Land of Canaan a nonesuch, and
typical
as supreme Heads and Governors in all causes, as well ecclesiastical as
Civil; shall we now then, in the bright light of the Sun of Righteousness, the
true King of Israel, etc. erect new Lands of Canaan in all the Nations of the
World? Will they not be mere Skeletons, Shadows and Carkases, without those
living Demonstrations, and miraculous appearances of God, from first to last
with that wonderful and typical People? Shall we still take the Lord Jesus by
force to make him a temporal King, and a temporal Judge; Christ Jesus not a
temporal King.
when he peremptorily refuses, and proclaims that his Kingdom is not of this
World? etc.

Will not this be as Job there says, to deny the God that is above, or (as the
Word seems to carry it) the God descending? who has ascended, but first
descended God in Flesh, and dwelt in Flesh of the Lord Jesus Bodily, and
established a spiritual Kingdom, in the Consciences, and Worships, and
Conversations of Men, etc.

And however the Devil (despairing to destroy the appearance of God in Flesh,
either in the Person of Christ's humane body, or in his mystical Body his
Saints, by three hundred years persecution) has taken the advantage, by the
shining of Peace and Favor to the Saints by Constantine, to turn the very
World it self Christian, designing, under the Masks and Flag of the Christian
name, to conceal his Serpentine malice to pure and true Christianity, and to
effect that by the Roman Popes, the Foxes, which he could never do by the Roman
Lions, the Emperors.

Yet (I ask) Shall Gods people still inhabit Babylon (or confusion) and darkly
confound all the most holy, Gods people commanded to disobey the civil power in
Sptrituals.
most wise, distinct appearances of God together? and not rather listen to the
holy Spirit of God, in that absolute prohibition ( Col. 2) Let no man judge you
in meats and drinks, etc. that is, upon any Spiritual account and
Consideration, albeit in Civil affairs, we ought to be judged, and submit to
every Ordinance (or Creation) of man, for the Lords sake? 1 Pet. 2.

Thirdly, Two kinder of Idolatry.
I ask (as before) Whether the Gospel Light has not discovered unto us (more
clearly at least, then ever the Old Testament did) at twofold Idolatry?

First, Religious, which is (in a word) the fearing or Worshipping of false
Deities, or Gods, or Godheads, which all the Nations, all the World over, live
in.

Secondly, Moral Idolatry, which is Idolatry in the Hearts and Lives of all
mankind, according to that of Paul to the Ephesians: and Covetousness, which
is Idolatry, etc.

According to this Distinction, how are all the Nations of the World (even that
which is called Christian also) or'e-spread with these Idolatries? Yea and (in
lamentably too great a measure) how are Gods own people reported (at least in
the moral sense) to be Idolatrous? etc. For,

If Coveting of Gold and Silver, House and Lands, The over-spreaing of Idolatry
in England, and all Nations.
be Idolatry, and consequently, all covetous actions (such as raking, lying,
stealing, etc.) are acts of Idolatry in a Gospel-sense: Then consequently the
goings out of the heart in other Sins, Pride, Self-love, Ambition, Whoredom,
are Idolatry also, and all the Acts attending such motions and desires, Acts of
Idolatry also in all the Inhabitants of the World, and then especially and more
eminently (or rather odiously) in such as profess the name of Christ Jesus. Oh
what an object of the Jealousy of the most High, is this Idolatrous Ball of
the Earth, and even that part above all others, which pretends the name of the
Son of God, and which (yet above all others) cries out against Idolaters? etc.

Fourthly, As to the Light of Nature, discovering Idolatry, I ask,

First, If there be not a wonderful mistake, a fallacy and snare in the term
of expression, Light of Nature?

It Is true, The Nature of Gods Children is Light, Gods people in a glorious
state of Light.
Ephesians. 5. Ye are light in the Lord; and Phil. 2. They shin as Lights: God is a
Sun and shield unto them; Christ Jesus is a Sun of Righteousness shining on
them; The holy Scripture is a Light and Lantern to them; The words of the
Prophets, as a Light shining in a dark place, until the Day Star Christ Jesus
arise spiritually in their hearts: They have glorious promises, that the Light
of the Moon shall be as the Light of the Sun, and the Light of the Sun seven
times brighter: They expect that time, when they shall need no more Candle nor
Sun, but the Lord God and the Lamb will be their Light: and knowing that Light
is sown for the Righteous, they expect and shall assuredly reap the Harvest of
Light to all Eternity. But what is this to corrupt Nature, Light of Nature in
spiritual things but darkness.
to dark Nature? You were not only in darkness and children of the night, but
darkness it self (Ephesians. 5.) And if that which we call Light in men, be
Darkness (as the Lord Jesus speaks) how great is that Darkness?

But if it be said, that Job and Paul say, that the Light of Nature discovers
Idolatry; I ask, Whether Job say so expressly, or by any consequence, which may
not rather be counterbalanced another way? Or if Job should say so, whether
upon an equal dispensation? when in those times corporal Judgments, and in
Gospel Times spiritual Judgments are proper; as in this very Romans 1. is
abundantly testified.

It is true, as Solomon says, The Spirit of a man is the Candle of the Lord,
searching all the inward parts of the Belly: It is an Excuser and an Accuser; a
Secretary, a Sergeant, an Adversary, a Judge, an Executioner, within the bosom
of all mankind: But yet I ask, What knowledge of God, corrupt Nature may attain
unto.
how far this Spirit of Man, this Candle of Jehovah has searched, and does, or
possibly may search, into all the inward parts of the Belly, or Hearts of man,
as touching this great mystery of true of false Deities, and their respective
Worships? And

I ask, Where lies the Harmony between these two Scriptures, this of Romans 2.
When they knew God, they glorified him not as God: and that of 1 Cor. 1. The
World by Wisdom knew not God. And

I ask, If natural wisdom (that Candle or Light remaining in man) be not
twofold? Natural light twofold.


First, That which is Common to all mankind in general; to the people, the
lowest, the vulgar?

Secondly, That which is more Noble and High, The highest seize of the
highest sons of nature, in spirituals.
(in degrees) refined and elevated by finer Animal Spirits, by Education, by
Study, by Observation, by Experience. And

I ask, Whether these highest Lights, and greatest Candles can attain, by
their utmost Activity, to a true, and saving, and Gospel-knowledge, even of God
himself? And therefore, whether the place of Romans 1. They knew God, can amount
unto more, even in the Princes of natural knowledge, Plato, Seneca, Aristotle,
etc. but unto a confession of a Deity, a Godhead above us, in us, about us; an
Invisible mighty power, Creating, Ruling, Ordering all things; as also, a
Conviction of Blessedness in the favor of this Deity, and of Cursedness in
Disunion from it?

But now let us descend to Cultus Institutus and Cultus Naturalis, an
Instituted, and a natural Worship. Come to the light of nature worshipping this
Deity: Come to the seven precepts of Noah, which some, both Jews, and other
ancients, talk of; and then I ask, if it be not a downright Doctrine of
Free Will, in depraved nature? No spirituat object seen with a natural eye.
If it be not to run point blank against all the Histories of the Nations, and
all present Experience of mankind, in all known parts of the World, to
attribute so much light to any of the Eldest and Gallantest sons of Nature, as
to attain a spiritual and saving knowledge of God, to attain a love unto God,
in all their knowledge; to attain the mystery of the Father and of the Son, God
manifested in Flesh, by whom Creation and Redemption are wrought; to the matter
of true worship, or to any thing but Splendidum Peccatum, without the
Revelation of the Word and Spirit of God, out of his absolute, free, and
peculiar Grace and Mercy in Christ Jesus?

Hence I ask, The monstrous opinions of the Nations, as to Dieties and their
worships.
If from this Corruption of Nature it have not sprung, that the wisest Nations,
Councels, Parliaments, have run into such monstrous opinions about the Gods,
and the number of them; and so many monstrous and horrible, and some ridiculous
kinds and ways of worship? Thus did the Chaldeans, the Egyptians, the
Persians, the Greeks, the Romans, and all the Generations and Nations of men,
unto this day.

It is true, It is charged upon the wisest of the Sons of men, Romans 1. They
glorified not God, as God, that they were not thankful; that they gave the
glory of the Creator to the Creature; and that therefore God delivered them up
to those moral filthinesses and defilements.

It is true, Two deep dungeons of moral wickedness, into which the conscience
of some in worshipping have tumbled.
That because men received not the Truth in the Love of it, God delivered them
up to strong Delusions, to believe lies. And also these Spiritual Judgments
have proceeded so far, that the poor deluded Generations of men, have tumbled
down millions of millions, one upon the neck of another, into these two deep
and doleful Dungeons.

The first, Whoredom and Murder.
Of practicing uncleanness and Whoredom, practiced by some Nations, even upon
the very account of Religion and Conscience.

The second, Of Cruelty and Murder, as of Baals Priests, cutting and launcing
themselves, and of many Priests and Sects, afflicting themselves in some
Nations, with many Torments; and above all, that of the abominable and most
inhumane Sacrificing mankind: In which horrid Worship, not only the Mexicans
did abound, The Sacrificing of mankind out of conscience.
in their Sacrificing yearly many thousands Infants to their bloody Dieties,
before the coming of Pizarro amongst them; but also Gods own people of Israel,
and none of the very Kings of Judah (before repentance) fell into this bloody
pit, of offering up their Children through the fire to Molech.

I readily acknowledge, that in these cases mentioned, The Civil Sword must cut
off all Incivilities, though under Religions pretenses masked and covered.
and in all other cases wherein Civility is wronged, in the Bodies or goods of
any, the Civil Sword is Gods Sword, as well as man's, for the suppressing of
such Practices and Appearances, yea and the very Principles of them; and for
the Encouragement and applause of the contrary, Chastity, Humanity, etc.

Hence, I honor that noble act of the Emperor of Rome, who censured that
famous Ovid, for that wanton Book of his De Art amandi, as a spark to
immodesty and uncleanness: and doubtless it is the the duty of the civil sword,
to cut off the Incivilities of our times; as the monstrous hair of women,
up-the heads of some men, etc.

But yet I ask, Whether Paul speak ought, in the first of the Romans, of any
humane Judge or Judgment upon the Nations of the World, for their mere
Idolatries, thus most dreadfully plagued already, by the most righteous Judge
of the whole World, in those strong Delusions and Lies, and deliveries up to so
many Lusts and Sins, which also run upon the Civil Sword of God and man, for
their uncivil and unrighteous practices?

I ask further, All seeming incivilities, not to be looked upon with one eye.
Whether or no some seeming Incivilities, which the Light of Nature more fairly
may condemn, and hale before the Civil Tribunal, yet may not be such; and so
Circumstantiated with Impressions from Heaven, that they ought not so suddenly
and easily to be condemned and punished, but, with a more tender and observant
Eye, be distinguished?

For (not to instance in any disputable Acts which the holy Scripture and
experience presents us with) what shall be said to that very common and
constant practice of Circumcision, The practice of Circumcision, a seeming
Incivility.
commanded by God himself to the Jews, and now entertained by one of the
greatest Empires of the World, the Turks? may not it be (with fair
probability) argued to be against the light of Nature? For, Although the Jews
might plead, The Institution of this Ordinance was from Heaven, and the Lord of
Nature, That it was done in so solemn and Religious a way, that it was not
performed with any lascivious or unclean observations or gestures, but with
Horror, and Pain, and Bloodshedding, and great Affliction of the outward man
(as we see in the Shechemites) And lastly, That it was attended with heavenly
and mystical significations, as a Type and Figure, and. Yet not withstanding,
how was it branded and blackr with the Scorned and Jeers of the Nations?
insomuch that the very Sabbath (the solemn worshipping of God one day in seven,
in a most religious acknowledgement of his most glorious Creating of this
wonderful frame of the World in six) was jeered, from this very seeming
Incivility of Circumcision: Recutitaque Sabbata, etc. the Circumcised Sabbaths,
etc.

If Abraham had lived now in England (one of the most zealous Nations of the
World, Abraham's Sacrificing of Isaak a seeming incivility.
for inflicting torments on others, and being tormented for Religion and
Conscience) what would our rash Zealots have done with Abraham, in case he had
Sacrificed his son Isaac? etc. would they have examined the miraculous
conception of the Child a s from Heaven, and the reason that that most holy and
most glorious hand, that so miraculously and supernaturally gave him, now
called again for him, by a Voice miraculous from Heaven? also, would they have
observed the Man, so Holy, and so Faithful, his Addresses to the Act to Holy,
and so free from Passion, from Design? etc.

Or if the Mother of the Lord Jesus had brought forth her Son amongst us, So
Mary's bringing forth of Christ Jesus.
and (it should have been acknowledged) without the company of her Husband; Yet
who can be so impious against God, and so unchristian and blasphemous against
Christ Jesus, as to question, but that the most Civil, and the severest Judge,
upon due Examination of the whole matter, might rationally and judicionally
have pronounced to have found no violence of Civility, no wrong to the Bodies
or Goods of any (the proper object and cause of all Civil Officers) but
contrarily a most holy and glorious appearance of the living God, and
gloriously free from such Impurities, with which even the Religion of whole
Nations are defiled?

But, The Extreme madness of the Religious zeal of men, seldom but in extremes.
oh the madness of the Children of Men (said I?) yea the precious Children of
the very God of Heaven! Into what furious Extremes do we leap and run into,
without the Light and Lantern of the holy Spirit and Word of God; not
withstanding our great pretenses of such pure Natures light? For how fiery
would we be to condemn such a Birth as spurious, the Parents and the child
unclean (Bring her forth and burn her, as Judah said of Thamar) until we own
the Child (in Religion) ours, the Mothers ours? etc. And therefore again, how
ready to sheath our swords in the bowels of the poor Jew or Gentile, which
cannot see with our Eyes and spectacles, and believe this Child to be the
Christ, the true Messiah?

I profess my self unsatisfied, as to the Baptism and Dipping now used; I
abhor the debauchedness of those poor deluded high Attainers, The Incivilities
of the Ranters.
the Mad Folks (as Master Pennington well calls them) the Ranters: And I praise
God, for the height and prudence of the State, to prevent and punish the
Practices and Doctrines of such Abominations, etc. But, are there but one sort
of (Religious) Mad Folks, Ranters? etc.

What is it but Ranting, Reuters and Ranting, more sores them one.
to call Fire from Heaven (as the gracious Disciples of Christ Jesus did and
may do) because (as they think) men practice Incivilities (against the light of
Nature) refusing to entertain the Son of God Christ Jesus?

What is it but Ranting, to forbid the very casting out of Devils (as done by
Conjuration, Heresy Blasphemy, etc.) because these Exorcists, these Castters
out, they follow not us, our Way, our Church, our Faith; our Worship? etc.

Yea what is it but Rantisme, May Consciences differing about the blood of
Christ.
to sling stones at the Conscience of any, persuaded to find out the Blood of
Christ, in the way of dipping into Water; or at the Conscience of the poor Jew,
accounting of that blood as false and Counterfeit? or of the Papist, persuaded
that the Jews are wanderers; but that there is need of Mary's Milk to her Sons
blood? or at the Consciences of the Turks, the Persians, the Pagans, the
millions of millions of millions of poor deluded Consciences, whose oppositions
the meek Lamb of God commands gently to be born, and his Servants patiently
to wait, if yet it might please the God of Heaven to give Repentance, and a
Rescue from the snares and chains of Satan and Destruction?

Yea, If ever there was Ranting in this World, what is it, but the mad flinging
about of Firebrands, Arrows, and Death, (which Solomon speaks of) to fling all
the World topsi-turvy, and to Fire the Nations with uncivil and irreligious
Heats, Tumults, Plundrings, Ravishings, Slaughters, about the Heretics, the
Blasphemers, the Diablo's? etc.

And therefore (lastly) I ask the Proposer, The New Testament in case the Old
were not.
of these Questions, Whether in case it had pleased the Lord to conceal the Old
Testament from us, or that of the New bound up alone (as it is frequently)
should fall into the hands of some people in the World; I ask (I say) Whether,
therein, Christ Jesus has not left his Followers full, and complete, and
absolute Directions in all Cases? I ask, then, in what part of his Testament,
has he given the least Direction, for the Civil Sword to be drawn in his
Quarrel, Christ Jesus no Author of civil force, against the highest of his
opposites and Blasphemers.
for the Body of any man to be afflicted for his sake? and therefore in this
case proclaims to his zealous Followers (who in this case did not know of what
Spirits they were) that he came not to destroy men's Bodies, no not for the
highest Opposition made against him; no not that of calling him Beelzebub, and
charging him with Sorcery, and casting out of Devils by the Devil himself.

Yet I ask, Whether in the very Old Testament it self, such Persons, such
Nations aw were wholly Idolaters, where punished even by David himself; as the
Moabites, the Ammonites, etc. when they were subdued under him; although in the
Land of Canaan (the only Church in Covenant with God) there were just Laws in
force against such sins and practices?

I therefore conclude with this Question, When-(notwithstanding the Proposers
plea, of the qurity of the Gospel, discovering Idolatry more clearly) whether
the Gospel, and Covenant it self, Christ Jesus, have not expressly locked up the
hands of all that call his Lord and Master, saying, Let the Tares alone until
the Harvest?

The sum of the fourteenth Question.

Whether, Idolatry brings plagues upon the people, the Magistrate ought not to
deliver the people from those plagues, by removing Idolatry?

I ask, First, Idolatry is twofold (as before) Religious and Moral; And making
the Belly a God, or Gold a God, is as real Idolatry, as the making of the sun a
God; and the honoring, and loving, and serving them before the true God, is as
real Idolatry, as the worshipping of the sun, or a Golden Image: As also, since
Christ Jesus commands his people to separate from a Covetous person, professing
to be a brother in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 5;

With what face then, before the flaming Eyes of Christ Jesus, can we cry out
so much against Idolatry in Worshipping, and raise such Sormes and Tempests in
the World about Idolatry? etc. When the whole World, and each Nation, and our
Selves, lie in the second kind of Idolatry, of many sorts; The World lies in
Idolatry and this Nation, and People.
Worshipping (according to the several Lusts of the Eye, the Flesh, and the
Pride of Life) several sorts of Creatures, before the Creator, God blessed for
evermore. This kind of Idolatry especially in Gods people, and especially
after so much light and experience from God, the Lord abhors as much (having
commanded it not to be named among the Saints) yea, and in some respect, above
the grossest Idolatry of all the World beside. What Antichristian Blindness and
Madness is it therefore to cry out, like the Spaniards and Portugals, The
greater Idolaters, cry out against the less.
against the poor Indians Idolatry; when besides their own Images and
Superstitions, they were notorious worshippers of, and bowed down to the
Indians Gold, which, to their astonishment, the Indians beheld and stumbled at?

Secondly, I ask, Does Idolatry alone, without a ripeness in other sins, bring
Plagues and Destructions (...) upon Lands and Peoples? Sodom,
Were not other fins alleged the cause of Sodoms destruction (one of the most
fearful and most famous Destructions, since the beginning of the World) and
among other sins, that of oppressing the poor? and soul-oppression is still the
highest.

Was not Egypt the wonder of the World for Plagues? and Egypt,
and though most in famous for Idolatry, yet was there not one Sin, which
especially unstoped the Vials of Plagues and Vengeance on them, to wit, their
Oppressions, indeed their Soul-oppressions, on the Israel and people of God?

It is true, and Israel,
Gods people were guilty of Religious Idolatry, 1 Chronicles. 36. but yet there was
a remedy, until they mocked, and despiled, and misused the Messengers from God,
sent unto them.

Hence, and Jerusalem, destroyed for oppression, and Soul-oppression chiefly.
What was the complaint of the Lord Jesus against Jerusalem, when he wept over
it, foreseeing the Destruction of it shortly after his death (in which Eleven
hundred thousand Jews, Men, Women and Children perished, and were captivated)
What was his great complaint, but this, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou which
killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee! etc.

And if that second Woe ( Rev. 9.) be the Plague of the Turks, upon the
Antichristian World, beside their Idolatries, read we not (verse the last) That
neither repented they of their. Murders, nor of their Sorceries, nor of their
Fornications, nor of their Thefts?

And when we read of the great Whore (commonly interpreted the Church of Reme,
the greatest professed State of Christianity, though most Whorish, in all
abominable worships and practices, under the pretense of being the most chaste,
and only Spouse of Christ Jesus) read we not also, Oppression and Bloody
Persecution, one chief cause of the downfall of the bloody Church of Rome.
before the tearing of her Flesh, and burning of her, That she is a Where;
drunk with the blood of the Saints, and the Witnesses of Jesus? Rev. 17. And
when ( Re. 18.) three famous causes are assigned, of her most famous downfall,
is not this among the rest, a principal one, that in her is found Bloody
Oppressions, to wit, (verse the last) the blood of the Prophets and Saints, and
of all that were slain upon the earth?

Thirdly, I ask, Whether that place of Paul, Romans 1. speak not there only of
spiritual plagues, Spiritual plagues follow abuse of light.
and not of Gods punishing sins with temporal plagues; but of punishing sin
with sin; and implies no more; but that God justly punishes mankind, for his
abuse of, and not improving of all his Light, (though but moral, civil,
natural) with a spirit and conscience hardened, and delivered up to further
alienation from him, into several degrees and sorts of sin and wickedness?

What hinders this, but that such as have some convictions of a Deity, and yet
improve not these convictions to the highest, but worship that Deity corruptly,
That such (I say) yet ought to be suffered to live, and are not to be destroyed
as Idolaters and Blasphemers, yea and with meekness ought to be instructed, if
peradventure it may please God to give them repentance, that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, whereby they are taken captive as his
will: Tim. 2.

Yea, I pray leave humbly to ask, without of offense, What if some Edw. 3. or
Her. 5. should rise again, and that in a Protestant profession, and conquer
France, as those Kings did; yea, suppose that France should conquer England,
What should the Catholic conqueror do with so many thousand Protestant
Heretics, so accounted? And what should the Protestant conqueror do with so
many hundred thousand Popish Idolaters in France and Spain, yea suppose all the
world over?

I know what some furious Zelots would say, on either side; I know what
Superstition, what self-interest, what intemperate and unbridled Zeal, heath
done in former and and present times: But I ask, what Christ Jesus would do,
what the meek Lamb of God would do, who tells his fiery Disciples in such
cases, Luke 9. you know not what Spirit you are of; I came not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them.

Fourthly, The Land of Canaan a figurative Land, it and the people attended
with miracles.
As to that particular cafe of the Land of Canaan, I ask, whether that Land and
Nation, the people of it, whom the Land spued out, and the people of Israel,
whom the Land recieved, were not all of them typical and figurative, and
attended with extracrdinary, supernatural, and miraculouus Considerations?
Further, may we not as well expect, to pass over to Ireland, France, or
Holland, on dry land (as Israel from Egypt toward Canaan-land) and to tumble
down City Walls and Castles, with the sound of Rams-hornes, etc. at to think of
a material or literal Antitype or parallel, now in these Gospel-daies?

Has not the irreconcilable Disproportion and Dissimilitude, between that
Land of Canaan, and all others, been alleged by some, against the most
conscientious and able in this Controversy, Master Cotton, and that without
any reply of his, or any man else, as unto that great Argument, of the
difference between the Land of Canaan, and all other Lands that are, or ever
have been, or shall be?

And since the Proposer of this Question is pleased to mention Lev. 20. I ask,
Is not this the Ground, even of Isreal's ceremonial and typical holiness,
touching their not eating of Swines Flesh, Israel a Nation separated from all
Lands to God.
and all unclean Beasts and Fowl? verse 25. I am Jehovah you God, who have
separated you from other people: and verse 25. Therefore I have separated these
unclean Beasts and Foul from you, as unclean: and verse 26. You shall be holy
unto me, for I Jehovah am holy, and have severed you from other People, that
you should be mine.

Did not all these unclean Beasts and Birds, signify men in Gospel Times, from
whom we ought not to separate in civil converse, as the Jews did, Act. 10. for
then we must go out of the World, 1 Cor. 5. but in spiritual communion and
Worshipping of God, 1 Cor. 6. Come out from among them, and be ye separated,
and touch no unclean thing, and I Will recieve you, and be a Father unto you,
etc. The Israel and people of God, the only type of Gods Israel in Canaan.


Does not Master Cotton himself acknowledge, that this punishing of the
Idolater, in the Land of Canaan was typical, and that the Antitype is only the
Church of Christ, which ought not to purge out Idolaters: which Church (whether
Congregational, as Master Cotton holds) or National, as others; Yet I ask, what
weapons has either the one or the other, as Christ's Church, or Wise, but
Spiritual? etc. what can be then the Result from this, Lev. 20. but that the
Israel and people of God, who are ( Nazarites, or) separated unto him, from all
the people of the World, ought to touch no uncleanness; and not only to
separate from Religious Idolatry, All Gods people are separated unto himself.
but even to separate from, and abhor that Moral Idolatry, Covetousness, and to
hold no Spiritual Society with that man, being called a Saint or Brother, who
covets this Worlds goods? which thing, is not to be once named, among the
Saints, Ephesians. 5.

But fifthly, I ask, What is this to all the Nations of the World, who, as
Nations, are all parts of the World, and lie (faith John) in wickedness, in
Idolatries and Superstitions, rolling and changing as Waves of the Sea, in
restless Lusts, and Passions of all sorts? etc.

Did not God wink at the Nations, Act. 17. and is he not still pleased to wink
at those numberless Nations of the World, unto whom the sound of a Savior
reaches not? The State of all the numberless numbers of the Sons of men,
without Christ in the world.
How wonderful are the Dominions of the Grand Seigniour (the Turkish Emperor)
and the mighty Empire of the Persians, the great Mogul, the Chinois, the
Tartars, and the many millions of millions of the Sons and Daughters of Men,
who in all Ages and Nations pass on in outward Peace, Prosperity and Glory,
amongst some of whom, God may call some to fear him, and love the Lord Jesus?

But for any of these whole Nations to be become Christians, A National Church
a fiction, and not found in Christ's Testament.
that is, to be anointed with Christ's Spirits; I ask, Whether such a thing be
found in Christ's Testament, or be in experience true, of the Body of this, or
any other Nation?

Sixthly, Whatever be the pretense and mist, which Satan casts, I ask (with a
famous observer once Lord Chancellor of England) Whether all Violence in
Religion, be not for some sinister cause and Interest? Jehu pretends and
boasts, Come, see my zeal for the God of Israel, etc. He acted gloriously,
Magistrates act zealously for an Interest.
with wonderful Activity, Impartiality, and (seeming) Piety; And yet I will
visit the blood of Jehu, says the Lord ( Hos. 1.) for, he took not heed with
all his Heart, etc. For, having got the Throne of Jeroboam, to maintain that
Throne and Crown, he goes on in the sins of Jeroboam, and kept up still the
worship of the Calves, which Jeroboam had set up.

What a wonderful noise an sound have those three Greek names, Idolatry,
Heresy, Blasphemy, The World scared by strange names.
made in the world, to the scaring and affrightment of poor people, in both
Popish and Protestant Countries? But let the Zeal of the most Zealous outcries
be examined in plain English, and let the Zealous (even such as make profession
of the most reformed National Ministeries, in the most Reformed Churches) I
say, lot the most Zealous impartially Examine; and it shall be found, that the
Bottom and Root of the matter, is a plain Merchandising with the word of God,
and as it, was in Rome, and is ( Omnia Roma, cum precis, etc) a very Sale of
Law and Gospel, Moses and Christ, Heaven and Hell, God himself, and the Souls
of men.

I truly honor the many excellent Persons, Ministers pretend zealously but
for an Interest.
and the excellent Abilities, both humane and Divine, of many, that have
professed, and do, the Nations Ministry or Service.

I confess, there is a due of Temporals, to such as Minister Spirituals; but
withal I ask, What is it but a Trade and Living, but a Merchandising for gain,
when men profess they cannot, without so much or so much, preach Christ Jesus?

Surely the Apostacia has been most wonderful and dreadful. The maintenance of
Christ's true Ministers.
None can say but that the Lord Jesus did send out such Preachers of his Truth,
as did trust him, and Lacked nothing; who did as freely give, as freely they
had received; who did labor spiritually, and, upon defect of supplies (through
the poverty or coldness of the Saints) did labor with their own hands: and
other course for his Messengers (in most infinite wisdom) took he none, nor
will his true Ministers and Prophets desire he should: and whatever other
Prudential Images and Inventions are set up, will he disclaim and judge, when
he appears in flaming fire, etc.

What should be so free in the world, What more free, and yet what more bought
and sold then light?
as divine and heavenly light? and yet what is so frequently and so dearly
sold, as that Light? (I speak as to the external preaching of many holy Truths.)

I shall desire to be corrected, if Ierre in the Piety or Charity of the
Question; and ask, If any man can possibly, by rules of Christ Jesus, profess a
Ministenance to him and his? Yea, although he have so much Civility, as not to
make a Bargain, for so much or so much; yet if there be an implicit
Expectation or Dependence, upon such a Service or Ministry, for a Salary,
maintenance, etc. I ask, (Whatever the Person, Mercenary light
his Gifts, Experiences, Light be) whether is Calling and Standing be not as
truly Mercenary and Unchristian, as his that stands at the Corners of the
Streets in dark Nights, with ready lights and linkes, offering to go with any
call (presuming on a pay) and therefore his word is to every likely passenger,
Will you have a light Sir?

Lastly, I ask, Whether (as the Lord Jesus speaks of false Prophets) we any not
discern false Doctrines, Bloody fruits of a (pretended) holy Root.
Tenants, and Opinions, by the horrible fruits, which this bitter Root has
brought forth, to the slaughter of so many thousands, and ten thousand times
then thousand of mankind, Religiously and Zealously (as it pretended) hunting
one another, as wild Beasts, Monsters, Idolaters, Heretics Blasphemers? etc.

Yea, And which may cause a Soul, truly in love with Christ Jesus, to tremble;
this above all other, has been that bloody Knife, that has so many thousand
and then thousand times stabbed the Lord Jesus to the Heart, in the bloody
hunting of so many his Servants and Followers, as the greatest Heretics,
Blasphemers, etc. both in this and other Nations.

The sum of the fifteenth Question.

Whether the Examiner has not set himself to confute Paul, Heathen should not
make a Graven Image; nor any marvel, that they should by the form of some
Creature, represent him, etc. Whereas Paul proves, that the Eternal power and
Godhead, are so manifest, that they are without excuse, who knowing God, do not
glorify him as God, etc. but change the glory of God into an Image? etc.

First, Andsw.
I ask, Whether the Proposer of these Questions expresses not very little of
that Christian Moderation, The Examiner unchristianly dealt with.
and Equity, and Equanimity of Spirit, which a Follower of Christ Jesus
pretends to, in setting the words (which bear a better sense) yea and the Heart
of the Examiner upon the Rack, by infinuating little less, then that he has
set himself to contradict and fight against God himself, and his most holy
Spirit in Paul, his Servant and Penman? Whereas a more sober and Dove-like
Christian Eye will read no more, but a faithful and Christian plea, for
moderate and Christian thoughts, to all the Nations and Generations of the
World; who although by the hightned power of Reason, they may possibly attain
to (as above has been discoursed, by the light of Nature) many Convictions and
Confessions of a Godhead; The Natural estute of all and the very best of
mankind.
Yet is it not so facile and easy for them (having so many thousand clogs and
chains, of barbarous Ignorance, and Education, and Lusts hanging on them) to
soar so high, with the wings of mere Natural corrupted Reason, as to to find
the true God, and the true Way of glorifying God acceptably in Christ Jesus.
Yea I ask, Whether this is possible to be attained unto (as abovesaid?) But
rather that this place of Paul, Romans 1. implies, that the wisest and most
industrious of the Sons of Men, will be found guilty of gross Negligence and
undervaluing of God, and of being inslaved by many corrupt Lusts, Examples,
Customs, Fear of men, Tradition of Fathers, and of not improving that Power of
Reason, and understanding in themselves so far, and so high, as they ought and
might also do?

Secondly, I ask, If it be easy for the Nations of the World to escape and
miss these Rocks of Idolatry, All the Nations of the World, wandering in
Idolatry and superstition.
Superstition, Will Worship, etc. how comes it to pass, that all the
Generations of mankind, from the first Creation and Fall of Man to this day
(the Phoenicians, the Chaldeans, the Egyptians, the Persians, the Grecians, the
Romans, and the many millions of millions of wise and understanding men, not
only the Pagans, but the Turks, the Jews, the Papists, and carnal Protestant,
should so stupendiously and constantly wander from the glorifying of God, as
God, but by invented Images, and Representations of Superstition, Will Worship,
darken his Glory? etc.

Thirdly, If it be so easy to escape Idolatry, Superstition: Will Worship,
etc. How is it that the holy Spirit record, how easily, how wonderfully, Gods
own people and choicest Servants hardly kept from Superstition and
Will Worship, etc.
and fearfully, Gods own people ( Aaron the Leader, and all Israel with him)
slipped into the Idolatry of the Golden Calf? yea and afterward, the whole ten
Tribes of twelve (Gods own people) apostate to the Calves (again) of Jeroboam?

How is it, that not only the Godly Kings of Judah, neglected the demolishing
of the high places, and the reforming of what was notoriously Superstitious,
and that not only Solomon built houses for the gods of his Wives, but even
David, and thirty thousand of Israel with him, brings up the Ark of God (the
sign of Gods presence) with wonderful Solemnities shootings and rejoycings,
until they met with Perez-Uzzah, the Breach of Uzzah, the signal of Gods
displeasure?

How is it, that not only many shall seek to enter, and shall not be able;
Christ Jesus not easily found of, not only pretenders, but Cordial Intenders.
and Israel obtained not that which they sought for, as it is written, Romans 2.
But even the tender Love, and Dove, and undefiled of Christ Jesus ( Cant. 5.)
rising up to open to her Beloved, she finds him agrieved at her unkindness,
and gone; she sought him, but she found him not; she called him, but he gave no
answer?

Fourthly, The divisions of Reuben, yea even of Judah.
How is it, that not only God sends Antichristians strong Delusions, which
so hold their Understanding, Conscience, Judgment, and Affections, that they
really belive Lies, notorious and great Lies; but even at this Day among our
selves, the Consciences of Gods children and people (in whom the blessed fear
and love of God has shined) how are they (I say) divided each from other, not
only Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, and both against
Judah, but even Judah against Judah, Insomuch that Gods people at this day have
not only occasioned that reproachful term of Sectaries; because of their
separation from the National Churches, gathering themselves into separate
Congregations, but even from their Sects and Divisions among themselves? And I
ask, whether this shall not be, and must continue, until the blessed time of
one Heart, and one Spirit, and one Lip, which God will vouchsafe to all his
people?

Fifthly, Since every Way, Manner or Form of Worship, of Church, of Ministry,
of Prayer, of Baptism, etc. (that only excepted which the Lord Jesus
appointed) is an Invention, an Image, a molten or carved Image; And
consequently, Gods people full of Images, how much more the Nations.
the many strange ways, and kinds, and forms of Protestant Churches,
National, Provincial, Diocesan, Parochial, Presbyterian, Independent,
Separated, Half-separated, Baptized one way, a second, a third way (as to their
various Forms and Constitutions) are but Images and Pictures, and none but one
of them (if any of them be yet) according to the first pattern; And since Gods
own people, have had a great share and hand in such framings, etc. both in
England, Scotland, France, Low Countries, etc. I ask, If it be not much more
easy for the poor Nations of the World, who sit in darkness (as of old) to
erect Images of Gold and Silver, Wood, Stone, etc. and of late, Ways and
Manners of Worship (though more subtle and mysterious, yet) as real Images, as
those of the grossest Composition?

Lastly, I ask, If there be not a deep and heaven-designe, Gods design to
suffer the Nations, and his own people, to wander and feel the want of his holy
Spirit, in the use of all means.
of the most holy and only wise God, thus to suffer the world and his people
also, to divide and scatter, and dissipate themselves; Thus to cause the holy
Scriptures, amongst both Papists and Protestants (the pretended Rule of Life
and Light unto all their ways and Consciences) to be so Penned, so Written, so
translated, that as it was said of Jesus Christ, he was given for a stumbling
Block, and Rock of offense, as well as for a Rock and Foundation to his people:
So, may it not also be said of the holy Scripture, and the texts and writings
thereof, from whence so many, and so wonderfully different persuasions and
Consciences are risen?

In particular, I ask, If it have not been wonderfully easy, from the seeming
light of Nature and Scripture too, to slide into the many wanderings and
Labyrinths of consciences now extant, which though but Threads and Strawes, yet
do hold the conscience as with Chains of Adamant, until the holy and blessed
Spirit of God discover and dissolve? etc.

If there be any Bowels (therefore) of pity in us, toward poor sinners, like
our selves; If any sense of the mercies and pity of Christ Jesus to our
selves, How should we compassionate the Captivated and (sometimes) the striving
and relucting souls of thousands, about these and the like Opinions?

How many thousands and ten thousands of Gods ancient Friends and Acquaintance,
The Jews Conscientious plea from Scripture.
the Jews, will say unto us, How can that Jesus whom you pretend, be the true
Messiah, the anointed of God, he whom all the Prophets told of, whom all the
Fathers looked for? How did he deliver us from the Roman yoakes? how has he
redeemed us, these 1600 years since, from all our Enemies, in the Lands of our
Dispersions and Scatterings?

How many thousand Papists will tell us, that Jesus the Son of Mary, he is the
blessed Messiah that was to come? and why should we not believe him, that
plainly said, This is my Body? Is he not able to make good his word, in a real
and corporal presence? Did he not say to Peter, thou art Peter, and upon this
Rock will I build my Church; To thee will I give the Keys of the kingdom of
heaven?

How many thousand will tell us, that the great and wonderful mystery of the
holy Trinity is beyond their understanding and reach; and they cannot believe
and die for that which passes their comprehension; as also, that the knots of
holy Scripture (besides those of Reason) are very great and wonderful?

How many thousands are persuaded that the several Orders in the government of
Christ's House and Kingdom, The several conscientious pleas of the more knowing
and most godly persons in England.
are not manifested in vain unto us, in the Word of God, and in particular, the
order of Bishops?

Nor are there thousands and then thousands wanting, who will (triumphantly)
ask us, What that laying on the hands of the Presbytery was?

How many Consciences will ask how we can dare to say, that Christ Jesus died
not for all, when so many Scriptures speak of the propitiation for the sins of
the whole world?

And why (say they) shall the power of Nature be so slighted, when Christ Jesus
tells us, that he would, but Jerusalem would not?

And how is that doctrine (say they) so infallible, of the impossibility of a
final breach between Christ Jesus and Believers; when so many Caveats,
Warnings, Items, are given us nor to fall; and so many dreadful examples
(especially in these times) of the departure of so many from Christ Jesus, to
the world with Demas and Judas, to honor and preferment with Diotrephes, to
lusts, and pleasures, and many abominations, with the stony ground?

How many are assaulted by Satan, to question the Godhead of the Son of God,
and of the Holy Spirit, and of the truth of the holy Scriptures; Whether there
are no more holy Scriptures but these; and whether the Translations and
infallible, and which are to be rested or relied on?

Oh how merciful, how pitiful are the bowels of the Lamb of God, to poor
wandering sinners? And how sierce, how cruel are the thoughts of his Corrival
Antichrist, who makes it so casie to be born again, to have Gods Spirit, to
the Orthodox, to be truly Zealous against Idolaters, Blasphemers, Heretics?
etc.

The sum of the sixteenth Question.

Whether Idolaters may not be punished, Idolaters; and whether this opposes
not the word of God by Moses, and the punishment of the worshippers of the
Calfe, and Baal, and the Prophets of Baal?

Unto which may be added the seventeenth Question, viz:

Whether Idolaters may not be convinced by Acts, Murderer, and thereby the
heart of the Idolater is discovered? for the Murderer is discovered guilty,
because of Malice in his heart.

As also the eighteenth.

Whether of two sins,

First, to the Distinction of Idolatry, as to the nature of civil Magistracy
and its power, the different dispensations of God, diverse times, and diverse
ways, and at last by his Son; To the Fathers in familes, to Moses and the
Prophets in the typical Land of Ganaan, and at last all the world over, by his
most glorious and dear Son, God blessed for ever!

I ask, first, Whether the Examiner can be fairly charged, to bring it in as a
reason, that Idolatry should not be punished, because the Magistrate does not
know the heart of the Idolater? The Spaniards sacrificing millions of mtn to
that grand Ido! of the world, the Indian gold
And will all that the Examiner speaks there of the heart, be fairly cast up
and amount to more, then the forementioned distinction of Religious and moral
Idolatry, and that opened by that so famous instance of the Spaniards, in the
West Indies, who cried out against the poor Indians, Idolaters, Idolaters,
Heathens, worshippers of the Sun; and yet themselves did most notoriously bow
down to the Golden God, the Indians Gold (as all Europes Nations, and England
more or less) and in a sordid and bloody devotion, did sacrifice to that Golden
Images, so many thousands, yea millions of the Inhabitants? It is incredible
how many millions of mankind were there destroyed (as their own Cardinal --
wrote to the Emperor Charles the fifth) as Idolaters, Blasphemers, and c. But
it is very credible and easy to believe, what stumbling blocks, such their
Covetousness and Cruelties were, to the poor Indians, insomuch that they
abhorred to hear the Spanish Priests to talk of Heaven, whither the Spaniards
were said to go; whose Covetousness and Cruelties they thought would never send
them to a place of Blesedness.

Secondly, I ask, Whether those Examples of punishing the Worshippers of the
Calfe, and of Baal, and of Baals Priests, are presidential and binding unto all
the Nations of the World? And whether the Paralleling of all Times, to that
ceremonial Time, The new piecing up of the veil of the temple.
and all places to that typical and ceremonial place, be not indeed (upon the
point) a new piecing up of the veil of the Temple, which the right hand of the
God of Heaven has rent, and a preferring of Moses the Servant, before the Lerd
Fesus the Son, yea and (consequently) a denying of the Lord Jesus, the great
Messiah, to be yet come?

Thirdly, I ask, If these Examples be now presidential, The Bishops root and
branch, and all faise Ministers ought to be put to death.
Whether if there were such Civil Magistrates Monarchs of the world as formerly
(yea and however) whether it be not the duty of all the Magistrates in the
World, to destroy (even beyond all compare and Imagination) the greatest part,
if not almost all the Inhabitants of the whole World, for some false Worship,
Idolatry, and one Golden Calf or another?

Yea I ask, Whether by this rule, the State of England,, then favoring the
Nonconformitant and Presbyterian, ought not only to have abolished Episcopacy
(branch and root) but also to have slain the Bishops by the sword? And by this
rule, whether all false and Antichristian Ministers, whether Bishops, Priests,
Monks, Friars, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Deanes, Doctors, Chaplains, and c. yea
and all several Priests in the World, ought not without mercy to be put to
death?

Yea, I ask, If this State of England should resent the Presbytery of England,
Scotland, and c. as false: Presbyterian and Independent Ministers put to death.
And if another Power or Parliament should revolve, in the constant turning of
the Wheels of Providence) and should condemn the Independent Ministers, to be
as false as Presbyters; Where will this bloody Issue stop? What Heaps upon
Heaps? How would (by this Doctrine) not only this hopeful Commonweal, but also
the whole world, be turned to Shambles, and Akeldama's, Fields of blood? for
must we not slay the worshippers of Calves as Baal, as Moses and Elias did?

Fourthly, As to the instance of Murder, I ask, If there be not three apparent
differences between civil crimes against the State, and those of spiritual
nature against God, his worship? etc.

First, There are no generations of men, nor never were in the world, but by
the dark light of nature, have condemned these four sins, viz. Murder, Four
sins which all mankind have agreed to condemn not so about Religion.
Adultery, Thest, Lying, as inconsistent to the converse of man with man: But
all the Generations and Nations of men, have most constantly differed, and
varied into many thousand differences about the true God, and his ways of
worship, etc.

Secondly, Those four sorts of Sinners, Murderers, Adulterers, Thieves and
Liars, are easily convinced and ashamed ( Ier. 6.) they cannot but confess
themselves sinners, and justly punished, etc. But Idolaters all the world over
are ready to cry out (hours, and years, Civil transgressions more discernable
them, Spirituals.
and ages together) Great is our Diana. And however ( Tit. 3.) an Heretic or
obstinate, withdrawn from Christ's admonition, has some checkings and
convincings in his own conscience; yet both Papists, and Turks, and Jews, and
Pagans that are serious, have trampled over Posts and Prisons, Torments and
Deaths, to keep their Consciences.

Thirdly, Without Civil Order, no Civility; without spiritual, no Christianity.
Without some Order of Civiltie (more or less) some civil Officers of Justice
to punish those four sins (especially) it is impossible that men can live (as
men, and not as Beasts or worse) together, etc. But notwithstanding several
Religions in one Nation, in one Shire, yea in one Family; if men be either
truly Christian, like unto Christ. Fesus, whom they pretend to follow, or but
truly Civil, and walk but by the rules of Humanity and Civility; Families,
Towns, Cities, and Commonweals (in the midst of Spiritual Differences) may
flourish.

Fourthly, Spiritual plagues the sorest.
I ask, As to the punishing of the Idolatry, and all other transgressions of
Spiritual account, Are, the wounds and deaths of the two edged sword,
proceeding from the mouth of Christ Fesus, little, and of no estimation with
us? Are Levi's impartial slayings of Brethren, Sisters, Fathers, Mothers, and
c. ( Deuteronomy. 33.) Is the delivering up of the Nations of the world ( Romans 1.) to
such unnatural and monstrous Lusts, And the Chains of strong Lies and
Delusions upon all the Antichristian World, no dread nor terror with us?
Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone (especially now in more spiritual and
Gospel Times) is far more dreadful and horrible ten thousand sold, then
cutting off for murder, etc.

And I end this Question, A fourth plague added to the three of David's choice.
with this Quere: If it had pleased the most holy and only wise, to have added
one Judgment more to David's choice of the three sore plagues, Sword, Famine,
and Pestilence; I say If he had been pleased to add a fourth, to wit, a giving
up to the least of sins, the least hiding of his holy Countenance, and c. would
not David, yea our selves (if our Hearts be after Gods and David's) choose ten
thousand times all the first three, then the least Spiritual stroke of
Blindness, Hardness from the sear of God? Isa. 63.

The nineteenth Question.

Whether Asa did well in bringing the the people into Covenant, Hypocrites,
whereas the people swore with all their heart? and c. And although Hypocrisy
do follow, yet this flows from the Corruption of the hypocrite, and not from
the holiness of the command.

I have before, and it is else where discovered, Canaan, that people
miraculously cast out, and the seed of Abrabraham and Israel miraculously
brought in; their Kings and Judges immediately designed and stirred up by God,
as the Saviors, and types of the great Savior to come: these were anointed,
as also were their Prophets and Priests, in figure of that great King, Prophet,
and Priest, Christ Fesus: All which, with all those figurative Ceremonies and
miraculous goings of God with that people, is acknowledged by so many of Gods
people, and by Master Cotton in this Controversy; and that the people of God
in the New Testament is the only Antitype; as also that there is no Footstep
nor Color, in the New Testament of Christ Fesus, for a National Church or
Covenant: And therefore,

I ask, First, Whether this be not an overthrowing of the whole design of God
concerning Christ Jesus, and a denying of him yet to be come; and to have
fulfilled the National and Ceremonial figures? But since we say he is come,
Christ Fesus his Testament enough for Christians, although we had never heard
of Moses.
and has brought the discovery of his Fathers displeasure, otherwise dispensed
then was in former times, to the Fathers and the Prophets; Is not his Testament
complete, and the Revelation of his Fathers mind full in all matters, as to
his Servants and Followers, although we had never heard of Meses, and although
it should have pleased God to have concealed the whole Old Testament from us?

I Further ask, The difference between Israel and other Nations.
Whether Asa did compel any Nation that had not been so miraculously bought and
brought by God as Israel was, into Covenant with him? And may indeed a King
now, if he conquer all Nations, compel and force them all to swear to serve his
God, to make a Covenant and Contract with him, and this under pain of death, as
Asa did? Did or might Asa, or any of the Kings of Israel or Judah, so compel
other Nations, which they did or might have conquered, and that under pain of
death?

Is not Christ Jesus the truly and only King of Israel? And is not his sword,
his two-edged sword, and his mighty weapons, spiritual (2 Cor. 10.) entering
into the very Hears, and Spirit, and Conscience, and thoughts of the Heart?

Secondly, I ask, If this poor Nation of England and Scotland, and c. have not
heard the voice of the God of heaven out of the whirlwind (as in Job) declaring
himself in thundering language, and dialects of Blood, Distractions, and
Destructions, about this National League and Covenant? The wonderful Character
of Gods jealousy upon the Scorish National Covenant.
Were ever two Nations so solemnly, and with such seeming glorious Holiness,
united, to make this Island an holy Land, and to purge out, as out of an holy
Land and Air (as Canan was) all Idolatry, Schism, and Heretics? And were
there ever more evident Characters of the Jealousy and displeasure of the most
High, written upon such Covenants, such Conjunctions?

Or was there ever (almost) such a miraculous Decision of the controversy,
between the Covenanters themselves, about the Interpretations of it?

And has not the most holy and invisible God made bare his holy Arm, and
written it in National letters of blood, that he that runs may read it, That
this National Covenanting, and National Churching, and National compelling, and
National conforming (as to the Souls and Consciences of men, and as to the
worship of the God of heaven) is but Levitical and Ceremonial, but Mosaical and
Jewish, but Unchristian and destructive to the New Testament of Christ, to the
freedom of the soul and conscience, to the gracious free breathings of the
most holy Spirit of God, persuading and spiritually compelling, the Spirits and
Souls of men, to knit the only true Lovers Knot and Covenant, that Death and
Hell, and all the powers of Earth and Hell, Men and Devils, shall never be able
to untie?

Thirdly, It was no guilt of Hypocrisy in Asa, to compel that whole Nation,
which, according to those figurative times and old Covenant, were miraculously
brought and kept in Covenant with God; The Hypocrisy of National Covenants.
upon which the Examiner does not fix the least charge of Hypocrisy: but now
he may (and all men may) ask, why other whole Nations, and all Natitions should
be forced (like Cattle) by thousands and ten thousands, Cities, Nations, and c.
to a Religion, and Covenant, and Worship, which their Forefathers knew not,
which their Souls own not, and their Consciences secretly disclaim as false?
etc. Does not this, as Isaiah tells us, fill a Nation with Hypocrisy? And has
not this Doctrine filled this Nation (if ever any) with wonderful Hipocrisies,
as the Civil Sword and power of compulsion has fallen by Gods most holy
providence, into the hands of Pagan, or Popish, or Protestant, or Presbyterian,
or Independent, (if perse cuting) Consciences?

I ask further, Is there not a two fold Hypocrisy, First, A tu of old
Hypocrisy amongst Pro^.
that which is more hidden and secret, such as Achitophels with David, and
Fudas with Christ Jesus, Thieves and Traitors in the Bosom, etc. Yet outwardly
true, faithful, holy, Cordial? etc.

Secondly, That which is more open, evident and plausible, such as that of the
ten Tribes, pro fessing the name of the God of Israel, and yet with-all, the
Worship of the Calves; and Ieroboams Feasts and Priests, and other his
Inventions; and moreover, living without the life of the true God of Israel.

In the late Wars, some that professed to side with the Parliament, voted in
the House, sat in Committees; yea fought for the Parliament, Laws, and
Liherties, and c. yet lay they like Traitors in the Bosom, as after was
discovered. Others fought for the Parliament, Laws and Liberties, and yet
joined openly with the King, fought under his Colors, and pretended only the
name of that (to wit, holiness and the Love of God) which they hated more then
Sin, and Hell, and Damning.

Or as in our Streets daily, we find two sorts of Beggars, one speaks such
wants, Antichristian hypocrisy illstrated.
so predicates Christ Jesus, so prays for you, that many are taken and moved
to real pity and compassion, and yet deceived. A second sort, profess the Trade
of Begging, they keep open those Sores, which they will not have healed; they
steal or get Children to beg with, they abhor to labor, and make a Trade of
Hypocrisy: It Is true, that they cry up the name of Christ Jesus too, and pray
for you; but if you put not into their mouth, how soon fall they from blessing
to cursing! etc.

Of this second sort, The pretended Christian Nations found Antichristian.
are not the Christian Nations (so called) made up and constituted, whether
East or West, Greek or Latin, the Popish or Protestant Churches, who like the
ten Tribes, and (many of them) like the strange Nations, brought in after the
Captivity by Salmanasser, 2 King. 17. They feared the God of Israel and served
him, and their own Gods too; and the Spirit of God concludes of them, that
they served their own Gods, and served not the true God at all?

Is not this apparently the state of thousands and ten thousands and millions
of (named) Christians, professing Christ in Word, Tit. 1. but in works denying
of him, overspread with the Abominations of Religious and moral Idolatries,
spiritual and corporal Murders, Whoredoms, Oppressions, Drunkenness, and c.
either as the great Whore (probably the Whore of Rome) actually drunk with the
blood of the Saints and Prophets of Jesus, or else thirsting after the day of
their bloody fills? etc.

Fourthly, Religious Ravishments and horrid Abominations.
I ask, Whether as to force the Consciences of the Unwilling is a Soul- Rape,
so to force the (Ignorant, profane, and unregenerate) Nations, into a
pretended holy fellowship and Communion with God, be not ten thousand fold more
unholy and unrighteous, then to force into the Beds of any Men of Honor, ugly
and deformed strangers, yea enemies, yea and impudent Whores and Strumpets?
Would the Proposer style their commands holy, just, good, did the matter
concern but his own Bed? as who can but know the matter in question so nearly
concerns the Lord, being communion, which ( Cant. 1.) is no other then the
mystical and spiritual Bed of the Lord Jesus?

Did ever God or Man command to do well, The methods of Friendship with God and
men.
before a ceasing from Evil? Does God or man ever strike up Covenants of Love,
Leagues of Amisy, yea or admit a treaty, before Repentance and Satisfaction for
former Injuries, before the Removeall of Force, the laying down of Arms, and
the acknowledging the Power and State of such with whom they treat? If these be
ways of civility, rightecusness, order, prudence, what commands shall they be
called, what holiness and goodness shall be found in them, which carry written
(like the Whores forehead, Rev. 18.) Mysteries, Babylon, Hypocrisies,
Dissimulations? and c.

Therefore (lastly) I ask, how much infinitely sweeter are Gods Methods,
delighting only in a willing people? how sweet are the paths of the Lamb of
God Christ Jesus, whose true Messengers are Maidens ( Pro. 9.) who with
Virgin-Chastity and Modesty, invite poor sinners to the heavenly Feast and
Banquet? And because three are not only Rivers of pleasures at the right hand
of God, but Rivers of Fire and Brimstone for the obstinate, they knowing these
Terrors of God, persuade, and pull, and compel poor sinners as Brands from the
everlasting Burnings, etc.

The sum of the twentieth Question.

Whether those portions of Scripture, Heb. 6. 2. Whether if the Examiner were
ready to starve, or sick near Death, he would refuse Bread or Physic, because
they came in Forms?

1. I ask, Proposer of these Questions have fairly collected from any words of
the Examiner in the quoted ninth Section, that the Examiner does call any
Principle, necessary to Salvation, or despise them under the name of Forms; or
does despise those Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6. under the
title of Forms? or whether he do simply, or without all due consideration,
contend against the Title, or the substance of a Form?

For can it be supposed, Of outward Forms of worship.
that the Examiner should plead so much for the Light of the holy Scripture and
the holy Spirit of God, and yet to want that light of Reason, as not to know
that form a dat esse; and (although there are very intricate Disputes de formie
internis and externis, and whence the forms of creatures are produced) to
imagine that any thing in the world should have a being (much less the best and
perfectest, spiritual and heavenly things) and be formless? or that there
should be so much visible Acknowledgements, service or Worship of God left in
the world, as of the Word and Prayer, (which the Examiner is known to approve
and practice) without some form and order, without which it must prove a Chaos,
a Babel and confusion?

Besides, Several sorts of Forms pretending all to be Christ's
are not these his very words excepted against, [Do yet make so much of outward
Forms, as to force men to bow down to them?]

In which, does there not fairly seem to be couched this double Assertion,

First, That there are many sorts of outward forms, Forms of Confessions, Forms
of Prayers, Forms of Churches, Forms of Discipline, Forms of Worship, and c.

Secondly, That every Sect and Sort are woefully apt to force one another to bow
down unto their own most excellent ways and manners, of which they severally
and respectively are so and so persuaded: And is not this most woefully and
lamentably true, in all Nations, in all Religions, in all Sects of all sorts,
now extant among our selves, and upon all the Face of the whole Earth?

Secondly, I ask, Of doctr^^^ necessary (...) ^^^vation.
If the Proposer walk not upon a most dangerous Bridge, whiles he disputes of
Principles necessary to Salvation? And indeed, whether both Papist and
Protestant are not both in the woods, while they force whole Nations to believe
many Doctrines necessary to Salvation, and yet wind up all in one, viz. to
believe as the Church believes? For if they prove but obedient Sons to the
doctrine of their Mother the Church (although they wholly want the Life and
Spirit of God their (pretended) Father, yet how have such Children been ten
thousand times more accepted, then such who cannot see nor live, but by their
own Eyes and Faith, and desire to taste, to examine and try all things, and to
hold fast that only which they are persuaded comes from God?

Again, Fundamentals of Religon.
notwithstanding several numbers of Fundamentals, which others both Papists and
Protestants are pleased to assert: Yet I ask, what we think of the short word
of the Lord Jesus, Mark 16. 16. He that Believes and is Baptized, shall be
saved? yea whether upon the point, the first of these two be not absolutely
necessary; because he pincheth only upon not Believing as Damnable; He that
believes not, shall be damned?

And howsoever some grant that as to the visible profession of the Christian
Religion, It is danger^^^ to say, with how little faith God will save.
a distinct knowledge of Christ Jesus is necessary, Yet we know what is extant
abroad of a possibility of Salvation, without an express and distinct knowledge
of the name of Christ, according to that of Heb. 1. He that comes to God, must
believe that God is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek
him. And I ask, Whether (although it be a duty to work out Salvation with fear
and trembling, and to grow in the Grace and Knowledge of the Lord Jesus) yet is
it not very presumptuous and dangerous to set a Neplus infra, a stint and bound
of so much Knowledge, and so much grace of Christ (as to the degrees of it)
without which there is no Salvation.

I ask, Two of the Principles Heb. 6. of great controversy.
once more, from that Heb. 6. Whether (although I question not but that both
the Proposer and Examiner believe four of these Principles, viz. Repentance,
Faith, the Resurrection and Judgment, yet) whether the Proposer be able to
dissolve the doubts of thousands, as to those other two, the Doctrine of
Baptismes, and the Laying on of hands; concerning which, the more Conscientious
and tender the People of God are, about the true worship of God and Christ
Jesus, the more they find their loss, about the holy ways and means of it?

Thirdly, I ask, What have been most of all the Forms, and Prescripts of
Doctrine and worship (since the great Apostacy and falling away) but mere
Forms and Pictures, without the power and life of Godliness? In which respect,
may I not say in the Language of James, As the Body without the Spirit, and
Faith without works is dead; So, what have been the several National Models,
Platforms, Frames and Forms, The mere Formalities of State-Forms of worship.
of the Ecclesiastical Governments (which the Fathers have built, and the
Children have broke) either in the East or Western Churches, even to the last,
and Youngest, and Fairest of the Pictures, but Pictures drawn to the Life, and
yet but liveless Pictures and Proforma?

I most humbly and thankfully acknowledge the Heavenly discoveries of many
Truths of Jesus, wrapped up confusedly even in Babylon it self and the people of
the God of heaven with them; from whence he has, and will gloriously redeem
them both: I acknowledge the several blessed degrees, Gods light and Gods
people wrapped up in the National Reformations.
and increasings of Light, wrapped up in several Clouds of Reformations (so
called) in our own and other Nations: I am far from imagining that people
should hold nothing, do nothing, etc. for I unfeignedly desire (as the
Scripture speaks) in a Scripturesence, that all men might be saved; That every
Man were a Noble Man, an ingenious Berean, Examining by the Scriptures, and
holding fast to the Death, what he believes he has received from the Father of
Lights.

And yet, better sit still, then still rise and fall: Have all the Spirit, the
Calling, the Gifts, the Life and the presence of God with them; as those first
Messengers the Apostles, whose Successors Men yet pretend to be?

Were it not better for us to acknowledge, The danger of our own Inventions in
heavenly matters.
how poor, how naked, how blind, how miserable we are, and to listen to the
holy Counsel of Christ Jesus, etc. to buy of him, that blessed Gold and
Eye Salve, that white Raiment and fine Linen, that we may truly see, and be
truly rich, and be truly glorious and beautiful; then boasting of our
Knowledge, and Abundance, and want of nothing; we prove so grievous to the
stomach of Christ Jesus, that he vomit us with loathing out of his mouth?

Lastly, I ask, In case we had for unquestionable Fundamentals, a Creed
composed by the twelve Apostles of the Lamb: That a Synod of heavenly Angels
assembled and concluded of Fundamentals, of Forms of Worship, External force in
Spirituals can only pierce the outside.
Ordinations, Ministeries, Maintenance, etc. (and all without the reach of a
Curse, for another Gospel, Gal. 1.) Yet I ask, what rule can be produced from
the Testament of Christ Jesus, that these Forms, these Prescripts must be
imposed, and beaten into (not the Brains and Hearts of men, which is
impossible) but into the outsides and knees of men, with Swords and Staves,
that (as Christ Jesus said of the Samaritans) they might worship they know not
what? What reason of Christianity, or Civility, that the Talmud of the Jews,
the Alcaron of the Turks, and the Canons of all sorts of Popes must not be
questioned? What Scripture or Reason shall force a man to be a Scholar to a
Teacher, and force him to pay for his Teaching; To trust his Ship with a Pilot,
and to pay him for his Piloting; to trust himself with a Guide, and to pay him
for his Conduct, when he believes that Teacher, that Pilot, are dangerously
ignorant, that Guide is blind? etc. The mystery and and tyranny of persecuting
Teachers.
Yea further, from whom he must receive all upon Trust, and not dare (in the
very place and time of Teaching) to propose his Doubt, his Question, his
Objection, or desire Explanation?

And I add, What Christianity is that, which commands that no Churches be
gathered, no Ministers chosen, no Doctrine preached, but what the civil Sword
shall say is true and Orthodox? Nay no Magistrate himself chosen, nor any Civil
Officer, except he be of our Church, our Way and Conscience, as some say is the
Mystery and Tyranny of New-Englands practice?

The two and twentieth Question.

If God was to be blessed for putting it into the Heart of a Heathen Magistrate
to make Laws for Religion ( Isa. 7.27.) Whether he comes not near to a curse,
Idolatry and Heresy?

Sure the Proposer highly esteems this Example of Erra 7. for, Force and
Storming (indeed in a very stormy Language) in this last Question.

To many Branches of the same has been spoken: As to the nature of Civil
Magistracy, essentially Civil all the world over: As to the power of the
Magistrates or Officers designed unto them by the people, as but their
Deputies, either Legislative or Executive: As to the perfection of Civil
Magistracy in its self and in its kind, not capable of Diminution or Addition,
by the Magistrates change of Religion, to or from Christianity or any other
Religion in the world: As to Artaxerxes his fact, Artaxerxes his favor to the
Jews.
not being moved out of any heart to the true Religion; for neither did he, or
his people, forsake their own; but out of a Conquering Terror of God, he
shows, just mercy to his captives and people; he fears wrath to himself and
his Sons from that God, whose love and acquaintance he cared not for. But I
shall add (with Christ's help) these few Queries.

First, Whether this Supposition of making Laws to advance Religion, and
especially in a National way, does not overthrow and Evacuate one great end of
the coming of the Lord Jesus, which was to fulfill all those former shadows of
Temple, Altar, Priests, Sacrifice, etc. to tear the veil, to break down the
partition Wall, and with the two edged Sword of his Spirit, (his Word) to
conquer poor sinners in a way of love? National holiness and shadows, etc.
abolished by Christ Jesus the body and substance.
For if Ezra's pattern of carrying Laws and Authority from this King, to force
men to keep the Law of God, in this Jewish Religion, Jewish Nation, be a
president for all Nations, where is the abolishing of the holy Nation, holy
Cities, holy Temples, Altars, Priests? etc. Or ought we not (if Christ Jesus be
not come) to have the Officers commanded by the King to be Tole free, verse 24.
the Priests, the Levites, the Singers, the Porters, the Nethinims, or Ministers
of the house of God?

If it be said, The Morality of such a Law remains, I ask, Whether according
to Heb. 7. there being a necessity of the change of the Priesthood, there is
not a necessity of the change of the Law also, of that Law of Shadows, the holy
Land, holy Temples, holy Priests, holy Swords? etc.

I further ask, If that people of God (the figure of Gods Israel in after-Ages
to arise, in all Nations of the world) if they had not been Captivated, but had
been in their own Land, and not restrained by force; whether they ought not to
have builded the Altar and Temple, without the Kings command, yea and against
it? Yea it is expressly said, chap. 4. Gods people in Spirituals know no Caesar
but himself, and dear Son.
they were made to cease the building by power and Force; yet they went on,
chap. 5. to build again, at the instigation of Haggai and Zachary,
notwithstanding the prohibition of the King, yet lying in force against them.

And lastly I ask, If these things were not Examples ((...). 1 Cor. 10.) or
Types, figuring out the freedoms of Gods people, who if not hindered by actual
Force and Power, ought only to regard (in Spirituals) the Scepter, and Sword,
and Crown of the Lord Jesus Christ?

Secondly, I ask, What Laws this Artaxerxes made for the advancement of
Religion? Is not the first of absolute Freedom and Toleration to these poor
captive Jews? Was there any Babylonian or Persian command to go up to
Jerusalem, any commanded to pay, or to offer a penny toward this Expedition? Yea
were not the Jews themselves absolutely free, whether to go up to Jerusalem,
or stay in Babel; whether to offer to this work one penny, or not, as appears
both by the Decrees of Cyrus, in the first Chapter; of Darius, in the sixth;
and of Artaxerxes, in the seventh? Secondly, he decreed bountitiful Assistance
out of his own Treasury, toward the building of the Temple, the Sacrifices,
etc.

Thirdly, a Decree against any that should oppose, or hinder the building of
this House; and therefore (accordingly) whosoever would not do the Law of God,
and of the King, judgment must be executed speedily, etc. And chap. 6.11.
whosoever should alter Darius his decree, Timber should be pulled down from
his house, and being set up, he must be hanged thereon, and his house made a
dunghill.

If any shall say, The command of God and the King here mentioned, was a
command and Law in Spirituals, etc.

I ask, What Law was the Law of Artaxerxes the King? The Law of Artaxerxes, was
an absolute Law of Toleration of the Jews Conscience, vastly differing from,
and opposite to his.
was it of commanding the Jews to his Worship and Conscience, in an Uniformity
of Worship to the Nation wherein they were captive? Yea, was it a commanding of
the Jews to their own Religion, or only (on his part) a Law of Toleration
and Freedom to practice their own Religion, Conscience, and Worship, and that
with favorable Encouragement from himself?

For (as before) if the force were removed, although Artaxerxes should have
given them no Countenance nor Encouragement; Yet I ask, whether as Jews (Gods
people and subjects) they ought not of themselves to have departed from
Babylor, and from all parts of the World, and to have ascended to Jerusalem (as
the Jews literally dream) to their holy City, and there have built the Temple,
and presented their Sacrifices? etc.

Further, The literal and Spiritual Jew.
I ask, As Artaxerxes made not one Law either how or when the Jews should
pray, or fast, etc. but left them free to their own Conscience, to go up, or
not to go up to Jerusalem; so when these Kings did makes Laws in Spirituals
(as concerning prayer) whether Daniel did not well, in refusing to cease
praying, or by shutting of his window to give appearance of obedience, though
to the extreme ruin of life? etc.

And consequently. Whether as the Jews refused to be subject to any Judicature
but Gods alone revealed by Moses; So whether Christian Israel and Jews ought to
acknowledge any Tribunal but Gods?

Thirdly, I ask, Whether the plain English of not tolerating the Idolater and
Heretic, has not been in all Ages since Christ Jesus, the not tolerating
indeed of Christ Jesus, God manifested in flesh, and both in his own Person,
and in his Followers, the hunting or persecuting of him out of the world?

Was there ever any of the Prophets esteemed so great an Heretic from the
Jewish Religion, Christ Jesus accounted and hanged as the greatest Blasphemer
and Heretic that was.
as Christ Jesus was? was there ever such a Blasphemer of God (as the High
Priest esteemed him) as the blessed Son of God; God himself; Christ Jesus? And
does not the many Books of Martyrs, in our own and other Languages set forth,
that under this Hood and Vizard, the Devil has cast the Saints into Prison,
Rev. 2. He has watched to devour the Man-child, Rev. 12. and hunted the Woman
the Spouse of Christ Jesus, and her seed: And the great Whore pretending that
she drinks the blood of Heretics, etc. has been drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and Witnesses of Jesus? Rev. 17.

Hence will not Reason suspect a Murtherous snare in the Law pretended against
Thieves, Robbers, True grounds of suspicion, in Spirituals.
Whores, etc. and yet most commonly falling upon none but honest and faithful,
chaste, and modest Persons?

Are not these Engines worthily to be questioned, which pretending to take none
but Birds of prey, and Wolves, etc. and yet ordinarily catch nothing but
harmeless Doves, the Sheep and Lambs? etc.

If it be said, Idolatry, Heresy, etc. are the chiefest Enemies in Religion,
etc.

I ask, First, If those very famous Religions, which have pretended themselves
the truest in the World, have not been found the greatest Idols? etc.

Secondly, Christ Jesus his Spiritual provision, against Spiritual Adversaries.
Grant them to be the greatest Enemies, yet since Enemies are of two sorts,
Spiritual and Corporal, I ask, Whether as Corporal weapon are proper against
Corporal, so whether Spiritual weapons are not only proper against (merely)
Spiritual Adversaries?

Thirdly, Could Christ Jesus so forget himself, as not to take sufficient
order for Spiritual weapons against all his Spiritual enemies? In a Battle or
Fight, by Sea or Land, how apt are men to charge Generals and Commanders, if
Ammunition be wanting, etc. Yea in that case, how justly may men complain (as
in 88) that Powder was said to be wanting in our own Ships, at our own doors?
And shall i^ be imagined that the Last Will and Testament of the Son of God,
his whole Life, his 40 days after his Resurrection, and those Gifts, which
upon his Triumph in Heaven he sent upon men, should leave his Army, his Family,
his Kingdom, his Wife, unprovided, etc. so that in the very day of the Battle,
they must be forced to the Forge of the Philistims to borrow Swords, Halberts,
Guns, Pikes, Prisons, Halters, against Idolaters, Heretics? etc.

Fourthly, I may end and ask, in the Proposers own words (whether he be not
near a Curse, that would change the two-edged Sword of Gods Spirit, the word of
God, for a Sword of steel, in the hand of Civil Officers; and the Arm of the
eternal Spirit of God, for an arm of Flesh? etc.

And if blessed are Christ's peacemakers, Christ's Cursings and Blessings.
and Christ's persecuted ( Matthew. 5.) how near to a curse does he come, that
brings not Buckets to quench, but Bellows to kindle the Fire of Gods Jealousy
against State Inventions; the Fires of persecutions and hunting of Christ's
Saints, the Fires of devouring Wars amongst the Nations, for their respective
Religions and Consciences? How near to a curse does he come, who under a Cloak
of Christian Magistrate, True Religion, Zeal against Idolaters, Heretics, etc.
shall conceal a Dagger (which yet, I hope this Proposer knowingly does not)
stabbing at the heart of God, his Christ, his Spirit, his Saints, his pure
Worship, yea and at the Heart of all Civil peace and Civil Magistracy, and
Civility it self throughout the whole World?

And therefore lastly, I ask, Whether these two Examining Worthies shall not be
wrapped up in the everlasting Arms of Blessedness it self, while they improve
their Talents uprightly, and impartially, in the further Examination of this
Fire of Zeal in question? Yea and whether not only these two honorable
Senators, but the most renowned Senate of the world (the Parliament it self)
shall not be truly crowned with the Lawrells of true Nobility, as the Bereans
were, while they Heartily and Impartially Examine whether these things are so
or no?

FINIS.

