Exceeding Joyful NEWS FROM THE PRINCE Being Comfortable Tidings for Both
Houses of Parliament, as it will evidently appear in this ensuing Subject.
Wherein His Highness does express his firm and constant Resolution. Also the
Express Command that the Prince has given to the Cavaleers. With the
Parliaments Resolution concerning the Kings Majesty, He being now Resolved to
set up his Standard, and has thereupon commanded all those that will aid
assist him to Repair to Nottingham.

Ordered that this be forthwitg printed

Hen. Elsing Cler. D. Com.



August 19. Printed for James Ragge. 1642.

Exceeding JOYFUL NEVVES FROM THE PRINCE.
HIs Highness being made Lord General of a Troop of Horse, in the Northern
parts of this Kingdom, His Desire was, that they should behave themselves
fairly, not doing any harm, to man, woman, or child, giving them strict
Command, that they should commit no Outrages whatsoeverr against any of His
Majesty's loving Subjects, neither should they take any thing from them by
violence; which Command was observed and obeyed by them for a long time, till
within these few days they began to revolt from obeying the Princes Command,
committing many tyrannical Actions against His Majesty's Subjects, plundering
their Houses, and taking from them all that they could find therein.

Which Outrages and in humane Acts, at last came to the knowledge of the
Prince; who having information of it, was much moved, and forthwith gave
Command, for the apprehending of all such persons.

His Highness has also set down His Resolution, that if any of the Soldiers
in His Majesty's Army, or elsewhere, does offer to abuse any Person or
Persons, or ceize upon their Horses, Goods, etc. or presume to take any thing
away from them by violence, that they shall have just and severe punishment for
the so doing.

This is the Resolution of our most Gracious Prince, whom God ever protect with
peace and prosperity, and these particulars he is resolved to put in execution
against all those that will not concur with His Desires; the which Command
strikes joy and comfort to the hearts of His Majesty's loving Subjects, by
reason that they have now some hopes to be eased of their Burdens, which they
have of late days groaned under.

His Majesty both sent a Message to the County of Kent, Declaring His will and
pleasure therein, commanding the Judges of that County to displace some of the
Justices; which by virtue of His Majesty's Warrant 1, were dismissed, and five
other chosen, who have since their coming into that place, subscribed to
certain Articles and Propositions of His Majesty, for raising of Horse, Men,
and Money for His Majesty's service, and endeavored as much as in them lay, to
bring the said Propositions to perfection; but their Designs did not take
effect for the House having received information of their proceedings,
forthwith Ordered, that the said Justices should be sent for as Delinquents,
and immediately dispatched a Messenger for the apprehending of them.

Information was also given to the House of His Majesty's Proceedings in
Yorke-shire, and that the Malignant Party had so far prevailed with His
Majesty, that there is now no hopes of Peace, by reason that the King is
determined to set up his Standard at Nottingham on Monday next, as it was
credibly signified, and reported to the House of Commons upon Wednesday last,
being the 17. day of this instant month of Angust.

And to that end, his Majesty has caused great preparations for War to be
made, declaring His will and pleasure therein, and giving special command to
all his loving Subjects for these speedy Repair thither.

The House having received these sad tidings, forthwith fell into debate
thereof, and unanimously, that they held themselves bound in Conscience, for to
raise Forces, and to send them down with all possible speed and expedition, for
the preservation and Defense of the Religion of Almighty God, the Liberties and
peace of the Kingdom, and in pursuit of those wicked and rebellious Traitors,
that does strive and endeavor to involve this Kingdom in a Civil War.

They are resolved to withstand those wicked Counselors that does daily
incense the King against his Parliament, and through their means has caused
him to set up his Standard; it being the way to bring this Kingdom to
destruction, and it is the only course that the Malignant Party can take, to
bring Popery and Superstition in this Kingdom, and so by that means beat down
and trample under feet Gods true Religion, and Gospel.

Lastly, the Lords and Commons to witness their constant and firm Loyalty and
Affection to His Majesty, do here solemnly Declare, That if his Majesty will be
pleased to disbandon all his Forces, and abandon those wicked Counselors that
are about him, and leave them to condign punishment, and return and hearken to
the advice of his great Council, they will really endeavor to make both His
Majesty, and His Posterity, as great, rich, and potent, as much beloved at
home, and feared abroad, as any Prince that ever swayed this Scepter.

This is their Resolution, and this they are Resolved to maintain with their
own precious blood.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons, That this be printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parliament. Hen. Elsing Cler. Par. D. Com.



FINIS.

