THE EXAMINER EXAMINED. Certain Questions proposed to the AUTHOR of Zeal
examined concerning his PRINCIPLES. Whereby he endeavors to prove; That the
MAGISTRATE by his Authority ought not to advance true RELIGION, but to give a
Toleration to Idolatry and Heresy.

ESAIAS 49.22, 23. Thus says the Lord God; Behold, I will lift up my hand to the
Gentiles, etc. And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy
nursing Mothers.

REVEL. 17.12, 16. The ten Horses which thou saw are ten Kings. These shall
hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her
flesh, and burn her with fire.

Printed at London for John Wright, at the King's Head in the Old Bailey, 1652.

(...) be given up to strong Delusions not to receive the Love of the Truth;
yea, an universal Love of all Truth. But if he propose things contrary to
Truth or doubtful things for resolved Truths (as indeed he is very cloudy in
many of his Assertions) herein he may be Questioned, That so he may receive
Light in those things wherein he erres by being certainly in the Dark; and may
be stird up to seek more clear Light in those things which he yet sees but in
a Mist.

Toward these Ends are these following Enquiries; which if they shake the
Examiners Principles and Pillars, and the House built thereon do fall, it will
be no great loss nor wonder. No loss nor wonder, I say, if a House of Dagon
fall, the receptacle and shelter of Idols and Idolatry, Heresy, and Blasphemy.

Question 1. WHether a MAGISTRATE that knows the Doctrine of Salvation by
Christ Jesus, do fulfill the Office of a Nursing Father, if he do not cause
this saving Food to be given to his Children; and Poison, that is a contrary
Doctrine to be kept from them? 2. Whether the Doctrine of GRACE that brings
Salvation, do not teach Men to live godly, righteously and soberly; and more
particularly, to obey Magistrates, and to Live in Love and Peace among
themselves; and whether such a Doctrine do not advance the peace and
prosperity of a Nation; and consequently, whether a Magistrate be not bound to
advance this Doctrine, which does advance the peace and prosperity of a Nation?
3. Whether Godliness has not the promise of this life and that to come? And
whether these Promises do not contain in them all good and happiness? and if
so, whether the Magistrate be not bound, to his power, to advance that
godliness which gives all good and happiness to a Nation? 4. Whether the
Magistrate be not bound to love GOD with all his Might, and accordingly to
advance his Glory with all his might? And whether he do so, if he do not put
forth all his might in advancing Gods true worship and service, and the chief
good of Gods People committed to his care? 5. The People being bound to pray
for Magistrates, that under them they may lead a peaceable and quiet life in
all godliness and honesty: Whether the Magistrate be not bound to do that
which the People are bound to pray that he may do? And whether he be not also
bound to give himself up to God to be his servant and Instrument, when he
grants this Prayer? 6. Whether Abraham, and the Heads of other Families
before the Law, Genesis 18.19.
were not Magistrates in their Families? And whether Abraham did not command
his Family to keep the way of the Lord? And whether God did not commend him
for doing so? Genesis 35.2.
and whether Jacob did not purge his House from Idols, and caused his Household
to go up to Bethell to worship the true God? Sect. 10.
And whether Abraham and Jacob were merely Fellow Servants with their Servants
(as this Examiner says) and their Household might command Abraham and Jacob, as
well as Abraham and Jacob command their Household? 7. Whether Artaxerxes did
well in making a Decree for the advancement of the true worship of the true
God, Ezra 7.
and in causing Ezra to teach them the Law of God? And whether the King of
Niniveh did well to command his People to keep a general Fast, and to turn
from their evil ways, whereby he saved that great City? Or whether he might
not have done better to have left them to a careless liberty, and so to
destruction? 8. Whether any of the Prophets, Apostles, yea our Savior himself
did ever except at the Magistrates Auhority, for questioning them in matters of
Religion? 9. If a believing Magistrate, as a nursing Father, Recommend to his
Children the wholesome food of the Word, that is able to save their Souls, and
encourage those that disperse and dispense it; and withal, forbid others to
give abroad the poison, contrary to it? Whether the Examiner has just cause to
say, that this is a Ground for another Magistrate to command the giving abroad
of poison, and to forbid the delivering of the wholesome food that may save his
peoples souls? 10. Authority being given by God to Asa to advance true
Religion and suppress Idolatry (which he did to the deposing of his Mother)
Whether this were a ground for Manasseh, (one of his Successors) to set up
Idolatry, and a principle of Persecution, whereupon he might kill those that
would not worship his Idols? 11. When God made a Law, that Blasphemy proved by
two Witnesses, should be punished with Death; Whether he therein did lay a
principle of Persecution or Murder, whereby Jesabel by two false Witnesses
might unjustly put Naboth to death? 12. Whether Paul commanding Christian
Fathers to bring up their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,
do hereby lay a Principle, Ephesians. 6 4.
whereupon Idolatrous Parents may bring up their Children in the nurture and
and Doctrine of Idolatry; that is, in the doctrine of Devils? 13. Idolatry
being against the Light of Nature, Job 3.28. Romans 1.
and therefore punishable under the Law of Nature, and so acknowledged by Job,
who lived before the Law of Moses; Whether the Magistrate under the Gospel
(which gives more light to the discovery of the sinfulness and guilt of
Idolatry) may not also restrain and punish that sin? 14. Idolatry by the
testimony of Paul, drawing down heavy Plagues upon a People, and delivering
them up to grievous and abominable sins, Romans 1.18 and seq.
the worst of Plagues, whereof he gives a Catalogue; and actually causing the
Land of Canaan to spue out the Inhabitants; Whether it do not concern the
Magistrate to deliver his People from those Plagves, Levit. 20.2, 3, 22, 23.
by taking away Idols, the cause of them, and to cast out Idolatry, rather then
it should cast out the People from the Land where he Governs? 15. Whether
this Examiner do not directly set himself to confute the Apostle Paul; Sect.
9.
for the Examiner argues, that it is not easy to find that the Heathen should
not make a graven Image, nor any marvel that they should by the form of some
Creature represent the invisible Being, and worship him in the form of such a
representation. But Paul just on the Contrary proves, Romans 1.
That by the things that are made and seen, the Invisible things of God, even
his eternal power and God head are so manifest, that they are without excuse
who knowing God do not glorify him as God, but change the glory of the
Incorruptible God into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds and
four footed Beasts. But this brings to mind that saying concerning Idols;
They have Eyes and see not, and they that worship them are like them, and so
are those that plead for them? 16. Whether Idolatry may not be punished; Sect.
5.
because the Magistrate does not know the heart of the Idolaters? And whether
this reason do not directly oppose that Law of God which punished Idolatry, and
the execution agreeable to that Law; when those that worshipped the Calfe were
slain by the command of Moses; and the worshippers of Baal by Iehu; and the
Prophets of Baal by Elias? 17. Whether Idolaters may not be convicted by
outward actions, professions and confessions; Sect. 5.
and thereby the Heart of an Idolater discovered, as well as the Heart of a
Man-killer? For such a one is condemned because of Malice in his heart; without
which it were not Murder nor he a Murderer? 18. If two sins be of a heinous
nature and both deserve punishment, Whether one that can be discerned should be
spared, because the other is not punished for want of discerning; yea, whether
if both may be discerned and punishable, yet neither should be punished, because
both are not? 19. Whether Asa did well in forbidding Idolatrous wroship, and
bringing the People into a Covenant with God; Sect. 22.
since (as the Examiner says) he might thereby have made many to turn
Hypocrites; when yet the Scripture says, 2 Chro. 15.
That they swear withal their heart, and sought God with their whole desire?
And though Hypocresie should follow such holy Commands, whether the fault of
Hypocrisy be not from the Corruption of the Hypocrite, Rom 7.12, 13
and not at all from a holy and good Command? 20. Whether the parts and
portions of Scripture that contain Principles necessary to Salvation, Sect. 9.
deserve to be called merely by the Name of Forms, and much less to be
despised under that Name? And consequently whether the Examiner think it fit
upon the Title of Forms to despise the Principles of the Doctrine of CHRIST
mentioned by the Author to the Hebrews? Heb. 6.1.
21. If the Examiner were ready to starve, and the Magistrate (as Pharaoh did
to the Priests) would give him an allowance of Bread in a Portion, Sect. 9.
Whether he would despise that Bread, and call it a Form, and so starve to
death? Or in a desperate Sickness, whether he would refuse the receipt of a
Physician that may save his life, because it comes in a prescript or Form? Or
rather there being a substantial and saving Truth in that which he calls a
Form; Whether the saving virtue of the substance be not of more value to gain
acceptance, then the word Form considerable to the casting away of the
substance that is able to save? 22. If God was to be Blessed, Ezra. 7.27.
for putting into the Heart of a Heathen Magistrate to make Laws for the
advancement of true Religion; Whether he do not come near to a curse that
would take out of the Heart of a Christian Magistrate the advancement of true
Religion, and persuade him to give a Toleration to the chief Enemies of
Religion, Idolatry and Heresy.
FINIS.

