THE EXAMINATION, CONFESSION, TRIAL, AND EXECUTION, Of Joane Williford, Joan
Cariden, and Jane Hott:

Who were executed at Feversham in Kent, for being Witches, on Monday the 29 of
September, 1645.

Being a true Copy of their evil lives and wicked deeds, taken by the Major of
Feversham and Jurors for the said Inquest.

With the Examination and Confession of Elizabeth Harris, not yet executed.

All attested under the hand of ROBERT GREENSTREET, Major of Foversham.

LONDON, Printed for J. G. October 2. 1645.

The Confession of Joan Williford, September. 24. 1645. made before the Major,
and other Jurates.
She confessed:
THat the devil about seven years ago did appear to her in the shape of a
little dog, and bid her to forsake God and lean to him: who replied, that she
was loath to forsake him. She confessed also that she had a desire to be
revenged upon Thomas Letherland and Mary Woodr^fe now his wife. She further
said that the devil promised her, that she should not lack, and that she had
money sometimes brought her she knew not whence, sometime one shilling,
sometimes eight pence, never more at once; she called her Devil by the name
of Bunne. She further says, that her retainer Bunne carried Thomas Gardler out
of a window, who fell into a backside. She further says, that near twenty
years since she promised her soul to the devil. She further says, that she
gave some of her blood to the Devil* who wrote the covenant betwixt them. She
further says that the Devil promised to be her servant about twenty years,
and that the time is now almost expired. She further says that Jane Hot,
Elizabeth Harris, Joan Argoll were her fellows. She further says that her
Devil told her that Elizabeth Harris about six or seven years since cursed the
Boat of one John Woodcott, and so it came to pass. She further says, that
the Devil promised her that she should not sink being thrown into the
water. She further said Goodwife Argoll cursed Mr. Major, and also John
Mannington, and said that he should not thrive, and and so it came to pass.
She likewise says, that the Devil sucked twice since she came into the
prison, he came to her in the form of a Muce.

She being brought to the Bar, was asked, Guilty or not guilty, she answered,
guilty.

When she came to the place of execution Mr. Major asked her if she thought she
deserved death? to whom she answered, that she had; and that she desired all
good people to take warning by her, and not to suffer themselves to be deceived
by the Devil, neither for lucre of money, malice, or any thing else, as she
had done: but to stick fast to God, for if she had not first forsaken God, God
would not have forsaken her.

The Examination of Joan Cariden widow, taken September. 25. 1645.
THis Examinant says, that about three quarters of a year ago, as she was in
the bed about twelve or one of the clock in the night there lay a rugged soft
thing upon her bosom which was very soft, and she thrust it off with her hand;
and she says that when she had thrust it away she thought God forsook her,
for she could never pray so well since as she could before; and further says,
that she verily thinks it was alive.

The second Examination of the said Joan Cariden, alias Argoll, taken the same
day before the Major.
THis Examinant says, that in the same year that this Major was formerly
Major the Devil came to her in the shape of a black rugged Dog, in the night
time, and crept into the bed to her, and spoke to her in mumbling language; The
next night it came to her again, and required this examinant to deny God and
lean to him, and that then he would revenge her of any one she owed ill will
to, and thereupon this examinant promised him her soul upon those conditions;
And that about that time the Devil sucked this examinant, and has diverse
times since sucked her, and that it was no pain to her.

September 27. 1645.
Confessed upon the examination of Joan Carriden before Master Major, that
Goodwife Ho^t told her within these two days that there was a great meeting at
Goodwife Panterys house, and that Goodwife Dadson was there, and that Goodwife
Gardner should have been there, but did not come, and the Devil sat at the
upper end of the Table.

The Examination of Jane Hott widow, taken before the Major and Jurates the 25
of September, 1645.
THis examinant confesses that a thing like a hedghog had usually visited her,
and came to her a great while ago, about twenty years ago, and that if it
sucked her it was in her sleep, and the pain thereof awaked her, and it came
to her once or twice in the month and sucked her, and when it lay upon her
breast she struck it off with her hand, and that it was as soft as a Cat.

At her first coming into the Goal she spoke very much to the other that were
apprehended before her, to confess if they were guilty; and stood to it very
perversely that she was clear of any such thing, and that if they put her into
the Water to try her she should certainly sink. But when she was put into the
Water and it was apparent that she did flote upon the water, being taken forth,
a Gentleman to whom before she had so confidently spoke, and with whom she
offered to lay twenty shillings to one that she could not swim, asked her how
it was possible she could be so impudent as not to confess herself, when she
had so much persuaded the other to confess: to whom she answered, That the
Devil went with her all the way, and told her that she should sink; but when
she was in the Water he sat upon a Crosse-beame and laughed at her.

These three were executed on Monday last.
The Examination of Elizabeth Harris the 26 of September, 1645. before Master
Major.
THis examinant says, that about 19 years ago the Devil did appear to her
in the form of a Muse: she further says, that she had a desire to be
revenged, and the devil told her that she should be revenged; she called the
Devil her Impe. She further says, Goodman Chilman of Nuenham said that she
stole a Pigge, then she desired that God would revenge her of him, and the man
pined away and dyed, and she saw it apparent that her Impe was the cause of
that man's death; she further says, that the Devil bid her to forsake Christ
and lean to him, whereupon she says that she scratched her self with her
nails and fetched blood from her breast, and she wiped it with her finger and
gave it to her Impe who wrote the covenant with it: she further says, that a
fortnight after the devil sucked her, but she felt no pain. Being demanded
how many Witches were in Town? she answered, that were a heavy sentence. She
further says that Goodwife Dadson, Joan Argoe, William Argos wife, Goodwife
Cox have very bad tongues; She further says that her Impe did suck her every
three or four nights; she further says that her son being drowned in
Goodman Woodcots High she wished that God might be her revenger, which was her
watchword to the Devil, and this High was cast away, and she conceives that
her wish was the cause of its being cast away: she further says, that Joan
Williford told her, that her Impe said on Wednesday last, that though the
Boat, (she not knowing what Boat,) went cheerfully out, it should not come so
cheerfully home; She says further, that Goodwife Pantery did many times make
meetings with Goodwife Williford and with Goodwife Hott; She further says,
that Goodwife Gardner has a very ill tongue.

ALL these are true coppies of Examination, one whereof is not yet executed,
and were taken before me,

Robert Greenstreet, Major.

FINIS.

