AN EXHORTATION TO Catechizing: The long neglect whereof is sadly lamented. And
the speedy reviving as earnestly desired.

BY The PROVINCIAL Assembly at LONDON. August 30. 1655.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Samuel Gellibrand at the sign of the
BALL in Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

AN EXHORTATION TO Catechizing.
ALthough the confessed corruption of our own hearts, and unobserved cunning of
Satan, have unhappily held us, too long a time, at too great a distance; so
that we have not been so forward, as we ought, to contribute our mutual
counsels, to the better advancing of the common good: yet can we not allow
ourselves to suspect, that any of our dear Brethren, (who (blessed be God) do
fully accord with us, in all the fundamentals of our holy Religion, though of
different persuasions in some smaller points), will be backward to entertain
that seasonable, yea, necessary motion, which we shall here, in the fear of the
Lord, humbly present to them.

What desperate defections many have lately made, from that precious faith,
which was once delivered to the Saints; and what insolent invasions have been
made upon it, by loose tongues, and lewder pens, we must needs all clearly see,
and should as sadly lament.

How blasphemously have some disputed against the infinite merit, yea, and
Deity of our Savior, as if they intended to justify the Jews, in sentencing
him to the Cross, for avouching himself the coeternal and coequal Son of
God? How audaciously have they proceeded in the like sacrilegious attempts
against the Holy Ghost, and while they have presumed to cry up all sanctified
men as so many Gods, not feared to cry down the blessed Author of all our
sanctification, as if he were at most but an Angel? Bid. Cat.
How wildly have they risen up, in the profane pride of their haughty wits,
against most of the glorious attributes of the Deity, reckoning the
unquestionable Doctrines, of Gods Omniscience, Omnipresence, Immutability, with
the rest of his blessed excellencies, among the absurd dreams of
Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, and the like novel and ridiculous
Paradoxes? Thus pretending to make their disciples mere Christians, they have
taken a fair course, to leave them mere Atheists.

Having laid these cursed foundations, it is not to be wondered, that they
raise an answerable structure of wretched fancies, about the purity of man's
nature, and the sufficiency of his power to save himself, without being too
much beholden to those poor means, which the simplicity of our preaching,
belike in too nice a conformity to the foolishness of God has been wont to
prescribe.

Hence they have taken the boldness to decrie the Scriptures, as some what too
dim, especially in comparison of their more glorious new lights; to despise the
Sacraments, as if they were as beggarly elements as the Jewish ceremonies; to
deride the sing^ng of Psalms, as if David's Harp were now out of tune; to
reject Prayer, as if they had attained to so plentiful a measure of spiritual
riches, that it were a shame for them to crave any further supplies. And then
alas (think they) what should they viainly lose a seventh part of the year in
the superstitious observation of a weekly Sabbath, whereas their whole life is
but one continued holy day? What should they defile themselves with the
infectious air of our corrupt Churches, where we never assemble, without
constant confessions, of too many iniquities in our holy things? Shortly, what
should they busy themselves too much in preparing themselves for Heaven? We
must know they are there already; nor can they acknowledge any other Heaven,
besides that in their own bosoms. What should they be too fearful of the
torments of Hell, wherewith w^ are wont to terrifi^ worldlings from sin? These
men have discovered, upon a profounder search, that eternal death is but a
total annihilation, and so Hell is just nothing. Bid. Cat.
And for the souls of the wicked, though it should prove true, that they shall
not be utterly annihilated, R. O.
yet they are satisfied they shall sleep so soundly after their dissolution,
that they shall not be at all sensible of their happiness, or misery.

Thus is there scarce any one Article of the Christian Religion, yea, or that
Systeme of Divinity, which may be easily framed out of the scattered notions of
humane reason, as miserably as we acknowledge it to be corrupted, which has
not received many a sore blow, and that from the hands of those, whose hearts
did ere whiles seem ready to expose their heads, to the greatest hazards, for
the least tittle of sacred truth.

We have the charity to think, that most of the oppositions, which have been
so unhappily raised against the truths of God, though they be now attended with
too much malice, yet did at first spring merely from ignorance. Had the truth
been rightly understood, it had not been so unworthily undervalued, much
less so treacherously undermined, and least of all so impudently affronted, as
woe is us we behold it, both to our grief, and horror.

We are not unwilling to charge our selves, as so far accessory to all those
Barbarous Heresies which are daily broached, and cursed Blasphemies which are
as frequently belched out, against the Majesty, and truth of our holy God, that
we have been less solicitous then we ought, for the due seasoning of the
hearts of our people, with the first principles (which are indeed the most
momentous points) of Christian Religion. A timely salting, would by the
blessing of God, have happily prevented most of that unsavourinesse, in the
discourses, and practices, of too too many of them, which, (God be merciful to
us) it is impossible not to resent, and it is as difficult to remedy. Had there
been more Catechizing, there would have been less Apostasy. Had it not
been for want of seasonable instructions, we had not seen so many licentious
insurrections, against the sacred truths, and Ordinances of God.

It is the rare privilege of the Romish Synagogue, to have such a power over
ignorance, as to command her to employ her self as a tender nurse to their
blind devotions; But the Church of Christ has ever found her such a froward
piece, as that she has churlishly handled all the genuine issues of truth and
piety, and as fondly cockered all the misshapen Monsters of Error, though never
so strangely composed, of an Heterogeneous commixture, of superstition and
profaneness. We cannot prevail with our selves, to nourish the least hope of
ever being so happy, as to see Ignorance become serviceable to true Piety. We
know the affections, cannot out-go the apprehensions; that till Truth be
known, she cannot be reverenced, cannot but be hated. The Principles of
Christianity have nothing in them, that can at first glance, take with the
prejudiced hearts of natural men; and yet they secretly carry an incomparable
beauty, which is no sooner discovered, then admired and adored by all those,
whose eyes God is pleased to open to a clear inspection, and whose hearts he
vouchsafes to draw to a nearer embracing of them. They who have the happiness
to be rightly informed in these sacred Principles, readily acknowledge that the
choicest treasures of wisdom, are curiously wrapped up, under the mysterious
covert of a seeming foolishness; and that what appeared but a worthless
shell, secretly incloseth the invaluable Pearl. The shell being skilfully
opened, the Pearl forthwith displaies it self with an orient luster. To open
the shell is the Catechists task.

The more do we wonder, and the less can we believe, what has been sometimes
suggested, that any of our Brethren of the Ministry should superciliously
overlook this Exercise of Catechizing, as below the dignity of their station,
and accordingly put it off as a meaner chare, to the parents and governors of
private families.

We heartily rejoice to hear, of any good hands that are pleased to employ
themselves in so profitable a service; and could earnestly wish, that all those
to whom the providence of God has committed the care of young ones, would
reckon it a chief part of that honorable duty, which they owe to their
children and servants. But withal we profess, that those privater
preparations, should rather be encouragements to the brethren of the Ministry,
the more cheerfully to pursue, then dispensations in any wise to omit the
necessary exercise of public Catechizing. They who have been taught at home,
will the better learn in the Church; and having first gotten somewhat of their
lesson by rote, be the more qualified to receive the reason of it. They are
mistaken who think the Ministers Catechizing, is but an examining of the
memory; it is an informing of the understanding; and of all others the most
Doctorlike part of his work. If there have been any heretofore, who have
gravely required the Catechists, to ask certain questions, and as solemnly
forbidden them to expound the answers, we do suppose such injunctions were
laid, only on some of their Curates, of whom their wisdom saw good cause to be
jealous, how it adventured to allow them to speak without book.

But certainly Catechizing is a familiar kind of preaching extempore, not to
be performed without a clear insight into the greatest depths of Religion, and
a proportionable gift of ready expression.

What is there that requires more Theological abilities, then a perspicuous
explication of those dark mysteries of the righteousness of God, in charging
the sin of Adam on the whole world, and laying the sin of the whole world
on Jesus Christ of the Hypostatical union of two natures in one person of
Christ, of the communication of all the properties of each nature to the
person, the limitation of all the attributes of the person to the several
natures, of the offices which Christ exercises in his Church, the relations
which all the members of the Church have to Christ, and one to another; of the
subserviency of the law to the Gospel, of Christ's abrogating some parts of the
law, so as to establish all? It had need be a very skilful hand, that shall
lead lambs both with safety, and not without an holy delight, through those
profound depths, wherein so many Elephants have most miserably miscarried.

The consideration hereof does little less then amaze us, when we observe how
some of our people, (in whom (be it spoken without offense) we never discerned
any extraordinary measure of spiritual knowledge, beyond the common size of
their neighbors seize,) do overly reject this exercise of Catechizing,
and hold it unworthy of such wise ones as themselves, to vouchsafe their
presence at it. We had thought the strongest men among us needed not have
disdained to taste some few spoonfuls of milk. We are sure that that which they
please to slight as but milk, costs us more the dressing then any other
provisions wherewith they can expect to be entertained. The lowest principles
of Christianity, are the highest mysteries. Those are the greatest stones which
are laid in the foundation. These are they which support all the rest of the
building. These are they which bear the greatest brunt of opposition. What
controversies ever troubled the Church of God, like those about the corner
stone? The conclusions of our Religion are for the more part beyond
contradiction, all the greatest quarrels have been against our principles.
Witness in elder times the heresy of Arius, which struck so audaciously at
the Deity of Christ; that of Macedonius, which dealt as full a blow at the
Deity of the holy Ghost; and in our days that of the Socinians who have
assayed to knock down at once all the received Articles of the Catholic faith,
and to set up most of the stigmatized heresies in their room. Hereof we have
too full evidence in the Racovian Catechism, not long since Englished, and
more lately enlarged, by Master Biddle; Such men's publishing their Catechismes
for the propagation of their Blasphemies, minds us of the true use of Orthodox
Catechizing, for the suppressing and preventing of them.

And we seem to have just cause to conceive the higher thoughts of its
usefulness to this purpose, when we sadly reflect on the many difficulties
whereof we have had heretofore too frequent experience, and have now as jealous
expectations. We have all along observed that the better any practice is, the
worse reception it does usually find. The general averseness of young ones
from this exercise of Catechizing, is not the least argument of its singular
usefulness. The more unwilling they are to present themselves to be
catechized, the more reason have we to press them to it, by the greatest
violence of persuasion.

We would not seem to fear, that any of them will have the face to tell us,
of a tedious longsomenesse whereunto the addition of catechizing will draw out
the exercises in the Church. For besides that the pleasing variety will sweetly
detract from the sense of prolixity, we hope they are not to learn, that the
Lords day would be wholly spent in the Lords service; and that every moment of
it is more precious, then to be idly squandered away in such vain triflings,
as wherein too many are wont to mispend it. And as for some necessary
employments, which may chance to be alleged as exceptions against this
exercise, it may suffice to say, that coming to the Church a little sooner in
the morning, will so sufficiently lengthen out the afternoon, as that it will
conveniently enough afford a competent time for it in the shortest days. Nor
will any of the other services complain of being wronged, in being now and
then drawn somewhat closer together, for the opening a place to Catechizing,
considering how exceeding much it is like to deserve of them all.

For other things, we shall all readily give them, whatever assurance they can
reasonably desire, that we will have a tender eye to the slownesse of
apprehension in some of them, to the slipperinesse of memory in others, to the
bashfulnesse of most, to the reputation of all of them; that we shall
opportunely prevent their grosser mistakes, and heartily palliate their lesser
ones. That we shall give the best sense to the worst of their answers, and put
some necessary words into their mouths, the better to facilitate the expression
of their thoughts; that we shall carefully manage every part of this business,
with the best of our wisdom, and endeavor to credit them, as well as to
instruct them; and to procure them both the more esteem in the Church, and
favor when they come home.

And if any of them shall yet chance to look upon it as some indignity to them,
to sit under the Deske, when some of their fellows advance themselves to stand
in the Pulpit, we doubt not but to convince them, that all intelligent men
account such forwardness, not a specimen of more knowledge, but less modesty,
then their years seem to bespeak. Alas, it is only their ignorance that oiles
their tongues: had they but had the patience to have been duly Catechized,
they had not had the presumption to preach, or rather, prate so impertinently.
Their want of learning is the principal faculty that qualifies them for such
exercises. Had they been swifter to hear, they would have been slower to
speak.

We are so sufficiently acquainted with the untractable temper of such
impetuous spiritati, that we begin to excuse their parents and masters, that
they forbear to interpose their interest and authority for the further
restraining them. What hope is there that they who pretend God does immediately
Commission them to preach, will yield obedience to any mortal man that shall
command them to be silent? But we must needs say we extremely marvel, how it
comes to pass, that any parents and masters (albeit they hereupon neglect to
forbid these bold yonkers to preach, yet) should pretend a secret check in
their consciences, and make a pitiful doubt whether they may require them to
learn. We wonder how they have been so strangely inveigled, as to tolerate
all things by scrupling them; and to let the reins loose purely out of
strictness; to think it a sin in themselves to press a duty on others, and
a breach of Gods holy Laws to enjoyne the keeping of them; how it comes about
that they who can allow themselves to be severe enough to their servants for
loytering in their shops, cannot find it in their hearts to rebuke them for
neglect of the Church; that they who hold themselves bound in conscience, to
inform their servants in all the secrets of their trade, should think
themselves as much tied up, from pressing them to learn the mysteries of
Religion.

We shall say but this, that we see too much cause to fear, lest they who use
not all the means they can, to bring their children and servants to the Faith,
be themselves brought at last to an unprofitable repentance. Sure we are, they
who have not learned their duty to God, will never rightly perform their duty
to men. We wish that sawey behavior, and lame accounts, be not too sad proofs
of this unhappie truth. We take it to be so necessary that all Parents and
Masters bring their young ones to be Catechized, that we think it needless to
press it any further.

Only we are sorry to consider, that some who profess themselves convinced of
the usefulness of Catechizing, are at a stand about those Catechismes which we
would commend to their use; we mean those excellent ones, which were not long
since composed by the Reverend Divines assembled at Westminster, attested by
the Church of Scotland, recommended to this Nation by the High Court of
Parliament.

If we be not too much mistaken, the larger Catechism is as complete a body of
positive Divinity, as any we know extant this day; and we believe that
whosoever shall peruse it with a judicious, and unprejudiced eye, will easily
observe the singular skill of those eminent workmen, who so accurately folded
so much variety of choice matter in so few plain words, so artificially
digested the questions, so irrefragably confirmed every branch of the answers,
by so many clear proofs of Scripture, all along quoted in the margent. We
profess to look on that larger Catechism, as an excellent card, not only for
vulgar Christians, but all younger Divines to steer the course of their
studies.

Nor yet do we think higher, then some most Reverend men have been pleased to
speak of it, and they such, as by reason of their interest in the Episcopal
cause, were not like to overvalue any labor of the Assemblies, beyond the just
rate of its apparent desert.

The truth is, we judge that larger Catechism to be an useful Comment for our
selves to have recourse to, in the explication of the lesser, which we esteem
better tempered to the capacities, and memories of younger people. And this
testimony we may freely give to this lesser Catechism, that it has this
considerable excellency, above all those we have seen, that every answer is an
entire proposition without relation to the question preceding.

In short, we humbly bless God, for so great a help, as he has graciously
afforded these Churches in this little piece; and we as heartily blush to think
of our own un^xcusable neglect, of so precious a means, for the instruction of
our people.

And yet too, though we most passionately wish, that all our Brethren would
unanimously concur in the joint use of one and the same, and that the
Assemblies Catechism; yet shall we abundantly rejoice, to see them persuaded,
to use any other Orthodox Catechism, which they in their wisdom, shall judge
better calculated, to the condition of their people. We see indeed too much
cause, and so we doubt not, do all our Brethren, to abhor the Racovian and
Biddles Catechism; but for all those which have been ordinary amongst us
(however it has pleased some body, in a sullen gravity to put them to
rebuke,yet) Red. Red. P. 555.
we profess to receive them with reverence, and could readily comply with our
Brethren in the use of any one of them. So that the younger people may be
taught to know who made them, and why be made them, how good and happy man was
made by God, how evil and wretched he has made himself, what need he had that
the Lord Jesus should die for him, that the Holy Ghost should regenerate him,
what privileges he does enjoy, and may expect by Christ, what duties he is
obliged to by those privileges, how he is to present his petitions to God, how
to receive the seals of Gods gracious Covenant, with other particulars of like
nature, we shall think them singularly happy, what ever be the form wherein
they shall learn them. We shall not too morosely stand upon circumstantial
differences, where there is a fair accord in material principles.

But our hearts even bleed, to consider, how many precious souls, are in daily
danger of perishing eternally, for want of meet instruction in these necessary
points. Woe is us! while we have too supinely neglected the seasonable sowing
of better seed, how wickedly diligent has the envious man been in scattering
his tares? We estimate his excessive pains in sowing, by the cursed plenty of
his harvest. Not to take notice of lesser weeds, though such as have all but
too much poison in them, how do we see Popery, Libertinisme, Socinianisme,
Ranting, Quaking, spreading themselves so widely, as if they meant to overgrow
the whole face of the Nation, and scarce leave room to the true Religion to
put forth its head among them? How often do we see several Sects in the same
family, and many a subdivision in each Sect? How do we see sundry perverse
doctrines as perniciously practiced, that which some please to call Religion
(quite contrary to the nature of what is such indeed) sacrilegiously breaking
all the bonds of society, and yokes of government, which are the only securers
of true liberty? We pray God the State do not one day feel, what it is to let
all loose in the Church: sure we are that too many masters of private families,
are already feign to sit down under the unsufferable loss, of a considerable
parcel of their authority; and well were it for them, if they mist it but one
day in seven: We do not despair, but they will at last grow so wise, as to see
how much of their own interest, is involved in the cause of God; and that it is
an apparent disadvantage to their secular affairs, to neglect the spiritual
instruction of their children and servants. But for our Reverend and dear
Brethren of the Ministry, we cannot easily admit the least doubt that they are
not fully convinced of an especial duty they owe to God, who has honored them
to set them as Stewards in his house, to give every one his proper portion in
due season: and of all others young ones would be most carefully provided for;
to the truth, whereof God has appointed them to take a peculiar care, as the
most precious treasure in his house; to the souls of their hearers, who are
not capable of being saved without the knowledge of the truth; to the souls of
young men especially, who if they be not taught the truth in their greener
years, will more difficultly learn it when they are grown elder, and the
more ripe the more rotten; to themselves, who owe a just account for every
particular soul committed to their charge. They know how great a price the
least soul has cost, that the weakest lamb stood Christ no less then the
strongest sheep, how rich a prey Satan has ever reckoned on in the poorest
soul; how industrious he is in hunting, how many nimble beagles he has that
rejoice to do their best in the worst service he lists to employ them; how
great advantages they have at this time by the many sad breaches in all our
hedges; how little we can answer it, that so many breaches have been made,
while we so speciously pretended, and solemnly vowed to repair them; how heavy
censures are daily cast on our sincerest endeavors of a pure Reformation, as
if they aimed only at ruining. We have good hopes that all who unfeignedly love
God and his truth, will in the serious consideration of these particulars, and
many more, which their own wisdom will readily prompt them, immediately lay
aside whatever pretenses, and conscientiously join with us, in a speedy
reviving of that most necessary, though neglected exercise of Catechizing;
which seems of all others the most probable means, both for the timely baying
back of that fearful inundation of pestilent Heresies, which has too far
broken in upon us, and for the better preventing of those mischievous effects,
which they daily threaten.

We cannot entertain the least surmise, of any of our Reverend Brethren, that
they will look on this Work, as too troublesome an addition to their other
labors, on the Lords day. We are confident they rejoice, to spend themselves
in the service of God and his Church; and reckon not on the consuming of their
oil, while they may lend their light; yea, that they feel no greater burden,
then the heaviness of their people in hearing.

Besides, we easily foresee, how much their Catechizing will seasonably
conduce, to a just vindication of the honor of their Doctrine, from those
absurd reproaches, with which some slanderous Pamphleters endeavor to blast
it, impudently saying any thing, and proving nothing; yea, saying nothing, but
what has been as often answered, as objected.

We doubt not but that model of Divinity which is commonly taught in our
Churches, has a fair conformity to the pattern in the Mount. We are sure its
aim is to advance, the glory of Gods grace, to stain the pride of man's
nature; to make the Saints walk much the more comfortably, nothing the less
carefully; to damme up that cursed fountain of self-conceit, whence daily
issue so many impure streams, not to open a sluice to any of those horrible
abominations, which threaten to over-whelme the face of the world. The known
practices of those blessed men, who have been the most zealous Preachers, and
resolute Champions for our Doctrine, have all along sufficienly vindicated it,
from these both senseless and frontlesse calumniations.

And howbeit it be pretended, that we impose on other men's belief, and suffer
our selves to be overruled by corrupt inierests; Yet we doubt not but it
clearly appears to the children of wisdom, that we make Gods Word our only
rule, and his glory our only aim; and drive no other design, but to bring
our people to the saving knowledge of the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
he has sent. It is our grief to see poor souls, taught to hate our
Doctrine, before they know it. If they were duly Catechized, we hope, many of
them, would both acknowledge, and adore, that beauty of holiness, which
gloriously shines in every lineament of it.

Could we dispense with our selves, to borrow a wild strain from the ranting
Rhetoric, of a Thrasonical adversary, we should term it an Apocryphal
diabolisme, to say that we will not suffer the Lord Jesus, quietly to inherit:
the glory and praise of his ever-blessed work of Redemption, in the just
compass and extent of it; that we set bounds and bars to the grace of God
which he never set; that we preach this (in effect) for Gospel to the world,
that God never bare any good will to the greatest part of them; but decreed
peremptorily from eternity, eternally to torment them, with the vengeance of
eternal fire, how innocently, blamelessely, spotlessely soever they should live
in the world all their days. I. G. Catabapt. Epist. to Read. p. antepen.


Be it known, we extend the glory of the work of Redemption, far more then
they who accuse us of restraining it: We not only teach that God gave his only
begotten ^ne, that whosoever believes, should not perish, but have life
everlasting; but also add, that Christ redeemed his people from their sins,
as well as from the wrath due to them; from the world and themselves, as well
as from Hell and Satan. We teach that Christ purchased our faith in order to
our salvation, as well as our salvation in consequence on our believing; and
profess to owe to Christ's purchase the changing of our hearts as well as the
saving of our souls: We acknowledge our selves indebted to Christ, for that
which our adversaries have learned to put on their own account, and to thank
themselves for it. And whereas they are pleased to represent Christ, but such a
Redeemer, as whose redemption notwithstanding, the whole world possibly might
have been damned, yea it was impossible that any man should be saved, (it being
as much beyond the power of nature to believe of it self without special grace
purchased by Christ, as for a man though never so gracious to merit the glory
of heaven;) we have learned, and accordingly teach, that not one of all Christ's
sheep shall eternally miscarry. So far are we from straitning the grace of
God, that we allow no bounds, or bars to be set to the invincible efficacy
of it. We indeed set bounds to nature, none to grace; as acknowledging a
sufficiency of the grace of God to conquer all the oppositions which can be
made by the corruptions of man; denying a sufficiency in man, to the least
spiritual work, without a blessed superaddition of Gods special grace. In the
mean time we deny, that God decreed, to punish any of the sons of men but for
their sins; only we affirm that he bare not such good will to the greater
part of men, as to decree to give them his special grace; and that without
this, no man how innocent, blameless, and spotless soever his conversation
may seem to men, is other then a desperate enemy against God. Nor yet do we
preach this as a branch of the Gospel; but only maintain it as a part of the
counsel of God revealed in the Scriptures, not repugnant unto it.

All that we aim at, is, to convince Gods people how much they owe to Gods
grace; how miserable they had been, if he had left them (as justly he might)
to the corruption of their own nature. We open a door of hope to the poorest
souls that groan under the sad sense of their loathed corruptions: that though
of themselves they can do nothing toward their salvation, yet by the grace of
God, who works in us both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, they
shall be happily enabled to work it out in a pleasant fear and comfortable
trembling. We are far from saying, what we are shamelessely reported to do,
That the Elect, though they prove the first sons of Belial, yet may be true
believers, namely, while they continue such; we only say the Elect are many of
them all as wicked, as any of the Reprobates, till by the grace of God they be
brought to believe; and that though after they believe, they may possibly fall
into horrible abominations, yet God out of his unchangeable love in which he
elected them from all eternity, mercifully preserves his seed though miserably
withered in their souls, and will in his good time graciously quicken it,
infallibly reduce them to a hearty repentance, and bring them in repentance to
salvation. We never dreamed of an impossibility of the Saints falling as of
themselves, nor of a possibility of their being saved without repentance
through the grace of God. This distempered pen strikes no less boldly at the
Apostle, then our selves; and does but in a restless impotence, kick against
the pricks.

It will be much for the honor of our Doctrine to have the younger people
receive the sum of it from our own mouths in Catechizing, and not from the
malicious pens of the wilful depravers of it, and defamers of us.

As for expedients for the better accomplishing of so good a work, whatsoever
any of our Reverend Brethren shall please to communicate to us, beside those
which we are bold to commend to them in a short draught hereunto annexed, we
shall as thankfully receive, as they shall lovingly propose them. And we
earnestly desire that all sinister misconstructions being charitably laid
aside, we would al readily join both our hearts and hands, to the happier
promoting of whatever may conduce to the propagation of the Truth, and
preservation of the peace in the Churches of Christ; as knowing that who in
these things serves Christ is acceptable unto God, and approved of men. And
though perhaps we may not find the issue of our endeavors, answerable to our
aim; yet shall we sweetly satisfy our selves with this, that our labor is
with our God, and that he will not reward us the less, where our trouble is
the greater.

We shall add no more, but that we humbly bow our knees to the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named, that
he would mercifully pardon all our failings, graciously prosper all our good
endeavors; that he would knit the hearts of his people each to other, and all
to himself; that he would vouchsafe to watch over his Ministers, and help his
Ministers to watch over his people; that he would bless all those who love the
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, that mercy and peace may be on them and upon
the Israel of God.

FINIS.
August 30. 1655.
ORdered by the Provincial Assembly that Doctor Kendall be desired to take care
for the printing of the Exhortation now brought in and read.

Samuel Balmford Moderator. John Jackson Scriba.


Ordered at a Meeting of the Provincial Assembly of London, November 23. 1648.
That Copies hereof be sent to the Classes within the Province of London.
THe Provincial Assembly of London taking into their serious consideration how
singularly useful a diligent course of Catechizing in all public Assemblies
within this Province, will be for the promoting of sound knowledge in the
Fundamentals of Christian Religion, and of the power of godliness against all
manner of Errors in Opinion, and Profaneness in conversation; have thought it
necessary, most earnestly to recommend this pious and profitable Exercise to
all the several Classes within this Province, that they in their zeal to Gods
glory and the Churches edification, may take such course, that it be speedily
and effectually put in execution within all their respective Congregations.

And for the more orderly and uniforme carrying on of this excellent and
needful work, It is desired that these following directions be observed; I.
That the several Ministers on some Lords day when they give public notice of
their purpose to set upon Catechizing, do in their Sermons effectually
demonstrate the great necessity and utility thereof, earnestly exhorting all
Parents and Masters of families to prepare their children and servants by
Catechizing them at home, that they may more readily and cheerfully give
account in public. II. That the Catechism to be made use of through this
whole Province be the lesser Catechism, drawn up and presented by the Reverend
Assembly of Divines to the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and published by
their Authority, to be used throughout the Kingdom of England and Dominion of
Wales, this Catechism herein excelling all others, that every answer is a
perfect Proposition without the Question. III. That the persons to be
Catechized, be children and servants, that have not been admitted to the Lords
Table by the Eldership. IV. That the time of Catechizing be on the Lords days
in the afternoon before the Sermon, to the end that the whole Congregation may
receive benefit thereby. V. That the Catechism be briefly explained at the
first going over it, that so the people may in a short time have a taste of the
^hole body of Divinity. VI. That Parishioners be desired at the common charge
of the Parish to provide Catechismes for the poor sort, who cannot well
provide for themselves, and that the distribution of them be referred to the
respective Ministers. Lastly, it is desired, that an account in writing [what
progress is made in the Premisses] be returned from the Classes, to the
Provincial Assembly, within forty days after the receipt hereof.


Signed in the Name and by the appointment of the Provincial Assembly. Edmund
Calamy Moderator. William Harrison Scribe. William Blackmore Scribe.



